

SUNDERLAND Harrier Malcolm Price will make his road racing return after illness when he will start among the favourites for tomorrow's Chester-le-Street 10K, writes FRANK JOHNSON.
Price, who has returned to the sport with renewed vigour after unrelenting injury problems, won three local races before finishing third in the classy Saltwell road race on December 22.
He had hoped to continue his improvement in the Morpeth- Newcastle road race on New Year's Day, but was hit by flu.
Now, after a two-week lay-off, Price is back to form and his main adversaries tomorrow are likely to be Morpeth's Mark Hudspith and Ian Archbold.
There will be eight events, starting with the minor colts race at 1pm.
OVER 150 athletes will compete in the North-East indoor championships at the Gateshead International Stadium tomorrow (10am).
One of the keenest tussles will be in the women's 50 metres, when the holder, Ruth Williams, takes on her Darlington clubmate, Helen Blanchard.
They will also clash in the senior women's long jump and the shot.
The highlight of the men's events should also be the 50 metres, when North-East outdoor 100 metres champion David Lawson, of Cramlington, lines up against Morpeth Harrier Andrew Abrahams.
DARLINGTON must choose another Rumbelows Sprint Challenge representative following the transfer of Jim Willis to Leicester, writes RAY ROBERTSON.
Manager Frank Gray said: ‘We have one or two players with pace, such as Steve Mardenborough and Steve Gaughan.
‘Any competition that creates interest is worthwhile, and the £10,000 prize for the winner is certainly attractive.
The competition also offers an opportunity for players to appear at Wembley.’
Heat winners will win £500 and qualify for the Wembley final, along with runners-up and the four fastest losers.
A Rumbelows spokesman said the £10,000 jackpot would not necessarily go straight into the champion's bank balance.
‘A small club could arrange a split with the player.
After all, a lot of money is at stake,’ he said.
Darlington will hope for some reward at Shrewsbury today to ease relegation worries.
Manager Frank Gray said: ‘I think the standard of the Third Division is higher than a lot of people expected.
There are some very good sides.’
Gray has discussed with his players the costly defensive errors at Swansea in midweek and will demand an improvement.
Darlington's Northern Intermediate League game against York City has been postponed because of a frozen pitch at Hundens Lane.
CHOICE:
In answer to M. Sutcliffe's letter (HAS January 7), everyday letters are written to newspapers whining about bloodsports or, to give them their correct title, country sports.
The last time there was an inquiry into activities which may involve cruelty to wild animals was the Scott Henderson Inquiry set up by the Labour Government in 1949.
This report was concerned mainly with hunting and hare coursing.
It made the following recommendations:
1.
Fox hunting makes a very important contribution to the control of foxes and should be allowed to continue.
2.
Deer hunting is a useful and necessary method of controlling red deer on Exmoor and therefore should be allowed to continue.
3.
The degree of cruelty involved in hare coursing is not sufficient to justify its prohibition.
Surely there are more important illegal issues requiring immediate attention, i.e. assaults on the aged and small children.
There is little or no deterrent for these fiendish acts.
Country sports are a heritage and a way of life to literally millions of people and to take them away is to prevent freedom of choice within the law.
RAY SIMPSON reports from Gay Meadow
Shrewsbury 0 Darlington 2
NEW-LOOK Darlington made Shrewsbury look distinctly second best as the Quakers recorded their fourth away win of the season.
There were many pluses in what was the best performance of the season so far, home or away.
The first clean sheet on their travels, a fairly solid defence which allowed the home side only two clear chances, a midfield which showed finesse as well as strength, and a forward line which caused problems every time they moved forward.
And also the goal of the season which any Bobby Charlton fan would have treasured had their idol scored it.
That might sound a little over the top, but the truth is that Quakers were streets ahead of Shrewsbury, and could well have surpassed the four goals which Hartlepool scored on their visit to Gay Meadow.
John Bond's side never got a look in as Quakers took command in the first half hour.
Shrews keeper Steve Perks pushed a Mick Tait piledriver round the post after only eight minutes, and then the keeper got down well to make an identical save from a left foot shot by Steve Gaughan.
Gaughan held his head in his hands after 23 minutes when Shrewsbury defender Dean Spink headed just over his own bar while trying to clear another effort, and the former Sunderland man forced Perks to his knees with a long range right foot shot.
A goal had to come, and it duly arrived in a moment of magic after 33 minutes.
Nick Pickering broke up a rare Shrewsbury attack on the edge of his own box, made a 50-yard run into the other half and played the ball forward to Ellison, who laid it off to Steve Mardenborough.
The striker took the ball in his stride and powered it into the top right hand corner from 25 yards.
Shrewsbury rallied briefly just before half time.
Neil Lyne lobbed over when clean through, and the keeper made his only real save when he blocked Tommy Lynch's shot.
Bond he no longer has the Princess Di haircut by the way reorganised his team at half time, pushing former Quaker Alan Walsh further forward, but Quakers had the perfect answer.
Ellison cleverly flicked the ball over his marker, made ground into the box, crossed low into the six yard box for Nick Cusack, who looks every inch a £100,000 striker, to have a close range shot blocked, but Mardenborough, lurking behind, stabbed the ball home.
Shrewsbury put on both subs one of them Howard Clark, on loan with Quakers earlier in the season in an effort to save the game, and for a short spell put Quakers under real pressure.
But Quakers regained full control and could have added more.
O'Shaughnessy tried to chip Perks from 25 yards but failed admirably, Mardenborough twice shot wide looking for his hat trick, Gaughan twice broke through on his own but was denied by the keeper, and Ellison hit the post from an acute angle in the last minute.
Rugby Union
THE Yorkshire Cup, Shield and Courage championship fixture congestion is to be considered by the Yorkshire RFU at their monthly meeting tonight.
But the signs are that they are going to get tough with clubs that offer idle excuses for not getting their cup-ties out of the way.
Some clubs with injury problems and players missing through suspension have put off playing first round Yorkshire cup-ties.
One ludicrous situation involves Keighley and Old Hymerians.
The match was due to be played on January 25 but was postponed because of frost.
Keighley were not keen to visit the Humbersiders on Saturday because they claim that they had a sponsor lined up for a home game.
Keighley went into the Fixture Exchange Pool to find an opponent, only to find Hymerians in the pool too.
Before league rugby, the Yorkshire RFU relied on clubs to put Cup and County interest first but the secretary of the Yorkshire Cup committee, Mr Dennis Fox said yesterday: ‘If people are not going to play fair or straight, we are going to have to lay the law down.’
Many would add not before time.
Only two North Yorkshire clubs found grounds playable on Saturday and both no doubt would have preferred to watch England live on television after their matches ended in defeat.
Whitby were knocked out of the Yorkshire Shield 7–4 by the visitors to their heavy pitch, Wibsey (Bradford), while Knaresborough plunged to the heaviest defeat in the club's nine-year history when they went down 57–0 to the newly-formed Hull and ER club.
DARLINGTON'S dismal season plumbed new depths on Saturday when they were thrashed 83–6 by a Blaydon side just two divisions above them in the Courage League.
Although no one yesterday was able to confirm this as a record defeat, club officials admitted it was the biggest thrashing in their memories.
The scale of the defeat was laid firmly at the doors of several established players, who failed to turn out because they had made other arrangements on the basis that the match would fall victim to the frost.
There was little sympathy for them from club officials, with ‘apathy’ one of the words used to describe their attitude.
The result was that a scratch team made the trip north and in the end were powerless to stop Blaydon running in 15 tries.
Ironically, it was Darlington who took the lead with penalties by O'Kelly and Butler.
But by half time Blaydon were 27–6 ahead and after that they ran riot, with patched up Darlington doing their best to stem the flow.
To add to Darlington's problems, centre Steve Ellis was injured in the second half and club skipper Mark Layfield was called into action for the first time in two months following injury.
Redcar were involved in a much more competitive game against Guisborough, running out winners by 16–9.
Slack line-out play presented Guisborough flanker Chris Pern with a try which Paul McLuskey converted, but Redcar replied in the 16th minute through flanker Graeme Evans.
Guisborough went further ahead through a McLuskey penalty before Redcar full back Richard Forrest ran 70 yards for a superb try just before half time.
Redcar's forwards turned the screw in the second half and tries from hooker Phil Mohan and prop Phil Beal sealed the win.
Bishop Auckland were disappointed with their 28–0 defeat by Gateshead Fell, bottom of North East Division One, two leagues above Bishops.
Fell ran in seven tries but the scoreline could have been much greater as all the conversions and a penalty were missed.
The frost put paid to Mowden Park's home game, while Newcastle Gosforth warmed up for next weekend's Pilkington Cup fourth round tie at Manchester with a 27–9 win over Nottingham.
DARLINGTON manager Frank Gray agreed that his side gave one of their best displays of the season so far.
‘I was very pleased with the overall performance,’ he said.
‘We always looked capable of creating chances, and controlled the game for long spells.
‘Defensively we were pretty sound, and only had a couple of lapses.’
On the change in tactics to a three man forward line, he said: ‘I decided to play with three men up front to cause them problems back there.
They left themselves man to man at the back, leaving themselves wide open.
‘Everybody played well, and it was one of our best performances of the season.’
Assistant manager Tony Mcandrew said: ‘I thought we thoroughly deserved the points, and the most pleasing thing was the clean sheet.
It was a great team effort, and I thought we could have scored another two or three.’
Goal hero Steve Mardenborough added: ‘We knew we had to get a result because we've slipped up a little bit recently.
‘The manager told me to play out wide, and pull a defender out with me.
That seemed to leave a massive hole, which caused them problems.’
On the Quakers' goal of the season so far, he said: ‘I can't remember a lot about the build up, but the ball sort of bounced just right and I let fly.
‘As soon as it left my foot, it was going into the top corner, rising all the time.’
A TALENTED teenager gets a kick out of football but is also hitting a high note as a singer.
Tim Hole, at 17 the youngest player in Guisborough Town football team which is near to top of the Northern League table, and other members of a band at his school could be winging their way to fame.
He and his four fellow sixth formers at Barnard Castle School have won their way to the regional final of a music contest in Newcastle.
Tim, from Darlington, a member of the five-piece band The Scarecrows, has high hopes of becoming a professional footballer but his future may be decided if the band goes on to win the national final in London.
Apart from perhaps winning a chance to record prizes worth more than £16,000 are on offer to the winner and runners up.
FORMER window fitter Thomas Carter is off to a flying start in his new career.
Mr Carter, 21, of Darlington, has passed out of the School of Recruit Training at RAF Swinderby near Lincoln as Best Recruit of his Intake.
GROTBAGS, Tweedledee and Sexy Miss Santa went along to Darlington police station loaded down with moneybags.
The three better known as Marion Cowper, Lisa-Jane Walker and Jennifer Mclean handed over £580.35 raised from a fancy dress evening around the town's pubs and a charity fayre in Clark's Yard, Darlington.
The cash all in coins is to go towards the £14,000 appeal to create a child protection suite in Darlington, where child abuse victims and women sex assault victims can be dealt with in a pleasant atmosphere.
‘We thought it was a really good cause,’ said Mrs Cowper, who dressed up as Grotbags.
‘We're all concerned about children and their well-being.’
The project is a joint effort by Darlington Police and Durham County Council's social services department.
Det Insp Gordon Williams added: ‘We still have a long way to go before we reach our target.
We're grateful for any donations.’
DARLINGTON rally enthusiast Steve Parker had mixed emotions yesterday as he joined hundreds of spectators at Scotch Corner to see classic cars competing in the Monte Carlo Challenge.
Steve, 39, from Primrose Street, was due to be among the drivers setting out from Edinburgh for the gruelling trip to Monaco.
But in the final weeks of preparation Steve, and his co-driver Graham Robbins, from Staindrop, realised they would struggle to raise enough sponsorship.
So as the 48 assorted classic cars arrived at Scotch Corner around 3pm Steve and Graham's Jaguar XK150 was not among them.
‘We decided not to go into debt to take part but it was still hard just to be a spectator,’ said Steve.
The cars left the starting grid at Edinburgh Castle at 10.30am and most had reached Scotch Corner by 3pm.
They came down on the Pennines to Alston before joining the A66 and heading East for Scotch Corner.
The cars then travelled south on the A1 before turning off for Ripon.
THE show must go on.
That was the vow at Abbey School, Darlington, when thieves made off with one of their most vital props.
The wolf's head for the panto Little Red Riding Hood was stolen from a car outside the school.
The last performance of the panto is tonight at 7.30pm tickets are available from Jane Savage on Darlington  or Joanne Ackerman on Darlington .
ILKLEY are now almost certain to win area one of the Vauxhall men's indoor tennis trophy after they beat Barnard Castle at Ilkley.
The surprise defeat of Puma Sunderland away to Top Spin Darlington meant that with two games in hand Ilkley need to win only one of their last two matches to be the North-East representatives in the area play-offs.
Ilkley were without their top two players, Gary Henderson and Simon Ickringill.
Henderson has returned to America and will not be available for the rest of the competition.
The surprise result however, was at Teesside Airport where John Henderson and Gary Wanless ended the hopes of a weakened Puma Sunderland, winning 2–1.
SHILDON Strollers retained their leadership of the Durham Second Division at a canter when a weakened Wingate failed to offer any real threat despite the incentive of moving into third place with a win that would have toppled the home team from the No 1 spot.
The absence of the Bentham brothers and Trevor Robinson proved too great a hurdle against a competent home team that recovered from being 22–6 down after five minutes to take a 22–13 lead, then run the bench for a 77–49 victory.
South Moor still look threatening though in second place, just one point behind but with a game in hand.
They emphasised the point with a 94–52 win at Chester-le-Street.
Rob Harland (18 points) top scored for Norton again in the 58.39 home win over Belmont but they seemed to have left themselves with too much to do having lost four games already.
The closest score of the week came at Harwood and Jackson where Durham University moved closer off the bottom spot somewhat easier than the 58–52 final score suggests.
They led by 14 points at the break only to dry up three minutes from time when they were 58–42 ahead leaving Paul Carr to hit the last ten points of the game and be top scorer on 28 points.
The top game in Division Three was at Willington where Spectrum entertained Consett Cougers who stole the game three seconds from time with the first basket of the game from Ian Lockey who hit an amazing three pointer from well outside the line.
Convincing wins The game had been close throughout with Spectrum looking good for a win after Terry Parvin had hit a basket and a free throw to give them a last minute lead by 47 points to 45 until Lockey decided to steal the limelight to give Consett a 48–47 win.
Spennymoor also visited Willington and they came away with victory thanks to 18 points from Darren Shiel and 15 points from Steve Toman they won 63–39 at Parkside Imps.
The women's league produced four convincing wins as luckless Peterlee went down 7–15 at Tyneside and Darlington avenged an earlier reversal when they entertained Stockton Diamonds and won 8235.
Leaders Sunderland made the short trip to Seaham and things looked close at half time as they nosed in front 19–14.
The second half opened up with Theresa Harrison hitting ten points as Sunderland eased to a 47–29 victory.
An exciting game at Heathfield saw Dawn Nicholson top score on 22 points for the home team as they saw off the challenge of Shildon Aces by 68 points to 47.
The late arrival by 13 minutes of three of their key players left Peterlee with too much work to do at Consett where they went down in a first division game by 91 points to 58 as they were left wondering what effect Ivor James, Gord Laing and Allen Quarmby might have had had they been there for the start.
A first win of the season looked a possibility for Stocktonians when they led visiting Grindon 42–41 at the break.
The second half proved a nightmare as the visitors hit the first three baskets to take the lead for the first time and stay there for a 7670 victory.
Firebrand
LEO Smith, the retired Seaham bookie who burned his football boots after being substituted (Backtrack September 17) was like us at Seaham Red Star v Shildon on Saturday.
(So was former Sunderland star George Herd, but they didn't have substitutes in those days).
Seventy next birthday, Leo's looking forward to Good Friday when he captains his team in an annual charity match on Red Star's ground.
‘They can't take me off if I'm the skipper,’ he reasons.
We'd hoped to have a beer afterwards, but Leo had disappeared probably back to his daughter and girl friend.
His daughter's six, his girl friend a little bit older.
‘I'm still a sprightly lad,’ said Leo.
On a Roller
THE following morning we trooped up to watch Kneeton Park's continued, currently clarty, climb up the Hambleton Combination, third division.
Bottom last season with fewer points than a truncated triangle, the Middleton Tyas club now finds itself second, above Masham Reserves on goal difference.
Much credit for this transformation is given to team manager Barry Perkins, a genial and bespectacled Cockney who commutes each week between Richmond and the smoke.
Afterwards in the Shoulder of Mutton (Kneeton Park 1 Knayton 1) it transpired that he's in what used to be known as Tin Pan Alley probably the only manager in the Hambleton Combination (third division) who's also been a manager of the Bay City Rollers.
Just now he's working on a deal that could give him a big say in the life of a lady who'll ‘definitely’ be in the Top Ten within weeks.
But will she be second on goal difference above Masham Reserves?
Watch this space.
Gunners report
SENSING our recent sorrows, an elderly gentleman kindly sent an Arsenal badge in the mail.
Unfortunately the Post Office metal detectors thought this all rather suspicious, prompting the letter to be torn apart and then re-packeted.
Someone else, at least, knows that the Gunners are about to explode…
Leg up
DESCRIBING himself as ‘one of life's gricers and ground hoppers’ formidable combination Mr A W Hutchings writes from York.
Though he'll probably come by rail (‘gricer’[UU]train spotter) Mr Hutchings is particularly interested in the Northern League's unique ‘ground hoppers weekend,’ mentioned here a fortnight back.
There'll be eight games from Good Friday to Easter Sunday, with accommodation and between-venues travel for those seeking it and ground hoppers social evenings on Friday and Saturday.
Ubiquitous at all of them will be the caricature form of Harry Hopper pie eater, real ale quaffer and sedulous seeker of programmes.
Bought in advance, a £6 ‘passport’ will give admission to all matches whether or not the Hopper is part of the overall package.
Mr Hutchings and others can get full details from Neil Bennett, 5 Temple Buildings, Middleton St George, Darlington DL2 1EA.
IT'S 25 years since Malcolm Scott made big on the back pages, and still it rankles with him.
‘I was made a guinea pig,’ he says, ‘and being a guinea pig can hurt like hell.’
Born in South Shields, Scott was one of the 12 months a year men who played League football and County cricket.
Long described as a dying breed, and now just about stone dead, we'll have more of their all round number in about 15 paragraphs from now.
Though well remembered at Feethams, Scott's soccer career was relatively uneventful: 25 Newcastle United first team appearances between 1956–60; 47 for Darlington, 19 at York.
In his teens he'd taken 157 senior wickets (average 11.81) for Shields and made 29 Durham County appearances, claiming 65 wickets at 21.41.
Northamptonshire signed him for four years he shared digs with Colin Milburn and though he progressed less spectacularly than his former Durham colleague, Scott proved an able bowler.
In 1964 he took 113 wickets at an average 19.27; in a 185-match first class career his 461 victims cost 24.27 apiece.
But his career all but ended that August day in 1967 when the MCC announced he'd been suspended from bowling suspected of throwing for the rest of the season.
A statement said that after studying reports and films they were ‘not satisfied with his basic action.’
Malcolm Scott had never been called for throwing in his life, nor warned of what was to come.
The reaction in South Shields, where chiefly he is remembered as an all round nice guy, was ‘incredulity by all who remembered his smooth action’ recalls Clive Crickmer's history of cricket in the town.
The following season Scott was reinstated without action over his action.
Words had been enough; the damage was done.
‘My confidence went completely,’ he says.
‘I couldn't handle the pressure of being watched all the time.’
In 1969 he took just seven wickets, before retiring.
‘In those days you had Charlie Griffiths chucking them like a 90mph dart and I was bowling slow left arm.
‘I got done because they wanted a scapegoat.
Why didn't they examine my action first?
Can you imagine getting dragged down to Lord's only after you'd been hung up by every sports page in the country?
‘I still feel quite peeved about it; well, more than that really.’
Now 55, Scott is a social worker in Worcestershire, preferring golf to cricket or football.
Though he looks forward to Durham at Worcester, watching opportunities are limited ‘because there are a lot of unsocial hours in social work.’
The column is drawn to him through a piece in Mission Impossible, Darlington FC's first class fanzine, which touches upon post-war all rounders.
Malcolm Scott may have been the only footballer/cricketer at Feethams, but MI lists nine more who played against the Quakers.
Willie Watson, 211 appearances for Sunderland and later player/manager at Halifax Town, was one of the few who represented England at both sports.
H S Carter (Hull and Derbyshire) made a bit of a name for himself too.
The others are Chris Balderstone (Carlisle, Leicestershire); Ian Buxton (Port Vale, Derbyshire); Ian Hall (Mansfield, Derbyshire); Chris Marples (York City, Derbyshire); John Mitten Charlie's son (Exeter, Leicestershire); Phil Neale (Lincoln, Worcestershire) and Dennis Oakes (Peterborough, Warwickshire.)
Then there was Bill Barron, born in Herrington in 1917, who played his early cricket for Philadelphia and Durham County (21 appearances, 929 runs, average 33.)
After a brief football spell with Bishop Auckland, Barron made 169 Football League appearances with Charlton, Wolves and Northampton Town and 118 Championship appearances for Northamptonshire.
He's still in Northampton and, we're told, as broad Durham as ever.
The demise of the 12 months a year man is due mainly to the extra pressure, and greater financial rewards, in both sports.
But even 30 years ago there was sometimes a conflict of interests.
‘It was a magical time, young and daft and a full time sportsman, but you certainly weren't making your fortune,’ recalls Malcolm Scott.
‘Whether you were me or Jackie Milburn you got the same money, and it wasn't much.
‘Playing cricket as well always caused a bit of a problem come April, unless you weren't in the team in which case they couldn't give a stuff.
‘I remember the winter of 1962–3 when Feethams was frozen over from Boxing Day until March and the pile up of fixtures was horrendous.
‘I wanted off to Northampton in April and Darlington still had about a third of the season to play.
‘Little Eddie (Eddie Carr, the manager) got pretty upset and just told me to sod off.
You couldn't serve two masters, I suppose.’
Sitting room only at final
RUGBY LEAGUE: The Stones Bitter Premiership final at Old Trafford on Sunday, May 17, is to be made all-ticket for the first time.
Work starts in April in developing the ground into an all-seater stadium and the capacity will be reduced from 48,000 to 33,000, with only 3,000 standing places instead of the usual 19,000.
Bowling on
CRICKET:
New South Wales continued their Sheffield Shield renaissance with a resounding innings defeat of South Australia in Sydney yesterday to move equal second behind last year's champions, Victoria.
Nice walk
ATHLETICS:
Russian Grigory Korniev broke the world indoor 5km walk record in the Commonwealth of Independent States' championships.
Mountfield move
FOOTBALL:
Wolves have completed the £150,000 signing of Aston Villa centre half Derek Mountfield, who has been on loan at Molineux for the past 27 months.
Cup chance
FOOTBALL:
Simon Clarke, 20, with just a minute of first team experience behind him, has forced his way into West Ham's squad for tonight's FA Cup fourth round replay at Wrexham.
Commercial man
FOOTBALL:
Northern League second division club Esh Winning have appointed John Hindhaugh as commercial manager.
Coaching job
CRICKET:
Doug Ferguson, the County Durham-born former national cricket coach for the North of England, is to coach Bermuda when they face the England A team in a forthcoming tour of the Caribbean.
Team wanted
SNOOKER:
The South West Durham Snooker League has a vacancy for one more team.
A side within 15 miles of Darlington is required for Tuesday night matches and anyone interested should contact the League secretary on Darlington .
Winners all
BOXING:
Shildon ABC had five winners and Darlington four in Saturday's North-East divisional schools boxing championships.
Through to the next stage at Knottingley a week on Saturday are Nigel Wright, Steve Hodgson, Neil Patterson, David Evans and Craig Wake (Shildon) and Stuart Hall, Jim Smith, Roger Bowers and Aaron Kelly (Darlington).
THE draw for the last sixteen of the FA Trophy yesterday threw up a battle of the Irish.
Northerner Tommy Cassidy, manager of Gateshead, is pitted against Southerner Gerry Daly, manager of Telford, with Daly having home advantage in the tie on February 22.
Gateshead were hoping for a home draw, but they will go into the game full of confidence after defeating 1990 winners Barrow in the second round on Saturday.
Three times winners Telford, meanwhile, have struggled to finally overcome two Northern League sides in Northallerton and Guisborough in earlier rounds.
The two sides have already met in the league, Telford winning 2–0 at the International Stadium, before Cassidy's reign began.
Daly, meanwhile, has paid tribute to Northern League Northallerton, who put up a battling display before being beaten 3–0 by the Conference club on Saturday.
The former Eire and Manchester United midfielder said: ‘They could have had one or two goals before we took the lead.
‘They tried to come and play football, and battled well.
They caused us plenty of problems.’
CLEVELAND Bridge manager Phil Shute is hoping his team can pull further away from the bottom of the table when they play Esh Winning at Neasham Road tomorrow night.
Shute took over at the Northern League Second Division club in November, and together with assistant Peter Boddy has pulled the club out of any immediate danger.
He said: ‘It was a struggle at first, because when we took over, we discovered that most of the team had left, so we had to find players quickly.
‘We've searched the local leagues for talent in an effort to bring in new blood, and hopefully a few more will be coming in the near future.’
Bridge moved up a place at the weekend to fourth from bottom, without playing a game, as Bedlington had three points deducted for playing an ineligible player, and so swapped places with the Darlington club.
Shute will probably start the game tomorrow night, as he has work doubts over defender Dave Bowman and striker Mark Shield, while another midfielder, Micky George will have a fitness test.
Noel Young, signed from Evenwood, will make his debut.
Cleveland's game with Esh tomorrow night is not the only rearranged match in progress.
Guisborough take on Northallerton in a First Division game, while Second Division promotion chasers Durham tackle Shotton. — BLYTH and Northallerton are the latest clubs to inform the Northern League that they will take promotion at the end of the season if it comes their way.
Under league rules, the Northern League must be informed by the end of January if any club wishes to take promotion if it is offered to them.
Gretna have already done so, but Blyth and Northallerton have also revealed that they have informed the league.
Blyth's decision comes as a surprise because of their opposition to the pyramid during the Eighties, while Northallerton's letter is indicative of their ambition to progress beyond the Northern League.
FORMER Bishop Auckland and Gateshead full back Paul Doolan has been released by Barrow, and is now looking for a club in the North-East.
Doolan was part of the Gateshead team which clinched promotion to the Conference two seasons ago, but left when Tony Lee arrived at the International Stadium.
DAVE McAughtrie, Harrogate Town's central midfielder, is expected to sign for Goole Town this week.
IT PROBABLY never existed, the England where everybody went dancing to a big band on a Friday night and tripped the light fantastic and moved romantically, cheek to cheek, with their best girl or their best boy, and where there was always a full moon outside.
But it ought to have done.
That was a place where all the men had crisp, white shirts and twinkle toes, all the women had elegant dresses and steps to match and Glenn Miller or Harry Roy played all night and some of the morning.
Chatting yesterday to Steve Wright was to be taken back there.
‘You will probably never be able to bring back the era of ballroom dancing,’ he said.
‘Or if you do it will be a long, long process.
But we're trying.’
The latest part of his attempt is to hire a real big band to entertain the organisation of which he is chairman, the Dolphin Sunday Dance Club of Darlington.
This is a distinctly unromantic sounding but buoyant group which has so far twirled its way round to records.
But ballroom dancing is an activity that screams out for a band.
Thus the Cleveland Dance Orchestra has been booked for two evenings with the Dolphineers.
‘I'm sure it will make a difference,’ said Steve Wright, a ballroom dancer who happens to share his name with a Radio One disc jockey, a man who probably never played a Glenn Miller record in his life.
‘It's all part of encouraging the growth.
There's not an organisation like ours round here.
Plenty of tea dances and sequence dancing but if you don't know the sequence you can't do it.
We want people just to go round the floor.’
Which sounds as it should be, as it was.
The reality, said Steve (the ballroom dancer, not the DJ) was that everybody was in couples today.
In the old days of the dance halls people could turn up separately and get a dance.
The difficulty with restoring the former glories was that many bands had outpriced themselves.
Fees of £2,500 were not uncommon.
As Dolphineers pay £1 each Sunday night such prices would be prohibitive.
When the Cleveland Dance Band plays the price will be £2.
‘They're excellent,’ said Steve.
‘I went over to see them in a tea dance one Friday and they said it was like they were being auditioned.
Well, I think they're perfect.’
The band has been booked twice, on February 23 and March 22.
If they are a hit, to use a word perhaps not of the big band era, it is probable they will be booked monthly.
‘People are looking for something different,’ said Steve, a chiropodist, which seems an ideal profession to be indulging in lots of ballroom dancing, ‘but it has to be of good quality.’
So if it never existed before perhaps that England will, one day in the future.
In the unclear
AFTER the uplifting win at Shrewsbury the gallant Quakers move out of the bottom four in Division Three and up to chairman Dick Corden's stated target of fifth bottom.
The victory of course is precisely what was required.
Fifth bottom is quite enough for the chairman and the manager to continue their policy of keeping the fans in the dark.
Ida McAninly, of St Albans Street, Tow Law, says it's years since she stood on Witton Park Station, but the memories are brought back by this photograph.
‘I think it is a men's outing,’ writes Mrs McAninly, whose maiden name was Hindmoor.
‘My father and uncle (Richard Hindmoor and John Calvert) are in the first row standing.
‘Both are wearing caps — my father is the only one with a cigarette in his hand and Uncle John Calvert has his famous watch-chain on show.
Both have buttonholes.
‘We lived at Witton Park between 1908 and 1914 so this must have been taken sometime during this period,’ adds Mrs McAninly.
Do you have any old photographs?
Send them to Way We Were, Echoes, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, Co Durham.
DL1 1NF.
We pay £10 for each one used.
A MONTH ago Echo Memories told the tale of The Theatre Royal's coat of arms.
It seems, however, that the stone sculpture was not the only piece of the theatre to survive demolition in 1938.
According to Mr S Raisbeck of Selby Crescent (assistant manager at the replacement Regal Cinema 1948–51) the whole of the north wall of the Regal is the original wall of The Theatre Royal and so must date back to the 1880s.
Meet a man proud to go in by the tradesmen's entrance
MR PETER Smythe is a trader and proud of it.
‘I am not scared of walking down Bondgate with my checked trousers and apron on,’ says the owner of the Smythe confectionery chain, now part-way through a two-year stint as chairman of the British Confectioners' Association.
‘I am not afraid of calling myself a trader despite the fact it is now rather fashionable to describe the field you work in as a profession,’ he says.
‘The way people view traders in this country compared to other countries is very poor.
‘If we afforded them the respect they deserve the respect they are given in other European countries then the standard of service we would get would be a lot higher,’ says the 55-year-old Swiss-trained baker.
A willingness to stand up and promote his trade with gusto typifies Mr Smythe's approach to his job as chairman his Association.
He ends his term of office in September when he addresses a national conference for his members which, fittingly, is to be held in Darlington.
He opened his first shop in Bondgate with the help of his father.
Three other outlets quickly followed in the town, with others in Yarm and Stockton.
Now, a quarter of a century after that first opening, Mr Smythe has been able to work for the good of the trade which has brought him travel, skill, and national recognition.
Travel came when Mr Smythe left Sedbergh School and the security of the family home in Sunderland for a three-year apprenticeship at the Arosa confectionery school in Switzerland.
After passing out top of his class he signed up for his National Service and travelled around Europe, first with the King's Dragoon Guards and then as an officer in the Catering Corps.
Back in civvy street he landed a job at the Strand Cornerhouse in London; from there a number of jobs with skilled confectioners allowed him to accumulate the experience needed to go it alone.
It is these highly-skilled experts who make up the 85-year-old association and exclusive club over which Mr Smythe now presides.
‘Membership of the association is limited to 60 confectioners.
Anyone wanting to join has to apply and needs a two-thirds vote in favour to be allowed in,’ says Mr Smythe, who lives at Green Bank, Heighington, near Darlington.
Much of the discussion at recent conferences has been on the recession and how hard it is hitting the industry.
The challenge of the wider European market has also figured: on the continent confectioners are both more respected and much more common than in Britain.
Already there are signs of an influx of French confectioners into this country.
Mr Smythe's own 23-year-old son, Andrew, has worked for French confectioner fairly new to Britain the Maison Blanc in Oxford and he will soon take the reins of the family company, his training complete.
Mr Smythe's two other children are Catherine, aged 25, a graduate co-ordinator, and Nicola, 19, studying estate management at Newcastle Polytechnic.
Success at last from the bowels of a Hercules
WHEN he wasn't fighting wars, you could almost guarantee Sqn.
Ldr.
Kevin Ottaway would have his head stuck in a book studying for an Open University degree.
And his seven years of study have paid off, with his name among those of this week's successful candidates.
Sqn.
Ldr.
Ottaway, who is stationed at Catterick and has two children, even wrote his first eight-hour assignment for his last course in the cargo hold of the Hercules as they flew out to the Gulf battle zone last year.
‘I couldn't get to sleep,’ said the man who has also served in Germany, Cyprus, the Falklands and Northern Ireland.
His studies also helped to relieve the boredom when he spent almost five months in the Falklands in 1985.
‘I had a lot of spare time to study and it was a useful diversion as there wasn't much else to do,’ said the 37-year-old, who lives in Darlington.
He joined the RAF fresh from A-levels and says he decided to go for the degree so he would have another string to his bow.
He plans to leave the service in December this year and, with the renewed confidence of a graduate, is already applying for work.
‘Once I got going, I didn't want to stop,’ he said of his years of study.
‘It was great fun and it was nice to met other people not involved in the services.’
Many fellow students who fell by the wayside over the years did so through domestic pressure, added the squadron leader, who attributed his success to the invaluable support of his wife, Fay, a midwife at the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton.
‘For a married person it isn't something you can do without the support of your partner.
It takes so much of your time, 15–20 hours a week from February to October and sometimes a lot more,’ he said.
He added: ‘It's been brilliant in the Air Force and I wouldn't have missed it.
But not having a degree would hinder my chances of getting a job.’
He also believes his air force skills will benefit a career in business or commerce.
BRASS bands competed in a hard-fought contest over the weekend.
The annual grading contest run by the Durham County Brass Band League at Peterlee attracted 37 bands.
League secretary Peter Dalby said competition was fierce.
He said: ‘It works like the football league with bands being promoted or moving down.
It is based on results from the last three years.’
A bonus to the competition was the presentation of the British Bandsman Award for 1991 to the president of the league Tom Finkel.
The league won the award because it was judged to be the association doing the most for its member bands.
Previously the award had gone to composers and arrangers.
Mr Dalby said: ‘We are very pleased about it.’
The grading contest is sponsored by Easington Council, Durham County Council, the Northern Clubs Federation Breweries and the Musicians' Union.
A COP-A-GRAM who stripped in a busy railway station has escaped prosecution.
David Tuckett, a strip-a-gram with the Flickers agency, startled passengers at Bank Top station, Darlington when, wearing just a loincloth, he slapped handcuffs on his victim.
British Transport police were not amused and detained him.
Police had considered taking action against David as they said he was carrying an offensive weapon his bendy rubber truncheon.
But Insp.
Ian Griffiths, from British Transport police, said David would not be prosecuted.
‘But he will be given some advice,’ he said.
It is an offence under railway bye-laws to be disorderly, offensive or indecent in a station.
But it is not an offence to dress up as a policeman unless the uniform is used for personal gain.
David said he was pleased the police had decided not the take the matter further.
He said: ‘I thought it would be a bit petty if they did.
‘I have done it thousands of times before and will do it thousands of times again.’
Angela Robinson, who runs Flickers, said she was relieved the matter was all over.
ONE of the founders of successful North Yorkshire food group Dalepak has died after a two year battle against leukaemia.
Frank Carr died on January 24 aged 64, leaving a widow Ann and children Susan and Simon.
Mr Carr, of Croft, near Darlington, was one of three people who jointly founded Dalepak in 1976.
He was a chartered engineer and designed Dalepak's two factories at Leeming Bar, near Northallerton.
The firm now employs 640 people in the manufacture of frozen foods and ready meals, and its six month pre-tax profits to October 31 were £1.7m.
Dalepak chief executive Chris Ivory said Mr Carr had been the engineer of the company's firm foundations.
‘He was a very caring person who took a great interest in the people in the business, he was very thoughtful.
‘I can't think anyone would have an adverse word to say about him, he was always so polite, considerate and caring to others,’ Mr Ivory said.
Mr Carr retired from Dalepak in 1988 but stayed on as a nonexecutive director, and was also a non-executive director with Hartlepool-based building group Cecil Yuill.
He was a keen golfer and was known for his interest in the Stock Exchange.
Other hobbies included bridge, shooting and gardening.
Mr Carr contracted leukaemia two years ago.
A private funeral was held at St Peter's Church in Croft.
Magpies' self-inflicted wounds
I WAS delighted that Newcastle City Council leader Jeremy Beecham will not bail out the ailing Newcastle United FC (Echo Jan 15).
It is the function of local authorities to provide services to the public at a reasonable cost (ie: giving the community charge payer value for money) and not to prop up ailing businesses due to their own mismanagement.
It is now coming home to clubs in a similar position to Newcastle, building expensive useless stands they can't afford.
So in my opinion, they should take a leaf out of the books of people in industry and pay both management and staff on results.
As for the statement made by Sir John Hall, I would hope the Newcastle City councillors will decide on the development of Newcastle FC's Benwell site purely on planning grounds and not be influenced by the financial state of Newcastle United which in my opinion is self-inflicted.
James Wayman, JP, 37 White House Drive, Sedgefield.
Beavers' night:
The 1st Weardale Beaver Scouts meet from 5.15pm to 6.30pm each Thursday night at the Barrington Hall.
IT WAS a night of drama at the finals of the Durham CIU Jonty Ward Memorial Trophy team darts competition held at Rowlands Gill Victory Club.
An hour before games were due to begin, the club was plunged into darkness by a major fault at the local sub-station, just as officials were setting the stage for the event.
Fortunately a supply of candles was found and as the competing teams and their supporters arrived they settled down to some serious drinking as darts players do and nearly cleared the stock of bottled beer before the lights came back on.
The drama continued throughout the evening as the contest got under way, with fortunes changing with every throw of the darts.
The first semi-final between Bishop Auckland WMC and Deneside Social resulted in a win for Bishop Auckland.
Billy Row Workmens beat Belle Vue WMC in the second semi-final and eventually succumbed to Bishop Auckland in the final.
Durham Branch president George Lawson presented the Jonty Ward trophy to the Bishop team and also an award from sponsors Telmar Electronics.
George Lawson was also on hand, along with divisional representative Keith Ray, to hand over the awards at the Durham CIU No 9 Division Indoor Games League Presentation Night.
Winners included: Darts: New House (Esh Winning) R Bradley, J Milburn, H Hodgson, T Johnson, T Finley, J Gilchrist, K Robson, J Robson.
Esh and Waterhouses: singles, I Sillet, Doubles J Milburn, J Robson (New House) Dominoes doubles: B Jones, H Hodgson.
— MEMBERS of Rise Carr WMC will be able to drink free all night from 7pm at next Friday's Valentine Night Show featuring comedian Al Meechie and Fiona George.
There's only one snag it will cost £10 to get in.
— NOT one, but two star groups are to be featured in a special Easter show at Belle Vue Social Club, Hartlepool.
Popular crowd pullers Talisman will be joined by Alligator for the show on April 18.
Tickets, which are limited, are now on sale at £3.50 each.
IT was a mild shock to discover yesterday that St Valentine's Day is something other than a jolly wheeze fashioned by the greetings card industry to steal our hearts and an unfair proportion of our wages.
There are no English churches named after the old boy, or old boys as it happens.
The designation marking the canonization is frequently deleted so that Val merely sounds like a dilettantish scamp with an eye for the girls and a desire for a good time.
By way of a reminder that there are apparently religious connotations, as there are in that December festival, there will be a special service next week in Masham Methodist Church.
It is part of the building's centenary and all those couples married there down the years are invited.
‘It will be one of those nice occasions,’ said the minister, the Rev Dr Maurice Staton.
‘We hope people will come and take the chance to remember their wedding day, one of the memorable days of their lives.’
It was, he said, a reunion of sorts.
Masham Methodists Marital Old Boys.
Of course, as Dr Staton observed numbers may be diminished not simply by failure to trace couples but because some of them are no longer couples.
Chatting to him about the service (on February 16, two days after the Valentines' martyrdom) it was clear he might take the opportunity to make a point or two about the state of modern human relationships as not touched on in your average Valentine's card.
‘There are ups and downs in marriage,’ he said.
‘It isn't always easy but it's those hard patches where you come together.
But this is a throwaway society.
You change things if they're not going well.
You change your car and there's a tendency to change your partner.’
Now, all this may be true but it is not the message that comes blaring from greeting cards shops in North Yorkshire or anywhere else.
It is a new accent on the day.
St Valentine, incidentally, was a Roman priest martyred on the Flaminian Way during Claudius's time.
There was another Valentine, a bishop martyred in Rome, also on February 14.
Neither of them are obviously connected with lovers or courting couples.
That link, somewhat tenuous, comes from birds who traditionally mate on February 14.
Those facts aside, Masham Methodists could possibly reach out to 80 couples who were married in the church.
The small number has nothing to do with separations but with traditional rural marriages.
Dr Staton said human rites of passage (weddings, funerals, baptisms) were traditionally carried out, even by Methodists, in the parish church.
It was not only because the parish church was more attractive but because of roots and traditions.
Those, on the other hand, who gladly settled for Masham Methodist can make contact.
Similarly, those christened there are invited to a special Mothering Sunday in March.
There are events throughout this year the old chapel was established in 1819.
Next week's begs the thought, however, of how many will go to church on St Valentine's Day.
Skill and thrill of the chase
IN MRS Barrass' description of ‘hunting horror’(HAS Jan 29) it is difficult to believe that the couple running up and down egging on the hounds (not dogs, please) were real hunt supporters.
To the knowledgeable this is not normal practice.
In any case, such activity would be unlikely to distract the hounds because they hunt by scent.
However, it would certainly confuse the fox, thereby causing it to run erratically as described.
That the fox was exhausted is questionable for it did gain the cover of the woods and in all probability survived.
To call hunting an upper class hobby is to misname it; all classes of people participate.
Riding to hounds, taking fences and obstacles along a route dictated by the fox is a very skilled activity.
As a follower I marvel at the cunning of the quarry and the pertinacity of the pursuers and often have a sneaking admiration for the ‘one that got away’.
G.W. Siddle, 18 Latimer Road, Darlington.
If anyone is in any doubt as to whether or not a fox suffers when hunted by hounds, they should contact the League Against Cruel Sports to arrange to view their videos locally they will be left in no doubt whatsoever about the cruelty inflicted.
Surely drag-hunting is the obvious answer.
Routes could be planned for a variety of jumps etc.
No land would be crossed unless previous permission had been granted.
The excitement of a group of horses galloping together with hounds at heel would be just as intense.
There would be no job losses and there would be no killing/ suffering.
Nature does take care of itself if allowed to.
The fox is needed in the food chain.
P. Lightfoot, Falls Fold, Hett, Croxdale.
WORK will not start on a new golf course near Darlington until legal agreements have been finalised with the developers.
Permission has been given for an 18-hole golf course at the Redworth Hall Hotel, near Heighington.
But work cannot start on the course for some months.
Councillors in Darlington gave the development the go-ahead after they heard the hotel company Tomorrow's Leisure has made several changes to the original application submitted last year.
Most of the changes affect the amount of landscaping which is necessary for the golf course.
Other changes related to the number of trees due to be felled at Redworth Woods.
Yesterday Peter Shovlin, of course designers Anthony Walker associates, said there are ‘fine details’ which need to be resolved with the lawyers at Darlington Council before diggers can move on to the site.
Last night hotel manager, Brian Philpotts, said he was delighted with the decision.
‘This is what I have been waiting for to really make the hotel complete.’
He says that the addition of a golf course will make the hotel more popular both for business visitors and tourists.
Mr Philpotts believes that with luck work can begin in early April.
‘I'm setting a deadline to open the course in spring 1994, but if we can have it open in the late summer of 93 that would be ideal,’ he said.
CAN I thank Gadfly (Echo January 29) for putting a face and name to me and providing some, albeit sarcastic, coverage in The Northern But there is a little more to the story than he implies.
The reason the two items appeared on the same day is your Editor's responsibility.
The letter was written three weeks before it was published.
This kind of delay seems common.
When I wanted publicity for a young persons' trip to London, arranged to allow them to talk to MPs of all parties, your paper did not publish the Press release.
Nonpublication of Liberal Democrat Press releases by your paper seems to be a common event, my colleagues inform me, despite repeated attempts to prompt your Editor.
I'm sure I don't need to inform Gadfly that it is the media that put faces to names.
Perhaps the reason that I am the invisible man (in Gadfly terms) is because I don't frequent the same watering holes as your journalists.
Or is it because it's my round?
Peter Bergg,.
SO Gadfly (Echo January 29) is puzzled by the apparent silence of the Liberal Democrat Prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, Peter Bergg?
A chat with his colleagues in the newsroom would have quickly revealed the reason for this.
Peter Bergg has put in a large number of Press statements reflecting his current activities on behalf of Darlington's residents but the vast majority have been totally ignored by the Echo's reporters.
In the coming election campaign Darlington will be kept well informed of Peter Bergg's viewpoint by our leafleters and canvassers, but not perhaps by the pages of The Northern Coun John Cresswell, Liberal Democrat, 87 Westmoreland Street, Darlington.
Objection
I STRONGLY object to last week's South Durham Viewpoint (Echo February 3).
I attended the launch of the Wearfit Club but did so in order to discover what the circus was all about.
As a former chairman of the leisure committee, I am well aware of the work done to promote the super leisure facilities provided throughout Wear Valley by the former Labour council.
I did give not give my public support to the scheme, in fact I feel most strongly that the cost of membership or the large increases in charges proposed will only succeed in driving away the poor.
Moreover, the commercial approach now evident suggests that this is merely a first step towards privatisation.
We need to continue to promote the health and well-being of our community but the introduction of a millionaire's card scheme will not work.
Health and fitness for all at an affordable price will always be the aim of Labour councillors on Wear Valley District Council and this scheme will merely place the excellent facilities out of the reach of many ordinary people.
Coun Keith Reed,.
Thank you
I NEED to thank a lot of people after my recent stay in the coronary unit of Bishop Auckland General Hospital.
First, to my good neighbours who very quickly alerted my GP and to two splendid ambulancemen to whom I am told I owe my existence.
I remember little of my stay in the intensive care unit, but I am told they cared for me every second of the night and day.
The nursing care and kindness of the staff of Ward 14 was excellent and greatly appreciated.
I must not forget the back-up staff and the community staff who visited me so promptly after my return home.
Finally, to my daughter who was a pillar of strength.
I know people get tired of appeals, but I urge them to organise fundraising for the echo-cardiograph equipment as undoubtedly a great number of people will follow me through the coronary unit and the machine will surely be of great help to them.
L E Fenton,.
Time to laugh
THE good councillors of Darlington, bent on keeping the wages of sin away from the eyes of their townsfolk, may ponder the growing demands of the homosexual community to have more representation in the ranks of the police.
Barring the Chippendales and now this talk of withholding Swan Lake from its citizens' eyes will, I think, be small potatoes compared with the prospect of having homosexuals in the police force.
Already a number of police forces have issued directives against discrimination making it inevitable that Darlington police will have a homosexual policeman.
The townsfolk deserve better guidance from its leaders.
They are becoming a laughing stock.
B Naylor,.
My pleasure
AT St James Park on Saturday just about everyone seemed to be on a winner.
Though he's still injured, Mick Quinn's horse trained by Mick Channon and prophetically called Pleasure Ahead — won the 1.30 at Lingfield at 5–1.
KIMBLESWORTH Cricket Club are newly elevated to the Millburngate Durham County League.
‘Come up and see us some time,’ they wrote, dangling as bait the finest toasties West of the A1.
In addition, they promised, we'd at last learn the real reason why Bobby Orton walked off the field against Burnhope.
What they desperately sought in return was the score on Evenwood skipper P W Teesdale, the Big Bad Wolf of Durham County League cricket.
We told them he was as soft as clarts.
Kimblesworth is four or five miles North of Durham, and is not to be confused with Nettlesworth which is 25 yards further on.
Also to avoid confusion (and shortage of breath) the Kimblesworth and Nettlesworth exServicemen's Club is known universally as The Hut and the cricket club, which is in a hut, is known as the cricket club.
The clubhouse displays several notices warning that bad language will not be tolerated and another, more succinct, that says ‘No bloody swearing.’
There were no bloody toasties, either, due to a malfunction in the machine's mainframe computer, or something.
What else is there to do in Kimblesworth, we'd asked the taxi driver on the way from Durham railway station?
‘Not a lot,’ he said.
Formed in 1879, the cricket club has had more success in the past decade than in the previous century Vaux North West Durham League champions for the past four seasons.
They may also have cricket's champion talker in fast bowler Brent ‘Bomber’ Smith who commutes from Stockton and looks like a 39-year-old Clark Gable.
Former first team captain Peter Crossley, now fixtures secretary and holder of the coveted Golden Duck award, insists that once when Smith rang he laid the phone down, did the week's shopping and returned 90 minutes later.
‘Bomber was still talking,’ he says, finally getting a word in edgeways.
‘He hadn't even realised I'd gone,’
Much travelled in North-East cricket, Smith takes it in good part.
‘It's the best club I've ever played at,’ he says, concisely.
‘Win or lose, every Saturday night's like they've won the championship in here.’
Next season they'll be augmented by teetotal Aussie pro Gavin Corcoran said to spend on the bandit what he saves on the beer and by a new scorebox built by hirsute skipper Colin ‘Winker’ Watson and resembling the leaning tower of Kimblesworth.
‘Someone stole the bubble out of me spirit level,’ he protests.
Former Hartlepool, Carlisle and York City footballer Kevin Dixon, now at Gateshead, is also among their number; Robson Smith will be celebrating 25 years as a player.
‘I made me second team debut when I was eight year old,’ he claims.
Frankie Craig, the groundsman, held us in conversation too.
The reason for their excellent wickets, he said, was that he'd changed from Mendip loam to Surrey loam.
‘It's a feather bed.’
said Bomber Smith, ‘What good's a feather bed to a fast bowler.’
Perhaps Frankie was a loam shark, we supposed.
At ten o'clock they gave us a handsome club sweater, which was so generous we decided to let someone else win the domino handicap.
It was only half way back to Darlington that we realised we never had learned why Bobby Orton walked off against Burnhope.
NORTH-EAST HOCKEY Round-up NORTON Hockey Club's Philip Hardy was selected for England Under 18s at the weekend.
Philip who lives in Darlington, and attended the town's Longfield Comprehensive school before going on to the Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College, has already represented his country at under 15 and under 16 levels.
Next month sees him attending training sessions at Bisham Abbey.
He will be playing in the home internationals at Aberdeen between April 3 and 5.
‘The one I can't wait for is the European Cup.
That's on April 1620.
The only problem is that it's at Cannock and not somewhere exotic in Europe.’
Philip left Darlington Hockey Club a few seasons ago to improve his standard of play and joined Norton.
His new club are currently lying fourth in the Northern Premier League.
THE early morning jingle has an exciting sound to it.
Not just the clink of milk bottles, but more strangely, the sounds of a group with a few pintas of potential.
The ghinocerous part about it is the mega-big way that Citizen Kane have put the title single of their first and latest album on the doorsteps for milk drinkers who want some rhythm and blues with breakfast, in a tape on offer with extra pintas.
The word Ghinocerous sums up how the band see their potential.
Citizen Kane, an eight-piece band of rhythm and blues and boogie-musicians are three saxophonists, two guitarists and a double bassist plus a drummer, who have played nationally since 1981 and in their current line-up for three years.
‘We were in a Stockton recording studio at the time when the MMB asked the guy who runs it for ideas of music and we were suggested,’ says Meadows who with schooldays chum Anthony Roe are the lead vocals.
‘We're all from the NorthEast.
Anthony and I'm from Shildon and learnt to play when at King James's Grammar school, Bishop Auckland.
Mick Shoulder plays the electric and double bass, and adds his voice here and there.
Ian Halford is the drummer.
Tenor saxes Alan Thompson and Sue Ferris who also plays flute, are completed by Graham Hardy on trumpet and John McGough an alto sax and blues harp.
‘On a Sunday afternoon we all go to practise in Henknowle community centre at Bishop Auckland.’
Intriguingly last year Meadows was contracted to bring out a works manual on BS5750, the British Standard for consistent total quality care: ‘I had to read up all I know and produce a manual from that in six months.’
Does it follow that Citizen Kane is seeking the BS5750 business accreditation for playing and performances?
‘We have made our own management team, to control and reinvest profits into the group.
And we keep records of bookings, stating what is expected of us, and what we expect from a booking,’ says the cheery singer.
‘We have a business plan as far as mid-1993 and are going professional by this Christmas.’
This month sees their first CD album on their own R&M label; a cassette is on sale now.
Citizen Kane curiously go down a treat more in the Midlands than the North though 48 bookings nationally fill this year's diary.
They are also looking to gigs in Holland, France and Germany for 1993 the year for going into Europe.
‘I feel we're getting there.
We don't get the standard pre-typed letters back from companies.
They are personally written,’ Meadows remarks wryly.
Citizen Kane have recorded Beaver Hunt and two more tracks for their second album.
Refreshingly like Ghinocerous, the lyrics are penned by Roe, Meadows and Shoulder.
The 11.4 minute track on Ghinocerous flip-side titled 16 Men, about a man finding 16 men in his marriage bed, has a strong storyline Roe loves telling and the group love acting on stage.
Other memorable tracks are Flip Flop Fish Fry, a re-arranged Fifties song, and City Streets on the A-side.
Roe has a strong earthy voice which wheedles around the tunes.
At home on stage live, his enjoyment comes over on the album which has no extra studio gloss to them.
With Citizen Kane, what you hear on tape is how they sing live.
This year's ‘local’ booking they say is at Old Shildon Working Men's Club on February 14.
— Citizen Kane is at Station Hotel, Stokesley, Feb 13; Inventions pub, Newcastle, Feb 17; The Victoria, Whitley Bay, Feb 19; Harvey's, Darlington, Feb 23; Harvey's, Stockton, March 5.
OFFICIALS of an apparently doomed workingmen's club have been given fresh hope that it could survive.
Last week The Northern Echo disclosed how Durham county councillors had voted to repossess the Duke Street premises in Darlington occupied by the Durlia Club.
No rent has been paid since July 1990 and the club has been shut since a serious fire last April.
Yesterday a spokesman for the club committee said officials had spent months trying to rescue the Durlia, which has more than 800 members.
He said: ‘Things were looking very bad because the lowest estimate we received for putting the club right after the fire was £180,000.
In addition we were going to have to buy the premises for £95,000, and pay off the old debts.
All we got from the insurance company was a sum for fixtures and fittings.
‘But within the last few days we have received a letter from our insurance assessor that gives us fresh hope.
It seems we may be able to pursue a negligence claim in respect of the fire.
If that comes off, we could be in a position to buy the premises and re-open the club.’
The spokesman said he had been advised to give no further details of the possible legal action at this stage.
Meanwhile, officials had instructed their agents to ask the county council to postpone a planned sale of the Duke Street building.
A VET from Stockton, firemen and an RSPCA inspector were honoured yesterday for rescuing a pony trapped after it slipped down a drain.
The six-month-old animal fell through a hole less than two feet wide in a field at Great Burdon, Darlington and was imprisoned 12ft underground in a narrow chamber for a day until a man walking his dogs discovered her and called the RSPCA.
Even though the foal was hauled to safety it had to be put down shortly afterwards when a bad gash in one leg became infected.
The rescue team was presented with prestigious commendation certificates from the RSPCA by the Mayor of Darlington, Coun Rita Fishwick.
The team included Stockton vet Jackie Paterson, who clambered into the drain and injected the foal with sedatives.
FIREFIGHTERS, a vet and an RSPCA inspector were yesterday officially recognised for rescuing a pony trapped after it slipped down a drain.
The six-month-old pony fell through a hole less than two feet wide in a field at Great Burdon, Darlington.
She was imprisoned 12 feet underground in a narrow chamber for a day until a man walking his dogs discovered her and called the RSPCA.
Staff from the animal charity worked alongside Darlington firefighters and a vet to sedate the terrified animal, then winch it above ground.
Minutes after the hours-long rescue in August 1990 a flash storm filled the drain with water.
Even though the foal was hauled to safety it had to be put down shortly afterwards when a bad gash in one leg became infected.
Yesterday the rescue team were reunited when they were presented with prestigious commendation certificates from the RSPCA.
Stockton vet Jackie Paterson, who clambered into the drain and injected the foal with sedatives, said it had been petrified when she had gone down.
‘We think the drain cover must have been removed by accident by a farm machine and no-one had realised at the time,’
Station officer John Finlay said the firefighters had their work cut out to lift the animal out.
‘We couldn't believe it when we saw the size of the hole it had fallen down, it must have slipped backwards and was just small enough to slip in.’
Charles de Bues, RSPCA branch co-ordinator, said the rarely awarded certificates were being presented to recognise the physical effort shown by everyone involved in the rescue.
Smiling with the angels
I WAS surprised to read in the article by Harry Mead (Echo January 17) and your editorial (January 20) where, after a careful scrutiny of the present troubles in Northern Ireland, both of your suggested conclusions were for accepting the defeatist attitude of the greater good subordinating itself to the prevalent evil.
The only way to win a war of attrition is by halting the enemy's advance and cutting off all the aggressor's supply lines.
The Ulster politicians should be told by the British Government that maintaining law and order in the Province will require a reassessment of financial priorities to relieve the burden of the mainland taxpayer.
The cost of unity could be done through a gradual restructuring of the Ulster economy to make it similar to the Irish Republic.
Through their culture the Irish people have brought pleasure and benefits to many nations throughout the world.
We should remember when Irish eyes are smiling and Irish hearts are happy even the angels sing.
It is time to give the angels something to sing about.
Thomas Conlon, 38 Hallgarth, Kirk Merrington, Spennymoor.
DARLINGTON'S hopes of remaining in the Third Division were dealt a severe blow in London last night when they crashed to their eleventh away defeat of the season.
Even without regulars Steve Mardenborough and Andy Toman there can be few excuses for such a disappointing performance in which Frank Gray's side were outplayed and outfought by fellow strugglers.
Only Lee Ellison and goalkeeper Mark Prudhoe emerged with any credit.
Ellison had a header disallowed for offside following good work from Drew Coverdale, then was unfortunate not to have a clear sight of goal when Steve O'Shaughnessy's through ball struck Ellison on the back.
However, that brought Fulham to life and soon afterwards they were testing Prudhoe's handling, in slippery conditions, with a stream of deep crosses.
That finally produced dividends in the 34th minute when Sean Farrell headed the ball to an unmarked Gary Brazil and the former Newcastle striker calmly lobbed the stranded Prudhoe.
Despite a let off five minutes after half time when Farrell missed a penalty, awarded for Kevan Smith's hand ball, Darlington went further behind in the 52nd minute.
John Marshall was given ample time to cross and Farrell redeemed himself with an unstoppable half volley.
Two more Fulham goals in two minutes, the first from Jeff Eckhardt plus another from Brazil, guaranteed Darlington's heaviest League defeat of the season.
SOMEONE was only saying the other day in the Red Lion that the demon drink is a killer and has reduced many a man's life to misery.
Or was it in the Golden Cock?
I can't remember.
Nearly 200 years ago Darlington was awash with drink.
Children were pumped full of beer and wine at social ‘dos’; doctors freely prescribed alcoholic liquors, and society regarded reaching the condition of drunkenness as a great achievement.
But 180 years ago in America someone came up with the idea of a Temperance Society.
It caught on over here some years later with the Seven Men of Preston setting the trend.
One of the seven had a terrible stutter (not withdrawal symptoms).
He said nothing but ‘te-total’ would satisfy him, and so the Teetotal Movement was born.
One of the first temperance groups in the country started in Darlington in 1831.
It was called the Moderation Society, and George Mottram was an early convert.
Mottram was an original drunken sailor and was condemned to death for stealing a boat.
On renouncing alcohol he was pardoned and he set sail for Darlington where he became a leading light in the Society.
One day he set off for Barnard Castle to address a meeting, but got so hopelessly drunk on the journey he was unable to speak on his arrival.
Mortified by the twist in his sobriety, George decided to go the whole hog and join the Total Abstinence Society.
Within 12 months the Moderation movement had collapsed and in 1835 the abstainers re-grouped under the banner of Total Abstinence.
In turn this evolved into the Temperance Society, and the first meetings were held in a watchmaker's shop in High Row.
In these early days Temperance was greeted with cynicism.
The established church believed teetotalism was taking the place of God and was carried out in an un-Christian spirit.
In Darlington the Wesleyans sacked a Sunday school teacher when he became a ‘Temp’ because of his new movement's ‘erroneous teachings’.
The Society prospered, although at its 1852 annual public tea it could hardly hold a Christmas cheese and wine party members were saddened by the numbers that had fallen from grace once the hay and corn harvests had been collected.
In 1854 the Pease family donated money towards the building of the Mechanics Institute on the condition that the Society could rent a room inside.
In 1876 the Institute's trustees locked the Temps out in Skinnergate during a financial row.
This sparked the Society's dreams of a hall of its own.
Temps were boosted by the opening of a Cocoa Palace in Parkgate in November 1881.
The Darlington and Stockton Times reported: ‘There are so many public houses in the neighbourhood that the Palace will afford a very wholesome counter-attraction to the temptations which are offered by these houses.’
The Cocoa Palace was one of a number of teetotal offshoots: Temperance Choral Union, Temperance Debating Society, Women's Temperance Association and the Juvenile Temperance Society also thrived.
In 1881, the leader of the Blue Ribbon Mission came to town and it was estimated that a quarter of the 32,000 population were ‘blue-ribboners’, or had taken the pledge.
At the speechifying, Darlington Temps boasted that the Highland Laddie had become a temperance hall; the Royal Oak a bootmaker's; the Dun Cow a solicitor's office and the Talbot a shoe emporium.
On a roll, finances were accumulated for a Temperance Institute, and a foundation stone was laid in Gladstone Street in July 1902.
Fourteen months later the £5,000 Institute opened for business with, said the D and S Times, ‘up-to-date furnishings and electrical arrangements, not omitting the penny- in-the-slot telephone’.
The reporter also noted that the Institute's kitchen would be connected to all rooms by a ‘metraphone’.
THE Institute's attractions included a billiard room and a bathroom where a hot or cold shower cost 4d, and quickly proved so popular the building was overwhelmed.
In September 1909 a £2,000 Temperance Hall was founded next door, and it was opened in February 1910 by Mr EB Mounsey.
He said: ‘It would tend to make men, women and children happier, better and more Christ-like.’
For a while the 600-seater Hall was fully-utilised.
Over 50 trade unions and friendly societies met inside the Institute.
The heady days of abstinence lasted a couple of decades.
In 1946 when Charles Simon's Repertory Company occupied the Hall it burnt down, and the Temps never had funds to restore it.
The popular advent of television kept many members at home.
In September 1957 the Gladstone Street buildings were put up for sale; in 1958 the Temps moved out, and in 1959 the Hall was demolished and the Institute converted into shops.
And so to the pub.
ON TUESDAY June 10 1862 the leading men of the Darlington Temperance Society honoured the memory of their most influential member Dr John Fothergill.
The Wensleydale-born man was elected the first president of the Society by those gathered in the watchmaker's shop in 1835 and held that post until his death in 1858.
In 1860 the Society asked the Local Government Board if a fountain could be erected in Prospect Place.
The request was turned down for fear of creating a traffic hazard as Joseph Pease's statue later did.
When the Society heard in July 1861 that the Board was to remove the Bondgate bubbler the cattle fountain that was turning the highway to mire it asked for permission to replace it.
The Board agreed, and a competition with a two guinea first prize was run to find the best fountain designer.
Septimus Hird, 17, who ironically lived in the Green Tree Inn, Skinnergate, won but before his design was built he drowned while bathing at Redcar.
On Tuesday June 10 William Thompson, Fothergill's successor as president, drunk the first glass of water and declared the fountain open.
But the Fothergill Fountain churned the street to mud, just like the others.
At one time a footway was made from Skinnergate to North Bondgate to save people's shoes.
For the Railway Jubilee in 1875 it was decided to remove the Fountain altogether, and South Park became its home where it stands today.
With the gas disconnected, the light on top of the canopy was replaced in 1880 by a stone bowl donated by a Mr Ross.
Today the Fothergill Fountain can be seen regaling the first president's achievements.
It stands next to the South Park aviary.
Canoe store roof back in place
REPAIRS have been carried out to a 40ft long roof of a village canoe store which blew off after just a few weeks in place.
Residents in Middleton St George were stunned to find most of the new £3,000 roof lying in a field after a night of strong winds last month.
Building firm G Rhodes and Son, who put it in place, said the problem could have resulted from the shed's location below a bank which could have caused winds to form a vacuum behind it, pulling the roof off.
They used additional steel straps to re-secure the roof.
Drum store go-ahead:
Fujitsu has won permission from Sedgefield District Council's development committee to put up a chemical drum store at its factory at Heighington.
Heighington Sale date:
A table-top sale will be held in the village hall from 10am to 1pm this Saturday.
Funds success:
Last week's 70s Night was a roaring success with over 100 guests who raised about £280 for the village play group.
High Coniscliffe Quiz winners:
Children from the school celebrated a crime prevention triumph last week when they won a competition organised by Darlington police.
The crime prevention and personal safety quiz was held at the police station and judged by senior officers, the Mayor of Darlington and the town's MP, Michael Fallon.
The children beat off a challenge from nine other Darlington schools.
Hurworth Parish meeting:
Durham County Council has warned school bus drivers not to use Roundhill Road when travelling into or out of the village.
Parish council chairman Peter Foster said there had been reports of one of two buses using the road following a ban on school buses, imposed by the county council after campaigning by residents.
Coun Foster said the county council had written to bus operators telling them to abide by the rules and regulations or face disciplinary action.
Buses travelling from Darlington into the village were last year instructed to travel along the A66 southern by-pass and down the A168 entering the village at Hurworth Place.
Members thanked David McBeath for taking photographs of the War Memorial and Alan Gibson for helping set up the Christmas tree.
The meeting decided to contribute £10 towards to cost of the Durham County Best Kept Village competition.
Ceilidh date:
Hurworth Comprehensive Parent-Teacher Association will hold a ceilidh at the school on February 22 at 8pm.
Tickets are available from the school.
Valentine Dance:
A Valentine Dance will be held tomorrow at the Hurworth Grange Community Centre.
Tickets are £3 and include supper.
Contact Darlington  or  for further information.
Low Coniscliffe and Merrybent Council meeting:
There will be a meeting of the villages’ parish council tonight at High Coniscliffe School at 7pm.
There is a full agenda and the clerk to the council is optimistic that a large number of villagers will attend to give their views on local issues.
An important item are the proposals for the new Low Coniscliffe and Merrybent community group.
It is hoped the group will have a permanent base where advice and information can be made available by volunteer staff.
Ideas and suggestions for the way the community group runs are invited at tonight's meeting.
Melsonby Vicar takes baton:
A concert given by the Green Howards Band at Melsonby Church was praised by local people as a highly successful evening.
One surprise star of the show was the Rev Mel Gray.
He was invited to get up and conduct the band half way through the evening which, according to eyewitnesses, he did with gusto.
Middleton Tyas Lent boxes:
The Lent boxes at St Michael and All Angels this year will be for the United Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and the additional Curate Society.
Quota paid:
The church area has paid its annual quota to the Diocese of Ripon.
The contribution amounted to £6,694 including £3,435 from Middleton Tyas, £2,866 from Croft and £393 from Eryholme.
Annual meeting:
The St Michael and All Angels annual meeting will be held at the church on Sunday, March 1.
New treasurer:
The new treasurer of the village hall is Graham Thomas, of Maypole Cottage, The Green, Middleton Tyas.
His telephone number is .
All village hall bookings should be made through him.
The village hall committee are still looking for a secretary.
Cheese and wine:
The Community Association will hold a cheese and wine evening on Friday, February 21 at Scotch Corner.
The event starts at 7.30pm for 8pm.
Entrance is £3 and includes a tombola and raffle.
Sewing group:
The Middleton Tyas sewing group meets on Thursdays at 1.30pm at the home of Chris Channon.
They are looking for sponsors for kneelers to put in the church at £10 a time.
Garage sale:
The NSPCC will hold a garage sale at Foresters Hall, The Green, on Saturday, February 29 at 10.30am to 1pm.
Entrance is 25p and includes coffee or tea biscuits.
St John's Chapel Quiz ahead:
The Upper Weardale Quiz Challenge Shield will be contested at the town hall on three successive Mondays next month.
Meeting time:
The 1st Weardale Beaver Scouts meet from 5.156.30pm each Thursday at the Barrington Hall.
Special service:
Education Sunday will be marked at St John's Church at 10.30am this Sunday.
The service will be attended by pupils from William Cassidy but is open to the whole community to celebrate education.
Wearhead Council meets:
Wearhead Methodist Church Council meets on February 24 at 6.30pm.
School's music:
Musician Andy Jackson from Durham will work with all 42 pupils at Wearhead Junior and Infants' School to help them with basic music skills in line with the requirements of the national curriculum.
DRAG racing star Ian Merryweather has launched a quest to raise funds in a bid to defend his European crown.
The electrician, from Bishop Auckland, County Durham, has been hard to beat since he burst onto the racing scene in 1989.
His massively powerful Cobra replica accelerates to 60mph in 1.97 seconds and develops 600bhp.
Ian can blast this cruise missile on wheels to 100mph in less time than it takes the average family car to reach 30mph.
Provided he can raise the money, Ian is confident of defending his European title.
He said: ‘I showed what I could do last year, given half a chance.
Now I am ready to improve things even further.’
RALLY ace Miles Johnston started his 1992 season with a fighting drive to sixth place on the Riponian stages event at the weekend.
Miles, from York, finished third in class on the tough rally, which is based in the Ripon and Bedale area and includes three stages in Lightwater Valley.
He used the event to test modifications to his Peugeot 205 GTi, carried out by Autotech of Thirsk over the winter season.
Chief change is a move up to a 1900cc engine so he can compete with Peugeots at the head of the field.
Co-driven once again by Alan Hill, Miles has retained his sponsorship from Davids of Ripon with extra support from Knaresborough Tyre Services and Mintex.
ANOTHER ace looking for funds to continue his winning ways is Darlington's Ian Todhunter.
Ian produced a string of good results to finish fourth in last year's 600cc British Motorcycle Clubman's championship.
But despite his impressive record the young lion is struggling to put together a decent budget for 1991.
His two main sponsors have dropped out of racing for the moment leaving him chasing a £3,000 shortfall.
In a bid to make-up the missing funds Ian has written to more than 350 companies throughout County Durham.
But so far only five have responded and he admitted: ‘I still need to find a big backer or things will be really difficult.’
Darlington motorcycle dealer White Brothers and EBC brake pad manufacturers have agreed to help out with costs.
Enthusiasts from the Tees Tornados bike club have also chipped in with a £100 donation.
Ian's campaign will be bolstered by a new addition to the team Darlington mechanic Roy Watkinson has agreed to prepare the bike during the season.
20 years ago PEOPLE in Darlington could choose between learning the Language of Love on screen on the ABC or asking When Did You Last See My Mother?(‘a stimulating and imaginative modern play’) at the Civic.
Stay indoors in front of the box and you could have watched Home and Away.
No, not the Aussie soap but a seven-part drama series about Brenda a fortysomething housewife and mother of four children.
She's bored and uncertain about her future until encouraged to take a few steps in the outside world.
Sounds a bit Shirley Valentine-ish, doesn't it?
BBC-TV's Treasure Over the Water was a new three part adventure serial for children filmed on location in Cambridge.
Two boys searched for family jewels lost at the time of the Armada.
The Rev Chad Varah, founder of the Samaritans, talked on Tyne Tees TV's Face the Press about his challenge to the Church of England's traditional attitudes.
He regarded adolescence as a period of sexual apprenticeship.
‘What moral difference is there between piano lessons and petting lessons?’ he asked.
15 years ago MOVIES were a major part of the schedules although the film of Up Pompeii starring Frankie (Please yourself, missus) Howerd was on back where it started on the small screen.
Murder Ahoy had Margaret Rutherford as Agatha Christie's spinster sleuth Miss Marple in a mystery also featuring Derek Nimmo.
Peter Sellers, subject of a season of movies on Channel 4 at present, starred in The Smallest Show on Earth.
This Fifties comedy was set in a ‘flea pit’ cinema called the Bijou where staff turned up the central heating to boiling point in a desert picture to boost ice cream sales.
ITV's World in Action sent two market traders from North Wales to Holland to flog cloth to the descendants of the famous rag traders of Tudor times.
Apparently the men were angry at foreign traders coming to Britain.
10 years ago CLIFF Michelmore, who introduced the first Holiday ‘69 in would you believe? 1969 was still at the helm of Holiday ‘82.
He was visiting Vancouver on the programme's behalf.
And dear old Anne Gregg, now replaced by younger but not necessarily better Anneka Rice, was looking around Bude.
Over on ITV The Incredible Hulk was going green long before it was fashionable and keeping clothing manufacturers in business by splitting his shirt every week.
When it began in 1978 the series was described in the publicity blurb in the following terms: ‘Gamma rays turn angry scientist into raging, seven-foot tall green monster!’
THE first issue of the clubmen's ‘bible’, The Club Journal, in its new format has been well received by members of the Club and Institute's six million members.
The Journal now has a completely new look, with bigger pages and loads of colour.
The new magazine is produced in Tyneside and printed in the region and chairman of the editorial board in Durham CIU Branch secretary Jack Amos who commented: ‘We are very pleased with the reception the new Journal has received.
It offers enormous possibilities.
‘I wonder what the Reverend Henry Solly would have said if he had seen the tremendous progress made by the Union over the past few years.’
The Rev. Henry Solly was the founder of the Club and Institute Union.
It was over 150 years ago that he saw the need for working men to have somewhere to meet in their spare time, to talk and relax.
The Unitarian minister had established a reading room in Yeovil in 1842, and in 1849 the Rev F.R. Robertson formed the first Working Men's Institute at Brighton closely followed by the setting up of a similar Institute in South Shields.
Originally the working men's clubs were strictly teetotal and it wasn't until 1860 that beer was allowed on the premises.
The Club and Institute Union was officially formed in London on June 14, 1862 and a few months later Henry Solly resigned his pulpit at the English Presbyterian Church in Lancaster to become the first fulltime paid secretary of the Union.
There are now 3,500 clubs within the national network of the CIU, of which 450 are in the North-East region.
— Members of Framwellgate Moor and District Royal British Legion branch have used the Framwellgate Moor WMC as a meeting place for over a quarter of a century and Legion members said thank you to the club for providing them with free accommodation during that time.
Officials of the club and the Legion branch were present at a special ceremony to hand over a certificate of appreciation for their kindness.
— The owners of a new cabaret venue in Darlington plan to make it the showplace of the North when it opens later in the spring.
Over £200,000 has been spent on transforming the old Patons ballroom in McMullen Road into a plush nightspot which will feature some of the top names in show-business on stage.
Variety will be the catchword at the new venue, to be called the Beehive Variety Club.
Negotiations are going ahead for booking top personalities like Johnny Mathis, Bob Monkhouse and Freddie Starr to appear at the club subject to approval by the licensing authorities.
The club will also feature old time dancing, special features and facilities for conference and party bookings.
— Members of Croft Sports and Social Club can now enjoy free games of snooker, pool and even a free juke-box every Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.
There are also free sessions of carpet bowls every Monday and Thursday.
The club also has an impressive list of forthcoming entertainment attractions including Officers Club on Friday February 21, superstar T.J.
King on Sunday March 8 and incomparable Freddie's Beano on Saturday March 28. — A Gentleman's Social Evening at the Lakeside Sports and Social Club on Friday February 21 features comedy duo Tramp and Swank.
— Sacriston clubmen are sponsoring young Glen Hilton, the current Great North Junior Champion, as he travels the country for competitions and training sessions.
Glen, 17, has received backing from the members and officials of Sacriston Workmens Club to assist in paying for costly travel expense.
— Maxine Barrie, the Shirley Bassey lookalike who came out on top in the Granada TV Stars In Your Eyes programme, is appearing tonight at the Shotton Hall Banqueting Suite, Peterlee in a Valentine's Night Special.
— Hartlepool Working Mens Club holds its annual Sports Supper Night on Friday February 28 with the hilarious comedy group The Mimics and supporting act.
The club handicap trophies will also be presented during the evening.
Limited tickets available at £1.50 each.
— A regular Talent Competition at Sherburn Hill WMC is still attracting large entries every Saturday night.
Prizes are £25, £15, and £10, with £3 for all entrants.
THE latest movies from British directors Derek Jarman and Peter Greenaway feature in the current film season at Darlington Arts Centre.
Edward II (showing on April 11) is Jarman's version of Christopher Marlowe's play with Steven Waddington as the king.
Prospero's Books (April 25) is the new one from Greenaway whose previous movies include The Draughtsman's Contract and Drowning by Numbers.
Sir John Gielgud stars in a version of Shakespeare's The Tempest using high-tech film and video techniques.
More Shakespeare with Zeffirelli's version of Hamlet (April 4) starring Mel Gibson as the moody Dane.
Other films lined up include Close My Eyes, The Commitments and Jungle Fever.
Words of wisdom
ALMOST unnoticed, as befits someone who's about five foot nothing, cap in hand comedian Norman Wisdom was among the 30,000 who welcomed back Kevin Keegan.
The little feller, now 72, was in Newcastle to record a Tyne Tees Television chat show.
Since being a Magpies fan hasn't exactly been a bundle of laughs of late, his timing as ever was perfect.
‘I've always been a United nut,’ he told studio staff.
‘I only came here because it coincided with the match.’
This week he was on a beach in Malta ‘he still gets all over the place,’ says his agent dreaming of the Premier League.
The agency, however, has promised that he'll be in touch.
Watch this five foot nothing space.
Round trip
WHY is it, writes Ron Hails from Hartlepool, that your column is guaranteed to arouse my slumbering memory banks?
What reinvigorated them this time was the passing reference in Tuesday's column to former Sunderland (and Darlington) manager Billy Elliott ‘the old flying winger,’ recalls Ron.
He saw Elliott at Hartlepool Indoor Bowls Centre a couple of months back, playing for one of the Sunderland teams: rudely awoken, his memory turns to other footballers who were dab hands at bowls.
Perhaps the most famous was former Rangers centre half Bob Sutherland, who became world singles champion; undoubtedly the most fearsome was the old St James's Park warhorse Jimmy Scoular.
Scoular took up bowls and probably scared them half to death after his wife, Joyce, became a Welsh international.
Then there was Jimmy Boyd, who played for Newcastle in the 1932 Cup Final (‘against your lot’ says Ron) and represented Scotland at soccer and England at bowls.
He died last year.
Football League referee J Russell Evans was another much capped Welsh bowler; Joe Burrows, former England bowler and The Northern bowls correspondent, was also a ‘fiercely competitive’ amateur footballer.
Enough, cries Ron, tucking up his grey cells again.
And there's a PS: ‘How do you spell digress?’
Programme note
NOTING the column's interest in football programmes, a reader sends perhaps the most improbable of all Roddymoor FC, Crook and District League Division One.
Actually, this one's called an Official Match Day Magazine, presumably to differentiate it from all the unofficial ones.
For Saturday's match with St John's Chapel (attendance three, we're told) the ‘club notes’ consisted of advice on where to drink afterwards and an injunction to have a nice day.
One of the teams (difficult to tell which) was perm any 11 from 20 and the other wasn't included.
But it's 24 pages, there's an interesting club history for those who haven't read it 20 times before and from advertising it makes Roddymoor £400 a year.
Good on them.
HARTLEPOOL United have signed Leicester City reserve midfield player Jason Peake on loan, writes RAY ROBERTSON.
The 20-year-old, Leicester-born Peake is a former England Under-19 international.
Leicester's former Darlington manager Brian Little has helped out Pool, who are eager to hit winning form again after recent setbacks.
First-team football could also benefit a player who has not won a first-team spot at Filbert Street this season.
Peake has been registered in time for tomorrow's home game against Preston North End.’
— DARLINGTON defender Les McJannet and midfielder Gary Gill came through a game for the reserves unscathed and could soon be set for first-team action.
THE latest in our weekly updates on an appeal led by Age Concern to build a day care centre for Darlington's elderly people.
RAFFLE tickets for Darlington Day Care Centre Appeal will be on sale outside Feethams on Saturday weather permitting.
Appeal organisers hoped to sell tickets for the prize draw outside the ground a few weeks ago but a cold snap forced the football match to be cancelled.
Now the date has been rescheduled for Saturday when Darlington take on Huddersfield Town so make sure you have some loose change ready.
First prize in the raffle, to be drawn in April, is a Vauxhall Nova Merit, donated by Sherwoods.
Other prizes include a holiday in Florida donated by Fourseasons and The Northern Echo, and a colour portable television set donated by Anna Hedley.
The appeal hopes to raise £637,000 to build the day care centre, which will act as a meeting place for all old folk, especially the lonely, frail and housebound and provide a range of services.
So far £111,780 has been raised.
CUB reporters in primary and secondary schools in the North-East can make news with School Scoop.
Winners of this year's competition will take over the education page for a day and pick up a £200 cash prize.
Editorial teams from the winning schools will also learn how to edit the page while The Northern Echo's Darlington head office.
All they have to do is write ten articles they consider suitable for the education page.
Three of the news stories or feature articles should be of 350 words or more and one should give a pupils' view of what the next Government's education policies should be.
The rules are flexible for entries from younger children.
Photographs, illustrations and cartoons are welcome.
All work must be written by pupils and marked with names, ages, and the name, address and telephone number of the school and a teacher contact.
Closing date is March 27.
Entries should be sent to School Scoop, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
The editor's decision is final.
DANCING for joy or dancing for fitness, pupils at a Darlington school are two steps ahead of the rest of the nation.
Teenagers at Haughton Comprehensive are working with the professionals from the Phoenix Dance Company as schools throughout the country prepare to teach dancing for the first time.
From September the National Curriculum makes dance compulsory in primary schools and an optional physical education course for 11 to 16 year olds.
Concerns were voiced nationally that older boys particularly would resist any move to force them to dance.
But dance has long been a popular option at Haughton where teacher Jenny Ruston says its hard to find the time to meet all the demand from boys and girls.
THE WORLD'S longest pancake race visits Darlington next week.
Two teams are running the 550 miles from Edinburgh to London down the east and west of the country.
The race, which aims to raise money for Radio Lollipop, a national children's hospital charity, stops at Darlington Town Hall on Thursday.
Runners will be met by the Mayor of Darlington, Coun Rita Fishwick.
The race is due to finish in London on March 2.
DARLINGTON sailor Julie Carroll, 20, is looking forward to a life on the ocean waves on the type 42 Destroyer HMS Southampton after successfully completing a radar operator course at Portsmouth.
Her parents, David and Christine, still live in Darlington.
MARTIN and Andrea Stevens will enjoy a special Valentine's Day treat today to put a double nightmare behind them.
Martin was left fighting for his life when he fell from Brimham Rocks, near Patley Bridge, North Yorkshire, on the last day of their honeymoon.
Then as Andrea, 21, kept a bedside vigil their home in Cumberland Street, Darlington, was ransacked by thieves.
But management at Redworth Hall hotel, near Heighington, have stepped in to offer the delighted couple a top suite and romantic candlelit meal to celebrate Valentine's Day in style.
T'WIT to woo owls Eddie and Edwina have struck up a tender relationship.
Edwina faced being moved out because she couldn't get on with Eddie, the tawny owl at The Grange veterinary surgery, Darlington.
But she had a sudden change of heart and the pair were yesterday perched together for the first time.
Nurse Catherine Cockborn said: ‘The change that has come over the pair of them is absolutely amazing.
Staff here are all over the moon.
Both birds have become part of the family now.’
Eddie has been at the surgery 18 months and would not be able to survive in the wild.
Edwina was brought to the surgery about three months ago after being hit by a car.
Vets had to amputate one of her wings.
GORDON Turner has launched a search for the pal he has not seen for forty years.
Mr Turner, 61, of South Humberside, and Ray Hubbard, who lived in Darlington, joined the Royal Navy together in 1952.
Mr Turner, a retired electronics computer engineer, said: ‘I would love to hear from Ray.
We were such good friends,’.
Mr Turner lives at 39 Earlsgate, Winterton, South Humberside, DN15 9SS.
A BOY is making his mark in the entertainment business before he has even left school.
Paul Ferry, 16, is a pupil at Hummersknott School, Darlington, where yesterday he presented a cheque for £300 to the Cot Death Association the fruit of his business judgement in a school project.
Together with friends Paul established a disco and party business which was organised and run from school.
Paul and his colleagues organised a series of parties at the school and his company also ran the school tuck shop.
His Disco Roadshow business, called Darlington Number One, has been hired out for several parties and functions in the Darlington area.
Paul lives in Leafield Road, Darlington.
GROUPS as diverse as the Royal Fine Art Commission and the National Union of Mineworkers have joined the controversy about plans for a new supermarket.
The proposal to build a supermarket, car park and doctors' surgery on a former school cricket field between Queens Road and Quaker Lane, Richmond, comes before a special meeting of Richmondshire District Council's development services committee on Thursday.
And the issue has brought the council its biggest postbag, with more than 2,000 letters or forms 920 against development, 1,333 in support.
Chief planning officer Bill Green is recommending the committee to refuse the application.
He says the important open area cannot be replaced once it is lost, the scheme would severely damage the Richmond Conservation Area and would bring noise, disturbance and loss of environment to neighbours.
Supporters of the scheme say the town needs a new supermarket to boost a flagging economy and that the site is suitable for a new store.
They say local people are rejecting Richmond outlets to shop in Darlington and Northallerton and that the new store would bring them back.
A spokesman for Richmond Chamber of Trade said: ‘An urgent solution is required to regenerate Richmond.
The Chamber feels that this is it.’
But opponents say the site is totally unsuitable.
The Rt Hon the Lord St John of Fawsley, chairman of the Royal Fine Art Commission, says the commission ‘is filled with a sense of outrage by this proposal’.
The commission believes the scheme will have a profoundly detrimental effect on the town, which it describes as of quite extraordinary quality and of exceptional architectural and historic interest.
David Hopper, General Secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers North-East area, said the store would completely destroy the environment and views for the women who stay at the union's Sam Watson Rest Home, which overlooks the site.
Local and national sports bodies have also objected on the grounds that the scheme would take away open space that could be used as a public sports field for a town which the National Playing Fields Association says has a shortage of open space.
100 not out:
York-born and bred Charlotte Bailey, who lives off Burton Stone Lane, has celebrated her 100th birthday surrounded by relatives.
Lights nearer:
A £15,000 appeal to erect floodlights at Pickering Town FC's ground is now just £2,000 short of its target.
It is hoped that volunteers can start work on preparing the ground in a few weeks time.
Centenarian dies:
Widow Edith Brown, who celebrated her 100th birthday just six months ago, has died.
Mrs Brown lived in Morrell House, Burton Stone Lane, York, but before that lived for 70 years in New Earswick.
Arts fair:
Arts and Crafts Fair takes place at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre, in the Yellow Hall from 9am until 6pm on March 12.
Soccer event:
A Nalgo five-a-side tournament takes place at Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre on February 26 from 4pm to 9.30pm.
Round in circles:
Darlington Rucksack Club is to go on a moderate going circular walk around Castle Bolton tomorrow, starting from Darlington Market Place at 9am.
Today's wills
BEDALE:
Henry John Winn DSO MC, of The Manor House, Aiskew, left £570,664 net.
NORTHALLERTON:
Robert John Carson of Meadow Drive, Scruton, left £140,789 net.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York ; Sian Roberts on Richmond  and Ian Lamming on Northallerton .
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington .
Cash is raised in tribute to manager
A BUSINESSMAN has collected £2,000 from others in the business community to mark the retirement of a bank manager be believes may have saved his company.
Brian Clark, director of Cryotech, said his bank manager Peter Horne at Barclay's in Wolsingham ‘was a real friend and confidante’ during lean periods.
The cash has bought medical equipment which will be presented tomorrow in Mr Horne's name to the town's health centre.
Keep fit:
Darlington Borough Council has organised keep-fit sessions at the Firth Moor Community Centre on February 20 for an hour from 7pm.
Meeting date:
A meeting of Sedgefield District Council's policy and resources committee will convene at 11am next Thursday in the Green Lane council offices in Spennymoor.
Women's role:
A talk on ‘women in the environment and development’ will be held next Wednesday at a meeting of the Bishop Auckland Business and Professional Women's Association in the Wesley Church Hall.
Children's parties:
Nearly 1,000 children attended a total of 46 children's parties at Sunnydale Leisure Centre in Shildon last month.
Planners meet:
Members of Wear Valley District Council's planning committee meet next Wednesday night at 7pm in Crook Civic Centre.
Pig facts:
A report in The Northern Echo on Wednesday said that 438 pigs in the Wear Valley were condemned as unfit for human consumption in November and December.
We have been asked to point out that that figure actually relates to parts of pigs and that only 11 complete carcasses were condemned.
We apologise for any misunderstanding which may have arisen from this error.
Dog show:
The North-East Afghan Hound Society is holding a show tomorrow from 11 am to 5pm in the main sports hall at the Sunnydale Leisure Centre in Shildon.
Sixties sounds:
A Sixties disco will be held on February 22 from 7pm to 12pm in the Hackworth Lounge at the Sunnydale Leisure Centre in Shildon.
Basketball match:
A National League Basketball match between the Sedgefield Racers and North London will be played on February 22 in the Red Hall at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre at 7.30pm.
Ashdown backed:
Darlington Liberal Democrats have supported the party's national leader Paddy Ashdown's forthrightness in his recent response to the news of his affair with a former secretary.
Chairman Peter Freitag said the association passed the resolution in support of Mr Ashdown at a general meeting.
Open show:
Newton Aycliffe Canine Society is holding an Open Mixed Breed Dog Show at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre on March 8.
It is to be held in the Red and Yellow halls, starting at 9am and finishing at 6pm.
Crafts fair:
March 14 sees an Arts and Crafts Fair at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre, in the Yellow Hall from 9am until 6pm.
Stepping out:
Darlington Rucksack Club is to go on a moderate going circular walk around Castle Bolton tomorrow.
Anyone interested in going along should meet members at Darlington Market Place at 9am.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
DARLINGTON manager Frank Gray is set to make a comeback against Huddersfield at Feethams today.
Gray said: ‘I have been in similar situations before as a player.
I like to think my experience will help.
‘We have had a lot of kids in the side since the turn of the year.
It is unfair to put too much pressure on them.
‘They will be good assets in the long term, but right now we need experience.
‘Our side against Huddersfield will be the most experienced we have fielded for a long time.
‘There is even the possibility of a comeback for Gary Gill.’
Andy Toman and Steve Mardenborough are also recovered from injuries.
Darlington beat Huddersfield 1–0 in the Rumbelows League Cup and a repeat performance would improve their chances of survival.
Gray added: ‘Huddersfield have won only one game since the turn of the year but they are in a good position for a play-off place.
‘We face a stern test but it is important for my players to continue to believe in themselves.’
Team Prudhoe, Gaughan, Gray, Tait, Pickering, Smith, O'Shaughnessy, Coverdale, Cusack, Ellison, Dewhurst, Cork, Toman, Gill, Mardenborough.
LUCKY, the blind mongrel who was found wandering the streets of Darlington lost and alone, has been reunited with his owner.
The dog, blind since he was six years old, was returned home after his plight was featured in The Northern Echo.
Animal lover Ray Mackinlay took the cuddly pet in after he was discovered in the town's Geneva Road area.
Ray, who runs a local lost and found bureau for the National Petwatch organisation, took the dog in while he tried to trace the owner.
But the search proved fruitless until Lucky appeared in The Northern Echo.
The dog, who lives in Langton Walk, Darlington, had escaped when the postman forgot to close the garden gate.
Now the pet is reunited with his grateful owner.
DARLINGTON couple Andrea and Martin Stevens made the perfect start to their new life with a Valentine's Day treat.
The pair's honeymoon turned into a nightmare when Martin, 22, spent several days in a coma after he fell from Brimham Rocks, near Pateley Bridge.
And thieves broke into their Cumberland Street home and stole all their wedding presents.
But the Redworth Hall hotel, near Heighington stepped in with a surprise Valentines Day treat.
The couple were wined and dined before retiring to a plush suite for Valentine's night.
Afterwards Martin said: ‘We had an absolutely wonderful time.’
INTREPID traveller Derek Reeves will be discussing his marathon journey through China next month.
Derek, who is a retired British Rail worker, took 18 days to travel across the vast country of one billion people.
The train lover was fascinated to find that most journeys are undertaken on the railway because Chinese roads are not up to Western standards.
Almost a third of the population 300 million people use their bicycles for local travel.
With the help of a native interpreter, Derek had a chance to chat with the Chinese people.
Derek's talk, organised by the Friends of Darlington Memorial Hospital, will be held in the hospital lecture room at 7pm on March 4.
A PHOTOGRAPHY enthusiast from Staindrop has been awarded a second Fellowship of the Royal Photographic Society.
Officials at the society said the rare honour meant Myles Audas, of Moor Road, Staindrop, had gained the ‘highest distinction awarded for excellence in photography’.
Myles, already an associate of the RPS, had to submit a portfolio of his work for approval by a top panel of society fellows.
A spokesman for the society said: ‘To receive a Fellowship is a rare honour and to receive a second Fellowship is a rare achievement.’
Myles is life vice-president of Darlington Camera Club, an Artist of the International Federation of Photographic Art and an Associate of the Photographic Alliance of Great Britain.
Young soccer star Stephen Kilgour strikes home a penalty shot during the interval at Darlington's home match on Saturday.
Ten-year-old Stephen was playing for St Augustine's Junior School in the schools' penalty competition run by Darlington Football Club.
The competition, held during the interval of each home game, this weekend involved St Augustine's, North Road, St Bede's Junior and Red Hall School.
Each has five penalty shots at goal.
Despite Stephen's efforts, St Augustine's were beaten 4–3 by North Road and St Bede's lost out to Red Hall.
North Road and St Bede's will go forward to the finals.
A GROUP of Darlington nuns have started a 35-day journey to establish the first multi-racial Carmelite convent in the southern African country of Bophuthatswana.
The seven nuns stepped from the safe enclosure of the Carmel Convent in Nunnery Lane to face a voyage on a cargo ship followed by a 1,000 kilometre drive through the Kalahari desert.
On arrival in the town of Mafeking the nuns will organise the building of a new convent requested by the Bishop of Kimberley.
The money for the building which is based on a Kgotla, a meeting place in an African village has come from donations from across the world.
The will live in temporary accommodation until the work is completed.
Once established the new convent will serve the Kimberley diocese.
The nuns eventually hope to become self-sufficient.
They will provide the diocese with tapestries, candles, altar bread, prints and cards, following in the footsteps of Darlington's Carmel which operates a successful printing business.
Eyes up:
The search is on for the best pancake tosser in the North.
The quest has been launched by Gala bingo clubs in the run up to Shrove Tuesday, March 3, and the competition is set to see 600 enthusiasts at the Darlington club.
Blackburn Rovers 3 Newcastle United
IT took Kenny Dalglish six years to walk out on football management six years, three championships and two FA Cups.
Kevin Keegan, the new kid on the managerial chopping block, lasted just two games before falling victim to the short fuse of frustration.
Newcastle United's mortal Messiah will be back at his desk today, of course, pondering the next step in his crash-course Second Division survival mission.
He'll do so a little wiser to the neurosis his new career can induce.
Keegan had his assistant Terry McDermott later explained a plane to catch at Manchester airport on Saturday night.
But his exit from Ewood Park, barely ten minutes after the final whistle, was still at the stormy end of football management's meteorological scale.
Escorted by Francis Lee as a striker of Olympic-standard diving technique, ironically, the man who bluffed a thousand referees he brushed pokerfaced past the press corps suffering from an acute case of ref-induced parrot-sickness.
‘Ask Kenny Dalglish about it,’ he said of the incident which turned the game.
‘If I say what I think, I'll get into trouble.
You saw it you report it.’
Through binoculars from the press box, it was no less baffling than it must have been from the pitch-side dug-out.
Newcastle were one-nil up and rising when Blackburn posed their first threat of the afternoon, in the 41st minute.
It seemed to be the well-being of Tommy Wright, who was clearly kicked in the leg while gathering a loose ball ahead of Jason Wilcox.
Unfortunately for Keegan and his players, referee Peter Jones dictated otherwise.
When the Newcastle goalkeeper rose to his feet after treatment, Mr Jones chose to re-start play not with a free-kick but with a drop-ball inside the penalty area.
Ray Ranson, United's skipper, was booked for his protests, which were maintained by his team-mates when Blackburn won possession and Mark Atkins headed down for David Speedie to score with a half-volley.
Ranson followed his manager's lead afterwards, saying: ‘I'll get sin died if I say anything.’
Wright was more diplomatic, but volunteered: ‘I'll show you the bruise on my leg.’
Dalglish, predictably, said the referee was ‘technically correct’ while McDermott's official line from Newcastle's management team tempered injustice with a little perspective.
‘I've never seen that in twenty years of football,’ he said.
‘If he'd give a free-kick to us the Blackburn crowd wouldn't have complained.
It was disappointing, to say the least, but there's no point crying over spilt milk.
We might get a decision like it next week.’
Mr Jones, unfortunately, declined to make his reasoning public before leaving with a police escort.
‘No comment,’ said the Loughborough accountant, who won't need a calculator to estimate how dearly his decision might cost Newcastle.
That, however, does not excuse the considerable part United played in their own downfall.
They played throughout the second half in peeved mood, allowing Blackburn to assume the dictating role with Gordon Cowans prompting from midfield and Speedie in predatory form up front.
Speedie, a one-time Quaker with Darlington and like the two managers a former number seven at Anfield, headed his second on the hour and side-footed his third after a mix up between Wright and Liam O'Brien with fifteen minutes left.
Why Mr Jones didn't book him for what could have been deemed incitement in front of Newcastle's followers will remain a mystery along with his dropball doodle-bug.
Keegan and Newcastle, though, have other problems to solve: like how United lost their pattern after the break and mustered just a couple of halfchances.
For the first forty minutes they were much more composed than the league leaders and fully warranted the advantage they took in the 13th minute when David Kelly headed home Lee Clark's cross after a winning midfield challenge by Ranson, a stable influence on his younger colleagues before falling victim to a calf injury twenty minutes from time.
THE fans who revelled in Darlington's magnificent rise from near-obscurity are helping the side slip back into the bad old days.
The lack of support from the home fans, which has been a feature at Feethams for weeks, culminated on Saturday with calls for the dismissal of manager Frank Gray.
As an indication of the mood of the crowd, the fanzine seller before the game said: ‘This is the sack Frank Gray issue.’
Cries of ‘What a load of rubbish’ and ‘Gray out’followed the final whistle.
Memories of Gray's contribution to two championship winning seasons appear to be fading fast.
Certainly, there is some disquiet among the fans at the team's current lack of shape and the poor start by £100,000 signing Nick Cusack who was greeted with calls of ‘what a waste of money’ by home fans.
The terrace abuse had already played a hand in getting young striker Lee Ellison left out of the team and has prompted comment from several visiting managers about how quiet the home supporters are.
There was speculation that former Sunderland manager Denis Smith could be ready to step in if Gray was ousted.
But Gray is unlikely to be axed simply to silence the unjustified demands of the minority but he must wonder whether it is worth carrying on anyway when the supporters are so fickle.
His side were not particularly inept on Saturday they were beaten by a side who would probably survive comfortably in the Second Division.
Early on, the Quakers were the better side and had good scoring chances even before Nick Pickering blasted them ahead with a 25-yard volley in the 16th minute.
An equaliser five minutes before the break and another goal five minutes into the second half signalled the start of the jeering from the supporters.
But Darlington were still in the game and more backing from the fans might have helped them turn pressure into goals.
Huddersfield only made certain of victory in the 85th minute when Iffy Onuora grabbed his second with a simple tap in after good work by Nigel Callaghan and Iwan Roberts.
Police moved on the protestors who gathered in the car park after the game calling for Gray to be sacked.
No-one from the club was prepared to comment on the demonstration but an insider said a board meeting is due to be held on Tuesday.
THE Yorkshire divisional finals of the ABA championships must be re-boxed.
The order came from the ABA on Saturday when they heard ‘with sheer amazement’ that the finalists had not been weighed in.
As the Yorkshire division champions meet the NorthEast division title holders in the North-East Counties finals at Thornaby Pavilion on February 28, the ABA ordered that the Yorkshire finals must be re-fought within a week.
Yesterday, a harassed Yorkshire division secretary Eric Hoyland ‘up to my neck in rearranging the finals,’ refused to comment on the ABA decision.
But Hoyland, also NorthEast Counties secretary, explained the situation when the finals were held last week.
‘All boxers were weighed in, but because there was no chance of getting through a 28bout programme at a workmen's club in one night, we decided to take half the bouts to another venue two nights later.
All clubs agreed that there should be no further weigh-in.’
The Yorkshire boxers' misfortune at having to box twice so soon before the N-E Counties finals can only help the N-E division winners, who laid on another fine night of boxing at Gateshead Leisure Centre on Friday.
Among the top prospects to emerge was Alan Temple of Hartlepool Boys Welfare and Grainger Park's Alan Exley.
Featherweight Temple forced last year's champion Steve Hurcombe, of Lambton Street, into first-round submission with an exhibition of attacking boxing that, though short, illustrated amply why he received his first England vest recently.
Exley, a middleweight, laid on two impressive shows.
He paced his semi-final beautifully, dominating Steve Bellfield with superbly sharp left jabs that left the Sunderland man's face a bloody mess.
In his final, however, he wasted no time.
His crisp jabbing had Gary Newton of Teams instantly on the defensive, and Exley followed up with tremendous hooks that had Newton down three times in the first round before the referee stepped in.
Another boxer in a hurry was Spennymoor superheavyweight Mark Hopper, who stopped Mark Rowe of Teams in the first round.
Last year Hopper trained down to heavyweight, but found it too draining and lost heavily.
On Friday, however, back at his natural weight, he looked sharp and crisp, and after forcing Rowe into a standing count was landing punches at will before the referee mercifully stopped the bout.
Testimony to his punching power was that Rowe was left clutching his ribs and in obvious pain.
John Mett, a middleweight from Middlesbrough's Phil Thomas School of Boxing was involved in two tremendous but controversial bouts.
In his semi-final Hartlepool's Mark Chicocki was disqualified after being given three warnings in the last round for leaning on, a decision booed soundly by the crowd and highlighted by the fact that in following bouts boxers who leaned on just as much weren't even spoken to.
Mett's luck ran out in the final.
He and cross-town rival John Pearce, of Wellington, put on a great scrap which Mett seemed to have just won.
But a majority verdict went to Pearce.
Again the booing broke out and Pearce, champion last year after beating Mett, admitted: ‘I was lucky to nick it.
I feel sorry for John, but we've all had close decisions against us.
I had no zip in my legs.
I fought last week with flu, so I’ ll take the weekend off and start training again on Monday.’
— SHILDON got four out of five boys through to the quarter finals of the national schools championships at Knottingley on Saturday.
Craig Wake, Neil Patterson, Davey Evans and Steven Hodgson will fight again at the same venue in a fortnight.
Nigel Wright, unfortunately, won't be with them.
He lost for the first time on Saturday.
Darlington have four out of four through Aaron Kelly, John Lee, Roger Bowers and Jim Smith.
Michael Hall, also of Darlington, won his first two bouts for Young England, against Finland and Yugoslavia and was named best boxer of the night each time.
He now fights against Wales.
BRIAN Little got his first taste of League football by watching Hartlepool in action at the Victoria Ground in the Seventies.
Now it looks as if Leicester's manager, formerly at Darlington, is set to pay the club back by putting a brand new star their way.
If Jason Peake can regularly play as well as he did on his debut on loan from Filbert Street on Saturday, Pool need to sign him quickly.
Peake arrived at the Victoria Ground highly recommended by Little and Pool boss Alan Murray said: ‘Now we know why.
‘Brian said he felt Jason could do us a job, and I know him well enough to realise that his judgement is worth following.
‘Jason's only had one game, but it was a good one.
The signs are bright.’
Twenty-year-old Peake not only scored the goal which put Pool on their way to a desperately needed win, he was also one of only a handful of players on either side who looked capable of coming to terms with the gale-force wind and bumpy pitch.
Even Pool captain John MacPhail, a veteran of more than 500 senior games, admitted: ‘Jason was very impressive.
‘He looks very comfortable on the ball and scored us a fabulous goal which set up the win.
‘After three defeats, we weren't desperate.
But it's nice to get back on the right tracks and now we have to keep it up against Stockport on Tuesday.
‘We took a battering down there in the Autoglass Trophy a couple of weeks ago and we badly need to put things right.
I know we weren't at our best against Preston, but the result was important.’
Preston were unlucky not to earn a point, hitting the woodwork twice and having two goals disallowed for offside.
The first in ten minutes, was a blatant error by the officials Neil Williams was well on-side when he picked up a pass before scoring.
But Pool went in front in 63 minutes when Preston keeper Simon Farnworth headed out from outside the area and Peake sent his 30-yard shot into the net before anyone could recover.
The points were safe in 79 minutes with one of the game's best moves.
Brian Honour and Paul Dalton combined on the right before the latter set up Paul Baker for his 17th goal of the season at the far post.
DELIGHT:
John Byrne (left) after equalising against West Ham.
DESPONDENT: A week after the elation of his first victory Kevin Keegan (centre) watches his team lose to Blackburn.
FLYING: Gary Gill on the attack for Darlington but the dark clouds gathered over Feethams.
YORKSHIRE Cup holders defend their title in the second round with a derby on a date to be arranged.
Harrogate were 9–0 down against their first round who had not had a try scored against them since October.
But when they took the wind advantage Harrogate also took control, crossing Driffield's line for four tries through number eight Jeremy Hopkinson with a push-over, county prop John Woodthorpe from a tap penalty move and rolling maul, Steve Baker from the line-out before driving over, and Adam Pearson from a back move finished off under the crossbar.
Reserve scrum half Bill Freeman had opened Harrogate's reply with a penalty and he went on to score another penalty and convert Pearson's try.
Harrogate's well known coach Peter Clegg, who captained the club for a record five consecutive seasons from 1977 to 1982, announced his retirement from the end of the season for family and business reasons.
He still intends to maintain contact with the game, however.
In 1981 he skippered Harrogate to their first Yorkshire Cup victory for 17 years and coached them back to cup-winning form when they beat Otley in the final at Morley last April.
He has been the coach for the last five seasons.
Driffield's fly half Charles Burdass scored two drop goals from set scrums and added a 45metre penalty.
The second round ties of the Yorkshire Cup are down to be played this Saturday a had kept open but when Harrogate were hoping to entertain Cambridge University for their first visit to Claro Road.
Harrogate would prefer to play Ripon next Sunday.
Ripon's fixture secretary Andy Proud could not be contacted yesterday as he was en route from Paris.
also fielded a side weakened through injury and they went down 22–12 at Ripon in their cup-tie.
Ripon opened up a 15–0 gap by the interval and scored tries through former British Lion Peter Squires and left winger Dave Watson (2), one of which came from a breakaway.
Roger Dawson kicked two conversions and two penalties.
Redcar replied with four penalties by Carl Leach.
produced one of the shock wins of the competition when they hung on to their 6–3 lead to beat side who are two leagues Selby's seniors.
were trailing 18–0 in their first round cup-tie Bradford and went desperately close to another major upset against a North Division One side, but York ended four points short of victory at 18–15.
With the gale and hail at his back, Bradford and Bingley's flyhalf Peter Rutledge scored all their points in the first half, converting his own try and succeeding with four penalty goals.
York replied with a try from a driving maul through their scrum half Martyn Harrison which was converted by Andy Brown, who also added three penalties.
made a quick exit from the Yorkshire Shield competition when they were knocked out of the first round 13–4 in a game spoiled by the wind.
Barnsley opened a 9–0 lead before Acklam's number eight Stuart Dredge touched down a push-over try.
Barnsley scored a try through their replacement number eight Damian Burdon and Steve Wogan and Paul Matthews kicked a conversion and a penalty.
York finally produced a win for the first time since the second half of November but only by 1110 against a side who went desperately close to clinching a late victory themselves.
A penalty by Dave Moore had given RI a 3–0 interval lead, Moore going on to score an unconverted try, as did scrum half John Moorby.
Marist replied with a try and two penalties by Ian Vernon, who went desperately close to clinching victory in the last minute of the game when a penalty hit an upright.
He also missed a penalty moments before the final whistle.
Malton and however, were hammered 29–0 in the Shield competition whose try scorers were lock forward Ian Richmond (2), number eight Andy Read and full back Keith Thompson.
Kevin Robinson landed a drop goal and Andy Marshall kicked two conversions and two penalties.
suffered their fifth defeat in a row when they went down to a narrow 17–15 defeat in the Shield at home to Knottingley.
Knottingley were 17–4 ahead at the interval with tries by Chris Carlyle and Dennis Stead.
Mike Belcher kicked a hat-trick of penalties.
Tony Readman and Richard Thompson replied with tries for Northallerton and Fergus MacLeod added two conversions and a penalty.
With their original opponents, Marist, involved in the Yorkshire Shield at York did not fill the gap on their fixture list, entertained a touring side from who they beat 31–6 in an over-35 friendly.
The scene is set for a Courage League National Division Two showdown West on March 14 Newcastle victory moved them to within two points of their North-East rivals.
Weakened Wakefield had tried in vain to postpone Saturday's game and they duly lost their 33 match unbeaten home record to a Newcastle side who were clinical rather than spectacular in registering an 18–8 victory.
Centre Ross Wilkinson scored a try within 60 seconds of the start, which David Johnson converted his only successful kick of the match.
Dave Walker touched down a pack push-over and winger Paul Holdstock scored a try to put Newcastle 14–0 ahead at half time.
They were 18–0 up and cruising when Richard Thompson touched down another push-over, but Wakefield replied with a fine try.
Gosforth closed down any further Wakefield pressure until the last minute when ex-England winger Mike Harrison scored a try.
West Hartlepool registered their expected win put up fighting resistance in losing 22–4 in stark contrast to their previous two matches, in which they conceded over 80 points.
West ran in five tries through Alan Brown (2), Craig Emmerson, Paul Pook and Barry Corbett, Armstrong adding one conversion.
Stockton scored an opportunist try through Paul Beattie, while Mark Graham and Graeme Docherty were outstanding in a much-improved performance.
Hartlepool went down 22–13 whose try scorers were Courty, Smith and nall, Hails kicking two conversions and two penalties.
Rovers used the wind in the second half to score tries through Bell and Houghton, Calvert kicking a conversion and a penalty.
A 15-minute purple patch in which they scored 19 points a 22–14 win Durham City.
City went ahead with a Paul McGoay try, converted by Steve Kirkup, before Mike Robson's penalty made it 6–3 at half time.
Boro took control with a penalty try and touchdowns from Ross McMillan and Millichip, Robson converting two and adding a penalty.
City roared back with tries from Kirkup and Kevin McCallum but it was too late.
Mowden 26–3 with two tries from Steve Towns and one each from Ian Dunnabie and Greg Young, who had a fine game before departing with a gashed head.
Andy Craggs kicked two conversions and two penalties.
Bishop thrashed 44–3, scoring nine tries through Willie Bond (2), Steve Hargreaves (2), Mark McNair (2), Dave Walker, Steve Errington and Steve Brown.
Ian Campbell added four conversions.
Darlington won 13–7 with tries by Ron Archer and Keith Bolland and a conversion and penalty from Colin Woodcock.
had no fixture.
DARLINGTON had a disastrous day at Maiden Castle, losing 3–1 to Tynemouth.
Darlington have a tough run in to their league programme and are in desperate need of points to stay in division one of the North-Eastern League.
Before they lost Richard Biddle with a hamstring injury, the Quakers looked like they could actually match the ex-Premier League side and for a time they promised to take the lead.
With the departure of the enthusiastic Biddle, Darlington lost momentum and things began to go wrong for them.
Tynemouth began to apply pressure and went close with Phil Price and Malcolm Hall both hitting the post.
Price then had a short corner brilliantly saved by Darlington keeper John Lee.
This inspired a mini revival by the Quakers and John Weldon hit the post at the other end, with Peter Lentinue following up only to put a simple chance wide of the post.
Price and Hall then worked their double act for Tynemouth again and opened their account with the latter chipping over onrushing goalkeeper Lee.
Darlington could easily have equalised before the break when Lentinue was blocked unfairly in the area but Ross Alderson had his penalty saved by Rob Smith in the Tynemouth goal.
Tynemouth went further ahead after the interval when Jonathan Thomson found himself with a scoring opportunity after a rare mistake by Lee.
The experienced Peter Thomson then showed his younger Darlington counterparts the way as he pulled a goal back following a run of sheer determination from his own half.
Tynemouth had the last say, however, when a poorly taken 16 metre hit out by Alderson was met by Malcolm Hall who weaved his way into the area to finish the score Tynemouth's third.
Stockton continue to lay claim to the title after beating Morpeth 6–0 at the Tilery.
Mark Newbould and Dave Lawrence both hit hat-tricks.
Billingham beat Tynedale 2–0.
Mike Smith made six crucial saves at vital stages in the match, with Chris Brown and Tim Johnson scoring the goals which clinched victory for Billingham.
League leaders Sunderland were held to a 1–1 draw at Whitehaven, who took the lead in the first half through Frank Hatton.
Steve Maxwell was on hand for the Wearsiders to equalise before halftime.
South Shields and Redcar drew 1–1, while in the Premier League, Norton came a cropper at Ramgarhians, losing 4–2 to goals from F Mathuru, Pefull and H Mathuru (2).
Scorers for Norton were Robson and Finney.
Darlington Ladies beat Durham University Ladies 2–0 with two excellent goals by Shirley McConnell and Melanie Dobson.
THE scene is set for a Courage League National Division Two showdown West on March 14 Newcastle victory moved them to within two points of their North-East rivals.
Weakened Wakefield had tried in vain to postpone Saturday's game and they duly lost their 33 match unbeaten home record to a Newcastle side who were clinical rather than spectacular in registering an 18–8 victory.
Centre Ross Wilkinson scored a try within 60 seconds of the start, which David Johnson converted his only successful kick of the match.
Dave Walker touched down a pack push-over and winger Paul Holdstock scored a try to put Newcastle 14–0 ahead at half time.
They were 18–0 up and cruising when Richard Thompson touched down another push-over, but Wakefield replied with a fine try.
Gosforth closed down any further Wakefield pressure until the last minute when ex-England winger Mike Harrison scored a try.
West Hartlepool registered their expected win put up fighting resistance in losing 22–4 in stark contrast to their previous two matches, in which they conceded over 80 points.
West ran in five tries through Alan Brown (2), Craig Emmerson, Paul Pook and Barry Corbett, Armstrong adding one conversion.
Stockton scored an opportunist try through Paul Beattie, while Mark Graham and Graeme Docherty were outstanding in a much-improved performance.
Hartlepool went down 22–13 whose try scorers were Courty, Smith and Hall, Hails kicking two conversions and two penalties.
Rovers used the wind in the second half to score tries through Bell and Houghton, Calvert kicking a conversion and a penalty.
A 15-minute purple patch in which they scored 19 points a 22–14 win Durham City.
City went ahead with a Paul McGoay try, converted by Steve Kirkup, before Mike Robson's penalty made it 6–3 at half time.
Boro took control with a penalty try and touchdowns from Ross McMillan and Millichip, Robson converting two and adding a penalty.
City roared back with tries from Kirkup and Kevin McCallum but it was too late.
Mowden 26–3 with two tries from Steve Towns and one each from Ian Dunnabie and Greg Young, who had a fine game before departing with a gashed head.
Andy Craggs kicked two conversions and two penalties.
Bishop thrashed 44–3, scoring nine tries through Willie Bond (2), Steve Hargreaves (2), Mark McNair (2), Dave Walker, Steve Errington and Steve Brown.
Ian Campbell added four conversions.
Darlington won 13–7 with tries by Ron Archer and Keith Bolland and a conversion and penalty from Colin Woodcock.
had no fixture.
YORKSHIRE Cup holders defend their title in the second round with a derby on a date to be arranged.
Harrogate were 9–0 down against their first round who had not had a try scored against them since October.
But when they took the wind advantage Harrogate also took control, crossing Driffield's line for four tries through number eight Jeremy Hopkinson with a push-over, county prop John Woodthorpe from a tap penalty move and rolling maul, Steve Baker from the line-out before driving over, and Adam Pearson from a back move finished off under the crossbar.
Reserve scrum half Bill Freeman had opened Harrogate's reply with a penalty and he went on to score another penalty and convert Pearson's try.
Harrogate's well known coach Peter Clegg, who captained the club for a record five consecutive seasons from 1977 to 1982, announced his retirement from the end of the season for family and business reasons.
He still intends to maintain contact with the game, however.
In 1981 he skippered Harrogate to their first Yorkshire Cup victory for 17 years and coached them back to cup-winning form when they beat Otley in the final at Morley last April.
He has been the coach for the last five seasons.
Driffield's fly half Charles Burdass scored two drop goals from set scrums and added a 45metre penalty.
The second round ties of the Yorkshire Cup are down to be played this Saturday a had kept open but when Harrogate were hoping to entertain Cambridge University for their first visit to Claro Road.
Harrogate would prefer to play Ripon next Sunday.
Ripon's fixture secretary Andy Proud could not be contacted yesterday as he was en route from Paris.
also fielded a side weakened through injury and they went down 22–12 at Ripon in their cup-tie.
Ripon opened up a 15–0 gap by the interval and scored tries through former British Lion Peter Squires and left winger Dave Watson (2), one of which came from a breakaway.
Roger Dawson kicked two conversions and two penalties.
Redcar replied with four penalties by Carl Leach.
produced one of the shock wins of the competition when they hung on to their 6–3 lead to beat side who are two leagues Selby's seniors.
were trailing 18–0 in their first round cup-tie Bradford and went desperately close to another major upset against a North Division One side, but York ended four points short of victory at 18–15.
With the gale and hail at his back, Bradford and Bingley's flyhalf Peter Rutledge scored all their points in the first half, converting his own try and succeeding with four penalty goals.
York replied with a try from a driving maul through their scrum half Martyn Harrison which was converted by Andy Brown, who also added three penalties.
made a quick exit from the Yorkshire Shield competition when they were knocked out of the first round 13–4 in a game spoiled by the wind.
Barnsley opened a 9–0 lead before Acklam's number eight Stuart Dredge touched down a push-over try.
Barnsley scored a try through their replacement number eight Damian Burdon and Steve Wogan and Paul Matthews kicked a conversion and a penalty.
York finally produced a win for the first time since the second half of November but only by 1110 against a side who went desperately close to clinching a late victory themselves.
A penalty by Dave Moore had given RI a 3–0 interval lead, Moore going on to score an unconverted try, as did scrum half John Moorby.
Marist replied with a try and two penalties by Ian Vernon, who went desperately close to clinching victory in the last minute of the game when a penalty hit an upright.
He also missed a penalty moments before the final whistle.
Malton and however, were hammered 29–0 in the Shield competition whose try scoreres were lock forward Ian Richmond (2), number eight Andy Read and full back Keith Thompson.
Kevin Robinson landed a drop goal and Andy Marshall kicked two conversions and two penalties.
suffered their fifth defeat in a row when they went down to a narrow 17–15 defeat in the Shield at home to Knottingley.
Knottingley were 17–4 ahead at the interval with tries by Chris Carlyle and Dennis Stead.
Mike Belcher kicked a hat-trick of penalties.
Tony Readman and Richard Thompson replied with tries for Northallerton and Fergus MacLeod added two conversions and a penalty.
With their original opponents, Marist, involved in the Yorkshire Shield at York did not fill the gap on their fixture list, entertained a touring side from who they beat 31–6 in an over-35 friendly.
I WISH to set the record straight on the issue of the works and health committee's decision to introduce a ‘Caring Contractor’ scheme for Darlington.
The aim of the scheme is to improve areas around building sites, making them cleaner and easier to negotiate, to encourage contractors working in the borough to use more environmentally-friendly materials and to be more energy efficient.
The phrase that has caused all the fuss is that contractors and their staff, should they decide to adopt the code, should ‘have proper regard for the public and be courteous.’
How anyone can ridicule and trivialise such an attempt to make life more pleasant in Darlington is totally beyond me, particularly when the person primarily responsible is the Mayor and first citizen of the town.
I am particularly proud of this scheme and I sincerely hope it will succeed.
If it does not, and Darlington's reputation is sullied once more for personal publicity then I for one know where to lay the blame.
It seems that once again local Tories are following the Central Office line if you haven't any credible policies of your own, rubbish everyone else's.
Eleanor Young, Chairman, Works and Health Committee, Darlington Borough Council.
I HAVE been following the saga of wolf whistling building workers on the Cornmill building site.
So what is new?
I can't understand what all the fuss is about.
There were wolf whistles when I was a young woman over 50 years ago, not only on building sites but on street corners.
It was not taken as an insult by the person it was aimed at, more as a compliment.
The men liked what they saw and this was their way of showing it.
Mrs A. Hauxwell, 8 Aldbrough Walk, Darlington.
THE CRITICS Musicon Concert: Durham Cathedral IT is not often that the reverberant acoustic of Durham Cathedral enhances the sounds produced by a orchestra; but two of the items in this concert certainly benefitted from the extra resonance.
Nigel Osborne's Sun of Venice, a work commissioned by the orchestra, used an unusual layout of instruments, with two sets of players beyond the main body in the style of Venetian composer Gabrieli.
This wide disposition yielded felicitous effects of colour and tone which always fell pleasingly on the ear.
Osborne, to judge from the other of his works, is concerned to produce music which is generally concordant and does not afflict the senses with cacophonous sounds, though always working within a modern idiom.
This piece was inspired by Turner's paintings of Venice and Osborne attempts to reproduce in music some of the artist's preoccupations with spectral lights refracted in the special atmosphere of the city.
It is, therefore, impressionistic in intent.
The result was undoubtedly impressive, helped greatly by the acoustic.
Ravel's ravishing Daphnis and Chloe Suite No 2, beautifully played also benefitted from the reflective wash of sound.
Earlier, a gracefully shaped performance of Haydn's Symphony No 8 preceded Nielsen's clarinet Concerto in which Michael Collins was the excellent soloist.
Nielsen in this work, explores the full potential of the instrument in a demanding part which Collins played with apparently consummate ease.
Denis Weatherley Andrew West: Darlington Arts Centre WEST is one of a crop of young British pianists of immense potential.
On the evidence of his recital he is increasing in assurance and beginning to fulfil expectations.
He gave a stimulating programme ranging from the crystal clear Partita No 1 of Bach, through Schubert and Schumann to the 20th century Berg and Prokofiev.
His playing of the Bach was delightfully unmannered.
Two of the Schubert D899 impromptus followed.
These again were notable for clarity and eloquent in interpretation.
Berg's Sonata, a student work written before he embraced atonality, is not often heard.
It is in one movement, imbued throughout with profound melancholy, yet breathing a spirit of Viennese romanticism.
The playing here was fluently lyrical and of great understanding.
As a prelude to the final Schumann Fantasia we were given a selection of six of Prokofiev's attractively astringent Visions Fugitives; short but eloquent pieces.
The Schumann Fantasia in C is a masterly work written in homage to Beethoven.
It is a piece requiring consummate technique and deep understanding.
It was played with panache and authority, well controlled throughout yet with poetic feeling; very satisfying to the listener.
Denis Weatherley Eddi Reader: Live Theatre, Newcastle THANKFULLY there are still artists around who shun the hitech approach to music-making.
Eddi Reader is one who sticks to the principles established in her old band Fairground Attraction.
On the opening night of a tour to support her new album Mir Mamma, there were first night nerves floating around on stage, but the performance didn't suffer and ranks as the best of the year.
Not all the songs played during the evening hailed from the album with the set already suggesting Eddi has more than enough material to record and release another album at fairly short notice.
The mix of own compositions and covers worked well, bringing to my attention songs I'd never heard before from the likes of Dick Gaughan and Steve Earle.
Every song received a warm response from an attentive and enthusiastic crowd.
I'd be hard pushed to single out any particular track for special praise.
The atmosphere she and her band, The Patron Saints of Imperfection, created was that little bit special in the ‘you had to be there to totally appreciate it’ vein.
If subsequent visits can capture that atmosphere there will be a few more happy audiences around.
Keith Rickaby The Care Bears Magic Show: Sunderland Empire MICKEY, Tim and Chris were the age of the typical audience the under-eights and with Care Bears you know your feelings beforehand about sitting two hours to see human-sized puppets performing on stage.
Five Care Bears dance, wiggle their bottoms and enjoy some general slapstick during a rather loose story that doesn't matter if your heroes are Funshine, Braveheart Lion, Good Luck, Wishbear and Baby Tugs.
Silly crybaby Sally Anne, who belongs to the circus, is caught by the baddy Professor Coldheart, a Rik Mayall-ish type who deserved all the boos and screams he got.
He hadn't reckoned on the Care Bears.
They showed they really do care.
And anytime they got in a fix, they called on the children to lift paper masks (given out free and serving as a programme on the reverse) to their faces and give a special Care Bear Stare at the stage to overcome Coldheart's evil intent.
WHEN footballer Paul Gascoigne crunched into an opponent during last year's FA Cup Final the nation's sportsmen and women winced.
It was a wild challenge brought on in the heat of the moment and by the magnitude of the occasion.
But all over Britain, in far less august surroundings, every day equally serious damage is done to people playing all sorts of sport from karate to table tennis.
Until now the treatment of sports injuries has been a specialist skill only available to top professionals and some people fortunate to live near a good clinic.
In Darlington sports injuries have been dealt with by doctors or general physiotherapists.
Serious injuries have meant players travelling to Teesside for more specialist help.
But now Darlington Football Club has invested in new physiotherapy equipment at Feethams and a trained physiotherapist is developing a service for people in the town.
Nigel Cornell, 27, has returned to the North-East after several years spent working for the NHS in the Merseyside area.
He is now Darlington Football Club's full time physio with big plans for improving the treatment of sports injuries in the town.
The club has spent £3,500 on the latest physiotherapy equipment ranging from ultra-sound technology to a Furudism machine, which electronically stimulates muscle tissue.
Nigel plans to make this equipment available to the public by asking doctors in the town to refer patients to him.
‘These are very specific injuries which if not treated properly can ruin someone's sporting future,’ said Nigel.
Although having trained as a general physiotherapist he has always wanted to specialise in sports injuries.
‘I play football and I like watching it.
I have to say I see a match a bit differently when I watch Darlington now,’ he said.
As a boy living in Stockton Nigel always used to watch Middlesbrugh at Ayresome Park and consider Darlington the poor neighbours.
His allegiances have switched completely now.
‘It's a nice club with a really good atmosphere.
It's great to work alongside some really experienced footballers like Frank Gray and Tony McAndrew,’ said Nigel.
He has also earned the respect of the players who know that Nigel can hold the key to them returning to the side quickly.
‘There is pressure on me sometimes to get players back in the team.
The final decision is with me.
If I don't think someone is fit to play they don't play.’
Some of the worst damage to footballers is caused by players trying to start training and playing to soon after an injury.
Both Gary Gill and Mick Tait are receiving regular treatment from Nigel.
Although Tait has played he knows that he is not fully fit.
‘The new equipment has meant the treatment here is much better,’ he said.
Injuries, pulls and strains can be swiftly attended to at Feethams where Nigel can perform a speedy diagnosis to decide how serious the problem is.
During a match when a player goes down injured he must make the same decision but this time in the thick of the action with the crowd chanting and the referee looking at his watch.
‘Some referees think they know best and won't let the physio on the pitch.
That could be very dangerous when a man is genuinely hurt,’ said Nigel.
He also believes that despite the crowd's impatience with what they might think is play-acting, 95pc of players who get treatment on the field really do need it.
All Nigel has time to do is slap on the magic sponge and decide whether the man can carry on.
If he makes the wrong decision minor problems can snowball into an injury which requires months of physiotherapy.
‘At this time of year when the ground is hard every injury is worse.
It's very important that I can keep as many first team players fit to maintain a regular team,’ says Nigel.
The feeling within the club is that the investment in a physio and new equipment is already paying off.
BATTLING golden oldies have launched a fund raising appeal to replace their missing music machine.
Pensioners at the Wesley Court community centre, in Darlington, were left singing the blues when thieves broke in and stole their favourite karaoke machine.
The raiders also made off with more than £700 in cash collected to pay for summer outings.
But the 90-strong band of pensioners are determined not to be down hearted and they have redoubled their fund raising efforts.
The appeal got off to a flying start at the weekend when the group held a jumble sale and raffle.
A spokesman for the centre said: ‘We were extremely disappointed to lose the karaoke machine because it was also used for our bingo calling.’
DARLINGTON Scouts were put through their paces at the weekend.
Youngsters from throughout the town met at Harrowgate Hill Methodist Church for a test of their scouting skills.
Officials hope the demonstration day will encourage other youngsters to join the movement.
SCORES of World War Two veterans in the North-East could be in line for a special thank you medal from the Russians.
War heroes who served on the Russian convoys had given up all hope of receiving the award issued by the old Soviet Union.
Although the medal was minted to mark the 40th anniversary of the end of the war, it received virtually no publicity.
Many ex-servicemen had given up all hope of ever seeing the tribute after the Ministry of Defence warned supplies could dry up following the break-up of the USSR.
But the medals have continued to arrive in this country and among the latest batch of heroes to receive one is Darlington man George Stevens.
Mr Stevens, 68, served aboard the light cruiser HMS Scylla in 1943 ferrying supplies to the Russians and keeping German submarines at bay.
He said: ‘It has been such a long time coming I had almost given up hope.
This will give everyone else who is still waiting fresh hope.’
Copies of service records belonging to hundreds of seamen have been forwarded to the Russian embassy via the Navy records office in Portsmouth.
BANKRUPT former publican Maurice Siddle was contemplating suicide hours before police stopped him for drink driving on Christmas Day, a court heard.
Darlington magistrates were told Mr Siddle had been suffering from clinical depression triggered by business problems.
Yesterday magistrates heard Mr Siddle was stopped by police at 11.30pm on Christmas Day as he drove his Toyota Celica along Whinfield Road, Darlington.
Christopher Morrison, prosecuting, said he had been almost twice the legal limit.
Mr Siddle, of Brighton Road, Darlington, admitted driving with excess alcohol and was fined £300 with £25 costs and disqualified from driving for five years.
In mitigation Ronald Coia said his client was suffering from deep depression because his business had failed.
A NEW fund raising drive has been launched by Darlington Community Radio in a bid to ensure the station goes on the air in June.
The group, which hopes to raise £10,000, plans to write to some of Darlington's major employers in an attempt to secure sponsorship.
Members are also planning to sell badges of its bee logo to boost funds.
Future events include a children's Easter party at the Dolphin Centre, Darlington, at which Tizer Ted is to be the star attraction.
The group, which hopes to broadcast from the Arts Centre in Vane Terrace, is liaising with Darlington Council to find permanent premises.
ORGANISERS of an appeal to collect food and medicine for deprived Russian children are delighted at the response so far.
On Thursday and Friday volunteers at Morrison's supermarket on North Road, Darlington, asked shoppers to buy an extra tin or two to send to hungry youngsters in Kostroma, County Durham's twinned Russian city.
Michelle Le-Neveu, Darlington co-ordinator of the appeal, said the team were given ten trolley-loads of tinned goods and basic medicine like aspirin.
She said: ‘It was shattering but well worth while, we managed to get the message across and people were very generous.
‘We will be back in a fortnight and are trying to find volunteers so we can collect in the evening.’
Everything collected will be taken to Kostroma by lorry in March and distributed among local schools.
Darlington firm Bowater Containers will today hand over 1,000 custom-made cardboard boxes for the goods, designed to withstand the long journey.
NEW pupils at a dog obedience class were all shapes and sizes when they arrived for their first lesson yesterday.
The six naughtiest dogs in the North-East ranged from Bracken the cairn, who insisted on leaping up at every visitor, to Jessica the fearsome-looking rottweiler.
In between the two were boxer bitches Penny and Sally, Benson the beagle, and Nicky the labrador.
The six dogs are part of a scheme organised by former police dog handler John Woodward, based at Sadberge Kennels, near Darlington.
In ten days he aims to teach the six to walk properly on a lead, sit when told, lie down and stay and return to their owners from any distraction.
Mr Woodward, a police dog handler for ten years, launched the course, which would normally cost about £300, to stress the importance of training.
He said many dogs given as presents at Christmas were often thrown out in January and February.
Benson's owner Denise Taylor, of Brockett Close, Newton Aycliffe, said: ‘He hates being on a lead.
He just wants to be off.
I'm hoping I'll get a changed dog when I get him back.’
A RETIRED Navy man is to be reunited with his best friend after almost 40 years, thanks to readers of The Northern Echo.
Five neighbours of Darlington man Ray Hubbard alerted him to an article in the newspaper appealing for him to contact the pal he last saw in 1953.
Gordon Turner, 61, enlisted the help of The Northern Echo, trusting that his long-lost friend had returned to his native Darlington.
Mr Turner, of South Humberside, said: ‘I was so pleased when he called all his neighbours had told him about it.
‘We were on the phone for an hour we had some pretty special memories and I just want to thank The Northern ‘.
Now the friends are planning a reunion when Mr Turner visits Darlington in March: ‘We're going to talk a lot, swing the lamp and take some grog,’ he said.
Mr Hubbard, who is retired and lives at Hutton Avenue with his wife Margaret, said: ‘We just hit it off as pals.
Gordon left after just a year.
I carried on, then came back to live in the North but it just seems to have been a really cemented bond.’
The search is on for Darlington's young sports winner for 1992.
The scheme will continue its format set up by Darlington Sports Council and the North of England Building Society to encourage and reward sporting youngsters.
Eight premier award winners will be chosen and then in December the Young Sports winner of the Year will take the title held by boxer Anthony Todd.
Nominations for this year's awards should be sent to the Young Sports winners Scheme, North of England Building Society, 10, Bondgate, Darlington DL3 7JE.
UNTIL Saturday we'd not been to Meadowbank Stadium since July 1986, the distinctly unlucky 13th Commonwealth Games.
Memory suggests that at Berwick Rangers v Alloa the weather (perishing) and the crowd (277) were both much the same as for that earlier multi-national misadventure.
For a match described by the Berwick Advertiser as Rangers' last, the number of mourners could be considered low, perhaps even pitiful.
Truth to tell, though, the Scottish second division strugglers have had a fair few ‘last’ games recently — more funerals than a Co-op undertaker.
The only English team in Scottish football has had a dramatic season, not least because a former chairman best not named for what are darkly known as legal reasons faces charges of stealing over £60,000 from club coffers.
With £300,000 debts, they were last week locked out of their council-owned Shielfield ground by the new leaseholder, greyhound operator Gary Grant.
The reserve team has been disbanded, the manager former Newcastle United player Ralph Callachan has had no wages all season, the players have been paid from £12,000 donated by supporters.
The fanzine, named ‘From the Grove to the Harrow’ after two neighbouring pubs, has been gloomily sub-titled From the Grave to the Gallows.
‘Three o'clock on a Saturday afternoon will become meaningless,’ grieves the new edition, widely expected to have been posthumous.
‘Saturday will become meaningless, the weekend will become meaningless, life will…’
The newspaper Scotland on Sunday had also addressed the problem on January 26.
‘The downward spiral carries all the pace and peril of the Cresta Run,’ it wrote.
Meadowbank Stadium, Edinburgh 60 miles from home and, insisted the Scottish League, a one-off arrangement seemed the final, fatal twist: a view of the corpse, a chance for well-wishers to pay their last respects.
Colin Beveridge, the fanzine's assistant editor and chief vendor, was doing the sort of trade he might have expected by selling the Rock of Ages song sheet.
Berwick Rangers was founded in 1881.
For them to fold, he said, would be a tragedy.
Like everyone else he blamed the former chairman, who's best not named (but if he could be he'd be called Alan Bowes.)
‘There used to be a Football League team called New Brighton; whoever heard of a town called New Brighton now?
‘The club brings Berwick millions of pounds worth of free publicity every year.
Without its football team Berwick is nothing.’
Unlike the 13th Chaotic Games, alcohol was banned.
By 2.45 (this is Meadowbank and a crowd of 277, remember) the kiosk at the back of the stand had contrived to run out of Iron Bru too.
Inside, the giant scoreboard had billed the match as Berwick v Allo (as in ‘Allo) and was little further electrified until former Darlington striker Kevin Todd (‘he's had a rotten season’ Beveridge said) had a goal disallowed for a bit of slap and tickle in the great puddin' of a penalty area.
Berwick fans didn't agree, neither did the giant scoreboard.
Berwick 1 Allo 0, it insisted.
Good old Meadowbank.
Almost everyone in the North-East has a soft spot for them, of course, but few are as susceptible to Berwick's charms as 36-year-old Stuart Bell, from Redcar.
A British Rail quality manager and former Sunderland nut, he changed allegiance in 1980 when it seemed to him that some Roker players were becoming too mercenary.
Now he rarely misses a Rangers match, a privilege of cut- price rail travel.
‘My mates and I came up here one day when there was no English football, Christmas Eve I think, and I just got hooked,’ he said at half time.
‘It's not just the football, it's a nice town and it's a nice day out; if we went out of existence I just wouldn't know where to turn.
The irony is it's the best team we've had for a very long time.’
Needless to say, added Stuart, his wife thought he was barmy.
Alloa got a goal early in the second half.
In England, Chelsea had scored against Sheffield United too.
Chelsea 1 Sheffield Wednesday 0, said the Meadowbank scoreboard.
In both games it was the only goal, though for Berwick Rangers the end of 90 minutes may not be the end of 111 years.
Throughout the match rumour of a reprieve had chased up and down the stand.
There'd apparently been a Friday night meeting though the chairman had gone to New Zealand the day before at which new directors had been appointed.
‘One of the worst things of all,’ Stuart Bell had said, ‘is trying to find out what's going on.
Even the directors don't seem to know.’
Tonight, the trapdoor again having failed to open, they'll be back at Shielfield against East Stirling.
No one supposes, however, that it is the end of Berwick's agony.
‘The feelings just now are helplessness, despair and depression,’ the fanzine had said.
‘No one can explain the feeling, apart from the fans of Third Lanark.’
Grice product
THE Northern League's Easter ‘Ground Hoppers’ weekend gathers pace: there's even been an enquiry from Cork and a chap in Birmingham who says we can use his name to guarantee Northern League hospitality.
Thank you, Tony Benney.
Meanwhile, intending hopper Andy Hutchings, from York, has taken us to task for defining his other passion ‘gricing’ as train spotting.
(Backtrack Feb 4)
‘I am a supporter of the railways,’ he insists.
‘I am not, thankfully, a train spotter.’
We have, therefore, beaten him about the head with Eric Partridge's unimpeachable Dictionary of Slang, which defines a gricer as an ‘engine spotter.’
Gricers and others can get full details of the NL's three-day package eight matches, £6 from Neil Bennett, 5 Temple Buildings, Middleton St George, Co Durham DL2 1EA.
Any port in a storm
OUR old friend John Dawson can show a clean heel, or pair of them, to all the hoppers in Christendom, of course especially when given a week off from Hartlepool post office.
The only game that fitted his plans on Friday night was at far off Newhaven, normally only visited en route to Dieppe.
Told that it was a bit damp but the match would probably be on, John duly set off via Darlington, Kings Cross and Lewes Junction.
When he got there the pitch resembled the English Channel and the game was off.
‘It's just one of those things,’ says John, philosophically.
And, of course, there's always the train journey home to look forward to.
Yours sincerely
TWICE in 24 hours we've been shown letters from Ossie Ardiles, written in the week of his barbaric departure.
The first courteous, friendly, perhaps a little naive even promises to try to send a team to Shildon.
‘Do you want the first team or the Reserves,’ it adds.
The second generous, dignified, accommodating says he'd be delighted to bring his wife to a charity dinner in Darlington.
The dinner's being organised by Canon Bob Spence, St James's Park season ticket holder and parish priest of St Augustine's.
‘It shows,’ says Canon Spence, ‘my impeccable sense of timing.’
Five per cent off
BORN again Emmanuel Yarm, emerging from the column's wing, have taken seven points from their last three games.
Saturday's 1–1 draw at Beacon Lough Baptists was the first time the Gateshead side has dropped points this season.
‘They had 95 per cent of the play, we were just hoofing it anywhere,’ insists self-effacing supremo Graham Bond.
Meanwhile, the North-East Christian Fellowship League's Northern section kicked off the Christian Aid Charity Shield on Saturday.
All nine teams have paid £10 to enter, thereby raising £85.50 for the worthiest of causes.
Rules is rules, the local FA has had its five per cent.
Pro-active approach
BACK from a cricket tour of the West Indies, Darlington photographer Ian Wright finds himself almost overtaken by letters from gizza job Barbadians.
Cricketers seeking professional posts with North-East clubs include former Test player Alvin Greenidge and Philipson Johnson, who last season broke a Bolton League record with a century in 41 balls.
He'll pass on enquiries: Darlington .
CHAIRMAN Gary Gibson is furious that Hartlepool's promotion-chasing team are facing a wall of public apathy.
Gibson said: ‘It is soul destroying and makes me wonder whether all the effort is worthwhile.
‘The club is having its best season since it started in 1908.
We could clinch a play-off place with a good run yet a lot of fans appear to have written off our season.
‘Gates for our last two home games have plummeted to 2,400 and 2,100.
I cannot understand it.
It shows what a fickle business this is.
‘Our average gate is 3,500, though we pulled in 6,500 for big cup games with Ipswich Town and Crystal Palace.
‘Fans came out of the woodwork for those games.
Where are they now when we need them?’
Gibson accepted Pool sold Joe Allon and Rob McKinnon, who were popular with fans.
Yet the club brought in players from Second Division clubs and a Premier League club.
‘We need to sell players to keep our heads above water.
The fact we don't splash out a lot of money is good management.
‘It would be easy to spend heavily to appease fans but we won't do that.
‘The players have been absolutely brilliant, backed by a good management team.
‘People may argue it is wrong to have a go at fans and there could be a backlash.
‘But it is not our regulars, or our magnificent away supporters, I am criticising.
‘It is the floating fans.
If they want Second Division football they should support us now.
‘Chester have the lowest Third Division average but they play 45 miles away at Macclesfield.
What would our gates be like if our matches were so far from home?
‘Darlington are fighting against relegation yet their gates are better than ours.
‘Hartlepool is a traditional working-class town, whereas Darlington is more of a middle-class town.
‘Football may be an expensive pastime but I don't think that is why fans are staying away.
‘Not one letter of complaint about admission prices has been received by the club this season.’
Hartlepool have a chance to move into seventh place when they play Stockport County at Victoria Ground tonight.
DARLINGTON manager Frank Gray says he sympathises with fans who called for his dismissal after Saturday's home defeat.
There was an angry protest after the match against Huddersfield and chants of ‘Gray out’ from a section of supporters.
It was Quakers' seventh home reverse of the season.
Only Hull, who beat Darlington at Feethams, have lost more at their own ground.
The club has criticised the fans for not turning up in bigger numbers to support the club but now they are turning their criticism on the manager.
Gray said: ‘I know how they feel, particularly after two great championship seasons.
‘But now is the time for everyone with the club at heart to rally round.
It is important we all pull together.
‘It does no-one any good if there is a split between a section of supporters and the club.’
Gray said everyone at the club is deeply disappointed over the current situation but they all trying to put it right.
‘Fans pay their money and have a right to express their feelings.
But I am sure we will win our survival fight.
‘Nine of our 16 games are at home, many against teams in the bottom half of the table.
‘I have seen both sides of the coin in my career.
I have had success but I have also been involved in relegation fights.
‘Obviously, this is a new experience for me as a manager.’
Gray, who wrote in Saturday's match programme that morale at the club was good, thought a lack of confidence contributed to last Saturday's dismal performance.
‘You can never legislate for a loss of confidence.
But it was always going to be difficult for us once Huddersfield scored with a penalty.
‘Our team pattern was affected.
But now is the time for everyone to roll up their sleeves.’
DIRECTOR David Glass admits surprise that his stage adaptation of Mervyn Peake's Gormenghast is proving such a success.
Not because he didn't have faith in his own production.
It's just that Peake's trilogy Titus Groan, Gormenghast and Titus Alone has attracted such a cult following that Glass was apprehensive about doing justice to the novels in the eye of fans.
These fears seem to have been groundless.
The show which comes to Darlington Arts Centre on Thursday is playing to sell- out audiences on its national tour and getting good reviews into the bargain.
This must be particularly pleasing for Glass as he's wanted to put Peake's fantasy trilogy on stage for some time.
His first attempt, four years ago, had to be put on hold through lack of cash and the right cast.
‘I fell in love with the story as I think a lot of people do in their teens,’ he explains.
‘I felt there was a simple story at the heart of it, as well as the unusual content of the books, lent itself to the kind of melodramatic theatre I like.’
The result is a David Glass Ensemble production that intriguingly promises ‘an evening of hilarity, atrocity and stunning visual theatre.’
What's more, Glass has been able to stage Gormenghast with the blessing of the Peake family.
‘They have been very supportive,’ he says of the first major professional stage production of the novels.
Glass, as adaptor, and John Constable, as writer, spent a week last April thrashing out how to translate Peake's flights of imagination into flesh and blood in the theatre.
‘I said what I required from an adaptation and he said what he would like.
Then we collaborated,’ says Glass.
By the time the second draft was written, favourite characters had been left by the wayside.
Glass accepts this was for the best.
‘I think it benefits the story, instead of giving an endless list of characters,’ he says.
The story has to do with Titus preparing to inherit Gormenghast as ambitious kitchen boy Steerpike leaves a trail of death and destruction in his wake.
The presentation takes in dialogue, physical and visual theatre, puppets, design, special effects and live music.
Gathering the right cast a mix of straight theatre, dance and mime performers has been a major task.
Glass reckons he saw 100 people individually and in groups over a four or five month period.
The current tour is on the road for 11 weeks before a London season.
The response has been so good that he anticipates taking the show out again in the autumn.
The Royal National Theatre has also shown an interest in ‘picking up’ the production.
Thursday's performance at Darlington Arts Centre is sold out, although it might be worth checking with the box office () for returns.
I REFER to Horace Wilson's letter ‘Withdrawal is the only answer’(HAS February 4).
To suggest that Northern Ireland be united with the South without the consensus of the Northern Irish themselves is insulting and irresponsible.
Withdrawal should be over an period of time to allow the Northern Irish time to establish a new form of government.
Mr Wilson's further suggestion that all of the blame lies on one side, namely the Protestants and to suggest they leave what is rightfully theirs, shows a contemptuous disregard for these people.
Ireland may one day be a united nation, but it cannot be done and should not be done from London.
The North and the South must sort this one out themselves whether it be peaceably or with the gun.
It is their destiny and theirs alone.
John Young, 1 Willow Avenue, Crook.
Tory Press YOUR leading article (Echo February 3) carried what must be the understatement of the year so far ‘the Tories have more friends than Labour in the national Press.’
The article goes on to say that this does not mean these Tory papers are working in concert to get the Tories elected.
While the first statement is no doubt true, the second must be taken with a pinch of salt.
You just need to glance at the front pages and leader columns of the Tory papers to see the free advertising alone must be worth millions to the Tory Party.
Not to mention the thousands of pounds pumped into the Tory Party funds by the likes of Rupert Murdoch's News International.
J.
Emerson, 96 Front Street, Stanhope.
THERE was an article in The Times the other day which said that good spelling did not necessarily make for good writing.
Similarly, bad spelling did not mean bad writing.
This may be true, or to put it another way, this may be trew.
However, it was still fairly disconcerting to receive some information yesterday from a Newcastle public relations company.
In confusing its compliments and its complements it is not alone, but there was more.
Exemplifying the way that lazy speaking leads to lazy writing (nothing to do with dialect, this) it began one sentence: ‘Whever as a mid-day snack or an evening bite’ Whether it meant to put it like this is unlikely.
The firm is called Einstein.
Agenda addition
WITH its every utterance the board down at Feethams is approaching the moment when it will have to give a vote of confidence to its manager.
This should then be followed by the manager's departure within the month.
By all accounts Saturday's display (it was not desertion of the cause but prior engagements which made it impossible to be there) from the mighty Quakers was slightly better than the previous innocuous effort.
But they still lost 3–1.
Some fans have been on to say that calling for the manager's dismissal is not the answer.
Often, it is not.
Indeed, when Darlington were last in Division Three and plummeting the late, great Cyril Knowles received frequent backing in this space.
But his team had cohesion, some character, a little grit which have been in short supply in the present line-up.
This week's board meeting at Feethams is scheduled to deal with the usual monthly business and no more.
An addition should be made to the agenda unless of course Division Four football is already on it.
Scent of the West MORE anticipated than the next novel by Martin Amis (much more, actually) or the new Inspector Morse series on television, the latest Tex Larrigan has arrived.
Tex, of course, is a writer of westerns, a no nonsense sort of critter who speaks the language of the old Wild West.
He is also Darlington grandmother Irene Ord.
The fascination lies in trying to discover if she reveals anything of her true, gentle persona.
In Miserywhip's Last Stand she does not.
Not from the first sentence which begins: ‘He was conscious of his own stink.’
YOUNG athletes are to get the chance to parade their skills in Darlington in front of one England's finest-ever footballers.
It is the sixth time the Bobby Charlton sports skills contest has come to the North for heats for the national competition.
The April 24 event is being organised in conjunction with British Gas Northern, who are appealing for 200 entrants in the competition for girls and boys aged from 9–13.
Sessions will be held at the Dolphin Centre and Hundens Lane sports fields and details of how to enter will be given in The Northern Echo soon.
AN APPEAL for tins and basic medicines to send to deprived Russian children collected ten trolley loads of gifts, delighting organisers.
Volunteers at Morrison's supermarket on North Road, Darlington, asked shoppers to buy an extra tin or two to send to hungry youngsters in Kostroma, County Durham's twinned Russian district.
CHILDREN at a Darlington school have done their bit to raise money for hungry families in Russia.
A letter was sent to parents of children at Skerne Park Infants School and the following day tins of nonperishable food and basic medical supplies came flooding in.
The children also collected small change from their piggy banks which they laid out on the school hall floor.
The school's headteacher Mary Parkin said the line of coins stretched more than twice round the hall.
She was delighted by the children's generosity.
Many of the children at the school do not come from wealthy families and staff were impressed with the speed and generosity of the reaction.
Mrs Parkin described how children were coming to the school weighed down with tins of food.
‘It was far more than we had expected,’ she said.
All the cans of food and money, which came to more than £50, has been collected and passed on to the County Durham Kostroma Appeal.
A WOODEN Darlington church has been declared a no-go area in bad weather.
A recent architectural survey revealed problems at the 60-year-old Salutation Church in Salutation Road.
Although roof and joist problems have been temporarily solved it was decided to close the building to the public during strong winds or snowfall.
THIS weekend marks the 100th anniversary of the birth of one of the North's most celebrated soldiers.
Roland Bradford, one of four brothers, was born at Witton Park, near Bishop Auckland, on February 22, 1892.
Before his death at the age of 25, he had won the Victoria Cross and become the British army's youngest-ever brigadier general.
There are no events planned for this weekend to mark the anniversary of his birth.
But the heroism of the famous ‘Fighting Bradfords’ of Darlington is due to be preserved in print later this year.
Two local historians working on a book about the brothers have a publisher lined up and are aiming to have the book ready in time for the 75th anniversary of Roland Bradford's death in November.
Harry Moses, head teacher at Aycliffe Village Primary School, is working on the family's story with George Harwood.
Mr Moses paid tribute to Roland Bradford, a man he described as one of the Durham Light Infantry's most celebrated soldiers.
He said: ‘He was a remarkable man, even by First World War standards.
To become a brigadier general at 25 was a remarkable thing.
‘If we make comparisons, Montgomery was a staff captain when this young man was a brigadier general.
Had he lived, we could have been talking about Field Marshal Bradford in World War Two.’
Of the four brothers who went to war, only Thomas Bradford, who won a Distinguished Service Order, survived and returned to County Durham to live a full life until his death aged 80 in 1966.
George, who also won a VC for his part in a daring naval exploit at Zeebrugge, died on his 31st birthday, and James, who won a Military Cross for his actions at the Somme, died of his wounds at 28.
Roland joined the DLI in 1912 and went to France in September 1914 with the second battalion of the tank regiment.
He had a meteoric rise winning the Military Cross for leading an attack at Armentieres before becoming a lieutenant colonel in 1916 and being awarded the VC at the Somme.
In November 1917 he was made a brigadier general in command of a brigade of 3,000 men.
But within weeks he was killed by shellfire while he was at rest at Cambrai, France, during the first major tank battle in history.
He was and may still be the youngest man ever to have held the rank of brigadier general in the British army.
There is a plaque in his honour in St Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, and a porch at the town's Memorial Hospital is dedicated to him.
BLOOD on their hands, as it were, readers have been grappling with the unsolved mystery we set last week.
Why is the Cumberland Arms at Coundon Grange (or thereabouts) invariably known as the Blood Kit?
The first four theories were all different.
Gill Wootton, from Darlington, had the imaginative notion that it was hereditary, a link with the Duke of Cumberland son of George II who triumphed at Culloden and mercilessly annihilated surviving Jacobites.
History embalms him as ‘Butcher Cumberland.’
Michael Degnan, 30 years in Bishop Auckland, strutted the theory last weekend shared by Arthur, Squeak and a few others of the Cumberland's Friday night faithful that the name comes from the cockfighting pit that once was out the back.
‘They used to put spurs on.
It was pretty horrible,’ he insisted.
J W Clifford, now in Darlington but born in Gurney Valley 75 years ago, argues simply that it was because of all the fights not least between the boys of Gurney Valley and their contemporaries from the Cumberland Arms area, then known as Brickyard.
The pub's east wall was also used for playing handball, he says ‘like squash but without the racket; I've seen men's hands running in blood after playing to a final.’
And, of course, there were pub fights too.
But the most ingenious theory is from Bishop Auckland historian John Land, who devoted much time to the Eden Theatre's history and particularly its links with Stan Laurel.
John's long held theory is that the pub was once the site of a tent theatre known as a ‘penny gaff’ or ‘blood tub.’
In 1891 the landlord was Jeremiah Addison, who ran the Theatre Royal in Bishop Auckland with his brother.
A tub in mining parlance was also known as a kit, hence perhaps? blood kit.
‘The main entertainment at the time was melodrama and drinking.
The publicans catered for both,’ he surmises.
John, husband of the Wear Valley Council chairman, also recalls that the area round the pub was once known as Brickyard.
‘Some of the residents emigrated in the 1920s to Sunderland.’
Friday night's four pinter elicited little further.
There is a sub-theory that attempts to embrace ham curing in the cellar and a consensus that the frequent fisticuffs notion is the least likely.
‘Where was there a pub in them days that didn't have fights?’ demanded Squeak.
There was a chap in from Auckland Park half a mile round the bend too.
Auckland Park, he said, was now known as Sandshoe Alley because everyone up there was on his uppers.
It is the stuff from which social history, and columns a century hence, are made.
Eldon Lane is a half a street away from Coundon Grange: in the age of innocence, cub reporting and beer at 1/9d a pint, it was the column's regular beat.
They were also the days of a community serial killer called Category D, and of Eldra the never-say-die Eldon Lane and District Redevelopment Association.
We remember well its prime movers: Charlie Hopper, the gallant sub-postmaster; Tom Robson who had the paper shop in Low Deanery Street; Bob Jackson whose family business described itself still does as a ‘lifetime furnisher.’
Maybe we thought they hadn't a cat in hell's, or in Coundon's.
Clearly we were mistaken.
Today the once-condemned village has lots of new houses (including those which appear to have state-of-the-art outside netties) and more under construction.
En route to the Blood Kit, the chip shop even sold pineapple rings.
Bob Jackson and the boys had nicknamed their little whisky and dry ginger group Eldorado, and maybe Eldon Lane is still not the Golden Land.
But in its victory over bureaucracy it's a great tribute to all of them, and a rich example of life's most enduring maxim.
Don't let the bastards grind you down.
Three shadow boxes Monday's deaths column recorded the passing of Chris Hunter, who for donkeys years or so it seemed had had a sweet shop between our house and the football ground in Shildon.
We really only knew him through childhood over-the-counter dealings smiling, ever-patient, avuncular.
Do sweet shops exist any more?
And if they do, are there still people like Chris Hunter to answer a thousand times a day: what have you got for a penny?
Readers may recall, indeed find it difficult to forget, that a couple of years back Drum Major Jones (that well known Conservative celebrity) compiled the Conservative Celebrity Cookbook.
Wasn't it Jonesey who was pictured, book in hand, alongside the then Prime Minister?
Wasn't it the then Prime Minister who provided the recipe for her husband's favourite salmon fishcakes?
Could this be the same Conservative Celebrity Cookbook that is being remaindered some would say almost given away in Dresser's?
Surely not.
Every house in Darlington had a leaflet from borough solicitor Peter Kearsley last week, concerning electoral registration.
‘If a general election were to be called on April 9 1992’ it says do you suppose they know something we don't?
Billy Neilson, a prominent Wear Valley councillor until last May's Christopherian coup, was approached the other day by someone seeking to set up a small business in Sunderland.
Billy contacted the advertised Enterprise Initiative number at the DTI in London: there's no one you can talk to, they said, we only give out leaflets.
What's the number of your Newcastle office, he asked.
Dunno, they said.
Eventually Billy got it.
Newcastle clearly hadn't heard of Sunderland, so he asked for the Wearside number.
Dunno, they said.
Eventually he was given the Sunderland number, too.
‘The number you have dialled no longer exists,’ intoned a resultant voice at the other end.
Billy slammed the telephone down.
Such is enterprise initiative.
After last week's further note on the ineffectiveness of Neighbourhood Watch schemes in Darlington, another three people have been in touch.
One was a 70-year-old Watcher who threatened to do us grievous bodily harm and then hand herself in thus doubling at a stroke the NW clear up rate.
A lady in Pierremont shared our misgivings ‘in its present form the scheme is in a non-starter in Darlington’ and a chap round Carmel Road way told how he'd tried in vain to interest either police or neighbours in a scheme.
He and fellow residents have been persuaded, however, to install security lighting after two burglaries further up the road.
‘The only result is that a large heron discovered that when it activated the floodlight it enabled him/her to decimate my expensive collection of koi carp, brazenly standing in the middle of the pool at 10.30pm.’
Neighbourhood Watch vigilantes have so far failed to apprehend the culprit.
Perhaps it is a job for the flying squad.
…and finally, last week's news of soaring crime rates in Teesdale prompts reader Fred Day to suggest that it would never have happened had Geoff Moody still been on the Barney beat.
Geoff, an old fashioned sort of polliss, retired on health grounds a few years back and we still haven't bought him a pint.
We don't know if Fred Day's claim is true; we do know that he's not alone in believing it to be.
Pub refurbishment:
The Kings Arms pub, Great Stainton, near Sedgefield, will be shut until March 13 for refurbishment.
The public bar is to be extended.
MANY people will remember Archie Heaton.
Many will have forgotten him too because it is surprising how quickly those in the public eye fade.
There is always someone there to take their place.
But it was good to speak to Archie yesterday.
He was in genial, generous mood as ever.
He reminisced but not too much and he laughed a lot.
Archie was a former cinema manager who became the most successful chairman in the post-war history of Darlington Football Club.
It could also be argued that he was the least successful to because the club fell to bottom of the league under his stewardship.
Before they dropped out he had been replaced.
But under him they had also spent two mid-Eighties seasons in Division Three.
Archie is 71 now.
He still follows the Quakers avidly, though he rarely attends matches.
For seven or eight years he was down at the ground every day.
‘I miss it and I don't miss it,’ he said.
‘I miss the comradeship and there used to be a lot among directors and with other clubs.
It was good fun.’
But there was a black side.
‘Sometimes I think I don't miss people throwing stones at my windows.
That got a bit hard to take.
I came out of it because of my wife's health though.
That sort of thing wasn't doing any good.’
He had a point or two to make about the present regime but if there was a hint of criticism it was of the gentlest sort.
He knows what his successor will be going through.
No stones at windows, he hoped.
It was the return of Kevin Keegan to the North-East which had got Archie to thinking back.
He remembers being there the night the great man came to Feethams to play for Southampton in a match to mark Darlington's centenary.
The club was in big trouble then, on the playing front and financially.
It was in danger of going broke.
The old chairman still worries about them, about the continued fight for survival.
From what he has heard he fears the worst about the likelihood of a quick turnaround on the field.
At least he is in good form again.
Roundabout trip
THIS is a bit hard to understand but some audacious young men from Newcastle have set off for Europe in the company of Ermentrude the Cow from The Magic Roundabout.
They chose Ermentrude not only because young men tend to do silly things but also because Ermentrude is one of the heroines of The Magic Roundabout.
As this television programme was made in France the chaps thought the French might appreciate the little touch and make friends.
This seems mightily optimistic.
In view of what happened on the rugby field last week the French are unlikely to speak to us for a decade or so.
They call us Les Rosbifs as it is (as the English refer to them disparagingly as the frogs) and may indeed wonder what the students intend to do Ermentrude.
Eat her, they probably think.
The students are visiting three French cities to discover more about the single European market, an entity which probably received a severe setback last weekend.
Ian Donohue who helped to design the tour t-shirt said: ‘We will be the first intake of graduates into industry in the 1993 and want to take a first-hand look at what's happening with the single market.’
They all study Building Services Engineering, known as BSE, which are also the initials for mad cow disease.
One hopes they return intact.
Girls guide
ON the subject of matters French the all-girl band Roulez Fillettes begin their North-East tour next Tuesday.
It was speculated here that their name could be translated as Rolling Young Girls.
This has a certain ring to it, but apparently it is not entirely accurate.
Roulez Fillettes are more Right On, Girls.
They are part of a joint tour with Sisters Unlimited, the first in a series designed to bring us European folk music.
And there is more.
There will also be sheltered women only workshops and songs from the women's perspective.
Quite right too, and naturally later in the series there will be men only workshops and songs from the men's perspective.
Burning issue
THERE is more than one fire that has burned constantly for 200 years.
The Saltersgate Inn, near Pickering is a veritable flicker compared to the blaze which engulfed the Chequers near Osmotherley.
It just went on and on and on.
In Victorian times visitors were taken by wagonette to see the magnificent peat-fuelled flames.
A reader called to say she had a postcard dated 1910 which showed the fire with a notice saying: ‘This fire hasn't been out for over 200 years.’
If it was still going the third centenary would be approaching quicker than flames on dry moorland.
Unfortunately, it is no longer so.
‘Yes, we know of the legend,’ said Gladys McDonald who has been at the Chequers, no longer an inn, for 32 years.
‘But when we came we had the fireplace taken out.
It's a pity really on reflection.’
Reflections are something you cannot see in the flames of central heating.
Bottom of the table
THE financial plight at the mighty Quakers (see above) must be worse than anybody thought.
The club has advertised for sale its boardroom table and invites offers of more than £500.
Does this mean they no longer have a board to sit round?
Barton Club call:
New members are invited to join the Barton over 60s club.
The club meets on Wednesday afternoons in the village hall.
The club is a popular opportunity for conversation, refreshments and games playing.
Bolam Choir sings: Trimdon Male Voice Choir is to sing at St Michael's Church on Saturday March 14.
Tickets for £2 from PCC members.
Brafferton Committee AGM: The village hall committee AGM is to be held in the hall on Monday March 9 at 7.30pm.
All villagers are invited to attend.
Frosterley Star quest: Relatives and friends of Sara Anne Hawkins will be glued to their television sets next month as the young singer takes part in Esther Rantzen's Search for a Star.
Sara, who was born in Bollihope, will appear on That's Life on March 14, singing My Baby Just Cares For Me.
She has already established herself as a backing singer specialising in jazz and stands to win professional recording sessions.
Proud mum Maureen Brown urged everyone who knows Sara to vote for her.
Great Stainton Pub closed: The Kings Arms pub will be closed for another three weeks while internal alterations are carried out.
Tools stolen: Tools were stolen from Stainton Hill House farm during a burglary last week.
Heighington Slide show: Villagers in Heighington were entertained recently with a slide show given by John Bennington.
He showed pictures of a recent trip he had made along the Cumbrian Way.
Future village speakers are still to be arranged for the meeting due to be held on February 25.
Easter draw: The Baden Powell Scouts will be raising money with an Easter draw to fund their transport for summer trips.
They will be selling tickets at the beginning of March.
Quiz nights:
The George and Dragon pub will be holding regular quiz nights on Tuesdays, starting 9pm.
Free food on the bar and quiz entries just 25p each.
First prize; £10, second; four pints of beer and third; a bottle of wine.
Hurworth Sailors homes: Homes are wanted for sailors from HMS Hurworth when they visit the village next month.
Sailors from the hunter class minesweeper are due to visit Hurworth from March 7 to 9 while their ship is docked at Hartlepool.
A cocktail party has been planned for March 7 and many of the villagers will be invited.
School route: Durham county council has reminded school bus drivers that they should not use the narrow Roundhill Road route.
Drivers have been told they should use the A167 route instead.
Road review: Parish councillors have agreed to keep The Glebe under review.
Councillors said they have been approached by a number of people about the poor repair of the road.
Tree pruning:
John Howard, of 15 Hawkswood, Hurworth, has applied to Darlington borough council for permission to prune an oak tree.
School ceilidh: The Hurworth School Parent Teacher Association has organised a ceilidh on Saturday night at the school hall.
There will be live music from 8pm to midnight and the £4 tickets also includes the cost of food.
Low Coniscliffe and Merrybent New group:
A meeting of the parish council held last week launched a new Low Coniscliffe and Merrybent community group.
Volunteers have been asked to come up with ideas as to how the club should be run and what the objectives of it should be.
Anyone who still has ideas about the group but has not yet passed them on should contact the clerk to the parish council.
Middlestone Moor Members needed:
Middlestone Moor Youth Centre is looking for new members and people to serve on the committee.
Officers and the management committee will be elected at the centre's annual meeting on Monday at 7pm.
New members are welcome at sessions on Mondays and Wednesdays for 12 to 21-years-olds and a girls only session is held on Thursdays.
Middleton-in-Teesdale Firefighter needed:
A part-time firefighter is needed for the Middleton-in-Teesdale station.
Anyone interested should call at the station at 7pm on a Thursday evening when an officer will be available with more information.
Middleton St George Planning application:
Mr Anderson of Coatham Avenue has applied to Darlington Borough Council for planning permission to demolish a garage at his home and rebuild a detached double garage.
Parish council:
The next meeting will take place on Monday March 9.
Mother's union:
The annual general meeting of the Mother's Union was held on Tuesday.
WI news:
At the next meeting on Thursday Mrs Russell will bring a display of Goss china, and the competition will be for a small piece of china.
There will also be an auction of unwanted gifts.
New members and visitors are always welcome, meetings take place on the fourth Thursday of the month at the WI hall starting at 7.15pm.
Middleton Tyas Annual meeting:
The St Michael and All Angels annual meeting will be held at the church on Sunday March 1.
Cheese and wine:
The Community Association will hold a cheese and wine evening tomorrow at Scotch Corner.
The event starts at 7.30pm for 8pm.
Entrance is £3 and includes a tombola and raffle.
Theatre visit:
Ladies from the Middleton Tyas Women's Institute are looking forward to a visit on March 20 to the Georgian Theatre, in Richmond, to see a production of The School For Scandal.
A party from the institute also plans a trip to Scarborough to attend the annual spring meeting.
Neasham Parish council:
The next meeting is due to be held on Monday March 2.
WI news:
A jumble sale will be held at the village hall on March 19.
Newbiggin-in-Teesdale Domino drive:
Members of the Women's Institute are holding a domino drive in Newbiggin village hall on Thursday February 27 at 7.30pm.
Attractions include refreshments and a raffle.
Admission is 75p and all proceeds go towards Darlington Hospice.
Redworth Russia help:
Members of the Redworth Women's Institute have agreed to send a cheque for £15 to the County Durham Kostroma appeal.
The money will help buy food and medical supplies for hungry families in Russia.
The institute also enjoyed a talk given by a member of the Durham Wildlife Trust.
Members have been working on designs for an antipollution poster.
Meeting time:
The 1st Weardale Beaver Scouts meet from 5.156.30pm each Thursday at the Barrington Hall.
Band date: Stanhope Silver Band will perform a concert at the town hall at 7.30pm on February 25.
Sadberge New club: A new weekly floral art club will meet from tonight between 7–9pm in the village hall.
Council meeting: The parish council met yesterday.
Amongst the items on the agenda was a planning application for Chapel Row.
Stillington Special service: Education Sunday will be marked at St John's Church at 10.30am this Sunday.
The service will be attended by pupils from William Cassidy but is open to the whole community to celebrate education.
Windlestone Shed raid: Burglars broke into a shed at Windlestone Farm and stole tools during a night time raid last week.
FEARS that a town's successful adult literacy course could face the axe have eased.
The Adult Basic Education Unit at Darlington College of Technology has been funded for the past two years by a grant from the Department of Education and Science.
That cash aid is due to run out on March 31 and unit organiser Kate Harker said there were concerns that without the Government money it would not be possible to continue the same level of service.
Since the unit opened two years ago more than 600 people ranging from 16 to 70-years-old have benefitted from the specialist tuition.
But worries over its future have been allayed after Darlington college stepped in to subsidise the cost of employing a full time teacher at the unit to ensure it can continue its daytime classes.
Mrs Harker said: ‘At the moment about 85pc of our students are from the community.
‘A growing number are using the unit as a stepping stone to start courses at the college itself.’
The unit has been run with one full time and four part time teachers as well as a full time secretary.
Mrs Harker accepts that some reduction in staff may be necessary but hopes voluntary tutors will help out.
As well as teaching basic literacy skills the unit also teaches maths and numeracy.
Some of the students come for extra help for courses they are studying at the college.
Mrs Harker said she had contacted Michael Fallon, Darlington MP and DES junior minister, seeking his advice.
‘He was very helpful and has worked hard to encourage the college to support the unit,’ she said.
PARISHIONERS in a village near Darlington will be treated to a rather different Sunday service this weekend.
The congregation at Ingleton Church will listen to a lively discussion between a vicar turned interviewer and the head teacher of the local school.
The Rev John Boocock said he was looking forward to acting the David Dimbleby role as he gives up the regular ‘sermon slot’ for a full interview in which he will try and investigate the relationship between the church and education.
Ingleton School is a Church of England junior and infant school and Mr Boocock said he thought it was appropriate for the issue of the church's role in education to be discussed in church.
‘It's not very often that I come down from the pulpit but I feel this would be a genuinely worthwhile exercise,’ he said.
Jane Katsambis, head teacher of the school, will face a variety of questions from the vicar, who wants to find out how she views the school's role in the community and its relation to the church.
Mr Boocock hopes the 10am service will be thought provoking and enjoyable for the congregation.
‘It's part of a general Church of England policy throughout the diocese to address some important issues in an interesting way,’ he said.
The congregation can stay after the service to continue the discussion.
THE BBC's Byker Grove cast join swimmers at a charity gala in Darlington this month.
They will attend the 1992 British Sports Association for the Disabled/Variety Club swimming championship from February 29 to March 1 at the Dolphin Centre.
GET the buzz!
That's the message from Darlington Community Radio which is set to raise more funds from the sale of bee badges.
Grace Carter, a DCR member, is pictured above wearing the first batch of badges as she chats to Mary Jordan about the idea.
THE North-East record in the FA Trophy does not exactly form a roll of honour.
Not since Spennymoor reached the 1978 semi-final when they lost to Chris Kelly (the Leatherhead lip) and co, has any club made similar progress.
Several clubs have made it to the quarter final, but all have faltered, the most notable being Darlington, when they lost by a single goal to HFS Loans League side Leek Town two years ago.
The highlights of a sad record are: 1981–82: Third round: Wycombe 4 Bishop Auckland 1.
1982–83: Quarter finals: Blyth 2 Northwich 3 (after 1–1 draw).
1983–84: Quarter finals: Whitby 0 Dagenham 3 (after 2–2 draw).
1984–85:
Third round: Altrincham 2 Bishop Auckland 1.
1985–86: Quarter final: South Bank 0 Enfield 2. 1986–87: third round: Burton 1 Whitley Bay 0: Nuneaton 1 Blyth 0 (after three 2–2 draws).
1987–88: Third Round: Wokingham 3 Spennymoor 0.
1988–89: Quarter final: Blue Star 1 Telford 4.
1989–90:
Quarter final: Leek Town 1 Darlington 0.
1990–91: Second round: Horwich 2 Gretna 1: Witton Albion 3 South Bank 2. 1991–92: First round: Blyth 0 Gateshead 0 (replay) Blyth 0 Gateshead 3; second round: Gateshead 1 Barrow 0.
Gateshead's record has not been impressive so far.
In the seasons they have reached the competition proper since 1981, their record has been: 1980–81: First round: Boston 4 Gateshead 0.
1983–84:
First round: Gateshead 3 Horden 1 (after 1–1 draw) Second round: Carshalton 1 Gateshead 2: Third round: Gateshead 0 Bangor 2 (after 2–2 draw).
1984–85: First round: Gateshead 2 Stalybridge 1: Second round: Frickley 4 Gateshead 1.
1986–87: First round: Southport 1 Gateshead 2; second round: Nuneaton 3 Gateshead 2. 1987–88: First round: Gateshead 2 Corby 0 (after 0–0 draw); Second round: Gateshead 0 Wokingham 4. 1990–91: First round: Billingham Synthonia 0 Gateshead 3 (after 11 draw).
Altrincham 3 Gateshead 1.
Cusack scores
FOOTBALL: Darlington striker Nick Cusack, a £95,000 record signing from Motherwell, grabbed both goals for the Quakers reserves in a Midland Senior League 2–0 home win over Halifax Town.
Poaching fine:
David Mason, 24, was fined £140 by Barnard Castle magistrates for poaching and two counts of having no game licence.
Mason, of Park Royal Hotel, Consett, along with a friend, was found with 11 rabbit nets, one ferret and six dead rabbits.
He was convicted in his absence.
Funeral day:
The funeral of former Blackhall Rocks woman Mary Jane Thompson, 72, an active member of the village WI and drama group, takes place at Harrogate today.
Mrs Thompson, a widow, is survived by two sons and two grandchildren.
LEEDS United have announced new prices for Elland Road next season proudly boasting some cuts and other rises below the rate of inflation.
Directors are delighted with the cuts and modest increases at a time when many clubs are announcing hefty rises to help pay for ground re-development schemes and the move to all-seater stadia.
General manager Alan Roberts said: ‘We have listened long and hard to the needs of our supporters and given great consideration to our long-term aims at home and in Europe.
United supporters in Stand B will see prices fall from £15 to £14, with season ticket holders in the Kop and Lowfields seeing prices rise from £135 to £140 an increase of 3.7pc.
— SCARBOROUGH boss Ray McHale is considering revamping his side's formation for tomorrow's tricky trip to Chesterfield.
McHale is toying with the idea of a complete reshuffle as the Seasiders bid to climb closer to the Fourth Division play-off zone.
Make-shift defender Simon Thompson could revert to his normal position on the right wing to allow Gary Himsworth to assume a more central midfield role.
If McHale reverts to a 4–2–4 system Thompson will push on the right flank with Mark Ash recalled to right-back after being left out for the last three games.
McHale is giving a trial to 6ft 1in goalkeeper Ian Taylor, 24, who has been released by Carlisle United.
However, Boro's YTS keeper, Steve Hewitt is set to retain his place at Chesterfield tomorrow after an impressive midweek debut against Crewe.
THE world's longest pancake race featuring a larger-than-life lemon Mr Jif flashed through Darlington yesterday.
About six runners from the Peterlee Road Racers covered the stretch between Newcastle and Darlington in the 550-mile relay race ending in London on March 2, the day before Shrove Tuesday.
They were welcomed to Darlington Town Hall by Mayor Rita Fishwick, who donated a cheque to Radio Lollipop, a national children's hospital charity.
Pupils launch new recycling scheme
A NEW can recycling scheme is to be launched in Darlington today.
Council leader Coun John Williams will open the first of many Save-a-Can recycling banks this afternoon.
Schoolchildren from Whinfield Junior School will deposit the first cans into the bank in the car park of the Gateway Foodmarket on Whinbush Way.
Another two can banks will be opened in Darlington in the car parks of William Morrison supermarket in North Road and Presto in Yarm Road.
And a fourth is planned for the autumn.
Girl warned:
A 15-year-old Darlington girl admitted yesterday that she had been part of a gang which broke into the town's Salvation Army Hostel.
Darlington juvenile court gave the girl a conditional discharge for 12 months and she was warned to stay out of trouble.
VOLUNTEERS braved the cold on Saturday to sell dozens of raffle tickets for the Darlington Day Care Centre Appeal to football fans at Feethams.
The crowd at Darlington's home game bought a total of £150-worth of tickets for the prize draw, and organisers say the warm reception they received helped them endure the icy conditions.
Tickets are still available for the raffle, to be drawn in April, and first prize is a Vauxhall Nova Merit donated by Sherwoods.
Other prizes include a holiday in Florida donated by Fourseasons and The Northern Echo, and a colour portable television donated by Anna Hedley.
Appeal organisers would like anyone thinking of holding a coffee morning or jumble sale in aid of a worthy cause to do it for the day care centre.
Events like that would help convince charitable trusts with thousands of pounds at their disposal that the people of Darlington are backing the appeal and they should too.
Contact Moira Shields at Farmway for more details.
Darlington Harriers are arranging a 10km fund raising fun run for August 30, starting at 11am on High Row you must be 17 or over to take part.
If that sounds too energetic there's a 2km run starting at 10am on the same day.
Watch this space for more details.
The appeal hopes to raise £637,000 to build the day care centre, which will act as a meeting place for all old folk especially the lonely, frail and housebound and provide a range of services.
So far £111,857 has been raised.
Correction
In the Northern Notebook item last week about an Order of St. John honour for Dr. Iestyn Williams it was reported, in good faith from information supplied by Dr. Williams, that when he received the award he would be ‘accompanied by his wife, Celia.’
We regret that this was incorrect and apologise to Mrs Dorothy M. Williams of St. Ninian's Close, Darlington.
Everybody knows that people in Barbados are just crazy about cricket.
But even cricket-mad Darlington businessman Mr Ian Wright was amazed to find just how fervent is their love of the game.
When he presented a new Kwik-Cricket set to the Barbadian Secretary of State for Education, the minister promptly moved desks, bookshelves and even delayed leaving for a cabinet meeting so that he could play the game in his office.
Mr Wright, aged 45, of Cockerton, was in the Bridgetown office of Minister Mr Cyril Walker as part of a Lord's Taverners Caribbean tour.
He was also acting as an emissary for the Mayor of Darlington, Coun.
Mrs Rita Fishwick.
She gave him two goodwill letters addressed to legendary West Indian cricketers Mr Wes Hall and Sir Garfield Sobers.
He also took with him two framed photographs of West Indian teams at the Feethams ground in Darlington.
One was of the 1991 touring side and the other, the 1923 team.
The gift was signed by 92-year-old Mr Harry Moon of Earlston House, Coniscliffe Road, Darlington, who played for the 1923 Minor Counties side which took on the might of the West Indies.
The letters and photographs were part of a minor damage limitation exercise by the Mayor, who was angry last year after Darlington scored a public relations golden duck.
There was a booking mix-up which meant the West Indians were unable to stay as one party at the Blackwell Grange Moat House Hotel, so they chose to stay together in Gateshead instead.
This meant that Mr Wright and the Darlington Cricket Club secretary Mr Brian Dobson could not take the West Indian official team portrait.
It was to have been taken outside the ivy clad bay-windows of the Blackwell Grange Moat House.
It was taken instead in Gateshead thus depriving Darlington of the chance to have its name on a picture which would adorn walls as far apart as Headingley pavilion and West Indian embassies in Washington.
But thoughts of the administrative foul-up were far away last month when Mr Wright handed over Darlington's peace offering and also gave sets of Kwik Cricket to schoolchildren at two Bridgetown primary schools.
Humbleton chalets rise to fight again
Amended plans for a controversial chalet development in Teesdale will be considered by councillors next month.
Mr John Richardson, a Whorlton farmer, employed consultant engineers to examine road access to Humbleton Camp after Teesdale councillors rejected his plans to build 73 holiday chalets there.
Bullen and Partners of Darlington propose widening the A67 Darlington to Barnard Castle road to include a third lane for traffic turning right into the site.
Visibility from the access road, which is doubled in width, will be increased from 163 metres to 215 metres.
Members of the development control committee (south) will consider the amended plans on March 18.
Mr Robert Niven, the planning consultant acting for Mr Richardson, said the majority of councillors had rejected the chalet scheme on grounds of access and road safety.
‘We have addressed the problems of access and hope the new plans will allay the councillors’ worries,’he said.
Coun. Alan Theakstone, the member for Streatlam and Whorlton, is confident the amended plans will be approved.
‘These plans cannot possibly be refused by members of the council.
They were 99.9 per cent refused on the grounds of the traffic access and this plan appears to be the answer,’ he said.
Councillors voted 1514 to refuse permission for the chalet scheme on December 11, on the grounds of road safety and its detrimental scale and impact for local residents and the environment.
Mr Richardson applied for outline permission to build the chalets after winning approval for a hotel and golf complex at Humbleton.
Reports from Darlington Cycling Forum
Town injury record is the ‘worst in county’
More children are being seriously injured in cycling accidents in Darlington than anywhere else in the county.
Mr Geoffrey Hillcoat, Durham county council group traffic manager for road safety, told Darlington Cycling Forum on Monday that serious accidents in the town accounted for almost half of all the cycle injuries in the county last year.
Mr Hillcoat said that there had been no cycling fatalities but in-juries to those under 16 had risen, whereas accidents involving older riders had fallen.
Young people had 14 accidents, three more than in 1990, but the number of injuries to older riders fell from 19 to 17 for the same period.
Mr Hillcoat said: ‘Nearly 90 per cent of all these accidents occurred in the main urban areas of Darlington, inside the southern bypass in 30 mph speed limit zones.’
He added that although the figures might seem worrying, the number of people using bicycles in the town was greater than anywhere else in the county by 3.4 per cent.
Coun. Bill Stenson called for more schools to get involved in cycling proficiency and road safety schemes, and Mr Hillcoat said that road safety officers from the county were involved in helping teachers run the schemes.
‘They try to encourage schools to take part, as we have a very large amount of information and facilities to offer, but not all the schools in the county are involved,’ he said.
He added that the demands imposed on teachers by the National Curriculum often meant there was not enough time for cycling lessons, but many of the town's primary schools were involved.
Nearly all the accidents in Darlington occurred at junctions, when cyclists were waiting to set off or just starting to pedal.
All the slight injuries happened at roundabouts on Northgate, Bondgate, Parkgate and North Road Mr Graham Hamilton, of Darlington Freewheelers, said car drivers were often to blame for bike accidents and called for new measures to raise awareness.
‘Most accidents happen in daylight,’ he said, ‘so are we doing enough to make car drivers aware of pedal cyclists?
‘There should be warning signs to educate drivers driving without due care at places like Neasham Road, Yarm Road and Langdale Road.’
Club honour as adventurer bows out
THE man who founded Swaledale Outdoor Club and inspired a spirit of adventure in thousands of people over the past quarter of a century stood down as chairman at this week's annual meeting, prior to moving to South Africa.
Mr John Deighton, of High Pottergate, Richmond, expects to be away for three years.
However, members wanted to recognise his outstanding contribution to the club so they elected him president.
Mr Deighton, who has been chairman since the club's formation, said: ‘I feel honoured and pleased that I can officially keep close ties with the club.’
SOC was formed when a dozen outdoor enthusiasts met in a back room of the Oak Tree pub in Richmond.
Since then it has grown to involve about 700 people.
‘In the early days few people were interested in outdoor pursuits indeed there were few outdoor activities anyway.
In recent years we have seen a tremendous growth in interest and the range of activities,’ said Mr Deighton, whose wife Maura was also a founder.
Walking, mountaineering, caving, skiing, windsurfing, canoeing, mountain biking and cycling are now regular club activities.
Beginners are always welcome.
Members venture abroad, too.
Five years ago Mr Deighton led an SOC expedition up Kilimanjaro, the highest mountain in Africa.
He has also been involved in the successful annual Swaledale Marathons run by SOC.
The club, which was a model for other outdoor organisations, has a permanent headquarters and clubhouse in New Road, Richmond.
Mr Deighton was also a founder member of Richmond Folk Club and helps organise the increasingly popular Richmond Folk Festival.
For several years he was a member of Swaledale Fell Rescue team.
For most of his life he has worked for Cummins Engine Co., and met his wife there.
She was the daughter of Mr Bill Kelly, captain of Darlington Football Team.
His latest appointment with the firm is to work as service manager for the whole of South Africa.
‘I see it very much as an adventure,’ said Mr Deighton, who will be taking his walking boots and rucksack, windsurfer and mountain bike with him.
He has agreed to take the appointment because his two sons are now grown up.
Richard is at Liverpool University reading geography, while Tim, a former head boy at Richmond School, got his geography degree at Liverpool last summer and is now travelling around the world.
The new chairman of Swaledale Outdoor Club is another stalwart and allround sportsman, Mr Dave Thompson of Darlington.
Darlington boy gets new hockey challenge
PHILIP HARDY, a member of Norton Hockey Club, has been selected for England under-18s.
Next month he will attend training sessions at Bispham Abbey and between April 3–5 he will play in the home internationals at Aberdeen.
‘The one I can't wait for is the European Cup on April 16–20,’ says the talented teenager, quipping: ‘The only problem is that it's at Cannock and not somewhere exotic in Europe!’
Philip, who lives in Darlington and attended Longfield Comprehensive before going on to Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College, has already represented his country at under-15 and under-16 levels.
He left Darlington Hockey Club for Norton a few seasons ago to improve his standard of play and his new club is currently lying fourth in the prestigious northern premier league.
His clubmate and perhaps the area's most experienced hockey player, goalkeeper Tarl Singh, said: ‘We are all delighted for Phil.
He really deserves his chance.
‘His main assets are his close ball skills and the tremendous work rate he puts into his midfield play.
He has certainly strengthened our midfield since he joined us.’
Philip's selection is also a boost for the North-East which each season is developing its potential as a major hockey force.
‘Sundial may close if it cannot be converted’ The Sundial Hotel in Northallerton may close if it cannot be converted into a nursing home, it was claimed this week.
At a public inquiry held on Tuesday following the refusal by planners to grant permission for the conversion, Mr James Asquith, a town planner, said the hotel had been badly affected by the recession.
He said there was no reason to think the hotel industry would pick up the Scotch Corner Hotel and Croft Spa Hotel had gone into receivership and The Solberge and Kirkby Fleetham Hall were up for sale.
‘It is no exaggeration to suggest that the consequence of a failure to secure planning permission for a change of use may be the complete shut down of the Sundial with the loss of about 20 staff,’ he said.
The occupancy rate of the hotel had dropped to about one in four rooms last year, he added.
But Hambleton district council claims the hotel, in Darlington Road, is unsuitable as a nursing home as it lies in the heart of Northallerton's industrial estate.
Mr Maurice Cann, development control officer, said: ‘If permission is granted the occupiers of this building will be living in a substandard environment surrounded by a variety of industrial and commercial uses.’
He added the presence of a nursing home would have a long-term effect both on the future development of existing firms in the area and those wishing to locate on land earmarked specifically for industrial purposes.
Northallerton had the lowest level of accommodation provision in Hambleton and the loss of the Sundial Hotel would result in a 33 per cent reduction in the total number of beds in the town, the inquiry heard.
The owner of the Sundial, Mr Fred Davies, said the hotel would make an ideal nursing home with little need for alterations.
It is already residential and only the degree of care would change.
A noise specialist told the inquiry that levels at the Sundial were not high, it had double glazing and an air conditioning system so there was no need to open windows.
The Sundial opened two-and-a-half years ago after an 18 month planning battle with the district council, as Mr Davies wanted to build on land the other side of town.
A final decision will be made by a Department of Environment inspector.
Opening on August 27 a shopping centre Darlington can be proud of
Optimism prevails on the letting front The Cornmill shopping centre in Darlington opens on Thursday, August 27, it was announced this week.
As journalists were given the first glimpse inside the mall on Wednesday, managers from developer Burton Property Trust geared up for a major marketing exercise.
Already 24 of the 64 units are let or in the hands of solicitors and another 22 have attracted specific applications.
Although managers remained tight-lipped on the full list, C and A, H.
Samuel, Dorothy Perkins and C and J Clark Shoes were known to be among the stores which signed up.
Electrical retailer Rumbelows said last week it would not now take Unit 12, one of the larger shops in the centre, after the national chain announced it would streamline its business and close several shops around the country.
However, Mr Chris Noble, of Sanderson Townend and Gilbert, the agents letting the units, said two applications for the unit were received within a day of the Rumbelows announcement.
Fears that areas of the town centre would suffer as businesses moved into the Cornmill were rejected by Mr Noble.
‘Dorothy Perkins is moving in from its Northgate store the former post office and has already let that building again,’ he said.
Most of the units would be let to chainstores new to the town, including the anchor store, C and A, which has taken the biggest, two-floor unit.
One of the most prestigious units, No. 32, on the Priestgate bridge, had attracted six applications despite carrying one of the highest rents £30,000.
It was the only unit with a large bay window and interest came from local, regional and national businesses.
The bridge, which appears much wider from inside than from Priestgate, includes other smaller units and a kiosk as well as a pedestrian walkway linking the two sections of the Cornmill.
Although much of the interior was still shrouded in scaffolding and plastic sheet, marble tiled floors, ceiling panels, twin escalators and the glass-domed roof gave a clear impression of what shoppers could look forward to.
A triangular pond was taking shape and trees, shrubs, seats and market barrow style stalls are planned for the aisles.
Main entrances would be from Northgate, Prebend Row and Tubwell Row with a smaller door in Priestgate.
Mr Noble stressed the importance of ensuring a good mix of businesses in the Cornmill, which began to take shape two years ago with the demolition of the old Co-op store and part of the King's Head Hotel.
‘It is also important to make sure we don't have the same kind of shops in one part of the centre,’ he said.
‘For example, we would not want two jewellers next door to each other .’
Disabled people and mothers with pushchairs would find no steps in the mall and access to the first floor is by escalator or lift.
Toilets were also accessible to the disabled, including wheelchair users.
Delivery lorries would enter the complex from Tubwell Row, telephone the manager's office giving details of the delivery and the driver would be directed to the correct bay.
Goods lifts would take the items to the correct unit.
Mr Albion Small, former manager of the Eldon Gardens complex in Newcastle, has been appointed manager of the Cornmill and said on Wednesday he was confident the centre would weather the current recession and attract more shoppers to Darlington, bringing more business to other shops and offices in the town centre.
The opening in time for August Bank Holiday Monday, possibly the busiest day of the year for Darlington shops, would give businesses the chance to establish themselves before the pre-Christmas onslaught in mid October.
Christmas plans were already in hand, said Mr Small, who hoped to rival the Gateshead MetroCentre with a stunning display of automated models.
Although managers have drawn up a list of personalities who could be invited to open the centre, identities were not revealed.
Claims that people would be put off travelling to the town centre because of lack of parking were dismissed.
Miss Sue Rutherford, marketing director for Burton Property Trust, said Darlington had fewer traffic and parking problems than most other major town centres.
Public transport in the town was frequent and fairly cheap and a high proportion of people travelling to the shops did so by bus.
Darlington had waited a long time for a shopping centre, she said, but the wait had its advantages.
‘At least the town escaped a 1970s style concrete flat roofed monstrosity of the type that went up in other town centres throughout the country,’ she said.
‘I think the town can be proud of the Cornmill.’
Town needs another museum
Another museum should open in Barnard Castle to chronicle the history of the town, an amateur historian has said.
Mr Robert Jackson, who is retiring as chairman of the Victorian History Society in the town, said a folk museum would complement The Bowes Museum while providing residents and tourists with a history of Barnard Castle.
The Bowes Museum, which is celebrating its centenary year, is one of the best museums in Britain it is known as the V and A of the North but cannot house the history of its town.
Mr Jackson, who lives in Green Lane, Barnard Castle, believes a folk museum would be an ideal way of collecting records on the town which are scattered throughout archives in the North East.
‘A lot of records held on microfilm in Newcastle, Durham and Northallerton could be brought to the town and housed in one place,’ he said.
‘A few years ago we thought the Butter Market could have been made into a little museum but it would have been difficult to cross the roads into it.’
Mr Jackson founded the Victorian History Society three years ago, when a back injury forced his retirement as a nurse at Richardson Hospital, Barnard Castle.
He now works a lay minister visiting patients in nursing homes in Barnard Castle and Darlington, although suffering from chronic spinal pains.
Despite his retirement as chairman, Mr Jackson will continue attending the monthly history society meetings in Witham Hall.
Dining out on history
An imposing table which graced Darlington Football Club boardroom was offered for sale this week by a Quakers fan.
Mr Brian Pilkington, who runs the Speedstrip furniture business in Melville Street, bought the 15ft. table ‘on spec’ at an auction about six weeks ago.
‘I didn't know at the time it had been in the Quakers boardroom but it was a good, handmade, solid oak table and I got it for a reasonable price,’ he said.
After a friend recognised the piece of furniture, Mr Pilkington began tracing its history.
The table is believed to date from the 1930s and could have been given to the club by a local building firm, whose managing director was on the Quakers board.
Durham County Coun. Derek Mason, a former director of the club, said the table was found covered in paint pots and grime in a lock-up shed underneath the Feethams west stand by a director, Mr Brian Hadley of Middleton St. George, in the mid 1970s.
‘It was in a dreadful state, there was even a lawnmower standing on it,’ he said.
‘We thought it was a good table and three seasons ago about £120 was spent having it professionally polished.
‘It is part of the history of the club and it is a great shame the present directors got rid of it.
I would buy it myself if I had room for it.’
It was sold at auction after alterations to the club headquarters.
Football fans and businessmen in the area showed a lively interest in the table when it was advertised in the small ads of a local newspaper at the weekend.
‘A lot of people came to see it, some from as far away as upper Teesdale and Cleveland,’ said Mr Pilkington.
‘They were mainly people with offices or garages although I had one or two with large country houses.’
Offers over £500 are invited for the table.
RC schools get extra cash for more classrooms Two Catholic schools in Darlington will be among those to gain from new rules on extra classrooms, the town's MP said this week.
Mr Michael Fallon, who is also schools minister, said it was an historic change which he had been working on with Catholic bishops since November.
Canon Bob Spence, the senior Catholic priest in Darlington, said he was delighted with the news.
But Ms Hilary Armstrong, education spokesman for Labour and North West Durham MP, called it a desperate measure to save Mr Fallon's parliamentary seat.
The new move, announced by Mr Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Education, means over-subscribed schools will be given money to expand even if empty places exist in nearby schools.
It will apply to state schools as well as those that are voluntary-aided.
‘But the first to benefit will be successful church schools because they might have been discriminated against in the past,’ said Mr Fallon.
‘I am delighted to be able to do this.
It's nice as a Minister to be able to do this, to look after your own patch.’
‘But what has been happening in Darlington has been happening all over the country, this has been a national problem.’
He said a working definition of ‘oversubscribed’ had yet to be agreed.
‘I am sure however that both schools in Darlington will qualify.’
Canon Spence said: ‘We are delighted that Kenneth Clarke has made it absolutely clear that Catholic parents have the right in law to send their children to the local Catholic school.
‘His department has been saying to us in recent weeks that we could not have the classrooms and toilets we need because there are empty places in other schools.
‘Now the way is open to St Bede's and St Augustine's parents to get what they need for the good of their children.
‘We are going to negotiate hard with the department to see that we get things moving.’
But Ms Armstrong said she had been bemused by the statement.
‘It appears nothing can be done until the next round of bids which are not out until later this year after the general election.
And there was no indication that extra money was available.
‘I am also perplexed about this ‘rule’.
This is the first year that Catholics or anyone else have known they couldn't expand if there was a surplus in other schools nearby.’
She said she had tabled questions in the House of Commons asking if new money was to be provided for the expansion and to identify the rule in an act.
‘This is desperate attempt to crawl out of the hole that he has dug himself.
It's pure electioneering and I know the people in Darlington have got more sense.
He won't even be the MP for the town let alone the minister by the time these decisions are made.’
Mr Fallon said he had talked to the longest serving officials in his department who said the expansion rule had been in place as long as they had been there.
And he promised £20m. of ‘new money’ to help with expansion in both normal and voluntary aided schools.
Mr Alan Milburn, Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, described the decision as a desperate U-turn.
‘He has failed in his attempt to downgrade Darlington's Catholic schools but his assault on the 1944 Education Act has delayed vital improvement work at St Bede's and St Augustine's for at least a year.’
IN THE article (Echo February 3) in which you report the proposed cuts in the Home Help service, Durham County Hall says the cuts are necessary because money is running out.
The majority of elderly people would far rather stay in their own homes rather than live in residential homes, however good that home may be.
Would it not be far less expensive to increase the Home Help service to enable people to stay at home rather than go into care?
The cost of residential care in many cases has to be topped up by the DSS.
I made enquiries recently about the amount of topping up the DSS would do and was told that the maximum amount is £170 per week.
The maximum Home Help charge is £4.60 an hour.
Three hours a day for seven days a week would therefore amount to much less than the maximum for residential care.
And many elderly people do not require three hours daily; help with meals, cleaning and shopping is what they need.
Would it not be good policy to consider this option?
D.M. 
MY wife and I joined the National Trust at Cragside in Northumberland and over the last few years have cut a pretty wide swathe through Trust properties in Northumbria, North Yorkshire, Kent, the Lake District and East Anglia.
Every year a bank statement informs us that the Trust has lopped a mildly painful number of pounds from our far from princely pensions and every year we wonder whether we should continue to belong or not.
We always go continue and we probably always will.
But we sometimes wonder why.
Sadly, you see, there's quite a lot about the Trust which we don't find particularly sympathetic.
Why is it, for example, that every single Trust employee above the level of gardener's mate speaks with an exquisite Wykehamist accent of the kind rarely heard outside the better cavalry regiments?
Those tight-lipped, clipped voices curl the toes of any Trust member who lives north of Watford and can't say ‘five thisand pinds.’
We wonder whether there aren't perhaps rather too many of the beautiful people running the Trust, perhaps sustained by the arcane procedures for electing them.
We mere peasant members are asked, in practice if not in theory, merely to murmur reverentially a few names of a few decent people into a few of the proper ears, who will then look after everything for us.
And those local wine and cheese mornings and the open air Shakespeare and the woolly ties and the pot pourri and the comfrey-scented face creams and all those coffee table books about life in Edwardian country houses well, it does all tend to bring out the boor in at least one member.
The trouble is that I recognise the tug of it all.
I too am made tearful for those dear dead days beyond recall when bread tasted like bread and lawns were always newly mown and ladies smelled of candied violets.
The rich man in his parlour, the poor man at his gate what a tidy, orderly world nostalgia makes it now seem.
But if the Trust's appeal is to be only nostalgia, it doesn't deserve my subscription.
There has to be more.
Take Cragside, for instance, Lord Armstrong's Victorian mansion outside Rothbury and one of the Trust's most visited properties.
To be perfectly honest, the place is an eyesore, an abomination.
Seven million gloomy conifers, acres of heavy, sagging rhododendrons all surrounding a monstrosity of a building which contains not one single item of any lasting or significant aesthetic merit.
No wonder the house is always cold.
Even Bradley Hardacre would feel uncomfortable there.
And this monument to bad taste is a jewel in the Trust's crown.
But nowhere does the Trust help me much with the only truly interesting questions about Cragside:— what was the first Lord Armstrong's annual income?— from what was it derived?— what was the annual average industrial wage at the time?— how much did he pay his gardeners and his tweeny maids?— what kind of employer was he to his workforce?
In fact, it seems reasonable to suggest that the answers to those five questions, suitably adapted, should be prominently displayed in every appropriate Trust property.
That would be of enormous help in staunching the flow of treacly sentiment on which so many Trust properties base their appeal.
It might also encourage the lordly ones who run the Trust to see that its properties only have real value and interest when set in a wider social background that the rather greenery-yallery context in which too many of them are set for us by the Trust's publications.
But now I've embarrassed myself and you.
How can I be so curmudgeonly, so rude, to an organisation which makes it possible for me to enjoy the serenity of Fountains Abbey and Studley Royal, the bone-chilling bleakness of Housesteads, the intimacy of the walled garden at Wallington?
Oh dear, I feel rather ashamed of myself.
It is as though I've burped during Evensong.
What do you think of conservation bodies?
Write to Hear All Sides, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Absentees who failed the fox
IN JOINT opposition to foxhunting and in support of the recent Wild Mammals (Protection) Bill, both your columnist Harry Mead and your correspondents Mrs C. Overfield and John Temperley (HAS, Feb 14) put forward a timely, sane and comprehensive argument against this cruel, unnecessary and barbaric so-called sport.
It is rather sad that due to the subsequent rather narrow defeat of the motion that we find that such a large complement of Northern Labour MPs absented themselves from such a vital environmental vote due to prior engagements and by doing so thus failed to support their Labour colleague Kevin McNamara, the sponsor of the Bill, and failed to contribute to ending once and forever this sickening, depraved social pastime.
After all, a fox being pursued to ground by a pack of baying dogs to the point of sheer exhaustion and possibly ravaged to pieces in their final kill has little option of a prior engagement.
To the region's Labour MPs who did support the Bill, the compliments of many; a conscience brickbat to those (my own included) who just could not find time to do so.
Mr Gayles Fitzpatrick,.
CONSIDERING the Labour Party so opposes blood sports, it is a pity that several Labour MPs were absent from the House of Commons on February 14 when the Wild Mammals Act was debated.
Not since 1949 has there been such a chance to abolish blood sports and just 13 absent MPs blew it.
However, many thanks to my MP, Derek Foster, and all others who voted for a more civilised society and thanks on behalf of the unfortunate foxes, stags and hares, still running for their innocent, tormented lives and still relying on humanity to get moving.
E.M.
Johnson,.
WAITERS at an Indian restaurant have swapped plates for microphones and made a rap record.
Rashid and Shahid cooked up the idea while serving customers at the Sitar in Northgate, Darlington.
They already have advance orders for 3,000 copies and hope their Indian rave music will catapult them to the top of the charts.
The Darlington duo, both 21 and joint-managers of the restaurant, recorded the song using music samples from popular Indian films and synthesizers.
Translated as For Your Eyes Only, the record mixes elements of Eastern culture and Western pop with English rap.
‘We want to show people how Indian instruments can be used in a different way,’ said Bangladesh-born Rashid.
‘It's something new and fresh, and can be played in English nightclubs.
It does not have to be just for Asians.’
Owner of the Sitar and manager of the band, Mohammed, has financed the project to the tune of about £5,000.
He plans to release it all over the Far East as well as Britain, and said: ‘It will sell like hot cakes.’
Re-mixes of the record, by Darlington producer Graeme Robinson, are being sent to nightclubs throughout the North-East, including The Mall in Stockton.
GIRL guides in Darlington are planning to help children in County Durham's beleagured Russian twin city Kostroma.
They hope to collect around 800 tins of food at their annual Thinking Day service at St Teresa's Church on Sunday.
Big rush to join new fitness club
WEAR Valley's newly-launched Wear Fit Club has attracted more than 3,500 members more than 50pc of its 6,000 target since enrolment started on Monday.
The club is a discount scheme to be operated in all the district council's leisure facilities from April.
Members will also be able to use their club cards to get savings at several stores and companies.
The club was officially launched last month and drew criticism from some Wear Valley opposition councillors, but the Liberal leader of the council, Coun Chris Foote Wood, said yesterday: ‘This is an excellent start and I am sure we will reach our target.’
Further details about the club are available from Wear Valley leisure complexes.
Swim discos:
A series of Friday night swim discos get under way at Bishop Auckland's Woodhouse Close leisure complex next week.
Admission costs £1 and the first disco will be held on February 28.
Staff success:
Four members of Wear Valley District Council's leisure and marketing department have been awarded certificates.
Billy Dunn and Mark Etherington have achieved a diploma in management studies from Teesside Polytechnic and Helen Pearson and Ian Mavin received a certificate in management studies from Newcastle Polytechnic.
Appeal boost:
Tudhoe Moor Nursery School raised £175 for the Durham County Council Kostroma Appeal with a coffee morning.
Service date:
An interdenominational service celebrating the 60th anniversary of the Women's World Day of Prayer will be held at St Catherine's Church, Crook, on March 6 at 7pm.
The theme will be living wisely.
Charity boost:
More than £3,500 has been raised by the Darlington Meningitis Support Group in the last six months.
The group presented a cheque for £2,800 to TV celebrity Paul Frost for the meningitis research unit at Southampton at their charity dance on Thursday.
Tabletop sale:
The Save the Children Charity has organised a tabletop sale on March 14 at the Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington, from 10am until 2pm.
Tables are bookable in advance by phoning Darlington .
Bus rally:
Vintage bus enthusiasts will have a day to look forward to as the first Quaker Rally is held in Darlington on May 17.
Buses will gather at Russell Street car park.
Awards night:
An awards ceremony will be held at Darlington College of Technology on March 6 at 7.30pm.
Dr Oliver Coulthard, deputy director of Teesside Polytechnic, is to present about 50 awards to students.
Scrapbook plea:
Harold Svensson, chairman of Darlington CHA and Holiday Fellowship Rambling Club, is compiling a scrapbook on the club's 56year history.
He is also compiling a list a founder members and has appealed for photographs and Press cuttings to help his research.
Mr Svensson can be contacted on .
Hospital mural:
A second mural is to be painted by children's ward patients and local artist Steven Cairney at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Bingo night:
A bingo and supper event will be held at the village hall in Stillington, near Bishopton, on Shrove Tuesday, March 3, to raise money for church funds.
Admission 50p.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
A NEW can recycling scheme was launched in Darlington yesterday when council leader John Williams opened the first of many Save-a-Can recycling banks.
Children from Whinfield Junior School deposited the first cans into the bank in the car park of the Gateway Foodmarket on Whinbush Way.
Save-a-Can banks accept all metal tins including drink, food and pet food cans.
Donors are asked to wash and squash the cans before depositing them.
Sanctuary appeal:
Scarborough wildlife leader Jim Ward has launched an appeal to create a rescue centre.
Mr Ward who runs Scarborough Animal Welfare says there is a growing need for a sanctuary following the closure of premises at Ravenscar nine miles from the town.
Wonder bearded
FREED from a lift in his Harare hotel, the Bearded Wonder sends us a ‘Weather hot, cricket wonderful’ postcard from Zimbabwe.
What he fails to mention is that he's just been fined by his fun loving Durham County Cricket Club colleagues for turning up unshaven.
The rough with the smooth, as it were.
Salman stake
GARRY Gibson, the fax: this time the Hartlepool United chairman wires us with news of ‘urgent and decisive’ action to arrest the slump in attendances.
They've signed Salman Rushdie.
‘He mightn't score many goals, but there'll be millions outside desperate to get in.’
Mist again
OWEN Renton is another long distance Berwick Ranger.
A West Ham fan since 1966 (‘when the Hammers won the World Cup under the pseudonym of England’) he now lives 30 seconds from York City's ground and nurtures a neighbourly allegiance.
But it's Berwick that intrigues Owen, ever since he discovered which side of the border it lay.
‘York's football over the last two years makes Berwick v Arbroath relatively breathtaking,’ he says.
Earlier this year he caught a train North, groped his way to Shielfield and discovered that the match was fogged off.
‘I shall return before the season's end,’ he promises, ‘assuming we're still in business, of course.’
LES McJannet hopes to put a nightmare season behind him and help Darlington win their survival fight.
The 30-year-old full-back, who has had two operations and months of frustration, makes a comeback in the Third Division relegation dogfight at Torquay.
McJannet said: ‘With both Darlington and Torquay in the bottom three, it could be called a six-pointer.
‘I believe Darlington have players with the ability to get out of trouble.
You have to think positive and there are 16 games to pull clear.
‘Watching from the sidelines, it has been difficult to put a finger on what has really gone wrong.
‘If I knew, I would tell the manager.’
McJannet's injury problems began towards the end of two championship-winning seasons.
The former Scarborough player felt a sharp pain in a knee against Scunthorpe United.
McJannet thought a summer's rest would provide a cure, but an operation was necessary just before the start of the current campaign.
He struggled through a few games but a swollen knee indicated his problems were not over.
McJannet recalled: ‘I had another rest before the problem flared up again after the FA Cup game with Hartlepool United.
‘Another operation was necessary when it was found a growth on my kneecap was burying into the bone.
‘On top of that, my knee was slightly off line.
‘I now feel fine after my second reserve game against Halifax this week, and look forward to being back in first team action…’
McJannet has tasted promotion joy or relegation agony in his three seasons at Feethams.
Darlington's longest-serving player would settle for a safe position in May.
Darlington (from: Prudhoe, McJannet, 0'Shaughnessy, Tait, Smith, Toman, Gaughan, Gill, Pickering, Cook, Mardenborough, Ellison, Cusack, Cork, Gray.
HARTLEPOOL have smashed the club transfer record to sign a new striker.
Blackburn Rovers’ Lenny Johnrose has joined the club but is not in time to make his debut against Chester at Macclesfield today.
Instead he has to wait a week for next Saturday's Victoria Ground clash with Swansea.
Johnrose, 22, has scored ten goals in 35 league appearance at Blackburn, his only league club.
But he lost his place when Kenny Dalglish started to invest millions in the club and until last week was on loan at nearby Preston.
In fact, Johnrose was due to play for Preston at Pool a week ago, but he picked up a calf injury in the pre-match warm-up and missed the game.
Four days earlier he had scored two of Preston's three goals in their win over Hull.
Pool boss Alan Murray is refusing to reveal the fee paid for the new man, but it is believed to be about £50,000.
The previous record was the £20,000 paid for winger Paul Dalton (Manchester United) and left back Paul Cross (Barnsley).
Murray said: ‘We have been trying for months to sign the right sort of player to replace Joe Allon.
Now I believe we have him.
Paul Baker has had to do a lot of work on his own up front and he will benefit more than most from Lenny's arrival.
‘I've seen him play often enough to know that he will do a good job for us.’
The deal was completed at a Darlington hotel yesterday and Murray added: ‘Lenny's strengths are his pace and his finishing.
The fans will love him.’
Hartlepool match preview: page 4
ASTON VILLA manager Ron Atkinson has Newcastle's Mick Quinn and Middlesbrough's Bernie Slaven on his list of potential transfer targets.
Atkinson wants to sign a striker before next month's transfer deadline and has placed the North-East duo under scrutiny.
Alan Shearer is his principal target but, with Manchester United favourites to lure the England new boy, Atkinson is considering a move for a more experienced goal scorer.
Quinn is close to returning to first-team football following a knee injury and Atkinson has noted that the 29-year-old Merseysider would not be cup-tied.
Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan is also looking for a new striker.
He watched England under-21 international Mark Robins play for Manchester United reserves at Sunderland last Wednesday.
Ray Wilkins agreed to come to Tyneside last week but subsequently turned down a playercoach job because his wife didn't want to leave London.
DARLINGTON chairman Dick Corden admitted he felt sorry for the fans after the disastrous 3–0 defeat at Torquay on Saturday.
A coachload of supporters made the 700-mile round trip to South Devon and they had a perfect view of the defence giving away two first half goals and Mitch Cook missing a penalty in the second.
Corden said: ‘I must admit I feel for them after that display.’
Corden refused to comment on the manager Frank Gray's position.
‘The board has never discussed it,’ he said.
Gray said: ‘There's no denying that it's going to be a tough fight now.
‘We need to win at least seven of our remaining games.
‘Of course I feel under pressure.
I've got to get on with a job I'm paid to do.’
Gray's plans have been thrown into disarray because of injuries.
Smith was virtually carried off with an ankle injury, Mardenborough has a knee problem and Cusack had stitches for a facial injury.
NO miracles to report from St James's Park this time.
The merely mortal Kevin Keegan had to suffer with the rest of us as Newcastle laboured to break down Barnsley's proficient five-man defence.
The point apiece was fair, the football fairly turgid, and Newcastle are still knee-deep in the clarts, thirteen games from Third Division football.
‘It's not all doom and gloom,’ insisted Keegan.
But brightness was in short supply as his players trooped off to a crescendo of boos.
Newcastle may have their Messiah manager and their financial rescue package in place, but they couldn't afford to turn on the floodlights in the fading light on Saturday and they can't ignore the darkness still descending at the foot of the Second Division table.
They remain third from bottom with Oxford, who have played one less game, now just one point behind.
Of the teams ahead without matches, as well as points, to spare only Port Vale are within their immediate grasp a one-point deficit which can be removed at Vale Park this weekend.
Newcastle, though, need others to trip up.
And Barnsley's advantage could have been cut from five to two points had Keegan's side not lacked the creative nous to topple them.
A case of swings and roundabouts perhaps?
Newcastle have gained Keegan's kick-start inspiration and solid organisation on the football management merry-go-round but at the expense, it seems, of the subtle artistry Ossie Ardiles introduced.
Keegan knew his side would face Barnsley's stifling three-man central-defensive formation, yet the attempts to counter it bordered on the banal.
All Newcastle could muster were Liam O'Brien's long-range pounding (the best of which struck the bar two minutes before the break), hopeful punts to the outnumbered and dwarfed David Kelly and Gavin Peacock, and the set-piece predictability of Kevin Sheedy's kicking and Brian Kilcline's heading.
The exception looked to have won the points twenty minutes from time, when substitute Franz Carr delivered an early cross from the right and Kelly found the net with a diving header his fourth goal in Keegan's three games.
The on-loan Kilcline brought much-needed stability to the heart of Newcastle's defence but a moment's hesitation by the otherwise accomplished Alan Neilson undid the good work, allowing former darlington player David Currie to fire the equaliser five minutes from time.
It was Barnsley's first effort on target but was followed quickly by a second, a header from Andy Savile that would have won the match had Tommy Wright not produced a topdrawer reflex diving save.
‘It still feels like we've lost,’ said Kilcline, in the absence of the suspended Kevin Scott, skipper on his debut day.
‘But we'll get out of trouble if we keep battling like we did today.
‘You can play all the pretty football in the world if you're top of the league.
We're not.
We're at the bottom.
We've got to get down to the nitty gritty and fight.’
There was fighting talk too from Keegan, though he did concede: ‘We could have outthought Barnsley a bit more.
We could have been a bit cleverer.’
Defeat wouldn't be too clever either when Newcastle hit the dreaded road again at Port Vale this Saturday.
Another point-less return really would leave them squinting for light deep down in the Second Division's dark vale.
NOTHING went right for Quakers from the moment that skipper Kevan Smith lost the toss at Plainmoor.
Manager Frank Gray perhaps had a point after the game when he said that luck didn't smile kindly on his side, but it must also be said that Quakers did not utilise the strong wind in the same forthright manner as the home side in the first half.
And it could take more than a change of luck to lift them off the bottom of the table.
Smith's wrong call enabled Torquay, with new manager Ivan Golac taking charge of his first game, to start with the wind at their backs and their intentions were obvious after only 37 seconds when Mark Loram forced Mark Prudhoe to his knees with a left foot shot from 20 yards.
Torquay then pounded the Quakers with high and in-swinging balls, but the first goal on 13 minutes came from ground level.
Loram and Sean Joyce combined neatly on the edge of the Quakers box to put Justin Fashanu clear and his right foot shot just beat Prudhoe, with Les McJannet, returning to the side after injury, unable to stop the ball on the line.
With Quakers looking decidedly shaky at the back, Torquay almost sneaked another when Paul Hall ran clean through but Prudhoe blocked with his knees, then defender Matthew Elliott stole up unmarked to volley just wide from a Loram corner.
It took Quakers 19 minutes to produce any noteworthy effort, a Nick Cusack left-foot shot that slipped just wide of the post, and they almost equalised after 29 minutes when Fashanu flicked Andy Toman's left wing corner against his own bar but the rebound fell to a Torquay defender.
Quakers breathed a sigh of relief when Fashanu's right-foot blast took a wicked deflection and floated just past the post when Prudhoe was diving the other way, but he was laughing after 39 minutes when the Darlington defence presented him with the most embarrassing gift of the season.
Prudhoe dashed along the goal line to the corner of his box to keep a misdirected Smith backpass in play, but all the keeper could do was palm the ball to the feet of Loram, who simply squared the ball inside for Fashanu to sidefoot a second.
Things went from bad to worse in the second half.
Smith and Steve Mardenborough both limped off and it wasn't until the 62nd minute that the home keeper was tested by a 25-yard floater from Mitch Cook.
The game was beyond redemption in the 69th minute.
Sub David Cork was brought down by Wes Saunders after Cusack headed down a long punt by Prudhoe, but Cook, taking the responsibility instead of the absent Lee Ellison, blasted his spot kick too close to Gareth Howells and the keeper pushed the ball away.
There was a further little flurry of activity.
Cook forced Howells to backpedal and push a floater over the bar, while Andy Toman curled a free kick just wide.
But, unlike the wind, Quakers blew themselves out and Torquay took command in the late stages.
Prudhoe just beat Fashanu to a loose Steve O'Shaughnessy backpass and Loram turned well inside the box to shoot straight at Prudhoe.
The keeper excelled himself to keep out an Elliott header, but he was stranded again in injury time when Loram fired in a precise 25yarder which went in off the post.
When Quakers lost at Plainmoor at roughly the same time last season, there was still plenty of encouragement in the performance and they recovered to win the Fourth Division.
This time, alas, there is little to cheer and they need to pick themselves up for this Saturday's basement battle against Chester.
Mission facts
I WAS very pleased to read your report (Echo February 3) on the nuns leaving the Carmel convent in Darlington shortly to establish a multi-racial convent in Bophuthatswana, Southern Africa.
I would like to express my government's pleasure at seeing this important spiritual project taking place in Bophuthatswana, but in passing I feel I should also correct one or two points.
Firstly, the convent is being established in Bophutatswana not in South Africa.
Secondly, we are not a ‘homeland’, we are fully independent of South Africa, both politically and financially.
We were also the first place in southern Africa to be converted to Christianity, and different religious beliefs of all kinds already thrive there.
Unlike South Africa, the Dutch Reform Church has no special place in our country, not does apartheid or its residual attitudes in society.
The whole idea has always been abhorrent to us, and we were rid of it 14 years ago in 1977, when we voted to secede from South Africa and re-assist control over our own affairs.
Anthony McCall-Judson, Head of Public Affairs, Bophuthatswana International Affairs, Piccadilly House, 33–37 Regent Street, London.
Christian unity Having read M Chalker's comments on Christian Unity (Echo February 10) one wonders if she knows the origin of the aim of this week of prayer?
It has its roots in a sermon preached in 1900 by Rev. Spencer Jones who was an anglican vicar seeking reunion with the Church of Rome.
His idea quickly developed into eight days of prayer, each day having one simple emphasis the return of all churches to the one fold the Church of Rome with the Pope as head.
There was however one problem, it was not reaching the Protestant churches, as it was exclusively Roman Catholic.
However, a new formula, more acceptable to Protestants, developed in 1956 into the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity.
Although the formula was changed the objective remained and still remains today as originally planned, full union with Rome and the Pope as its head, and has nothing whatever to do with the conversion of St Paul as suggested by S.J. Shearburn (Echo January 27).
J. Robinson, Burnside, Eggleston, Barnard Castle.
The great divide
AS one of those despised southerners who feature so often in Mr Brenkley's column, I wonder where he gets his information from in respect of the term ‘Doolally Tap.’
The expression is well known in the South, especially among service families and may I add, there were a great number of fine soldiers who came from the South in units as famous as that fine body of men who serve and have served in the DLI.
In my youth there was a man who lived in our block of buildings who was a champion boxer while in the Army in India and he was always known as being doolally tap.
He used to go out in the air raids and watch the anti aircraft shells bursting in the sky because he said they looked like beautiful flowers.
Further, to use another colloquial slang term, I wish that he would stop ‘getting up my nose’ with his denigration of his fellow human beings who live below the Watford Gap.
Each time he attempts to show they are ignorant he displays his own ignorance.
Les Parsons, 11 Kelso Walk, Darlington.
FROM cramped offices above Blackwellgate in Darlington Jackson Taylor is championing the cause of NorthEast firms in one of the most difficult periods for the small business community.
Taylor, who runs Taylor & Taylor Executive was named the regional chairman of the Federation of Small Business six weeks ago.
He began his term in office much in the spirit he intends to go on when he blasted the banks and receivers for causing so much misery among the small business community.
He told a regional meeting of the federation: ‘Unlike large companies, small businesses cannot raise capital, they can only borrow but because of their size, they do not have the negotiating clout of a large business when it comes to dealing with a bank manager.’
He attacked the 1986 Insolvency Act for its penalising and punitive consequences on the owners and directors of small companies, often resulting in personal bankruptcy.
He said: ‘A senior partner of a national firm of insolvency practitioners recently said, and I quote his very words, ‘we are parasites living on the misfortune of others’.’
A lot of businessmen had wanted to say it, but many were cowed by the banks and the possibility of impending insolvency.
Taylor has won the gratitude of many small businessmen for shouting what many have been whispering.
His objective now is to develop the Northern network of the Federation which stretches from Scotland down through Northumberland, Tyne and Wear and Teesside into North Yorkshire and across through Cumbria.
It's a lot of work.
The Northern arm currently caters to the needs of more than 1,000 small businesses.
According to the Bolton Report a small business is defined as a company employing less 200 which is managed owner-managed.
In reality Taylor will be talking to companies where the majority employ less than 20, often many of them one-man outfits.
The Federation, which represents more than 50,000 members nationwide has emerged as a strong national voice in Parliament and is constantly badgering Government ministers for a better business deal.
It's hit list includes the Uniform Business Rate and the poor treatment of small firms by the banks.
In North-East, however, Taylor will be concentrating on a period of consolidation followed by growth.
In his time Taylor has been part of the North-East's industrial traditional first as managing director of the now defunct Head facility at Stockton and later at Aycliffe-based Eaton Axles.
But that was 20 years ago, now he concentrates on executive recruitment.
In this role he believes he has gained a valuable insight to the North's economic well being.
‘I see no prospect of improvement in the North's economy and it seems ridiculous to talk about an upturn.
Creating jobs is a long term matter,’ he says.
‘You can close companies overnight but you can't create them overnight.’
Taylor is very representative of his members, who regard him as one of the best qualified chairman the federation has had in the North-East.
One member commenting on the new profile Taylor can bring to the region says: ‘He understands what it means to run a business and what it costs to run a business.
He understands our feelings.’
Feelings of the smaller F business community are F clear cut.
‘One of the main worries of small businesses is their relationship with their bankers who too often are regarded as adopting a cavalier attitude,’ says Taylor.
‘Small businesses are operated by individuals who place everything on the line that is their money, their skills, their enthusiasm and, in many cases, the matrimonial home.’
Small companies are the mainspring of the British economy.
It is small, burgeoning firms which account for true economic growth.
It is the small company which soaks up the unemployed, rather than the larger company, which of late has been shedding workers in massive numbers.
Currently small business represents more than 25pc of UK turnover and accounts for one third of the total workforce.
Taylor says: ‘What we should be saying now is not what can Great Britain do for small businesses, but what can small businesses do for Great Britain.
‘It's a fact that in the first 12 months one in three firms will close and in the longer term 900pc of new companies will shut in their first five years.’
He believes the small businessman invests his whole life in a company and risks losing it all.
‘When you realise that turnover for 80pc of small firms is often less £100,000 and many small businessmen often earn less than £10,000 a year one realises the difficulties many small firms are facing.’
He says: ‘In the current recession, which is biting further and further into the North-East, small businesses feel that they are carrying the main thrust of the banking community's claw back of their lending.’
Taylor makes the point that one of one his members believes that while the banks had been more than generous in their lending to the third world and writing off significant sums, there was little, if any support, for the small business on their own doorstep.
Taylor has taken up the fight and is tackling small business worries over banks charges head.
He has organised a meeting between the regional directors of the major clearing banks and the Federation's North-East members.
The Federation claims the meeting will give the banks and small businesses the opportunity to air their thoughts on a range of important issues.
Each bank representative will give brief talk on their policy towards small businesses, after which they will be given a grilling by the audience.
The meeting is open to the public but expect Taylor to give the banks a hard time.
— For further information about the meeting telephone .
DOCTORS are hoping to persuade North-East sportsmen to set aside the magic sponge for more sophisticated medical techniques.
Nigel Carnell, who provides physiotherapy for Darlington FC, plans to give lessons on how to treat injuries.
He is worried that some trainers could do more harm than good by attempting to treat injuries without the correct tuition.
The seven-week course, starting on March 5, covers physiotherapy, anatomy, how to apply bandages and what to do if a player breaks a bone.
Ian Leckie, Quakers' community development officer, said: ‘The traditional approach has been to run on with a bucket and the magic sponge.’
Anyone wanting to take part in the pilot scheme should contact Mr Leckie on .
Pub contracts made clear
YOUR news report, Chairman's pledge on pub rents row (Echo February 5 1992), contains a number of misleading statements.
Since April last year we have assessed open market rents on 24 pubs in the Darlington area based on the new 20-year leases, and the average increase over the historic tenancy rent and transfer of machine income is in the region of 55pc the same as the national average.
What your report fails to explain is the reasons why rents agreed by the lessee for 20-year leases are on average higher than under traditional short-term agreements.
‘Inntrepreneur’ rents are agreed by negotiation with a potential lessee.
They are fixed for five years at open market value, based on a detailed profit and loss account taking into account the outgoings, turnover, style, size and location of the pub.
Additionally, these long leases can be assigned, which means that if the lessee wishes to sell the business after two years or more, then often a considerable lump sum premium can be obtained which reflects the lessee's investment and related goodwill.
In short, ‘Inntrepreneur’ rents, as determined by the market, are a fair reflection of the substantial commercial opportunities open to a lessee who is running a pub as an individual business..
Sad side to retirement
IT is sad that Wear Valley District Council cannot help the family of a three-year-old handicapped boy or Bishop Auckland General Hospital's £175,000 Echocardiograph Appeal.
These refusals coincide with their Chief Executive's early retirement at the age of 57.
Council leader Chris Foote Wood has explained that Mr Allen Dobson volunteered for early retirement and was not pushed out of office.
By shuffling the duties of the remaining officers the ruling Liberal Democrats claim that they will save up to £29,000 a year on the council's wages bill.
However, secrecy surrounds the size of the redundancy lump sum for Mr Dobson, although Gadfly (Echo December 18, 1991) suggested it could be just over £56,000.
If this is anywhere near the true figure, wouldn't it be nice if Mr Dobson made a substantial donation to help fund treatment for the three-year-old handicapped boy, say £2,500, plus another £2,500 for the echocardiograph appeal?
He should be able to spare £5,000 out of his golden handshake.
After all he will still have a good pension to fall back on.
Jobs up in smoke
ALAN Milburn, the Labour candidate for Darlington, supports the campaign to ban cigarette advertising.
Touring Rothman's factory in Darlington he assures workers that such a ban would have no effect on sales or jobs, in fact, he said as in the case of Italy, tobacco sales would increase!
Then why the proposed ban?
To cut back on financial support for sporting events?
No.
He is indulging in looking both ways and political double talk.
He aims to please even if it means putting his principles in cold storage and his policies in the mixer.
Not an edifying way of vote hunting.
VOLUNTEERS:
Further to your report (Echo February 4), I am asking for volunteers from the Spennymoor Ward to form a steering committee to promote activities for the youth of the ward, such as Outward Bound, fishing, youth projects etc.
Some months ago a gang of local youngsters asked if I could help them in this direction.
I wrote to Durham County Council on their behalf and as a result met Matt Frazer, principal community education officer and youth works.
It was felt that another youth centre building with current economic restraints would be out of the question.
It would be possible to operate a youth community bus if a steering committee and funds could be raised.
I ask that volunteers should contact me and the steering committee should be non-political.
SOLDIERS got their marching orders for 24 hours at the weekend to boost funds for a special care baby unit.
The 32 members of Arras troop at the Royal Armoured Corps Training Regiment carried out drill on the parade square at Cambrai Barracks, Catterick Garrison, from 6pm on Saturday until 6pm last night.
They are expected to raise hundreds of pounds in sponsorship for the special care baby unit at the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton.
The troop consists mostly recruits from the Royal Corps of Signals and Royal Scots Dragoon Guards carrying out their ten week basic training.
Trooper Paul Martin from Durham City said: ‘It was a bit harsh at 2am but we've recovered and our drill has certainly improved in the last 24 hours.’
Signaller Chris Lodey of Darlington said: ‘It's not been too tiring because we've managed to get a bit of rest.
The lads have certainly noticed that our drill is all coming together now.’
Book search:
A charity bookshop in Darlington is seeking a new home after its landlord Vaux Brewery said it could no longer stay at cramped premises in Priestgate.
The Darlington Lions Club shop is to be taken over by changes to the reception area of the King's Head Hotel.
Clean up call:
A man who was using private land as an unofficial scrap-yard and heavy goods vehicle base has been asked to get the site cleared up.
It is thought that planning permission was never sought for the land, behind Oak Lea Farm, Aycliffe Village, to be used as a scrap yard.
Several efforts have been made to get the area tidy.
But council officers are again going to ask for improvements.
Car complaints:
A man who was running his taxi business from his home has been interviewed after complaints were received about parked cars.
Cars were being left on a fast stretch of road outside Woodham Cottages, in Newton Aycliffe, but it now seems likely the owner of the business will make an arrangement to park his taxis on land at the Woodham Equestrian Centre to reduce the dangers.
New chairman:
Don Macro, of Brompton Walk, Darlington, has been elected chairman of the town's Talking Newspaper for the Blind.
Development plan for historic yard
THE FUTURE of one of Darlington's historic yards will be considered by councillors tomorrow.
Darlington council hopes to develop Clark's Yard into an Lshaped block of two-storey shop units.
Local traders and organisations have been consulted about the plans and the Chamber of Trade and the response has been favourable.
The Clark's Yard Traders Association welcomed the proposals but stressed the need for a variety of shops so trade would not be taken away from existing cafes.
I REFER to recent reports (Echo January 28) concerning the promotion of accommodation establishments in the Borough of Darlington.
I would like to clarify for your readers the role of the Tourism Section in promoting accommodation.
Darlington's Tourist Information Centre is part of the English Tourist Board network, and as such it has to abide by certain rules.
It can only publicise those accommodation places which are ‘eligible’ under the English Tourist Board scheme (ie. which agree to abide by a code of conduct) and these must be given equal treatment.
Staff do not, either verbally or in their written material, give more prominence to one establishment than others.
The Tourism Section offers an equal opportunity to all existing eligible places to take part in its promotional campaigns and to benefit from advice which the Economic Development Unit may offer.
Only by qualifying for either the English Tourist Board crown grading and quality scheme, or one of the other nationally recognised quality schemes, can establishments be singles out with the relevant symbol and this is the result of independent, objective assessment by trained inspectors, not as a result of decisions by council staff.
Rachel Escott, Tourism and Promotions Officer, Economic Development Unit, 10, Houndgate, Darlington.
Weather raises roof alarm at wooden church
The congregation of a 60-year-old wooden church in Darlington have been warned not to go inside in bad weather.
A survey of the church in Salutation Road last week revealed serious defects in the structure and showed that the roof was in danger of slipping off.
Urgent repairs were carried out to secure the roof but the parish council has accepted the architect's recommendation that nobody should be allowed into the building during severe weather.
The ruling affects the 80-strong congregation and at least 15 other groups who use the church as a meeting place.
Mr Cecil Robinson, chairman of the parochial church council, said: ‘We have scouts, guides, brownies, afternoon clubs and elderly people's groups who use the hall to meet in the morning, afternoon or evening.
‘It will affect a lot of people if there is a gale or a lot of snow but it is safe otherwise.
‘We are very cautious and don't want anyone to get hurt and so that is why there is this rule.’
At present there are no plans for structural repairs to the church, where problems first came to light after a survey two years ago.
‘Essentially we recognise we have a problem and the church authorities have done everything to minimise the danger,’ said Mr Robinson.
‘We will be looking over the next few months to see what longer term solution can be devised.’
Europe's tallest mobile ski jump has arrived in the town for a much-needed overhaul.
Engineers at the A5 Hydraulics plant at Albert Hill, Darlington, have won an £8,000 contract to service the travelling Alpine slope.
The jump will be a familiar sight to people who attended the Citroen stand at the Yorkshire Show last year.
Daring skiers used the 60ft ramp to make airborne acrobatic leaps before landing on a giant air-bag at the bottom of the slope.
French Canadian Phillipe Laroche, Olympic gold medal winner in the aerial skiing display competition in Albertville last week, is one of many top ski acrobats who have braved the plastic ramp.
The contract to service the ski jump is a big boost for A5 Hydraulics a co-operative five-man company which bought out Agricultural and Industrial Hydraulics for £70,000 last year.
‘It is quite a major coup for us to get such a prestigious contract,’ said Mr Doug McCue, aged 43, of Park Lane, Darlington, one of the five co-operative owners.
Mr McCue had seen the ski jump being used and commented: ‘I saw very few people actually ski from the very top of the ramp most of them start half way down.’
It was like the scene where Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid start to rob yet another ‘easy’ train only to find an armed and mounted posse leaping out of a carriage.
Of course Insp.
Graham Hobson of the British Transport Police would not like his highly-trained men and women compared to reckless vigilantes.
And the Darlington to Hartlepool railway line is not the wild west nor did Wednesday see it produce a huge number of train robbers.
But in the trackside wastelands near Stockton, Norton and Billingham the looks on their faces were exactly the same.
To start with it was pure cockiness.
Trespassers and vandals just do not expect to be brought to book by passengers on a train.
But then they looked again and saw that these particular passengers were all standing up facing their way.
Some of them appeared to have police-type uniforms while others carried notebooks or cameras.
What was more the train appeared to be slowing down quite markedly.
Then as the electric doors swished open and three police officers jumped out on to the ballast, the awful realisation dawned.
For this was a Q train two normal enough looking carriages that are not all that they seem.
According to British Rail press officer Sue McInstry the term was filched from the navy.
‘Fighting ships that were disguised as merchant vessels were known as Q-ships and we've just done a straight lift from there,’ she said.
British Rail Transport Police has been running the anti-vandal and trespass trains in blackspots since the early 1970s.
The idea is that unadvertised, untimetabled trains cruise up and down lines where BR has experienced particular problems.
A specially-designed timetable means the driver has a lot of freedom to stop, start and reverse in response to events on the track.
He is accompanied in the cab by a police officer armed with binoculars, two cellphones and a radio who can spot vandals hundreds of yards ahead.
By the time the train has reached them, it has already slowed to a crawl allowing a team of five officers to be at the trackside before the offenders know what has happened.
The officers are backed up by four different police cars.
Their job is to try and keep up with the train on nearby roads and hopefully help catch the faster of the trespassers fleeing from their colleagues on the trackside.
And on Wednesday the police decided to invite the press along to see just how bad the situation has become in many areas of the North East.
Ms McInstry said British Rail has recorded 40 cases of trackside vandalism in the region this year alone.
The Ferryhill area was struck twice last weekend, once on Friday and then again on Saturday.
On both occasion youths were seen placing cable across the track cutting all telecommunications.
‘It's just sheer wanton vandalism, and its costing BR thousands of pounds in damage repairs as well as being incredibly dangerous,’ she said.
On our particular line the main problem was trespassing: and we only once caught glimpse of a vandal.
As passed by a Stockton housing estate we saw a young boy who finished climbing a steep embankment just in time to throw stones at us.
The train couldn't stop in time and he wasn't there by the time we had reversed.
But on numerous other occasions during our si-hour excursion the police tactics worked superbly.
Time after time both children and adults were caught red-handed.
The final tally was 41, with 12 reported for possible prosecution, six cautioned, and 23 others either talked to or extremely worn out after a long chase.
According to Insp.
Hobson, half the problem in the Stockton area is that trespassing has become an accepted part of life.
‘One guy we spoke to said he had been walking this route everyday for the last ten years.
To him it was a right of way.’
That perhaps was the biggest shock.
Most of the journalists expected to see children near the line.
And the sequence of events that started with an innocent wave to the train and ended with orange-bibbed coppers chasing youngsters across unofficial adventure playgrounds, rapidly became commonplace.
But the number of adults who quite clearly used the line as others would use a footpath, was a surprise.
One mother, near the Blue Hall estate to the north of Stockton, was dragging her three young kids along a trackside shortcut.
And you could see just from the body-language that she felt the policemen's warning was unjustified.
Yet it was the same stretch of line where a two-year-old boy Mark Gilbert died just five months ago.
‘To be honest we haven't got much chance with her,’ confided Insp.
Hobson.
‘We're just going to have to concentrate on educating her kids at school instead.’
For since the east coast main-coast line was electrified the police have spoken to a million children about the dangers of trespassing.
It started by visiting every school in a ten-mile corridor of the line all the way from London to Edinburgh.
But that proved so successful the scheme has now been extended to all schools.
Every pupil should now be addressed by the police at least every two or three years.
Several children received a rougher form of education on Wednesday.
Three were dragged back on to the train and taken by the scruff of the neck from station to police car.
Others received a tough lecture on the dangers and might just have learnt to think again.
And on housing estates all along the line, residents came out to watch the strange scene.
Policeman scrabbling down embankments, trespassers fleeing into side streets and other, stranger-looking folk, leaning out of a stationary carriage with their notebooks, cameras and microphones.
‘When is a train not a train? when it is a Q train,’ said Insp.
Hobson at the end of the day.
‘That's the message I want to get across.
I want people to realise the train coming down the track might not be all that it seems.’
On Wednesday, along that uniquely unscenic stretch of line between Stockton and Billingham, he had definitely made his point.
Mr John Lear, an outdoor man, dies
A country-lover who spent most of his life in the great outdoors has died suddenly in the Yorkshire Dales.
Mr John Lear, aged 84, president of North Yorkshire and South Durham area ramblers' association, collapsed after lunching with friends in Reeth in Swaledale before they resumed their walk.
A well-known walking enthusiast, he started the Darlington and district youth hostel association in the 1930s and was a founder member of the rucksack club the town's first rambling group.
In 1942 he joined forces with other keen walkers to form the North-East branch of the ramblers' association, an interest which he kept up all his life.
Mr Lear was the son of an ironmonger who owned a business in Horsemarket, Darlington, which had been in the family for generations.
He ran the business until his retirement some 20 years ago, when he moved to Richmond.
Friends say he cared deeply for the countryside and worked tirelessly to improve the public rights of way network through his job as footpath officer for the Richmondshire group of the ramblers' association, which he helped to start.
‘He will be a great loss to many people, including Richmond town council, who benefited from his vast knowledge and expertise,’ said Coun.
Mrs Ella Devlin, mayor of Richmond.
Mr Stanley Bettinson, footpath officer for the North Yorkshire Moors national park, said: ‘He knew the Dales like the back of his hand but he was a field man, not a committee man, and he loved to be outside.’
Colleagues this week paid tribute to his co-operative manner which helped forge strong links with the farming community.
Mr Stan Cardwell MBE, co-founder of the North-East ramblers' association, said: ‘His style was one of cooperation, not confrontation, and through this he made many friends, not least among the farming community, where he was regarded highly for his expertise on rights of way matters.
‘Above all else, he was a gentleman, someone with whom disagreements could be had on occasion, but who could always be respected for his firm views, honestly held and clearly put.’
Mr Lear also put his energy into encouraging young people to enjoy the outdoors and was a commissioner for the scouts for a number of years.
He helped form the midweek walkers' club for retired friends who shared his love of walking and it was after one of their regular meetings that he died.
He leaves a wife, Mrs Beatrice Lear.
A funeral was held in St Mary's parish church, Richmond, yesterday, followed by a private cremation.
AT first sight Stella Shields comes as a shock.
She has short-cropped sandy hair, a fixed stare and when she folds her arms across her chest you see a criss-cross of tattooes on her wrists.
She sits squarely in a revolving chair, eyes unblinking.
You quickly realise she knows exactly what you are thinking.
‘I got these done when I was sniffing glue,’ she says, extending her arms to show the impressive display of needle- worked skin.
‘The trouble is people take one look at them and stick a label on you.
Just like you're doing now.’
It's an uncomfortably astute remark.
One that forces you to listen to what this 18-year-old has to say next.
‘Yea, I'd like to get rid of them.
But what can you do?
It costs a fortune.
That's why I like working with old folk or kids.
They don't mind what you look like.
They take you as you are.’
A job working with old folk or children is Stella's ambition.
Right now it's a dream unlikely to be realised.
As she well knows.
‘I go to the Jobcentre and they don't even bother opening up the files.
It's just ‘come back in a fortnight’.
It's never any different when you go back though.
‘There's no jobs going to start with and those there are go to people with qualifications, not tattooes.’
There's surprisingly little bitterness in her voice.
More a tone of resigned acceptance and that uncomfortable perception of what life is all about when you've no qualifications, a criminal record and an unsettling set of images on your outer skin.
‘You can write down what you like and people can read it any way they want but unless you've got no job, no money and nowhere decent to live then you don't know what it's like to be out of work.
Do you?’
She has a point.
But even by Stella's reckoning there are a lot of people who know exactly what it is like to be out of work and with little hope of finding a job.
Figures to be officially released this week reveal that long-term unemployment has rocketed by nearly 25pc in the North over the last year.
There are now almost 50,000 people in the region who have been on the dole for more than a year.
It's a bald statistic which cannot really tell what life is like for those bound up in its flat figures.
Stella Shields can tell you what it's like.
So could her friends Michelle, Lenny, Tony, Sue a whole line of people caught in the unemployment trap.
A trap that has been expanding its grip steadily since the end of the Eighties.
For several years the number of people out of work for 12 months or more had been steadily dropping, reaching a low in the North-East (the North excluding Cumbria) of 36,000 in October 1990.
And then began that painful ascent; reaching 37,000 in January 1991, up to 38,000 in April and 40,000 in July before hitting 46,000 in January 1992.
Not un-naturally Tony Blair and the Labour Party have sought to make political capital out of what are pretty damning figures representing a turnaround of frightening speed and proportion.
Blair says: ‘The long term unemployment figures are an absolute disgrace.
They represent a monumental waste of human resources and more, they represent a great deal of human misery.
‘The really tragic thing is that the longer people are unemployed the harder it is to get them back to work.
It is time we invested seriously in education and training and stopped letting this misery grow worse and worse.’
For its part the Government claims that the figures are not as bleak as they would seem.
Employment Secretary Michael Howard argues that the rate of unemployment among under-25s is lower in the UK than in Italy, France, Spain, Belgium and Ireland.
And he adds: ‘I remain determined to provide as much practical help and advice as possible to long-term unemployed people.’
The political war of words goes way over Stella's head.
She has a simpler attitude.
‘If we could get a decent job, have somewhere settled to live, then we could get on with a proper life.
‘At the moment all you do is lie around the place, you get bored, get into trouble, you can get into drugs and that.
It'd all be different if you could get a job.
No-one's asking for owt for nowt, I'd be happy to work instead of getting benefits.
I'm not afraid of work.’
Certainly no-one could accuse Janet Dobson of being afraid of work.
After leaving school at 16, she took three part time jobs to earn money.
The 21-year-old from Darlington says: ‘I used to get up at five in the morning and go cleaning at Presto, then I'd work in a chippy from eleven to two and then later I'd do some child-minding.
‘It was hard work but I don't mind hard work, I like working.
People are always on about how if you don't have a job you must be workshy, that there's always jobs if you want them.
They should try and stand in someone else's shoes for a while before coming out with all that.’
Janet's problem is similar to that of thousands of women in a similar situation.
She gave up her jobs when she had a baby.
Now that her daughter is two, Janet would like to go back to work but finds it impossible to arrange childcare that would make it worthwhile.
‘Because I've no qualifications I'm not going to get a high paid job, so I won't be able to pay for childcare.
I've tried to find work on a night time when my parents or my boyfriend could look after the kiddie but there just isn't that much of that kind of work around.
‘It's maddening but you're just left not being able to work and having to get by on benefits.
I don't want the benefits I want a job but I'm caught in a trap.’
Lenny, who prefers we don't use his second name, is also caught in a trap.
Unable to follow his original line of work in demolition following industrial injury and, unqualified for any other job, he finds himself, at the age of 57, resigned to a life on the dole until pension age arrives.
‘I used to enjoy my work but I haven't had a proper job in ten years now,’ he says.
‘I spend my time in the bookies or sat at home in front of the telly.
That's my lot really.
I don't drink and don't go out much so I manage on the money.
But it drives you mad with boredom.
I still miss work.’
The stories are endless but their message is clear.
They illustrate that, at a time when long-term unemployment is spiralling, it does not pay to make mistakes.
Whether that mistake is to have a troubled upbringing, or to have a baby without access to childcare support, or to have an industrial accident.
With so many others in the dole queue, all desperate to find work, having any kind of handicap makes it almost impossible to move up the line.
There are no second chances.
As Stella says: ‘There's a load of people in front of me in the queue for jobs, isn't there?’
Job prospects
FOR real fans the events at Feethams yesterday can bring no rejoicing.
Frank Gray, the manager, was sacked to be replaced, surprisingly, by Ray Hankin who was nobody's favourite to take over.
Any real fan will send Hankin their good wishes.
He has no time for a honeymoon period, of course, and he will not have the dramatic effect on mood and gates which Kevin Keegan managed at Newcastle.
The chances that he will get them out of a mire of their own making are as thin as their performances have been for most of the season.
It is a big job now which has grown bigger with each passing match.
Action might have been taken two months ago.
Hankin's acceptance of the post is a measure of football's odd, continuing ability to attract managers who know the score is that if their teams don't score they go.
Spring jinglers
THEY are back.
It is probable they will never go away now.
Each spring they resurface, no doubt from a winter of lovingly polishing their bells and their clogs.
The programme for the Spring Thing, Darlington's annual festival of folk music, song and dance is out.
It confirms anybody's worst fears.
No fewer than six sets of them will be appearing.
Ladies and gentlemen, aargh, it is the return of morris dancers.
Park hope:
A Scarborough fun park, which went into receivership last summer, could soon have a new owner and a potential early summer re-opening.
Touche Ross, who have been handling negotiations for the sale of the American style Marvels park, say there are several potential buyers.
A BOWLS hut destroyed in an arson attack could be replaced.
Members of the recreation committee on Thursday will consider giving £9,500 to replace the hut in North Park, Darlington.
A SCHEME to build on the tourist potential of a popular County Durham show farm was rejected by planners yesterday.
Farmer Jack Gibson submitted plans for a visitors' centre, caravan site, holiday cottages, log cabins and homes for sale at Hall Hill Farm, near Lanchester, which attracted 20,000 visitors to open days last year.
But he failed to win planning permission because Derwentside Council's development control sub-committee rejected most of the individual elements, which meant that effectively the whole scheme was refused.
Mr Gibson who has already received permission for a tea shop can now submit separate applications for the visitors' centre and the conversion of a former smithy into a holiday cottage the two elements supported by councillors.
He said afterwards that he would consult his advisers before deciding his next action.
Mr Gibson's scheme was opposed by the Browney Valley Preservation Society whose members include motor millionaire Sir Tom Cowie which said attractive countryside would be spoilt and endangered wildlife threatened.
Councillors decided the caravan site was too prominent and that the conversion of listed farm buildings into nine homes for sale would endanger their character.
They also felt that the plans for 12 log cabins in a plantation would threaten badger and red squirrels habitats.
‘If development like this is allowed there will be no wildlife left for coming generations to enjoy,’ said Labour councillor Ben Brenkley.
However, independent Coun Derek McVickers said the council was losing an opportunity to demonstrate its commitment to tourism in the area.
‘It's very rare we get an application of this nature and unfortunately 80pc of it has been thrown out and lost to the people of Derwentside.
It does disappointment me.’
Mr Gibson's daughter, Anne Darlington, said afterwards: ‘Obviously we are disappointed.
We attracted 20,000 visitors last year and we had hoped to expand.
‘But we have got a teashop opening this year.’
Mr Gibson's original plans, submitted in 1990, included a hotel, golf course, lake and water sports centre.
These were dropped after an environmental assessment was called for.
A BUS enthusiast is to have a dream come true when the first Quaker rally and road run is held in Darlington this summer.
Michael Fishwick urged Darlington Council to hold the event.
It will feature vehicles such as old buses, wagons and fire engines.
Michael, son of Darlington Mayor Coun Rita Fishwick, has a 1963 Bedford single decker coach.
The event is open to preserved and current commercial vehicles and preserved emergency vehicles.
The road run route is 25 miles via Croft, Hurworth, Neasham, Middleton-St-George, Sadberge, Great Stainton and Aycliffe.
The vehicles will be on display back in the car park, where class and individual winners will be announced.
Yesterday Coun Fishwick said: ‘This is a first class idea for Darlington and I hope it's going to turn into an annual event.’
OLD soldier Dominic Lavery has refused to give his beloved wellies the boot despite rumours they're soon to be replaced by a new American alternative.
Mr Lavery, of Clare Avenue, Darlington, was given the 1937 black boots as part of a uniform during his army days and they're still going strong.
The 67-year-old contacted The Northern Echo after reading the wellie is to be replaced by the Duck Shoe.
The shoe's American makers have invited Wellie-wearers to bury their boots in a special wellie ‘funeral’ in London next month.
‘They're a very nice boot.
I did well getting away not handing them in,’ said Mr Lavery.
He has joined other wellie lovers, including Darlington MP Michael Fallon, who reckon a new boot would never replace 200 years of tradition.
Mr Fallon, who has a pair of Barbour wellies, added: ‘This is a slur on one of our greatest military heroes,’ referring to the Duke of Wellington who gave the wellie its name.
Club theft:
Bishop Auckland police would like to hear from anyone offered golf clubs for sale following thefts over the weekend.
Four cars were broken into at the town's golf club and radio-cassette players, Ryder and Slazenger clubs and other property worth £2,000 was stolen.
THE first inhabitants of Britain were, when necessary, warriors and head hunters.
And apart from a severed, waxen head, on a pole, for starters, there is a pair of stone-carved heads of Celtic Deiters one of them Janus fashion, double sided from Corstopitum and the first century AD.
From then one we are taken through a Druids' Grove to consider swords, war trumpets, and the bronze shield cover discovered in the River Witham in Lincolnshire and dates from the second century BC.
Jewellery was worn by men and women.
Thus there is a superb brooch with coral inlay from Wetwang Slack in Humberside and, from the Royal Scottish Museum in Edinburgh one surviving and priceless gold Netherud Terminal for a Ringshaped Torc, or Neck Ring.
Equally intriguing is the bronze pony cap, which once belonged to Sir Walter Scott.
He had two duck-billed terminals attached to it as though they were horns.
The ‘Barbarian’ Celts were well and truly domesticated.
They farmed sheep and pigs and cattle and lived in homesteads.
Clive Hart, the Keeper or Archaeology at the Roman Fort at Arbeia, in South Shields, and my guide, happily refers to them as ‘Celtic Cowboys’.
To give some idea of their domestic arrangements we are shown, not only a superb model of a typical Celtic settlement, but also a full-scale thatched Celtic Hut.
Finally we are shown, among other things a small display of Celtic tokens, rather than coins or mites, which seem to have taken their inspiration from the gold stater hence status symbol? of Philip 11 of Macedon (382–358 BC).
Natassa Markidou Newcastle 1991.
Projects UK, 1 Black Swan Court, Westgate Road, Newcastle (Until March 7) AS the second of the four overseas photographers, who came to Tyneside last summer, thereby pre-empting the international flavour of the Cleveland's River Tees project by more than a year, Natassa Markidou, who has a studio and dark-room in Athens, decided that she wanted to commemorate her stay in the North-East by going back to basics.
Thus most of her work here, a series of a dozen double images in black and white, has been taken with a disposable 35mm camera, where the negative, with a thick black border, is virtually half the normal size.
These wide, panoramic views are usually extremely compatible, as Natassa combines views of two of the Tyne Bridges in one double shot; looks down at the field pattern provided by the flagstones at the corner of the street; looks back on-shore, from the water's edge; or concentres on old rotting timbers out to sea.
Pete Ellis Funny Energy The Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington.
(Until March 7) FUNNY Strange might have been an almost acceptable alternative to Ellis's title.
For there really is something a little odd surrealist even in the idea of a folding-leaf Dining (Bird) Table, where the flaps are made to beat up and down like the wings of a bird.
Alas with the other bird-inflight piece.
The two chalk-drawn images, on either side of a Black(Bird)board, don't rotate fast enough to achieve the required effect.
It was interesting to see, however, that in the Big Kiss with its two osculating tooth-brushes, he has followed the sexual stereotype by providing blue for a boy and red, rather than pink, for a girl.
What intrigued me most, however, was the arrangement of four dangling neck-ties, like swaying cobras, which only needed a squatting snakecharmer to really hypnotise.
A Slice of Saturday Night:
Darlington Civic Theatre THE Heather Brothers' musical knew how to pull at heart strings of those who have felt first love.
The yearnings are as real for 17-year-olds today, let alone for the Club A Go Go crowd on any Saturday night in 1964, presided over by Eric Rubberlegs De Vene.
The show is a compilation of such nights, from getting stamped in, waiting around, having a drink and a dance, being chatted up, to vomiting in the loos, and leaving with or without a bird.
And the loos in his club are an ideal confessional box to hear the virginal hopes of Sue (Nikki Belsher), Sharon (Nikki Brooks), Shirl (Joanne Engelsman) and Bridget (Judith Ellis), looking for romantically inclined Mr Right.
The boys, Gary (Paul Darnell) with his cocksure swagger, the so-funny slob Eddie (Peter Hepplethwaite), and shy Rick (Andrew Kennedy) agonizing about his feelings, present different views of what makes their Saturday night.
The ‘bogs’ are a swamp of high hopes, wild boasts, wet walls and vomit-filled drains.
And while the cross-stage shots highlight the chat of the boys and the birds, Eric sits at the club door, always on call.
Alvin Stardust handles the role of Rubberlegs perfectly: smooth, smart, and a touch cynical.
He gives an enrapturing spot of rock ‘n’ roll, be-bop and soft shoe shuffle in the second act after the cast had larked on with the audience at interval-time and some brave hearts had a bit of a rave-up on stage.
The night was a laugh.
Even Rick's problem with premature ejaculation got guffaws.
Teenage memories may be treasured or treated with embarrassment, it doesn't matter.
The musical captures the intense extremes, the fashions, the dances and the dates.
And that is what it was all about, made more of a nostalgic night by the Sixties style club band The Trends playing strains of all the old hits in the Heather Brothers' newly-penned songs.
Unlucky?
THERE was a minor error here yesterday.
It is untrue that there are six sets of morris dancers due to appear at the Spring Thing, the annual Darlington folk festival.
There are, and apparently they are still counting, 13 of them ready to descend with their bells and hats and shoes and pretty bogus folklore.
That has to be unlucky.
AS FANS and players all over the country were being invited to stage a sit-down protest against all-seater stadia, ITV executives last night admitted they are seeking an exclusive multimillion pound deal to televise Premier League games.
Greg Dyke, chairman of ITV Sport, would not go into details but it is believed that ITV's interest will extend to a sponsorship package that could be worth around £80m over four years.
‘We have made a bid and are confident of winning but we haven't yet heard anything from the Premier League,’ said Dyke, who last year retained ITV's franchise with a bid that was £28m less than their rivals.
Premier League chief executive Rick Parry is meeting chairman Sir John Quinton, probably later this week, for an up-date after the FA Council's decision to finally ratify the new set-up.
It kicks-off on August 15 and Parry was yesterday involved in a fixtures meeting in Coventry.
Clearly ITV will want a say in when certain games are played, with more live matches planned than ever before.
The existing four-year exclusive index linked arrangement with the Football League, worth around £50m, was for 18 live League games plus three Rumbelows Cup ties a season.
Now it looks as though Dyke is set to triumph again over BBC and BSkyB, who show FA Cup ties and England matches.
There was also a multi-million pound interest from the Swiss Bank Corporation, who had talks with Parry and the FA's Glen Kirton about selling Premier League matches to a soccer-only satellite channel.
However, there were no guarantees that the service would be up and running next season and that would be a turn-off for would-be sponsors.
The Premier League, rather than seek one major sponsor, have been looking towards the World Cup/European Championship idea of group backers who could contribute around £25m a year.
The Football League hierarchy are also looking for a new TV deal for their revamped competition and they also still have to meet sponsors Barclays to discuss the final year of their deal.
Meanwhile, England's professional footballers have been asked to join Saturday's nationwide protest against allseater stadia.
Thousands of fans up and down the country plan one minute's peaceful demonstration to coincide with weekend kickoffs.
And David Lee, spokesman for the Football Supporters' Association said: ‘We have asked the PFA to support the protest by asking their members to sit down for one minute on Saturday.’
He added: ‘So far we haven't had any response, but the players may consider they have more pressing concerns!’
There has been a more favourable reaction from the fans, with West Ham, Manchester City, Sunderland, Derby, Millwall, Darlington and Hereford among those to have pledged supporter solidarity.
‘We are hoping at least 20 grounds will be involved in a sit-down/stand-up protest on Saturday,’ said Lee.
‘Our research shows the vast majority of clubs want to retain an element of terracing.
‘Clubs are being hurried into installing unsuitable and often dangerous seats when neither they nor their fans want them.
‘Fans demand the right to sit or stand in a safe ground.’
— Scarborough chairman Geoffrey Richmond will take part in a television programme on the proposed new Premier League tomorrow night.
Richmond will be on a three-man panel of soccer experts on the BBC2 North programme Leagues Apart at 7.30pm and followed by a local radio phone-in.
ERNIE MARTIN, fund raiser for the Dawn Craggs Meningitis Appeal fund launched in memory of the Darlington 16-year-old who died six years ago.
I first had the idea for the Dawn Craggs Meningitis Appeal when my wife, Ena, was in Darlington Memorial Hospital with cancer.
While I was in visiting my wife, I met Dawn's mother, a sister at the hospital.
She told me that there was some money in a bank account which had been raised in memory of her daughter.
I suggested that the money could be spent on buying some new equipment for the unit.
We started to organise some fund raising events to buy some extra equipment for the hospital.
Unfortunately, just after we started the appeal, my wife died.
It made me even more determined to keep alive the memory of both Dawn and my wife.
It's very difficult for me to summarise a week of my life.
Whenever we're organising fund raising events, it usually takes us several weeks to get everything organised.
There are four committee members on the appeal fund, myself, Judith Craggs (Dawn's mother), Joyce Hall, and Lawrence Craggs (Dawn's father).
We usually start by looking through the Yellow Pages and ringing up companies to ask if they will give donations and prizes.
We've been lucky in that companies and organisations have been supportive of our appeal.
The Centre for the Unemployed has done a great deal for us.
Celebrities have also been supportive.
In the past we've had people like Leslie Crowther and the Beverly Sisters, and I'm currently trying to arrange for Frankie Vaughan, Joan Regan or Paul Shane to come along.
Before we start fund raising, we usually have discussions with Dr Truby, a consultant at the hospital.
We decide on which piece of equipment we will buy next.
This gives us an indication of how much money we will need to raise for the appeal.
We're planning a number of events at the moment.
On March 28, we're holding our next coffee morning at Branksome Hall.
The warden there, Sue Smith, lets us have the hall free for the event.
The old people who live at Branksome Hall really look forward to our events.
We often have the Apache Country and Western Group playing, which the old people enjoy.
One of our other events is a charity night at Cockerton Club.
We've got another on April 18.
We often have street collections in Darlington town centre.
Our regular pool of supporters can always be relied upon.
As soon as we mention we're planning another event, the volunteers are very helpful.
Sometimes, some of the members from Darlington Community Radio come along and help out.
The appeal started on the January 4, 1988, and so far we've raised over £18,000.
We recently handed over a paediatric endoscope, costing £1,200, to the unit.
I'm very grateful to all those who support us, both by donating prizes and money and by giving up their time to help us.
Without them, I don't think we could buy the hospital the vital equipment it needs.
CONTINUING the Cockerton theme set by the Alma, Fountain of the Week digs deep into the flowerbeds of the village green and comes up with an historic geezer.
The red granite fountain was originally in Stanwick Park on the estate of the Duke of Northumberland, and so its early history is unknown.
The Stanwick sprinkler officially became the gusher on the green on August 1 1924 when the Mayoress, Mrs R Loraine, turned on the water.
It was a present to the village from Coun Sutherland, but many people regarded it is a sop.
Cockerton had lost its individual council in 1915 when it was swallowed up by Darlington Corporation which had promised much, but delivered little.
The town councillors said the fountain was the first of many such gifts that would improve the villagers' quality of life.
But the gusher could hardly raise a trickle, so within a couple of decades the council filled in its basin and planted some flowers.
The railings were removed in the 1940s to assist the War Effort.
HILARY Armstrong, the articulate and accomplished Labour MP for North-West Durham, is getting her knitting in a knot with Tory opposite number Michael Fallon, the member for Darlington.
Ms Armstrong considers Mr Fallon to be sexist: the reason appears to be that he called her a woman.
What he actually said, in a Commons debate about teachers' pay, was that the shadow education spokesman was a ‘silly woman’ a comment as inaccurate as it may have been offensive.
‘I shall not rise to the inevitable sexism which comes from the Government front bench,’ replied Ms Armstrong, and since not even today's siren Labour party can consider the word ‘silly’to be sexist we must assume that the objection is to being described as a woman.
Last week, by coincidence, the Labour leader a man, it is widely believed went out of his way to be pictured with a particular group of parliamentary candidates.
Almost all wore skirts, make up and appeared to have had their hair done especially for the benefit of the cameras.
Even in an age where appearances are sometimes not all they seem we could have sworn that every one was — the naughty word seems inescapable — a woman.
But since the Labour party is nonsexist, clearly we were mistaken.
MEANWHILE a Gadspy sends us a Yorkshire Post cutting in which Foreign Office minister Tristan Garel-Jones is branded both racist and xenophobic.
Something to do with calling the French ‘frogs’, apparently.
The interesting (and decidedly non-xenophobic) thing about Mr Garel-Jones is that he is a Welshman married to a Spaniard; the interesting thing about the Yorkshire Post report is that alongside the caption ‘Tristan Garel-Jones’ it carried a picture of Michael Fallon.
Is the Darlington MP therefore libelled?
Should he dash off a few writs?
Should he pass go and collect £105,000?
Discuss.
THE ‘Blood Kit’ debate flows unstemmed.
After countless readers' theories on the origin of the nickname given to the Cumberland Arms at Coundon Grange Dacre Long throws in a red herring.
There was also a Blood Kit, he insists, in Spennymoor.
Officially the Red Lion, it was just off the High Street and scene of a regular Sunday evening congregation.
‘After chapel we used always to go down there and watch them battle it out,’ he says.
‘Usually it was the hawking fraternity.
They'd have been to the Catholic service, had their sins forgiven from the week before, then started again.’
While we're at it, and since the Teesdale village of Woodland was in the news on Monday, why is the most prominent of its two pubs called The Edge?
ALMOST choking on his cask conditioned, Colin Robinson from Darlington writes about an incident in the Tap and Spile crucible of the town's real ale pubs.
Two yuppie types came in, dressed says Colin ‘in the demob suits typical of their species.’
Predictably, they ordered lager.
‘It's interesting this real ale business, isn't it,’ says the first.
‘It's just a clever bit of marketing,’ says his mate.
‘People will soon go back to drinking proper beer.’
The rest of his letter is exclamation marks.
AND finally, we are grateful to the Rev Janet Chapman of Darlington for news of the Sunday School at All Saints, Blackwell.
Janet had been introducing a group of six-year-olds to the nations of the world.
‘Hands up who can tell me a country which particularly needs our prayers,’ she said.
The first (obviously bright) said Albania, the second suggested Yugoslavia.
A third was even more keen to be heard.
‘Yes, Mandy,’ said Janet.
‘Please miss,’ said the little girl, ‘Shildon.’
MEMORIES will come flooding back to Harry Moon tomorrow when England play the West Indies at cricket.
Harry is the last surviving member of the County Durham side which played the West Indies on their first-ever tour of England almost 70 years ago.
And he still recalls the time fondly.
Harry, 92, said: ‘It was a real experience.
I had a lovely time.’
At the tender age of 23 Harry strolled out at Feethams to take on the legendary West Indian all-rounder Learie Constantine.
He scored seven before Constantine took his wicket and managed 11 in the second innings.
‘I loved every minute of it and played against many of the touring sides.
I am very proud that I was the highest scorer for Darlington for many years.
I got 162 not out but Norman Doggart did the dirty on me by getting 173.
As far as I know that score still stands.’
Harry's cricket career was cut short in the 1930s when he hurt his back but he is still an avid cricket fan.
And he plans to follow England's progress in the one-day world cup tomorrow.
He saw the West Indies when they played at Feethams last summer and was introduced to the team.
He said: ‘That was lovely, a real treat.’
He is also looking forward to Durham's entry into the county championship this year.
Harry, who lives in Earlstone House, a residential home in Coniscliffe Road, believes cricket has not changed over the years.
He said: ‘It's still a gentleman's sport.
They still wear the whites in England unlike in New Zealand and Zimbabwe.’
Harry, who used to work for the coal board, cites Graham Gooch as his favourite cricketer.
‘I was captain of Darlington for many years so I know what it is like in his job.
But you cannot make yourself into a cricketer.
You have to be born with it.
You can learn and improve but you need a natural talent.’
Moving the Shrove Tuesday goalposts
MOVING the goalposts will take on a whole new meaning in Sedgefield next week.
The traditional Shrove Tuesday football match is to move its goalposts 100 yards downstream.
The move follows complaints from local resident Dr Keith Beveridge after his garden was trampled by 150 people last year causing £100 worth of damage.
The Shrove Tuesday game has been going for 960 years.
Traditionally traders play farmers in the match, which has no referee and no rules.
EVERY Thursday, The Northern will publish a list of supply contracts on offer via the Darlington Business Link, a free service from Darlington Business Venture aimed at matching customers' needs with suppliers in the area.
DBL would like to hear from locally-based companies able to supply the following:
Supply and maintenance of two-way radio communication equipment.
Architectural polyester powder coating of 7-metre lengths of aluminium extrusions.
Printed alloy instruction labels for attachment to manufactured products.
Toner cartridges and spares for IBM personal page printer.
Colour separation facilities on to bromide or film from computer disc.
Cling film pallet wrap.
Enquiries should be made to Ken Lee, at Darlington Business Venture, Tel.
Wind up:
Comet Developments of Picton near Yarm is the subject of a petition to have the company compulsorily wound up.
Northern Electric is bringing the proceedings against the company.
The case will be heard in the Newcastle District registry on March 5.
DARLINGTON bowlers went into the national record books this week when the women's Yetton Trophy team beat Boston to clinch an All England semi-final place.
They joined the club's men's team who travel to Bedford next week to take on March of Cambridge in their semi-final.
The women play at Stevenage.
No other indoor club in the country has ever had two teams in the semi-finals.
Darlington ladies held Boston well away from home and on the two rinks who played at the Morrison Centre.
They piled on the pressure to win handsomely by 30 shots.
Scores (Darlington names first): Joyce Stephenson, Joan Winter, Jean Howling, Marjorie Bousfield 27, M Kisby 8; Shirley Andrews, Doreen Hope, Margaret Shaw, Betty Bayliss 29, D Quincey 18; Kath Ramsdale, Audrey Shepherd, Margaret Wilson, Dulcie Harbin 20, J Cannack 14; Maureen Baines, Vicky Knight, Gwen Summers, Pearl Wright 14, M Hewitson 19.
John Palmer, an outstanding competitor, was in great form when he beat Eric Ramsdale (Darlington) 21–10 after leading well throughout the game.
John, playing from Great Aycliffe, goes through to the area finals of the national championships to take on international Cliff Simpson (Hartlepool) on a neutral venue.
Cliff did not allow Derek Dowson (Bishop Auckland) to score in a one-sided contest.
In the Durham County veterans league championship Brian Howell, Derek Redfern, Dennis Hammond and Tom Horner were outstanding against the Bishop Auckland rink of T Walls, T Lambton, W Ogle and R Bedford.
They went into a 21–0 lead after only seven ends and won 29–10.
In the £1,000 Hathaways fours tournament Teesside bowlers T McKeon, T Appleby, B Mosley, J Banks finished strongly collecting a 2–1–4–1 on the run-in to recover from an 816 deficit to finish 22–17 up against N Cooper, P Baines, M Baines, D Baines.
The Darlington eight-rink team was in great form against a combined Nottingham and Somerset side with outstanding performances from Lee Shepherd, Ken Abbott, Cec Houghton, Alan Moore, Eddie Taylor, Frank Elgie, Colin Young and Graham Peacock who had decisive victories after a flying start.
DURHAM Squash Club's challenge for the Durham and Cleveland First Division championships has come a catastrophic cropper.
Darlington 2, already doomed to Second Division status next season, pulled off the shock of the season dumping high-flying Durham 1 3–2.
Former British champion Bryan Beeson, in Madrid for the Spanish Open, will return to find that the league is no longer a two-horse race.
At the halfway post his team led Darlington 1 52–51.
In the first match of the second half defending champions Darlington regained the lead beating Durham 4–1.
Before last Tuesday Darlington 1 were only five points clear on the same number of games and could not afford to lose a match.
‘But that's taken the pressure right off,’ said jubilant Darlington captain Steve Rose.
It is hard to see how Darlington 1 could not lose the title, but as their second team so ably demonstrated, it's a funny old game.
Durham 1 arrived at Darlington minus Beeson and Dave Smith, but could never have conceived that they could lose.
Fifth string Doug Campbell set Darlington on their way with a superb 3–2 win over Ernie Matthews.
Steve Finlay, at 4, proved too strong for Darlington's Colin Shields while first string Dave Lumsdon kept Durham in the match with a convincing 3–0 victory over Mike Hewitson.
With the match score at 2–2 Kevin Carr led Phil Crowther 2–0 as the third strings battled for the rubber.
Crowther clawed his way back and clinched the fifth.
Darlington 1 have a tough one next Tuesday against Redcar 1 who are fielding Tim Clark, Steve Heatley, Mike Pugsly, Stephen Clark and Malcolm Mills.
KEVIN Keegan has rapped some of his Newcastle players for not showing enough desire to play for the club.
Now he's prepared to get tough.
‘They knock on my door and say they want to pull on a black and white shirt, but when I ask them to prove it some can't,’ said Keegan.
‘At least, they haven't done it yet.
I'm disappointed that not more have staked a claim.’
A staggering
SIXTEEN contracts are up in the summer at the struggling second division club.
And while established first team players like Kevin Scott and Gavin Peacock are certain to be offered new deals, the new Newcastle boss is already preparing to be ruthless.
He insists he has an open mind on the players he wants to keep.
But clearly those who don't impress him will be out of the door.
‘They are all on trial and they should all have something to prove,’ he said.
‘I don't want players knocking on my door to talk about new deals.
We'll sort that out once we clinch second division safety.
I want them to show me how they feel on the pitch.’
Keegan believes some players have suffered because they can't handle the massive crowds that have returned to St James's Park since his arrival.
The last two home gates have averaged an astonishing 28,000.
‘The bigger the game the more I enjoyed it,’ he said.
‘They have to come to terms with that.
The option is to play somewhere where they can arrive at 2.45 and the ground is still empty.’
While Keegan is still making up his mind on players some of them are already in the shop window.
He is prepared to start pruning before the transfer deadline.
That's why a number of clubs were represented at last night's reserve game against Coventry.
Keegan said: ‘I've told players that if they are not in the first team here they can always impress somebody else.’
DARLINGTON'S new manager Ray Hankin has moved quickly into the market, signing Guisborough Town's Gary Hinchley for a nominal fee.
Hankin returned to one of his former clubs to pick a player who can slot into defence or midfield.
Hinchley was released by Darlington as a youngster.
Hankin said: ‘Hinchley is a battler with great potential.
I am sure he will do a good job for us.
It is a chance for him to prove he can make it in the Football League.’
Hinchley could be thrust into the relegation clash with Chester on Saturday.
Hankin could bring in another new face as he prepares for the 15-match survival fight.
Darlington are allowed one more loan deal this season.
— TALENTED
young Scarborough goalkeeper Steve Hewitt will be out of action for about a month after fracturing a wrist in training.
Hewitt had only just broken through into the first team and gave a good account of himself in matches against Crewe and Chesterfield.
Scarborough manager Ray McHale said Hewitt's wrist was in plaster and it would take until the middle of next month for the injury to heal.
Despite the blow to Hewitt, McHale said the injury would give former Leeds United and Northern Ireland star Phil Hughes the chance to re-establish himself in the side after being axed last week.
But McHale has another option after taking former Bridlington Town keeper Ian Taylor on trial following his release from Fourth Division Carlisle United.
‘Ian looks quite a good keeper all-round.
His shot-stopping is good and he can handle crosses well,’ said McHale.
Utility player John Moore has been hit by yet another injury blow.
He damaged ankle ligaments in the defeat at Chesterfield last Saturday and will be out for about three weeks.
Moore has had a nightmare season after signing for Scarborough last summer on his return from playing in Europe.
He has been plagued by injuries and has only started four first team games this season.
Barton Sale date:
A tabletop sale takes place in Barton village hall on March 21.
Brafferton Bowls invite:
Indoor bowls nights are held at the village hall on alternate Tuesdays at 7.30pm.
New members from outside the village are welcome to join the 14 regulars.
The next session is on March 10.
Dance lessons:
Ballroom dancing lessons are held every other Tuesday at the village hall starting at 7.30pm.
Anyone is welcome.
The next class is on March 3.
Stepping out:
A sequence dance is held every Saturday night at the village hall.
Admission is 70p.
Anyone welcome.
Coatham Mundeville Security move:
An application has been received by Darlington Borough Council for planning permission to fit security bars to ground floor windows at Hallgarth Country Hotel.
Eppleby Village dance:
A dance will be held in Eppleby on Saturday night to raise money for the village hall funds.
Everyone from the village or the surrounding area is welcome to attend.
Escomb Concert reminder:
Residents are reminded of a concert to be held in Escomb village hall on March 6 at 7.30pm.
It will feature Bishop Auckland Amateur Operatic Society and tickets, at £1.50, are available by calling Stuart Kitching on .
Proceeds will be used to help stage an art exhibition at Auckland Castle in June.
Great Stainton Funds drive:
A concert is to be held by The East Layton Singers to raise money for repairs to Great Stainton church on Saturday, March 21, at Bishopton Village Hall.
Tickets, to be bought in advance, are £4.50 and include a buffet supper.
Telephone Betty Kitching on .
Heighington Society boost:
More than £90 was raised by a successful sale held in the village hall for the show society.
Some of the money came from sales while other cash was donated to the society.
Throughout the morning the village hall was packed.
An offer of thanks has been extended to those who helped to make the event a success.
Talk praised:
The village 50/60 club has praised a thoroughly enjoyable talk with slides given by David Compy who spoke about his experiences in Egypt.
The event was such a success that club members are very much looking forward to him making a return visit.
Coffee morning:
A coffee morning is to be held in the village hall at 10am on March 27.
Admission costs 40p which will include the price of coffee and refreshments.
There will be cakes, bric-a-brac, toys and books.
Other attractions at the sale, which is to raise funds for the Children's Society, include a raffle and a painting competition for children.
Entries are required from children between pre-school age and 11-years-old.
Club invite:
The new Young Farmers' Club holds regular weekly meetings on Tuesday nights.
New members are welcomed.
For information telephone secretary Joseph Dods on .
Concert date:
A concert by Trimdon Male Voice Choir is to be held in the church on March 14 at 7pm.
Tickets £2 on the door.
Sale success:
The tabletop sale held in the village hall on February 15 raised more than £200 for the hall.
Thanks are sent to all helpers and the 27 stall-holders.
Planning appeal:
Mr and Mrs D Sayles are appealing against refusal of planning permission for a bungalow in the garden of 6 Garthlands.
Their plans were rejected by Darlington Borough Council on December 12.
The appeal is to be dealt with by the Department of the Environment who are inviting neighbours of the site to send any objections to the plan in writing.
Helmington Row Jumble sale:
A jumble sale will be held in the village hall at 6.30pm on Tuesday, March 10.
Proceeds will go towards hall funds.
Hurworth Coffee evening:
Hurworth Methodist Ladies Group raised £52 for the Home Farm Trust in a coffee evening at the church last week.
House extension: Mr Ross, of Bryan Close, Hurworth, has applied to Darlington Borough Council for permission to build a single-storey extension to his house.
Tabletop sale: A tabletop sale takes place at Hurworth village hall on March 28 from 10.30am to 2pm.
Telephone  to book a table.
All proceeds go to the Village Hall Fund.
Pruning go-ahead: Darlington Borough Council, which is responsible for tree felling, has given permission for extensive pruning work to be done on an oak tree at Hawkswood in Hurworth Place.
Ireshopeburn Story time: North Pennines storyteller Taffy Thoman will be joined by members of The Company of Storytellers for an evening of myths and legends next week.
They will be at the Ranch on Tuesday, March 3, at 7.30pm and admission costs £1 on the door.
The evening is not suitable for children under 12.
A bar will be available.
Manfield Charity choice: Members of the Manfield Women's Institute have decided that the proceeds from their Christmas carol singing should be given to the MacMillan Nurses appeal.
At this month's meeting members were also entertained with a slide show and talk about the volcanic eruption at Mount Helena in the United States.
Merrybent Cheery notes: Villagers have applauded the efforts of former parish council chairman Morris Marshall who has fought off ill health after suffering two strokes.
He has written a five page article about his illness in a Darlington medical journal and to celebrate his gradual return to good health he has started to learn the piano.
Middleton St George Change sought: H Walton and Sons, of Hunger Hill Farm, have applied to Darlington Council for permission to change agricultural buildings into two separate dwellings.
Traffic dilemma: Darlington Borough Council has indicated that the parish council will have to wait until a bypass is opened before the problems of congestion in the village can be properly addressed.
Parishioners complained about the frequent congestion around the bus stop.
But there is no intention of turning the area into a clearway because it would not be possible to police the area effectively.
Middleton Tyas Anniversary party: The first Midleton Tyas Guide company celebrates its 21st anniversary on March 24.
Former members of the company have been invited to attend.
The party will be held in Middleton Tyas village hall and will start at 8.15pm.
Neasham Jumble sale: A jumble sale in aid of the Neasham Women's Institute takes place in the village hall on March 19 at 6.15pm.
Fashion Show: The Darlington Machine Knitter's Guild holds a fashion show on May 20 at 7.30pm in Neasham village hall.
Oriental flavour: There was a distinctly oriental flavour to a recent meeting held by Neasham Women's Institute.
A new member came to the meeting dressed in full Chinese costume and others brought personal Chinese possessions for others to look at and discuss.
The group also discussed a plan to make a trip to York to see a needlework exhibition which will feature the Duchess of York's wedding dress.
Tow Law Fashion date: Tow Law Youth Club has a fashion show and hairdressing demonstration on Wednesday, March 18.
The event has been organised to raise money for new equipment and starts at 7.30pm in the community centre.
Admission costs £1 for adults and 75p for children.
THE MILK of human kindness flowed in Darlington yesterday when milkmen delivered goods for the Kostroma appeal on a milk float.
They have been collecting tins from their customers to help the needy in the Russian town of Kostroma, which is twinned with County Durham.
Organiser Michelle le Neveau, foreground, said: ‘Things are going really well and the response has been better than we anticipated.’
RECREATION services provided by Darlington council continue to attract a growing number of visitors.
At the Crown Street Art Gallery attendances went up from 24,000 in 1990 to 31,200 in 1991.
At the Civic Theatre, despite a lower number of performances last year, attendance has gone up from 112,000 to 113,000.
The Dolphin Centre has maintained its usual popularity with attendances again breaking the one million barrier.
More than 100,000 visitors again came to the Arts Centre in Vane Terrace.
Both the town museum in Tubwell Row and the railway museum at North Road enjoyed a boost in numbers.
Richard Collin, director of central services for the council, said the figures show the services are as popular as ever and justify the money spent on them.
THE MILK of human kindness flowed in Darlington yesterday with a deluge of goods for the Kostroma appeal.
Milkmen have been collecting tinned foods and medicine from their customers to help the needy in the Russian town of Kostroma, which is twinned with County Durham.
And they collected so much they had to use a milk float to deliver the load.
Bob Martin, from the Darlington Milk Buyers, said customers had been very generous and they still had more to collect.
Michelle le Neveau, Darlington collection organiser, said: ‘Things are going really well and the response has been better than we anticipated.’
MAUDE Alice Rand is 107 today and she is to be wished many happy returns by the Queen, the Queen Mother and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Mobile minister the Rev Bill Harper, who is to conduct a special service for Maude, is to take her a letter from the Queen Mother and a signed photograph from Dr George Carey.
Maude's telegram from the Queen was also expected this morning at Trees Park Village, near Middleton St George, where she has lived for the last seven years.
This afternoon Darlington Mayor Coun Rita Fishwick is to be a special guest at a party for friends at Willow Lodge.
And on Sunday family from all over Britain are to travel to the complex.
‘Several members of my family have lived to a good age.
My father lived to be 88, which was a good age in those days, and my mother was about 95.
I keep myself busy.
I like reading, playing Scrabble and doing crosswords,’ said Maude.
Matron Marjorie Grant said: ‘Maude's a super lady to look after.
She never complains even when she's not well.
She's a treat.
She speaks very good French.
Last year she asked for a big French dictionary for her birthday.’
Bradford trophies
THE Fighting Bradfords (Echo February 19) will never be forgotten and in the week of the centenary of Roland's birth we raised our glasses, all seven of us, in memory of this fine young officer.
On March 28 as every year, ex-servicemen of the North will gather at Morrisons in Darlington to bowl for the Roland and George Bradford trophies for the honours of their Messes.
Comparisons with the 1914–18 career of Monty should be viewed with the knowledge that this outstanding man was gravely wounded while leading his platoon of the Royal Warwicks early in the conflict and this slowed his promotion considerably.
Allan H. Newman, No 428 Bradford VC Darlington Mess of the Fellowship of Services, 53 Elton Road, Darlington.
Dark deeds
THE FA, meanwhile, is putting in its own rusty oar to ensure that the grass roots wither and football becomes the plaything of the elite.
A blunt letter last week told all clubs without floodlights that unless they were up and shining by 1993–94 and to 120 lux, a higher standard than many existing installations they'd be banned from the FA Cup.
For village teams like Evenwood, proud FA Cup contestants for over 60 years, the outlook is gloomy.
Club secretary Jim Coates has appealed to Gordon McKeag, Challenge Cup committee chairman and Newcastle United director, arguing that most early season FA Cup ties are in daylight.
Midweek replays could be held on neighbouring grounds.
Coates adds that at least three Football League clubs don't even have their own ground, much less illumination.
‘We can't see Charlton Athletic, Chester City or Maidstone United being refused entry, nor would we want them to be,’ he says.
‘For teams like us to enter the competition is a long standing privilege which enhances the competition and harms no one.’
Father figure AFTER floodlights, the men in black.
Police are investigating claims that linesman Ray Bowden made a V-sign to the crowd in last week's Preston v Shrewsbury game.
It's said to have happened after Stockton referee Ken Lupton sent off Preston striker Ronnie Jepson, for allegedly badmouthing Bowden.
Ken, Stockton council's cleansing officer, is perhaps more experienced in handling abuse.
It's he who from time to time begins talks with the observation that a referee's parentage is often questioned.
‘For those still in doubt,’ he continues, pointing to the elderly chap in the front row, ‘I've brought along my father.’
Third rate ‘IN the third (division) Southend have no problems scoring at home, but Sunderland were desperately unlucky not to go ahead on the half hour’
Sunday Times, February 23.
AMERICAN striker Gilbert Johns will not be joining Hartlepool United.
The trial of the 22-year-old player lasted 45 minutes.
Johns made a second-half appearance for the Reserves in a goalless draw at Darlington and caught the next train back to London.
Hartlepool chairman Garry Gibson said: ‘I'm glad he cost only a train fare and not a plane fare.
‘Johns has aspirations to get into the American World Cup side.
I think I have more chance of breaking into the England squad.
‘He was very disappointing.
Even I could see he is not a good player.
‘I recommended the player through a contact, so I have taken some flak from my management team.
‘They have asked me if I have any more players lined up.
The fact the player has been at Tamba Bay Rowdies, and has an agent, clouded my judgement.’
Gibson accepted the ribbing and promised to check more in future.
LEEDS United midfielder Steve Hodge may need an immediate operation on his calf.
Manager Howard Wilkinson had hoped Hodge could soldier on until the end of the season but there has been no improvement.
A PUB football team is planning a cross-Channel trip to play matches in Darlington's twin town of Amiens.
Members of the Brown Trout pub team have launched a fund raising drive to help finance the trip, which will be the first official visit by an adult soccer team.
Their efforts were given a civic start when the Mayor, Coun Rita Fishwick, donated a football signed by members of Darlington FC.
Team spokeswoman Sarah Coulthard, said: ‘The Mayor has been exceedingly generous but we also need the support of local firms.
Any sort of donation would be greatly appreciated.’
Gifts will be raffled with 50pc of the proceeds going towards the team's travel fund and the rest to the children's ward at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The team, who are all regulars at the West Auckland Road pub, are in their first season in the Darlington and district football league.
Sarah said: ‘Although we got off to a shaky start everyone is getting it together now.
We are looking forward to some good matches in Europe.’
ALTHOUGH several national charities have pledged money to build the centre their promises must be matched from within Darlington.
There are 16 national organisations which have agreed they are committed to put money into the project.
One of the organisations has made a pledge of £25,000 to the appeal.
But all the promises of money for the building, which has been earmarked for Beaumont Street, in Darlington, are dependent on the fund raising committee meeting its side of the bargain.
Already the fund has broken the £100,000 mark but it needs £200,000 more before it can add the pledges from the national organisations.
Most of the trusts make offers on the grounds that half the money for an appeal is raised from fund raising work in the local area.
Darlington council has provided a site for the day care centre while the county council has given £15,000 from the budget of the social services committee.
Now the fund organisers are broadening their appeal to businessmen and women in and around Darlington to match the generosity of the local authorities.
Anyone who would like to find out more about the appeal or make a pledge to the funds should contact: The Darlington Day Care Centre Appeal, c/o Farmway Ltd, King Street, Darlington.
THE York Early Music Choir will celebrate the birth 100 years ago of one of the most important composers of church music, Herbert Howells, with a concert on Saturday at 7.30pm in Ripon Cathedral.
And Christ's College Choir, Cambridge, will tour North Yorkshire and County Durham from March 14 to 18.
It will perform at Northallerton Parish Church on March 14 at 7.30pm, and Darlington Parish Church on March 15 at 8pm; it will sing evensong at Durham Cathedral on March 16, and at York Minster on March 18.
A LADIES' choir in Darlington has appointed a new musical director.
Carol Andrew, known for her work with the Carol Andrew Singers, replaces Connie Overend, who recently retired from the Blackwell Ladies' Choir.
The 21-strong choir was formed in 1985 with seven members from the Blackwell Women's Institute.
Ms Andrew is also a solo performer and teacher and chairman of Darlington Music Festival.
THIS group of youngsters from Durham Sixth Form Centre showed themselves to be canny consumers when they won the county heat of a national competition this week.
The team clockwise from top left, James Tromans, 17, Anthony Jewitt, 17, Jennifer McCaffery, 18, and Katie Lane, 19, won the County Durham final of the Young Consumer of the Year event, and go on to represent the county at the regional finals in Gateshead on April 7.
The competition is supported by the Institute of Trading Standards Administration which hosts the finals at its annual conference in Torquay in July.
Prizes also went to runners-up The Avenue comprehensive, Newton Aycliffe, and Hummersknott comprehensive, Darlington.
A RETIRED businessman who kept his sense of humour despite discovering he had cancer has won a top prize for his comic poetry.
Graham Tennant, 81, has been writing poetry for a hobby since he was 10 and his poem Looking Back taking a humorous look at the Biblical tale of Sodom and Gomorrah has been judged one of the top ten funniest poems in a national competition judged by comedian Ronnie Corbett.
Mr Tennant, chairman of the Darlington office equipment company Graham Tennant Ltd, discovered last year he was suffering from cancer.
Luckily, a scanner investigation detected a tumour on his kidney early enough for it to be safely treated.
Mr Tennant, of The Royd, Yarm, said: ‘I kept on writing poetry while I was in hospital to fill the time and keep my spirits up.’
The competition was organised by the magazine Poetry Digest.
LUNG transplant patient Barbara Easby yesterday praised a council's same-day service when her heating broke down.
Mrs Easby, 58, has returned to her house in Minors Crescent, Darlington, from Harefield Hospital, Middlesex, where she underwent life-saving surgery to replace one of her lungs.
Within a fortnight of coming back to her council house she woke one morning to find all the house's utilities had failed.
‘I was very upset.
The doctors had given me strict orders to keep warm while I was recuperating and there was no heating at all in the house,’ said Mrs Easby.
Her son went straight to the town hall to ask maintenance men to restore the vital services for his mother.
And within hours Darlington council workmen arrived at the house and fixed all the various problems.
‘I was absolutely delighted about the quick response,’ said Mrs Easby.
‘People are often complaining about the council but I think this time they deserve some praise.’
She has had no further problems and is recovering from her operation well.
BOWLS players yesterday accused Darlington Council of wasting its money on a new bowls hut.
The hut at North Park, Darlington, was destroyed in an arson attack last year.
And the recreation committee yesterday agreed to replace it with a new wooden one costing £9,500.
But bowls players said this would only be vandalised again.
Reg Marshall said: ‘They are wasting their money giving us a wooden hut.
We need a breeze-block building that would not burn.’
And Coun John Cresswell (Lib Dem) said the council should wait and build a more solid building for £15,000.
‘We want something that would be secure,’ he said.
But Coun Dot Long, committee chairman, said they wanted to get something up and running for the club before the start of the bowls season in May.
‘At least this way they will have a shelter,’ she said.
DARLINGTON soccer players put on their walking boots to raise money to help combat Multiple Sclerosis yesterday.
Members of Darlington FC joined other fund raisers including staff and friends from the Nationwide Building Society, above on a sponsored walk round town.
The Quakers' community development officer, Ian Leckie, said: ‘We wanted to make sure players from Darlington did their bit.’
FORTIES film star Humphrey Bogart is set to help scores of Darlington smokers kick the habit.
Health promotion officers have enlisted the help of ‘Bogie’ and his Casablanca co-star, Ingrid Bergman, for their latest antismoking initiative.
They have organised a promotional float which depicts a scene from the classic movie where Bogart and Bergman ‘kiss it goodbye’ in Rik's Cafe.
The float will be in Darlington town centre a week tomorrow helping publicise the borough council's newly adopted no smoking policy.
Officials also hope the float will draw attention to National No Smoking Day, on Wednesday, March 11.
Judith Taylor, Darlington's district health promotion officer, said: ‘Stopping smoking is the single most important step that a smoker can take if they want to live longer.
‘After only one year not smoking, the extra risk of coronary heart disease is reduced by half.
Exsmokers live longer and are healthier as a result of kissing it goodbye.’
A SERIES of steam train weekends start in Darlington later this year.
The Peckett engine will be used for 12 live steam dates from May 23 to September 27.
The Darlington Railway Preservation Society is negotiating with British Coal over the event and hopes to transport the engine from the Whessoe sidings.
Oldsters to rub bumpers at Darlington rally
Up to 40 fire engines, buses, coaches and lorries will snake around Darlington in the first vintage rally of its type to be held in the town.
The first Quaker Rally and Road Run will take place on Sunday, May 17, and is expected to attract thousands of spectators and enthusiasts.
Vehicles which carried passengers and freight in the 1920s will rub bumpers with state-of-the-art models recently acquired by local companies.
The rally is the brainchild of Mr Michael Fishwick, aged 27, of Huntershaw Way, Darlington, whose mother, Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick, is the town's mayor.
He has had a passion for buses and coaches ever since childhood when his father took him to the Darlington bus depot where he still works as a driver.
‘He still drives the Darlington buses to Newton Aycliffe,’ says Mr Fishwick Jnr.
‘When I was a lad I would go down there with him.
That's where my fascination with old coaches like these started.’
In 1988 he fulfilled a longstanding ambition to own a coach, buying one jointly with his father.
The 1962 Bedford singledecker is being resprayed in time for the rally.
Another enthusiast taking part will be Mr Alan Shepherd, aged 53, the owner of a 1960 Leyland Atlantean bus, one of the first double deckers powered by a rear engine.
Mr Shepherd, of Fawcett near Richmond, bought the bright red Plymouth Transport bus in 1989 and has recently completed restoration work on it.
The rally will start in the Russell Street car park.
Vehicles will travel through Croft, Hurworth, Neasham, Middleton St. George, Sadberge, Great Stainton, Aycliffe and then back into Darlington down North Road and High Northgate.
Greetings from the Queen Mother, the Archbishop of Canterbury and a visit from the Mayor of Darlington helped a former teacher celebrate her 107th birthday this week.
Mrs Maude Rand, of Trees Park Residential Village, Middleton St.
George, marked the milestone on Thursday with friends and staff.
After morning service she was presented with a letter from the Queen Mother and in the afternoon, surrounded by cards and flowers, she met Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick, the mayor.
Mrs Rand, an avid Scrabble player, crossword fan and reader, lived alone in Stockton until just before her 100th birthday when a fall meant moving into the residential village.
Born in Stockton, she trained as a teacher and worked in schools throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire, including North Ormesby Girls' School, Ripon Training College, Grangetown Girls' School, Widdale (near Hawes) and Wath, where she became headmistress until her retirement in 1946.
She was a keen member of Wath Women's Institute and served as president and secretary.
She also looked after the school and village libraries and was secretary of Wath and Melmerby Nursing Association.
Her only son died aged 23 while a Japanese prisoner of war after joining up as a volunteer instead of pursuing his exempt profession as a metallurgical chemist.
Mrs Pauline Rees, activities organiser at Trees Park, said Mrs Rand was as bright as ever despite being partly deaf and wheelchair-bound.
When she was 105 a relative took her on a day trip to Ripon Flower Festival and staff and family have to keep her supplied with historical novels and books about the Royal family.
Mrs Rand with her signed photograph of the Archbishop of Canterbury
Department store offers help for its deaf customers
Six members of staff at a Darlington department store will be able to assist deaf customers after passing a sign-language course.
The employees at Binns on High Row volunteered for the yearlong course after it came up in the company's suggestion scheme.
‘We are always looking for new ways to improve the service we give to customers and this was one of them,’ said Mr David Gettings, store manager.
‘About 12 people went along to the basic 15 week course and of course we have six who have gone on to get the certificate.
I am delighted.’
The course was held at the Darlington Deaf Club, which meets in rooms above St Mary's Association Club on Raby Terrace.
And the staff still go along to the club as social members.
Mrs Young said she had previously been handed notes by deaf people in the shop.
‘But that means they are missing out on the communication and the enjoyment of talking and shopping.
Everybody else enjoys shopping why shouldn't the deaf community enjoy it as well?’
Mr Gettings said he hoped more deaf people would come into the shop once the new Darlington Association on Disability directory was published.
The book gives details of the facilities each shop in the town offers the disabled.
Binns becomes the second shop in the town to be able to help the deaf.
Two members of staff at Boots the Chemist passed an exam in October 1991.
Binns' staff members who passed the course were Miss Paula Meale, Mrs Cathy May, Mrs Pauline Young, Mrs Joanne Harker, Mrs Eileen Thomas and Mrs Anne Matthewson.
Mrs Pauline Young (left) and Mrs Anne Matthewson practise sign-langauge in the store.
Music teacher scores a successful career
A music teacher who turned his hand to writing books after he suffered a stroke yesterday presented the Mayor of Darlington with some of his works.
Mr David Biermann, who was born and bred in Darlington, gave Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick copies of a series of his books entitled ‘Switched On’, which have been published by the Oxford University Press.
Mr Biermann, who is visiting his mother at her home in Elton Road, wrote the books to rebuild his life after a stroke in 1989 left him paralysed down the right hand side of his body.
‘The books use the electronic keyboard to teach music to children, adults and the physically handicapped,’ he said.
‘The Open College of the Arts encouraged me to a course in music using electronic keyboards and things took off after that.’
Mr Biermann was head of music at Peterlee Grammar School until he moved to Milton Keynes in 1987.
He moved to Stockhach near Lake Constance, in Germany, in August 1990 and now teaches music, English and current affairs to students of Akad, the German equivalent of the Open University.
‘My father was German and I wanted to go out there to rebuild my life,’ he said.
‘I am currently teaching Russian immigrants to speak English and it is something that I really enjoy.’
Mr Biermann signs one of his music books for the mayor.
Catholic schools get Government go-ahead
Building extensions to two Catholic schools in Darlington could start this year if the county and the church agree, the schools minister said this week.
Mr Michael Fallon, also MP for Darlington, said he had bent government rules by guaranteeing the classrooms at St. Augustine's and St. Bede's schools would receive funding in the next two years.
‘It has not been easy to do because we have never given guarantees before.
‘But now it is up to the Catholic officials and the county to find the money from the £243,000 I have set aside for church school repairs.
‘The county normally delegates that to the churches to carve it up among themselves.
And we know the Catholic churches are to have about £200,000 of the money.’
He said St. Bede's required £4,000 for work to start in April and St.
Augustine's first year expenditure needed to be between £80,000 and £90,000.
Mr Keith Banks, a principal education officer for Durham, said he had not yet seen the guarantee in writing.
And he also wanted Mr Fallon to make it clear he agreed with the interpretation of the 1944 Education Act saying every Catholic child was entitled to a Catholic education.
Father Caden, who represents the Catholic diocese on Durham County Council's education committee, said he, too, wanted a clear declaration that extra places were a basic need in the north end of Darlington.
He was concerned that under a new scheme announced earlier this month only successful schools would be given extra funding.
But Mr Fallon said ‘successful’ was simply another word for ‘oversubscribed’and therefore more places would be provided if they were needed.
‘We have made it clear that we accept the principal Father Caden is talking about.’
What about Boro?:
AS a regular reader of your paper which I regard as the voice for the North-East, I have become increasingly frustrated at your sports section.
I am in my early twenties, and well remember the ‘glory days’ of Newcastle United with their world class line up of Keegan, Waddle, Beardsley and Co.
I used to say that when the good times returned to Ayresome Park and we actually did a little bit more worthwhile than finish third in Division Two, then the headlines would shine on us.
Well, we will try again, and maybe if we do win the Rumbelows League Cup and finish third in Division Two, we might just get the same coverage overall as one man has had over the past weeks.
No, of course I'm not referring to Kevin whatsisname!
O. Simpson, Claude Gibb Halls, Newcastle Polytechnic, Newcastle.
EDITOR'S FOOTNOTE: You obviously didn't see our exclusive interviews with ex-Boro players Gary Pallister and Tony Mowbray, the letter to Lennie and our coverage of Boro's FA Cup exploits all published in the last fortnight.
Better service:
As one who finds a certain amount of pleasure in a small daily flutter on the horses, your recent introduction of bolder type for the listing of runners on your sports pages has not gone unnoticed.
To those with failing vision little things mean a lot.
Thank you.
Mr Gayles Fitzpatrick, 153 Alexandra Road, Gateshead.
NEW Darlington manager Ray Hankin has ordered his 22-strong professional staff to report to Feethams for the crucial Third Division relegation battle against Chester.
A final team choice will not made until shortly before the kick-off.
Hankin said: ‘I have one or two options to consider.
I want us to get out of the habit of losing.
‘When a team wins ten games they expect to win.
When a team loses five or six games it is too easy to accept another defeat.
‘That won't happen from now on.
Survival is too important.
‘Our squad is good enough.
But the players have to prove it.
I hope to instil a bit of confidence.’
Chester have staged a revival and will be confident.
A few weeks ago they were seven points adrift at the foot of the table.
But now they are fifth from bottom, one place above the relegation zone, after a seven match unbeaten run and three straight wins.
Manager Harry McNally said: ‘We are not out of the wood but we have been thrown a lifeline.
‘The Darlington game is like another cup final for us.
It is a dog-eat-dog situation.
‘It is difficult to assess how a change of manager will affect Darlington.
They are an attack-minded side who cause problems.
‘But if you can defend against them you are always in with a chance.’
Hankin will choose his team shortly before the kick-off.
FOOTBALL fans thought Lord Justice Taylor had done them a big favour when his report into the Hillsborough tragedy condemned the ill-thought ID card scheme to the dustbin of history.
But they quickly realised the judge had done them a great disservice and that his report hinged on a massive irony.
On the other hand, he said ID cards were ridiculous and confirmed what fans had known for years that they were ill- treated by uncaring clubs who were allowing grounds to fall into disrepair.
But on the other hand, he gave fans exactly what they didn't want a plan for all-seater stands.
He told supporters what was good for them.
Fans have been constant in their opposition to all-seater.
Two conferences of the Football Supporters' Association have called for a re-think, but it seemed we were banging our heads against a brick wall.
Luckily the fans stuck at it and today is the culmination of their efforts.
At 3pm today, supporters all over the country will stage a sit-down protest against sitting down.
Fans in the seats are asked to stand up in solidarity.
The one minute, peaceful protest is a simple demonstration of opposition to compulsory allseaters.
The basic argument is persuasive fans want the choice to sit or stand in safety.
Lord Justice Taylor should have asked fans what they wanted, but didn't bother.
The centrepoint of the FSA's case is that the grounds must be upgraded.
After all, supporters have a vested interest in ground safety and comfort.
We want modern grounds with good facilities, but recognise they will not come overnight.
By rushing headlong into allseaters, money that could be better used elsewhere is being spent on unwanted and potentially dangerous seats.
There is no way all-seat can mean all-safe Bradford is the most brutal example and there is no way that all-seaters will ‘civilise’ fans in the way Taylor imagined.
Indeed some of the most horrific scenes of violence from the 1980s came when Millwall fans rampaged at Luton, flinging seats across the pitch as they went.
Seats, particularly if they are the bucket-type and simply plonked on existing terracing, can give a bad view in an uncomfortable position at a higher cost.
At the moment no one is considering how to make terracing safe.
The FSA's position is clear the Football Licensing Authority, set up as a Government quango to impose all-seaters must widen its remit and become a national body to impose standards of safety and comfort.
The FLA should draw up a development plan with every Football League club to bring its ground up to scratch over an agreed time period.
The majority of fans prefer to stand and terracing can be safe.
Many improvements have been made since Hillsborough, which was caused by a combination of factors.
Blaming terracing alone for the tragedy is rather like banning cars after a fatal accident.
The FSA has produced a document on safe terracing, which will be circulated next week and how entry and exit points to standing areas are perhaps more important than the terracing itself.
Crucially, many perimeter fences have disappeared, gates onto the pitch have appeared, capacities have been cut and new gangways installed.
Progress is being made and should be allowed to continue.
If all-seaters guaranteed safe and comfortable grounds, we couldn't raise the financial argument.
But all-seaters don't mean all-safe so why should clubs risk bankruptcy and fans pay through the nose for an ill-conceived scheme?
Let's hope we don't have to.
The climate is changing with politicians, clubs and the media finally starting to speak out.
I recently wrote to all Second Division clubs asking if they wanted to retain terracing and every reply to date says yes.
Today's protest sprang from the West Ham bond scheme which aimed to make loyal fans pay skyhigh prices to guarantee longterm season tickets.
All-seaters may also mean bans on away fans as grounds are developed.
Supporters aren't happy and today fans in Darlington and Derby, Millwall and Manchester City, West Ham and Hereford, will sit down in protest.
The vast majority of fans oppose all-seaters and demand choice.
For a Government that claims to have offered choice for the last 13 years, their stance on this issue is odd.
Today's the day to show them how fans feel, so ‘when the whistle blows, change your pose.’
Fenech bids to join greats
BOXING: Australian Jeff Fenech is poised to become only the fourth boxer in history to win world championships in four different weight divisions.
He challenges Azumah Nelson for the WBC super featherweight title tomorrow in Melbourne and, if successful, would join three of modern boxing's greats Thomas Hearns, Sugar Ray Leonard and Roberto Duran.
Fenech has won 26 of his 27 fights, the single blemish being the controversial draw with Nelson in Las Vegas last June.
Gora wanted
FOOTBALL:
Polish international Janusz Gora is wanted by West Bromwich Albion but not until the end of the season.
Brett on loan
FOOTBALL:
Oxford United have signed Nottingham Forest's 23-year-old full back Brett Williams on a month's loan and he will make his debut against League leaders Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park today.
Title safe
BOXING:
World flyweight champion Muangchai Kittikasem retained his WBC crown yesterday in Bangkok when he stopped fellow-Thai Sot Chitalada in the ninth round.
A VILLAGE outside Darlington looks set to get its own portable village hall.
Robert Aaron, of Low Coniscliffe, has applied to the council for permission to set up a portable building in his garden for village events.
If approved, the building would stay there for two years and then could be moved to another site.
Jeremy Smith, senior planning officer at the council, said: ‘This is a bit of an unusual application, but there could be a lot of local support for it.
We will have to see what response we get.’
THE birthplace of the railways has been accused of failing to cash in on its heritage.
Railway enthusiasts are angry that Darlington borough council is not making any money available to help the town's historic North Road station celebrate its 150th anniversary.
Barrie Lamb, chairman of the Darlington Railway Preservation Society, claimed the council had missed out on a major tourist attraction.
Mr Lamb said: ‘The council has put nothing in the budget to celebrate the anniversary yet Bowes Museum at Barnard Castle has just got £100,000 from the county council to mark its centenary.
‘Even if we celebrated in a small way we would have attracted tourists from all over the world.
The council has really missed the boat.’
Mr Lamb, a former mayor of Darlington, hoped to re-enact the opening of the station with Victorian period costumes.
The Railway Preservation Society informed the council about the anniversary two years ago.
They now hope to combine their anniversary celebrations either with the steam weekends starting in May or the Railway Carnival.
Norman Maltby, head of leisure services at the council, said: ‘We haven't given any specific money to the anniversary but we do intend to celebrate it.’
Festival appeal:
Sword dancers, mummers and fake doctors are being sought to join York's forthcoming Easter festival.
They should contact the city's Visitor and Conference Bureau at 6 Rougier Street for more information.
Today's wills
YORK:
Peter Oswald Basil Davis, of Moorlands Nursing Home, Moor Lane, Strensall, left £282,869 net.
Thomas James Pulleyn, of St Mary's Close, Wigginton, left £142,987 net.
WHITBY:
Dorothy May White, of Westbourne Grove, left £221,499 net.
KNARESBOROUGH:
Frank Roland Baldwin, of St Margaret's Close, left £177,461 net.
HARROGATE:
Jack Hunter, of Beechwood Grove, left £122,264 net.
TADCASTER:
Sarah Elizabeth Ward, of Edgerton Garth, left £171,528 net.
SCARBOROUGH:
Edna Booth, of Prince of Wales Terrace, left £155,749 net.
She left £100 to the RNLI Scarborough branch.
Today
HARROGATE:
Tom Wanless artist and printmaker, flower and plant studies.
Mercer Art Gallery, Swan Road, 2–5pm, closed Sun.
YORK:
York Holland Association first meeting with film shows at Priory Street Centre, 2pm, 3pm, 4pm, 5pm.
TODAY is Leap Year's Day and Adam Walker got in the mood yesterday by leapfrogging over classmate Kevin Kokes.
More than 200 youngsters from North Road school in Darlington held a sponsored leapfrog to collect money for Oxfam.
Teacher Mike Kent said the children hoped to raise £200 for overseas aid.
Picture: IAN WEIR
Battle dates:
York Visitor and Conference Bureau hopes to attract extra tourists to the Royalist city this year on the 350th anniversary of the outbreak of the English Civil War.
Festival's climax:
York's annual Jorvik Viking Festival reaches its climax today with the traditional boat burning ceremony on the River Ouse and a firework display beginning at 7.15pm.
Earlier in the day, warriors will engage in mock battle.
Royal re-opening:
A member of the Royal Family is set to reopen York's National Railway Museum following £6m refurbishment work in April.
It will double the size of the attraction with the Great Railway Show remaining open.
They made off with hi-fi equipment, three cameras, two antique clocks, china and an anorak worth a total of £1,500 from a house at Easby.
Today's wills
RICHMOND:
Joyce Elizabeth Graham of Brokes Farm, Hudswell, Richmond, who died in May, left £127,917 net.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York ; Sian Roberts on Richmond  and Ian Lamming on Northallerton .
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington .
China talk:
The Friends of Darlington Memorial Hospital will present an illustrated talk Five Thousand Miles Through China on Wednesday.
Derek Reeves, a retired British Rail employee, spent 18 days travelling north to south across China by train.
The talk, about various places in China and the lifestyles of its people, begins at 7pm in the Darlington Memorial Hospital Lecture Theatre.
Tabletop sale:
Hurworth Over 60s club will hold a tabletop sale between 9.30am and 12.30pm, today at the village hall.
Stallholders may enter at 9am.
MP guest:
The Dyslexia Institute in West Auckland Road, Darlington, will hold a public meeting at Polam Hall School, Grange Road, on Friday next week.
The guest speaker will be Darlington MP and Schools Minister Michael Fallon.
Begins at 7.30pm.
Admission free.
All are welcome.
Quiz time:
A Grand Quiz Night will be held today at St Augustine's Parish Centre, Larchfield Street, Darlington.
Teams of four can enter at £1 per team.
Anyone wishing to attend alone will be found a place on a team.
Begins 8.30pm.
Appeal boost:
Parishioners at the Holy Family Church in Cockerton, Darlington, have raised £250 for the Romanian Mattress Appeal.
Jim elected:
Jim Wayman, a member of Sedgefield Town Council and Sedgefield District Council, has been elected to the National Local Government Committee of the Conservative Party.
Video stolen:
A video recorder, a kettle, an iron and ten ornamental cottages were stolen in a burglary from a house in Deepdale Way, Darlington.
Super swimathon:
A swimathon organised by Darlington Rotary Club raised £1,500 more than its £5,000 target.
Sixty teams took part in the sponsored swim last October and winners of the fancy dress and distance prizes received their trophies last week.
Neighbours' action:
An open day for the new Trimdon Neighbourhood Action scheme, to develop community groups and services, will be held in the Community Centre, Trimdon Colliery, on Monday, March 9, from 2–4pm and 6–8pm.
Bedrooms plan:
Plans have been submitted to build a ten-bedroom accommodation block at The Locomotion One pub, on Heighington Road, Newton Aycliffe.
Office revamp:
Plans have been submitted to Sedgfield District Council by Durham County Council to refurbish the offices at Aycliffe Children's Centre.
Water probe:
Northumbrian Water are investigating the possibility of extending the water supply to Clarence Chare allotments at Newton Aycliffe.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
Show winners:
Bodygruve a three-strong aerobics team from Spennymoor, were winners of Wear Valley's 1992 Valentines Health and Fitness Show.
They are all part-time instructors at the Spennymoor leisure centre.
The Funky Bunch from Ferryhill were awarded second place and the Wear Valley's Unlimited were third.
Course starts:
A flower arranging course starts at the Woodhouse Close leisure complex, Bishop Auckland, on Monday at 3pm.
More information is available on .
Tabletop sale:
Hurworth Over 60s club will hold a tabletop sale between 9.30am and 12.30pm, today at the village hall.
Stallholders may enter at 9am.
Prayer Day:
The Women's World Day of Prayer services take place in Bondgate Methodist Church, Darlington, on March 6 at 2pm and at Cockerton Methodist Church at 7pm.
Jumble sale:
A jumble sale will be held in the Holy Family Social Centre, Prior Street, Cockerton, Darlington, today.
The event starts at 1pm and all proceeds will go to Animal Welfare.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
produced some forgotten qualities but one of their old bad habits cost them a point on Saturday.
Determination, aggression and commitment have all been missing from their recent displays, but a lack of concentration denied them their first much-needed double of the season.
New manager Ray Hankin disposed of the rusty 5–3–2 formation and pushed his assistant Mick Tait into a hard working midfield which created several openings in the first half hour.
Steve Gaughan set up Kevan Smith to head straight at Billy Stewart, and Nick Pickering, having his best game so far burst through to force the keeper to dive to his left to clutch his shot.
Gaughan again popped up on the right wing to centre for Nick Cusack to force Stewart into another diving save, then the impressive Andy Toman charged on to a Steve Mardenborough flick, and fired just wide with the keeper beaten.
In the next attack Toman again ran at the defence and laid the ball off for the supporting Les McJannet ten yards out, but the full back was denied by a last ditch tackle.
But Chester, who had their manager Harry McNally sent from the dugout in the first half for protesting about a high tackle by Smith on midfielder Gary Bennett ‘I was having a private conversation in the dugout with one of my staff when the linesman interrupted’ he said later started creating chances.
Smith somehow got back to clear Stuart Rimmer's shot off the line after the Quakers' new style offside trap was sprung by Paul Comstive, and Mark Prudhoe could only head the ball to the forward's feet.
Then Mitch Cook flung himself in the way of a goalbound Gary Bennett drive after Rimmer had squirmed free down the left.
Then after 57 minutes referee Terry West lost control.
Tait fouled Chester midfielder Graham Barrow twice in the space of seconds and was booked; when play restarted Tait was red-carded for a pretty innocuous challenge on Chris Lightfoot.
His dismissal was his second of the season, and the side's sixth.
Emotions then ran high, and by the 62nd minute Chester were also down to ten men when Barrow lashed out at Toman in a tussle for the ball and was booked.
He then ran back to his position, foolishly had another go at the midfielder with his elbow and was given the first dip in the Chester bath.
Barrow's indiscretion brought about Quakers' goal, although there wasn't much quality about it not that Quakers were bothered.
Steve O'Shaughnessy's hoisted kick landed on the edge of the area and, after Cusack's shot was blocked, the ball ran to Nick Pickering who fired left footed into the bottom corner.
But with five minutes left, Chester were gifted the equaliser.
Gaughan lost the ball to Lightfoot midway inside the Chester half, the defender put a delightful ball forward which cut out Smith and O'Shaughnessy, allowing Rimmer to race through and lash the ball past the helpless Prudhoe.
There was time for Mitch Cook to fire over the bar in the last minute, but by then Ray Hankin's first game as a Football League manager was spoilt.
Three points became one, but at least the faithful have something to cheer about and the revival might just be under way.
Hankin wouldn't reveal his views in public anyway about his assistant's sending off.
‘I thought it was very harsh.
The referee's got a job to do, and he got on with it.’
The Quakers' boss had praise for his midfield.
‘I couldn't fault the midfield today.
‘Andy Toman was terrific and was the best player on the park, while the fans saw the best of Nick Pickering.
Steve Gaughan and Mick Tait, before he was sent off, also worked hard.
‘I think the crowd appreciated the improvement in our performance, and they must rally round on Tuesday night again.’
TAKING his coach's advice earned Alan Exley a dramatic win at the North-Eastern Counties ABA championship finals at Thornaby Pavilion.
The Grainger Park middleweight, normally a fine jabber, was under severe pressure throughout the first round from hard-hitting Jason Sharp of Sharlston Colliery, who continually out-jabbed Exley and took every opportunity to harry him.
But things changed in the second round after coach Billy Armstrong told Exley to use his hook.
They took the crispness out of Sharp and put the Tynesider on top.
In the third it was over suddenly.
Sharp took an eight count after taking a hard left hook.
Another excellent Exley attack had Sharp helpless and the referee stepped in.
‘I showed him too much respect,’ said Exley.
‘Billy told me to use my hook I can hook well as well as jab and found Jason couldn't take them.’
Results (winners meet North West Counties champions at Gateshead Leisure Centre on March 13): Flyweight: Steve Parry (Lambton Street) bt Kevin Sheridan (Plant Works), referee stopped contest first round.
Bantamweight: Lance Crosby (St Paul's Hull) bt Tony Martin (Hartlepool Catholic Club) RSC third round.
Featherweight: Alan Temple (Hartlepool Boys Welfare) bt Adrian Benton (Batley and Dewsbury) pts.
Lightweight: Andy Green (Phil Thomas School of Boxing) bt Jim Phelan (St Paul's Hull), RSC third round.
Light welterweight: Sean Armstrong (Hartlepool Boys Welfare) bt Mike Barker (St Paul's Hull), pts.
Welterweight: Peter Waudby (St Paul's Hull) bt John Green (Phil Thomas SoB), pts.
Light middleweight: Shaun Hendry (Burmantofts) bt John Pearce (Wellington), pts.
Middleweight: Alan Exley (Grainger Park) bt Jason Sharp (Sharlston Colliery), referee stopped contest third round.
Light heavy: Craig Joseph (Sedbergh) bt Karl Dukes (Sunderland) pts.
Heavyweight: Neil Kirkwood (Grimethorpe) bt Danny McFarlane (Birtley) pts.
Super heavy: Michael Hopper (Spennymoor) walkover.
Light middle (non-championship): John Mett (PTSoB) bt Geoff McCreesh (London)— DARLINGTON had four winners out of four in the national schools championships quarter finals at Knottingley on Saturday.
John Lee and Aaron Kelly had very impressive wins against ex-champions, and Roger Bowers and Jim Smith hade walkovers.
For Shildon it was two out of four.
Steven Hodgson, in his first year in the championships, stopped his opponent in the third round, and Craig Wake had a walkover.
Hartlepool 0 Swansea 1
BRIAN Honour, Hartlepool's most consistent player over the last year, has admitted he and his team-mates aren't playing well.
After Pool slumped to their sixth defeat in seven games at home to Swansea Honour said: ‘We have to do better.’
He is as baffled as anybody over why Pool have suddenly slumped in the last month.
But he said: ‘Football is as much to do with your mental attitude as it is to anything else ours just isn't right at the moment.
‘Apart from one or two changes, this is the team that has paralysed teams like Birmingham, Ipswich and Brentford.
Yet now we just can't win.
‘If I knew the answer to that, I'd be a manager in the First Division instead of a player in the Third.’
Pool are in the sort of run most teams find difficult to stop.
No matter how hard they try, things aren't going their way and on Saturday it was Swansea's turn to take advantage.
It wasn't that they were particularly good or, come to that, that Hartlepool were too bad.
The conditions didn't help either team, the strong wind and the bumpy pitch ruling out a lot of good football.
But Swansea defended well when they had to and got the game's one and only break.
That came nine minutes from time when Steve Thornber scored with his shin after sub John Williams set him up as Swansea caught Pool on the counter-attack.
Earlier Paul Olsson had hit the top of the bar with a great lob early in the second half.
Before the break, record signing Lenny Johnrose got his one and only chance but Roger Freestone pulled off a good save.
Honour admitted he felt sorry for the £50,000 striker.
‘He's probably come at a bad time,’ said Pool's longest serving player.
‘I thought he played well in the circumstances and he was unlucky not to score.
‘But when a team is doing badly like we are, it's not easy for a new player to settle in.
‘A lot of the lads are lacking confidence and that means we just aren't trying things which a few weeks ago we were doing.
‘We need a win or a good performance at least to get the spark back.
‘Some people might say we were unlucky to lose against Swansea, but let's face it we didn't play well.
We had a lot of the game, but we all know we can play a lot better than that.
‘But nobody plays badly on purpose and with a very hard spell coming up, we just have to dig in and hope we can turn things round.’
Pool are at home to Bolton tomorrow and desperately need a win before travelling to Stockport and West Brom, followed by the home derby with Darlington in a fortnight.
THE Northern region finished fifth out of ten behind winners Scotland in the BSAD national junior swimming championships at Darlington's Dolphin Centre over the weekend.
But each of their small squad of 12 won at least one medal in their final count of 16 golds, 13 silvers and nine bronzes the first time this has happened.
And blind Christopher Ross of Ormesby Comprehensive set a national record of 24.31 seconds in the 25 metres freestyle on his way to a haul of four golds.
Other leading medal winners were David Tupman of Ormesby (three golds, one silver), Andrew McCreath of Hummersknott School, Darlington (one gold, two silver, two bronze) and John Purvis (Hartlepool), who won three silvers and three bronze.
There were medals too for two debutantes, Stuart Linden (Cedars Special School, Gateshead) who won a silver, and Darren Taylor (Cedars) who won a gold and a bronze.
THE North-East Hockey League Championship is still a long way from being decided.
Last week's leaders Tynemouth were knocked off their pedestal losing their first game of the season.
Sunderland refound the winning habit to beat them 2–0 with goals from Steve Maxwell and Eric Mathers.
Stockton, a game in hand, emerged as Wearside's main rivals.
They beat 2–1 in a tight encounter.
Mark Gill missed an early flick for Stockton who immediately went a goal down as Billingham counter attacked and took the lead through Tim Johnson.
Mark Gill was given the chance to make amends before the interval as he converted an equalising penalty awarded after Mike Smith had smothered the ball in the Billingham goal.
After the break Smith proved the menacing player for Stockton but he was well dealt with by a hard working Stockton defence.
Stockton grabbed the winner when Peter Morton found Mark Gill who made no mistake with his shot.
Two Graham Bowen goals damaged Carlisle's championship hopes as Redcar held them to a 2–2 draw.
A 0–0 draw did little for Darlington's hopes of escaping the drop.
They now go into second bottom spot on eight points.
They will play bottom place South Shields next week.
Shields lost 40 to a strong Norton second team who are probably safe on 10 points although they play Sunderland next week.
Tynedale rise above Darlington as they beat Morpeth 3–1 in a scrappy affair.
Tynedale now have nine points and entertain Tynemouth next week.
South Shields are doomed to relegation with only three points.
Darlington Ladies thrashed Stockton 6–0 playing magnificent triangular hockey.
Biff Beveridge opened the Quakers account with a well rehearsed short corner goal.
The second came after a similar incident but this time the ball was cleverly switched to Meg Thompson who fired home.
Darlington were five up at halftime after Jane Littlewood hit a fine hat-trick.
The sixth came after young Sarah Wade sneaked in to take on the Stockton defence in style.
DARLINGTON boss Ray Hankin has denied that his former Leeds teammate Tony Currie is on the way to Feethams.
Currie, who is Football in the Community Officer at Sheffield United a similar position to which Hankin filled at Feethams before becoming youth team coach was reported to be on the brink of joining Hankin's management team.
But Hankin denied all knowledge of any link-up.
‘As far as I'm concerned, Mick Tait is my number two no matter what happens.
‘A few people's names have been mentioned, but at the moment Ian Leckie is going to look after the youth team, with John Hope helping me out on a Saturday.
‘I'm happy with the backroom team I've got.
But if I am going to bring anybody in, then they will have to be somebody I can trust and live in this area.’
Hankin, meanwhile, is planning talks with an unnamed midfielder at Feethams today, with a view to signing him on loan in time for Saturday's game at Bradford City.
He said: ‘I need him to play in the same role as Mick Tait, who starts a suspension after Tuesday's game against Stockport.
He is playing in the Second Division at the moment, but my priority is to get him to come to the club.’
Tait is facing a double suspension after Saturday's sending-off.
Last season's player of the year is due to miss the Bradford game and the following midweek home clash with Reading because of an accumulation of penalty points, but there is now a question mark over whether he will have to serve a three match or one match ban.
NEWCASTLE United will have to clear their debts before contemplating any ambitious moves in the transfer market for the numerous superstars with whom they have been linked.
Former Newcastle players Paul Gascoigne, Chris Waddle and Peter Beardsley have all been mentioned as Newcastle targets, along with Liverpool striker Ian Rush.
Chairman Sir John Hall, however, has stressed that the struggling Second Division club still have to put into operation the so-called rescue package designed to soak up debts of around £5m.
‘We still have to deal with the bank,’ he said.
‘I think they'd be very unhappy if we splashed out excessive money before settling our debts.’
NEWCASTLE United will have to clear their debts before they have a chance to sign any of the big name stars linked to the club.
Former Newcastle players Paul Gascoigne, Chris Waddle and Peter Beardsley have all been named as Newcastle targets and even Liverpool's injured striker Ian Rush.
Chairman Sir John Hall, however, has stressed that the struggling Second Division club still have to put into operation the so-called rescue package designed to soak up debts of around £5m.
‘We still have to deal with the bank,’ he said.
‘I think they'd be very unhappy if we splashed out excessive money before settling our debts.
‘The club is still in a perilous position while the rescue package is being put through our legal advisers.
‘My success as a businessman has been based on keeping tight control of financial matters and that is what Newcastle United need more than anything else at the moment.
‘It's true that I've given my personal backing to Kevin Keegan in our search for players, but we have to be realistic.
‘Gazza is not a player who has crossed my mind.
He's valued at £4.5m and you can buy a team for that.’
Waddle, Beardsley and Rush, however, could be long-term targets for manager Kevin Keegan providing Newcastle avoid relegation.
—DARLINGTON boss Ray Hankin has denied that his former Leeds teammate Tony Currie is on the way to Feethams.
Currie, who is Football in the Community Officer at Sheffield United a similar position to that which Hankin filled at Feethams before becoming youth team coach was reported to be on the brink of joining Hankin's management team.
But Hankin denied all knowledge of any link-up.
‘As far as I'm concerned, Mick Tait is my number two no matter what happens.
‘A few people's names have been mentioned, but at the moment Ian Leckie is going to look after the youth team, with John Hope helping me out on a Saturday.
‘I'm happy with the backroom team I've got.’
Hankin, meanwhile, is planning talks with a midfielder at Feethams today, with a view to signing him on loan in time for Saturday's game at Bradford City.
MAUREEN Baines gave a flipping good performance when she took part in a contest to find the best pancake tosser in the North-East.
Mrs Baines, 54, who represented the Darlington Gala Club, won the cup and £100 after she tossed her pancake 62 times in the competition in which she had dressed up as Minnie Mouse.
The Scrogg Road Club from Newcastle came second after tossing a pancake 52 times.
About 400 from all over the NorthEast took part in the Great Northern Pancake Jamboree held at the Gala Club, Skinnergate, Darlington, yesterday.
Darlington Mayor Coun Rita Fishwick picked out the Flintstones from one of the Newcastle clubs in the fancy dress contest.
American footballers from Ashington came second.
The day ended with a performance by comedy duo The Chippendales and a bingo session.
Organiser Barry Clemo said after the event: ‘Everyone really enjoyed themselves, but the pancakes weren't in an edible state afterwards.
Most of them were being scraped from the ceiling.’
Thanks for support
MAY I express my thanks and those of the Willington Labour Party to the voters of Willington, Oakenshaw and Page Bank for their support on Thursday, February 20 in the Willington East by-election.
It is a very great privilege to be chosen to represent this ward for the next three years.
I intend to repay that trust by working tirelessly for all Willington East residents.
David Kingston,.
Where to start?
WITH reference to R.D. Long's letter (HAS February 17)‘The Cost of Labour’.
What has Labour done for Spennymoor?
Where to start is the problem.
The town council under Labour have provided: Community facilities at Byers Green, Middlestone Moor, Kirk Merrington and Tudhoe.
Football fields at Byers Green, Middlestone Moor, Kirk Merrington, Tudhoe, Jubilee Park, and this year High Whitworth will add three more pitches to the total.
We helped to ensure that cricket will continue by assisting both Tudhoe and Spennymoor clubs and also that league football survives by helping to bring the Brewery Field up to standard.
We have also, along with the Groundwork Trust, created a nature and woodland area at Cow Plantation.
Jubilee Park is in the ownership of the town council and the improvements carried out include new pavilions and changing facilities, new and refurbished tennis courts, two bowling greens, footpaths and seats.
We also, along with the Spennymoor Round Table, ensure that an impressive bonfire and fireworks display is held.
I could go on forever, but I will finish with this.
We still meet on evenings and we still don't get paid for our services and we still call for a pint on the way home.
J. Burns, Labour town councillor,.
Dance delight
WE are writing regarding your report (Echo February 21) which featured our school.
The report gave a brief summary of the afternoon when the Phoenix Dance Company visited our school.
The report was a delight to us, but one thing came as a disappointment.
We are the two boys shown in the photograph and because of us being the only boys who took part we were saddened to see the caption at the side of the picture.
‘The boys do their best, but the girls seem to be making a better job of it’ gave the impression that boys can't dance as well as girls.
We are the only male dancers in the whole of the school and we feel that your statement does not give boys the encouragement they need to participate.
We feel that boys, including ourselves, are able to dance as well as anyone, may that be male or female.
The Phoenix Dance Company instructors told us several times that our movements were very good and at one time described them as ‘nice.’
J.
Audy and B. Watson,.
A DARLINGTON couple wanted to buy a new door.
Coincidentally they received a phone call from a double glazing company to see if a rep could call round.
The husband Malcolm Humble fixed the appointment for his day off, imagining it would last half an hour.
All he wanted was a door.
Five hours later Mr Humble was at the end of his tether.
In his innocence he had allowed the salesman in to discuss doors.
Unfortunately he was too polite to show him his own front door after half an hour.
Politely he asked him to leave a quote so he could discuss it with his wife.
But that didn't work either.
Instead the rep went off to arrange for his boss to telephone Mr Humble later with a special offer, which turned out to be a costly special offer.
In the end the company Sure Style Windows, of Bury got nothing, but bad publicity.
A couple who once toyed with the idea of buying a door would rather do without than open up that time-consuming subject again.
They were left feeling drained, insulted and angry at a man who suggested he should bill them for the five hours he spent at their home.
But what could they have done?
Almost apologetically Mr Humble explained he wasn't the type of man to kick someone out of his home.
He dropped hints.
There was nothing short of taking the chap by the scruff of his neck and showing him the street that would have done the trick.
Salesmen have a job to do but many have a far better chance of selling their wares if they demonstrate a degree of understanding and sensitivity.
Half an hour's visit, a reasonable quote and the chance to talk it over with his wife were the only things between Mr Humble and his new door.
No one should be subjected to this sort of ordeal, especially in their own home.
Life is hectic, time is precious enough, without having to cope with unwanted visitors staying four and a half hours beyond their welcome.
This type of badgering has got to stop for everyone's good.
Rural route or racetrack
I HAD time to spare one morning and decided to avoid my usual traffic fumes and noise-polluted route into town.
I walked the long way with the early sun bright in my eyes and frosted gravel crisp beneath my feet.
Blackbirds fluffed and posed in the hedge bottoms by my path.
There seemed to be a robin singing in every tight bushy tangle and sly magpies slouched about like under-employed waiters seeking tips.
In a field where an old horse nibbled the cold grass delicately, a covey of partridges, three strutting chasing moles and an indifferent female, caught my eye.
They ignored me safe in the open field where the old ridge and furrow strips and the flatter headlands where the plough was turned were clearly silhouetted by the sun.
The noise of mallards squabbling minded me of work and on my way I went.
Ah, I hear you say, that lucky chap lives in the countryside.
Would that we could too.
You are wrong.
My route was from Red Hall to the Havelock pub using the old railway track, soon to be another noise and fume-filled racetrack, courtesy of Durham brains and Darlington apathy.
And what price partridges then?
R.N. Leonard,.
They can't be serious
I REFER to the controversy over the Prebend Row bus stop area.
Surely those concerned cannot be serious about using Crown Street as an alternative.
They must (or should) be aware of: 1 There is a very busy pedestrian cross-over on Northgate junction within Crown Street and this end of Crown Street has many shops.
2 We have Presto's corner, very busy with shoppers and taxis and of course, the main Post Office opposite.
3 Just a little further on, a Cornmill entrance (service bay), potentially a very dangerous spot.
4 The library, The Northern Echo, the carpet shop.
5 Priestgate junction a one-way entry.
6 Finally a busy car park entrance/exit.
Combine many buses (moving and parked) with all the above and we have a chaotic, dangerous route for vehicles, not to mention vulnerable pedestrians, and bottlenecks and blockages galore.
Frank Snowdon,.
Problem is where to start?
WITH reference to R.D. Long's letter (HAS February 17)‘The Cost of Labour’.
What has Labour done for Spennymoor?
Where to start is the problem.
The town council under Labour have provided: Community facilities at Byers Green, Middlestone Moor, Kirk Merrington and Tudhoe.
Football fields at Byers Green, Middlestone Moor, Kirk Merrington, Tudhoe, Jubilee Park, and this year High Whitworth will add three more pitches to the total.
We helped to ensure that cricket will continue by assisting both Tudhoe and Spennymoor clubs and also that league football survives by helping to bring the Brewery Field up to standard.
We have also, along with the Groundwork Trust, created a nature and woodland area at Cow Plantation.
Jubilee Park is in the ownership of the town council and the improvements carried out include new pavilions and changing facilities, new and refurbished tennis courts, two bowling greens, footpaths and seats.
We also, along with the Spennymoor Round Table, ensure that an impressive bonfire and fireworks display is held.
I could go on forever, but I will finish with this.
We still meet on evenings and we still don't get paid for our services and we still call for a pint on the way home.
J. Burns, Labour town councillor,.
Boys' view
WE are writing regarding your report (Echo February 21) which featured our school.
The report gave a brief summary of the afternoon when the Phoenix Dance Company visited our school.
The report was a delight to us, but one thing came as a disappointment.
We are the two boys shown in the photograph and because of us being the only boys who took part we were saddened to see the caption at the side of the picture.
‘The boys do their best, but the girls seem to be making a better job of it’ gave the impression that boys can't dance as well as girls.
We are the only male dancers in the whole of the school and we feel that your statement does not give boys the encouragement they need to participate.
We feel that boys, including ourselves, are able to dance as well as anyone, may that be male or female.
The Phoenix Dance Company instructors told us several times that our movements were very good and at one time described them as ‘nice.’
J.
Audy and B. Watson,.
Court out
I VISITED the new magistrates court at Newton Aycliffe with a friend.
It was a sorry sight.
The police and the majority of defendants put on an arrogant front.
You could feel the hate for the system, the tension from every person be it authority or the accused.
Sentences seemed to be one-sided.
For a burglary, community service, for speeding, bald tyres or a motor vehicle defect, a heavy fine or short ban.
No wonder the taxpayer asks what is wrong with the system.
A little bit of friendliness, a more caring attitude from the magistrates would help.
As to the defendants, those on criminal charges should be treated as criminals.
More magistrates who know what being unemployed is about, who are in touch with everyday life, would also help.
Mr J. Anderson, Main Street, Shildon.
Waste of time
AS AN addendum to Mr Robson's letter (HAS February 24), last year I did what we are always urged to do I wrote to my MP with the self same complaint.
But what a waste of time it is.
All I got was sympathy and a piece of House of Commons headed notepaper.
The sad thing is that if all the OAPs and others who genuinely can't afford the extra withheld that portion of their poll tax, my God, wouldn't we have been pounced on as lawbreakers and worse and dealt with ten times faster than the poll tax rebels who withhold purely for so-called political reasons.
I reckon we should join up with Scotland and have the border moved to Croft Bridge.
M. Pattison, 26 Pease Street, Darlington.
DARLINGTON is fast becoming one of the country's favourite venues for disabled sportsmen.
Simon O'Connor, spokesman for the British Sports Association for the Disabled, said the town's Dolphin Centre had gained a reputation as one of the best leisure complexes in the country.
Speaking after BSAD's national junior swimming championships, Mr O'Connor said: ‘The Dolphin Centre is perfect for us because it has a top class pool and excellent facilities for disabled swimmers.’
Over 100 junior competitors took part in BSAD's national finals at the weekend.
Fierce competition meant officials had to re-write the record books after the final event yesterday afternoon.
Mr O'Connor added: ‘All our competitors may have suffered some sort of disability but the standard of competition was phenomenal.’
BSAD plans to hold another gala at the Dolphin Centre later this year.
He said the town's reputation for hosting top sporting events had spread.
BSAD hopes national governing bodies will organise their own championships for disabled people and Darlington could be on the list of venues.
The championships were organised with the Variety Club of Great Britain which gave competitors a chance to meet kids from the BBC's Byker Grove.
Actors from the popular children's series — shot in and around Newcastle — presented trophies to class winners and signed autographs.
The Variety Club's Chief Barker, Marsha Ratcliff, said: ‘You only had to see the expressions on the competitors’ faces to see how much they were enjoying themselves.’
Marsha presented BSAD with a cheque for £14,000 which will help towards the cost of organising the championships.
When Nye Bevan was a young man, many of his pals, frustrated by unemployment and deprivation, decided to emigrate.
Nye wouldn't go.
He stayed to fight on.
There is always the temptation to crawl into a hole and let the devil take the lot.
‘Why should I worry?
Let them get on with it,’ comes easily.
But there sometimes comes a spark of enthusiasm, a dislike of stupidity, even a love of the subject, which combine to say no to apathetic inaction.
My subject is the dear old Quaker town of my birth, Darlington, and I cannot accept its continued defilement.
I am old enough to remember the clean streets, the neat parks, the dignity of Carmel Road, the sedate trolley buses, the low rates, the LNER trains which ran to time, the prosperous water, gas and electricity works and the big crowds at Third Division north games at Feethams.
But then the traffic menace grew and the town, being on the A1 and without a bypass, began to suffer.
I continuously pick up litter thrown down by others.
I can't do much about graffiti but I would like to see the perpetrators clobbered.
The decline of British Rail and Darlington FC, I can only observe with sadness, but the rape of Skinnergate and Northgate by traffic angers me.
The town has no real hills and has many pleasant tree-lined streets.
It is easy to walk from the perimeter to the town centre and easier still to cycle.
I deplore the laziness of people who feel the need to travel by car for any distance more than 100 yards.
But the real horror is the pollution of the small, compact town centre by buses.
It is so obvious that they should all stay outside the ring road except for the bus station where they would all terminate.
Yet there are people who see the stones throw distance from there to the covered market as an intolerable distance.
As a retired person myself, I occasionally took my 90-year-old disabled mother in her wheelchair from Cockerton to the town centre.
She would joke about the young ‘uns with fat bums, riding around in cars and we would marvel at the so-called disabled people dismounting briskly from buses or climbing energetically from orange-badged cars.
The crocuses will soon be out in full bloom along Grange Road and they will look towards the sky in fresh beauty.
The Cornmill will soon be finished but no crocuses will be there.
Instead there will be lines of stationary buses with engines running, pumping their muck into the entrances.
Unless of course, the majority of the council…— Darlington.name 
Thank you for using one of my snapshots of myself and office friends from Stooperdale in The Way We Were (Echoes, February 25).
It was unfortunate that you printed my married name incorrectly — who I wonder is Vivienne Bell?
It has certainly caused some confusion amongst my friends — I have been Mrs  for 44 years!—
It was a recent television series called Heroes II — The Return, which brought the memories flooding back for Bernard Seyburn.
The series recalled a daring war-time raid by the Allies on Singapore harbour, where Bernard was stationed in 1946 following the Japanese surrender.
And although the fighting was over by then it's an experience he will never forget.
Singapore had been under Japanese occupation from 1942 but by the time Bernard reached there it was under the control of the British Military Administration.
As a sergeant with A company, the 2nd Battalion, The Durham Light Infantry, his task was to help guard Japanese prisoners, some of whom had been accused of war crimes.
If I remember correctly,’ he says, ‘for the trials they brought out some legal people, people who were given a military rank and sat as judges at the war crime tribunals.
They weren't real officers, they had just been given a military rank to sit on the tribunal.’
He was there for most of 1946 and 1947, having served previously in India.
‘We came down just after the surrender and landed in Singapore and marched 20 miles because there was no transport.’
Bernard had joined up in November 1944 and after training he remembers being sent on a train to Liverpool.
‘Everybody was full of conjecture about where we were going.
There were rumours but we didn't get our tropical kit until we got on the boat.
‘We'd got on the train at Morpeth and threw letters out at Darlington, saying we were going abroad and hoping somebody would pass the letters on.
My mother never got hers, though.’
Once they reached Singapore the company's duties were varied.
‘We guarded nurses in the grounds of the hospital and also looked after civilians because that was the early part of the Communist uprising,’ he says.
But it was guarding the Japanese prisoners in Changi Jail that made the deepest impression on the 20-year-old sergeant from Billingham.
Bernard was present at their interrogation by Australian and British officers and helped escort them to Singapore Supreme Court, where some were found guilty of war crimes.
‘We were required to sit in court as a guard duty,’ he says, ‘and therefore listened to many of the charges brought against the accused, who were mostly senior Japanese officers, although some of the lesser ranks were involved.
‘Most of the atrocities had been committed against the civilian population of Singapore and neighbouring areas like Sumatra, Java, Malaya and the Nicobar Islands.
‘Those found guilty were returned to Changi Jail where they were put into condemned cells to await their fate of execution, mainly by hanging.
‘Some of these prisoners were arrogant and felt proud to die for their cause; others were less so and resigned to their fate.
‘I remember vividly being on night guard prior to the morning executions when some prisoners sang and rattled their tin mugs against the bars in some form of defiance.
Some had cut their hair and nails as mementos to return to their families.
‘In the morning the Australian staff took over so I never actually witnessed the executions.
I think the executioner was a Sikh.
All we saw were the bodies in the morgue and I remember parties carrying them away.
I can remember at least five executions.
‘I must admit at that time I had little sympathy for the victims, having heard gruesome evidence at court, but my feelings have now changed.
I've mellowed a little.
‘I'm not as bitter as I was, but I heard a lot of evidence about these war crimes and it really shook me as a young lad.
‘They ran people into the sea and shot them.
Life was very cheap at that time and the full impact probably hit me a little later.’
Bernard remembers Changi Jail as being a very austere place where a 24-hour guard duty would involve four hours on and four hours off at a time.
‘We were incarcerated with them,’ he says, ‘and it was very claustrophobic.
It had a double wall and was almost impossible to escape from.’
He also recalls how the monsoon ditches — built to carry away water — had filled up with debris and rubbish and were beginning to smell.
‘It was a real stench,’ he says, ‘the stench of death, if you like.
‘I know the Japanese are a very clean race, very keen on hygiene, but they had let things go towards the finish and we had to get their working parties to clean the ditches out.’
Bernard, who is now 65, returned to Singapore in 1986 for a holiday with his wife, Betty, and found that much had changed — with skyscrapers now dominating the landscape.
Changi Jail was still there, though, together with the old sergeants' mess he'd known 40 years earlier.
And so was the famous old Raffles Hotel (although it's been rebuilt since his visit) just as he remembered it — from the outside, that is.
For when he had been there at the end of the war it was very much the preserve of the officer class.
‘I don't know if we weren't actually allowed to go in there,’ says Bernard, ‘but it was an officers’domain and I don't think we'd have been very welcome going in there as lower ranks.
‘We had a YMCA over the road — but I thought if I ever came back I'd go into the Raffles Hotel.’
So it was that he escorted Betty there in 1986, taking tea in the Tiffin Room and enjoying a plate of fish and chips.
Bernard Seyburn would be pleased to hear from anyone who may have served with him in Singapore.
He can be contacted at 15, Conifer Grove, Billingham, Cleveland TS23 1PG or by telephone:.
NEARLY 100 people attended the Sitar restaurant in Darlington last night for a charity dinner.
Friends and members of St Augustine's church gathered to raise money for Sister Paula of the Sisters of Mercy, who is working in Sierra Leone.
Father Bob Spence, from St Augustine's, said: ‘Sister Paula was very well known in Darlington.
She has been working out in Sierra Leone for some years and has been taking children off the streets and teaching them the basics of domestic skills and education.’
The meal, for the House of Light Appeal, was attended by the Mayor of Darlington Rita Fishwick, and raised £2,170.
JINXED Ian Loughran was given permission to change the number of his house yesterday in the hope of changing his luck.
Mr Loughran has had nothing but bad luck since he moved into 13 Harding Terrace, Darlington.
Shortly after setting up home he ran into a series of mishaps.
His house was broken into, his fiancee was attacked while walking home and had her handbag snatched, and then his car window was smashed.
Fed up with nothing going right, he finally decided to change the house number to 11A in the belief that the bad luck was due to the ill-fated number 13.
Mr Loughran said last night: ‘My girlfriend put the application in a few months ago.
She was superstitious and so am I.’
Members of Darlington Borough Council's works and health committee yesterday agreed to the number change and chairman Coun Eleanor Young said: ‘I wish him more luck from now on.’
But Mr Loughran's misfortunes have not finished there his fiancee has since left him.
Spirited stuff
IT seemed a mite strange, though not downright spectral, when a book of ghost tales by radio presenter Alan Robson dropped on the desk.
Why should a bloke on the wireless write about ghosts?
Not much defeats this space for long.
After five days it came with the speed of a poltergeist hurling a vase: Robson is the long time presenter of the Metro Radio programme Night Owls, ghosts strut their stuff at night, the two make a neat marketing ploy.
Probably.
There are loads of familiar ghost stories.
If the one about the little drummer boy under Richmond Castle has appeared once it has appeared 1000 times, which is 1000 times more than anybody has heard the strains of the drum from under the place.
But Robson tells the stories sparingly and in many cases adds modern twists as a sort of verification that age old phantoms might still exist.
Nor are all his yarns about stately homes and ladies in grey.
There is one from Stockton about a woman whose husband died in 1987.
He returned eight months later to sleep with her.
In a letter to Robson she described their rekindled passion, feeling only slightly aggrieved that she could not put her arms around him (presumably they go straight through).
There is probably no finer praise than to say that those who listen to Robson's programme and then read his book should be guaranteed a sleepless night.
Undercover work
AFTER perusing the ghosts in bed the other night (see above) it seemed equally appropriate to mull over the National Bed Federation findings about what people do in bed.
Reading was voted as the most popular way of relaxing and getting to sleep.
A hot bath, sex, a warm drink and alcohol also figured prominently as aids to somnolence.
The greater proportion (33 per cent) of people said they could function on a minimum of six hours' sleep, though many claimed they could get by on five hours (23 per cent ) and four hours (20 per cent ).
This seems fairly remarkable and it can only be assumed they are being kept awake by ghost stories and surveys about what people do in bed.
This is apparently National Bed Month.
In the heat of the night
DIPLOMACY prevents our revealing which member of the happily returned Durham cricket touring party was accosted near the team hotel in Harare by a lady of the Zimbabwean night.
Unaccustomed to such approaches in the decorous County Palatine, he consulted his watch, mumbled ‘twenty past six’ and took to his heels.
And speaking of runs, the whole party was afflicted by a distressing ailment known in some quarters as Montezuma's revenge.
The Durham lads renamed it after a Zimbabwean mountain range ‘the curse of the Bvumbras.’
(Or Bvumbras rush, as it were.)
Up front OUR friends at Mission Impossible, Darlington FC's un surpassed fanzine, carried an enthusiastic review a few editions back of a book on the fall and fall of Workington Town.
Entitled ‘Sad, So Very Sad’ it was written by a chap called Martin Wingfield.
MI's current issue, however, includes a letter pointing out that Wingfield is a vice-chairman of the National Front and a former Parliamentary candidate.
There is a footnote from the editors: ‘We now unreservedly withdraw any recommendation we made about this book.’
What a shower
TALK of the Toon, the Magpies' newest fanzine, is going well too.
(Two mentions for the column in the third issue.)
After the Bournemouth Cup replay was abandoned, TOTT has also disinterred Dumbarton v Vale of Leven, 1891, when torrential rain caused the game to be halted.
It wasn't the ref's decision, though.
Half the Vale of Leven team didn't fancy getting wet and walked off.
Mind, they were getting beat 8–0 at the time.
Cap it all
LAST Tuesday's column asked which two footballers went from the Mill Field to Field Mill Crook Town to Mansfield, in other words.
The answer (of course) was Billy Ayre, now Blackpool's manager, and Jimmy Goodfellow last seen carrying a magic sponge at Cardiff City.
Meanwhile, a quiz buff at Shildon's fair to maudlin match on Saturday asked which British club can claim most international caps won by players while still at the club?
And which is second?
Answer, if we remember, on Friday.
Table talk
THE sportsmen's dinner wagon rolled on to Darlington and Simpson Rolling Mills, where the football club tops the league and the social club is even more impressive.
They'd hired a crisp toastmaster, the immaculate Charles Hadfield borrowed with his red coat and war medals from the King's Head and persuaded Bass to sponsor the soiree.
Beer was a mere 75p a pint; top table wallahs paid 75p less than that.
DSRM are in the Auckland District League, 100 years old this year and planning a bunfight of its own before the summer's out.
Rugby League ref turned raconteur Billy Thompson was again the speaker, booked after making a big hit at Darlington Cricket Club's do.
Doncaster's RL team, he observed for some reason, was even worse than its footballers.
‘The bookies are offering longer odds on Doncaster winning anything than they are on the first Martian landing in Newton Aycliffe.’
Service line
WHO has the longest continuous connection with a North-East football club, asks one of our regularly anonymous correspondents?
Nationally Sir Matt Busby would probably qualify especially since Bob Paisley's retirement from the Liverpool board and our learned friend knows of two 44-year men at Ross County, a team he seems to know well.
Nearer home he recalls the late Gordon Coe's 50 years at Evenwood, Harry Brown's near lifetime service to Shildon and generations of the Fairbairn family then as now helping football survive at Tow Law.
And now?
We'll start at three decades; any advance?
Hall chosen
BOXING: Darlington ABC lightweight Michael Hall is in the England team for the European junior championships in Edinburgh next month.
A REMARKABLE quadruple bill brings four of the North-East's top home-grown bands to Perrys in Darlington tomorrow night.
By an extraordinary coincidence all four have been in the recording studio recently, and have sent in their labours for critical appreciation.
Autumn Divers
THE Darlington Divers create a rock solid wall of immoveable and unmitigating guitar noise, driven by thumping drums and cymbals and occasionally punctuated by running bass.
Meanwhile over the top sings Mel, clearer and truer than before, apparently blissfully unaware of the unholy mayhem beneath her.
Surprisingly the outcome is coherent and tuneful, with the strangle of guitars contrasting quite beautifully with the relaxed voice.
This three-track tape was recorded under the auspices of the GDR Studios in Darlington who seem to have rounded up the Divers and pointed them in the right direction.
The tape, comprising Swinging Moods, Seasons and Feelings, in a garish/colourful sleeve, will soon be available for a couple of pounds.
Doors open tomorrow night at 7.30pm.
Admission is £1.50.
Darlington 1 Stockport County 3
THE relegation clouds descended on Darlington last night as Ray Hankin was obliged to swallow his first bitter taste of managerial defeat.
His side produced another spirited performance but slipped away in the final 15 minutes as Stockport striker Andy Preece fired in two goals to complete his hat-trick and take Darlington's promotions companions of last season a step closer to Second Division football.
Darlington could hardly have made a worse start, goalkeeper Mark Prudhoe and his fellow defenders standing frozen to the spot as Preece smartly turned and shot into the top left corner in the ninth minute.
The equaliser Darlington's endeavour deserved came two minutes before the break.
Mitch Cook launched a surging run down the left, David Cork had a shot blocked and record signing Nick Cusack sent a looping header past Neil Edwards and into the Stockport goal his second goal for the club and his first at Feethams since signing from Motherwell.
Confidence spread through the Quakers' ranks in the second half and they steadily took control.
Kevan Smith also wasted a clear opening, misses Darlington counted to their cost when the lively Preece broke clear in the 75th minute and curled a shot past the advancing Prudhoe from outside the box.
Preece beat the keeper again five minutes later, controlling a pass from the right wing and rifling home a right foot shot from 10 yards out.
MATCHFACTS Preece (9 mins, 0–1); Cusack (43mins, 1–1); Preece (75mins, 1–2); Preece (80 mins, 1–3).
Finley (foul).
2,384.
Alan Dawson (Jarrow).
Darlington Prudhoe 6, McJannet 7, Cook 7, O'Shaughnessy 6, Smith 6, Tait GAUGHAN Toman 7 (Coverdale 78mins), Cusack 7, Cork 6 (Borthwick 78mins).
Edwards 6, Thorpe 6, Carstairs 6, Lillis 7, Finley 7, Williams 6, Gannon 6, Ward 6, Francis 7 (Wheeler 82mins), Beaumont PREECE Sub not used: Knowles.
BILLY Hardy got his comeback off to a winning start at the McEwans Centre, Houghton-le-Spring, last night with a five round demolition of plucky Yorkshireman Chris Clarkson.
The former British champion from Sunderland took the first step back on the road to championship level by stopping Clarkson with 65 seconds gone of the fifth round.
Referee Larry Thompson stepped in to save the Hull fighter from further punishment after a sustained assault from Hardy after he had put his man down for a count of eight early in the round.
A barrage of punches which started with a swinging left hook left Clarkson on one knee and once the action restarted and Hardy picked up the assault, it was clear the fight would come to a quick conclusion.
That duly arrived when Hardy pinned a helpless Clarkson in his own corner and referee Thompson moved in to end the contest.
Hardy was a hot favourite before the fight and did not let a sell-out crowd down by producing the expected victory.
However, his performance vindicated the Wearsider's pre-fight prediction that he would need at least two or three fights before moving up in class in search of a European or world title.
The 27-year-old North-East man was at times impatient and ragged and displayed the expected ring rust from the ten-month lay-off he had had before the fight.
Hardy said afterwards he hopes to have two more fights before the end of the season in June, the first possibly coming at Stockport in four weeks time.
Wingate super middleweight Paul Hitch stretched his unblemished professional record to seven fights with a points victory over Blackpool's Simon McDougall.
Hitch was on top throughout and was probably worth better than the two-round winning margin given to him by Darlington referee Arnold Bryson.
Northern Area light heavyweight champion Terry French suffered a second successive knockout set-back when he was despatched inside one round by Castleford veteran Dave Owens.
In the opening bout on the show, Ludworth lightweight Micky Hall got his pro-career off to a winning start in spectacular fashion when he stopped Burnley's Nick Holmes in the second round.
In the chief support bout, Northern Area lightweight champion Paul Charters had a useful tune-up for his British title eliminator with Preston's Paul Burke next month.
Charters, from North Shields, was taken the full eight round distance by durable John Smith of Liverpool, gaining a full round victory.
Demand sparks extra auction
A RECENTLY opened saleroom is having to introduce an extra auction this week to cope with demand.
Tennants, of Harmby Road, Leyburn, will hold the mid-week sale tomorrow.
An auction last week of valuables from North estates raised more than £90,000.
A mahogany Partners desk brought £1,200 and a Hunter of Bridlington longcased clock £920.
THERE is a sad footnote to last week's Echo Memories on the Alma Hotel (now Brown Trout) at Cockerton.
Carl Shirley, son of James and Gladys who between them were licensees at the hotel from 1933–53, died on February 23.
With his sister Norma, who now lives in Newton Aycliffe, he was brought up at the hotel during the Second World War.
Norma remembers it as a time of great happiness tinged with much sadness, for the pub was adopted by the Canadians and Americans stationed at Middleton St George.
Norma clearly recalls one day during the Battle of Britain when a number of airmen left their overcoats at the Alma, thinking they would survive the night's mission.
Not one returned, and the Shirley family was left to look after the squadron mascot Darkie, a little dog who usually took to the air as well.
James Shirley died in 1943; Gladys continued until 1953 when she and her family moved onto the George and Dragon at Boldron.
Carl continued in the hotel trade, working in Leicester and South Shields for companies like Holiday Inn.
His last hotel was the Blue Bell at Belford in Northumberland.
THIS week's fountain is the Pierremont Vase, and it is possibly the town's most impressive.
Indeed, one correspondent went as far as to call it the ‘sexiest’ although that must be debatable.
The fountain now stands in South Park, Darlington, a shadow of its former itself.
It probably dates from after 1864 when Henry Pease turned his attention to the gardens of the mansion he had been enlarging and improving since 1846.
Allegedly Pierremont originally named Pierpont which translates as ‘the house on the hill overlooking the Cocker Beck’ was built in the 1830s by John Botcherby who swore that it would be the grandest villa in town and that the Peases would never own it.
It only became the grandest villa when Henry Pease bought it and began work.
The Pierremont Vase stands 20ft tall.
It was set beside an ornamental lake which was decorated by tumbling rocks, an island grotto and a waterfall, all lit by gas lamps.
It had 21 jets of water, a main basin surrounded by 12 flower vases on pillars, and was edged by semi-circular flower beds.
However, the whole Pierremont extravaganza was too much for ordinary people, and when Henry's second wife Mary, who outlived him by 28 years, died in 1909 the estate was gradually sold off for housing.
At a rough guess, Pierremont Gardens today stands where the real gardens of Pierremont used to be.
It is quite ironic that the most famous monument to Henry Pease should be a fountain, for he was one of the original shareholders in the Darlington Water Company responsible for providing the town with a mains supply in the early 1850s.
It is recorded that when the Local Government Board assumed control of the waterworks in 1854, Henry was most upset.
Builder and councillor Cuthbert Joseph Todd presented The Pierremont Vase to the town in July 1925 as the plaque on the fountain base notes.
For a while it preserved some of its glory in South Park as the rare postcard (borrowed from the collection in the Bygones shop in McMullen Road) shows.
Now, however, it has suffered a fate common to most of Darlington's fountains, and been relegated to a forgotten corner.
MEANWHILE the council's annual ball, amid the splendours of the Spectrum Centre in Willington, was by all accounts a pretty triumphant affair in which Mr Ashdown joined enthusiastically.
For some reason Gadfly failed to appear on the invitation list.
The district's two Labour MPs, however, had not been overlooked.
Protocol in turn suggested that it was an invitation they couldn't refuse.
Since neither Hilary Armstrong nor Derek Foster touches a drop of alcohol, they were unable even to drown their frustrations in multiple gins and tonic.
We are assured that both MPs retained a smiling dignity throughout.
Cinderella would have been proud of them.
MORE backing, meanwhile, for the suggestion that Sedgefield MP Tony Blair is very definitely Tomorrow's Man.
After being tipped in The Observer as the next Labour leader (Gadfly, Feb 19) he is now favoured apparently by the Prime Minister himself.
According to the Mail on Sunday, John Major is telling friends that Blair is ‘the most formidable debater and has the quickest and most dangerous mind’ on the Opposition benches.
Just one thing, adds the paper's columnist, could hold him back: Tony's view that his wife and children are every bit as important as his politics.
ITS attendance badly affected by the recession, the Liquid Luncheon Club was much cheered by the letter delivery across the bar of the Red Lion of a Leap Year proposal to the still slightly eligible Jimmy Whelan, a former Mayor of Darlington.
‘If I smother you with kisses, will you let me be your Mrs,’ it said.
We will not reveal in which prominent lady councillor's name it was signed.
Suffice to say, we smell a rat.
THE suggestion in last week's column that the Sedgefield District Council chairman's annual allowance was over £40,000 was based on mistaken information: it's around £15,000, and has fallen slightly.
Similarly Coun John Kitson, somewhat miffed at being called a ‘veteran,’ insists that he didn't say prospective industrialists had to be given tea and biscuits.
‘I said you couldn't just give them tea and biscuits,’ he says.
‘I wouldn't only offer tea and biscuits, not even to you.’
IT follows, therefore, that the rather neat poem on chairman's allowances subsequently faxed by Les Oxley has no relevance whatsoever to Sedgefield.
But as a reminder to others that we're still watching, here's the last verse: ‘So, chairman's allowance unaltered, ‘And fifty redundant, I think; ‘That rounds off the business quite nicely, ‘Now anyone care for a drink.’
PERHAPS the last word on the ‘Blood Kit’ business, from a lady in Newton Aycliffe whose maternal grandfather a chap called Harry Gent was landlord in the early twentieth century.
The pub, regulars will recall, was in Coundon Grange.
The origin of its universal nickname has been open to much debate.
Harry Gent, at any rate, always claimed that it arose from the numerous illegal cockfights that were held in the cellar.
With thanks to the many who've theorised, we're inclined to suppose that he was right.
IN last week's column we stated that Hazel Hague was a district councillor whereas she relinquished that position in May 1991.
We also referred to the wife of Coun Ray Flowers as Maureen, her name is in fact Marian.
We apologise for any embarrassment caused by these errors.
THE search is on for a dog fit for a queen and the auditions are to be held in Darlington.
The theatre company which is to bring Roald Dahl's The BFG, the Big Friendly Giant, to Darlington Civic Theatre has issued an appeal for corgis.
The dog will star in a scene where the little girl Sophie and the BFG have breakfast with the Queen.
Yesterday Judith Cheston, a spokeswoman for London-based Clarion Productions, said: ‘It doesn't matter if the dog isn't very well trained.
It just has to walk downstairs with the Queen on a lead and sit beside her.
‘It would be ideal if we could find more than one corgi as we have two performances a day.’
The company, which is touring the country with the play, adapted and directed by David Wood, is due at Darlington Civic Theatre from March 17 to 21.
Anyone wanting to make their pet a star should go along to an audition at the theatre on March 16 at noon.
A DARLINGTON barman last night told how he was terrorised during a £10,000 robbery at a town bar.
Barry Glenn said he cannot stop thinking about his ordeal, has problems sleeping and is scared to return home where his nightmare began.
Just after 11pm on Sunday Barry, 21, was grabbed by a robber outside his house in Harris Street, Darlington, as he returned from work.
He felt something press into his back and was told he would ‘get it’ if he moved or struggled.
Barry, assistant manager at Perry's brasserie in Beaumont Street, was forced to drive back to the bar in his own car and ordered to open the safe.
The thief then bound his feet, wrists and mouth with tape and left him face down on the office floor before making off with the money in Barry's car.
Barry waited to hear the car drive off before he shuffled to a desk, pulled a telephone to the floor and managed to dial 999 with his hands behind his back.
His call was traced and half an hour later police rescued him from his traumatic experience.
Yesterday Barry was back at work but said he had considered giving up his job and moving house following the horrific incident.
‘I was just numb while it was happening, I felt weak.
He had his hand on my neck the whole time and kept saying I would get it.
‘It's all I can think about, and whether I could have said or done anything.’
Barry was unable to give the police a description of his assailant as he was always behind him and ripped out the mirror from his car before they drove to Perry's.
IN THE last year, Dorothy James has scoured the country in search of her two horses, hoping that by visiting horse shows and events she may spot them.
She shares the heartache felt by many owners who lose their horses to thieves, often never to see them again.
‘We have been to Yorkshire, to Birmingham, all over the place.
You go anywhere there is anything horsy happening in the hope of seeing them.
‘It is not the same as having a video or television stolen.
The whole family was devastated when they were taken.
I cannot explain how it feels they may not be human, but they are flesh and blood.’
Mrs James' two animals were taken from their stable on her farm at Bedlington, Northumberland, one night in November 1990.
Chester, a chestnut gelding with three white socks, was a particular family pet.
The other was a chestnut mare with a distinctive rope-burn mark between her ears.
The thieves led the horses out of the stable into the neighbouring country park, where they had vehicles waiting.
Mrs James knows they were taken to Kendal, Cumbria, and then to Essex, but there the trail was lost.
Horse rustling, along with theft of tack, horse boxes, trailers and other equipment, is a growing problem.
Det Sgt Derek Elston, who investigated the theft of Mrs James' horses, said evidence points to a network of thieves and dealers working together across the country.
Two North-East men were jailed recently for a number of crimes involving horse theft, including that of Mrs James' animals.
But the number of thefts and the times at which they were committed suggests there are other criminals in the region in the same business.
‘It is possible they operate individually but are connected by having the same contacts, for instance a dealer in Essex or Ireland,’ said Det Sgt Elston.
One of the problems for police investigating the crimes is that horses can be stolen in one part of the country and then swiftly transported hundreds of miles away, or even overseas.
Without a national record of the animals stolen, it is virtually impossible to recover them.
Even if horses are found which are believed to be stolen it is difficult without a central file to link them up with owners who have reported them missing.
And the horses which are taken are often family pets less valuable, less likely to attract attention and, because they may be older and quieter, easier to sell.
‘They even take kiddies’ Shetland ponies,’said Det Sgt Elston.
‘What people don't realise is how much distress it can cause when a horse is taken how much they become part of the family.’
Lorraine Ludlow, from the West Midlands, lost three ponies worth around £1,000 each to thieves who travelled from the North-East to steal them.
Two have since been found they were advertised for sale in Darlington but the third, which she had as a foal, is still missing.
She has still not given up the search, but she fears some animals are exported to Ireland or to the continent.
‘All the thieves have to do is get a vet's certificate, then they can transport them.
Once on the continent, they can be sold for meat if nothing else.
I would like to see better controls at the docks to stop them getting through.’
She is also collecting reports of horses stolen to try to establish a link between the thieves across Britain and has started a Horse Watch group in her area, which works in a similar way to Neighbourhood Watch.
Horse Watch helped in the remarkable recovery of a National Hunt winner, returned to her Chester-le-Street owner last week, 14 months after she was stolen.
Heather Calzini spent thousands of pounds looking for Milliegrey, worth around £60,000 and pregnant when she was taken from her stable in the dead of night.
Mrs Calzini spent £2,000 on phone calls, drove all round the country and took out a quarter page advert in the Horse and Hound magazine.
Her contacts watched horse sales across the country and Mrs Calzini made regular checks with breeders, trainers and slaughterhouses.
Finally, Horse Watch heard that Millie had been spotted in the New Forest.
There, malnourished and thin, she was found with her foal.
‘She recognised me straight away,’ said Mrs Calzini.
‘She looked so sad, it wasn't my proud Millie; she just stood there.
She nuzzled me and I cuddled her with tears streaming down my face.’
An Essex man has been charged with handling stolen horses.
Schemes similar to Horse Watch are springing up around the country, initiated originally by the British Horse Society.
The society is also urging the Association of Chief Police Officers to improve records of horse thefts by marking them as such, rather than just as thefts of livestock.
But assistant welfare executive Bob Westecott said owners could take simple precautions to prevent their horses being stolen.
Freeze-marking with a number has been proved to be a deterrent to thieves, as well as making it much easier for police to identify animals.
Saddlery and trailers can also be marked with a postcode and, as many horses are taken from fields, it is essential to keep gates padlocked.
The only way people can be safe is to assume they could be the thieves' next target and do what they can to protect their horses.
IF YOU asked the woman in the Post Office, she thought it was ridiculous.
In all her born days she had never heard anything like it.
Honestly she had not.
The subject was that of Hawes and its phonetic connection to ladies of the night.
It could be offensive to some, it has been suggested, to be thought of as living in or visiting such a place.
This is what the woman in the Post Office thought was stupid.
It was not spelt the same way for a start.
She simply did not know what they were on about.
She had a point.
The Wensleydale market town with its inns, its tea shops and its cobbles looks to have as much chance of being frequented by members of the oldest profession as being the venue for the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
Despite an intensive search yesterday there was not a red light in sight, not even a 30 watt affair on the pink side.
Under normal circumstances, such as those which have pertained there for at least 685 years, it would hardly have been worth investigating.
That was before the fuss down in the Midlands.
In a little town called Alcester a new housing development of three roads has been recently completed.
One of the roads was to be called Hawes Close after the name given to the area of land since the 17th century.
The first group of owners objected.
At council meetings there was talk of undesirable sexual connotations which could cause embarrassment.
The road name was duly altered.
‘It didn't help that the first two people to move in were young ladies,’ said Richard Wright of Stratford Council's secretary's department.
‘It was a bit unfortunate.’
Which left Hawes, North Yorkshire, alone in its nomenclature.
Hawes it has always been, Hawes it will always be.
It rejoices in Hawes.
‘I've never even heard anyone titter about it,’ said the woman in the Post Office.
She refused to give her name because in her job she was not supposed to be speaking to newspapers.
She suggested calling in on the local correspondent to see what his views were.
He was out.
In the television shop, probably the one place at a pinch where there might have been a red light, Bryan Whitehead said there had been an occasion when Hawes became confused with females of dubious character.
‘It was once when Christopher Timothy the television vet opened our fete,’ he said.
‘He drew attention to it.
He said Hawes as in Hawes, but that's the only time it's been mentioned in public.’
Mr Whitehead has been in the army and well away from Wensleydale.
Not once had anybody thought anything of where he came from.
The thought occurred that Christopher Timothy must really have brought the house down with his little joke the day he opened the fete.
Sandra Wilcox, who has been in the town (never call Hawes a village because that is a real insult) all her life, said that sometimes there were remarks.
Occasionally you had to spell out the name to tourists to avoid any needless confusion.
Hawes was still half asleep yesterday, barely preparing yet for the seasonal onslaught which will begin when Lent is over.
The pottery was shut, the bookshop was shut, the dales countryside museum was shut and most of what was open was empty.
Nowhere were they concerned with their name.
Down in Alcester they have grasped the nettle.
They replaced their Hawes with Cabinet at first and then thought that was too dodgy as well, as a cabinet is a small, secluded room.
What was Hawes is now Allwoods Close.
In Wensleydale there will be no such messing.
They are more concerned with raising cash for their church, saving their scout troop and raising cash for a children's playground.
All these when rescued or built will be in Hawes and nowhere else.
Hawes, it seems, is from the old Norse word hals meaning neck, in this case a neck of land on which the town stands.
Down in Alcester they probably need shaking by the hals.
Spark plug
VINTAGE car buffs, perpetually restoring bodywork and protecting registration numbers, are in regular dialogue with the DVLC at Swansea about documentation.
It has often been an uphill struggle and one wonders if they have given up.
This month's NECPWA News newsletter of the North-East Club for Pre-War Austins carries an advert for its store: ‘Bring any unwanted spares, and a log or two for the stove.’
Ministerial Flannel IT HAS been reported that at the launch of National Dyslexia Week, the Duke of Westminster, entering into the spirit of the occasion (and surely nothing else was intended), introduced the junior education minister and Darlington MP.
Instead of welcoming Michael Fallon he referred to somebody called Michael Flannel.
Videos and votes
IN THIS space the other day it was mentioned in passing that Stockton South MP Tim Devlin had borrowed two video films from a Yarm shop.
His mum had returned them unwatched because he had decided to visit a nightclub instead.
The honourable member has been on to say that his mother was upset about her appearance here, not least because she felt it was invading her privacy.
Point taken.
Added to which they were not his films she was returning, but his brother's and Dangerous Liaisons was not among them.
Mr Devlin borrows his films from a different shop.
But he had visited a club.
As already observed that is a much better vote-winning method than staying in watching films.
I REFER to Coun Martin Quinn's attack on Paddy Ashdown (HAS February 24).
I would certainly not judge a man's (nor woman's) character simply because they had a love affair, especially when it occurred before that person became leader of their party.
Within Mr Quinn's own party, there will doubtless be those with looser morals than Mr Ashdown's.
As for the Tories, some of them, I understand, attend weird ‘correction’ sessions with Lindi St Clair.
In our uncaring society where relationships are reduced to a cold, three-letter word these days, I cannot blame Mr Ashdown (or anyone else) for keeping something so personal from the shadow of sordidness through which our society ignorantly views such things today.
Maybe society cannot comprehend what love is any more.
Eight elderly people's homes are closing in County Durham.
Home help services are being cut.
We can expect being cheated by the Tories, but Mr Quinn can perhaps explain how his party can always find money to pay for perks and excursions to faraway places for councillors and £3.5m expenditure upon the County Hall.
These occurrences affect us, the electorate, far more than Mr Ashdown's personal love life.
Bethany Megan Robinson, 4 Arkle Crescent, Skerne Park, Darlington.
War on the Unborn THE Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints has consistently opposed abortion for convenience which has been called The War on the Unborn.
It is a war on the defenceless, the silent innocents.
The figures of those lost in The Great Wars are dwarfed by the millions involved in the slaughter of the unborn.
Society professes reverence for human life, but our actions prove the lie.
In extremely rare cases where the life of the mother is endangered by continuation of the pregnancy, then competent medical advice regarding termination to save life should guide decisions.
To preserve life should always be the goal and in most cases of this nature the mother can be saved.
There are other considerations too in cases of rape and incest where the female could not exercise her choice not to conceive.
In these cases often the innocent suffers because of the crime of the father, but abortion should be the cause of much soul-searching and counselling before a decision is made.
David W. Deacon, Stake President (Diocese Area), The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, 59 Julian Avenue, South Shields.
A Darlington woman is looking for people to join a new knitting group to make clothes for visitors to Tom Raine Court, the Salvation Army Hostel in the town.
Moira Griffin, of Edgecombe Drive, explained that the death of a homeless man had given her the idea of knitting for the people who use the hostel.
‘It really touched me and made me feel quite sad that a man should have died in the street from hypothermia so I've decided to try and do something to help’ she said.
Moira already belongs to the Coworkers of Mother Theresa Group in Cockerton.
They meet regularly each week knitting blankets and other items to send abroad.
‘The workers in our group already have lots of knitting to do what I need now is another group of volunteers,’ Moira said.
The new group will concentrate on producing hats, scarves and gloves.
Anyone who has time to spare and would like to help can contact Moira on Darlington .
Barton Hall committee:
A village hall committee meeting takes place tonight at 7.30pm in the village hall.
The committee will thank Ralph and Pam Alderson for the work they have done in repairing and cleaning the hall.
Barton parish council is the trustee of the hall and is concerned about the roof, woodwork and damp.
Table top sale:
A table top sale takes place in Barton village hall on March 21 from 10am to 3pm to raise hall funds.
Council meeting:
Barton parish council next meets on March 25 at 7.30pm in the village hall.
Over 60s night:
The Over 60s Club meets on March 18 at 2pm in the village hall.
New members are welcome.
Brafferton Hall AGM:
The village hall AGM will be held on Monday at 7.30pm in the village hall.
Toddlers group:
A toddlers group is held from 10 to 11.30am every Wednesday in the village hall.
All welcome.
Croft Choir meeting:
The youth parish choir meets on March 13 at 6.30pm at St Peter's Church, Croft, to discuss future plans.
New members very welcome.
East Leyton Singers' cash:
The East Leyton Singers raised £210 at Christmas through carol singing, £120 was used to buy a Tens machine for pain relief for the Gainford doctor's practice, and £90 will be given to Dr Margaret Mowbray to give to a person in need.
The Singers would like to thank everyone who contributed.
Heighington Jumble sale:
On Saturday a jumble sale will be held at the village hall for St Michael's Church.
Doors open at 10am.
Prayer day:
Womens World Day of Prayer tomorrow will be marked with a service at 2pm in St Michael's Church.
The speaker will be Mrs P Antliss.
Hurworth Sailors visit:
Sailors from HMS Hurworth, the Hunt Class Mine vessel, arrive in Hartlepool tomorrow for a five-day visit to the region.
In a packed programme the sailors will play rugby against the Darlington Cavaliers on Saturday and football with villagers at the community centre on Sunday.
A social evening with the crew takes place in the community centre on Saturday at 7.30pm.
Visitors from Hurworth are also to tour the ship on Sunday.
And the captain of the ship and crew members are to visit Hurworth Junior and Infants School on Tuesday.
Jumble sale:
A jumble sale is to be held at the community centre on Friday March 20 at 7pm to raise funds for the centre.
Any jumble for the sale should be taken to the centre or telephone .
Race night:
A video race night is to be held in the community centre on Saturday March 28 when punters will be able to bet on films of American horse races.
Tickets, in advance only, cost £2 including supper.
Telephone .
Table top sale:
A table top sale will be held at Hurworth Village Hall on March 28 from 10.30am to 2pm.
All money raised will go towards funds for restoring the village hall roof.
Tables for the sale can be booked for £5 each on Darlington .
Melsonby Hall meeting: A public meeting will be held at Melsonby School on March 17 to discuss proposals for the new village hall.
Outline planning permission has been granted by Richmondshire district council and the views of villagers are sought regarding the next phase of the project.
The meeting begins at 7.30 and organisers hope as many people as possible will go to give their views and opinions on the project.
Middleton St George Parish council: The next meeting will take place on Monday.
WI news: A nearly new sale will be held on Saturday March 14 to raise money for institute funds.
Middleton Tyas Lent Course: A course of Bible Studies based on St Mark's Gospel starts on March 11 at 7.30pm at the Rectory, Middleton Tyas.
The course will continue every Wednesday during Lent.
Family service: A family service takes place at St Michael and All Angels Church on Sunday at 9.30am.
Neasham Parish council: The parish council met on Monday.
WI news: A jumble sale will be held at the village hall on March 19 starting at 6.15pm to raise money for institute funds.
The WI will meet next on Thursday March 12.
Sadberge Village AGM: The village hall AGM will take place on Tuesday March 24 from 7.30pm, the evening will include election of officers, an open forum and social with snack and wine.
Games night: A night of board games for all ages will be held in the village hall on Friday March 20, admission is 50p and all are welcome.
Organ help: If you play the organ and could help out in the parish church when the regular organist is ill or away please contact the Rev Robert Cooper on .
DUTCH the boxer is helping raise money for elderly people in a charity show.
The seven-year-old dog from Hurworth, will compete against 150 other elderly dogs in the Hardy Veteran Charity Shield next week.
All proceeds go to Help the Aged.
Dutch's owner Ron Smith, f rom Manor Road, said: ‘He has won a lot of championships already including best of breed.
And he has won in the Darlington championships.
I hope he will do well.’
The competition takes place in Grantham on March 15 and winners will be presented with prizes by actress Gretchen Franklin, better known as Ethel from Eastenders.
Organisers hope to raise at least £5,000 for Help the Aged.
DARLINGTON'S Mayor Rita Fishwick and Tory councillor Paul Geldart passed on the thanks of the Scottish Sports Association for the Disabled to the town's Dolphin Centre yesterday.
They presented a plaque to Rob Poynter on behalf of the British association which holds its annual swimming championships at the centre.
RAY Hankin's first signing is glad he ignored a specialist's advice to quit.
Utility player Gary Hinchley, who was signed on Hankin's first full day in charge last week, was told to quit playing football at Christmas, because of a knee injury.
‘I had a cartilage operation three and a half years ago, and I went in for a tackle just before Christmas and damaged it again.
‘The specialist thought negatively, and he advised me to finish.
‘However, I went for a second opinion, and I was put on a scan.
That showed a slight cyst on the cartilage, which was nowhere near as serious as first thought.
I was given a set of exercises to do, and since then I've been all right.’
Hankin's move for the left sided player came unexpectedly.
‘I came in from work on the Monday night when Ray was on the phone.
‘I told him I was training with Guisborough that evening, so he met me up there and a deal was sorted out.
This is Hinchley's second spell at Feethams, after being released by Dave Booth as a teenager.
‘It's obviously a big step up from the Northern League to the Third Division, so I'm building up my fitness in the reserves.
DARLINGTON Show made a loss of £11,000 last year but organisers have vowed this year's event will go on.
The loss the worst in the show's 36-year history was recorded despite increased entries, good weather, huge crowds and many new attractions.
But organisers the Darlington and District Agricultural Society pinpointed a security loophole which enabled many of the spectators to enter the South Park showground free of charge.
They have already appointed a gates superintendent who will liaise with the show manager this year to ensure no one slips in without paying.
Yesterday John Steel, the show's marketing director, said plans for this year's two-day show would continue, but the society could not sustain another big loss.
‘We are still in business and still functioning as normal for this year's but we might have to revert to a one-day show in 1993,’ added Mr Steel.
SUNDAY night is dance night for a group which loves to waltz the evening away.
But the dancing doesn't just stop with the waltz the Dolphin Sunday Dance Club knows how to mix the old and the new.
Among their routines as they trip the light fantastic at the Dolphin Centre in Darlington are the old time and modern dances.
And now they have an added attraction a few weeks ago they danced to the music of the 14-piece Cleveland Orchestra in a first for the group.
The club now hopes the band will return for an encore on March 22.
SWIMMERS in the North-East are planning to make a big splash for charity this weekend in a national fund raising event.
In Darlington, 99 fitness fans have signed up for Swimathon ‘92 which takes place at the Dolphin Centre at 5.30 pm tomorrow.
Swimmers have to complete the 5,000m marathon either as an individual or member of a team and raise money for three national charities: MENCAP, Royal National Institute for the blind and the Macmillan Nurse Appeal.
All swimmers will receive a certificate recording their time and individual participants completing the distance will also get a medal.
Olympic gold medallist Duncan Goodhew, President of the BT National Swimathon, wished all 30,000 swimmers who have signed up for this year's BT National Swimathon ‘the very best of luck’.
The event takes place in swimming pools all over the country until Sunday.
IF you want to get in trim for summer and raise money for a good cause, sign up for sponsored aerobics at the Dolphin Centre later this month.
A sponsored ‘step aerobics’ session will take place at the Dolphin Centre on Sunday, March 29 in aid of the day care centre appeal.
Stepping is the new fashion in exercise and if you haven't tried it this could be the chance to have a go.
The session will last from 10.30am until 12.30pm and details of how to sign up are printed elsewhere in today's Northern Echo.
Organisers of the appeal need to raise £637,000 to build the centre, which will act as a meeting place for old people especially the lonely, frail and housebound, and provide a range of services.
So far £114,957 has been raised including a generous donation this week of £3,000 from the Hedley Foundation, a charitable trust.
A coffee morning hosted by Mrs M Elders raised another £100.
Appeal organisers would like anyone thinking of holding a coffee morning or jumble sale in aid of a worthy cause to do it for the centre.
Such events would help convince charitable trusts with thousands of pounds at their disposal that the people of Darlington are backing the appeal and they should too.
For more information contact Moira Shields at Farmway.
PAUL Verrill, a graduate engineer at Tioxide, Hartlepool, explains the working of a valve to Carmel School student Dorothy Prior and fellow pupils who visited a Darlington College of Technology exhibition yesterday.
Teenagers from at least six local schools attended the event which was aimed at students thinking of a career in technology.
Golden day:
Whitby's first Town Mayor, George Butt and his wife, Joyce, have celebrated their golden wedding.
Star speaker:
Television gardening expert Pippa Greenwood will be the star speaker at a joint meeting arranged by Houghall Horticultural Society and the Friends of Durham Botanical Gardens in the conference hall of Houghall College, Durham, on Tuesday at 7.30pm.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout County Durham, Tyneside and Wearside to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mel Mason, Sian Thomas and David Taylor at Durham on 091–384 2261; Patrick Lavelle on 091–567 3422; Mark Summers on ; John Hayes and Anne Kostalas at Newcastle on 091–232 8708.
Or you can reach us at head office on .
DARLINGTON are down.
Needing a win to survive in the North-East League Division One, they lost 3–2 at home to bottom club South Shields.
Shields recorded their first win of the season on a greasy pitch after soaking up a lot of pressure.
The Quakers relied too heavily on the mighty hit rather than short passes.
Shields' first attack earned a short corner after a sloppy tackle by Roger Till.
The resulting shot hit a Darlington player's leg and the penalty was converted by Lee Jacobson on the stroke on halftime.
After the break Darlington produced their best hockey.
Playing swift passes from defence to the flanks, they equalised with a hard-hit shot from Nadir and took the lead after Richard Biddle found Andy Metcalfe free in the area.
But everything fell apart and Shields began to slice through a non-existent home midfield.
Martin Jajo equalised and within five minutes Jacobson sealed Darlington's fate.
The champagne has been put on ice at Stockton.
A magnificent 5–1 victory over Carlisle in NorthEast Division One leaves them on top of the table with only a slim chance of being caught.
They are assured of promotion.
Norton seconds held Sunderland to 3–3, so the Wearsiders slipped off the top spot.
Stockton can only be caught by Whitehaven, who have three games left, one of which is against Stockton in three weeks.
Mark Newbould scored twice in the first half for Stockton, Mark Gill added two more and Mark Briscow got the fifth after a run from halfway.
Tynedale pulled off a marvellous 2–1 win against Tynemouth, while Billingham ended a successful season by beating Morpeth 2–0 with well taken goals by Nigel Skerritt and Tim Johnson.
Stockton thirds were crowned champions of division three as they beat Darlington 4–1.
Durham University are champions of divisions two and four, and Newcastle University have won division five.
The final table for Division One is as follows:
A GOOD big ‘un hopes to emulate a good little ‘un in France this week.
ABA light heavyweight champion Anthony Todd, of Darlington, travels to the second of the three Olympic qualifying tournaments in Berck sur Mer hoping he'll follow in the footsteps of Scarborough's Paul Ingle, who qualified for Barcelona at the previous tournament in Denmark.
Ingle, ABA flyweight champion, qualified by outscoring Wales's Mark Hughes then stopping Scotland's John McLean in the second round.
McLean has since announced his retirement.
Like Ingle, Todd will have to box other British fighters, after a European ABA ruling.
The home countries have separate membership of the EABA, but enter only one team, Great Britain, in the Games.
The EABA did not want the British fighters eliminating other nations’ boxers, so ruled they must meet each other first before the survivor boxes against other European nations.
Todd first boxes Scotland's Stephen Wilson, 20, who has moved up a weight since winning silver at the 1989 world juniors and an ABA title in 1990.
The winner must then meet Ireland's Mark Delaney, who beat Todd in last year's Canada Cup.
Whoever wins that bout is likely to be in the semi-finals, which should guarantee an Olympic place.
NEWCASTLE Gosforth's England B scrum half Steve Douglas is out for the rest of the season after breaking his ankle on Saturday.
And there are fears that veteran lock Terry Roberts's distinguished career could be ended by a back injury.
‘Terry is very doubtful for next week's game at West Hartlepool,’ said Director of Rugby Mike Mahoney.
‘He's almost 42 and it's very difficult to keep your fitness and make a comeback at that age.’
Roberts's second row partner Steve Bainbridge was due back from holiday yesterday and is expected to play in next week's National Division Two promotion showdown.
Douglas's place at scrum half will go to either Robin Spencer or Dave Walker.
Mahoney claimed an opponent stood on Douglas's ankle at the bottom of a ruck, in what he described as a ‘terrible game’ at home to Broughton Park, which Gosforth won 41–6.
‘The parallels with the second half of the England game were incredible,’ he said.
‘We were trying to play rugby and they were just trying to spoil.’
West Hartlepool won 24–10 at Boroughmuir, with skipper John Stabler scoring 16 points.
He kicked four penalties and converted tries by centre Paul Hodder and prop Phil Lancaster.
Scrum half Alan Louden kicked three penalties in Middlesbrough's 17–10 home win against Hartlepool Rovers.
He also hit the post with another attempt and winger Taff Jolly followed up to touch down.
Flanker Ross McMillan scored Boro's other try from a tap penalty.
Stockton's struggles continued with a 17–11 defeat at home to Alnwick, for whom scrum half and skipper George Robson scored a hat-trick of tries.
Paul Weston scored in the first half for Stockton, but it was not until the last five minutes that Paul Bromley crossed for their second try.
Darlington won 20–15 at North Durham, where they got off to a flying start with two tries in the first 20 minutes by winger Martin Bewick and flanker Paul Barkes.
Barkes went off with a torn calf muscle early in the second half, but Mark Butler stretched the lead with a penalty and a drop goal.
Although North Durham hit back, Darlington made sure of victory with a try by winger Nathan Johnson, which Ian Dove converted from the touchline.
Bishop Auckland's lack of motivation resulted in a 15–3 home defeat by Seaham, who led 15–0 at half-time through four penalties and a drop goal.
Bishops dominated the second half but had only an Ian Campbell penalty to show for it.
Mowden Park lost 24–10 at Blyth, where they were 16–0 down at half-time before scrum half Tot Teasdale set up tries for Gary Edwards and Dave Wray.
Andy Craggs added a conversion.
SOUTH Shields consolidated their second place in the league on Saturday with a convincing 3–0 win over visitors Vaux Ryhope.
Once again their goal scoring duo of Steve Harkus and Paul Thompson did the damage in establishing a 2–0 lead at the interval with a second half goal from Brian Mulvaney finally putting the issue well beyond doubt.
Newton Aycliffe after disappointing recently at last returned to winning form with a 3–0 win over relegation candidates Usworth Village.
Leading from a Neil Vasey goal at the break, Aycliffe found Usworth always dangerous until in a five-minute spell midway through the second period a mix-up in the home defence allowed Stuart Howson in to score with Kevin Dinning notching their third shortly afterwards.
In a scrappy match Eppleton CW gained some consolation for their defeat in the League Cup by visitors IFG Roker winning their league meeting by the odd goal.
With the match looking as though it would end goalless at the interval David Tate broke down the right and from his cross Ged Kennedy forced the ball home to give Eppleton the lead.
Neil Scott put Eppleton further in front early in the second half with John hall scoring a last minute consolation goal for Roker.
Newcastle Bohemians squandered a two-goal lead at home to fellow relegation candidates Cleator Moor Celtic and in the end were grateful for a share of the points.
Both of the Bohemian's goals were scored by John Anderson with Kevin Messenger and Robert McDowell replying for the Celtic.
By the same scoreline Darlington RA shared the points with visitors Boldon CA.
Paul Adamson scoring both of the RA's goal while Kevin Gilbad and Tim Wright were on target for Boldon.
Herrington CW failed to ease their relegation worries when they went down 3–1 at home to Annfield Plain.
Trailing to a Cliff Thompson goal at half time Herrington were soon back on level terms when Tom Welsh scored only to again go behind to a David Ross effort.
Thompson notched the Plain's third to maintain their challenge for a top four position.
Wingate and Cleadon will have to meet again to decide their Monkwearmouth Cup quarter final after drawing 1–1.
Graham Chapman gave Wingate the lead only for David Appleby to equalise for Cleadon to take the tie into extra time and a replay.
QUAKERS manager Ray Hankin revealed that he gave his players ‘a bit of a roasting’ after their fighting 1–0 win at Valley Parade.
Hankin, who celebrated his first win as a Football League manager, said that he was unhappy with his team's passing, especially in the first half, but he was delighted with their commitment.
‘I had a go at the players in the dressing room after the match,’ he said.
‘We gave the ball away too much, and our crosses weren't too good.
‘But our work rate and commitment were tremendous.
I said after last Tuesday's game that if we kept working our luck would turn.
It was probably a below standard performance from us, but the players have got to be given full credit for the way they defended.
It was backs to the wall for most of the 90 minutes, and I hope I don't have to sit through too many games like that.
‘We got that little bit of luck that we've been missing.
Mark Prudhoe played extremely well and saved one certain goal, while one or two crosses went across the face of goal without anybody getting a touch.’
Undoubtedly, the players are responding to their new manager, who is determined to bring about a revival, and on the evidence of the last three games will do so.
There have been occasions this season when Quakers have taken the lead and then sloppily folded; but this time the players rolled up their sleeves to jealously protect the three points.
Quakers caught the home side napping in the sixth minute.
Mitch Cook's free-kick was hacked clear to Steve O'Shaughnessy on the edge of the box, where the Bradford old boy he was released by them as a youngster let fly with a powerful right-foot shot which Bradford keeper Paul Tomlinson allowed to slip under his body.
That was the first piece of luck.
The second slice came after 34 minutes.
City had already surged forward and stretched the Quakers' defence several times in search of an equaliser when Sean McCarthy beat the offside trap to a long through-ball, and was brought crashing down by Mark Prudhoe on the edge of the box.
Some referees would have produced a red card instantly, but Alan Flood decided that the challenge only merited a yellow.
His decision didn't please the home crowd, but as Hankin said: ‘It was one of those 50–50 challenges.
I don't think there was anything vicious about the foul, it looked worse than it was.
I thought the referee dealt with the situation sensibly.’
Prudhoe, who was never seriously troubled in the first half the closest he came to conceding a goal was when the under pressure Kevan Smith had to touch behind a dangerous cross by Mark Stuart was in the wars shortly after half time.
The swiftly reacting keeper bravely threw himself at McCarthy's feet after Mitch Cook was brushed aside by the forward, and caused a measure of concern as he hobbled around after lengthy treatment.
But with his defence protecting him from any direct shots, Prudhoe steadily recovered, and he excelled himself after 69 minutes when Noel Blake powered a header goalwards from only six yards, but the indisputable player of the season somehow threw himself along his line to scramble the ball away.
Bradford, who forced 11 corners in the game, became more and more desperate and resorted to throwing crosses into the box which brought about some desperate defending at times, but Quakers could have made the game safe after 79 minutes when Cook found David Cork unmarked inside the box, but the striker, after turning well, shot straight at Tomlinson.
Frantic Bradford took to diving in the box looking for penalties, but Quakers held on, and there was even the unaccustomed spectacle of possession football to waste time in the dying minutes with a chorus of ‘staying up’ from the travelling fans in the background.
A delighted Hankin said: ‘There were a lot of pluses in the performance.
If David Cork carries on playing like that, then he could be looking at a new contract instead of being on the transfer list.
He can stop if he keeps playing like that every week.
‘We battled well all the way through but we're still at the bottom, and there's a lot of hard work ahead.
One thing's for certain, it won't be far the lack of trying if we go down.’
JOHN Young seems to have some difficulty with the meanings of the words infer and imply (HAS February 18).
I implied that before there can be an acceptable solution to the Northern Ireland problem, we will have to withdraw our troops.
Mr Young inferred that this meant that reunification with Eire was my solution.
It wasn't.
If he is interested, I back the concept of the restoration of the Stormont parliament with members elected by proportional representation.
This is what I would also like to see happen throughout Great Britain, with devolution and regional assemblies.
Everyone will then have a voice on domestic issues and remove sectarian prejudices.
Limitation on employment, property ownership and the right to vote were a surefire recipe for disaster in Northern Ireland.
International issues could be under the aegis of a separately elected British Parliament which would replace the House of Lords.
Here again all parties would be proportionally represented.
It would, of course, be fiercely resisted because it gives back power to the people.
Horace Wilson, 18 Ayton Drive, Darlington.
Alarming failure
WE ARE writing to express our concern regarding your report ‘New Way to Fend Off Car Thieves’(Echo February 15).
The problems vehicle owners face trying to keep their property secure is a worry in the face of increasing criminal sophistication.
Therefore many of us anxiously wait for the latest anti-theft gadget.
To this end we purchased a Nightstick alarm in December 1991.
Unfortunately, the device proved inadequate to deter the thieves who attacked our vehicle.
In fact ‘inadequate’ is probably an understatement: they appeared to have been able to snap the ‘high tensile steel’with consummate ease since only the broken end which clamps to the steering wheel was ever recovered.
The police fear that the remainder of the device was removed in order for the thieves to find out how it works for future occasions.
The packaging of the alarm also indicates that should a vehicle be stolen with the Nightstick in place the manufacturers will pay the owner some compensation.
Purchasers should note the smaller print which indicates this offer does not apply outside the USA!
Mr and Mrs C.F. Drury, 2 Kelloe Villas, Kelloe, Co Durham.
Whingeing Aussies
WHAT really angered me about the rudeness of Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating was the fact that everyone in Australia celebrates a holiday for our Queen's birthday yet we never have.
I don't think the whingeing Aussies would like to lose their holiday.
As far as I could see in North Queensland, I should think they will end up under the umbrella of the Emperor of Japan, as the Japanese now seem to be in charge up there.
Joyce Rutter,.
IT WOULD be very interesting to know what ratios R.K.
Bradley measures himself by (HAS Feb 19) when suggesting members of churches no longer adhere to strict rules.
His sop to secular society is full of contradictions.
To say that church schools hinder the ecumenical movement is a nonsense.
Even though some Christians choose to go separate ways, the philosophy and goals are one.
As for them encouraging sectarianism, his letter is a nonpareil in its bigotry and insensitivity.
It lacks tolerance, the spirit of live and let live and militates against Christian people, in particular Catholics.
He complains about the price paid in taxes for church-aided schools, but it is small in comparison to the quality of the citizens they produce, living saints some of them.
Obviously good enough for the MP for Darlington to put his hand in his pocket for.
E.J. Forbes, 12 Barmpton Lane, Darlington.
E. HEBDITCH (HAS February 26) takes Harry Mead to task for not knowing the colour of the Glaisdale hunt master's coat.
What importance is the colour of his attire when at the end of many a day the master and his bullying gang's regalia will all doubtless be red with the blood of the helpless abused fox.
I fret often for the days when I lived and worked in the countryside, but one sad sight used to be that of herds of demented idiots vandalising the scenery and terrorising nature in their delirious lust for an innocent animal's life.
That there are Parliamentarians who actually can't see wrong in this sadistic illness makes one realise that these, along with bloodsport participants, need psychiatric treatment more than our votes.
I think it was David Bellamy who once said: ‘Never make a frog do that which you wouldn't do yourself.’
May I ask E. Hebditch and any fox tormentor, would you swop places with the animal you're happy to hound?
I think not.
Bethany Megan Robinson, 4 Arkle Crescent, Skerne Park, Darlington.
I live surrounded by farmland and I am pleased no foxhunters are allowed, as over 50 years ago I experienced the killing of a fox by hounds.
As long as I live I will never forget those screams.
If that is pleasure, people who enjoy it must be sick.
Mrs Lily Smith, 98 St Peters Road, Helredale, Whitby.
AS OMAN SEES US
SEVERAL hundred copies of today's edition of The Northern will be flown to Oman and presented to those involved in tourism and trade.
Ahmed Salem Al Rawas, president of the Ministry of Information in Oman's southern province, welcomed the strengthening of bonds of friendship: ‘I know the North East well, especially Durham, Darlington and Newcastle.
I still think of the people of the region with affection for all the help and courtesy they showed me.
They are among the kindest-hearted people in Britain.
People from the region will always receive a warm welcome from us.’
OMAN.
The name rings with the air of distance and romance, like Mandalay, Timbuktu or Samarkand.
And it would have remained little more than a name but for the immense political danger that threatened it 21 years ago.
Here was a country so backward that it had only one landing strip, a mile of tarmacadam road, six schools and two hospitals that were really little more than clinics.
Now the country is opening its doors wider than ever to tourists.
Few will be more welcome than the British, for we stood shoulder to shoulder with the Omanis in their struggle to beat off invaders and modernise their country.
Both efforts have been successful beyond dreams.
Today Oman is one of the fastest developing countries in the world.
The capital that has grown up around the old village of Muscat is a place of broad roads, shops, trees and flowers, imposing offices and graceful buildings in great variety.
What the tourist will also find is that among the Arab nations, there are none more genial than the Omanis.
They are a sunny-natured people with a well-developed sense of hospitality.
In several important ways, they resemble ourselves, for they are heirs to an ancient history and deep culture, and built up a great sea-going empire through gruelling effort and wise leadership.
Omanis made their mark in history as early as the third century.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, they defended their great overseas empire against pirates, using ships large enough to carry up to 80 cannon.
But for Arab compasses, navigational aids, instruments and charts, Columbus would never have discovered America.
In 1970 the Sandhurst-educated Sultan Qaboos bin Said decided that the situation in his backward country was intolerably dangerous; Oman was wide open to a predator.
Taking over from his ageing father, he set out to modernise his country.
If Oman today is a relaxed and comfortable nation, it is because it has been led in 21 years from medieval seclusion to modern success.
And what does that mean to the tourist from Britain?
A happy country, extremely little crime, no graffiti, a great sense of security and the chance to see a society that is making the transition from traditional ways to the new.
Go down at night to the Corniche, the old Portuguese part of Muscat, and you are as safe as in your air-conditioned hotel.
Step aside into the souk (traditional market) at Muttrah beside it, and you will find frail old men selling gold at giveaway prices (to us, that is) without a guard of any kind in sight.
The souk is one of the oldest parts of Muscat, a living link with the past.
In the warren of lanes and alleys, barefoot traders sit cross-legged in tiny shops crammed with strange goods.
The colour, noise, odours and bustle of the market are infectious.
The smells of incense, fruit, flowers and spices mingle in the hot air.
If you have ever lamented the biscuit tin school of architecture that has made many of our towns and cities depressingly alike, take a look at the Omani buildings.
They have gone back to their traditions to design buildings that are graceful and pleasing.
The national director of tourism, Mohammed Ali Said, can also claim that Oman has 1,100 miles of splendid beaches and unpolluted seas.
Fishing is ridiculously easy.
Toss a line overboard and you quickly catch one of the 500 varieties of fish, most of them delicious to eat.
The Omanis are nothing if not determined.
There will be no question of a visitor turning up to find a hotel half built.
Some hotels are out of this world.
The Al Bustan in the capital area, said to be the most beautiful hotel in the world, was originally designed as a palace and conference centre for the leaders of the Gulf States but is open to visitors most of the time.
Prices?
I did not think £9 too much for a fine steak, or £150 too much for the sort of weekend that would cost £200 in Edinburgh or London.
Visas are needed to visit Oman, there are ten to 12 flights a week from London and the journey takes about eight hours.
‘We would like to see British people come because we have a special relationship with you,’ says Ali Said.
Large numbers of Omanis have been trained at our universities and polytechnics, especially in Durham, Sunderland and Newcastle.
To leave the country without seeing Salalah would be a tragedy.
A 90 minute flight brings you to the southern capital and the Garden of Oman.
So profuse are the flowers, so many the farms and plantations of banana, coconut, fruit and vegetables around the middle of the city that you would sometimes wonder if you were in a park or a great tropical garden.
When you feel nostalgic for a change, it's time to head for the hills.
In 20 minutes by air-conditioned car or coach, you will be in an old and vastly different world.
Here is grass as green as any you will see in England, wooded hills and Bedouin grazing their flocks.
Prominent traffic signs warn you to beware of camels.
Good advice you just have to give way to these obstinate creatures.
In return, you get a disdainful glance from large, lustrous, long-lashed eyes and a curl of contempt from lips like prehensile sausages.
Here too, growing wild in the stonier parts, are the famous frankincense trees of Oman, producers of the world's most fragrant incense for thousands of years.
Salalah sprawls, but does it delightfully.
Jaguars and Chevrolets give way to troops of smooth-skinned little white goats like antelope.
People stop to greet each other with obvious affection.
You may browse in the shops without being shadowed or prodded into buying.
Time stands still.
The golden day seems eternal.
Yes, Oman is different.
THE majority of football supporters who read your newspaper will have been very disappointed with your leading article ‘Deadly Potential of the Terraces’(Echo February 29), particularly as the same issue carried a well-reasoned piece by one of your own journalists on why fans are campaigning to retain terracing.
The objective is not, as your editorial concluded, ‘to preserve the Victorian facilities and await another Hillsborough’ but to modernise grounds and offer the combination of safe seating and equally safe terracing that customers want.
A series of surveys has shown that, given a choice, up to 80pc of fans would prefer to stand.
Terracing can be safe.
For about 20 years, densities have been regulated and crush barriers tested.
That was one of the issues to come out of the accident at Bolton in 1946.
Of the subsequent disasters, Ibrox happened on a stairway when supporters leaving the ground tried to re-enter when their team scored a late goal.
That staircase could equally well have led from seats.
The cause was its unsafe design.
Heysel occurred at a ground so dilapidated it would not be cleared to stage Fourth Division matches in this country.
Hillsborough was the result of a police decision to open an exit gate to allow mass entry onto an already crowded terrace.
There was no question of bad behaviour.
Andy Hyams, 100, Willowbank, Coulby Newham, Middlesborugh.
Your leading article ‘Deadly potential of the terraces’(Echo February 29), on the campaign to end all standing in our football grounds, is to be applauded for its common sense.
How can these people be so blind?
The Americans love their sport and are just as fervent and passionate, but they have made their stadiums comfortable and safe and also an outing for the family.
Just imagine taking the family to most of our football games.
Yes, the cost will most probably kill off some of the clubs or at least make them less successful, but surely that is a price we will have to pay.
Safety must be paramount in our thinking, and if it stops any more such tragedies then there is no case for those opposed to all-seater stadia.
I wonder what these people's reactions would be if the boss of their works told them he would have to cut safety standards because of the cost?
Safety is expensive and sometimes irritating, but it is a price well worth paying.
John Young, 1 Willow Avenue, Crook.
The Echo supports allseater football grounds (Echo February 29) but the fans don't and neither do the clubs.
So what is the problem today?
Before the mid-Fifties, an attendance of 70,000 was common at leading clubs.
Manchester City's record is 85,000, Chelsea's 82,000 and Sunderland 75,000.
Nobody was killed or injured.
A few fainting cases were passed over the heads of the crowd to the touchline.
One wonders what the factors are which cause modern uncivilised behaviour?
Is it junk food and junk music?
People who stuff their bodies with suspect rubbish and get hyped up daily by ear-splitting ‘pop’ cannot be expected to develop a balanced personality.
So a policy of making them pay, sit down and shut up at football matches will not make any difference.
It will only put small clubs out of business.
Joe Corrie, 45 Barnes Road, Darlington.
THE Darlington Show lost £11,000 last year, but organisers have promised that this year's event will take place.
The loss, the worst in the show's 36 year history, was recorded despite increased entries, good weather, huge crowds and many new attractions.
Darlington and District Agricultural Society which organises the show pinpointed a security loophole, which enabled many of the spectators to enter the South Park showground free of charge, for the loss.
They have already appointed a gates' superintendent for this year to ensure no one slips through the entrances without paying.
Yesterday John Steel, the show's marketing director, said: ‘We had a very good crowd last year.
That's why we were so surprised when we saw the income from the gate.
‘We discovered that fences had been knocked down too.
It's one of the worst places to make secure.
‘The loss was basically caused by a lack of revenue through the gates, the increased cost of a two-day event and the bill of almost £2,000 from Northern Electric.’
He said plans for this year's two-day show would continue, but warned that the society could not sustain another huge loss.
‘We are still in business and still functioning as normal for this year's show.
But we might have to revert to a one-day show in 1993.’— Ex-serviceman John Bennet has been appointed show chairman.
The new president is Bob Welch.
DARLINGTON'S newest entertainment venue opened yesterday after a refit thought to have cost about £500,000.
Buzz, in Beaumont Street, a ‘fun venue for 18–30-year-olds’ was created in just eight weeks.
Steve Burn, who designed the rock ‘n’ roll memorabilia interior, was also responsible for similar Buzz bars in London and Cardiff.
He said the combination of bars in the Beaumont Street area of Darlington would put paid to the profits of similar areas in the town.
A large group of invited guests were at the opening yesterday where they heard the mayor of Darlington, Coun Rita Fishwick, formally wish Buzz every success.
Manager David Simpson, presented Coun Fishwick with a £500 cheque for the Mayor's Charity Fund, and thanked Darlington council for its co-operation.
Buzz is owned by Luck Next Leisure, which also owns Perry's nearby.
Mr Burn said Perry's was due for a design rethink which would ‘make the two venues most young people's first choice for a night out’.
He said: ‘It won't be long before this area of town is the only place for a good night out.’
Tasty traveller:
The elderly in Northallerton got their teeth into a well travelled cake yesterday.
Shaped like an Intercity 225, the 2ft long cake had been made by the RAF to mark the naming of an Intercity train The Royal Air Force Regiment at a ceremony in London.
The cake was handed over to the Friarage Hospital yesterday.
Bowling centre:
Conditional planning permission has been granted to build a bowling centre at the Scorpion club, Colburn, near Catterick Garrison.
Decision put off:
Richmondshire District Council's development services committee has postponed a decision on outline plans to build 58 houses, 25 retirement homes and warden's accommodation in Glebe Land, Scorton, near Richmond.
Deport visit:
District councillors are to visit Moor Road, Leyburn, before deciding on plans for extensions at Biker's haulage depot.
The firm wants to build an office, joiners' workshop and storage extension and use land to extend the depot, lorry parking area and builders' yard.
Some work on the plans has already been carried out.
Concert date:
The Janus Ensemble is to give a concert, Masters of the Baroque, using authentic instruments, at the Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond, on March 13 at 7.30pm.
The concert will include work by CPE Bach, JS Bach, Handel, Telemann and Vivaldi.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York ; Sian Roberts on Richmond  and Ian Lamming on Northallerton .
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 38 1313.
Social evening:
The Willington branch of the Royal British Legion holds a social evening at the Victoria Club on Tuesday.
Council meeting:
A meeting of Wear Valley District Council will be held at 6pm on Wednesday at Crook Civic Centre.
MEP's visit:
Durham Euro-MP Stephen Hughes will speak to first year pupils at St John's Comprehensive School later this month and will also speak to students at the town's Sixth Form Centre.
Poppy total:
A total of £955 was raised by the Poppy Appeal in Willington.
Marathon effort:
Wear Valley Council official Ian Bloomfield is to receive official congratulations from members for representing Britain in the Hong Kong Marathon last month.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
Jumble sale:
A jumble sale will be held today at St Bede's Parish Hall, Denton Burn at 1.30pm.
Charity car wash:
The Romanian Mattress Appeal will benefit from car wash sessions at Cockerton Methodist Church today from 10am until noon.
Tree sale:
A rose tree sale will be held in the Mowden car park, Staindrop Road, Darlington, tomorrow from 23.30pm.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
The Northern Echo's assistant chief photographer Tony Bartholomew has been commended for his portfolio in the British Sports Association for the Disabled Media Awards.
Tony received his award from England rugby captain Will Carling at a gala lunch in London…
The judges were particularly impressed with his photograph of 14-year-old Clare Bishop diving into the Dolphin Centre pool in Darlington at last year's BSAD swimming championships which they said ‘captured her athleticism rather than her disability.’
The awards were inaugurated by the Princess of Wales to encourage media coverage of disabled sport alongside able-bodied achievement.
FOLLOWING your article on sports injuries treatment available at Darlington FC (Echo February 18) we would like to express a few points.
Firstly we are pleased that Darlington FC have recognised the benefits of employing a chartered physiotherapist and wish Nigel Cornell every success.
Secondly, we would like to comment on the services offered by all NHS hospitals.
Although all chartered physiotherapists undergo general training initially, as our careers progress we specialise in specific areas.
Therefore all hospital outpatient departments contain staff who are skilled in treating injuries.
Outpatient departments prioritise acute injuries so that waiting times for initial treatment are short.
They have extensive equipment to treat acute injuries as well as gymnasiums and hydrotherapy pools.
Finally we would like to reassure members of the sporting public that injuries treated in NHS hospitals will be given effective treatments just as footballers received in hospital departments Jacqui Moore MCSP, Hiliary Adams MCSP, A Wallace, MCSP BSc Hon.
Friday saw the latest addition to Darlington's throbbing night life packed to the rafters.
Buzz, in Beaumont Street, is not a pub but a ‘theme venue’.
To the uninitiated that roughly translates as a drinking establishment with thumping rock music and brash videos crammed with hordes of fun-seekers.
Just round the corner is Perry's, an establishment which is frequently so crowded the council is taking action to reduce numbers.
A stone's throw away the young reveller has the choice of Harvey's or Humphrey's to continue the night out.
Having sampled the delights of those establishments it is a mere stumble to the newly-opened Institute, in Skinnergate, for more of the same.
Then the hardy ‘theme venue crawler’ could literally fall into nearby Bertie's.
From there it is only the briefest of staggers to Route 66 or Blackett's, in Bondgate, for a final beer before hitting the clubs.
As with most things which appeal to the vagaries of youthful fashion today's hit rapidly becomes old hat.
And yet Darlington council continues to receive planning applications from companies eager to break into the market.
Unless some controls are imposed the centre of Darlington is threatened with becoming a total exclusion zone for anyone over the age of 35.
This form of lowest common denominator drinking haunt defies the charm of quirky or unconventional pubs.
They add little to the cultural identity of Darlington and are guilty of attracting some unsavoury characters and behaviour to the centre of the town.
BLIND radio presenter Mark Turnbull made broadcasting history over the weekend.
Mark is believed to have become the first blind presenter to host his own radio show when he took to the airwaves at BBC Radio Cleveland yesterday.
And veteran broadcaster Mark Page, who is back with the station, popped into the studios to wish his colleague good luck before the first broadcast of the Mark Turnbull Sunday Phone-In.
Mark, who has been blind from birth, has had a meteoric rise in radio broadcasting, being given his own show less than a year after joining Radio Cleveland as a reporter.
Mark, 28, of Redcar, a former Darlington and Stockton Times reporter part of The Northern Echo group of newspapers has had to master the intricate stereo sound desk.
After his show he said: ‘I was a bit nervous at first but it went very well.
‘We discussed a range of topics including the under-usage of Teesside Airport, British Rail, traffic problems in Richmond and bus passes for the elderly.
‘Being blind means I have to listen very hard so I don't get distracted by things around me.’
HOSPITAL officials have pledged to investigate allegations that a 90-year-old patient was not properly cared for while she waited for an operation.
Lily Morrison went into Darlington Memorial Hospital after waiting 13 months for a hernia operation and waited hours before being told it had been cancelled.
Her daughter Joan McIntyre has written to hospital managers complaining at her mother's treatment.
Mrs McIntyre says her mother was in tears after going to the hospital, and is refusing to return.
Grandmother Mrs Morrison, who lives with Mrs McIntyre in Quaker Lane, Darlington, was allegedly placed in a ‘chilly’ side ward last Monday and asked to wait.
She suffers from deterioration of the spine, but her family claims she was left sitting on a bed without any back support for three and a half hours.
She was then put in an armchair only to be told a few minutes later that her operation had been cancelled because the hospital was ‘short staffed’.
Mrs McIntyre said: ‘It's disgusting the way she was treated.
It's bad enough for a young person going into hospital for an operation but when you get to her age you deserve a bit more care.
‘This has knocked her back, she has been very poorly and really cried when she got home from the hospital.
‘I know they are badly staffed there and the nurses are working very hard but it should be a bit better organised.
‘She says she won't go back for the operation now because of what happened.’
Mrs McIntyre has written a letter of complaint to the hospital manager criticising the apparent lack of communication, and asking for an explanation.
Yesterday, hospital on-call administrator Alan Kennedy said Mrs McIntyre's complaint would be thoroughly investigated and she could expect a reply within ten working days.
He said it was not usual for patients to be left alone for long periods of time and organisation on the ward involved was usually very good.
‘I can only express our sympathy for the lady and I will bring this to my manager's attention.
‘We will look very closely into the suggestion that the operation was cancelled because we were short-staffed, I would be very surprised if that was the case,’ he said.
HARTLEPOOL United's leading scorer Paul Baker has been placed on the transfer list at his own request.
Chairman Garry Gibson said yesterday: ‘Baker wants to leave for personal and not professional reasons.
We have reluctantly circulated his name to Second, Third and Fourth Division clubs.
Pool could ask in the region of £100,000 for the 29-year-old Tynesider.
Baker, despite his 17 goals, has taken some flak from fans at the Victoria Ground.
Torquay United manager Ivan Golac has already shown interest in a former Southampton colleague.
Hartlepool goalkeeper Martin Hodge has had a two-match ban quashed at an FA appeal hearing.
Hodge, charged with swearing at a linesman at Shrewsbury, has been ordered to pay a £300 fine.
THE Football Association has banned Darlington midfield player and assistant manager Mick Tait for four matches.
Tait will miss matches against Bradford and Reading after reaching 21 points, and will be ruled out against Hartlepool United and Preston after being sent off against Chester.
Manager Ray Hankin said: ‘Tait is a competitive player who shows the enthusiasm of a 21-year-old.’
Former Guisborough Town defender Gary Hinchley will make his debut at Bradford today after two second-team games.
Hankin is confident the former Darlington junior will not let him down.
‘Hinchley has a big heart and we need battlers in our current situation.
‘I will be more than happy if we play as well as we did against Stockport County, providing we get a little luck.
‘Luck was not on our side against Stockport.
I could understand the players walking off the field and wondering what they had to do to win.’
Team from: Prudhoe, McJannet, Cook, Hinchley, O'Shaughnessy, Smith, Gaughan, Toman, Cusack, Cork, Pickering, Coverdale, Borthwick.
Can't walk?
Will climb and run!
In recent years members of Darlington Lecture Association have heard some remarkable stories but it is probable that few have been so remarkable or so moving as that which John Hawkridge will tell on Monday.
John Hawkridge was born with cerebral palsy, crippled but able to walk, run and jump.
Experimental surgery on his legs when he was 10 left him in a wheelchair, yet in 1988 he climbed Kala Patar in the Himalayas over 18,000 feet in the shade of Everest.
He refused to sit in a wheelchair, crippled by his disability and others' prejudice and he taught himself to walk again, built up his stamina by playing football on crutches and progressed to the walking sticks he uses today.
Mobile once more and hindered only by misplaced (in his view) solicitude he rediscovered his freedom through sport, first fishing, then fellwalking, sailing and rock climbing.
His incredible story was told in the BBC 1 documentary Everest the hardest which is what he will talk about in Darlington.
His talk will be fully illustrated.
The talk will be at Darlington College of Technology, Cleveland Avenue, 7.45.
It is expected that there will be a capacity audience, but if any seats are available at that time non-members may be admitted for £1.50.
The Association is being helped in putting on this presentation by L.
T. Banner.
Cornmill will not open on Sundays
There are no plans to open the Cornmill shopping centre on Sundays.
But the centre's new manager, Mr Albion Small, said late night Thursday opening had proved very successful in Newcastle and could work well in Darlington after the centre opens on August 27.
He made his comments during a speech to the policy group yesterday.
Mr Small said security at the centre would be low key.
‘I do not go for the peaked caps, epaulettes and dummy holsters,’ he said.
‘Our security staff will be dressed in blazers and slacks.
They will carry radios to show they are something to do with the Cornmill.
Darlington council's chief executive, Mr Clive Owen, asked how the Burton Property Group, owners of the Cornmill, intended to evacuate the building in emergencies.
Mr Small said fire alarms were installed and special voice tapes would tell people to leave the premises.
He told councillors the centre would be a safe and entertaining shopping venue.
‘People go to shopping centres to be entertained,’ he said.
‘So, for instance, we will have Christmas decorations on a par with anything on show at the MetroCentre.
Christmas late-night shopping at the centre looks likely.
Mr Small said: ‘Our normal opening hours will be 9am-5.30pm but it will be up to the tenants’ association if they want late night shopping.
The town's Chamber of Trade has said if the Cornmill opened late, it would follow suit.
‘As long as Burton Property Trust are landlords of the Cornmill, then it will not open on Sundays.’
Answering a question from director of development services, Mr Stephen Tapper, about creche facilities, Mr Small said there would be baby changing rooms but no creche.
Dates set for town centre traffic ban Darlington's town centre traffic ban comes into force on March 29.
Despite objections from cyclists and disabled people, the scheme is to be put into action for an experimental period of 18 months.
Under regulations agreed with Durham county council, all traffic will be excluded from Skinnergate and High Row between 10.30am and 4pm.
A report says Duke Street is to be narrowed at the east of Raby Terrace to one lane over the weekend of March 28 and 29.
Head of local planning and transport, Mr Ross Chisholm said: ‘Work on the scheme is going ahead on target.
Duke Street will be blocked on the Saturday morning to allow work to begin.’
Labour's Coun. Bill Dixon wanted signs advising weekend shoppers about the changes put up a week before the work starts.
Heavy cost of checking pollution It would cost Darlington £200,000 to keep a gas pollution detector working all year round, councillors heard.
During two days in November, the council used a laser outside British Gas on High Row to fire pulses of light at a mirror on the Marketplace clock.
The speed at which these pulses returned told environmental experts at the town hall about the build up of dangerous exhaust fumes on High Row.
Test results showed air pollution in Darlington was well below recommended safety levels.
However, councillors were interested in the feasibility of using the OPSIS laser scanner all year round.
Head of environmental services, Mr Keith Atkinson, told them it would cost around £200,000.
Coun. Mrs Eleanor Young (Lab) asked if a repeat of the November test could be made in the summer, when heat and humidity would show much higher pollution readings.
Labour's Coun. Jim Skinner said a planned review of bus routes could be modified to take account of air pollution levels.
He was responding to an observation made by planning chief, Mr Ross Chisholm, who said parked buses often ran their engines for more than the permitted two minutes.
Coun. David Lyonette (Lab) said he was surprised to find that bus diesel engines are thought to be major contributors towards town centre air pollution.
Dolphin Centre writs issued
Writs were issued this week against contractors who built Darlington Dolphin Centre.
The borough council blames them for serious defects found in the building.
Wiltshier Northern, which traded as Leslie and Company in the early '80s when the sports complex was built, was named in the writ.
Other defendants include engineering consultants Simpson Coulson and Partners and roofing contractor Broderick Structures.
The council faces a £4.5m. bill for repairs to the centre after defective mortar was found in the outer walls more than a year ago.
The building is currently shrouded in scaffolding and plastic sheeting, and rebuilding of the outer skin of bricks is expected to take up to two years.
The roof panels must also be replaced after they warped because of wind, rain and sun.
The complex is closed down as a safety precaution whenever gales of more than 80mph are forecast.
A statement issued yesterday morning by Mr Peter Kearsley, borough solicitor, said writs would be served as soon as a detailed ‘statement of claim’ had been finalised.
The writ was issued ‘against a number of parties for damages arising out of or in connection with the design, construction and supervision of construction of the Dolphin Centre in Darlington and in relation to advice given as to the design and construction between about 1978 and 1984.’
Pit Prose
JOKER In The Coal, the latest little book by the Rev John Stephenson (not as rattling as Elliot Conway's but possessing its funny moments) has arrived.
It is his 81st, is dedicated to the pit communities for which he still cares so deeply even though the pits have all but vanished, and costs £1 for a miner's sideways look at life which is probably no more.
It gets a mention here because any proceeds (and there probably will not be many) go to the All Saints Renovation Fund, the church where the Controversial Cleric is vicar, and the Hetton Silver Band, which lost its sheet music in an arson attack on its hut last month.
Major worry
MICHAEL Purtill probably thought he had stopped being featured in the newspapers.
His Harrogate-based Principal Hotels, owner of the Royal Station in York and the Golden Fleece in Thirsk, went into receivership two weeks ago with lots of attendant bad publicity.
But his Eastbourne hotel, the Wish Tower, happened to play host to the Prime Minister, John Major, just 11 days before the receivers were appointed.
The PM addressed a local Conservative meeting and praised Mr Purtill's operation as being a particularly splendid example of free- enterprise Tory-type culture.
Mr Purtill also posed for a picture with Mr Major, managing to rustle up a sheepish grin.
All very innocent, if a little unfortunate in timing, unless one is a Daily Mirror journalist prepared to fire one of the first shots in the election campaign and print the picture pointing out Mr Major's unfortunate choice of venue.
The Left-leaning tabloid has today given Mr Purtill rather more publicity than he could possibly have ever wanted.
ONE of the BSAD's top events, the national junior swimming championships at Darlington recently, gave a vivid glimpse of the Association's good work.
A hundred youngsters from ten regions competed for medals with a joyous intensity.
Although at poolside their disabilities were obvious, in the water they were simply swimmers, competing just as keenly as more able-bodied athletes.
The achievement of qualifying standards was often a great lift to a youngster, said Ian Smith, manager of the Northern region team that finished fifth in the championships.
He spoke of one boy ‘who didn't really have a lot going for him’ who managed to qualify to compete in regional athletics events.
‘It gave his life a great boost,’ said Smith.
‘He used to say ‘I'm an athlete’ and his pride in his achievement was obvious.’
Growing worldwide awareness and bodies like the BSAD mean a chance of travel for the more successful competitors.
Brian Cooper, 16, of Darlington, who has restricted movement down his right side, has swum or played table tennis for Britain in America, Hungary and Holland in seven years.
He said the championships were his last event; he was quitting swimming to concentrate on bodybuilding and his studies at Houghall Agricultural College, Durham, where he is training to be a shepherd.
He won gold and silver at the gala, and is likely to be replaced as one of the region's stars by John Purvis, 15, of Hartlepool who won three silvers and three bronze, and blind Christopher Ross of Ormesby who, in the youngest age category, won four golds and set a national record of 24.31 seconds for the 25 metres freestyle.
For Andrew McCreath the gala was one of double celebration.
He won his first gold medal, plus two silvers and two bronzes then learned he had been named Darlington's young sports-winner of the month in the award scheme aided by the North of England Building Society.
FIVE weeks before taking the field as a first-class county, Durham unveiled another major sponsor yesterday.
Rothmans are to put over £100,000 into the county over the next seven years and will also be title sponsors of the opening home match, the Sunday League game against Lancashire at Durham University on April 19.
A spokesman for Rothmans, who have factories in Darlington and Spennymoor, said: ‘We are a major employer in County Durham and it seemed natural to support the team as it sets off on a new challenge as a first-class county.
A CRICKET forum to discuss Durham's entry into the first-class game will be held at New College Durham, Framwellgate Moor, on March 26 (7pm).
The meeting will be chaired by the club's former assistant secretary Sam Stoker and the panel will include chairman Don Robson, Director of Cricket Geoff Cook, chief executive Mike Gear and director Tom Moffat.
All cricket enthusiasts are welcome and admission is free.
HARTLEPOOL United have an injury crisis in a week when they face promotion-challengers West Brom and a derby match with Darlington.
Manager Alan Murray has been forced to delay team selection for tomorrow night's visit to the Midlands.
Leading scorer Paul Baker and midfielder Brian Honour could both miss the match.
Murray said: ‘The odds are heavily against Baker playing.
‘Baker has been carrying a strained abdomen for some time.
He aggravated it in our win at Stockport County on Friday night.
‘Baker will have time to recover if he is left out for one match.
If he played at West Brom there would always be the risk of losing him for three or four matches.’
Torquay United have shown interest in the transfer-listed Tynesider, without meeting Pool's valuation.
Murray said: ‘We will not give Baker away on the cheap.
If anyone is looking for an experienced goal scorer he fits the bill.
‘Torquay's interest is over as far as we are concerned.’
Honour has been troubled with a knee injury for some time.
He had a cortisone injection yesterday after a visit to a specialist.
Unless the injury settles down, Honour could face minor surgery.
Defenders Mick Smith and Keith Nobbs are ruled out and Paul Cross is doubtful with a hamstring injury.
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin will deliver a win-or-bust message to his players before tonight's home game against Reading.
Three points will improve survival hopes and be a perfect boost for the derby at Hartlepool United on Saturday.
Hankin said: ‘I don't like putting players under pressure, but we are in a pressure situation.
‘We must string a few results together.’
Mark Prudhoe, Steve Gaughan and Kevan Smith should recover from knocks.
A final report on Reading's formation at Leyton Orient on Saturday will determine Hankin's team selection.
Chief scout Barrie Geldart watched Reading in November and the former Queen's Park Rangers player completed the dossier after watching the 1–1 draw at Brisbane Road.
Teenager Lee Ellison captured the headlines, and attracted League scouts to Feethams, with his goal scoring earlier in the season.
Ellison has slipped into the background and does not figure in Hankin's current League plans.
Hankin rates the Bishop Auckland youngster but feels he will benefit from a spell away from the first team.
‘I think Ellison was kept in the first team too long.
Lee lost a little sharpness and a little confidence,’ he explained.
‘That always happens with young players, especially when they are in a struggling side.
‘Ellison has been playing in a central midfield role for the youth team.
He has come through quite well.
Who knows, it could be his best position.
‘I'm sure Ellison will come good again.’
Team from: Prudhoe, McJannet, Cook, 0'Shaughnessy, Smith, Hinchley, Gaughan, Toman, Cusack, Cork, Pickering, Sunley, Borthwick, Tucker.
Soviet team for Olympics
FORMER Soviet republics yesterday agreed to join a unified team for the Olympic Games in Barcelona this summer.
Francois Carrard, director general of the International Olympic Committee, said the IOC had granted provisional recognition to the 12 former republics, who in exchange had agreed in principle to the condition of fielding a joint team.
Carrard said Ukraine and Georgia, which had sought to compete independently, were part of the agreement.
Fenech accused BOXING: Three-time world champion Jeff Fenech was one of four people accused of assaulting a Sydney shop owner yesterday.
The hearing is expected to last for a number of days.
Luton's loss FOOTBALL: Luton's annual reports and accounts for last season yesterday showed they made a trading loss of £254,000, which would have been nearly £1.6 million if they had not sold players.
The previous year they lost just over £1m, despite transfer profits of £640,000.
Stars' respects
ATHLETICS: Steve Cram and Linford Christie were among more than 2,000 mourners at the funeral of Great Britain team manager Les Jones near Portadown, County Armagh, yesterday.
Jones, 48, died at the European Indoor Championships in Genoa.
Top names enter DARTS: Dennis Priestley, the 1991 world champion, and many other big names are competing in the Northumbrian Open at Haggerston Castle this weekend.
Meet the players FOOTBALL: Darlington Supporters' Club are holding a Meet the Players night on March 24 at 7.30 in the cricket club.
BRING a storyteller into school and children's imaginations can create a fantasy world of three-dimensional monsters.
Five and six-year-olds at Gurney Pease Primary in Darlington are turning storyteller Doreen Dean's tale of The Dinosaur Week into colourful clay and plasticine models, collages and paintings.
Their fascination with dinosaurs has led to discussions on conservation and ecology, writing their own stories and practise in drawing from observation.
MOTHER Teresa, a Scout jamboree and the Pope may seem an odd combination but for stamp designer Gyula Vasarhelyi they have a common bond they all feature on his latest stamp designs for Mongolia.
Mr Vasarhelyi, who has been drawing for 30 years, has also just finished a collection of World Wide Fund for Nature stamps for export to Italy and Iceland.
And he is already preparing Christmas stamps for the Ascension Islands.
He said: ‘My Iceland stamps show falcons and rare birds.
The WWF give me the ideas and I design them.
The Italian ones show bears and reindeer.’
Mr Vasarhelyi, who lives in Oakdene Avenue, Darlington, features in the Guinness Book of Stamps with a record-breaking 6,000 designs for more than 120 countries.
He said: ‘I've always been fascinated by stamps and used to collect them when I was younger.
My first design was for Surinam.’
But one of the few countries he has not designed for is his homeland Hungary.
Mr Vasarhelyi fled the country in 1956 at the time of the Hungarian Revolution.
He said: ‘I was one of the leading students in the revolution against the Communist system.
‘The Secret Police looked for me just the day after I left and they kept looking for me on and off for a year.
The neighbours were told to tell the police if I came back.’
But he stayed on the move and following a scholarship from the Paderewski Foundation travelled to India, where he got food poisoning, Peru, where he taught art for two years, and Morocco where he met his first wife.
Mr Vasarhelyi said he has never refused any offers of work and hoped one day to draw for the Royal Mail.
HURWORTH mascot Russel Walker runs to score his team's sixth goal against HMS Hurworth in a friendly football game on Sunday.
Russel played in the last five minutes of the game which was part of a visit by crew members from the minesweeper to the village near Darlington which gave the vessel its name.
Final score: Hurworth 6 HMS Hurworth 3.
A LABOUR parliamentary candidate has accused the Government of ‘doctoring’ hospital waiting lists in the North.
Alan Milburn, who is fighting Tory MP Michael Fallon for the Darlington seat, said health ministers were insulting Northerners by claiming ‘that artificially removing patients from waiting lists is a success story.’
However, three of the North-East's Tory MPs dismissed Mr Milburn's accusations and said the NHS reforms had made real progress in shortening hospital waiting lists.
Mr Milburn said latest figures showed that over the last three years the number of patients removed from waiting lists without having received treatment had increased 145pc.
He said the figure included people who no longer needed treatment, those who had gone private and failed to inform the health authority, and those who were reassessed.
He said the figures, ‘implied that everyone removed from a hospital waiting list has been treated when blatantly that is not the case.
‘The numbers waiting for treatment have increased substantially in the past three years from 48,924 to 56,653.
But Tory MPs Tim Devlin (Stockton South), Alan Amos (Hexham) and Neville Trotter (Tynemouth), have issued a joint statement in defence of NHS reforms.
They said: ‘In our health authority region the number of people waiting over two years for hospital treatment has fallen by nearly 69pc since last March.
‘Our region has one of the lowest number of long-wait patients anywhere in the country.
‘We are confident that by the end of March there will be no one in the North-East on a waiting list for more than two years meeting guarantees given in the Patient's Charter.
But Mr Milburn warned that the Government would not be making resources available on a continuous basis to cut waiting lists.
DONATIONS IN KIND Varahwear of Willington, clothing.
Dewhirst of Peterlee, children's clothing.
Ever Ready of Tanfield Lea, two tons of batteries.
Vidor, torches.
Blue Circle of Eastgate, vehicles to transport materials.
Bowater of Darlington, boxes to pack donated goods.
UK Corrugated of West Auckland, boxes to pack donated goods.
Artix of Peterlee, vehicle to transport goods.
Allinson's of Darlington, a trailer to go to Kostroma.
Lyons Tetley, tea bags.
Eden Eggs of Castle Eden, eggs.
Magnet and Southern, duvet covers.
Derwentside District Council, lorry to go to Kostroma.
FISHING fans can find out about the benefits of restocking rivers at a public meeting tomorrow.
Experts from the regional branch of the National Rivers Authority will give advice on the pros and cons of restocking with fish.
Many Tees anglers would like to see rivers restocked to improve their sport.
But experts say unless it is carefully controlled, the fish stocks and entire eco-system could be affected.
The meeting, organised by the Tees Valley Rivers and Fisheries Association, is at the Croft Spa Hotel, Croft, near Darlington, at 7.30pm.
Admission is free and advice will also be given on coarse fisheries and brown trout fishing.
PLANS for an extra-smoochy end to nights out at a Darlington bar and nightclub were turned down yesterday.
Tony Yates applied to the licensing committee to extend his music licence until 12.30am at Brannegans and 2.30am at Club Lucy.
He said the extra half-hour would be a time for couples to wind down.
But members turned the application down as they felt it would cause more late-night trouble.
FORMER Barcelona Open winner David Whelan, who failed to qualify for this year's European Tour, hopes to play regularly in NE and NW PGA events.
He has entered the matchplay competition and has been drawn against South Moor professional Shaun Cowell in the first round.
Bedlington's Richard West faces a tough start to the defence of his title against Seaton Carew's former amateur international Alex Robertson.
Darren Pearce, last year's beaten finalist, has been drawn against his predecessor as Barnard Castle assistant, Craig Hamilton, who is to team up with Phil Harrison at Newby Grange, near Carlisle.
Among the other pro's on the move are Tim Jenkins, who has left Castle Eden to take over from Fred Thorpe at Stressholme, the Darlington municipal course, and Steve McKenna, who has returned to Tynemouth after spending a year in France.
DEFENSIVE blunders cost Quakers the chance to lift themselves off the bottom of the table.
After coming back magnificently from two goals down with 20 minutes remaining, two goals in the last five minutes meant the Quakers, who dominated the game, are still without a win at home in two months.
Darlington bombarded the Reading goal in the opening stages but without success, and went a goal down completely against the run of play after 40 minutes.
Toman slipped on the edge of his own box in trying to find Prudhoe, and instead he laid the ball on a plate for Craig Maskell to fire home.
Darlington manager Ray Hankin put on both substitutes at the start of the second half and the move almost paid dividends after 53 minutes when Toman split the defence perfectly to find John Borthwick in the area, but the substitute's left-foot shot was well held by the keeper.
But disaster struck again after 57 minutes.
Cork, who had dropped back into midfield, dashed to meet Reading full-back Steve Richardson in a race for the ball but he hoisted his attempted back pass over the stranded Prudhoe.
Quakers, however, hit back five minutes later.
Toman's curling left wing corner was held up in the wind and Borthwick reacted first in a crowded six-yard box to poke the ball home.
Reading cracked under intense pressure again after 69 minutes.
Mitch Cook wrong-footed the defence with a low free-kick and Cusack stole in to side-foot home.
But once again Quakers gifted Reading another goal after 86 minutes.
Pickering lost the ball on the edge of his own area allowing Gooding to thread the ball through for the unchallenged Maskell to shoot home.
Quakers were down and out a minute later when Mark McGhee crossed from the right for Maskell to complete his hat-trick.
MATCHFACTS Goals: Maskell (40 mins, 0–1), Cork og (57, 0–2), Borthwick (62, 1–2), Cusack (69, 2–2), Maskell (86, 23), Maskell (87, 2–4).
Referee: Mr K Hackett (Sheffield).
Attendance: 2,388.
Darlington: Prudhoe 7, McJannet 6, Cook 7, O'Shaughnessy 6, Smith 6, Hinchley 6,(Borthwick 45 mins, 7), Coverdale 6,(Tucker 45 mins, 7), Toman 7, Cusack 7, Cork 6, PICKERING 8.
Reading: Francis 6, Jones 6, Richardson 6, McPherson 6, Gooding 7, Streete 6, Dillon 6, Seymour 6, Williams 6 (McGhee 45 mins, 7), MASKELL 8, Lovell 6 (Taylor 82 mins).
MANAGER Ray Hankin blasted his side for ‘defending like amateurs’ after errors cost Quakers the chance of lifting themselves off the bottom of the table.
After coming back magnificently from two goals down with 20 minutes remaining, two goals gifted to Reading in the last five minutes consigned Darlington, who dominated the game, to defeat and left them without a win at home in two months.
And an angry Hankin hit out: ‘It was the worst performance since I took over.
We were so unprofessional and defended like amateurs.
We got what we deserved.’
Quakers completely dominated the opening stages, but without success, and went a goal down completely against the run of play after 40 minutes.
Toman slipped on the edge of his own box in trying to find Prudhoe, and instead he laid the ball on a plate for Craig Maskell to fire home.
The stunned home side were lucky not to be two behind in Reading's next attack.
Mick Gooding found himself completely unmarked ten yards out, but the ever-alert Prudhoe spread himself brilliantly to block his shot.
Hankin put on both substitutes at the start of the second half and the move almost paid dividends after 53 minutes when Toman split the defence perfectly to find John Borthwick in the area, but the substitute's left-foot shot was well saved.
Disaster struck again for the home side after 57 minutes.
Cork, who had dropped back into midfield, dashed to meet Reading full-back Steve Richardson in a race for the ball and hoisted his attempted back pass over the stranded Prudhoe.
Quakers hit back five minutes later.
Toman's curling left wing corner was held up in the wind and Borthwick reacted first in a crowded six yard box to poke the ball home.
The goal certainly gave the home side a lift and they could have been level a minute later.
Sadly Cork shot wide with only the keeper to beat.
Reading cracked under intense pressure again after 69 minutes.
Mitch Cook wrong-footed the defence with a low free-kick and Cusack stole in to side-foot home.
But once again Quakers gifted Reading another goal after 86 minutes.
Pickering lost the ball on the edge of his own area, allowing Gooding to thread the ball through for Maskell to shoot home.
Darlington were down and out a minute later when Mark McGhee crossed from the right for Maskell to complete his hat trick.
MATCHFACTS Goals: Maskell (40 mins, 0–1), Cork og (57, 0–2), Borthwick (62, 1–2), Cusack (69, 2–2), Maskell (86, 2–3), Maskell (87, 2–4).
Referee: Mr K Hackett (Sheffield).
Attendance: 2,388.
Darlington: Prudhoe 7, McJannet 6, Cook 7, O'Shaughnessy 6, Smith 6, Hinchley 6,(Borthwick 45 mins, 7), Coverdale 6,(Tucker 45 mins, 7), Toman 7, Cusack 7, Cork 6, PICKERING 8.
Reading: Francis 6, Jones 6, Richardson 6, McPherson 6, Gooding 7, Streete 6, Dillon 6, Seymour 6, Williams 6 (McGhee 45 mins, 7), MASKELL 8, Lovell 6 (Taylor 82 mins).
ON PANCAKE Tuesday we were asked to judge a pie competition.
Shriven to it, as it were.
This farinaceous mardi gras was at Ferryhill parish church, where 19 of St Luke's finest (the Vicar included) had plated their pastrywork.
Judging jointly was local butcher John Allison, multiple past winner of the Darlington and District Butchers Association's own pie-olympics.
(The column, incidentally, seems summarily to have been removed from that crusty contest's judiciary by a meat trade equivalent of the Lord Chancellor.)
At St Luke's they're also diving into an Easter Sunday duck derby at Croxdale, to keep the organ and restoration fund buoyant.
John Allison, formidable fund raiser for muscular dystrophy research, has 3,000 plastic duckettes in his garage (or so the canard has it.)
‘I loaned someone 2,000 and got 3,000 back,’ he said, mysteriously.
Should make a good picture some time.
The pies were heavenly, even the Vicar's.
Ena Brown, Ann Jones and Tracey Beale tied for second place; Val Walton won by a point.
Her champion contained mince, onions, mushrooms, tomato puree, mixed herbs and ‘good old Oxo,’ she said.
It is entirely coincidence that we have now given up pies for Lent.
FAITHFUL readers know that four years ago we wagered a magnum of bubbly against the proposed restaurant in the former TSB premises in Stanhope having a Michelin star by 1990.
Since the restaurant never materialised, the bet was safe.
Now, however, the elusive Mr Raymond Court-Hampton once a waiter at Lumley Castle has renewed his planning application.
Perhaps there'll be a champagne opening.
TAFF Gregory, the Army cook who won a Gulf War BEM (Eating Out August 14), has quickly marched on from the Hartforth Hall Hotel at Gilling West, near Richmond.
Now the former staff sergeant is taking orders with the Edwards twins at the good old St Cuthbert's Inn at Scorton, where we paraded the other night.
The military honours should continue.
IT'S 80 years on April 13 since the unthinkable, the unsinkable sank.
Allan Jones, landlord of the nautically themed Arden Arms at South Cowton near Northallerton, is a guest at a Titanic Day lunch to mark the memory.
Hosted in London by the Institute of Marine Engineers, it will replicate the first class lunch menu on the day before the ship hit an iceberg.
That fateful meal offered consomme or cockaleekie soup, fillet of brill, eggs a la argenteuile, chicken Maryland and corned beef with vegetables and dumplings.
The grill had mutton chops and mash; the buffet ran things like smoked salmon, potted shrimps and corned ox tongue.
Jones, once a Royal Yacht engineer and a lifeboat mechanic on Anglesey, has been tied up at the Arden Arms for two years.
A year ago this week the column poured praise upon his grub.
Disconcerting, therefore, to hear that the pub is being floated on the property market.
Just testing the water, says Allan.
YOU know, of course(the bairns do) what cheese is made backwards.
Edam.
BOOKMAKERS Ladbrokes revised its odds for who will win most seats at a General Election after the Budget.
The new prices are: Conservatives 1–2 favourites from 4–7; Labour 6–4 from 11–8; Liberal Democrats unchanged at 500–1; no overall majority unchanged at 4–5.
In Darlington yesterday bookie Frank Pinkney put the prices for who will win the key marginal seat, currently held by the Tories, as Conservatives 4–6 favourites; Labour 5–4; Liberal Democrats 200–1.
Ale anyway:
The Small Beer Festival at Darlington's Arts Centre next week goes ahead unaffected by fears that the autumn ale festival may be scrapped.
Arts Centre management said that although they will not be hosting the autumn event, next week's beer fair is part of the Spring Thing folk festival from March 19–22.
Pub change:
The former Ironworks pub at Coulson Street, Spennymoor, is to be converted to a car repair garage.
The scheme won planning permission at yesterday's Sedgefield District Council development committee.
FORMER Darlington goalkeeper Jeff Wealands, who went on to play for Hull City and Manchester United after leaving Feethams, has decided to quit senior football.
Wealands, 40, decided to retire after his present club, Altrincham, were beaten 4–1 in a Cheshire Cup tie.
Darlington-born Wealands joined his home-town club from Wolves in July 1970 and made 28 League appearances before being transferred to Hull in march 1972.
Another former North-East player, ex-Sunderland winger Terry Curran, has resigned as manager of HFS Loans League Goole Town.
Curran made ten League appearances for the Rokerites in 1986 during Lawrie McMenemy's ill-fated spell as manager.
Sportscast goes down
SPORTS organisations were hit in the pocket yesterday when satellite channel Sportscast collapsed.
The British Aerospace-owned company, which beamed live racing into 1,500 pubs and clubs, has folded after 18 months in service.
Around 30 courses will be deprived of the expected income from contracts with the firm.
Sportscast, whose coverage also included rugby, football, boxing and greyhound racing, had been on the market since last November.
Refs' dinner RUGBY: THE Durham and Northumberland Referees' Societies celebrate their centenaries next season and a centenary dinner is to be held at Newcastle Civic Centre on January 29, 1993.
Walsall saved
FOOTBALL: Fourth Division Walsall, losing £7,000 a week, have had their long-term future assured by a £250,000 grant from their local council.
Surrey signing CRICKET: Surrey have signed 23-year-old South African paceman Rudi Bryson for this season.
He will replace Waqar Younis, who will be touring England with Pakistan.
Town's reprieve FOOTBALL: A winding-up hearing yesterday gave Northampton chairman Michael McRitchie eight weeks to come up with a financial package to save the debt-crippled club.
Sponsor wanted NETBALL: Hartlepool team Saks, who have qualified for the finals of the NatWest Trophy at Croydon next month, are looking for sponsorship to help with their expenses.
Anyone interested should contact Julie Anne Williamson on  (daytime) or .
Parke to profit?
SQUASH:
Knaresborough's Simon Parke will be hoping to profit from the absence of ten times British Open winner Jahangir Khan when the HiTec sponsored event takes place next month.
Oarsmen wanted
ROWING: Tees Rowing Club, whose senior men's crew finished second in their division in the Tyne Head of the River, are seeking new members.
Anyone interested should ring Darlington .
TOP motorcycle ace Ian Todhunter got his 1992 season off to a flying start during a shake-down session at Cadwell Park.
Ian, who comes from Darlington, intended to take things steady with his Honda CBR 600 but he still ended up challenging the leaders.
His best result was a fine second place in the 1300cc race, against much larger and faster machines.
Ian has spent the winter season rebuilding his machine to make it one of the fastest 600s on the grid.
After his successful session, he said: ‘The Honda is an absolute missile.’
Hours of hard work on a dyno have produced extra horsepower, which Ian says he can't wait to unleash on the British Clubmans' Championship.
‘At Cadwell I was flying past the other 600s and even had the legs on some of the 750s.
I can't wait to get started on the championship itself.’
Todhunter has secured the backing of Saltburn-based East Coast Tyre Services.
‘Their offer was a great load of my mind,’ admitted Ian, who finished fourth in the British Clubmans' series last year.
‘Tyres could have really held me back this year if I didn't have the right ones.’
RALLYCROSS star Russell Spink sped to a superb victory in the second round of the Perdal Performance Croft Rallycross Challenge.
The Scotch Corner-based driver was beaten in the A series final by Dalton le Dale's Ian Sandwith and was determined to get his own back in the Superfinal.
But it was Sandwith's Mini which raced into the lead as the pack charged into the first corner.
Sandwith made a rare error midway round the first lap when he clipped a corner and lost speed.
Spink quickly moved around the leader, who was fighting to retain control, and drew steadily away.
Once he was at the front it was plain sailing for the Pagid UK sponsored Vauxhall driver, who finished four seconds clear.
Local drivers dominated the Colway Tyres class.
Steve Williams, from Seamer, took victory from Stokesley driver Geoff Wilson and Whitby's Nick Botham.
Less than a second separated the three Mini drivers.
Mistaken I
REFER to your report ‘Rivals ruining town fight, say Tories,’(Echo February 25).
Nowhere in our In Touch leaflet do we claim the Thornaby identity issue as our issue or our bandwagon as this matter angers and involves people of all shades of opinion in Thornaby.
We do claim credit for having detected this anger and for having spent a year in working to set up a public meeting at which Thornaby people could express it, but even there we were careful to be non-party political and as a result of that meeting, with the support of Thornaby people and the town's MP Tim Devlin, we are now carrying the campaign to the proper quarter.
We do accuse the Liberal Democrats of jumping on the bandwagon at a late stage, but in this they are running true to form and they are confusing the issue by doing their own irrelevant thing.
Also the meeting was not a year ago as your report states, but only this month and we don't say that Thornaby should not be part of Stockton borough.
Yarm has its own council and is still part of Stockton borough.
We would like to be the same.
Neil Petty, 28 Bader Avenue, Thornaby.
A LOW-FLYING duck was fatally injured in Darlington yesterday despite the rescue efforts of shopworkers.
Now it is set to be the unofficial mascot of staff at Harper and Harper furniture, Northgate, who have taken the bird to a taxidermist to be stuffed.
The mallard was flying across Northgate yesterday morning when it collided with a bus outside the Cannon Cinema.
Staff at Harper and Harper rushed to help the stricken bird.
David Harper said: ‘At first we thought it was just stunned and then we realised it was really in a very bad way.’
By the time expert medical help could arrive the unlucky mallard had died.
Mr Harper said: ‘It was such a beautiful thing, it was terrible to watch it die.’
The staff agreed the bird was too beautiful to be thrown out and decided to make it a mascot.
PLANS to celebrate the 150th anniversary of North Road station, Darlington, take a step forward next week when the town's Railway Preservation Society meets the borough council to consider possible cash help.
Two weeks ago The Northern Echo reported that Darlington council had not given any money to help mark the occasion at the rail museum.
Barrie Lamb, chairman of the Preservation Society, said the town had lost out on a major attraction to the North-East.
DARLINGTON mum Kate Millar served up success on a plate when she entered a national cookery competition.
A panel of experts decided Kate's winning menu made the best use of French cheese and awarded her the top prize a Concorde flight to Paris for a supersonic celebration.
Kate was one of eight lucky finalists to be chosen from hundreds of entrants in the competition organised by Living magazine.
She was invited to London where she dished up her special menu against the clock aubergine and tomatoes with a baked brie lattice followed by salmon with le Roule cheese.
Further culinary delights await Kate and her husband when they visit the French capital a special dinner will be laid on for them at La Maison Androuet, the city's speciality cheese restaurant.
DARLINGTON man Paul Scott has been named Britain's best security officer in a national contest.
Paul, 36, said he was proud to have won the title against guards from across the UK and Eire.
He was chosen by a judging panel, which included senior police and fire officers, because of his professional approach and thorough knowledge of the job.
He was presented with £1,000 at a ceremony in Devon.
Paul, recently named Northern Security Guard of the Year by the International Professional Security Association, works at Darlington and Simpson Rolling Mills, in Whessoe Road.
He proved his professionalism when he helped police catch two armed robbers at the site after raising the alarm.
Paul, who lives at Washbrook Villas, Darlington, has worked as a security guard for 13 years.
IT'S not too late to sign up for a sponsored step aerobics session at Darlington's Dolphin Centre later this month.
The class will take place at the Dolphin Centre on Sunday March 29 between 10.30am and 12.30pm to earn cash for Darlington Day Care Centre Appeal.
Stepping is the new fashion in exercise and if you haven't tried it this could be the chance to give it a go.
Organisers of the appeal want to raise £637,000 to build the day care centre, which will act as a meeting place for all old folk especially the lonely, frail and housebound, and provide a range of services.
So far £114,957 has been raised but another £200,000 has to be found this year to keep the appeal on target.
A coffee morning hosted by Mavis Elders at her home in Grove Farm, Bradbury, raised £100 which was also very welcome.
Appeal organisers would like anyone else thinking of holding a coffee morning or jumble sale in aid of a worthy cause to do it for the day care centre.
Events like that would help convince charitable trusts with thousands of pounds at their disposal that the people of Darlington are backing the appeal.
Contact Moira Shields at Farmway for more details.
Roadshow run
SHOPPERS in Newcastle and the MetroCentre found there was Time for School when the department of Education and Science Roadshow hit the NorthEast.
The four-day exhibition advising parents how their children can get the most out of their education is a trial run that could lead to more permanent advice centres being set up throughout the country.
DARLINGTON Railway Preservation Society driver Cyril Flower and chairman Barrie Lamb inspect the running gear on the steam engine painstakingly restored by the society's members.
The railway enthusiasts have spent six months and £5,000 repairing the Peckett Locomotive in time for the start of the steam weekends.
Mr Lamb said: ‘We have put new bearings on the wheels, checked the brakes and the boiler.’
The 1953 engine has returned to its home as it was originally built for the Darlington Gas Board.
It will take pride of place at the series of steam weekends in Darlington which start on May 23.
Bingo evacuated due to gas leak
MORE than 100 bingo players were evacuated from the Gala Club bingo hall, in Spennymoor, when a gas leak was discovered.
British Gas said it was from a fractured pipe.
Have-a-go:
Staff and students at Bishop Auckland College yesterday celebrated Adult Learners' Week by holding a Come and Have a Go day.
The college's oldest student, Edgar Pryce, 84, of Newton Aycliffe, cut a ribbon to launch the celebrations.
Pupil's title:
Neil Flockett, 17, of St John's RC Comprehensive School in Bishop Auckland, has become its official photographer.
He is responsible for coverage of school sporting, academic, fund raising and competitive events.
His work has been used in promotional material and featured in regional Catholic publications.
Sarah's speech:
Sarah Harker, 15, of Rumby Bank, Howden-le-Wear was voted best speaker of the evening for her discourse on animal experiments at an English Speaking Society schools event in Durham earlier this week.
Schools results:
Tudhoe St Charles primary school won four of the six events in the last cross-country race of the season for youngsters from Spennymoor and Ferryhill, and shared the honours for two other events with Rosa Street school.
Garage break-in:
Six juveniles were arrested after breaking into Park View garage, at Chilton in which an £800 window was smashed and 12 bags of crisps taken.
Dance date:
Woodham Golf Club will hold a ceilidh in Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre on March 20.
Annual meeting:
Weardale Field Study Centre will hold its annual general meeting at the Dales Centre in Stanhope at 7pm on March 23.
Love story:
Durham Theatre Company's production of Women in Love will be staged at the Ranch in Ireshopeburn, Upper Weardale at 8pm on March 20 can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
Rovers' return
RUGBY man Billy Corkin, another Hartlepool nut, is back home with a proud picture.
What did Billy Corkin do that Will Carling could never do, he asks long lost friends.
The answer is that Billy got his hands on the rugby world cup.
Eight years a Hartlepool Rover, 14 times capped by Durham ‘front row unfortunately, my knees are telling the story now’ he emigrated to Australia in 1958.
‘I had three kids, Australia seemed to offer them better prospects than England and I was proved right,’ he says.
At 66 he's also just gained a sports science degree, which included running 10k.
‘I got there eventually but I couldn't now, not with all the Hartlepool pies inside me.’
He coached rugby at Sydney University, alma mater to Farr Jones, Egerton and Rowland.
When they returned in triumph with the cup coach Corkin and his wife were invited to the reception.
‘I don't think the gap between English and Australian rugby is very wide at all,’ he says.
‘England are probably more skilled, but Australia are more aggressive tacklers.’
He's home for ten weeks.
‘People ask why I don't tour round seeing the sights, but I could see sights in Australia and be warm.
‘I just want to see Hartlepool and Hartlepool people.
Wherever you travel, there's no place like it in the world.’
Open secret?
OBVIOUSLY Sky high, a reader writes about all the North-East advertising hoardings even one for Catherine Cookson country around Stamford Bridge for Monday's Cup tie with Sunderland.
What particularly intrigues him is the board promoting Banks, the West Cornforth based mining and civil engineering group.
Was it, he wonders, a prelude to opencasting at Stamford Bridge?
‘Looking at the state of the pitch on television,’ he adds, ‘they could easily argue that such an application would be an environmental improvement.’
Banks Group company secretary David Martin denies that they have designs on the Chelsea mudflats, however.
‘The advertising agency told us they wanted to make the ground look as much like Roker Park as possible,’ he says.
In any case, adds Martin, it would be impossible to opencast the Stamford Bridge pitch.
‘It looks like the London Underground got there first.’
Dead good
SHOTTON Comrades, whose Road to Wembley brought brief fame last autumn, have sent us a copy of their incredible programme 60 pages, 25p.
The sale, apparently, considerably exceeds the average crowd.
Just about everything is covered, including the smashing little club's perilous position near the foot of the Northern League Second Division there's an advertisement for the Samaritans.
Solid support
NEW Darlington manager Ray Hankin was quick to applaud the volume of vocal backing after the Quakers' 1–0 win at Bradford last weekend.
Perhaps from his seat in the dug out he was unable to hear the exact words, however.
Our man on the visitors' end assures us that the chant was ‘Big fat Ray's black and white army’ virtually throughout.
TOMORROW is a pretty big day for David Linighan, Hartlepool born skipper of Second Division championship chasers Ipswich Town.
The right results could see the East Anglians overhaul faltering favourites Blackburn Rovers for the first time.
But while Saturday is vital, today's news from Hillsborough occupies the immensely likeable Linighan's mind even more.
His elder brother Andy is already a £1.25m central defender at Arsenal, albeit an apparent spare part ‘as sick as a chip’ says David in George Graham's 13 piece jigsaw.
Twins Brian and John Linighan, 18, have been YTS apprentices at Sheffield Wednesday for the past two years.
This morning they expect to hear if they'll be offered professional terms.
Four brothers simultaneously in the Football League could be unique, though David suspects that a quartet of Clarkes also gave ‘family club’ a new dimension.
Throughout a long afternoon in Ipswich, however, we were unable to remember beyond Wayne, Derek and dear old Sniffer (there was also Frank, not to be confused with the former Newcastle United fullback, Frank Clark).
‘I'm really on tenterhooks about the twins,’ admits David.
‘Brian particularly has had a good run in the reserves, but I'm sure they'll both do well.’
He is one of five brothers of a close Catholic family.
Brian.
his dad, played for Lincoln City and once for Darlington on loan; eldest brother Mark was on Hartlepool's books and now enjoys Northern League football with Murton.
Gemma, their sole sister, was born 10 years ago when Olwyn Linighan one of 11 was 43 and her husband 46.
‘She's what everyone always wanted, a proper little girl,’ says David.
‘Virtually as soon as she was born our mum had her down for dancing classes, never mind football.
She's a pretty good dancer, too.’
David, 27, has been at Portman Road since 1988 but falls upon a North-East emissary like fond father upon prodigal son.
He talks often of events ‘up home.’
True happiness is being back with his extended family on the Headland.
‘Suffolk folk will tell you it takes a long time to get to know them, and I soon found out it's true.
‘Ipswich is a smashing club, but the town is a cemetery with lights.’
He provides the guided tour of the ground First Division facilities, Northern League friendliness before adjourning for a couple of halves in a town centre pub called the Black Adder, run by former Ipswich star Alan Brazil.
Brazil looks in briefly.
He is known as Belly, it's not difficult to see why.
Cheltenham races are being broadcast in one corner, the Budget in another.
We recall giving silent thanks that no one had ten bob for the juke box.
The barman establishes that we know Eric Gates and asks how his pigeons are getting on.
‘I used to live next door to him in Ipswich, great lad,’ he says.
David Linighan, known at the club as Linny and in the town simply as Skipper, talks above the commotion as amiable as he is unaffected.
As kids, of course, they were football daft.
‘There were only three of us at first, and we were up the field all day, every day.
‘If no one else turned up we'd play three pots in, at night we'd get nearer the light in the pub car park and try to play in the pitch black.
‘Whatever weather we always seemed to come back filthy.
It must have been murder for our mum.’
nndy was already with Hartlepool when the 17-year-old David made his debut.
Both were time served joiners, Brian Linighan insisting that his talented sons learned a trade too.
‘It's so easy to break your leg,’ he'd say.
David was just hours from joining the Royal Engineers (‘I'd passed the medicals and everything’) when Pool manager Billy Horner offered full time terms.
Over 100 central defensive appearances followed.
‘Hartlepool really set me up.
The football mightn't have been very good but it was a great time, magic.
‘If I had my time again, I'd never want to do anything different from that.’
After a lengthy loan spell at Leeds in which he failed to break into the first team, he signed for Shrewsbury in 1986 for £25,000.
He'd also married Kay, a Hartlepool girl, and now there's a talkative two-year-old called Chloe and an English bull terrier whose name we forgot to enquire.
‘I met Kay in a nightclub but did my courting in Woolworth's where she worked,’ he says.
‘Every time she saw me coming she'd dive beneath the counter.’
Two years later Ipswich paid a club record £300,000, his value decided by a transfer tribunal.
‘I kept telling people no one was worth that much.
that's how naive I still was.
‘Eventually I realised that the money was nothing to do with me.
You're just a commodity to that company.’
Former West Ham boss John Lyall made him captain (‘a shock to everyone’) soon after becoming manager in 1990.
Last season Linny won all five Player of the Year awards; the latest club newspaper describes him as ‘tough as teak, the cornerstone of the Town defence.’
‘The gaffer is brilliant, a real gentleman,’ he says.
‘He took us right back to basics, started us again on the simplest things.
‘He's taught me, and is still teaching me, so many things about football and about when you can do things and when you can't.
‘We can win the Second Division and hold our own in the Premier.
There's the nucleus of a very good side here, the young lads have been brought up the Lyall way.’
He has no plans, however, to follow his mentor into management.
‘To be a manager you have to have a strong personality, and I'm not really like that unless I've had 23 pints.
‘I like to think I'm not big headed either, you couldn't be the way we were brought up.
Up home they'd soon know what to call you if you started going on like that.
‘I don't really know what I'll do when I pack up, but I'll quite probably end up with my tools back in Hartlepool.
‘Hartlepool is always the same and I'd have no objection at all to doing that.
If it's good enough for my mates, why shouldn't it be good enough for me?’
HARTLEPOOL manager Alan Murray broke the club's transfer record again yesterday when he signed striker Andy Saville from Barnsley for £60,000.
Murray moved to clinch a quick deal on his return journey from West Bromwich yesterday morning after leading scorer Paul Baker was rushed into hospital for a hernia operation.
Baker will miss out on a proposed £80,000 move to Torquay and Pool's remaining Third Division matches this season.
Saville, however, will travel from South Yorkshire today and make his debut in the derby match against Darlington at the Victoria Ground tomorrow.
The 27-year-old who played for Hull City, his home town club, and Walsall before joining Barnsley will link up in attack with Lenny Johnrose, who Murray signed for a then-record £50,000 from Blackburn Rovers last month.
‘We've got a bargain,’ said Murray, who had a bid for Saville rejected before he signed Johnrose.
‘I've been looking at him since the start of the season.
I'm well pleased to have got him.
‘It's a measure of how much progress we've made in the past 18 months.’
With their new signing on show and wins at Stockport and West Brom behind them, Pool will line up in buoyant mood against their relegation-threatened local rivals tomorrow.
Murray warned, however: ‘What we haven't got to do now is fall flat on our faces.
We've got to look to keep the momentum going.’
While Darlington are deep in trouble at the foot of the Third Division, Hartlepool still have an outside chance of forcing their way into a play-off position.
SAVILLE FACTFILE Born: Hull, 12 Dec 1964 Height: 6ft Weight: 12 st Career record Hull City (1985–89): 87 apps, 20 goals Walsall, £100,000 (1989–90): 33 apps, 5 goals Barnsley, £80,000 (1990–92): 92 apps, 22 goals (incl 26 apps, 7 goals this season).
DARLINGTON striker Steve Mardenborough looks like missing the derby.
Mardenborough, who has missed the last three games with a medial ligament injury, could be sidelined again after he pulled out of Wednesday's reserve game at the last minute.
Assistant manager Mick Tait said: ‘He was pencilled in to play, but he withdrew himself before the game.’
Flu victims Steve Gaughan, who was absent from Tuesday's disastrous defeat by Reading, and Garry Hinchley, who played but came off at half time, are slowly recovering, and should be ready for consideration.
Also in the reckoning could be young defender Sean Gregan, who has been suffering from tendonitis in the ankle, and according to Tait, ‘wouldn't be far away.’
Looking at Saturday's game, Tait said: ‘Hartlepool was always going to be a hard game, but it's even harder after we lost the other night.’
DARLINGTON'S unsettled Gary Gill, having become a free agent, has joined Fourth Division promotion chasers Cardiff City.
The 27-year-old Gill, part of the Quakers' promotion squad last season, first interested Cardiff coach Eddie May at the start of the present campaign.
May said: ‘I immediately renewed my interest in him when he became available.’
Middlesbrough-born Gill has signed until the end of the season and goes straight into the squad for tomorrow's important game at Scunthorpe.
May added: ‘Gill is a good player and will do a job for me until the end of the season.
When he became available the opportunity to sign him was too good to pass up.’
Gill joined Darlington from Middlesborough and another former Ayresome Park player, Alan Walsh, is thinking over a move to City and is likely to sign on Monday.
Darlington-born Walsh who made three League appearances for Boro after joining from Horden Colliery Welfare, departed from Feethams for Bristol City.
He was a key figure in the Quakers' side for six seasons and played an equally important role with Bristol City until he moved abroad to play for Turkish side Beskitas.
Walsh returned to Britain this season and has had trials with several clubs the latest being First Division Southampton.
The 35-year-old Walsh also tried his luck with Shrewsbury, Huddersfield and Walsall.
IT CANNOT possibly be true, of course, that all male anti-vivisectionists are in need of a good razor blade themselves.
It merely seemed that way yesterday.
Unshaven chins appeared regularly at the Animal Amnesty stand in Darlington.
This was not designer stubble, this was getting up in the morning and not being bothered.
Or at least, not being bothered about a few whiskers when there were animals to be saved.
The man on the stand, who also looked as he could do with the loan of a GII, was proffering a petition to passers-by.
This gave them the chance to sign against experiments with animals in the development of such products as perfumes.
He assured anybody who asked that his group was also against violence in furthering its cause.
Whiskers or not it seemed worth signing.
‘We're quite specific about that,’ he said.
‘We don't have any truck with it.
It's in our leaflets.
Peaceful protest is what we're about.’
The leaflet to which he referred published by AA in the North-East was about blood sports rather than vivisection.
This goes over the old arguments.
‘The hunt is about fun, and not conservation or pest control,’ it says.
It also criticises the occasional approach of police and magistrates in ‘stretching the interpretation of different criminal law provisions so as to attempt to criminalise what are essentially lawful and peaceful acts.’
Non-violent AA doubtless it is, but it is unafraid of using strong language.
It was urging people to join a group trying ‘to prevent our countryside from being turned into a bloodbath for the amusement of the cruel and the wicked’.
In one argument it is pronouncing that huntsmen are having fun, while five sentences later it is saying they are cruel and wicked.
But they stood at their rickety table in the cold gathering signatures.
Such devotion is to be admired, no matter how much facial hair you have to keep you warm.
SIX years ago Liza Minnelli got sick and tired, as she puts it, of being sick and tired.
Drink and drugs were threatening to turn her life into a repeat performance of that of her mother, Judy Garland.
But Liza (with a ‘Z’) kicked the bad habits today her only addictions are cigarettes and caffeine and gets back into the old song-and-dance routine for Stepping Out, released on CIC Video on March 20.
She stars as tap teacher Mavis Turner, a chorus line dancer who never quite made it, in a screen version of the hit Richard Harris play among the motley crew of would be tap dancers at a church hall evening class.
Director Lewis Gilbert has already had considerable success transferring stage plays including Alfie, Shirley Valentine and Educating Rita to the big screen.
BAFTA Award winner Julie Walters co-stars in Stepping Out as Vera, a bored British-born housewife with social pretensions.
We have ten videos and ten bright pink Stepping Out bags as prizes in a 7 Days Plus competition.
To win: Tell us who played the title roles in the films Alfie and Shirley Valentine.
Answer, together with your name, address and telephone number, to Liza Competition, 7 Days Plus, Features Dept, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Usual North of England Newspapers competition rules apply.
Closing date for entries is Friday March 20.
Senders of the first ten correct answers out of the hat will each receive a Stepping Out video and bag.
Lottery fun
THE new national lottery is great news.
It will provide harmless fun for millions and give valuable funding to the Arts and sports.
But why won't Labour support it?
The Arts Council and Sports Council have enthusiastically welcomed the move, but all Roy Hattersley can do is trot out allegations of electioneering and say he'll ‘consider’ keeping it.
As for the Liberal Democrats, responding with ‘gambling is in many cases an addiction’ is absolutely laughable.
Do they really think people can't be trusted with buying tickets in a lottery?
Andrew Prest, 6, Pentland Grove, Darlington.
A FEW days ago one of your correspondents gave a much more reasonable answer to the bus stop question use Tubwell Row.
I would like to make a slight amendment.
Make the ‘low flags’ area a nonstopping zone that is, retain the bus stops on the High Row side but do not allow any stopping at all on the lower side, say, from Woolworths to the Tubwell Row corner.
Then at least we would avoid the congestion of bus traffic along there and if townbound traffic was limited to one stop on the museum side of Tubwell Row instead of two stops in 100 yards we might get somewhere in more senses than one.
M Pattison, 26 Pease Street, Darlington.
I WOULD like to thank Eden Travel for coming to the rescue of Albert Hill and keeping a bus service for us.
However it is only a six months trial so I am told, so come on residents of Albert Hill catch that bus and keep the service going.
After all the signatures were collected for the petition it would be a pity to lose this service as well.
Mrs N Raper, 13 Grey Street, Darlington.
DARLINGTON Railway Preservation Society members have spent six months and £5,000 repairing the Peckett Locomotive in time for the start of the steam weekends.
Society chairman Barrie Lamb said: ‘We have put new bearings on the wheels, checked the brakes and the boiler.’
The 1953 engine has returned to its home as it was originally built for the Darlington Gas Board.
It will have pride of place at the series of steam weekends in Darlington which start May 23.
A BRIDE-TO-BE says she could have been stranded after a wedding car company disappeared.
Jacqueline Stobbs booked a Rolls-Royce and a Mercedes from a firm called Darlington Wedding Cars.
Miss Stobbs paid an £85 deposit for which she received a written receipt and agreed to pay the balance before her June wedding.
But when she called into the business on Yarm Road earlier this week, she found Darlington Wedding Cars had vanished.
Now Miss Stobbs' mother Margaret has warned other brides: ‘Check your car is still available or you could be in trouble.’
Mrs Stobbs, who lives in Killerby, near Darlington, said: ‘It would be terrible if a wedding is ruined just because the chauffeur doesn't turn up.
I don't know how many other people booked with this company but they should be warned.’
Another auto trader has now moved into the Yarm Road site used by Darlington Wedding Cars.
He has no idea where the limousine hire business has gone.
The company's telephone number has also been disconnected and the post office has no forwarding address for mail.
Mrs Stobbs added: ‘My daughter chose these people on the recommendation of friends.
It now looks as if we will have try again.’
A spokesman for Durham County Council's Trading Standards department said: ‘This sounds like a very worrying incident and we will certainly be looking into the circumstances surrounding it.’
Darlington police said they had received no complaints about the missing company.
A BEER festival is back on after the council overturned an arts centre's refusal to hold it.
Last night just days after management at the Darlington Arts Centre said there would be no space in the autumn programme for the festival Darlington Council's recreation committee chairman, Labour councillor Dot Long, said the town's Campaign for Real Ale could count on the venue.
Last year's festival was so successful that arts centre staff had to turn people away as early as 8.15pm.
A spokeswoman said this was why the event had been scrapped.
Mike Bennett, head of the council's community services, said: ‘The matter has been dealt with internally.’
The row does not affect the Small Beer Festival which starts at the Arts Centre on Thursday.
New pool:
A £2.5m leisure complex at Queen Ethelburga's College, at Thorpe Underwood near York, is to be opened on March 21.
It includes a heated swimming pool for the 220 pupils.
Dale walk:
Richmondshire Ramblers make an 11 mile Teesdale walk tomorrow.
The group, and anyone who wants to join, meet in Nun's Close car park, Richmond, at 9.30am.
The walk's leader will be Ted Darwin who may be contacted on Richmond .
Concert night:
Richmondshire Musical Society presents a concert featuring music by Haydn and Vaughan Williams on April 4 at 7.30pm in Richmond Middle School Hall.
Tickets cost £5, £4 with concessionary prices at £4 and £3.
They are available from choir members, Jumpers shop in Richmond or Greensleeves in Northallerton.
TRANSSEXUAL Mark Rees is meeting Samaritans in Darlington next week.
Mr Rees, who comes from Tunbridge Wells, has waged a long running campaign to have his sex change legally recognised.
Samaritans hope his views will give them a better insight into the problems faced by people who feel trapped inside their own bodies.
Marjorie, a Samaritans spokeswoman, said: ‘We have received a number of calls from people who say they want to change sex.
‘When you hear someone who is in that situation it becomes obvious what they are going through.
Hopefully Mark's talk will help us better understand the difficulties of being a transsexual.’
Mr Rees will be talking to volunteers at the Samaritans' annual general meeting held in St Augustines Church Hall on Wednesday, March 18, at 7.30pm.
‘Everyone is welcome to come along and hear what he has to say,’ said Marjorie.
Craft fair:
An Easter craft fair will be held at Wear Valley District Council's Civic Centre in Crook on April 4.
No objection:
South-West Durham Community Health Council had decided to offer no objection to local health authority plans to close the geriatric ward at Sedgefield Community Hospital.
Boot sale:
Shildon AFC Social Club hopes to hold car boot sales throughout the summer.
The decision follows a successful sale at the Dean Street football ground yesterday.
Antiques wanted:
Antique furniture, jewellery and glassware is wanted for a fund-raising sale next month.
Northland Methodist Church hope to raise money to extend the church for extra function rooms.
Anyone who wishes to donate goods for the April 4 sale should contact Nora Pugh on , Vic and Val Hutchens on  or Northland Church on .
Meeting date:
A meeting of the Public Monuments and Sculpture Association will be held at Darlington Arts Centre on Thursday starting at 7.30pm, and anyone interested in antiquities, especially monuments, is welcome to attend.
Mother's dinner:
Members of Aycliffe Young People's Group are holding a Mother's Day dinner at St Francis church on Saturday, March 28, at 7.30pm.
The three-course candlelit dinner costs £3 per person and includes special entertainment.
LUGGING furniture around may not be everyone's idea of fun.
But for Mavis Hindmarsh and her team of volunteers furniture removal is a labour of love.
Every week Mavis, a manager of the Darlington Help Furniture scheme, helps needy families in the town by selling unwanted furniture at low prices.
Everything from beds to saucepans, crockery and curtains are sold at the Borough Road warehouse and prices range from 50p to £25.
People on benefit are referred to the scheme.
Chairman Cecil Robinson said they now hope to extend the scheme to other parts of the county.
‘By paying for their furniture, even if it's just a token amount, people value it more,’ he said.
The project needs to raise money for a new van.
Anyone who can help or who wants to know more about the scheme should ring Darlington .
A FOOTBALL signed by Newcastle and Sunderland players is to be auctioned for charity.
And all money raised will go towards funds for the 7th Darlington Sea Scouts.
Sea Scouts Claire Lowis, Samantha Lambird, Christopher Pinnegar and Mark Gent are seen with the ball, which will be sold to the highest bidder.
HIGH FLYER Julie Peeke will loop the loop next month on her first trip up into the skies.
Julie, from Minors Crescent, Cockerton, Darlington, will go up in a glider to raise money for the Darlington Meningitis Support Group.
She said: ‘I have never been in an aeroplane and I am a little bit nervous.’
Julie, 33, will fly from Teesside Airport to RAF Dishforth.
Julie set up the meningitis support group a year ago after her 13-year-old daughter Alison died from the illness.
Anyone who wishes to sponsor Julie for her flight on April 5 should telephone Darlington .
Prawn yawn:
A doctor had a good night's sleep at the weekend among frozen prawns.
Dr John Apps, whose practice is in Neasham Road, Darlington, spent the night in a frozen food store in preparation for a trip to the Arctic on April 5.
Leading voice:
Town Crier Alan Booth beat 75 schoolchildren when they carried out an experiment on shouting.
Alan, who was won several national awards, agreed to compete against all 75 children at Hinderwell Junior School, Scarborough, who were carrying out a topic on communications.
Spring clean:
About 20 people from Low Coniscliffe, near Darlington, spent yesterday giving their village a spring clean.
The villagers, who were provided with free refuse sacks and gloves by the borough council, picked up litter along the River Tees embankment.
I WRITE concerning the plight of the town of my childhood Thornaby.
After more than 20 years of domination by Stockton-on-Tees in the real county of Durham, Thornaby in the North Riding has now virtually lost its identity with the Post Office.
Many private addresses in Thornaby now only contain the word Stockton, Thornaby being dropped from the address completely.
We are also told that the new Teesdale and Teesside Park developments are in Stockton-on-Tees.
I am not against Stockton as a town, but the bureaucrats must realise that people identify with real communities not false creations.
Thornaby is a real community separated from the community of Stockton by a river which also forms a real geographical county boundary.
Whatever happened to local government in this area?
Politicians, councillors, Post Office bureaucrats and all must recognise that the people of Thornaby have their own separate identity in a totally different county from Stockton.
Nigel Wilkin, 63 The Slayde, Yarm, North Riding.
Trust gratitude
I WAS very surprised to see P. Sampson's letter (HAS February 22) attacking the National Trust and feel I must reply.
Three years ago I joined the Trust as a single member and later converted to family membership.
We have since visited many Trust properties, but never left one without feeling gratitude that we have been able to share the pleasures of visiting such fine examples of our heritage.
A. Ellerton, 11 Stanhope Avenue, Hartlepool.
ANYONE would think from the controversy over the English Shakespeare Company's production of Macbeth at Darlington Civic Theatre that the company are completely unaware of theatre finance.
Producing a play without an interval these days is asking for trouble.
This they will surely know.
On the other hand, it is a sad state of affairs when the profits from drinks and ice cream come before Shakespeare.
Perhaps this is the fault of the council for not giving Mr Goddard enough financial support.
It is all very well to put money into refurbishing a theatre.
Anyone can do that, but that's not the end of the story.
It's only the beginning.
Doreen Dean, 58 Cleveland Avenue, Darlington.
I have read David Isaacs' review of the RSC's Romeo and Juliet (Echo March 5) and felt I had to respond.
Why are theatre reviews always so negative?
They cannot possibly be any guide to potential theatre-goers.
If watching plays is so painful for David that he wishes he were somewhere else, then I for one would be glad to take his place.
As to the criticism of Claire Holman and Michael Maloney, I feel that this was excessively malicious.
Far from an ‘all too visible’ mumbler, I found Maloney to be well worth seeing.
I suggest that if David Isaacs hates his job as much as he seems to, then he be replaced by someone with an appreciation of the theatre and a more positive and informative approach.
Alison J. Yates, 64 Canterbury Road, Newton Hall, Durham.
I REFER to the Alan Amos story.
Is our society sick when an apparently minor happening which merely merited a caution can destroy a man's career, indeed his life, for many years to come?
How can we be so arrogant as to say ‘do as I do?’
I thought most people knew about genes nowadays.
Throughout recorded history people have displayed different sexual preferences and that's not likely to change.
Equally important is the fact that we have a Sex Discrimination Act.
Would Mr Amos have been pilloried in this way if the other person had been a female?
A French couple found coupling in a London museum recently were simply sent away from the fascinated onlookers.
Finally, with all the crime and terrorism besetting the nation, and especially London, how can we afford police resources to roam around Hampstead Heath for this purpose?
Surely the time for action is when someone complains of harassment.
Horace Wilson, 18 Ayton Drive, Darlington.
Could you please tell me if sauna bathing is good for your health.
My friend has his own sauna and spends what I consider to be excessive amounts of time in the sauna cabin with temperatures over 80 degrees centigrade.
He spends on average four to five hours per day, seven days a week.
He does not agree this could be harmful.
I have two or three short sessions every week and feel great benefit for my cervical spondylosis condition and other arthritic pains.
I agree with you that the length of time your friend is spending in the sauna does seem rather excessive.
However, as long as he makes sure that he does not become dehydrated by having regular fluid intake I can't see what harm this will do him.
My sister, who is 80, lives on her own and takes no tablets.
Ten years ago she had a hernia operation.
Seven years ago, because of bad circulation, she had her leg amputated.
She is in a wheelchair and must weigh 18–20 stones, have at least a 54-inch chest and upwards of 70 inches around a massive stomach hernia.
Her doctor says she cannot have another operation as it would kill her.
She is so cheerful and manages to cook and clean for herself.
Is there no hope for taking this hernia growth or whatever it is away?
I do understand your concern for your sister, but I think that her doctor is quite right in what he says.
The risks of such a procedure would be far too high.
In spite of her handicaps it seems that your sister is managing really quite well and in a non-complaining manner.
Perhaps you are worrying a little unnecessarily.
I would leave things as they are.
My son is mentally retarded.
I know I am not alone in having a close relative who is mentally impaired.
Most of the time I can cope really well.
However, at other times I feel at the end of my tether.
I don't like letting these feelings be known in case people think I'm cracking up.
I know there aren't any simple solutions and that you probably cannot help but I feel better by just writing.
No, there aren't any easy solutions but expressing your feelings can help greatly.
There is a carers group, DACMI, which has been established for two years now, close to where you live.
It is specifically for carers of people who have a mental health problem.
The meeting is held every third Tuesday at MIND, Borough Road, Darlington, at 7pm.
For those carers who don't feel they are ready for a support group, a one to one counselling service is provided.
Please consider contacting this group.
I am sure that it would help you.
I have recently started taking the pill.
My doctor told me all about the pill before he prescribed it.
The trouble is that I can't quite remember all he said.
Could you please remind me about what to do if I forget to take the pill at the right time?
It depends on how late you are.
If it is less than 12 hours then don't worry, just take the delayed pill straightaway and further pills as usual.
If you are more than twelve hours late, take the most recently delayed pill straightaway, discard any earlier missed pills and use extra precautions (e.g. condoms) for the next seven days.
If there are fewer than seven pills left in the pack after the most recently delayed pill, then when you have finished the pack, start the next pack next day, without a break.
HARTLEPOOL United skipper John MacPhail could miss the Third Division derby against Darlington at the Victoria Ground today.
The former Sunderland defender injured a knee when West Brom striker Paul Williams fell on him in Pool's 2–1 midweek win.
MacPhail said: ‘I twisted my knee early in the second half but I stayed on the field.
‘I will be absolutely gutted if I am ruled out of the derby.
It is a game I have been looking forward to for some time.
‘Darlington beat us 4–0 in the League at Feethams earlier in the season.
We turned the tables in the FA Cup, but we still have a score to settle.
‘After two great wins at Stockport County and West Brom, we hope to hit form at home.’
The £60,000 signing of Barnsley striker Andy Saville should boost the gate.
Manager Alan Murray described the record club buy as ‘a quality player’ whose pace will strengthen the attack.
Murray said: ‘The form book goes out of the window in derby games.
We have to make sure we don't fall flat on our faces after a great win at West Brom.
‘West Brom fans staged sit-down protests after the game and their team are third in the table.
‘We have not struck our best form at home when teams have packed their defence.
Apart from the Bolton Wanderers game, we have been hit by late goals.
‘It is important we make the most of our scoring chances.’
Mick Smith and Keith Nobbs are ruled out, along with Paul Baker, while Brian Honour and Paul Dalton are under treatment for knocks.
Team from: Hodge, McCreery, Cross, Tinkler, MacPhail, Davies, Johnrose, Saville, Olsson, Fletcher, Honour, Dalton.
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin has resisted bringing in young players after the 4–2 home defeat by Reading.
Hankin said: ‘Experience counts in a derby game.
‘I would have considered changes for a normal type of League game.
‘We have been punished for schoolboy errors in defence and we cannot afford similar slips against Hartlepool.
‘I have been quite happy with our general play, though we could pick up players a little better.
‘The League table shows that Hartlepool are a good side.
‘But I'm not really worried about them.
It is what my team does that concerns me.
‘We want three points at Pool, nothing less.’
Steve Gaughan returns to the squad for flu victim Gary Hinchley.
Hartlepool have recovered after a dismal run and want points to boost play-off hopes.
Darlington's need is even greater.
With time running out, they desperately need points to avoid relegation.
A League double over Pool would be a great boost in their fight to get away from the foot of the table.
Darlington (from): Prudhoe, McJannet, Cook, O'Shaughnessy, Smith, Gaughan, Coverdale, Toman, Cusack, Cork, Pickering, Borthwick, Tucker, Sunley.
ANTHONY Todd's Olympic dream disappeared with a first-series points defeat in the qualifying competition in France.
The 19-year-old ABA lightheavyweight champion from Darlington lost 9–6 to Scotland's Stephen Wilson in Berck sur Mer.
‘It's terribly disappointing,’ said his Darlington ABC coach Laurie Degnan, who has guided Todd to his international vest and nine national titles at junior and senior level.
‘For all these years ABA champions have gone to the Olympics.
It just had to be this year, when Anthony was champion, that they didn't.
It's such a shame, as the Olympics were his main aim,’ said Degnan.
BILLY Hardy will have his second comeback fight on March 31.
Sunderland's former British bantamweight champion tops the bill on a show at Stockport Town Hall against Manchester-based Irishman Noel Carroll.
Hardy also hopes to fight again at the McEwans Centre, Houghton-le-Spring on June 4.
In the autumn he hopes to meet the winner of tomorrow night's European title fight in Copenhagen between Glaswegian Donnie Hood and unbeaten local favourite Johnny Bredahl.
RAY Hankin insisted Darlington can still avoid an instant return to the Fourth Division.
So what, he was asked, would it take to keep Third Division football at Feethams next season?
‘A miracle,’ he said.
‘A bloody miracle.’
That's just about the sum of it now, with Darlington and Torquay seven points adrift at the foot of the table.
Quakers were not disgraced in the first derby match of Third Division standing played at the Victoria Ground.
But their performance had relegation written all over it.
They had several half chances but without ever really looking likely to score.
Once Pool had done their plundering a twin strike in the sixteenth minute the match, as a contest, was over.
Pool simply coasted along, and Darlington, for all of their honest endeavour, played with the confidence of condemned men.
As Alan Murray, Hartlepool's manager, observed: ‘They're clearly struggling.
Ray Hankin's got a real uphill task now.
Morale's low.’
Which isn't a problem for Pool.
After sneaking promotion in Darlington's shadow last May, they're on the fringe of the play-off contenders and, with three successive wins, nicely gathering momentum for another grandstand finish.
Once the Samaritans' advertised in the club programme.
Now proudly displayed is a fan letter from an economics student in Bulgaria.
‘I am greatly impressed by Hartlepool United,’ writes Ivo Andonov.
‘I believe the team will win its place in Division Two.’
It might just do that, if the new striking partnership forged by Andy Saville and Lenny Johnrose fulfils the promise it showed on Saturday.
Both were involved in the opening goal, Johnrose heading down a corner from the right by Paul Cross and Saville striking a shot Kevan Smith sliced, as he attempted to clear, into the Darlington net.
Saville, making his debut following his record £60,000 move from Barnsley, claimed the goal and Smith, who endured the unhappiest of afternoons, was in no mood to argue.
Thirty seconds later Paul Dalton raced clear of the Darlington defence and beat the advancing Mark Prudhoe with a low angled drive.
And that, more or less, was that.
Nick Cusack had three efforts on target for Darlington but, like David Cork, was well shepherded by Hartlepool's teenage central defenders, Andy Davies and Ian McGurkin, the latter making his debut as a late replacement for the injured John MacPhail.
Darlington's plight was summed up when the out-of-sorts Smith was substituted with twelve minutes left.
The skipper headed straight for the dressing room instead of staying to shout his support from the dug-out.
There was no dressing down, though, from Hankin.
‘Everybody has bad games,’ said the Quakers' manager, ‘and Kevan gives 110pc, no matter how he plays.
‘If you take away that one minute, I think we matched Hartlepool.
But we keep making mistakes.
Unless we cut them out, we'll get nothing.’
It's possible, mathematically, that Hartlepool will end up in the Second Division next season.
The probability is they won't.
But whatever their fate they are on course for the most successful season in their history.
And the credit for that is due to Murray.
They were eleventh in Division Four when he began his managerial career as a frowned-upon caretaker twelve months ago.
More of a solid success story, perhaps, than a bloody miracle.
NEWCASTLE United chairman Sir John Hall last night persuaded Kevin Keegan to remain as manager at St James's Park until the end of the season.
But Keegan's long-term future remains in serious doubt following his astonishing walkout after the 3–1 home win against Swindon Town on Saturday.
Keegan, angered by the absence of the £1m spending money he was promised when succeeding Ossie Ardiles, and upset by boardroom unrest, issued a statement at 7pm yesterday, ending speculation that he had resigned after less than six weeks in his first managerial job.
It followed a day of telephone talks between Sir John and Keegan, who drove straight to his £500,000 home in Romsey, Hampshire after the final whistle on Saturday.
His statement said: ‘I am under contract to Newcastle United until the end of this season.
‘What I'm not prepared to do is commit myself to the club beyond that, until such time as a final plan, which I understand from the chairman was agreed in principle by all directors on Saturday night, has been formally ratified by all board members.
‘This, in my opinion, is essential to provide the framework within which any manager can lead this great club.
‘There is no doubt in my mind that I can work with Sir John Hall and the board of directors who, along with everyone else at the club, have been under tremendous pressure because of the club's present financial position.’
The implications are that Keegan has received the go-ahead to spend, after last week suffering the embarrassment of telling transfer targets he had no money to complete the deals he'd agreed, and guarantees that a boardroom battle will be averted.
Sir John and his son Douglas, one of his six fellow directors, had been attempting to buy out board colleagues George Forbes, Peter Mallinger, Bob Young and Derek McVickers to increase their shareholding to one of absolute control at 75pc.
Whether the Halls, who remain the major shareholders with 42pc, will withdraw their support from the Second Division club remains to be seen.
The £10m they have pledged towards a £13m rescue package has yet to materialise.
The club's debts are still £6m and the viability of the package could depend on Keegan committing his long-term future to the club and survival in the Second Division relegation battle.
Accounts recently published show the club made a £3m loss in the last financial year.
Sir John was unavailable for comment at his Teesside home yesterday but insisted on Saturday night: ‘The board is 100pc united.’
Yesterday morning Keegan emerged from his home to tell reporters: ‘The board know how I stand.
I left them in no doubt about how I felt on Friday and Saturday.
‘I don't know if I'm still manager of Newcastle United.
The board are the only ones who can resolve that.
‘The only people who suffer are the fans.
I feel sorry for them.’
WHILE the farce at St James's Park continues playing to large audiences, moves are afoot which could force the show to shut down.
Ballot papers on strike action are ready to be sent out to Football League players if talks on the Premier League do not meet the satisfaction of the Professional Footballers' Association which wants a say in the new set-up.
The Football Association will know not to mess with the PFA.
Not only is it ably led by the shrewd Gordon Taylor (who perhaps ought to be running the FA), the players' union also has a record which other unions would be proud of.
I think I'm right in saying the PFA has never lost a battle it has fought.
In the early 1960s the PFA, under Jimmy Hill's leadership, threatened a players' strike in support of the abolition of the maximum wage.
It took its case to the public, the press and the House of Commons and it won.
Players are said to be equally solid in their support for the union's current case.
There is nothing new about the way in which the game's ruling bodies are at loggerheads (it goes back to the League's formation) but the stakes are now very high.
THE small clubs fear they will ultimately be cut off and thrown on the scrap heap if the FA ploughs its own furrow.
Likewise, the PFA is fighting its corner to make sure the players get a fair deal.
They must win and there is no reason to think they won't.
It's not only the players who want a piece of the action.
The fans are mounting their own bid for a voice in the game.
Too often taken for granted, the campaign against all-seater stadia is gathering pace and is uniting fans around the country.
Where once they fought pitched battles against each other they have now joined hands to fight the common enemy the FA and greedy clubs.
There is some justification in their case.
If Darlington (let's change that to Hartlepool) were lucky enough to win promotion to Division Two they would have until 1994 two years to eliminate standing at their ground.
Yet neither club commands very great support and even a Second Division Hartlepool or Darlington perhaps struggling at the foot of the division would be unlikely to attract more than 56,000 per game.
If they stay in the lower divisions they'll have to eliminate seating in seven years time.
Do they need all-seater stadia?
The question hardly merits an answer.
Footballer takes charge of new fitness programme
Fitness check: Mr Richard Dowson puts leisure attendant Miss Vicky Metcalfe through her paces at Hambleton leisure centre.
A Northallerton Town football player has been signed up to improve fitness facilities at Hambleton leisure centres.
Mr Richard Dowson, aged 26, who is in his fourth season as a defender with the football club, has been appointed health and fitness consultant by Hambleton district council.
He will be looking at ways of improving health and fitness activities currently on offer at Northallerton, Thirsk and Stokesley leisure centres.
Within the next few months he hopes to introduce an individual fitness programme for people using the centres.
This will enable customers to check their overall fitness and be tested for heart rate, body fat, and blood pressure, among things.
Mr Dowson, who is due to be married in June, said equipment worth more than £1,000 had already been bought for the programme.
He hoped the facility could eventually become portable so it could be taken into the community and set up in village halls.
Mr Dowson, who lives at Eppleby, near Richmond, joins the district council after experience of management in the private leisure sector.
He is the former manager of the Locomotion Leisure Centre at the Blackwell Grange Moat House hotel in Darlington.
After leaving Richmond School, he gained a degree in sports studies at Newcastle Polytechnic.
Charter for a cleaner, greener, Darlington
Environmentalists and local politicians this wee k welcomed an ambitious initiative to clean up Darlington.
The borough council's environmental charter is the first step in a programme to improve the town for residents, visitors and wildlife.
Coun. John Williams (Lab), leader of the council, said a number of aims in the fields of pollution, transport, development, energy, waste management and public health would be met by the development of a council policy on the environment.
BE INFORMED
An officers' working party would put together the policy after consulting the public and interested organisations each step of the way.
The idea of the charter, launched on Monday at the Rockwell nature conservation area off Martindale Road, Darlington, was to inform people of the type of improvements the local authority would work towards.
Prevention and reduction of pollution incidents had high priority, along with road safety, the promotion of public transport, reclamation of derelict land, energy-saving campaigns, recycling of waste and promotion of a healthy lifestyle.
ANNIVERSARY
Launching the document, to be distributed to schools and organisations in the borough, Coun. Williams said: ‘It is particularly appropriate that the day after the first anniversary of the completion of the highly successful and acclaimed Railside Revival something that has served as a model to the whole of the North-East we are unveiling the new environmental charter for Darlington next to the main line railway in the Rockwell nature conservation area.’
He said the launch marked the start of a Skerneside Revival project which continued the good work of Railside Revival, which cleaned up land alongside the main east coast railway line through the borough.
He said work had just begun on the Rockwell site where landscaping and planting should encourage wildlife and provide a pleasant outlook for people living on the nearby new housing estate.
‘We think it will be supported by everybody in the town.
Bill Westland, the environmental health officer who researched for the document, deserves everyone's congratulations,’ said Coun. Williams.
Coun. Mrs Eleanor Young (Lab), chairman of the works and health committee and of Darlington community health council, said the charter invited people to tell the council what they wanted done to protect the environment.
‘This charter will certainly raise the profile of environmental issues on the agenda of council committees,’ she said.
‘I hope it will do the same in people's homes and at other places of work.’
The move was also welcomed by conservation organisations throughout the borough.
Mrs Maggie Bosanquet, founder of Darlington Environmental Watch, said Darlington was gradually getting greener thanks to organisations like the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers.
The council charter would give projects a boost.
‘There are a lot of areas which need improving but traffic is a major problem and not an easy one to tackle,’ she said.
Planning issues would also be important and DEW planned to press for a green belt around Darlington.
A HAVEN Mr Alan Milburn, Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for the town, said the charter was ‘a declaration of intent that will be fulfilled during the course of the next few years.’
— Ten acres of open land in the middle of Aycliffe Industrial Estate, Newton Aycliffe, have been turned into a wildlife site after two years' hard work.
Woodland, a pond and a meadow form the basis of the haven on land given by landlord Helical Bar after the company was asked to help set up a nature park.
How to get a head start on fashion
IF you want to get ahead in the fashion stakes, get a hat.
That could well be the motto of Miss Pam Bosworth, who set up a hat hire business because her friends kept borrowing from her wardrobe.
Miss Bosworth, who has worked as a fashion model in a number of counties near her Grantham home, brings her hats to the Darlington area on Wednesday to stage a show in aid of Save the Children.
She will give an hour of fashion fun, talking and demonstrating her hat hire service and nearly-new designer fashion business.
Miss Bosworth's hat library includes a collection of styles from the forties, fifties and sixties as well as more up-to-date models.
Tickets for the event, to be held at the George Hotel, Piercebridge, cost £10, which includes a knife-and-fork buffet lunch served at noon in the Pavilion with a glass of wine followed by coffee.
During the hour before lunch, there is a chance to have coffee and browse round stalls selling jewellery, lace and silk flowers.
At 2pm the fashion show takes to the floor in the ballroom.
Anyone wanting tickets should phone .
A FORMER airman wants to trace a long-lost wartime colleague.
Stan Tempest, 70, first met George Whitbread when he was a member of 76 Bomber Squadron based at RAF Middleton St George outside Darlington in 1941.
Stan was an in-flight engineer on Halifax bombers, taking part in operations over Germany, Italy, and occupied France.
‘We became very good friends during the war years, and it would be great to see George again,’ said Stan.
He wants to know if anyone in the Darlington area has any information of the whereabouts of Mr Whitbread.
If so contact him at 23, Manor House Farm, Flockton, near Wakefield, West Yorks.
AN APPEAL from Down Under has set a North-East couple searching for a namesake.
Don Adamson received a letter out of the blue from an Australian trying to trace an old army buddy also called Don Adamson.
Mr Adamson, of Banklands Road, Darlington, has no connection with the former soldier but hoped that someone in the town might be able to help.
The letter was sent by Francis Tonge, who lives in South Yunderup, Western Australia, and had used a Darlington telephone directory to try to trace his old pal.
The friend he's looking for served with the Royal Military Police in Austria from .
He would be about 60 years old and was married in a Darlington church to an Austrian called Christine in 1954.
Mr Adamson said: ‘The man this letter is meant for has no connection with my family.
‘My father was an only son and I am an only son too.
He isn't a cousin or any relation but we thought somebody in the town must know of him or where he went.’
His wife, Pauline said: ‘We thought it was such a nice letter we wanted to help this man track down the right Don Adamson.
‘It seems a shame not to try and do something for him after he's sent a letter all that way.’
Anyone who can help trace Mr Adamson should phone the Adamsons on .
A LUCKY corgi's remarkable good fortune continues this week just a month after it was saved by a kindly Darlington couple.
Basil makes his stage debut at Darlington Civic Theatre today where he has a brief walk-on part in the show Big Friendly Giant.
Two months ago Basil's future looked bleak.
He was due to be put down because he did not have the right ears for a show class pedigree corgi.
But then Maureen Waiton and her husband Dennis stepped in to save him.
The chance of stardom beckoned after Maureen read that the Civic Theatre was looking for a corgi to appear alongside the Queen in the Roald Dahl play.
Maureen, of Mendip Grove, Darlington, said:’ As far as I know he doesn't have to do much on stage and I'm keeping my fingers crossed he'll behave himself.’
Civic Theatre spokesman Steve Luck said: ‘He strolled through the audition and I'm confident he will be a big hit in the show,’ he said.
Likely lads in an unlikely spot
WE have been down this road before.
It is called Fifth Street, and where it meets Blackhills Road is Horden Conservative Club.
Horden is a former pit village, and proud of it, in East Durham.
A Conservative Club is about as probable as a solid gold statue of Sir Ian MacGregor.
In the Easington constituency in 1987 the taciturn W.J.Perry (who fights again) polled 7,757 for the Tories, just 16.3pc of the vote.
Though the Conservative Club's 500 members have pledged Party allegiance to a man the question of women membership is said to be ‘in abeyance’ the number of votes in Horden is unlikely to have filled many coal tubs.
‘In a democratic society there is no way I can know how a person votes,’ says club chairman Dennis Robinson.
Friendly but cautious, he is a 41-year-old unemployed miner with a ‘very bad back.’
There is no way of knowing how Dennis Robinson votes, either.
‘You don't expect me to tell you that, do you’ he says.
It is Sunday lunchtime.
New housing (Seaview Gardens) is under construction where the pit offices used to be and in Nelson Close twin symbols of the Conservative years the television dish and the burglar alarm sprout with the Spring.
Someone pinched the portrait of the Blessed Margaret from the Conservative Club, too, leaving W.S.Churchill behind.
‘Who'd want that old bugger,’ says a passing drinker, ungratefully.
If an election is afoot there is neither sight nor sound of it.
A dozen house windows advertise an international Spiritualist weekend (‘tea and biscuits after each service’); none has a political poster.
In the Conservative Club the Keegan factor has superseded the Kinnock factor.
‘The only other thing that worries me,’ said a chap in the bar, ‘is how I'm gannin' to get oot tonight.’
We turned the conversation to a local politician.
‘Him,’ they said, ‘if he had two watches he still wouldn't give you the time.’
The magnificent lounge red leather arm chairs, chandeliers, beams, table lamps is named in memory of Bill Oxenham, a remarkable man who combined engine driving at Blackhall pit with being the only Tory councillor in Horden's history.
When they gave him the MBE (some said it should have been the Croix de Guerre) for services to the Party, the club committee charged 10p a pint all day.
It was May Day.
Now beer costs between 82p and £1 ‘mother's milk’ they say; there's a notice forbidding the movement of easy chairs (‘by order of the committee’) and a couple of football club letter draws, which we lost.
Though political discussion is welcomed, Dennis Robinson is saying little.
‘I think it will be very close,’ he suggests.
And he admits that there was ‘a lot of ill feeling’ towards the club when the pit closed.
Club secretary Ray Todd, though the chairman tries to forbid him, is more outspoken.
‘It's the poll tax and privatisation,’ says the Tory Club secretary.
‘I've voted Conservative all my life, but now it's time for a change.’
There are 23 days to go.
Sex appeal
MEANWHILE, the one man, one vote principle has been further enshrined at the 585 member Whitby Conservative Club where a motion to admit the opposite, er, sex as full members has been somewhat emphatically defeated.
Only nine members were in favour.
In the rest of Britain, men and women were given equal voting rights in 1928.
Colour scheme
JOHN Smith is doing just about everyone a favour.
‘We're absolutely snowed under,’ says the boss of Britain's biggest rosette making company.
G.Prudhoe, a Darlington stationery printer, first produced rosettes for the Queen's silver jubilee in 1977.
Subsequent ribbon development has been so spectacular that they were booming even before the election announcement.
Yesterday around 40 staff were tying up loose ends for all three main parties.
‘We could do with a bit more interest from the Greens.
There's quite a lot of green ribbon around,’ says Smith.
He is also pinning his hopes on a successful stand (‘just rosettes’) at the Ideal Home Exhibition, now running in London.
‘The response has been very good,’ he says.
‘We don't wish anyone ill, of course, but a few early by-elections would be pretty useful, too’
Margin of error
FAR sighted as ever, The Northern Echo enquired about the possibility of an opinion poll in the highly marginal York seat.
(1987 Tory majority, 147.)
Certainly said the pollsters, suggesting that to gain an accurate sample 299,014 York voters would need to be interviewed.
(The electorate last time was 79,297.)
The whole exercise, they said, would take 7,475 man hours, 934 working days.
It would cost £373,767 (and 16 pence.)
We have decided not to bother.
A SOCCER club paid a record fee for a player who cannot now play.
Hartlepool's £60,000 striker Andy Saville went out to celebrate only hours after his debut in the 2–0 derby win over Darlington at the weekend.
But it ended with a scuffle in a Doncaster restaurant and 27-year-old Saville's arm broken.
It rules him out of the game for the rest of the season.
Hartlepool manager Alan Murray said last night: ‘Saville and his wife went out, with two other couples, for a meal.
When a scuffle broke out, Saville moved to get away out of the way and fell awkwardly.’
He broke both bones in his right forearm and will be in plaster for eight weeks.
Murray added: ‘The player feels he has let me down and his wife was in tears when she rang.
But you cannot legislate for bad luck like that.
I have very sketchy information, but I feel sorry for the player.
‘Saville looked a good asset and we cannot replace him.
We sent the boat out to buy him in the first place.
To lose Saville is a disastrous blow.’
The former Barnsley player will be discharged from Doncaster Royal Infirmary tomorrow.
REUBEN Page, the Consett based bookies’ chain, was yesterday offering 8–13 against the Conservatives winning most seats, with Labour 6–5 and 4–5 a hung Parliament.
Mark you, this is the company that took bets at 661 last September against Murton winning the Northern Football League.
They're now favourites.
Meanwhile, Darlington Tory councillor Peter Jones (above) was yesterday offering £1,000 at evens from his own oversubscribed wallet that his man Michael Fallon would retain the Darlington marginal.
We said we'd pass on offers.
High flyer:
Daredevil Elaine Mitchell is planning a high flying stunt to raise money for multiple sclerosis research.
Elaine, 32, from Whinfield, Darlington, will be looping the loop in an open plane high above Teesside Airport on June 2.
COMPETITION WINNERS
THE switchboard of The Northern was jammed yesterday morning with people phoning up with the answer to Saturday's Stiff Little Fingers competition.
Their biggest hit was, of course, At The Edge, which got to No 15 in 1980.
David Hope of Great Lumley, Chester-le-Street, was first to give the right answer, immediately followed by Steve Pearn of Darlington.
Last night both winners saw the SLF show at the Mayfair in Newcastle and met the band.
Thanks to everyone who called but didn't get through.
WHEN the future of the country is uncertain, when your football team is going down, when half the nation's cricket eleven is injured, when there is nothing on the television positive thinking is required.
This is where Atisha Mahayana could assist.
It cropped up yesterday with the information that a positive mind shapes the world around us, preventing frustration and disappointment.
This was well and good as was the promise that it could show how ‘to cultivate and maintain a positive mind, even in the face of adversity.’
Nothing there about how to cope with a hung Parliament, how Darlington will stay in Division Three, what the walking wounded will do in Australia which is real adversity.
‘We're running an introductory session for people who might be interested,’ said Adrianne Astbury of the Mahayana Buddhist Centre for Buddhism is what it is.
‘It starts very gently with notions of having a bit more control of your own life.
‘Positive thinking will also be dealt with and how to make life more satisfactory.
We get people who simply want to recharge their batteries.’
This sounds a jolly good idea, a sort of 50,000 mile service when you might be feeling a bit seedy as grotty old winter turns to jolly young spring.
The day long session's tutor will be one Kelsang Tabkay, an English monk based in Pocklington.
Unfortunately, it is this Saturday, March 21 in the Green Room at Darlington Arts Centre.
The people in the town who may need a spot of positive thinking more than anybody else will be otherwise engaged.
Phone moan
MARK Turnbull, remarkable and persevering radio reporter, was in touch the other day about his new phone-in show on BBC Radio Cleveland.
Turnbull, who is blind, has a weekly weekend programme in which he himself operates the controls.
Somebody rang up the first programme to complain about people who were apparently telephoning the station and talking on air.
Lonely life
HANNAH Hauxwell, the former Teesdale hill farmer who became famous for living in virtual isolation miles from civilisation, is to appear on This Is Your Life shortly.
Somebody here observed that it must be the first Life on somebody so reclusive and how therefore did the programme-makers manage to find enough guests?
PUPILS at Darlington's Polam Hall school are looking forward to packing in the crowds with their latest stage production My Fair Lady.
A cast of 50 youngsters have been hard at work rehearsing the classic production since October.
Others have chipped in to lend a hand with the scenery and costumes.
The music will be provided by members of the school orchestra.
School spokeswoman Mary Thomas said: ‘This is the first time we have staged My Fair Lady and it has proved a resounding success.
Tickets for the production sold out weeks ago.’
My Fair Lady starts tomorrow and runs until Saturday.
Any profits will help boost school funds.
A POPULAR Darlington bookshop is looking for new premises.
The Darlington Lions charity bookshop has had to leave Priestgate because of the Cornmill development.
Don Hill, from Darlington Lions, said: ‘We are looking to find anything that is suitable and we don't need a lot of space.
Ideally it would be accessible to shoppers.’
The shop raised almost £3,500 since February last year.
Anyone who can help the Lions should contact Mr Hill on Darlington .
Parents worried I
REFER to residents of Lakeside objecting to traffic calming measures (Echo March 5).
Lakeside were not petitioned about this issue, whereas Shakespeare Road, Ruskin Road, Wordsworth Road, Chaucer Road, and Tennyson Gardens were.
The latter group have been given no consideration whatsoever.
Regarding the objection to the closure of Loraine Crescent/Hammond Drive, Lakeside and Coleridge Gardens are the two main exit/entrance points anyway.
There are people in Hammond Drive whose only objection to this closure, I have been informed, is because it will stop them taking a short cut through Loraine Crescent.
The parents in that area are only concerned for their children and see the need for this closure.
Indeed, I believe many people from Loraine Crescent itself want this closure.
According to one source I've spoken to, when this area was constructed a full crescent was exactly what Loraine Crescent was intended to be with no through road into Hammond Drive.
In fact two houses (in Loraine Crescent) were supposed to have stood upon where the access road presently runs.
Bethany Megan Robinson,.
Calling bluff
IT IS time to call Labour's poll tax bluff.
They advocate returning to the rates.
In 1988/89 my wife and I (both pensioners) paid £715 in rates.
If that system had stayed, allowing for a modest increase of 10pc annually for inflation et al, we would now be paying around £1050, probably more with Labour in power locally.
And Kinnock tells us we are being clobbered unduly because we shall pay £600 next year!
They will doubtless say we are lucky, but we just happen to be house-owners with a steady income, like millions of others.
If Labour wants to win the election they have to convince us that we shall be no worse off under their reinstated rates system.
Labour must also undertake to curb spiralling local government spending.
Clearly, whatever system we have, councils will want to squeeze as much money out of payers as they can and they will justify this in the same tired way: preservation of jobs and services.
So, does it matter what the charge is called and who holds power at Westminster?
The public will have to foot a large bill come what may.
R K Bradley,.
Better off
IN Monday's paper (Echo March 9) I read that the Darlington council poll tax will be £300 this year, this includes £19 to make up the shortfall for people who refuse to pay.
We are pensioners with no help from Income Support so I want to know why we should pay for these people, a lot of them are much better off than we are and can afford to smoke and drink.
If my neighbours ran up a bill and refused to pay we would not be expected to pay it.
This is the same principle with the £19.
Why should law abiding citizens pay extra?
C. Hauxwell,.
Clean it up
I KNOW it is an old problem but can I make a plea for the Skerne to be cleaned up.
I pass over the Stone Bridge virtually every day and the view is one of the utmost squalor.
Would it be possible, for example, to have a dredger clear all the silt, rubbish and vegetation?
The whole of the Skerne as it passes through Darlington is a disgrace and should be cleaned up.
I complained to Northumbrian Water about this and they gave me a very dusty answer.
They replied that the cleaning of the Skerne was absolutely no concern of theirs.
Can you believe it?
Incidentally Cocker Beck is like an open sewer in many places and this also should be dealt with.
Harold Svensson, 68 Neville Road, Darlington.
MANDALE
Harriers have underlined their rapidly improving road-racing status by winning their first national senior team award, finishing third in the prestigious AAA Half Marathon Championships in Bath.
The thriving Teesside club also finished third in a special challenge award for the first 12 men home, underlining their strength-in-depth.
Mandale's first counter was North-East ten mile champion Paul Kelly, whose employers, OIS Power and Nuclear, Stockton, helped finance the club's trip to the West Country.
Kelly, who joined the club last year from Hartlepool Burn Road, finished in 16th place in 65 mins 37 secs, while England fell runner Robin Bergstrand was second counter in 19th place in 66.09.
Kevin Brown, the reigning North-East half marathon champion, was troubled by a stitch but battled on gamely to finish in 33rd position in 67.11.
Mandale's fourth counter was another recent addition, Scottish cross country international Don Bain, who joined the Teessiders after moving to Darlington from Falkirk last year.
Bain finished 53rd in 69.02 to give Mandale, with 121 points, third team place behind Tipton (45) and Stockport (121).
Marco Cara was 61st, clocking 69.28, and four places behind was teammate Martin Scaife in 69.46.
Peter Connor, who coaches Mandale's road racing team, finished eighth veteran in 72.32, helping the club to third place in the 12-man category.
New Marske Harriers have a new quadruple world record holder.
Veteran Mike Harper took part in a 24-hour ultra-distance event at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham and set world best indoor times in the 55–59 age group for 30 miles (4 hours 58 secs), 50K (4:07:32), 40 miles (5:29:59) and 50 miles (7:23:58).
Harper had to drop out of the race with badly blistered feet after completing 80.53 miles.
Harper's next test will be a 12hour race at Darlington on March 29, when he will be trying to break the 55–59 category outdoor 50 miles record of 6 hours 46 secs.
DARLINGTON will step up their search for new talent this week.
Manager Ray Hankin and chief scout Barrie Geldart will take in an Under-19 game at Nottingham this afternoon and a Northern League game at North Shields tonight.
Hankin said: ‘We want to look at two players at Nottingham and one at North Shields.
‘We are also making non-stop enquiries.
‘I won't sign a player for the sake of it.
He must be the right man.
‘Clubs are quoting ridiculous prices, even for average players.
‘There has been a big improvement in the last five games, although our results might not show that.
‘We have given away too many bad goals.’
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale expects Chesterfield to attack his side in tonight's rearranged Fourth Division match at the McCain Stadium.
The Spireites are in 11th position in the table and their outside hopes of reaching the play-offs were upset when they lost at home to Rochdale on Saturday.
McHale said: ‘You'd think that Chesterfield have to come here and beat us to keep alive their chances of reaching the playoffs.’
Scarborough badly need to pick up points after slumping down to 17th place after suffering a run of just one League win in nine games.
The Seasiders will be eager to put five successive defeats behind them and McHale will again field a youthful side featuring four junior team players.
Striker David Holmes replaces Andrew Fletcher who has an ankle problem while John Ashdjian joins Mark Jules on the subs' bench.
Former Scarborough striker Steve Norris will be out to repeat last month's scoring feat against his old side when he netted the only goal at Saltergate.
Team: Ironside, Rocca, Swales, Lee, Hirst, Mudd, Thompson, Price, Mooney, Holmes, Himsworth.
Subs: Jules, Ashdjian.
AMERICAN
Kenny Schaefer aims to gatecrash the world's top ten by beating York's Commonwealth supermiddleweight champion Henry Wharton on Thursday.
The 28-year-old from Omaha, Nebraska, is confident he can put the first blemish on Wharton's unbeaten pro record when the two meet over ten rounds at the city's Barbican Leisure Centre.
And that, he hopes, will enable him to take over the top ten ratings the Yorkshireman holds with two of the four recognised world governing bodies the WBO and WBC.
Schaefer, who has won 17 of 20 fights since turning professional in November 1987, said: ‘I wouldn't have come all this way if I didn't think I could beat Henry.
‘This is a big chance for me and I aim to take it.
If I win I should get a top ten rating.
‘Henry has some very impressive wins on his record but that doesn't worry me too much.’
Eight of the American's wins have come inside the distance and, having boxed occasionally as a lightheavyweight, feels he has sufficient power to worry Wharton who has won 12 and drawn one of his pro bouts.
But Wharton's handlers do not feel the same as they have already made plans for their man to defend his Commonwealth title at Leeds Town Hall on April 8.
Manager Mickey Duff refused to discuss the likely opponent for that date, saying that Thursday's fight would have to be safely overcome first by Wharton.
But he did confirm that he was ‘95 per cent’ of the way to reaching final agreement with an unnamed challenger.
On the undercard on Thursday Darlington welterweight Charlie Moore will have his third professional contest when he meets Alfreton's Joe Corcoran.
Moore is also managed by Duff and the influential Londoner has added another top local talent to the growing Leeds-based part of his boxing empire.
Darlington featherweight Jacob Smith signed a pro contract yesterday.
Smith, 18, a former England amateur, national junior champion and the winner of seven Northern Area titles, will make his paid debut on the Leeds Town Hall show next month.
He is one of three fighting brothers 21-year-old super-featherweight Tommy is also a pro, while 15-year-old Jimmy reached the finals of the national schoolboy championships at the weekend.
Smith was due to box for England again against Italy soon but has decided to switch his allegiance to the paid ranks instead.
— JOHN Davison's European title challenge to Fabrice Benichou, scheduled for May 15 in France, is set to be put back a fortnight.
Benichou failed in his attempt to wrest the IBF world title from Mexican Manuel Medina on Saturday.
And the European champion's handlers yesterday requested that the Davison fight be delayed.
Davison's manager Tommy Conroy said last night: ‘Benichou's people have asked for an extra couple of weeks and, although I'll have to discuss it with John first, I think we'll agree.
‘It will suit as much as them to have the fight later because it will give John that little bit more time to prepare after having his jaw broken in his last fight.’
— SCOTLAND'S world flyweight title contender Pat Clinton was yesterday accused of employing underhand tactics by his Mexican opponent.
Isidro Perez, who defends the WBO crown against Clinton tomorrow, made the claim just 48 hours before the big showdown at Glasgow's Kelvin Hall.
‘I've heard that Clinton uses his head,’ declared 27-year-old Perez, who added: ‘But I have the experience to handle any dirty fighting.’
However, promoter Tommy Gilmour, who also manages the 26- year-old Scottish challenger, was quick to quash the accusation that Clinton uses his head illegally.
Gilmour hit back: ‘Pat Clinton doesn't stop working long enough to have the time to use his head.
As far as I know he has never received as much as a warning as an amateur or professional.’
Perez then added that the three judges two from the United States and one from Denmark would have to take care of any problems.
That prompted judge Robert Watson from the USA to interject: ‘Judges can only score a foul if it is reported to them by the referee.’
Suddenly, the air of civility has turned a little sour, and the accusations of impropriety from the Mexican should only encourage Clinton and his supporters.
The fight is a near 2,500 sell-out at the venue where lightweight Jim Watt captured his world title back in 1979.
— HEROL Graham, outpointed by European champion Sumbu Kalambay in Italy last week, has been told to defend his British title against Bradford's Frank Grant.
Grant was refused permission by the British Board of Control to fight Graham last October because a brain scan raised ‘queries’.
He has now been cleared.
— ROBERT Wright will bank on keeping the adrenalin flowing when he bids for a Commonwealth welterweight title upset at London's Grosvenor House Hotel tomorrow.
Eight days after knocking out Errol McDonald on a low-key bill at Bury, the 25-year-old Dudley boxer steps unexpectedly into the big time to take on experienced champion Donovan Boucher, of Canada.
DOUBLESPEAK:
As each year goes by I find the fiction of George Orwell becoming fact.
In his book 1984 he mentions Doublethink, jargon used by the politicians of the Inner Party.
Your paper carried a fine example of this (Echo March 10).
It stated that crime rose 16pc over 1991 to 5.3 million offences.
Mr Patten, the Home Office Minister, referred to this figure as ‘a welcome slowdown’.
How can you say that and keep a straight face?
Whales and seals that are washed up dead on our coasts have nothing to do with pollution.
As the election gets underway watch out for more of this Doublethink, particularly on television.
A thumping defeat is said to be a victory.
It goes on all the time.
It has become part of their stock in trade.
For instance, millions have been laid off in the construction industry.
Mr Rifkind blandly states that Labour is to blame.
They would lay thousands off, he says.
The propaganda of Josef Goebbels is old hat.
He was a cornball when compared to the svelte politicians of today.
They don't just bend the truth, they simply reverse it.
Black is white.
Mr Attlee once said that Philip Snowdon was a man he deeply admired.
Why?
Because he could say yes or no.
Sadly, that breed of politician had died out.
Jim Ross,.
DEFENCE:
If the Commons defence committee thinks the government may have gone too far in defence cuts, I wonder what it would make of Labour and Liberal Democrat policies.
Both parties would make dangerously large cuts in this nation's defence.
We still live in a dangerous and turbulent world.
By ordering the fourth Trident submarine, the Conservatives show they are the only party to be trusted with defending Britain.
Mr D. Rubens, 22 Leith Road, Darlington.
Pat can turn back clock
BOXING: Pat Clinton aims to revive sweet memories tonight at Glasgow's Kelvin Hall.
The once-great arena has staged just a handful of fights since Jim Watt ruled the WBC lightweight division between 1979 and 81.
But 27-year-old Clinton is banking on the traditional deafening din to help him wrest the WBO flyweight title from Mexican Isidro Perez and become only the sixth Scot to hold a world crown.
Bowen back FOOTBALL: Norwich captain Mark Bowen is ready to start his first game for six weeks in tonight's FA Cup quarter-final replay against Southampton.
Bruno foe BOXING: Frank Bruno has landed a highly-rated opponent at Wembley Arena on April 22 after a first-round fiasco win over Dutchman John Emmen in his comeback fight last November.
He will fight Jose Ribalta, a 28-year-old Cuban American, who has been in with some of the best heavyweights.
Davies boost RUGBY LEAGUE: Welsh stars Jonathan Davies and Kevin Ellis yesterday gave their country a big lift when they declared themselves fit for Sunday's British Coal international against France in Swansea.
Halle blow FOOTBALL: Oldham's Norwegian international defender Gunnar Halle once a target of former Sunderland manager Denis Smith has had a bone graft operation and will be out for the rest of the season.
Welsh pioneers FOOTBALL: Welsh soccer will break new ground when the national side competes in a triangular competition involving World Cup finalists Argentina in Japan this summer.
The three countries will play for the Kirin Cup.
Tunks sacked FOOTBALL: Former Preston goalkeeper Roy Tunks was yesterday sacked as first-team coach at Deepdale.
French stays FOOTBALL: Steve French, the former Whitby Town player, has signed a two-year contract with Harrogate Town, the HFS First Division side.
Bishop speakers CRICKET: Kevin Connelly and David Kendall are speakers at a Bishop Auckland Cricket Club sportsmen's dinner on March 25 at the Park Head Hotel.
Tickets, price £20, are still available from Harry Smurthwaite (Darlington .)
Lopez wins
BOXING: Mexico's Ricardo Lopez won a unanimous points victory over Domingo ‘Pretty Boy’ Lucas of the Philippines in Mexico City last night, to retain his WBC straw-weight title.
Roche to quit CYCLING: Former world cycling champion Stephen Roche, 32, said yesterday he would quit the sport in two years.
Schwer tops BOXING: Billy Schwer, the undefeated lightweight from Luton, has been voted Best Young Boxer of 1991 by the Boxing Writers' Club.
Heavyweight Herbie Hide from Norwich finished second.
Barton Table sale:
A table top sale takes place in Barton village hall on Saturday between 10am and 3pm.
Thriving club: Members of the Barton Over-60s club continue to enjoy their regular weekly meeting which are a combination of conversation, games and light refreshments.
New members are welcome to the club, which is held every Wednesday at 2pm in the village hall.
Brafferton and Coatham Mundeville Dance date: A 50–50 dance is to be held in the village hall on Friday, April 3.
The dance will combine disco and modern ballroom dancing and starts at 8 pm.
Tickets and inquiries to .
Heighington Planning appeal: An appeal has been lodged over refused planning permission for a 15-bedroom hotel and manager's flat at Heighcliffe Country Club.
Neighbours of the site are being asked to send their comments on the plans to a Government inspector who will decide whether to uphold Sedgefield District Council's decision to turn down the extension for the social club.
Special lunches: Lent Lunches are being held every Wednesday in the Methodist School Room starting at noon.
Proceeds will go to the Church Army College and all are invited to join in the soup and bread meal and Lent discussions.
Homemakers:
The Heighington branch of the Homemakers group has held a busy programme of events which included a pie and peas supper and planning to visit Darlington Civic Theatre on April 29.
The trip is now fully booked and money for tickets should be paid in as soon as possible.
The next meeting will be on March 24.
Outing: The first outing for the Heighington Over 50/60 club will depart on April 14.
The bus will leave the village at 9.30am heading for Carlisle via Hexham.
On the return trip the bus will travel via the Lake District.
Cost of tickets for the trip is £4.50.
On Monday night the club's members are looking forward to a pie and peas supper.
Friends meet: Friends of Heighington Village held their group meeting on Tuesday night.
The group was established to benefit the village area by raising funds for improvements.
The group is made up of residents determined to make Heighington a nicer place to live.
They would be pleased to hear from anyone who would like to join them.
Coffee morning: Everyone is welcome to the village hall on Wednesday at 10am for a coffee morning held by members of the Children's Society.
Entrance costs 40p and there will be a painting competition for children of different age groups.
The society is also arranging a house to house collection.
Karaoke night: Heighington Young Farmers are holding a karaoke night at 7.30pm in the village hall on Tuesday, March 24.
Hurworth Nearly new:
Hurworth Grange Mother and Toddler Group holds a children's nearly new clothes sale on Wednesday March 25 at 7.30pm at Hurworth Grange Community Centre.
Toys, books and baby equipment will also be sold.
Admission 20p.
Blooming time: More crocuses are to be planted on the village green next year.
Tree felling: Trees near a house in Hawkswood could be felled despite a tree preservation order.
Parish councillors are to write to the borough council for permission to fell the tress because of the risk of root damage to nearby houses.
Traffic concern: Parish councillors are to write to the borough council and Durham County Council over plans for the new cattle market at Roundhill Road.
Councillors are concerned the new development will mean increased traffic and are to ask for some sort of restrictions for lorries.
Middleton St George Parish council:
The next meeting will take place on Monday April 13.
WI news: The next meeting will be held on March 26 when the subject will be vegetarian cookery.
The second round of the darts competition will be held in the hall on April 24.
Middleton Tyas Guide celebrations: The Middleton Tyas Guide Company celebrates its 21st anniversary with a party in the village hall on Tuesday from 8.15pm to 9pm.
Neasham WI news: A jumble sale will be held at the village hall tonight starting at 6.15pm to raise money for institute funds.
Sadberge Jumble sale: A jumble sale will be held in the village hall on Tuesday April 7 at 6.30pm in aid of the church.
Parish council: The parish council will meet again on Tuesday April 7.
Cabaret night: The village youth club is holding a cabaret night on March 20 and 21 in the village hall at 7pm, admission is £1.50 or 75p children and tickets are available from the post office.
Church meeting: The third meeting in the series What is Our Church For? will be held at the village hall on Monday night starting at 7.30pm.
Village meeting: The village hall annual meeting will take place on Tuesday March 24 from 7.30pm.
The evening will include election of officers, an open forum and social with snack and wine.
Games night: A night of board games for all ages will be held in the village hall on Friday, admission is 50p and all are welcome.
DARLINGTON students have taken over production of the council's magazine.
Journalism and design students from the College of Technology have produced the spring issue of the Town Crier, which circulates to all 42,000 Darlington homes.
It is thought to be the first such venture.
Production of the magazine has become part of the students' training, with proceeds being used to provide additional resources for the courses involved.
Peter Tickner, the college's director of publicity and marketing, said: ‘We are always seeking ways of getting students involved in the real world they hope to join when they leave college’.
Clive Owen, the council's chief executive, said: ‘We have made an excellent start.
The new style is bright and crisp and it reflects the thorough, professional approach adopted by the college.’
North of England Newspapers, which The Northern Echo, will be distributing the magazine and has offered the students use of its photographic library.
Work has begun on the next issue, due out in June.
A TEAM of archaeologists from Newcastle University are to dig in the centre of Darlington in search of 14th century remains.
On Sunday, the archaeology students are bringing a JCB earthmover to Clark's Yard to make a preliminary search for medieval artefacts.
Darlington Council is trying to redevelop all the yards between Skinnergate and High Row.
Clark's Yard is soon to be put on the market for redevelopment and archaeologists are anxious that potential vital pieces of history should not be lost forever.
Yesterday Brendan Boyle, of the council's planning department, said staff at the Bowes Museum had applied to make a survey of Clark's Yard to establish whether a full dig would be necessary.
Niall Hammond, Durham County Council's sites and monuments officer, wrote to Darlington Council asking for permission for the dig to go ahead.
Mr Hammond described the yards area as the heart of the oldest part of Darlington.
‘Skinnergate was the main industrial area and it is possible there are remains dating back to the 14th century,’ he said.
IDOLATRY:
I am writing as the senior partner in a solicitors' practice, employing over 20 people, in reply to some of the comments spreading gloom and despondency about the Labour Party's proposals in the areas of taxation, economic growth and training.
We are in the middle of a recession which seems to have been wholly engineered by the Conservative Government through their raising of interest rates which are still far too high.
How businesses, especially small businesses, were supposed to survive interest rates at that level remains a mystery to me.
I only know that in 1990 I had to pay £20,000 or thereabouts in interest repayments alone for a business loan excluding repayment of the mortgage.
There are better ways of curing inflation surely than killing the patient.
I cannot understand people who continue to vote Conservative after they have lost their homes or their jobs, or both.
I think this is idolatry beyond belief.
Nancy Bone,.
BOWLERS from the Northern Counties will play a big part in this week's men's international series.
David Ramsdale (Darlington) plays third wood for David Bryant.
Chris Palmer (Stanley) also gets his first cap, again at third wood alongside skip Pip Branfield, like Bryant, from the Somerset Clevedon club.
Jim Lambert (Sunderland) is also selected as third wood and has David Ward (Norfolk) as his skip.
David Holt (Blackpool Borough), Ronnie Gass and John Bell (both Cumbria), Hughie Duff (Hull) and Terry Scott (Gateshead) complete the Northern squad in a powerful six-rink side to take on Wales then Ireland today and finally Scotland tomorrow in quest of the British Isles Hilton Trophy team championships.
The England team John Ottoway, Ronnie Gass, Gary Burgess, John Bell (skip); rink two John Rednell, Graham Standley, Jim Lambert, David Ward (skip); rink three David Holt, John Evans, Mervyn King, Tony Allcock (skip); rink four Hugh Duff, Gary Smith, Steve Halmai, Andy Thompson (skip); rink five Terry Scott, Roy Cutts, David Ramsdale, David Bryant (skip); rink six Brett Morley, Mel Briggs, Chris Palmer, Pip Branfield (skip).
Reserves R Hart, B Jenkins, J Mills, G Harker, W Richards.
Following in the footsteps of their male colleagues, who won the All England championships silver medal at Bedford last week, the Darlington women bowlers collected national bronze medals at Stevenage.
Against Tilbury, Essex, Betty Bayliss spearheaded Audrey Andrews, Doreen Hope and Margaret Shaw to a 7–1, 11–6, 22–7, 24–10 lead before winning convincingly 25–13.
Marjorie Bousfield was up against the national fours championship rink and lost 17–28, Dulcie Harbin lost 25–14, while Pearl Wright, after drawing 9–9 at ten ends, went 22–15.
Tilbury went on to collect the gold.
The teams made Darlington the first club ever to collect medals in the championship in the same season.
The Darlington veterans team to play Great Aycliffe in the Durham County league championships next Wednesday at 10.30am includes B Howell, D Redfern, D Hammond, T Horner, J Simpson, T Jones, S Clarke, A McCartney, A Porter, R Fort, K Abbott, A Wilson (captain).
Brian Metcalfe and Graham Peacock beat father and son Alan and Mark Stephenson in Darlington club pairs championship.
ASPIRING coaches in the Durham and Cleveland area have been stunned to find that the cost of the basic part one course has doubled in two years to £88.50.
‘It's absolutely terrible,’ says county chairman John Shaw.
‘We're trying to encourage people to become coaches, not put them off.’
Shaw, a member of the national SRA executive committee, is to raise this at their next meeting in London, on March 28.
The county's next part one course is at Durham SC on the weekend of April 25–26 and includes an examination on September 6.
‘The SRA have insisted on adding extra hours,’ says Shaw.
‘There are now 18 hours of court time.
This means taking up courts on Friday nights, which are always busy.’
The extra court times costs increase as with the fee, proportionately, for Bill West, the part three coach who will run it.
Shaw, however, worked off most of his exasperation over the weekend winning the Durham and Cleveland County veterans' over 50 title.
At one point it would have been reasonable to assume that Durham SC were staging a convention for knee and ankle supports as nearly 80 combatants rolled up for battle.
To suggest, however, that these were all wrinklies dusting off the cobwebs to have one final fling before a tranquil retirement would be a serious misapprehension.
The county's elder statesmen were collectively in good nick, both off the court and when hitting it on it.
Tommy Taylor, of TT Construction, and Ernie Matthews, of RPM windows and conservatories, forked out the £250-odd they had donated for the trophies and there was no harder match than when the two sponsors met in the semi-finals of the over 40s.
Results: men's over 35 semifinals Dave Lumsdon (Durham) bt Colin Shields (Darlington) 9–4 9–2 9–0; Robert Thompson (Darlington) bt Barry Hutchinson (Racecourse) 9–2 3–9 9–4 79 9–0; final: Lumsdon bt Thompson 9–1 8–10 9–5 9–4.
Over 40s Ernie Matthews (Durham) bt Tony Taylor (Durham) 7–9 9–6 7–9 9–7 9–3; Norman Turbull (West Hartlepool) bt Brian Graham (Squashtec) 9–2 3–9 9–4 10–8; Turnbull bt Matthews 9–5 4–9 9–5 10–9.
Over 45 Jim Hart (Stockton SC) bt Mark Honeybell (Consett) 9–4 8–10 1–9 9–2 9–4; Tom Elves (Durham) bt David Mackenzie (Sedgefield) 2–9 9–1 9–6 9–6; Hart bt Elves 9–6 9–7 10–9.
Over 50 John Shaw (Durham) bt Alan Todd (Darlington) 6–9 9–3 9–3 9–5; Dave Cawdwell (Chester-le-Street) bt Tom Snaith (Chester-le-Street) 5–9 8–10 9–1 9–2; Snaith bt Cawdwell 9–1 5–9 5–9 9–4 9–5.
Over 55 Malcolm McArthur (Stockton) bt Pat Moore (Durham) 7–9 93 9–5 9–4; Ken Marshall (West Hartlepool) bt Frank Cronin (Sunderland (9–10 9–7 9–5 9–4; McArthur bt Marshall 9–7 9–4 9–7.
Women over 35 Jill Shields (Darlington) bt Pat Walling (Durham) 10–8 95 10–9; Emily Andrew (Chester-le-Street) bt Sarah Burgin (Durham) 9–6 49 8–10 9–7 9–4; Shields bt Andrew 9–7 49 9–6 9–1.
Over 40 Pauline James (Chester-le-Street) bt Brenda Banks (Durham) 69 9–6 9–4 9–7; Pam Marshall (Chester-le-Street) bt Marion Smith (Durham) 2–9 90 9–5 9–7; Marshall bt James 9–4 9–6 96.
HENRY Wharton happily goes into the unknown in his home town of York tonight.
The Commonwealth super-middleweight champion takes on American Kenny Schaefer over ten rounds at the Barbican Leisure Centre.
And he goes into the non-title contest revealing: ‘I don't bother watching tapes of my opponents any more.
‘I haven't since the way Lou Gent fought against me in my first title defence.’
Gent adopted a change of style for the fight and almost pulled off an upset, unbeaten Wharton retaining his championship by the narrowest of margins after the brutal 12-round battle was declared a draw.
Consequently Leeds-born Wharton is keen not to be misled by the past performances of future opponents Schaefer included.
Schaefer's record to date is not that impressive.
The 28-year-old from Omaha has recorded 17 wins over modest opposition against three defeats as a pro.
Barring injury, Wharton should be clear to defend his title at Leeds Town Hall on April 8.
On the undercard tonight unbeaten Darlington welterweight Charlie Moore has his fourth pro outing when he takes on Alfreton's Joe Corcoran.
‘That's not Vic Halom, it's God’
IN May 1973 Vic Halom was in the Sunderland football team that won, wonderfully, the FA Cup; on Tuesday evening he was back at raucous Roker Park, canvassing for votes.
‘I never thought I'd end up outside the ground propositioning people,’ he said.
Halom, last minute Liberal Democrat candidate for Sunderland North, is anxious to be seen as a serious politician, not just a rekindled striker.
In a day to deity existence, however, greatness is sometimes thrust upon him.
‘Hey dad, that's Vic Halom,’ said a lad of about ten scurrying off to the big match.
‘That's not Vic Halom,’ said his father, ‘that's God.’
Now 42, Halom lives in Tynemouth and is general manager of North Shields FC, though the club £400,000 in debt is presently run by a receiver.
It's fair to say, however, that he put himself about rather more in the red and white of Sunderland than he did on Tuesday in the orange of the Liberal Democrats.
Though widely remembered and warmly received, the candidate had few political goal scoring opportunities.
‘Have you got a ticket,’ he asked a fan.
‘It'll cost you more than a bloody ticket to get me to vote for you lot,’ replied the fan.
Another gave him a chip.
A third, who seemed prematurely to have been celebrating Sunderland's success, planted a spontaneous kiss on his cheek.
‘You'll do for me, I've always voted Labour,’ said the fan, who may or may not have been colour blind.
Most just wished Halom was playing that night.
‘Aye so do I,’ said Vic, ‘I think I could sort out that Vinny Jones.’
After half an hour he went off to watch the match against the Chelsea of Ian Porterfied, his erstwhile colleague.
It is also, of course, the Chelsea of David Mellor and John Major.
Sunderland won 2–1; perhaps he will think it portentous.
Tough win SUNDERLAND North voters could be in for a liberal dose of confusion: as well as Vic Halom (Liberal Democrat) candidates include Win Lundgren, representing the Liberal Party.’
Mrs Lundgren, 52, is the region's sole candidate from the Party ‘relaunched’ three years ago and the only one in a wheelchair.
A viral illness five years ago left her hardly able to walk, though she retained a Sunderland Council seat last May.
‘I'm a Liberal and a cripple,’ she says, fairly cheerfully.
‘The problems of fighting an election from a wheelchair are absolutely horrendous.
You can't even get access to most of the polling stations.’
Nationally the Liberals, chaired by David Moorish and boasting a logo that resembles something from the side of a soap powder box, will field around 70 candidates the next nearest is in Leeds.
Mrs Lundgren describes her LibDem opponent as ‘a football gimmick’ but admits she probably won't finish top of the table either.
‘I rather think not,’ she says.
Gazza back in six weeks
FOOTBALL: Paul Gascoigne could be playing in six weeks, helping Tottenham's battle against relegation.
The England midfielder has had an operation to remove the supporting wires from the knee he damaged in last season's FA Cup final, and Spurs boss Peter Shreeves said: ‘Paul crossed his last major hurdle on Monday.
‘For the next few days he is going to be a bit sore.
But once the swelling subsides we will be pulling out all the stops to get him back into full training, and playing again in six weeks.’
Matt in danger
FOOTBALL:
Matthew Le Tissier is in danger of wrecking his England hopes after being sent off in Southampton's FA Cup defeat at Norwich just a month after England manager Graham Taylor lectured him about his approach.
Essex profit
CRICKET:
County champions Essex made a record pre-tax profit of £246,323 last year, an increase of £56,273 on the 1990 season.
Mendonca back
FOOTBALL:
Sheffield United striker Clive Mendonca has rejoined Second Division Grimsby, who play host to Newcastle tomorrow, on a month's loan.
Chilcott rested RUGBY: Bath have made two forward changes for tomorrow's Courage League visit to Rugby.
No 8 Ben Clarke and prop Gareth Chilcott are rested, with Steve Ojomoh coming into the back row and England Student John Mallett replacing Chilcott.
Luton blow
FOOTBALL:
Luton winger Scott Oakes has undergone a cartilage operation and is likely to be out for the rest of the season.
Linesman clear
FOOTBALL:
Police have found no case to answer against Stockport lineseman Bob Bowden, reported by several supporters for allegedly making a V sign during Preston's home game against Shrewsbury in February.
Bells beaten
SKIING:
Top British skiers Martin and Graham Bell suffered an embarrassing defeat at the hands of novice Macclesfield-born Gavin Forsyth in the downhill event at the British national championships in Tignes, France, yesterday.
Ryhope boost
FOOTBALL:
Following the latest vandalism at Northern League club Ryhope, youth team keeper Peter Quinn went fund raising around the local pubs and clubs, and collected £147 to help repair the damage.
West takings
FOOTBALL:
West Auckland raised £200 from an auction of memorabilia after their floodlight opener against Kevin Keegan's Newcastle United XI on Monday night.
Wintersgill listed
FOOTBALL:
Northern League Guisborough have transfer listed midfielder Dave Wintersgill, the former Darlington midfielder.
Reid on loan FOOTBALL: Leicester midfielder Paul Reid is joining Third Division Bradford on loan until the end of the season.
RAFFLE tickets for the prize draw will be sold at British Home Stores in Darlington on Saturday and on April 11, volunteers for both days are asked to contact Moira Shields at Farmway.
The sponsored step-aerobics session at Darlington's Dolphin Centre will take place at the Dolphin Centre on Sunday March 29 between 10.30am and 12.30pm.
Admission is free and all money raised will go to the Day Care Centre Appeal.
Organisers of the appeal want to raise £637,000 to build the day care centre, which will act as a meeting place for all old folk especially the lonely, frail and housebound and provide a range of services.
So far £114,957 has been raised but another £200,000 has to be found this year to keep the appeal on target.
Organisers would like local people to hold events like coffee mornings and jumble sales on behalf of the appeal.
They say this would help convince charitable trusts who can give big donations that the people of Darlington are backing the appeal.
Contact Moira Shields at Farmway for more details.
IN a gym in Darlington veteran boxer Laurie Degnan is training eight-year-old boys as future champion fighters.
Former Northern champion Degnan is taking kids off the streets and giving them a dream to fight for.
Laurie, known to the boxing boys as Lol, believes boxing can give ‘lads with fire in their belly’ an ambition which keeps them on the straight and narrow.
‘They have to be tougher than the average kid, I don't like losers, but once they're into boxing it takes them off the streets, away from the drugs and alcohol,’ said Lol, 57.
‘I have never had trouble with any of my lads in 20 years.
If they start boxing young they never get caught up in that scene.’
Laurie Degnan has watched his youngsters take national junior boxing titles for nine out of the last ten years.
And youngsters from eight to their teens are lacing up their boxing gloves and joining his flourishing club, in a gym in Larchfield Street, which has turned out 29 amateur British boxing champions.
The children have to learn footwork, shadow boxing, and sparring and are encouraged to thump every ounce of their energy into punch bags but they have to wait until they are 11-years-old before they are allowed a real fight.
Lol's 40 potential champions include teenagers John Lee, Aaron Kelly and Jim Smith, who are in the Great Britain Schools' Championships next week.
Lol, a former council brickie, said: ‘Boxing has been wonderful for me and it can be for the kids too.
They can travel abroad going to shows and fights.
‘Eventually they can turn professional if they're good enough and earn a fair bob or two.
It can be a route away from unemployment or dead-end jobs.’
Ten-year-old Trevor Kachel, of Belgrave Road, said: ‘I like boxing because it means I can defend yourself if you ever needed to.
It makes me feel safer.
‘I started boxing last November and I really like it.
I don't mind the hard training because you get better and better at it and it's something to do.’
Gavin Rose, of The Leas, Darlington, is 12 and joined Lol's gym last summer: ‘I had my first two fights a fortnight ago and I won them.
I loved it.
‘I'd done a lot of training, going to the gym three times a week and now I'm one of the top boxers for my age and weight.
‘I'm never scared, we don't get hurt because we have to wear a head guard.
My friends have other sports but I like the boxing even though I get a bit of stick of my friends about being hard.’
Mark Higgins is just 10 and said: ‘I saw boxing on the TV and loved it so I started at the gym twice a week.
‘My mum thinks it's OK too and Lol is great.
He's quite a strict trainer but we all like him.
He looks after us.’
SILK ties recovered from a house in Darlington are baffling Darlington police.
Two men were arrested in Darlington by the police who searched one suspect's house and found a bag crammed full of silk ties.
PC Dave Fishwick of Darlington police said: ‘Either this man is very well dressed or these ties have been stolen.’
But inquiries throughout the region have failed to identify where the ties were stolen from.
The ties are made by a company called Valenti and are 100pc silk.
It is possible they could be copies of a well known make called Valentino.
PC Fishwick said it is likely the ties have come from a shop in the North-East or North Yorkshire.
Anyone with information can contact PC Garland on Darlington .
Elsewhere in Darlington the number of crimes has remained high although here has been a slight decline in some common crimes.
PC Fishwick said: ‘Of course it is too soon to make any judgement but we are keeping our fingers crossed that some of the crime prevention messages are getting through.’
Police are searching for thieves who broke into a house in Corporation Road and stole a video recorder and jewellery worth £550.
They are also trying to trace thieves who broke into an elderly woman's house in Pendleton Road where they stole her pension book and her video recorder.
Other crimes include the theft of several items left outside houses or in unlocked cars.
The police urge the public not to underestimate what opportunist thieves may try and steal.
‘Make sure everything is secure even if you don't think anyone would want to steal it,’ said PC Fishwick.
The following vehicles have been reported missing and not recovered: White Peugeot F770 XWR, Red Cavalier C782 YUG, Black Escort G702 5YY, Black Sierra G241 YHN, Silver Bluebird A259 LWD, Blue Escort B869 FFT, White Escort G761 ENV.
STAFF and students at a local boys' school are preparing to thrill audiences with their latest drama.
Hurworth House school is staging a production of the 1920s comic murder mystery The Ghost Train later this week.
The tale involves supernatural suspense on the South Cornwall Joint Railway complete with gun runners and a cunning detective.
Darlington Railway Museum has provided props for a platform waiting room, and Huworth Theatre Group has supplied many of the costumes.
The 15-strong crew are putting on two shows tomorrow afternoon and Saturday evening.
The Ghost Train was written by Arnold Ridley, better known as the dithering Godfrey from TV's comedy series Dad's Army.
A NEW landlord is trying to trace his pub's past.
Chris Willsden took over the Bay Horse, Hurworth, near Darlington on Monday and hopes to set up a display of the pub's heritage.
‘I have inherited a pub full of history and want to know a little bit more about it,’ he said.
Chris believes the Bay Horse was first a pub in the 1560s and was also a coaching inn.
Anyone who can help with old picture postcards or other memorabilia can contact Chris on Darlington .
WAITING at tables may not seem much fun to most people but in Hollywood anything goes, says 24-year-old head waiter Richard Partington.
You name them, he's served them, and now Richard, head waiter at Martha's Vineyard, at the Kirklevington Country Club, Yarm, cannot wait to go back to Beverly Hills and the good life.
Richard, of Surbiton Road, Hartburn, Stockton, is off to the States again next week to find work where the film stars live.
But he'll be back next month for the national finals in London of the Remy Martin Cognac runners up final in their head waiter of the year competition.
Richard spent two years in Beverly Hills and had to leave when his work permit expired.
He said: ‘The money out there is so much better.
My waiters were getting $60 a day tips and driving round in Porsches.’
Richard, who trained at Darlington College of Technology and Maxim's, Paris, first got a job at the world-famous Beverly Hills Wilshire Hotel the scene of the film Pretty Woman where he served the likes of Richard Gere and Jack Nicholson.
Then he moved to the exclusive St James Club as restaurant manager, serving the likes of Lionel Ritchie, Duran Duran, Elizabeth Taylor, Robert Wagner and Jean-Claude van Damme, of Kickboxer film fame.
He said: ‘The stars are really nice people.
Dudley Moore used to come into the club twice a week to play the piano.
‘I'm just hoping I'll be able to get a job while I'm out there so I can go out again.
A student from Darlington's German twin-town has travelled to Britain to study life on an English newspaper.
Mr Thomas Kretzschmar, aged 22, is studying social science and English language and literature at the university of Duisberg in the Ruhr district of Germany.
This week he spent four days working on the Darlington and Stockton Times.
‘From what I have seen so far Darlington is a very nice town,’ said Thomas.
‘I am very impressed by the prices.
I bought these Levi 501's for £25 back home they would have cost me double that.’
Mr Kretzschmar says higher inflation is one of the prices paid by Germans for the reunification of their nation.
‘There are some people in the east and west of Germany who say the wall should be built again.
‘In the west it is the prices which are hard to accept and in the east people are unhappy about unemployment.
‘Many people in the east are also completely unrealistic about how the country is going to change.
‘They expected telecommunications and roads to be modernized within two or three years, but it will take many, many, years.’
Despite the problems caused by the fall of the wall he says most Germans are still glad reunifaction occurred.
‘Many Germans are afraid to say they are Germans.
No-one I know is proud to admit they are German when they travel abroad.
Reunifaction will help solve the German identity problem.’
Mr Kretzshmar, who has travelled extensively around Europe, says he will stay in Germany, where he hopes to become a teacher.
But if the urge to leave his native country grows he says Scotland or England will be the places he will look to live in.
Cricket star to launch new scanner
A private health clinic offering a high tech body scanner service will be opened in Darlington by cricketer Ian Botham in May, it was announced this week.
But patients will begin treatment at the centre from April 13.
Health Images, the company behind the Magnetic Imaging Centre, Lingfield Way, hopes the scanner, believed to be the first of its type in the region, will be in high demand.
The machine diagnoses internal injuries, including sports injuries, via a magnetic tube and displays results on a computer screen.
It removes the need for surgical exploration and the risks of side effects.
Mr Tony Prescott, managing director of Health Images, said the £1.2m.
development was finished and would take half private and half NHS patients.
The scanner looks at different kinds of injury than the equipment which Darlington and North Tees health authority expect to receive from a national health department package announced two weeks ago.
Managers did not expect the two pieces of equipment would compete with each other.
Carry on, Father
AT the age of 80 the Rev. Anthony Cunningham has jumped at the chance of a new job.
The sprightly priest, who at 75 came close to retiring but is now glad it never came off, has taken over the parish of St Paulinus in St Helen Auckland, County Durham.
And the one-time headmaster of St Mary's Grammar School in Darlington says the chance to work again with children prompted him to accept his new job.
He has already become a familiar figure at St Wilfrid's Primary School and he is also chaplain for St John's Comprehensive.
Father Cunningham plans to carry on with his pastoral work for many years to come.
He says his new post will not be a quiet one and expects there will be a lot of work to be done in the parish, which also covers the villages of Cockfield, Woodland and Butterknowle.
COMPETITION 7 Days Plus has videos, heat sensitive T-shirts and heat sensitive mugs to be won in an easy-to-enter competition.
Just tell us the long-running TV series in which Backdraft director Ron Howard starred as Richie Cunningham.
Answer, together with your name, address and telephone number, to Backdraft Competition, 7 Days Plus, Features Dept, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Closing date for entries is Friday March 27.
Usual North of England Newspapers competition rules apply.
Senders of the first ten correct answers out of the hat will each win a Backdraft video, T-shirt and mug.
20 years ago TV'S Second Generation dance troupe were on stage at Darlington Civic Theatre while radio's Mrs Dale, Jessie Matthews, was appearing in the Emlyn Williams thriller Night Must Fall at York Theatre Royal.
On the box in Coronation Street Emily and Ernest Bishop were looking for somewhere to live.
She wanted a house in the famous street but which of the residents would consider moving.
‘The only likelies, and they're not really likely, are Mrs Caldwell, Mr Tatlock and Kenneth Barlow,’ she said.
The Horizon film on BBC2 dealt with more serious matters the effects of dams in changing the face of the world.
Stopping rivers and creating lakes, it was reported, had caused irreversible changes to thousands of acres of land.
The programme looked at the effect on the environment of three manmade lakes in Africa.
Peak time viewing on BBC2 was filled by a low grade western, Duel at Silver Creek starring Audie Murphy.
15 years ago Impersonator Mike Yarwood made an appeal for Jubilee Year in the guise of Prince Charles on Mike Yarwood in Persons on BBC1, while dancers of the London Festival Ballet were accompanied by Kenny Ball and His Jazzmen on Saturday Night at the Mill.
The ballet company's artistic director Beryl Grey was one of the guests on the programme and the dance performed was The Siren from the ballet The Prodigal Son.
The music's better known as The Entertainer by Scott Joplin.
Tony Palmer's history of popular music in the 20th century, All You Need Is Love, took a trip to the music hall, claimed as the earliest example of a popular music industry.
Film fare included Eyewitness with Mark Lester, the little lad from Oliver!, as a boy who witnessed a murder but couldn't get anyone to believe him.
A case of crying wolf too often.
10 years ago The game show 3–2–1 had a Spinechillers theme, which was hardly surprising when you consider that the guests included Mike Read and Dave Lee Travis, two DJs guaranteed to send a shiver of shock up anyone's spine.
Johnny Morris told the musical tale of Lollopalong the Racehorse in Johnny's Animal Operas on Tyne Tees.
The cast of the show, filmed on stage at Newcastle Playhouse, included a massed choir of NorthEast schoolchildren and the Northern Sinfonia.
Both BBC1 and Tyne Tees offered big movies at peak time.
The former screened Red Alert, a TV movie about a full-scale alert at a nuclear reactor, a plot related to that of the cinema hit The China Syndrome.
Over on ITV was Valdez Horses with Charles Bronson, not the most expressive of actors, as a halfbreed stud farmer involved with his wealthy neighbour's sister and a teenage runaway.
The late night movie on BBC2 was the shot-in-Newcastle thriller Payroll, starring Billie Whitelaw as a widow swearing to get even with the armed robbers who shot her husband during a security van robbery.
HOW much is a train ticket to London?
Ask me instead about the Meaning of Life it would probably be easier to explain It all depends on whether you go First Class, Standard, on a Friday or Bank Holiday, before 9am, after 6pm, book a week in advance or want dinner on the train.
Sometimes, it's cheaper for a whole family to travel than it is for one person.
If you take the children and have a family rail card you can get a reduction one third off if it's a standard fare, a quarter off if it's a saver.
Clear?
No, neither were we when we took two trips to London in a fortnight.
The first paid for by generous British industry cost £178 just for me.
A week later I took two children and the three of us got there and back for £40.50, which does seem a comparative snip.
British Rail's vastly varying fare structure is simple to understand, as long as you have half an hour to spare, a clock and a calendar and the great fare bible to follow.
Basically: you can travel First Class or on any train, any day, any time.
are valid on most trains, except early morning trains used by businessmen.
are more restricted again.
From Darlington to King's Cross for instance, the first train you can get is the 9.02.
You can't come back in the rush hour, or on Fridays or other peak days eg round Bank Holidays.
is First Class with frills a meal and drink on the train, car park ticket, etc.
With you have to be organised and book at least a week ahead for the train you want.
On all these (except Executive), children under five go free, and those between five and 16 pay half price.
With me so far?
Enter the Family Rail Card.
This costs £20 a year and enables two adults to get reductions off fares a third off First Class and Standard, a quarter of Savers and Supersavers.
And up to four children can travel for £1 each on any journey.
But they don't apply to Apex fares.
Don't try and work it out any more.
Just look at the table of comparative costs and hope that when you get to the station there's a friendly British Rail man with time and patience to explain it all.
As the illustration above shows, even if you just use the Family Rail Card once, it will earn its keep.
It's almost worth borrowing a child to take with you and save a fortune.
There are other railcards too for pensioners and young people that offer their own discounts.
The price of train tickets can vary from the reasonable to the ridiculous.
And the idea of encouraging people to use off peak trains can only be commended.
But does it have to be so complicated?
IT'S so simple and logical, you wonder why it was so long being invented shampoo in a bar.
No messy bottles to drip down the side of the bath or break in your sportsbag.
The only people we know who do it are Cosmetics to Go, the mail order firm that brings you such exuberant delights as Filboid Studge Asparagus Mask and Goop Liquid Eyeliner.
Their Inasia Shampoo Bars cost £2.25 and the only snag is that you might get muddled on the side of the bath and mix them up with the soap.
We have a box full of varieties for you to try, including Tar Baby, for scalps in need of a bit of care; Bronx Blonde with chamomile for fair hair; Dead Sea Salt for frequent washing; and Coconut for normal to dry hair.
To know more about Cosmetics to Go, phone free on  for a catalogue.
And to get your free shampoo bar, send your name and address on a postcard to Sharon Griffiths, Shop Talk, Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Mark your card with which variety you'd like and we'll try, but not promise, to send your favourite.
Names out of the hat next Friday morning.
Sitting safely ARE your children sitting comfortably in the car?
More importantly, are they sitting safely?
A survey last year showed that a frightening proportion of child car seats would not do their job properly as they hadn't been fitted correctly.
You can have yours checked out for free on Sunday at Halfords in Durham, in a session organised by Halfords and What Car? magazine.
Experts from the AA, Halfords and local Road Safety officers will be on hand to advise on buying and fitting child seats.
Halfords at the Arnison Centre, Durham, 10am to 3pm, Sunday 22 March.
— Positively the last mention of good but cheap hairdressers: it took a reader to point out one almost on our doorstep.
Josie's in Priestgate, Darlington, ‘a pleasant and happy salon,’ £6 for a cut and blow dry with perms from £12.50.
Be Objective:
The standard of reporting by Simon Turnbull and, to a lesser extent, Clive Hetherington, leaves much to be desired when they are covering Newcastle United.
Mr Turnbull's match reports have always been jaundiced and he couldn't resist his usual helping of cynicism in his coverage of last weekend's saga at St James's Park.
Why bring Ian Botham, pantomime and comedy into the situation?
Why not report the facts and realism of the £3m loss of last season, which only John Hall seems capable of tackling?
Instead he sarcastically portrays Hall in anything but a true light.
Mr Hetherington continues the cynicism in his match report, two thirds of which only rakes over the ashes of the Turnbull report.
Hetherington makes no mention of the match quality, with both sides playing attractive football.
No mention of the fact that between them, Newcastle and Swindon had 34 shots at goal; not even a reference to the one and only Glen Hoddle, who in the entire match misplaced only one pass.
Messrs Turnbull and Hetherington are obviously talented journalists.
If they replace sarcasm and cynicism with objective reporting they will become good journalists.
Keith Musgrave Milton Avenue Bishop Auckland.
Ill informed:
May I respond to the article ‘Battling to Save Event’(Echo Sport February 19).
The National Association of Boys' Clubs refutes the allegations attributed to Miles Atkinson, the vice-chairman of the Durham Association of Boys' Clubs, contained in the article.
The suggestion that the NABC is considering abolishing the National Athletics championships is not correct.
We run some 19 national sporting competitions and events annually, open to young people throughout the UK, and each year these competitions are reviewed and evaluated by an appropriate specialist committee.
The NABC has never fostered a North/South divide and the suggestion from Mr Atkinson that we would give preference to the views from southern counties, as against northern counties, is totally without foundation.
I therefore wish to refute the accusations made in Frank Johnson's article by Miles Atkinson who, on this occasion, has been ill informed.
I believe the statements alleged to have been made by Mr Atkinson do not reflect the views of the Durham Association of Boys' Clubs.
Derek P.
Harris National Director NABC
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin will give youth a fling in today's Third Division relegation battle against Preston.
Hankin said: ‘We have had a disastrous season but this could be the start of a new era.
‘I cannot wave a magic wand and change the season around.
But I will plan ahead, even if we crash into the Fourth Division.
‘I want a group of youngsters who are committed to the cause.
It may take time to build a successful team, but we will get there.
‘The days of signing £30,000 or £40,000 players who move on after a year are over.
‘I think Darlington fans are fed up with that policy.’
Teenagers Mark Sunley and Sean Gregan will form the central defence today.
Steve Gaughan will also be in the side, with Anthony Isaacs on the bench.
Hankin appealed for fans' patience and encouragement at a critical stage of the season.
‘Supporters have been brilliant since I took over and I hope they will continue to back the team.
‘Only a miracle will save us from relegation.
A miracle in the shape of eight wins from our final ten games.’
Skipper Kevan Smith has been left out of the side.
Hankin stressed the central defender was rested and not dropped.
The season had been a hard slog and he felt a break was in the player's interests.
Team from: Prudhoe, McJannet, Cook, 0'Shaughnessey, Sunley, Gregan, Gaughan, Toman, Cusack, Cork, Pickering, Isaacs, Borthwick.
Former club chairman Dick Corden could attend the game as a spectator.
Corden said he might pay through the turnstiles and watch from the Tin Shed.
GRACEFUL dancers have brought the magic of the world's most famous ballet to youngsters at a Darlington school.
Suzanne Whitworth, a teacher and dancer with Northern Ballet, visited Heighington School with a group of dancers from the Dance-In Studio in Darlington.
The children in the junior school aged between seven and 11 were given a talk on Swan Lake and a demonstration of the ballet.
Teacher Stephanie Caldwell, who organised the visit, said: ‘They were absolutely mesmerised.
‘They couldn't take their eyes off the dancers.
‘The performance was of a very high standard.
‘We were all very impressed.’
Picture: MIKE GIBB
Pub fund-raiser:
Players at the Saxon Inn, Escomb, will finish a 24-hour darts marathon at noon today.
The teams are raising money for local charities and appeals.
Walk reminder:
Entries are still being taken for a Red Cross sponsored walk through Hamsterley Forest on April 12.
The ten-mile walk starts at The Grove at 10am and cash raised will be used to help the organisation's youth section.
The entry fee is £1.50 or free with £10 sponsorship.
Anyone interested should contact the Durham branch on .
Darts tournament:
Entries for the seventh annual darts tournament at Willington's Spectrum Leisure Complex close on March 31.
The event with cash prizes is being sponsored by Newholme Construction Ltd and will be held on Sunday, April 5.
Entry forms are available from the leisure centre.
Today
EVENWOOD:
Bingo and disco night, WMC, Manor Street, 7.30pm.
FROSTERLEY:
Cottage Crafts, The Old Church Hall, 1.30–4.30pm.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Barnard Castle Ramblers, nine miles of paths, meet at Post Office, Barnard Castle, 9.30am.
Cars to Little Salkeld.
Details, tel Ian Martin on .
Cottage Crafts, The Old Church Hall, Frosterley, 1.30–4.30pm.
Guitarist and vocalist Graham Russell, Misty Blue Inn, Spennymoor, noon-3pm.
Families welcome.
MONDAY:
Tea dance, Leisure Centre, Spennymoor, 1.30–3.30pm.
In aid of IM Mount Pleasant Church, Spennymoor.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
Today
BARTON:
Table Top Sale, Village Hall, 10am-3pm.
COLBURN:
Rummage Sale, Methodist Chapel, nr Catterick Garrison, 1.30pm.
Whist Drive, Church Hall, Colburn, 7.30pm.
In aid of Colburn Over 60s Club.
LEYBURN:
Jumble Sale, Scout Hall, 2pm.
Leyburn Amateur Dramatic Society in The Full Treatment, Playhouse, Leyburn, 7.30pm.
RICHMOND:
Church Missionary Society coffee morning, Town Hall, 9am-noon.
Richmond Amateur Dramatic Society in School For Scandal, Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond, 7.30pm.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Hambleton Ramblers, mid Wensleydale ramble of 11 miles, taking in Aysgarth Falls and Redmire Force, meet Market Cross, Northallerton, 9am, or Castle Bolton car park 9.45am.
Blood donor session, Town Hall, Richmond, 2–5pm.
MONDAY:
National Council for the Divorced and Separated meeting, Town Football Club, Northallerton, 8pm.
Details, tel .
Richmond Round Table charity 50/50 auction, Market Hall, Richmond, 6pm.
Britain in Bloom meeting, open to the public, Town Hall, Richmond, 7pm.
Richmond and Dales Talking Newspaper group meeting, open to the public, Library, Richmond, 7pm.
TUESDAY:
Live music with Fidler Hill performing country favourites and requests, Three Horse Shoes, Station Road, Brompton.
In aid of Alverton Physically Handicapped and Able Bodied Club.
Northallerton Mowbray Folk Dance Club, Grammar School, Northallerton, 7.30pm.
Details, tel .
Organist Howard Beaumont, Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond, 7.30pm.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York ; Sian Roberts on Richmond  and Ian Lamming on Northallerton .
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington .
FOOTBALLERS concerned by the plight of Gary Lineker's baby son George have volunteered to help leukaemia research.
On Monday Northallerton GP Dr Hilary Enevoldson visits Darlington Football Club to take blood tests from some players.
Dr Enevoldson, who is involved with the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust, said she is trying to get as many samples from healthy adults to match with leukaemia patients in need of bone marrow.
Dr Enevoldson said the more records of blood and bone marrow types she has, the more chance of helping patients like the England and Spurs striker's baby son, who was taken ill with a form of leukaemia when he was only a few months old.
Fishing industry lands a big boost
Scarborough's fishing industry has been given a big boost thanks to shoals of scallops.
Fred Normandale, a leading skipper, told the harbour committee yesterday that scallops were now attracting fishing boats from other areas.
Mr Normandale added that there had also been a recent rise in the landings of whiting, resulting in fish landing values rising £90,000 in the last two months to £312,330.
Total landings so far this financial year are now over £4m.
Footpath closed:
A footpath between Low Petergate and Swinegate in York will be closed between April 6 and April 16 to allow underground cables to be laid.
Pedestrians instead will use Church Street and Swinegate.
Coins date:
Roman coins unearthed in Malton will go on show at the town's museum from April 18.
They include some dating back to Emperor Septimius Severus who once ruled York.
Moving on:
The deputy head of Morecambe high School, Miss Rachel Totton has been appointed the new head of Whitby School.
She will take over from Bryan Barker who is retiring in July.
Work finished:
Work has been completed on extending the platform at Ruswarp Station near Whitby.
The improvement scheme has been carried out to meet new health and safety requirements.
Stepping down:
Mrs Jean Storrow has stepped down as secretary of the Ryedale branch of the Council for the Protection of Rural England after 15 years.
Green light:
Pickering Town Football Club has been given the green light to install floodlights as part of its plan to win promotion to the Premier Division of the Northern Counties League.
Today
RIPON:
Blair Dances, every Saturday, modern & sequence dancing, Hugh Ripley Hall, Skellbank, 711pm.
Details, tel..
YORK:
Sainsbury's Choir of the Year Competition, Barbican Centre.
Box office, tel..
Coming up
SUNDAY:
The Fell & Dale Club ramble of 17 miles, meet outside Library, Harrogate, 8.30pm.
Harrogate Croquet Club, Queen Ethelburga's Playing Fields, Penny Pot Lane, Harrogate, 2pm.
Details, tel.
. Every Sunday.
Harrogate Model Car Club competitive racing, indoors at St John Fisher RC High School, Sports Hall, Hookstone Drive, Harrogate, 12noon.
Details, tel..
MONDAY:
Volunteer Stroke Scheme Club, Harlow Over 60's Club, Harlow Avenue, Harrogate, 1.45–3.45pm.
Every Monday.
Woodlands Retired Men's Fellowship Meeting, Woodlands Methodist Church, Wetherby Road, Harrogate, 2pm.
Harrogate Bridge Club welcome visitors to Duplicate Bridge sessions at 27 Robert Street, Harrogate, 7.15pm.
Details, tel.
. Every Monday.
Scottish Dancing, Strathspey and Reel Club, St Lukes Hall,(behind the old church in Kings Road), Harrogate, 8–10pm.
Every Monday.
Linden Singers, rehearsal night, new voices welcome, 14 Beech Road, Oatlands, Harrogate.
Details, tel.
. Every Monday.
Harrogate Film Society presents The Exterminating Angel, Harrogate membership details, tel.
. Harrogate & District Community Health Council Meeting, Knaresborough House, High Street, Knaresborough, 7.30pm.
Ripon Dog Training Society Meeting, Hugh Ripley Hall, Skellbank, Ripon, 7pm.
Every Monday.
STUDENT and part-time chef Michael Pearson has won a top national prize in the first competition he has entered.
Michael, of Wyville Grove, Hunton, near Bedale, won the British Gas Capability competition and took top prize of £500 for himself and £200 for his tutor at Darlington College of Arts and Technology.
He was one of 12 finalists told to cook a meal using two oven-ready Gressingham ducklings, potatoes, savoy cabbage and other ingredients costing no more than £3.
Michael, a part-time chef at Catterick Garrison, was presented with his prize at the Savoy yesterday by Cedric Brown of British Gas.
Michael was not the only winner from Darlington College in the Northern regional competition Gillian Elders won the kitchen planning competition.
Eyes down:
The Parent Teachers Association of Eastbourne School, Darlington will hold a bingo evening in the Media Room in the school hall on Monday night at 7.15pm.
Proceeds to the PTA funds.
Today's wills
DARLINGTON:
Mark Anderson, of Farr Holme, Blackwell, left £278,629 net.
Today
BRAFFERTON:
Old time and modern sequence dancing, Village Hall, 7.30–10.30pm. 7.30–8pm new dance taught.
DARLINGTON:
Darlington Ramblers, Heighington circular via Houghton le Side, Bolam and Walworth Moor, meet at E D Walker Homes, Coniscliffe Road, 1pm.
Leader Keith Edgar on .
Coffee morning, cake stall and bric-a-brac, Northland Church, North Road, Darlington, 10am-noon.
Admission 35p.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Car Boot Sale, outside St Anne's Church, Wellbeck Avenue, Darlington, 2pm.
Cars to arrive by 1.30pm.
In aid of North Darlington Cradit Union.
50/50 dance, Dolphin Sunday Dance Club, Dolphin Centre, Darlington, 7.30pm.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
A PILLAR of a church community, renowned for his friendship and kindness, has died after a short illness.
The Rev Thomas Wilson, 86, died peacefully at his home on Tower Road, Darlington, on Wednesday.
He had been a minister in the Church of the Nazarine, serving in Leeds, Perth and Scotland before retiring and moving to Darlington.
His son, the Rev John Wilson, Minister at Corporation Road Baptist Church, paid tribute to the friendship he gave to others.
He said: ‘He came to live near us in Darlington in 1986 and became a regular at the church lunch club.
He was a very gentle and kind man and made friends with so many people in the Baptist church community here.’
John Wilson is to leave the Darlington church in August, after nine years service, to become senior minister in the Baptist Church, Teignmouth, South Devon.
A successor at Corporation Road has yet to be appointed.
IT was out with the old and in with the new and despite the result, Darlington manager Ray Hankin still found much to praise about Quakers' performance after another home defeat sent them closer to the Fourth Division.
Only an alarming collapse by four of the clubs above Quakers can save them from an instant return to the Fourth Division, with nine points separating them from the fifth bottom club.
And with their home form letting them down again this was their sixth successive home game without a win then there isn't much chance of that.
But there could have been a little more hope if Huddersfield referee Steve Bell had given a penalty when David Cork was manhandled to the ground in the six yard box when Quakers were looking for an equaliser.
Hankin, who denied rumours that keeper Mark Prudhoe is about to leave the club, said: ‘It certainly looked like a penalty from where I was watching, but typical of our luck we didn't get it.
It looked like a penalty to everyone in the ground.
‘If we do go down, it's not the end of the world.
These youngsters are the starting point of our next side.’
The manager is intent on using youth as the basis of his new side, and he took in an under 19 game at Nottingham Forest last week.
Hankin signalled the start of that new youth policy by leaving out defender Kevan Smith Andy Toman was given the responsibility of captaining the side and pairing youngsters Sunley and Gregan at the centre of defence.
They didn't let him down.
The first half was best forgotten, although Preston did have the better of the early chances.
However, the visitors caught Quakers cold at the restart when a right wing free kick was floated in for Ronnie Jepson to nip ahead of his marker and stab the ball past Prudhoe.
Quakers resorted to long balls, giving Nick Cusack several half chances, but they should have been back in the game after 72 minutes when David Cork jinked round his marker, Martin James, in the six yard box, and was then hauled down.
Amazingly, the referee waved play on, only for Steve Gaughan's follow up to be cleared off the line.
Cork hit the post in a desperate finish, but Quakers were caught on the break with only two minutes left when Warren Joyce broke down the right and crossed perfectly for the unmarked Jepson, who only minutes before had a goal ruled out for offside, to grab his second from close range.
DARLINGTON could appoint a new chairman this week.
The position is vacant following the resignation of Dick Corden, leaving only John Brockbank and Richard Tonks on the board, who have both yet to serve a full season.
They have held meetings during the past week with potential recruits, although who will take over the chair is not clear.
Brockbank, owner of a Teesside construction company, said: ‘We have spoken to a few people and expect something to be sorted out by the middle of the week.’
A new injection of cash would come in handy for Quakers.
It is understood that the figure of almost £300,000 owed to the club's short term creditors when the club last published its accounts in July last year is still at the same level.
And with the club's assets in only five figures, the cash flow is worsening.
Brockbank said: ‘It has been like that since day one, but many clubs are like that.’
WHO would put money into a football club?
Not many people fancy it as an investment these days.
The occasional millionaire comes along, like Sir John Hall, but putting money into a football club would not exactly be recommended by any financial adviser.
Take Darlington, for instance.
Any self respecting managing director in industry would recoil at the last Feethams balance sheet.
Current assets, such as debtors, stocks and cash, amount to £33,000, which is fairly paltry in comparison with the creditors' figure of £400,000, three quarters of which is due within one year.
Bearing in mind that the accounts refer to the period up to the end of July, 1991, then there are no prizes for guessing where the Jim Willis cash went to.
And indications are that the situation hasn't improved much, so any cash injection from new men on the board will go towards settling the debts.
Gate income won't exactly increase either over the remainder of what appears to be a relegation season.
No matter where one goes in the football spectrum, there is debt, debt, debt.
Newcastle have £6m worth, and are hoping that Sir John's proposed rescue package helps them out.
Tottenham's dilemma was well chronicled last year, but one wonders how long it will be before they return to the same situation.
And then there's poor Aldershot, over £1.2 million in the red and looking for handouts.
The players haven't been paid for three months, so who in their right mind wants to rescue them?
There's many more like them, and not just in the lower reaches of the Football League.
The occasional cup run improves cash flow, but is only short term; which is why the Super League has come about.
And with even more riches going to the big clubs, then it follows that even less goes to the smaller clubs.
But cash crises aren't confined to the professional game.
They occur at non-League level also.
Sponsors cannot be found for leagues just ask the Northern League never mind clubs, and with local businesses cutting back on handouts, then the committees of local football clubs have to raise funds from within.
North Shields reportedly have debts of between £200,000 and £400,000, which is fairly large for the North-East, but there are several clubs further south whose debts run into millions.
So, where are you, fairy godfather?
Or, as one football club committee man said: ‘We'll just keep filling in the pools coupon.’
ONE of your contributors recently stated that we were now in a post-apartheid period.
If that is true, it would be a great relief to the indigenous black population of South Africa, who had their country appropriated by foreigners who then proceeded to deny them basic human rights.
If apartheid is a thing of the past why did President de Klerk put his political future on the line in his fight against right-wing extremists who are determined to retain apartheid?
Speaking about South Africa and apartheid, most Tories opposed the use of sanctions as an effective measure to change their behaviour and discrimination against black people.
Mrs Thatcher was particularly scornful on sanctions and most Tories supported that view.
I watched the BBC's Question Time on March 12.
Imagine my surprise when I heard Douglas Hurd say that the only thing which would make Saddam Hssein toe the line on UN demands short of outright force was sanctions.
Horace Wilson, 18 Ayton Drive, Darlington.
Kinzu calmer
HAVING read in this space of a revolutionary new dog halter Philip Braithwaite bought one for his son's birthday.
This was not, you understand and heaven forefend, because his son needed keeping in check.
It was for his son's dog.
Kinzu, a Rhodesian Ridgeback, was the sort of dog who took his owners for a walk.
That was a week ago in pre-halter days.
It has all changed.
Kinzu is now a different animal, a sort of Zimbabwean Ridgeback, if you like.
The halter was invented, of course, by this space's resident dog trainer, George Grayson.
He was pleased at the news, though it must be reported not exactly knocked down with a feather.
That is something one could now probably do to Kinzu.
Up Norway way IT might be worth going to see A Handful Of Time, an acclaimed Norwegian film which is part of the Norway festival starting in Newcastle next week.
This has English subtitles.
It also features Susannah York and Nigel Hawthorne who must be, therefore, the first British actors in history to speak Norwegian on celluloid.
Yobs are menace in the park
I REFER to your report about Darlington Show (Echo March 7) losing money through people gatecrashing the show field.
Are they aware that the South Park fencing is in urgent need of repair or replacement?
Darlington council should do something as quickly as possible to have repairs done to the perimeter fencing, they would be surprised at the number of people wandering through the park at night, plus the vandalism which is caused by certain people whose sole object is to thieve and destroy.
So please council when you have the money will you take action to remedy this blot on our lovely park which is being destroyed by mindless yobs at night time.
F G Wealands,.
Poop scoop thank you
MAY I thank those dog owners who now use the poop scoop bins in Stanhope Park.
For my three children, walking, toddling and cycling in the park has become a much more pleasant experience.
I hope all local dog owners will follow your good example so we may all enjoy the park together.
Mrs A C Wright, 23 Stanhope Road, Darlington.
PUPILS from a Darlington school have earned top marks in a national competition.
Polam Hall School scooped 12 awards in the UK Schools Mathematics Challenge organised by Birmingham University and sponsored by the National Westminster Bank.
Rebecca Winter and Lucinda Sandys-Clerk won gold awards while four silver and six bronze awards were won by their classmates.
In a special presentation, Keith Donlan, administration manager of the National Westminster's Darlington branch, presented the winners with their certificates.
Mr Donlan said; ‘The schools’ performance was well above average, the results were excellent, and they did very well.’
THREE successful Darlington brothers and sisters have notched up another triumph.
Tae Kwon-Do champions David, Gavin and Laura Scott just can't stop winning and this month add to their collection the Northern Electric Foundation for Sport Promising Talent Award, worth £1,500.
David, 15, Gavin 14, and little Laura only eight, from Washbrook Drive, all started Tae Kwon-Do when they were four.
David (under 48 kilo category) held a full two-year unbeaten record until recently, when a fractured elbow caused him to narrowly lose the 1991 Junior British Championships, a title he won in 1990.
However, he is now back in top form and has just won a gold medal at the International Open championships in Paris.
Gavin is also 1990 Junior British Champion in the under 45 kilo category, and has been in the top three of every competition he has ever entered.
Young Laura is hot on the heels of her brothers.
Fighting in the under 23 kilo category, she recently won one of the top competitions in the country, the Yorkshire Open championships in Doncaster.
Currently a demonstration sport, the 1996 Olympics will see Tae Kwon-Do become a scheduled Olympic event.
Both David and Gavin, already 2nd Dan and 1st Dan Black Belts respectively, have been told they have every chance of bringing home gold medals for Great Britain.
A TEAM of archaeologists yesterday staged a dig in the centre of Darlington in search of fourteenth century remains.
The archaeology students from Newcastle University brought a JCB earthmover to Clarks Yard, off High Row, to make a preliminary search for medieval artefacts.
But the dig, which involved drilling three holes, was called off after all they found were eighteenth century foundations.
Clarks Yard is soon to be put on the market as part of Darlington council's bid to spruce up the three historic yards between High Row and Skinnergate.
Staff at the Bowes Museum had applied to make a survey to establish whether a full dig was necessary.
FOLLOWING Australia's early exit from the World Cup, Dean Jones's next contact with a cricket bat could be in the nets at Boldon.
The 30-year-old Test star will arrive in Durham on April 8 and will link up with his new team-mates in their pre-season squad practice.
Weather permitting outdoor nets will be held on April 8 and 9 at Boldon, where the wicket has been transformed in recent seasons.
The Durham Senior League club have agreed to make their square available and Durham's Director of Cricket Geoff Cook said: ‘Boldon are very keen to help the county and their wicket is probably the best surface in the area.
‘Our new net wickets at the University ground will have to be used sparingly, although they should be ready for use just before the Lancashire game on April 19.’
Durham will play Essex in two one-day friendlies at Chelmsford on April 11 and 12.
Ian Botham is to combine a speaking tour with a family holiday in South Africa after the World Cup and is expected to link up with Durham during their threeday game at Oxford University on April 14–16.
Otherwise the whole squad will go to Essex and Oxford, and efforts are being made to organise a match against Oxfordshire to occupy the Durham players not selected for the University match.
GEOFF Cook, delighted with the launch of the Northern Echo's Schools Cricket Competition for under 15s, is also involved in a coaching course for 10–11-year-olds.
Five Darlington schools are sending five children each to Haughton School for six weekly sessions run under a Lord's Taverners scheme called Cricket For You in 92.
Apart from Cook, also present are National Cricket Association coach Doug Ferguson and Darlington RA's David Eckels, a member of the Lord's groundstaff.
The money provided by the Lord's Taverners for the hire of the sports hall is being put into Haughton School's fund to repair their all-weather wicket, which has been vandalised.
Darlington primary schools are also being urged to enter the Wrigleys Softball competition for teams of eight, for which the finals are held at Edgbaston.
DANCERS sprang into action in the streets of Darlington on Saturday as part of the town's folk festival Spring Thing.
Groups of morris dancers from as far afield as the Cotswolds and the Borders took to the streets in their colourful costumes for the festival procession through the town centre.
Delighted shoppers looked on as the dancers weaved their way past Darlington Dolphin Centre.
Meanwhile, about six members of the Cleveland Clog Dancers held a workshop at Darlington Arts Centre, where the folk festival is being staged.
Between 25 and 30 interested people aged from about ten upwards went along to learn the North-East step the Durham Hornpipes, among others, in the centre's dance studio.
‘We taught them on three levels depending on experience, but people really did seem to enjoy it,’ said Gill Wootten, a member of Cleveland Clog Dancers.
Quote ‘I can fairly confidently predict that this week there will be a number of Cabinet ministers and recent Cabinet ministers in York’ Tory candidate Conal Gregory.
(In other words Maggie's coming)
AT 6.15 on Saturday evening our brave new InterCity 225 rolled to an unscheduled halt near Alnmouth, shuddered briefly and expired.
As powerless as the train, we sat for three and a half hours in the dark — key phrase, that — before a locomotive of more elderly years arrived from Newcastle to give us a croggy.
‘It's an overhead’ explained the senior conductor (guard, as was) without elucidating whether the ‘overhead’was a flock of Gadarene geese or an itinerant thunder storm, or what.
Come to think of it, the electricity bill's an overhead in our house.
Perhaps BR had also left the red letter behind the bread bin, and been disconnected?
After an hour or so we were offered a free drink from the buffet, a new and well intentioned gesture that soon will be seen as an albatross like being asked your height by an undertaker.
It was too dark to work the telephone and only the nob end had lighting, an interesting illumination on a classless society.
Next lunchtime we rang Conal Gregory, York's Tory candidate and in nine years as the city's MP a frequent rail users' champion.
We said it must have been the worst ever experience.
‘Nonsense, it won't be the worst this week,’ said Gregory.
‘I'll bet no one told you what was going on, either,’ he added.
Yesterday we went to see him.
The 8.16 from Darlington and the returning 10.38 behaved as impeccably as the reception class at a Victorian Sunday school.
Like his party, Gregory favours denationalization.
For British Rail read Branson Rail, and several similar permutations.
‘You'd say it was incredible if only one airline operated from Newcastle Airport, so why should British Rail have a monopoly.
What's needed on the railways is real competition,’ he said.
Defending a minuscule majority of 147, he commutes assiduously by train between Westminster and the railway-rooted constituency.
His own worst experience ‘in the past year, anyway’ involved a Friday 7pm service from Kings Cross that started late, had no buffet car, and after more stops than the Minster organ finally gave up the ghost at Doncaster.
‘At Doncaster the buffet was closed, the waiting room looked like it hadn't been cleaned for three months, the staff locked themselves in a room and every time we heard an engine and dashed out it was pulling coal wagons.’
Eventually, a passenger train sulked off to Leeds.
From there he got a taxi home, arriving at 2am.
Gregory grey haired, urbane, 45year-old wine buff wants better use of BR land and resources, better communication, fax and vending machines on trains, telephones in every carriage, magazines and newspapers on sale, international currency facilities and much more.
‘BR's sales and marketing techniques are still in the Sixties,’ he says.
He's also the man who last March upbraided BR for its argument that ten minutes either way was ‘on time.’
We await with interest their definition of three and a half hours.
Printer's pie
REDCAR'S Liberal Democrats, meanwhile, have discovered what side their bread's buttered on.
The Party ordered 30,000 leaflets, capable of being used as window posters, and then discovered that the ‘imprint’ publisher's details which must, by law, be openly displayed was on the wrong side.
They've now had a re-run free of charge.
Lib-Dem candidate Chris Abbott tells us it was very good of the printer but we are unable to reproduce what he himself says.
Unfortunately it's imprintable.
No score draw
GARY Huntingdon, the Lib-Dem's man in Sedgefield, had just arrived for a spot of canvassing in Chilton when he spotted four attractive women and two young children walking down the street.
‘Just the job,’ thought the enthusiastic Gary, and thus became the first person in history to attempt to convert a quartet of Jehovah's Witness.
He is also a director of Shildon Football Club.
Latest from this little encounter: Lib-Dems 0 Jehovah's Witnesses 0.
Whelan dealin’
FORMER Darlington mayor Jimmy Whelan, expelled from the Labour Party a few years back for alleged municipal disloyalty, is strolling the town with a ‘Vote Alan Milburn’ badge in his lapel.
Milburn is the town's Labour candidate.
In Jimmy's wallet there's a Labour application form, too.
‘This is national stuff,’ he says.
Semi-final clash
A THREE-way debate between North Durham's candidates, organised by local churches on April 5, has been postponed.
Officially it's because there's a Derwentside civic service the same day; that Sunderland are also in the FA Cup semi-final is, of course, irrelevant.
Nissan link
THE election's most original slogan appears to have been vetoed by LibDems in winnable Newcastle North.
Their candidate is Peter Maughan, said by constituency agent David Faulkner to be a dead ringer for opera singer Luciano Pavarotti.
‘Apart from his glasses he is, anyway, and he always wears black,’ insists Faulkner.
They'd contemplated a leaflet picture of Maughan, sans specs, with the legend ‘Nissan dormer’ above and the post script ‘Nee bugger sleeps in this campaign’beneath.
‘Unfortunately’ says the agent, ‘I seem to have been outvoted.’
Misdirected The Tories'’ direct mail’junk mail, some say seems to be losing direction.
Among the latest recipients of Chris Patten's little billets doux are Sunderland councillor Eric Jenkins, 47 years a Labour party member, and Richmond councillor George Irwin, whose letter was posted locally.
Coun Irwin is the LibDem candidate for Richmondshire.
A NEW guide to guest houses in Darlington will be published soon aimed at visitors looking for economic, good accommodation.
Destination Darlington has been compiled to provide extra information which is not available in the official Darlington council guidebook which covers an area far wider than Darlington alone.
It is hoped Destination Darlington will have a guide to some of the major events happening in the town throughout the year.
Among the guest houses featured in the guide the prices for accommodation very with the base price being £13.
The guide will be available in local garages, at the tourist information centre and in guest houses.
TWO villages clashed in combat yesterday, fighting out the first-ever community carpet bowls battle.
Sadberge met their rivals, Haughton-le-Skerne, near Darlington, in Haughton church hall yesterday for a championship game.
The two clubs are the first set up by the recreation support unit of Darlington Borough Council.
Sadberge won the wooden trophy made especially by one of the Haughton players.
THE Quakers are searching for new recruits to join their childrens' football schools.
Darlington Football Club is to run two training schools during the Easter holidays and want boys and girls to sign up straight away.
Two four-day schools will be held in South Park, Darlington, from April 13 to 16 and April 21 to 24 for children aged from seven to 15.
Iain Leckie, school organiser, said: ‘It's great for children.
They get top coaching and everyone has a great time.’
And he especially wants to encourage female football players to join: ‘We don't get the response we should from the girls it would be nice to see more at the schools.’
DARLINGTON's Bank Top railway station has benefited from a major facelift costing millions of pounds over the last decade.
Ten years ago yesterday British Rail signed a million-pound contract so work could start on repairing the Victorian building's roof.
The restoration process lasted for several years, extending to other parts of the station, and eventually cost in the region of £10m.
The station was opened in 1887 to superceed its historic counterpart at North Road.
But the years took their toll and BR decided to refurbish the East Coast main line station to restore its original elegance.
Money for the project came from BR, Europe, and Darlington Borough and Durham County councils.
One of the most striking aspects of the renovation was the clock tower, which was cleaned and repointed.
Dirt from brickwork inside the station was removed so its original hue was able to show through.
New lighting was installed and the floor was brightened up with the use of terrazzo tiling.
The restoration was singled out for praise in 1986 when it was highly commended by the Association of Railway Preservation Societies.
The following year a centenary festival was held in honour of the listed building.
DARLINGTON Memorial Hospital managers are still investigating claims that a 90year-old woman was forgotten for three hours while waiting for an operation.
Lily Morrison was due to have treatment for a hernia but, after a three hour wait in a side ward, was told the operation has been cancelled.
Mrs Morrison, who suffers from back trouble and can barely walk, was in tears when she arrived home at Quaker Lane where she lives with daughter Joan McIntyre.
Yesterday Mrs McIntyre said she had received a letter saying the matter was being looked into and apologising for the distress caused to Mrs Morrison.
Mrs McIntyre said: ‘The letter we have received says they don't know why or how it happened.’
CAMPAIGN CASH:
We are faced with almost a month of lies, halftruths, gossip, innuendo and invective from the two main parties.
To say the election is fair and just to all parties is simply not true.
The Conservatives will spend £20m, the Labour Party around £8m and the Liberal Democrats about £2m.
Our so-called democracy is a complete sham and an insult to the electorate.
It is clear from the above figures that the Liberal Democrats get a rotten hand at each game of election poker and it is high time the system was changed.
It remains to be seen if the British public's conscience is sufficiently roused to change things.
Hugh Pender,.
A BIT RICH:
I hope it is time for a change of Government.
The Conservatives always look after their own.
The Chancellor complains that people with an income of £500 per week will pay more tax under Labour.
But how would he survive on a pension of £90 per week for a married couple, with the cost of living today?
Mr Heseltine complains that if Labour wins taxes will go up on everything but fresh air.
What about his poll tax?
It nearly caused a revolution in the country.
I feel sorry for the Tories, they will only be able to go for a cruise around the world once instead of two or three times a year.
John Gowran,.
Editor's note:
In last Friday's HAS Election Post a letter from M D Tubman referred to the 100-year-old British electoral system.
It should have read 300 years.
We apologise for the error.
IF anything excites a fellow more than the price of a pint he is obviously a teetotaller.
This spring's annual beer story will as usual run and run onward and upward like its price.
Hardly had the froth subsided on yesterday's paragraph about a 3p increase at the local of which the landlady will receive about a tenth of a groat than the so-what factor came into play.
The Chancellor, you may recall in those far-off heady, as distinct from flat, days of the Budget talked of a penny on a pint.
The brewers appear to see this as a chance to think of a figure and double it.
In at least one pub (and if there is one, there will be more) 4p has been added to the cost of what cannot be far off being a 0.57 litre please landlord.
He was so miffed he left without leaving his name.
Then Keith Hopper came on to say that at his place too the price had gone up 3p.
As his place is Bishop Auckland Cricket Club of which he is chairman and clubs dislike alienating their members in this way these are clearly tough times.
In the Bishop's case the brewery is Scottish and Newcastle in the local it is Camerons or Wolverhampton Breweries, or whatever it is now and there was no choice.
Actually, it was worse.
‘It's done on the barrel,’ said the chairman who much more happily confided that at 59 of course he will be batting and bowling again this summer, ‘and that's what it worked out a pint.
We had already absorbed without increasing the price an increase in wages in January.
Then there's a little bit of VAT extra to pay too.’
In other words 3p on a pint probably is not enough to cover the previous profit margin.
These are hard times for beer sellers which may lead to beer cellars being fuller than otherwise they would be.
With any luck later in the week a survey will appear here of the NorthEast breweries' increases.
Rises of 1p a pint seem about as likely as getting a full pint from a hand-pulled dispenser.
On another Budget-connected subject the tax on matches and lighters went down while that on beer was going up.
Proof of this arrived in Darlington yesterday.
A familiar street hawker, usually shifting lighters at two for a pound was offering three for a pound.
Presumably this eases the pain of not being able to afford the fags they would light.
Fishy dish
PERHAPS feeling somewhat piscine at the time the organisers of North-East Norwegian Week insisted on announcing that something fishy would mark its start at the MetroCentre.
This was merely a way of saying that herring dishes will be available to shoppers on Saturday courtesy of the country's Consulate.
Vice-consul Gerd Judy McNamara said she hoped the English who of course like their fish wrapped in batter with chips would pluck up enough courage to try them.
‘The Herring Table has a tremendous tradition.
It's as Norwegian as roast beef is British.
Not only is herring tasty.
It's good for you too.’
Tasty maybe but nobody has mentioned the smell.
Clean break A
YORK hotel is planning rugby weekends.
This is a new departure probably inspired by the clean cut success of the England side.
Time was when places like the Waggon and Horses, within sight of the Minster, would have been as happy to welcome rugby fans as bank robbers.
Old-time rugger buggers were ruder and kept later hours.
DARLINGTON teenagers will soon be able to meet in a new club.
Work has been going on since October to convert a church basement into a sophisticated club for people aged between 14 and 18.
The club would only serve soft drinks but Morag Coates of Grange Road Action For Youth said it would have a wine bar-type atmosphere.
Mrs Coates said: ‘We have had a lot of support getting this set up, many local firms have contributed and a lot of people have given their free time.
The centre is due to open in the basement of Grange Road Baptist Church soon after Easter.
Anyone who can help out can call Mrs Coates on Darlington .
Town rejects costly race
A PLANNED Milk Race sprint section through Richmond has been rejected as too costly by councillors.
Stage eight of the Milk Race on June 2 is due to go from Blackpool to Darlington, passing through the Richmondshire district from Hawes to Richmond.
But the council's recreation committee was told last night that the council would have to pay £1,000, £600 for prize money and £400 as a management fee, and they said it was too much.
Top wedding:
Two pensioners celebrate their wedding on Saturday at a top nightclub.
Millie Herbert, 76, of Scarborough, will marry bachelor Thomas Fraser, 74, at the town's Register Office, followed by a celebration at the town's Champers night club.
Hair honour:
Laurie Walker, 18, from Swan Street, York, who works at Glen and Julio's salon, won an international hairdressing contest in Blackpool.
Milk Race sprint would cost £1,000
A PROPOSED Milk Race sprint section has been rejected as too costly.
Stage eight of the Milk race on June 2 is due to go from Blackpool to Darlington, passing through the Richmondshire district from Hawes to Richmond.
Milk Race organisers had asked Richmondshire District Council if it would support a sprint section through the town, but the recreation committee was told last night it would have to pay £1,000 £600 for prize money and £400 as a management fee.
Ivy Nixon, 76-year-old grandmother and Britain's oldest woman D J
I present a hospital radio programme every Saturday and Sunday on Radio Skerne at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
A typical Saturday at the station begins for me at about 7.30am.
I arrive in time to sort out the records for my show which starts at 8am and finishes at 10am.
I try and play a varied mix of music on the programme and, most importantly, requests for the patients.
My Saturday morning show consists mainly of music that I have selected, and occasionally the odd request as well.
Requests are really what hospital radio is about.
We are there to provide a service to patients, so it's nice if we can play their favourite music.
After the programme I spend several hours just going round the wards chatting to the patients and collecting requests for my Sunday show.
Often I can get sidetracked and spend too long on the wards and before I know it, it's late afternoon.
It's very easy to get talking to the patients.
I'm there to collect requests, but often the patients just enjoy having someone to talk to.
I like to cheer them up and have a laugh with them.
I've even done the tango before now.
On a Sunday lunchtime, I broadcast the Darlington Talking Newspaper on my programme.
The patients enjoy listening to the tape, which includes local news as well as magazine items and stories.
The tape lasts about an hour-and-a-half.
I've been working for Radio Skerne for about six years now.
Since I lost my husband I have a lot of free time and hospital radio is just one of the many ways in which I fill it.
I originally saw an advert in the paper asking for volunteers for the hospital radio station.
I can't play a musical instrument or sing but I do love music.
So I contacted them and was told to come down and have a chat.
At first I was washing up and making the tea, then I progressed to collecting requests before I finally took the plunge and started doing my own programme.
I've also been presented with two awards, although I'm not sure whether I deserve them.
The first was Radio Skerne's own Personality of the Year in 1988.
But the most embarrassing time was winning an award from the National Association of Hospital Broadcasting Organisations (NAHBO).
We had just finished lunch at the conference and the president of NAHBO was giving out various awards.
He came to the final special award, and then read out my name.
I could have died.
It was so embarrassing, I had to get up in front of hundreds of people and collect this award.
I've got it on display at home.
At the moment the hospital radio station is waiting to move into a new studio.
It's rather like a concrete bunker but hopefully with some work we can make it look quite nice.
I like to do as much as I can to help Radio Skerne.
In the past I've painted walls, vacuumed the floor and even salvaged a carpet for the studio from a skip.
I really enjoy working for hospital radio.
It's nice to think you can do something to make a patient's stay in hospital more bearable.
Most of all I enjoy the work.
I don't know what I'd do without Radio Skerne.
SKERNE Ironworks built bridges the whole world over, as told last week.
The closest to home that the firm came was the Pilmore Bridge.
In an 1879 book by managing director Edward Hutchinson called Girder Making and the Practice of Bridge Building in Wrought Iron, the Pilmore Bridge is described as ‘a small roadway bridge across the River Tees near Darlington’.
(Ironically, there can only have been months between the publication of Hutchinson's boastful book and calling in the liquidators).
Hutchinson says that the 200ft long, four-span construction with a wooden floor, bridged the Tees where the river ran shallow.
‘The main danger is ice, which coming down in large floes at the breaking up of a frost, is apt to accumulate at the pillars and exert enormous pressure thereon,’ he says.
He is proud of the fact that in November 1875, shortly after the bridge was completed, there was a huge flood accompanied by ice, and the water rose 14in above the underside of the girders.
The Pilmore Bridge didn't budge.
But where is the £1,730 Pilmore Bridge today?
The Echo Memories investigation team has been out scouring the countryside, unearthing hitherto forgotten bridges at Girsby (built 1870 by Theophanic Blackett, according to a tombstone nearby) and at Eryholme (a magnificent span built by one TW in 1909).
Pilmore doesn't seem to exist on Ordnance Survey maps; there doesn't seem to be any Tees crossings in this vicinity which have escaped our attention, so Echo Memories is stumped.
If you have any ideas please write to Echo Memories, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, DL1 1NF.
It is quite possible that the obvious has been overlooked.
NOT every train station can boast it has its own ghost.
But North Road station in Darlington has the honour of having two.
A ghostly man and his dog were spotted on the station at the turn of the century and many people believe they are still around.
The spooky goings-on happened when night watchman James Durham spotted a man with a heavy overcoat walking his black retriever.
Durham said the intruder hit him and the dog sank his teeth into his legs.
Yet no mark was left on him.
Some said Durham had had a nightmare or been under the influence of drink.
But he was a confirmed teetotaller.
He later found out that a clerk named Winter had committed suicide in the cellar by shooting himself just near the spot where Durham saw him.
Even today you can still see the trapdoor leading to the cellar.
And it's just one of the many historic artefacts in the museum.
Going into North Road station is like stepping back in time.
You get the real feel of another era of train travel complete with steam engines, iron staircases and a beautifully restored entrance hall.
The station, believed to be one of the oldest railway stations in use in Britain, celebrates its 150th anniversary this year.
Yet railway enthusiasts do not know exactly which month it opened.
Barrie Lamb, chairman of the Darlington Railway Preservation Society, explained: ‘Quite a few historians have written about this building but it seems a bit odd that none of them knew the exact date it opened.
We know it was 1842, but we don't know when.’
The museum hopes to re-enact the opening later this year with Victorian period costumes.
‘We want to do something to celebrate it,’ said Mr Lamb, ‘It's just we haven't got much money.
It would be a shame to let this go without some sort of show.’
About 20,000 people visit the museum each year and it houses some of the finest examples of railway memorabilia.
But in the early 1970s it was in danger of total destruction.
Following the decline of the Stockton to Darlington railway, the station gradually fell into disrepair and was repeatedly vandalised.
But thanks to the efforts of a group of dedicated train buffs it was restored to its original beauty.
Curator Steven Dyke said: ‘This building is so authentic because it was just as it was in 1842.
It had not been extended or improved.’
Herbert Wolfe, a Jew who fled Nazi Germany, helped led the campaign to save North Road station.
A true crusader, he also was instrumental in getting Timothy Evans pardoned.
Evans was wrongly accused and hanged for murder in the famous Christie case.
But thanks to Mr Wolfe's efforts and his work with The Northern Echo Evans was posthumously pardoned.
The pioneering work started at North Road by Mr Wolfe is still carried on today by the Railway Preservation Society.
The group used to meet in El Vino, Northgate, now Bonbons Chinese restaurant.
By a curious twist of fate it was the same house where Pease and George Stephenson worked during the plan and construction of the Stockton to Darlington railway.
In the early days passenger travel was uncommon and people used to buy their tickets at inns like the Fighting Cocks, Middleton St. George, or the Oak Tree, near Stockton.
So you could have a pint while waiting for your train a Victorian version of Travellers Fare.
Steven explained: ‘At that time the idea of a passenger service was a bit of an after-thought.
But gradually people decided railway transport was here to stay.’
North Road railway station at the turn of the century.
Sketches of first railway ticket office and goods warehouse at the North Road station site.
BANDCALL by CHRIS LLOYD Warfare: Crescendo of Reflexions FROM Shildon and by all accounts big in America.
This is a U.S. only (for the time being at least) compilation of 12 rerecorded tracks on one continuous groove.
The really good thing about Warfare is that, although deadly serious about their music, they don't take themselves too seriously (as the agony-inducing picture of the dentist's shows).
Consequently they are achieving more than any other regional heavy metal bands through their tie ups with Hammer horror films and, coming soon, the London Philharmonic Orchestra!
The play fast thrash metal with total overkill hence titles like Deathcharge and Dance of the Dead.
Their delicacy is indicated by the opening air raid siren of the opening track which suddenly explodes into New Age of Total Warfare.
But the overkill never degenerates into a lumpen morass of noise which afflicts much HM.
Amid the mayhem, Evo can be heard slaughtering his drumkit, all of Zlaughter's bass and JJ's guitars are perfectly audible.
Burn Down the Kings Road could even be described as a straightforward heavy rock track and Prince of Darkness is one of several songs that has the semblance of a pop tune.
Okay, so you are either born to love or loathe HM.
Warfare play it very well and, coming from a region that is practically devoid of successful artists, they should at least be recognised for that fact.
The Rye: Twist THE RYE are one of the NorthEast most successful homegrown bands at the moment, but their self-professed ‘unpigeonhole-able’ music has in the past proved too difficult for major record labels to get their heads around.
This new eight-track CD suggests they are veering slightly closer to the normal, becoming a little more rocky.
But they are not bland in a middle-of-the-road American way, as their music is still raw and unpretentious.
Indeed, there is a tint of punk rock as in a couple of places and this will raise eyebrows vocalist Billy Nicholson sounds like the dreaded John Lydon.
And, on Tin Town, there is a hint of glam rock drum pound.
Plus, of course, there's Emma's violin which will always draw folk-rock comparisons, even though it is employed more as a second guitar or lead keyboard.
The title-track is almost theatrical in an Almondesque way which seems to be another new departure for the group.
The songs, though, are not a new departure for they are as good and unusual as ever.
Each one is totally different, drawing out a variety of aspects of the band unheard elsewhere on the CD the male/female vocal on 12:8 for example.
After all this floundering around searching for comparisons, one is confronted by the final track, Mother Love, with its chiming guitars and haunted, wailing female vocal.
It is, of course, the Cocteau Twins which leads to the conclusion that The Rye are still unpigeonhole-able.
And Twist is very good.
— See for yourself tomorrow night (Friday) when The Rye play at Doc's Orders, Yarm Road, Darlington, when Twist will be on sale for the first time.
COLIN Young and Ken Bainbridge (Darlington) captured the glory at the Shildon indoor open pairs by lifting the title, beating Dean and Chapter's Bill Maddison and Ken Thompson, representing the Great Aycliffe club, in a great final.
John Glassey and Philip Stokoe (Stanley) and Eric Coatsworth and David Strong (Shildon) were losing semi-finalists from a strong field.
The women's singles championship went to Joan Blackett who beat Gwen Wharton 21–13 while John Hanmer beat Les Appleby 21–13 to secure a men's singles championship final place in a breathtaking match dominated by drawing to the jack end after end.
John, who has had a great season including previous wins against national champions John Leeman (Stanley) and international Terry Scott (Gateshead), now has to take on Archie McLean who beat the experienced Hughie Whitehead in the other semi.
Darlington A team bowlers, chasing a Durham County league double, have a tough task ahead on Sunday when they take on South Tyneside over six rinks on a home and away basis.
Gateshead, their nearest rivals, take on newcomers Houghton and could clinch the title should they collect seven of the 11 points at stake against the bottom of the table team.
Then, Darlington would need to win 11–0 to keep the county silver.
The Darlington team to play at South Tyneside is: J Weston, G McLennen, F Edwards, K Lamb, K Bousfield, K Macmaster, J Lynch, A Moore, A Kirtland, E Taylor, P Welburn, E Ramsdale, J Courtley, W Lancaster, J Clare, T Bousfield, A Lambert, M Baines, G Peacock, D Joyce, L Shepherd, G Bell, S Burton, D Ramsdale.
The game at the Morrison Centre starts at 1pm.
League placings:
Men's A League: Gateshead 51 pts plus 160 shots; Darlington 47+153; South Tyneside 38+24; Hartlepool 33; Stanley 28 7; Sunderland 27 7; Great Aycliffe 27.
In Durham County B Hebburn (148 7+160) have to play Shildon in their last game while Spennymoor are closely on their heels on 48+150 and they have to play Consett to decide the championship.
The Spennymoor veterans' team head their league with 24.
Great Aycliffe on 20 are second with Darlington following closely on 17.
In division two Stanley lead with 24 7 but have completed their fixtures.
Gateshead, on 21, could overhaul them if they beat Consett in their last game.
Bishop Auckland singles specialist Derek Dowson, seeking his first championship at Darlington indoor, had to draw on all his reserves to beat an inform George McLennen.
Derek led 12–6 then trailed 2016 before collecting two threes at the last two ends to win finally by 21–20.
Back to his best Billy Lancaster, who goes from strength to strength each season, beat the talented Mark Jones, last year's runner-up, by 21–16, while Bob Severs was at his best to beat Michael Ryan 21–7.
Norman Carlin opened up an 11–2 lead against club lead Alan Lambert and went on to win well by 21–12 while Terry Clarke led all the way to beat John Allison comfortably 21–12.
Stan Burton, back to his best, had one shot to spare against the successful John Lynch picking up a three on the last end to win 1716 in a quality contest.
The experience of Arthur McCormick, a previous singles champion, won well by 21–10 against Pat Ryan, while Colin Young beat Ken Bousfield 13–12 in a great finish.
The all-round skill of Ken Macmaster helped him open up a lead of 14–8, 17–11, 19–14 against star bowler Ken Lamb to win 2019 to secure him a quarter-final spot.
Results in the £1,000 Hathaway fours at the Morrison Centre showed that three games were won with the last bowl and another finished all square in a very competitive tournament.
Scores included B Mosley, D McKeown, T Appleton, J Banks 13, G McLennen, L Knight, P Richardson, S Dalton 14; D Bowes, D Hope, M Hope, J Ward 12, M Bousfield, K Macmaster, E Taylor, D Joyce 11; G Jeffrey, R Ions, A Robinson, R Fort 14, D Cuthbertson, A Holliday, D Marchant, A Race 13; J Mansfield, J Wells, D Anderson, H Dougherty 9, J Simpson, S Berry, K Abbott, J Pearce 19.
Darlington over eight rinks just had the better of a Nottinghamshire county side.
Scores: E Taylor, A Crowe, A Braithwaite, A Kirtland 25, B Pinder 13; F Thomas, K Abbott, J Hills, D Joyce 16, B Jones 16; C Critchlow, T Shaw, B Allen, J Clare 25, T Costall 25.
SOUTH Bank, the oldest surviving club in the Northern League, stressed yesterday that they will not be beaten by their current problems.
With rumours circulating that the club is in danger of folding after a century of existence following the destruction of their Normanby Road headquarters, press officer Les Crossman said: ‘We are adamant that the club will keep going, even though we have no money.
‘It is an achievement to play games at the moment, as we are literally living from hand to mouth.
‘The lads still at the club are coming from all over the place to turn out for us, and are happy just to play the game.
‘We're grateful to Guisborough for allowing us to share their ground, but our fixtures are coinciding with theirs and we have to rearrange some of them.’
The predicament has led South Bank to propose an amendment to league rules, which technically forbid ground sharing.
South Bank have lost former Darlington and Hartlepool midfielder Garry MacDonald to Northallerton, while today they will attend an appeal hearing over Kevin Stonehouse's contract.
BOOMING Durham Squash Club will host their eighth John Smith's Open from April 30 to May 3 with record prize money at stake.
Durham now boast a membership of about 1,200, of which 600 are playing members with the rest social or juniors.
It's a marked contrast to Squashtec in Hetton-le-Hole, once a hugely successful club but now facing closure unless a buyer can be found.
‘We've had a trickle of players joining us from Squashtec,’ says Durham's general manager Nick Clifford.
‘But it's sad to see a club like that in such difficulty.’
Durham are hoping for a quality entry and with £350 £50 up on last year waiting for the champion, they won't be disappointed.
All prize money has been increased so that the runner-up receives £175, losing semi-finalists £85 and losing quarterfinalists £40.
Even the plate runner-up nets £5 with £15 going to the winner.
Bryan Beeson, former British champion and runner-up in this year's British Closed, has indicated he will compete, says Clifford.
‘The European Championships are on that weekend, but if Bryan is not involved I'm hoping he'll be here.’
Durham SC had three players involved in Durham and Cleveland's valiant attempt to gain promotion to the over 35 Premier League of the Inter-County championships.
The county might have made it but for a dislocated shoulder suffered by second string Barry Hutchinson (Stockton Racecourse).
Durham and Cleveland, Worcestershire, Warwickshire and Cumbria were all involved in a round robin play-off in Division One North in Coventry for the one promotion place in the Premier League.
Having beaten both Worcestershire and Warwickshire 3–2, Durham and Cleveland needed to beat Cumbria in the final match.
But Hutchinson slipped and dislocated his shoulder the night before the match and Cumbria pipped Durham and Cleveland 3–2.
With official reserve Micky Amer (Durham SC) spraining an ankle, Durham and Cleveland played Ian Stead (Durham SC), a travelling supporter.
First string Dave Lumsdon beat Dennis Secher 3–2 and fourth string Robert Thompson (Darlington) beat Ronnie Bell 31.
Brian Graham (Squashtec) and Tommy Taylor (Durham SC) both had to move up one position and lost in straight games to second string John Warwick and third string Dennis Baines respectively.
Stead, at fifth string, bowed to Bob Farrell 0–3.
Results: Durham and Cleveland 3, Worcestershire 2 Lumsdon bt T Verow 9–5 9–4 5–9 9–1; Hutchinson lost to S Partridge 2–9 3–9 0–9; Graham bt R Gregory 5–9 5–9 9–6 9–0 9–2; Taylor lost to I Garvey 8–10 5–9 9–1 4–9; Thompson bt D Barnes 9–5 9–3 9–3.
Durham and Cleveland 3, Warwickshire 2 Lumsdon bt R. Batvala 9–4 9–2 9–10 5–9 9–7; Hutchinson bt J Hennessey 9–3 9–6 9–2; Graham lost to M Topping 8–10 1–9 9–6 9–4 6–9; Taylor lost to M Sarwar 3–9 4–9 9–6 6–9; Thompson bt G Redfearn 9–6 6–9 9–1 10–9.
VOLUNTEER receptionists start work at the hospice next week.
Until now guests at the new premises on Harewood Hill have had to find their own way to the first floor.
Volunteers such as the receptionist form the backbone of the hospice and volunteer sitters have been helping for five years.
But far more volunteers are needed to help the hospice expand it's reach.
Drivers, gardeners, receptionists, counsellors, and fund-raisers are needed.
Anyone who thinks they can help should call Dorothy Davison on .
Darlington Health Authority have donated office furniture and Mr Duck, of Carpet Market, and Colin I'Anson have donated and laid the carpet in the reception area.
Decoration work done by Darlington Probation Service has transformed the entrance to the building.
Friends and family of Mrs W G Annan made donations to the hospice at her request, instead of buying her birthday presents, and raised £350.
Other donations included those in memory of Mr MacCallum, Mrs Hope, and Mr Callow.
Mrs Swords and her friends raised £45 selling knitted toys, while Gainford villagers raised £125 at a Lent Lunch and Darlington Philatelic Society collected £60 selling stamps.
Barton Cub camp:
Barton cubs are spending this weekend camping at the District Scout Headquarters in Richmond.
The boys will make their own video film and plant cherry trees at Richmond House as part of the Scout Association Promise appeal.
Eppleby Pony club: The Zetland Hunt Pony Club holds a tack and togs event on Wednesday, April 8 at the village hall from 7pm until 9.30pm.
Admission costs 25p.
For more information contact Darlington .
Etherley Choral society: Bishop Auckland Choral Society will perform Stainer's Crucifixion at St John's Church at 7.30pm on Monday March 30.
Gainford Concert date: Gainford Choral Society presents Handel's Messiah at St Mary's Church on Palm Sunday, April 12.
There is not enough room at the church for an orchestra to accompany the 50 strong choir so backing will be by organ and string ensemble, led by George Wood.
Soloists are will be Julia Weeks, Angela Mathieson, John Sharrocks and Stuart Mathieson.
The performance starts at 8pm and tickets at £2.50 and £1.50 for children and senior citizens are on sale from choir members or at the door.
Great Stainton Hospital trip: Members of the Womens Institute from Great Stainton and Bishopton have arranged a special trip to Winterton to visit one of the elderly patients.
The members wanted to visit the lady to pass on birthday greetings.
Heighington Cookery evening: Friends of Heighington School are presenting a seasonal cookery demonstration at Heighington School, tonight at 7pm.
Tickets are £1.50 including raffle and refreshments.
Hurworth Jumble sale: Hurworth Methodist Church holds a jumble sale tomorrow at 6.30pm.
Admission 10p.
Bridge success: Clive Owen and Don Baldwin from the Hurworth Bridge Club have won the prestigious Chronicle Cups, the North East of England Pairs Championship.
Ron Mitchell and Pauline Knight, also from the club, came third.
Jumble sale: A jumble sale takes place tomorrow from 3.30–5.30pm at Westfield Hall, Hurworth Primary School.
Bric-a-brac, cakes and toys will be on sale.
Admission 20p for adults or children free.
Proceeds will go to new curtains for the library in the Westfield building.
Video race: A video race night will be held at the Grange community centre on Saturday at 7.30pm and tickets price £2 include supper.
New post: Trevor Rodwell, 47, has been appointed business development officer with the Wakefield-based Clark's Brewery.
He joins the company from Courage in Hartlepool where he was training and development officer.
Ingleton Mothers' day: A special Mothering Sunday service is to be held at St John's church at 10am on Sunday.
Children from the church school will be designing Mothering Sunday cards to bring to the church, and making a simnel cake to be shared with the congregation.
Other children will be giving readings and there will be a solo singer.
Middleton in Teesdale Jumble sale: Members of the womens institute are holding a jumble sale in the village hall on Saturday at 2pm.
Plans have also been made to hold a domino drive on April 3 at 7.30pm.
Middleton St George Parish council: The next meeting will take place on Monday April 13.
WI news: The next meeting will be held on March 26 when the subject will be vegetarian cookery.
The second round of the darts competition will be held in the hall on April 24.
Neasham WI news:
Mrs Brett from Essanelle at Binns gave a talk on aromatherapy.
There was a small exhibition of ‘Things I had when I was 15’ and supper was served by Miss P Taylor assisted by Mrs L Gaskell and Mrs E Hunt.
The April meeting has been brought forward to April 2 as it would otherwise clash with election day.
Piercebridge Cathedral talk: Members of the Piercebridge Womens Institute enjoyed a talk about Durham Cathedral at their March meeting.
Annual meeting: There was a large turn out on Monday for the annual meeting of the parish council.
A variety of issues were discussed, including plans for the memorial garden and the issue of how money collected in the village should best be spent to benefit residents.
Sadberge Flower night: The ladies' flower club will meet tonight in the village hall at 7pm.
Jumble sale: A jumble sale will be held in the village hall on Tuesday April 7 at 6.30pm in aid of the church.
Parish council: The parish council will not meet again until the end of April as the parish AGM is taking place on Saturday April 4.
Sedgefield Twin visit:
Visitors from Sedgefield's twin village of Hamminkeln, in Germany, will be arriving at the beginning of next month.
Burgermeister Heinrich Meyers will be among the party which arrives at Teesside Airport on April 3.
The visitors will have a buffet reception on Saturday night in the parish hall.
Anti-crime: Sedgefield Community College students have strengthened their work in the anti-crime fight.
The students, who are already represented on the village's crime prevention panel, are involved with the formation of a junior crime prevention panel.
Paths plan: Walkers turned out to hear plans for two new footpaths which could be located on the outskirts of the village.
Sedgefield District Council officers gave details of plans to put a footpath to the south of the village or to the North-West of the village.
Whorlton Wine evening:
Whorlton Village Community Association has a wine and savoury evening in the village hall at 7.30pm on Saturday April 4.
Tickets are available at £2.50.
THE person with the yellow rosette looked barely old enough to be supping the pint we set in front of him.
Had he come up on the bus with us from Bishop Auckland to Willington, we'd probably have asked for one and a half.
Tim Farron, a slight and boyish figure in a suit that seemed three sizes too big (but is probably the height of fashion) is just 21, the election's youngest candidate for any of the main parties.
Winning Durham North West for the LibDems would be a man's job, though, and he's confident he's big enough.
Dorothy Allen, his agent, had described him as a’ quite remarkable’fellow and so, personably and articulately, it proved.
The vast constituency is held with a 12,000 majority (over the Tories) by 46-year-old Hilary Armstrong.
But it includes large parts of the Wear Valley district where the LibDems took spectacular local authority control from Labour in May.
‘Hilary is favourite,’ he concedes, ‘but there are still over two weeks to go’
A Preston-born politics graduate, Farron is this year's elected full-time president of Newcastle Student Union 10,000 members, £2m turnover, 150 staff and on the NUS national executive.
‘A pretty big thing,’ he says, ‘among so many militants and Trotskyists to whom you're a Nazi if you aren't into revolution tomorrow.’
The 1979 general election ‘because we got the day off school’ provided the nine-year-old with his first political memory.
‘I stayed up until 3am watching television and thought it was great.
I can remember feeling very sorry for old Jim Callaghan, though.’
At 11 he won a seat on the school council by putting up his best friend to split the opposition vote (‘I always was a devious bugger’), at 14 he joined Greenpeace and at 16 paid thirty bob to become a Liberal.
‘The environment was the big thing for me.
Things like employment and education are incredibly important, but if you aren't here in 40 years time what's the point anyway?
‘I've always been a bit of a front man.
I like talking, I've got a big gob.’
A grudging Thatcher admirer ‘her principles might have stunk, but at least she was principled’ he regards the Labour party as unwieldy, undemocratic, totalitarian, outdated and one or two other things we didn't get down in time.
Should he fail on April 9, he'll complete the Union presidency ‘not just a cv filler, cock it up and you're finished’ then take a masters degree.
‘Hardly anyone has reacted to my age.
It's just an excuse if they're going to be put off voting for me because I'm only 21; they wouldn't have done anyway.’
Should he win, he could be the youngest MP since 15-year-old Henry Long won Old Sarum (electorate probably about two men and fifty horses) in 1435.
We have agreed with the phalanx of councillors and canvassers who guide him through life and Durham North West that his education should be completed with a visit to the Cow Tail, a pub near Crook of great and deserved renown.
In the meantime we bought him another half in Willington.
It was quite enough, we said, for a bairn.
Old, old story
UNLESS advancing years deceive us, John Scott is the old man among the region's parliamentary hopefuls.
Labour's candidate in marginal Stockton South is 66 and confident he can clicketty-click with the electorate.
‘I might not be the youngest candidate but I'm the most experienced and I think I have the most energy,’ he says.
But defending Tory Tim Devlin, a fresh faced 32, says the wartime Mosquito pilot should come down to earth.
‘His claims to have more energy are simply laughable.
If he'd like to come 100 yards down Yarm Road I would gladly take him on.’
Devlin also reckons his opponent would be unable to withstand the rigours of life at Westminster.
‘It's most unfair of the Labour Party to have imposed a burden such as this on a man of John Scott's age,’ he says.
Scott, a Stockton district councillor who went up to Oxford University at the same time as Margaret Thatcher, was third in 1987 in a tight three cornered fight.
Age clearly does not weary him.
‘Criticising my age is like a footballer going for the man rather than the ball.
‘I see myself representing this constituency throughout the 1990s.’
A MAN who successfully traced a forces pal through the columns of The Northern Echo said yesterday it had brought bad news.
Herbert Tempest asked readers for information on George Whitbread, a man he lost touch with 40 years ago after they served in the same RAF squadron.
A Darlington woman wrote to Mr Tempest at his Wakefield home saying George had been best man at her wedding in 1947 and lived in Pierremont Road.
Unfortunately, she also had to inform Mr Tempest his former friend had died in January 1988.
Mr Tempest said he was sorry to receive the news but glad he had taken the trouble to inquire.
MARGARET Port, president of Darlington and Teesdale Naturalists' Field Club, plants an oak tree in Green Park, Darlington, to mark the club's centenary.
MOTORCYCLE fans are holding a special night with the stars to celebrate their club's change of venue next month.
Members of the North Yorkshire Road Racing Supporters' Club will be holding their regular meetings at the Football Club, Ainderby Road, Romanby, near Northallerton.
To mark the move they have invited Isle of Man TT winner Steve Hislop to be their guest speaker on Wednesday, April 1.
Former race ace Andy McGladdery, from Darlington, will be hosting the evening.
Steve, who has won the Isle of Man race eight times and holds the outright lap record, will be arriving with his latest bike for the 1992 racing season.
Club members help North-East riders with the cost of competing in many of the country's championships.
DOG owners are being urged not to allow their dogs to stray with the introduction of new legislation from Wednesday.
From that date people allowing their dogs to stray will have to pay a new £25 fee on top of existing boarding fee if they want to retrieve them.
Darlington Council employs two dog wardens to deal with stray dogs which are taken to Deerness Kennels at Langley Moor, Durham.
If they are not claimed by their owners they are kept for seven days after which if they cannot be sold they can be destroyed.
A statement from the council's environmental health department said the authority would rather see dogs cared for properly than have to catch them as strays.
‘Dog owners are therefore urged not to allow their dogs to stray.
Dogs should also wear a collar and identification device in public,’ says the statement.
The new laws also require that people who find a stray dog should report it to the authorities.
Outside normal working hours the dog can be taken to Darlington Police Station.
Devil worship in chapel fear
A vandalised chapel in Barnard Castle, the suspected haunt of devil worshippers, could be converted into a stonemason's workshop and studio.
St Mary's Parish Church has applied to Teesdale District Council to change the use of the mortuary chapel in Victoria Road.
The redundant chapel, in a graveyard, has had its windows and doors smashed and part of the roof is missing.
Unsporting:
Golf clubs, a golf bag and a trolley worth £410 have been stolen from a garage in Cleveland Avenue, Darlington.
HOPELESS:
There is some truth in the principle that Britain is ruled by the floating voter.
He tends to opt for change merely because team A have had a go and it is time to give team B a chance.
The credentials of team B over the last two General Elections have been so patently hopeless that the floating voter has very rightly not applied the principle.
The result has been that the Conservatives have been able to transform this country from the laggard of Europe in the hands of the unions with inflation well over 20pc to a lean, competitive economy with low taxes ready to take full advantage of the upturn when the recession ends.
Inflation is now 4pc and due to reduce further to 3pc.
I have a great respect for the floating voter and I am confident he will see which side his bread is buttered when he casts his vote this time.
C.W. Robson, Rudd Hall, East Appleton, Richmond.
— GLENDALE Social Club doorman Brian Smith well known for his ghosthunting activities is also an expert gardener and is offering his services to disabled people and pensioners in Houghton, who are unable to do their own gardening.
It's rose pruning time says Brian and he will call and do the necessary if you contact him at the Glendale Club on 091–584–1148.
— DURHAM Club Stewards Association branch of the Managerial, Scientific and Finance Union held it's sixth annual banquet and ball with more than 480 guests attending at the Federation Brewery's Lancastrian Suite.
Former world darts champion Leighton Rees will be showing off his skills at Seaham's Red Star Social Club on Tuesday March 31.
Tickets are available at the club.
— BOWLS ace Ian Peacock has been named as Clubman of the Year at Leadgate WMC.
Ian, former Durham CIU bowls champion, put the club on the map last year by winning the Bath Open Tournament and was immediately nominated for the Clubman of the Year title by members of the club.
The award was presented to the club by Durham CIU vice- president Bill Laverick five years ago as an annual prize and he handed over the trophy at a special ceremony at the club.
— DYKE Heath, one of the legends of the North-East club circuit, has died aged 77.
Dyke and his four piece band were a popular attraction at many clubs and did several broadcasts including a Workers' Playtime programme from the Whessoe Works at Darlington.
Many stories were swapped about the band, especially the fact that Dyke and the lads enjoyed a drink.
Once, when they were playing at the Durham Miners Gala, they couldn't raise the price of a pint, so the drummer sold his drum kit to keep the drinks flowing.
A case of getting the priorities right!—
DELEGATES at this year's CIU Annual Conference at Blackpool will have a chance to visit the first Beer and Trades Exhibition being staged at the Sandcastle Exhibition Centre on the South Promenade.
The exhibition starts at 4pm on the day prior to the opening of the conference on Friday April 3 and will continue over the weekend.
Major breweries taking part include: Bass, Courage, Whitbreads, Guinness, Vaux, Allied Breweries and Carlsberg.
Other club suppliers will also be represented at the exhibition.
Club men and women are invited and will be admitted on presentation of their club membership card.
— MEMBERS of Winterton Hospital Social Club are helping colleagues at the South Cleveland Hospital to raise money for the hospital's Renal Unit by organising a charity night at the club.
The show will take place on Friday April 3 and features Dave Lee Michaels, Dave Alexandre, and J J Stephens.
Tickets are available at the Sedgefield club at £2 each.
— IT WAS surprises galore for Shotley Bridge Victory Social Club's retiring treasurer John Edgar when his fellow officials laid on a special party night to mark his 31 years on the management committee.
Officials invited Durham CIU branch secretary Jack Amos, who had served with John as secretary of the club for nearly 23 years until his appointment to the county post, to hand over a colour TV set from the club and members.
Another surprise guest was North West Durham MP Hilary Armstrong who added her tribute to John for his work for the local community as well as the club.
Blackadder, Haig, Vettriano and James Corrymella Scott, 5 Tankerville Terrace, Jesmond, Newcastle (until April 5)
CORRYMELLA and Charles Scott have opened up their home to provide an private view of the work of their artistic friends.
Elizabeth Blackadder shows a group of those charming still lives in which she gathers some of the objects to be found in her Edinburgh home and paints them as if they were in situ.
These have recently taken a new turn in that they are encrusted with gold and have developed a kind of oriental storyline.
I haven't seen the work of Earl Haig since Austen Haynes's balmy days in York.
Here he presents large open watercolours and thickly buttered palette knife studies of the countryside around the family seat at Bemersyde, near Melrose, and of his beloved Venice.
Apart from all that is familiar, this present show also offers two welcome surprises.
On the one hand there are the superbly modelled animal studies in ceramic by Jeremy James.
On the other, there is the almost magic realist quality of the canvases of self-taught artist Jack Vettriano.
His is a curiously dated world, a return to hard-edged figures.
The artist and his model is something of a recurrent theme while, as the illustration above shows, he must also be addicted to Come Dancing.
Galleries in the private sector rely very much on the continuing enthusiasms of their individual founders.
One wishes the Scotts the longevity that has been the hallmark in the past of both the Austen Hayes Gallery in York and the Stone Gallery in Newcastle.
Stolen Glances The Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington (until April 25).
HAVE you any of those Esso petrol vouchers scrunched up in the bottom of your bag?
If you're not going to use them, the Richmond and Dales Talking Newspapers would love to have them they use them to buy cassettes on which to record the paper for the blind or partially sighted.
Send your coupons to Barbara Deans, Bella Cottage, Castle Bolton, Leyburn.
Or drop them in at the Northern Echo offices in Northallerton and Darlington.
We'll pass them on.
RICHMOND Golf Club produced a remarkable family double when Peter Hughes and his son both holed in one on the same day.
Hughes senior, a 67-year-old ten-handicapper, holed with an 8-iron at the 140-yard fourth during the morning.
And when they went out again after lunch his 43-year-old son, also called Peter, aced the 180-yard seventh with a 4 iron.
‘My only previous hole-in-one in 40 years’ golf was 20 years ago at Phoenix in South Yorkshire,’said Hughes senior.
‘I was amazed when mine went in.
But it was unbelievable when Peter did it as well.
He's never had one before.’
DURHAM have drafted in Ravensworth's Mark Sewell for his senior county debut against the NE and NW PGA at Whitburn on Sunday week.
He replaces Hartlepool's Graeme Bell, who was originally selected but is unavailable.
Bell's absence leaves Durham without three of last season's stalwarts as Billingham's Nick Walton is about to become an assistant professional at Barnard Castle and Darlington's John Howson has retired from county golf.
The team to play the professionals is: C Kilgour, M Sewell (Ravensworth), R Walker (Wearside), A J McLure (Whickham), D Moralee (Boldon), J Kennedy (Consett), A K Green (Darlington), P Cain (Seaton Carew), J Surtees (Tyneside), J Handy (South Moor), D Conway (South Shields), C Marshall (Hartlepool).
For the match against the Durham Junior Golfing Society at Chester-le-Street on April 19 Wearside's Howard Walton will replace Darlington's Adrian Green.
Eaglescliffe youngsters Stephen Armstrong and Gareth Couzens, and David Sharkey of South Shields, will be given a chance in the annual match against Durham Ladies at Hartlepool on April 26.
PHIL Harrison succeeded his brother John, the Barnard Castle professional, as the PGA North Region's Winter Order of Merit winner.
Phil shot a level par 71 in the last of the six events at Mere to finish fourth equal and clinch the title by 80 points from Huddersfield's Paul Carman.
Billingham's Paul Bradley finished fifth and John Harrison was seventh.
MITCH Cook's transfer to Blackpool was the only deadline day deal for Darlington.
The 31-year-old left back, signed by Brian Little from Halifax last February, joined the Fourth Division club for what manager Ray Hankin described as a four figure fee.
Hankin added: ‘We received a biggish bid for a youngster, but I turned it down for the benefit of the future of Darlington.’
Hankin will be heartened by the news that young defender Sean Gregan, who went off with a rib injury in Saturday's home defeat by Preston, has recovered quickly.
Fellow defender Mark Sunley and midfielders Steve Gaughan, Anthony Isaacs and Gary Hinchley will start tomorrow's game at promotion-chasing Peterborough.
‘We will be concentrating on youth for the rest of the season,’ said Hankin.
Also in the squad is assistant manager Mick Tait, who has served a four-match suspension following his sending off against Chester last month.
The fourth board meeting of the week lasted all day yesterday, with directors John Brockbank and Richard Tonks still discussing options.
INJURY-HIT Hartlepool made a last minute signing to replace injured record striker Andy Saville.
Pool took Preston forward John Thomas, 32, on a free transfer for the rest of the season, and he will make his debut at home to Shrewsbury tomorrow.
He started his career at Everton, but did not make the first team and has since played at Bolton, Chester, Lincoln, West Brom and Preston.
Manager Alan Murray had been looking for somebody to replace the unlucky Saville, who broke his arm hours after his Pool debut a fortnight ago in a freak restaurant accident.
Murray said: ‘John is an experienced player who has scored goals wherever he has played.
‘This experience will serve us well and hopefully he will form a good partnership with Lenny Johnrose, another player from Preston.’
Chairman Garry Gibson revealed that Murray had been in touch with a string of top clubs looking for pre-deadline newcomers.
One of his targets was former Pool midfieldman Don Hutchison, but Liverpool would not let him go.
They also contacted Port Vale about Keith Houchen, but the Midlands club were only interested in a part-exchange deal.
Gibson said: ‘Alan has scoured the country and put in a lot of phone calls lately, but only this one worked out.’
SCARBOROUGH last night completed the signing of promising central defender Chris Curran from Crewe Alexandra for the rest of the season.
The 21-year-old defender will be in contention for the team to face Halifax at the McCain Stadium tomorrow.
Curran's arrival brings the number of new signings at Scarborough this week to five as boss Ray McHale looks ahead to next season.
FIRST class sport in County Durham is leading the nation as physical education becomes part of the National Curriculum.
The statutory curriculum to be followed by the nation's five to 16year-olds from September reflects guidance drawn up by the county's PE teachers two years ago.
In County Durham, school sport has reached record levels especially in primary schools where more children are taking part than ever before.
Yet elsewhere in the country there has been a serious decline in the amount of sport in schools.
The elitist emphasis on the ‘school team’ has been replaced in Durham by the aim of giving every pupil the chance to discover hidden talents in a wide range of sporting activities.
In Durham, it is not winning but playing the game that is important.
That means there is a lot more than soccer, netball, tennis and cricket on the timetable with pupils trying their skill at athletics and dance, squash and weight-training and many outdoor pursuits.
But team work is not neglected.
The county's cross country runners have become English schools champions for the third year running, an all-girl crew at St Leonard's Comprehensive won national acclaim for rowing and gymnasts from Deerness School have represented the UK in international events.
PE lessons in three of the county's schools including Mayfair special school in Darlington were observed by the National Curriculum working party which included Mike Thornton, deputy head of Greenfield Comprehensive in Newton Aycliffe.
PE inspector Alan Bell told county councillors that the good practice they saw influenced their draft report to education secretary Kenneth Clarke, so Durham's guidelines are now being used all over the country.
Mr Bell said: ‘If children develop an interest through PE they can feed into local clubs and take part in a worthwhile leisure activity for the rest of their lives.’
But he is concerned that the choice of leisure and sporting pursuits could be cut as schools try to balance their finances.
IF you are planning to take part in the sponsored step aerobics session for the day care centre sit tight for a few weeks.
The session was due to take place on Sunday at the Dolphin Centre but because it is also Mother's Day some people were put off.
It has now been rescheduled for Sunday May 3 between 10.30am and 12.30pm and anyone interested is welcome to take part, admission will be free.
Pupils at Branksome Comprehensive School will be helping raise money for the appeal with a ‘mufti day’ when they can wear their own clothes in return for paying a small fee to the charity.
This is an easy way of raising money, and appeal organisers are hoping other schools might adopt it on their behalf.
An information day is being planned for anyone wanting to learn more about the day care centre appeal, which needs to raise £637,000.
The centre will act as a meeting place for all old folk especially the lonely, frail and housebound and provide a range of services.
So far around £115,000 has been raised but another £200,000 has to be found this year to keep the appeal on target.
If you would like to attend the information evening contact Moira Shields at Farmway.
The date is drawing nearer for the raffle draw, first prize is a Vauxhall Nova car but there are many other exciting prizes.
The winning tickets will be drawn by Darlington Mayor Rita Fishwick on April 15 so buy yours soon.
Raffle tickets will be sold at British Home Stores in Darlington on April 11, anyone who would like to help sell them should contact Moira Shields at Farmway.
Hair today
TERRY Scouler, the Greens man in Sunderland South, runs a mobile hairdressing business called the Clip Joint.
(‘A very apt name,’ he says.)
Several times an unsuccessful council candidate in Washington East (‘it would frighten the life out of me if I got in’) he has been telling us how his work and his passionate concern combine.
‘It saves me a fortune on perm solution.
I tell people about the environment and their hair curls straight away.’
Radio frequency
ALAN Milburn, Darlington's NHS conscious Labour candidate, has been proper poorly.
Before a BBC Radio Cleveland debate yesterday, he was obliged to explain off air that because of an undemocratic stomach bug he might suddenly have to leave in the middle of the proceedings.
What's called running for Parliament, presumably.
Never rains
NOT content with this one, at Beamish Museum they're planning to re-create the Houghton-le-Spring by-election of March 18 1913.
There'll be candidates' rallies on May 10 and June 6 and a chance to ‘vote’ on June 20.
The Northern Echo 79 years ago announced a Liberal victory over Conservative and Labour opponents.
We also reported that a pound of tea was 1/4d, a boy's suit was ten bob, decorators were paid 8d an hour, the King of Greece had been assassinated and the MCC was discussing what to do in the case of rain affected matches.
Write a limerick
IT is time, some would say about time too, for the Diary's little competition.
(Handsome prizes.)
In 1987 we invited readers to compose an election song to any familiar tune.
To the melody of Smoke Gets in Your Eyes, the winner wrote an anti-opinion poll ditty that began: They asked me how I crossed I just said ‘Get lost’
This time it's even simpler.
We're after election limericks, with the only stipulation that entries should scan conventionally.
Preference may be given, however, to limericks which include the name of a North-East candidate.
You know the sort of thing: There once was a would be MP Who said if you don't vote for me I'll scream and I'll shout Might knock myself out And probably fall into the sea.
Yours, of course, will be very much better.
There's £25 for the best, £10 each for two runners up.
Entries to Election Diary, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Winners to be announced on April 10.
AN OLD Darlington building is set to become a children's nursery despite councillors' traffic fears.
Members of Darlington Council's land and property sub-committee approved use of the Corn Exchange building in Victoria Road for a nursery for children between two and four-years-old.
Councillors had feared the nursery might generate traffic problems.
DURHAM County Council is reviewing the range of skills offered by teachers working with special needs youngsters.
The move follows a growing number of concerns expressed by parents of dyslexic children who claim adequate schooling is not always offered.
A spokesman told The Northern Echo yesterday some local education authority staff were also working for the Dyslexia Institute and there was no indication the needs of dyslexic youngsters were not being met.
But local mum Carol Lambird says she has been locked in a wrangle with Durham County Council for the last two years after her son Christopher was diagnosed as dyslexic.
She felt so strongly about the situation she removed Christopher, now 13, from mainstream education and says she is still hoping to have his LEA provision reviewed.
Mrs Lambird of Belford Gardens, Darlington, said yesterday she felt the county council should recruit staff trained to deal with dyslexia.
‘The council does not recognise dyslexia and does not have teachers trained to deal with its problems.’
The county council said all children with special needs were given an individual programme and the LEA looked for a wide range of experience when recruiting.
‘There are children with physical, mental and behavioural difficulties and we have to look for a range of staff to reflect the balance,’ he said.
THE long-running row over Darlington's Court Arcade again spluttered into life yesterday.
Conservative borough councillors planned to sell the run-down site as a shopping development but Labour scrapped the plan when they took power last May.
Now the arcade will be knocked down with sheltered homes for the elderly built on the site.
At last night's full council meeting Tory group leader Tony Richmond criticised the ruling party for not setting aside £70,000 to pay for demolishing Court Arcade.
He claimed if a developer had to meet the cost of knocking it down each flat would cost £50,000 to build.
Housing committee chairman Bill Dixon said Coun Richmond was wide of the mark and each property would only cost £30,000.
Highkicking Frankie owes his name to Gran
THE very first night he took her out, Frank Ableson proposed to his wife, Stella.
It was probably a combination of the moonlight and the girl but what-ever it was, the man who went on to become world-famous singing star Frankie Vaughan says she stole his heart the instant he saw her.
It looks as though it's all down to the charm factor in Darlington
It could all come down to the doorsteps in Darlington.
In a town with a Conservative majority of just 2,661, the personal charm and persuasion of each candidate will be crucial.
And all four say they will be out canvassing almost every night in an attempt to woo the waverers among Darlington's 66,885 electorate.
But the battle is essentially between the old enemies, Conservative and Labour.
In Mr Michael Fallon, aged 39, the Tories have a seasoned campaigner who made his debut under the full blaze of the national media in the famous 1983 by-election.
He lost by 2,412 votes but returned to win at the General Election three months later with a majority of over 3,000.
Since July 1990 he has been Schools Minister, giving him a platform for some controversial and high-profile views.
Last May he said he wanted to see the TV soap opera banned because ‘children learn nothing from these junk programmes which dull their senses making teachers’ jobs even harder.’
Later in the same month he called the BBC ‘wicked, brazen and sinister’ for cashing in on programmes like Postman and by selling spin-off products.
More recently he was embroiled in a row with Darlington's Catholic community over plans to extend two schools.
The two sides eventually reached agreement but not before at least one priest had threatened to make it an election issue.
Out on the stump he is efficient and businesslike: shouting out orders and thanks to his lieutenants very much in charge of the operation.
He likes to ask voters if they are ‘on board’ and is quick to offer personal help where it seems appropriate.
He is married to Wendy and the couple have two young children, Peter and Timothy.
Mr Alan Milburn, aged 34, is contesting his first election.
But he has been the Labour Party's chosen candidate for almost two years and in that time he has worked hard to build up a high profile, assiduously interpreting official figures on unemployment, training and hospital waiting lists as well as taking on directors of newly-privatised monopolies.
During the campaign he has had morning press conferences complete with a TV-friendly backdrop, typed notes and a press secretary permanently on hand.
Mr Fallon by contrast runs his from his front room.
Almost permanently cheerful, Mr Milburn greets voters on the door with a ‘How are you doing’ and a beaming smile.
The Labour canvassing operation is much more of a team effort.
On the Red Hall estate on Tuesday he was taking his orders from Coun. Sonia Willans standing at a central point while the other members radiated out.
Until the election was called he has had to fit his campaigning around a job as senior business development officer for North Tyneside council.
Before that he was the co-ordinator of the Trade Union Studies Information Unit in Newcastle.
He lives with his partner Ruth and the couple have an eight-month-old son Joe.
Mr Peter Bergg, aged 47, is also running in his first election although he has previously stood in Sedgefield district council elections.
He works for the Aycliffe Centre for Children and lives just out of the constituency in Newton Aycliffe.
He deals much more with national issues rather than local ones and has received less media attention as a result.
His answers to questions normally start with ‘we believe’ and he seems to see himself very much as the party representative.
Mr Fallon and Mr Milburn are both keener to stress local issues and their constituency credentials.
His party came a distant third in 1987 with 6,289 votes.
It has only polled more than 10,000 votes once in 30 years, when as the SDP/Liberal Alliance it benefited from the special by-election atmosphere.
He is married to Andrea and has three children, Diane, Stephen and Sarah, and one grandson.
Mr Donald Clarke, aged 65, is the British National Party representative.
He is a retired headmaster who lives in Edinburgh and is married with three children.
His campaign is being run from a Darlington hotel.
His agent said he was refusing to speak to the press after an incident in which he said he had been misquoted.
He prefers to meet people on doorsteps although there will also be two public meetings, one of which he hopes will be in a school.
He stood as the Liberal Party candidate in Edinburgh in the 1966 and 1970 elections and joined the BNP two years ago.
Labour promises action to end ‘farms mess’
Farmers met Dr. David Clark, Shadow Minister for Food and Agriculture, when he was in the area this week.
He visited Mr Alan Wade's Ouston Moor Farm, in Darlington Back Lane, Sadberge, on Monday to discuss the future of agriculture, claiming farming in Britain was a mess, with 14 farmers and 25 workers leaving the land each day.
He said Labour would boost agriculture by encouraging the production of food at home to improve Britain's balance of payments deficit; reforming the common agricultural policy, and shifting the emphasis to decision making at national and regional level.
The Socialists would also offer a ‘green premium’ to farmers who opted for environmentally friendly methods.
Coun. John Scott, Labour candidate for Tory-held Stockton South, accompanied Dr. Clark on his tour.
The National Farmers' Union tackled all three candidates for the seat the closest three-way marginal in the country on their parties' commitment to investment in agriculture.
Mr Tim Devlin (C) and Coun. Mrs Kay Kirkahm (Lib.
Dem.) joined Coun.
Scott for a farmers' forum at Stockton Cricket Club on Thursday.
They were asked to outline what their parties aimed to do to boost the average income of farmers, which has fallen by 18pc to the lowest level since the 1939–1945 War.
Members also quizzed the trio on the issue of widespread job losses in agriculture, estimated at 250 a week nationally.
SO Sarah Ferguson is deemed unsuitable for life as a Royal it seems to me many of the ‘real’ Royals are equally unsuitable.
No doubt the Duchess was careless, even indiscreet, but she does not deserve the crude nastiness emanating from the Palace.
A person who does not have the decency to pay taxes on huge wealth deserves greater condemnation than Sarah, the Duchess of York and in case you don't know to whom I refer, I mean the Queen.
Our Royals, I am afraid, are arrogant, uncharitable, greedy and downright un-Christian when it comes to preserving their own privileges and image.
Surely, nearing the end of the 20th century the concept of a ‘'royal’ family is anathema to all sensible people bearing in mind the misery, suffering and hardships endured by many people today both at home and abroad.
Hugh Pender,.
Lay debate
I REFER to the feature (Echo March 23) about the Durham Diocesan Synod which could leave the average reader believing that the Synod was an entirely clergy body, whereas it has a House of Laity of equal size.
I understand the lay members took a full part in the debate.
No one will deny we face a difficult situation; no one will say the answers are easy or very obvious, or can be developed without the maximum cooperation between clergy and laity, parishes and deaneries with the diocese and between themselves and lots of goodwill and prayer.
There can be no doubt that Bishop David Jenkins is a man who cares deeply for his diocese, his clergy and his people.
I don't always agree with him, but find him ready to listen to constructive argument.
He has done more than most to stimulate thought on matters of faith among ordinary people.
He is now leading us, sometimes against our wills, to consider the spiritual needs of the diocese and how these can be met, against a backdrop of acute financial difficulties and a church structure much in need of reform.
Let us work together to meet the challenge.
Cecil Robinson, 114 Salutation Road, Darlington.
FERGIE may have found it difficult to learn Her Royal Lessons, but you don't have to be a fitness connoisseur to see that she has learned a thing or two about keeping in Of course her title of the Disappearing Duchess takes on a different meaning now a year ago it referred to her ability to lose five stones of regal flab.
Her diets ranged from the high protein steak and salad to the Hay diet, which cuts out eating starch and protein at the same time.
‘With the increasing pressure of everyday life I have come to realise the importance of finding time to exercise on a regular basis,’ says Fergie, who is also the President of the Sports Aid Foundation.
Well, the secret of her success is one Josh Salzmann, a personal trainer who numbers among his clients John Cleese, Michael Winner and even David Frost.
Former American wrestler Josh claims his new approach to fitness lies in making it fun.
His new video Bodyfit (Pickwick, £10.99) starts with Fergie saying how good it all is and then moves into some dynamic stretches with Josh, cardio-vascular exercise, routines for individual muscle groups and ‘together’ exercises you can do with your partner.
The buzzword among those who follow the routine is that it gives you ‘energy for life.’
That's certainly what the routine has given Josh and his 32 year wife Laura in just over four years the couple have had five children.
WIN A FITNESS VIDEO NOW you can join Fergie and her personal trainer in the battle of the bulge by answering these simple questions to win a video.
1.
Before a serious work out warm up exercises are essential because: a)
They can cut down your electricity bill.
b) They save your muscles and ligaments from getting injured.
c) They stop your libido from getting out of hand.
2.
The heart and circulation are improved best by doing aerobic exercise involving the: a) The left hemisphere of the brain.
b) The hands.
c) The big muscles in the legs.
3.
To get some real benefit from exercise you should continue for at least: a) 20 minutes.
b) 90 seconds.
c) Three hours.
We've only five copies to give out, so don't hang about.
Send your answers on a card to Health and Fitness, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Northern League
IT'S crunch time for Brandon when they travel to fellow relegation strugglers Shildon today.
Brandon slipped into the relegation zone in midweek after both Shildon and West Auckland collected points to move above them.
Peter Feenan's side have failed to win any of their last four games, despite picking up draws at South Bank and Guisborough.
Regular keeper Keith Mouncher returns after missing last week's home defeat by Blyth, but Keith Muckle, Darren Brewis and Barrie Wilson are all ruled out.
Shildon, who have won their last two games, expect to be unchanged from the side which beat title chasing Murton on Wednesday.
West Auckland, who are level on points with Shildon, will be looking for a win at bottom of the table Whickham, who will be relegated if they do not win today.
West welcome back forward Mike McKenna and defender Paul Jarps.
At the top, leaders Whitby expect to be at virtual full strength for their game at Tow Law, who will be without Darren Darwen and Tony Higgs.
Gretna are also near full strength for their home game with second bottom Langley Park, whose striker Graeme MacDonald played in a youth game for Darlington in midweek.
Murton choose between keepers Barry Corfield and Nigel Stewart for their local clash with Peterlee, but midfielder Kevin Young is doubtful.
Blyth, back in fifth place, are hoping striker Don Peattie, and defenders Steve Locker and Steve Plaskett, will pass fitness tests for their home game with Consett, who choose from a full squad of 17 players.
Billingham Synthonia, who have won their last seven in a row, have doubts over defenders Sean O'Brien and Tommy Connor for the home game with Northallerton, and with another defender Andy Harbron unavailable, manager Stuart Coleby may be forced to play.
Seaham will have a full squad for their home game with Blue Star.
Manager Kenny Mitchell has the choice of two keepers, as Paul O'Connor has returned to Leicester.
In the Second Division, neither side can afford to lose the clash between fourth placed Dunston and leaders Stockton at Federation Park.
Dunston, who are without suspended David Wright, and the unavailable Ian Mulholland, will lose touch completely if they are beaten, while Stockton, who give striker Neil Lockington a fitness test, may lose the leadership.
Durham, the team who can overtake them, face Cleveland Bridge at Ferens Park.
Strikers Tony Anderson and Micky Taylor, as well as midfielder John Reach, are all suspended, while defender Billy Youern and striker Dave Lawson both have fitness tests.
Cleveland, who will be at full strength, have appointed former Shildon manager Nick Jay as team coach.
Chester-le-Street, who have games in hand in third place, are forced to draft in new keeper Doug Pettit for their game at Norton because regular John Caffrey is injured for the rest of the season.
Norton will be without suspended midfielder Bobby Hadfield.
Northern Counties East League SPENNYMOOR are looking to extend their unbeaten run when third placed Sutton Town visit the Brewery Field.
Moors are closing the gap steadily on the leading teams, and three points today could lift them three places into fifth.
Manager Mattie Pearson, who played in the midweek win at Brigg, may leave himself out, allowing Micky Seymour to return to the side.
However, midfielder Jason Ainsley will miss the game after picking up an ankle injury in midweek, and also out of the side is striker Andrew Shaw, who is suspended.
I REFER to Corinna Harrison's report (Echo March 17) and the caption ‘Darlington's Russell Street car park; capacity to be halved by new development’.
This is incorrect and could mislead the public.
The proposals as reported to the planning applications sub-committee on January 8 will reduce the existing 225-space car park to 150 spaces during weekdays (ie to two-thirds its present size) and to 208 spaces on Saturdays (ie to over four-fifths its present size).
The council is prepared to accept this small loss of under-used parking space to secure employment opportunities the proposed development will bring to Darlington.
Coun John Williams, Leader Darlington Borough Council.
Healthy balance
I FEEL that I must take issue with two stories (Echo March 4) in relation to diabetes (a) special foods, and (b) specialist nurses.
It really is appalling to present this outmoded idea about special foods.
What is considered a healthy diet for the general populace is quite good enough for the diabetic; all that is required is the balance of the amounts of carbohydrate in relation to the medication required.
I still feel that the situation brought about by the local BDA group was an unnecessary, waste of valuable hospital resources.
The press release by the BDA, gave the impression that diet is the single factor in the prevention of the long term complications of the disease, which is patently not so!
Eliot P Joslin in the USA, Karsch in Europe et al stated quite categorically that the triad of medication, diet and exercise were necessary in diabetes care.
Each component is equally important in diabetes treatment.
In relation to the call for a specialist nurse, a campaign to set up a Diabetes Education Unit attached to the clinic would be more appropriate to the needs of the diabetic population.
C Brian Hunter,.
Reproach
SHOULD Labour Councillors in Eastbourne, whose party has had the area to itself for as long as I can remember, ‘knock on doors’ in this area, I hope residents will raise the question of the state of the Neasham Road approach to Darlington, south of the railway bridge, particularly when at this time of year it is a pleasure to approach the town from any other direction.
My own efforts over a long period of time, plus correspondence and telephone calls to various bodies have met with no success.
After all, we all pay the same Community Charge.
The Neasham Road approach to the town does no credit to Darlington or Durham County Councils.
It is a disgrace.
R. Clement,.
Petitions
I REFER to Mr Howe's letter (HAS March 23).
Unless there are more anti-Loraine Crescent closure petitions than I have been led to believe, the one I think Mr Howe refers to was rendered dubious.
If not, then where are our authorities in all this in respecting the petitioners' wishes?
Maybe to be fair a vote about the closure would settle the dispute.
I am not a councillor nor politician whose job ought to be sorting out this dilemma.
But as an independent campaigner for road safety, I am worried that this belated hassle could hinder vital measures taking place throughout the estate.
I hope all concerned and all four councillors will openly resolve this matter swiftly.
Had Mr Howe and all the Lakeside opposition attended the three public meetings we were all invited and urged strongly to attend, perhaps there would not be all this dithering now.
Bethany Megan Robinson,.
Formerly it was stilted, boring, narrow in approach and poorly laid out.
It is now the complete opposite.
An eye catching layout, full of interest over a wide range of subjects, well written and hardly a hint of political bias.
All those at the college concerned in its production are to be heartily congratulated for giving the town a very impressive civic magazine of a very high standard which for once is good value for the public money spent on it.
With all the criticism of standards of training and education flying around at present, it is heartening to see a tangible example of work which seems to refute some of it.
May the Town Crier remain in the very capable hands of the college students and lecturers for a long time to come.
R.K. Bradley,.
Fish farm
WHAT gives Wear Valley councillors the right to close the fish farm (Echo March 20) at Witton-le-Wear which lots of people enjoy?
The owner has planted trees all around the ponds which will conceal them from the roads so to me that can't be a problem.
As for him having a permanent dwelling, where is he supposed to live?
While he is living there he is stopping glue sniffers and vandals killing the fish and ruining the countryside.
My son fishes at the fish farm where I know there is a responsible adult who he can ask for help if needed.
Freda Hauxwell, 1 Chesnut Grove, Roddymoor, Crook.
A TEAM of young archaeologists were disappointed when a dig in Darlington revealed nothing more than a Victorian cellar.
The students had been given permission by Darlington council to unearth what they hoped would be important medieval remains in Clark's Yard, Darlington.
But shortly after their JCB digger started removing paving slabs it was clear their hopes of historical discoveries would be dashed.
The yard has been earmarked for a complete overhaul by private developers.
Before any building work began County Durham archaeologists from the Bowes Museum wanted to make a thorough check of what was buried.
They contacted Newcastle University's archaeology department which sent a team down to investigate.
Niall Hammond, of the Bowes Museum, said the three trenches they dug all came up against Victorian foundations of a disused cellar.
He is not confident of discovering other antiquities in the area between Skinnergate and High Row.
I REFER to Mr Howe's letter (HAS March 23).
Unless there are more anti-Loraine Crescent closure petitions than I have been led to believe, the one I think Mr Howe refers to was rendered dubious.
If not, then where are our authorities in all this in respecting the petitioners' wishes?
Maybe to be fair a vote about the closure would settle the dispute.
Had Mr Howe and all the Lakeside opposition attended the three public meetings we were all invited and urged strongly to attend, perhaps there would not be all this dithering now.
Bethany Megan Robinson, 4 Arkle Crescent, Darlington.
All change:
A landlord who converted his house into a number of bedsits looks likely to be forced to change it back again after planning officers recommended Darlington council's planning committee to refuse the application for the Station Road, Darlington, house.
IT WAS an unlikely, but happy return to London Road for Darlington manager Ray Hankin and centre forward Nick Cusack.
Hankin, who spent 18 months at Peterborough under John Wile before being released in 1985, saw his young braves survive numerous corners and hold on to a point against a side who have seen off Liverpool and Newcastle at home this season.
Hankin said: ‘We battled unbelievably well, and the lads, especially the youngsters, came through with flying colours.
‘It shows we have a good future.
We were as good as them.
They might have forced a lot of corners, but they created nothing from them.
‘I thought Gary Hinchley was the man of the match.
Considering he was playing non-league football two months ago, he has adapted to the pro game very well, and kept their left winger quiet.
‘There is a big future for this club, and I intend to put it on the right footing.
If I go at the end of the season, then I will have done my best, and can hold my head high.’
After a shaky start full back Nick Pickering got himself booked after only 42 seconds for chopping down Worrall Sterling Quakers restricted Posh to three first half chances, even though the promotion chasers enjoyed most possession.
David Robinson headed over from a corner after three minutes, Mark Prudhoe booted away a close range effort from Bobby Barnes after 22 minutes, while Ken Charlery lobbed wide with only the keeper to beat after 35 minutes.
But with confidence growing visibly, Quakers took the lead after 36 minutes.
A clearance rebounded off Cusack, Steve Gaughan beat two men and released David Cork into the box, and he pulled the ball back for Cusack to drive home.
But the lead lasted only eight minutes before Sterling's right wing cross reached the far post, where David Robinson outjumped the defence to head the equaliser.
Quakers didn't lose their composure after the break.
Hinchley and Pickering kept the wingers quiet, so Posh had to attack up the middle.
Again, Sean Gregan and Mark Sunley, helped by Mick Tait, were in command, and the only real fright came from a piledriver by substitute Steve Cooper, which Prudhoe pushed away.
A clearer chance fell to Steve Gaughan after 62 minutes.
Quakers broke out of defence, Cork laying the ball off to give Gaughan a clear run on goal.
Fred Barber got a hand to the midfielder's effort, and with the ball rolling towards the empty net, Gaughan's former Doncaster team-mate Ronnie Robinson slid the ball off the line.
The final corner count to Peterborough was 15, but Darlington's composure, with the youngsters particularly outstanding, never gave much away.
DARLINGTON are likely to appoint a new chairman this week.
Previous incumbent Dick Corden, who watched Quakers' game at Peterborough on Saturday, resigned a fortnight ago, leaving only two directors Richard Tonks and John Brockbank who met several times last week in an effort to solve the club's financial crisis.
The fact that manager Ray Hankin wasn't forced to sell any of his young stars by Thursday's deadline led to speculation that a new man was on his way.
Tonks also attended Saturday's game and when asked about the situation, he smiled confidently and said: ‘We are hoping to announce something early in the week.’
LANGLEY manager Vic Hillier is to resign at the end of the season amid question marks over the club's future.
Hillier, who guided Langley from being perennial re-election candidates to a first division side in only two seasons, announced his decision to quit after yesterday's 2–1 win Gretna.
His move follows a winter of crisis for the club after alleged cash irregularities were discovered in the accounts of its parent social club.
Club secretary John Ritchie, who is also the Northern League's registration secretary said: ‘We're sorry to be losing Vic, but the man has been doing the job since December and not received a penny.
It's through him that the players have stayed at the club.’
There is still a possibility the club could resign from the Northern League before Tuesday's deadline.
Langley pulled off a major surprise by beating title-chasing Gretna 2–1 away from home, despite having a man sent off.
Gary Lowes put Langley ahead from the penalty spot after 15 minutes after Jimmy Mulholland handled, but Kenny Goodrick levelled 20 minutes later.
Lowes fired Langley into the lead again after 49 minutes and they held on, despite having full back Paul Cooper sent off for swearing.
failed to take full advantage of Gretna's slip up and could only draw 3–3 Tow despite going into a 3–2 lead with three minutes left.
John Smith, Mark Dickinson and Paul Sharkey put Whitby in the lead, but on each occasion Ian Scott (twice) and Trevor Laidler equalised.
Whitby are now three points ahead at the top, but have played four games more than Gretna.
picked themselves up from their midweek defeat to beat 1–0, thanks to a first half goal from Dave Laws.
meanwhile, slipped up again at Croft Park, this time losing 2–0 Colin Mcleod and Paul Staff were on target in the first half hour.
Billingham who play Blyth in the League Cup semi-final tomorrow night, lost by the same scoreline at home to Former Darlington player Kevin Stonehouse, who left South Bank during the week, scored both goals in the first half.
Synners' midfielder Barney Malone was sent off for retaliation in the second half.
are definitely relegated after they were beaten 2–1 West their third win in a row.
Whickham took the lead through Paul Nicholson just after the break, but outstanding full back Geoff Young set up Andy Burgess to score twice for West.
still occupy third from bottom spot after they could only draw 0–0 one place above them.
Brandon hit the woodwork through Steve Houlden, as did Carl Black for Shildon.
The day's individual performance came striker Gary MacDonald, who scored all four of his side's goals in their 4–1 home win Blue Mark Outterside gave Blue Star the lead after six minutes, but the visitors then had Micky Robinson sent off for dangerous play.
MacDonald equalised just before half time and added three more in the second half.
took over at the top of the second division after they Cleveland 2–0 with a goal in each half by Colin Howey.
Previous drew 0–0 in a ding dong battle, with both sides having good chances.
picked up a point in a 1–1 draw George woodhouse gave the home side the lead 15 minutes from the end, but Roger Wicks levelled five minutes later.
CHAMPAGNE flowed and new coach Peter Nash was carried shoulder high by his team emphatic 29–13 triumph at Clifton Park on Saturday took them into North Division Two next season.
York, who had made a disastrous start to the season, won the North East Division One title with one of his best performances of the season.
York's fly half Andy Brown provided a cracking start, succeeding with two out of three penalties in the first eight minutes, Novos' Richard Calman reducing the arrears with a hotly disputed penalty which passed nearly a yard wide of the target.
It made little difference as York's full back Richard Stevenson bamboozled Novos with a hat-trick of exciting tries from set piece moves, the fourth being touched down by scrum half Martyn Harrison in the 49th minute.
Brown kicked two conversions and a penalty.
Novos' brave attempt to make a game of it was rewarded with a try tight up against the left wing touchline by Gus Walker.
Although York ended up on 18 points, equal to their main rivals, West Park (Bramhope), they were 31 points better off with their points scoring differential.
With two National Division Four North games to play, are on course to clinch their third promotion in the last four season when they made it ten out of ten league wins with their slender 3–0 success Stourbridge.
Second and third produced a 9–9 stalemate, so Harrogate kept up the pressure for a final place after their 13–7 home victory over Winnington Park.
Harrogate scored all their points in the first half with a try by their Yorkshire scrum half, Guy Easterby, from a blind side scrum move, Steve Baker touching down a try following a tap penalty move.
Park scored a push-over try through Mike Xiorrappa and Steve Foster kicked a penalty.
established as North East Two exchange places with second following their 19–9 success as Thorn plunged to a 12–10 defeat by Redcar.
Rockcliff were 9–0 ahead at the interval following a push-over try, touched down by number eight Pete Orchard, that was converted by Alan Robertson, who also succeeded with a penalty.
Back from injury, Selby skipper Ray Adamson kicked well for good positions downfield and he also succeeded with three penalties and converted one of scrum half Dave Bramley's two tries.
Both Old maintained their places in North East Two when they played out a 9–9 draw thanks, as far as Ripon were concerned, to an injury time penalty by Roger Dawson, who completed his hat-trick.
Hymers also scored three penalties through full back Andy Wood (2) and Paul Cook.
Whitby were awarded a penalty try against Seaton Carew for an offence at a five-metre scrum, prop forward Tom Eddy scoring a try from a tap penalty move and Tim Richardson also scoring a try.
Darryl Grason kicked three conversions and two penalties.
Knaresborough in Durham/ Northumberland Four 19–10 after Knaresborough had led 10–6 at the interval.
Knaresborough's points were scored by wingman Peter Roberts (try) and Gary Gilmore (2 penalties), while Sedgefield scored three tries through number eight Richard Wadless, winger Gordon Hirst and Paul McGee, Paul Wren kicking a conversion and Paul Bellis a conversion and a penalty.
Once fierce rivals of York came unstuck again in their desperate bid to climb away from the bottom reaches of Yorkshire Division One, going down 15–10 Leodiensians.
Leos scored tries through their scrum half Paul Mildenstein and fly half Ian Davidson, who converted both and kicked a penalty.
For RI, both wingmen Carl Walker and Mark Simpson scored tries and Alistair Gourlay kicked a conversion.
In the same boat close to the bottom of Yorkshire Division plunged to a 20–6 defeat who played their best rugby of the season.
Gary Hancock opened the scoring with a drop goal for Scarborough but they trailed 13–3 at the interval, Tim Elliott scoring a penalty in the second half.
travelled Leeds for their 9–3 win after trailing 3–0 at the interval.
Malton and West 36–6 with former Ampleforth College student fly half Tom Wilcox having an outstanding game.
Club game Malton and Norton 36, West Leeds 6; New Earswick 37, Wetherby A 7; York A 15, Barnard Castle 12; York V 4, Barnard Castle A 4.
AS one of the many who helped defend Malta when the island was under siege in World War II, I was interested to read (Echo March 19) that the Maltese Government is keen to issue medals to those involved to mark the 50th anniversary of the award of the G.C. to the island.
What a howler, however, to suggest that the island was occupied by German and Italian forces!
The heart of the momentous events of that time was that ‘softening up’ operations prior to invading or neutralising the island were successfully resisted.
There was no occupation by enemy forces and therefore no ‘liberation’ in that sense.
The island remained defiant until the siege was eventually lifted.
J.J.S. Smith, 29 Park View, Leyburn.
Death by soap Those naughty TV people have upset Sharon Griffiths (Echo March 24) by having football on two channels at the same time.
She ignores the fact that there are two other channels.
But what really bugs our Sharon is that they dare to show any football at all and thus interrupt the daily stream of soap sludge.
Does she know that there are 86 films on TV this week and only one football game?
I hereby sentence her to be tied to a chair and forced to watch EastEnders continuously for 12 hours.
Joe Corrie, 45 Barnes Road, Darlington.
THIS is a week for the wildest dreams.
They will encroach on the idle thoughts of 40 jockeys.
It will be impossible to stop them.
Over Anchor Bridge they will go, two fences from home, five lengths clear, the field broken, their horse strengthening, the crowd in tumult, the Grand National within their grasp.
Glory and a place in history await.
Andrew Orkney did not put it quite like that.
He was rational, relaxed, phlegmatic.
That is the business of steeplechasing.
But he did not underplay the significance of the biggest steeplechase in the world.
He would like to think, he said, that his mind will not wander to the race at Aintree in the next few days, that he will not run it through his mind, that it will not permeate his waking life.
But he knows almost certainly that it will.
‘I will be a bit nervous I should think,’ he said.
‘I've got a horse that has a chance.
You don't want to be falling at the first.’
Orkney will ride Old Applejack, a 12year-old chestnut which is trained by Howard Johnson at Crook and is the sort of outsider that can never be discounted at Aintree.
He has the distance in him, he ran the National last year, albeit without finishing, and he has had a solid season.
The imponderables of the race make it what it is, a graveyard for favourites for a start, and if Old Applejack goes to the line at 50–1 it can be persuasively argued that he is a better bet than Cool Ground at 6–1.
His jockey has had a solid season too, 18 wins from 142 rides, busier than ever before.
If Andrew Orkney does indeed lead over Anchor Bridge, jumps the last two obstacles cleanly and wins the great event it will be a story entirely appropriate to its ridiculously romantic pattern.
He is 30 and an optician as well as a professional National Hunt jockey.
He is able to run his part-time practice in Leyburn he worked in Darlington and Richmond before that around the racing calendar.
Having always ridden from being a lad he progressed from point to point to riding under rules as an amateur.
In the mid-Eighties the Jockey Club invited him down to London to deliver a gentle reminder.
Amateur jockeys are something but too many rides means they deprive the professionals and that is something else.
Orkney turned professional.
His progress since has been steady, his number of rides has increased.
But, my, if he were to come home at Aintree on Old Applejack how the tale would be told.
In 1989 he led for a circuit on his only previous ride in the race, on one Kersil with Little Polveir, the eventual winner, and West Tip in close attendance.
When he found himself in front his main concern was not whether he might hold on to win but whether he would follow the right course.
There is not much time for thought of any kind.
As it happened he pulled up a shattered Kersil seven from home.
He likes the blend of the two jobs, the one selfish because successful sportsmen must be to a greater or lesser degree, the other caring.
But this was about sitting on horses not looking into other people's eyes.
‘The weighing room has a magical atmosphere,’ he said.
‘For all that I might be fairly intelligent I'm often slow in there, the last to pick up on something.
‘They're a quick-witted bunch, sharp.
And you know taking the top jockeys, Scudamore, Dunwoody, Niven, Osborne, McCourt they could all have made a success of whatever they chose to do, I'm sure of that.’
Thus, it is easy to tell that he loves being a jockey.
Like all his colleagues he dismisses their legendary toughness.
They would ride, most of them, if they had to be put on a horse while needing the use of crutches to walk or with splints on every bone.
In January Orkney broke an ankle.
It was suggested that the plaster should stay on for between four and six weeks after which he might like to think of building up its strength.
Two weeks after the accident he was back in the saddle.
There was a man, he said, who knew how to deal with jockey's injuries.
He said it was all right for the pot to come off and for him to walk on the injured foot.
To race ride again so soon afterwards seemed a mite quick, however.
Orkney said that jockeys were worried that they were missing rides, that other jockeys would do well on their horses and that they would not get them back.
This might be so.
The hardness, the resilience both physical and mental is still astonishing and unquestionable.
Back to the National, for this week there can be no getting away from it, his first memory is of watching Red Rum's first triumph.
The deeds which followed that, an exhausted, courageous Crisp just caught at the last, would have stirred any potential horseman's heart.
So, what of his race plan for Old Applejack?
Well, he did not want to give away too much ground at the start.
But hold steady there.
He did not want to be too analytical about it either.
There were so many unforeseeable things.
A plan, then, but not too rigid a plan.
There is an adage in racing that good jockeys do not need instructions and that bad ones cannot carry them out.
The National sometimes has bad jockeys, enthusiastic amateurs deemed by the pros to be something of a menace.
But it throws the race wider open too.
It is safer now after the public outcry of 1989 when two horses died.
The slope on Becher's Brook was filled in.
Orkney, like most of his breed, is not sure this should have been allowed.
There is only one Grand National and even the jockeys, maybe most of all the jockeys, are starkly aware of that.
It is a singular, unparalleled event.
Not that Andrew Orkney will dwell too much this week on leading them into the Canal Turn and over the final six flights and up the long finish and on to the post and becoming the first optician to win and riding into history.
Not too much.
TIM WELLOCK
THE demands of league rugby could mean that West will somehow have to pick themselves up after Saturday's tragedy and play three successive league games.
They won't want to play next week, and the following week comes the home match against Wakefield, in which they had hoped to celebrate promotion to National Division One.
Saturday's abandoned match at Morley will probably have to be played the next week, followed by the trip to Liverpool St Helens on the final Saturday of the season.
West need three points to be sure of promotion, Newcastle keeping up the challenge on Saturday by winning 54–21 at home to Plymouth.
It was the ninth time they had passed 50 points this season, and David Johnson took his tally past 400 with three penalties, a drop goal and three conversions.
Prop Jon Curry, No 8 Graham Clark and winger Martin White scored two tries each, others coming from hooker Neil Frankland, flanker Peter Walton and winger Paul Holdstock.
Durham revival ended with an 18–12 defeat at home to which left them third from the bottom of Division Four North.
Tynedale's home win against Birkenhead Park was to no avail as they finished second in North Division One, with Rotherham clinching the only promotion spot.
Hartlepool finished fourth when prop Neil Winn scored their third try to earn an 18–16 win at home to Sandal.
Centre Ian Bell and full back Martin Saunders also scored and Kevin Sainty kicked three conversions.
won 24–15 at home to Widnes and will finish fifth unless Hull Ionians win their outstanding game by a large margin.
Fly half Mike Robson kicked three penalties and three drop goals, and full back Ian Stallard added two penalties for Boro.
must wait to find out whether they have won promotion from North-East Two after securing fourth place with a 1210 win away to second-placed Thornensians.
Roy Myers kicked his fourth penalty in injury time after Redcar trailed 7–6 at half-time.
Bishop made sure of third place in Durham and Northumberland Division One with a 22–6 win Darlington RA.
Tries came from flanker Jimmy Collinson and scrum half Willie Bond, with Ian Campbell adding four penalties and a conversion.
No 8 Mick Thompson scored for RA, with Colin Woodcock converting.
Percy established themselves as leaders of Durham Northumberland Division Two with their 9–6 win Hartlepool to fight it out on points differential for second place.
Guisborough's 26–0 home victory North Durham carried the day over Whitby's 22–0 success Seaton Carew.
JOHN Lee's prayer was answered even though it wasn't really necessary.
As the Darlington boxer went back to his corner after his national schools championships intermediate 45kg final at Derby on Saturday against Middlesex's Reg Robshaw, he muttered: ‘Please God let me win it.’
He had won it convincingly, as the judges' 60–56, 60–56, 60–57 scores proved, but such is the tension of the schools finals second only in most young boxers' eyes to the senior ABA finals that he felt he needed a bit more help.
But the 14-year-old, who had lost in last year's finals, didn't really need it.
He had out-boxed, out-hit and out-manoeuvred Robshaw in an impressive display that brought a bit of light into the North-East's nine-boy assault on the titles.
Before Lee's win, Lingdale's Stephen Swales had lost a controversial majority points decision to Peterborough's Liam Maltby at junior A 45kg even Maltby told him he had been robbed.
Shildon's Steve Hodgson had lost, also on a majority decision, to Middlesex's Barney Doherty in the junior 39kg, Darlington's Aaron Kelly (junior B 39kg) had lost to Middlesex's Danny Price, also majority, and Hartlepool Catholic's Jimmy Rooney was unanimously outpointed by Essex's Ned Lee at junior B 42kg.
Shildon's Craig Wake forged a hard-earned second win for the North-East in the intermediate 66kg class.
Wake, junior ABA champion and defending his schools title against the boy he beat last year, Roger Campbell, of Hampshire, found it hard going against a shorter but stockier opponent and had to survive being hurt in a tough second round before being given a majority decision.
Sunderland's Billy Tyrell (intermediate 54kg) won his first national title after stopping two holders en route to the final in convincing style against Essex's Richard Warman.
Darlington's Jim Smith gained an exciting unanimous points win over Essex's Danny Coates at intermediate 60kg level.
He clearly won a toe-to-toe scrap in which both boxers concentrated more on hitting each other than boxing, but it was good value.
Hylton Castle's Joe Donkin, fighting only his fifth bout, lost his junior B 57kg final against Middlesex's Francis Doherty, champion last year.
HARTLEPOOL South made the most of nearest Marske Eppleton being on cup duty to open up their lead at the top.
Pool found themselves being hard pressed by as after taking an early lead through Michael Smithies, they squandered several good scoring chances before scrambling home by the only goal of the match.
South Shields found themselves having to rely on a mix-up in the defence late in the first half to let Gary Davies in to give them the lead at the interval.
Paul Thompson rounded off the scoring after the break to give Shields three valuable points.
were unable to break through a Herrington defence going down by two clear goals.
Brian Carr gave Herrington the lead when he chipped the ball over the Wolviston keeper, with Malcolm Nugent rounding off the scoring after the break.
Annfield found their hopes of finishing in the top four being dimmed when they went down at home Boldon CA.
The Plain, a goal ahead in the tenth minute through Colin Milburn, were forced to reshuffle their line-up following an injury to Peter McCusker.
With play flowing from end to end, Boldon grabbed an equaliser through Peter Quinn, with Lee Philipson going on to slot in their second late in the second half.
Cleator Moor look to have guaranteed their place in division one following an easy win over Darlington RA.
The game was effectively over by the interval, with Celtic having built up a four-goal lead through Graham Nichols (2), Kevin Messenger and Tom Shepherd.
Darlington scored a late consolation goal through Paul Adamson.
Eppleton CW will now Esh in the final of the Monkwearmouth Charity Cup following their 3–0 win Cleadon SC.
Dominating for most of the tie, Eppleton had to wait until the 47th minute before Neil Scott forced a way through a resolute Cleadon defence.
Ged Kennedy made it 2–0 before Willie Wilson headed home to put the issue beyond doubt.
have taken over the lead in division two following a hard fought win Jarrow.
Joe Carr had given Jarrow the lead at half time, with Michael Taylor levelling the scores before Norman Platts shot home Silksworth's winner in the 87th minute.
Jarrow were given a scare at home by bottom Flo when Rob Johnson equalised an early goal from Kevin KcElwey, but from that stage they took command to finish 5–1 in front.
Dougie Bell proved to be their match winner with a hat-trick, while their fifth goal came from Paul Robinson.
Marske earned a replay against their more illustrious with a 1–1 draw on Saturday.
Steve Winn gave Marske the lead early in the game, with Archie Stephens equalising midway through the second half.
NEW MARSKE Harrier Mike Harper added the British 55 age group 50-mile record to his recently acquired four world indoor bests in yesterday's Darlington 12-hour race.
But once the ICI control analyst reached his goal he retired, suffering from sciatica in both legs.
‘I hate having to pack in but I had no choice,’ said Harper, whose time of 7hr 15min 3sec was a nine-minute improvement on his personal best.
Harper, who set world indoor bests in the 55–59 age group for 30 miles, 50 kilometres, 40 miles and 50 miles at Birmingham this month, will seek treatment for his sciatica.
‘Over the last three or four years it has gradually got worse and if I can't find a cure I might have to give up distance running,’ he said.
The cold, rainy conditions took their toll on the competitors at the Longfield Road Stadium and three race leaders were forced to throw in the towel.
Pre-race favourite Mick Francis, of Forres, who was runner up in the AAA 24 hour race in October, had to retired after covering 37 5 miles in five hours, leaving Paul Bream at the front.
But the Wallsend Harrier called it a day at 50 miles with a hamstring injury, leaving Tony Lenagan, of Wigan Phoenix, and Edinburgh's Dave Wallace to battle it out.
Wallace then withdrew from the contest after running 51 7 miles in 7 7 hours.
Lenagan built a three-mile lead, but he, too, was forced to retire after notching up just over 60 miles in 8 hours 35 mins.
Andrew Radjick, of Bracknell, took up the lead, beating Homfirth's Alan Tomlinson by just over three laps.
Results: 1 A Radjick (Bracknell) 82 miles 987 yards; 2 A Tomlinson (Stainforth) 81 miles 1,075 yards; 3 A Young (Arbroath) 81 miles 512 yards; 4 T Bond (100K Asscn) 78 miles 1,028 yards; 5 J Fletcher (Stainforth) 76 miles 614 yards.
Women: 1 I Clark (Arbroath) 64 miles 74 yards.
Retirements included: T Lenagan (Wigan) 63.5 miles; D Wallace (Harmony) 51.5; P Bream (Wallsend) 50; M Harper (New Marske 50; M Francis (Forres) 37.25; K Shevels (Darlington) 36; I Gunn (Darlington) 34; A Whiteside (Swaledale) 32; A Wallace (Harmony) 31.25.
OWNERS of a site earmarked for superstore development are still waiting for a Government decision on a financial clause blocking sale of the land.
Management at Caldaire bus company held top level talks in a bid to remove a clause which has stalled negotiations on the Grange Road site in Darlington.
Sainsbury has expressed an interest in the site but a Government clause imposed during the bus privatisation programme means Caldaire can keep only 35pc of the purchase price above £1.3 million effectively making a move financially impossible.
The company has said a buyer would have to come up with at least £8.5 million if Caldaire was not to end up out of pocket.
Managing director Mike Widmer said he was still waiting for a decision from the transport department but he felt pressure to move had gone.
‘While I am quite happy to move if everything is right, there are many obstacles to be overcome,’ he said.
‘It would be impossible to consider moving with the clause in place and there are other factors to consider if it is removed.’
A spokesman for Sainsbury said yesterday they were still interested in the Grange Road site.
‘We have a requirement for a store to serve the Darlington area and Grange Road remains our preferred site,’ she said.
The transport department said the clauses were introduced to prevent asset stripping and they meant tax payers reaped some benefit from sales.
‘There is no suggestion we will waive the clause and if an exception was made in this case there might be other companies who have already sold who would see it as a special dispensation for Caldaire,’ a spokesman said.
‘The department has no authority to make Caldaire sell and that particular clause will lapse after ten years, when the company would then be able to sell to the highest bidder.’
Sponsored walking:
Darlington FC players helped boost research into multiple sclerosis with a sponsored walk.
The event, which attracted a number of other enthusiastic volunteers, raised £109.
Scouts sale: Staindrop Scouts will hold a table top sale on Saturday, April 4, in Scarth Hall from 1.30pm.
To reserve a table for £5 call .
Pub reopens:
Darlington's Black Swan pub reopens on Monday after refurbishment.
The pub has been closed for eight weeks but tenant Tracy Willcox said the renovation was a vast improvement.
The pub will display railway and theatre memorabilia and collectors items.
Jumble sale:
Members of the Roman Catholic church in Tudhoe will hold a jumble sale next Friday in the Columbia Hall, King Street from 2pm.
Spring fair:
The Salvation Army in Dundas Street, Spennymoor is to hold a Spring fair next Saturday between 9.30am and 2pm.
Staindrop sale: Staindrop Scouts will hold a table top sale on Saturday, April 4, in Scarth Hall from 1.30pm.
To reserve a table for £5 call .
Trading places:
Staff and residents at a nursing home near Middleton St George have raised more than £120 by trading places.
Mary Hodgson, 71, of Sycamore Lodge in Trees Park village took over as matron yesterday, care assistants swapped places with cleaners and a fellow resident became the Queen Mum.
Service honour: Long-serving councillors at Sedgefield District Council could become Honorary Aldermen under a new scheme accepted by the council.
Past members of who gave more than 25 years of service to the council may be considered for the title.
Fun time:
A fun weekend is planned to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the opening of Ferryhill Leisure Centre.
It starts Friday, April 24 with a party night and the weekend will include basketball coaching, aerobics and roller discos.
Woman named: A woman found wandering along the A167 last Saturday night has been identified as Margaret Ratcliffe, from Swalwell, near Newcastle.
She was suffering amnesia and taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital.
MANY night-clubbers must have wondered if, when the clocks went back from 2am to 1am on a Sunday morning, they were entitled to an extra hour of fun.
The law of course, insisting that the spirit rather than the letter must be obeyed, never allowed such a thing.
Yet at the weekend, when the clocks went forward an hour at 1am, the police in Darlington moved in and closed the clubs an hour early.
Not surprisingly, there were many disgruntled drinkers and club-owners.
As there was little or no advance warning, those people who had paid for entertainment until 2am understandably felt short-changed.
Why, we wonder, were Darlington police so officious over this?
Some other forces throughout the region, if they even thought about it, appear to have turned a blind eye.
That, given the potential for trouble when hundreds of disgruntled drinkers are thrown out on to the street at the same time, was surely the prudent tactic.
It was fortunate that there was no bother on Sunday morning but next time we might not be so lucky.
If the law is really going to be so pedantic over this, then the least the police can do is ensure everybody is aware of the rules well in advance.
Northbound
AND still there are two nations in England, if only because part of it thinks the other part is somewhere else.
It has happened before and it will happen again.
A call yesterday involved giving the chatty female at the other end one's address.
On reaching the Co.
Durham bit she said: ‘Oh, isn't that funny because you haven't got a Scottish accent, have you?’
No, it was true, but why on earth might she expect one.
‘Well, with Co.
Durham being in Scotland and all that.’
As she was speaking from Stoke the ignorance of our existence is clearly creeping ever upward.
Which is not all.
The Observer on Sunday managed to place Yarm, one in Yorkshire and now in Cleveland, in Northumberland.
Och aye, that's all for noo, Jimmy.
Decision time
IT should first be reported that the refurbished Town Crier, Darlington Council's magazine, is a slicker and worthier product than its 18 predecessors.
Compiled by journalism students it is a model of industriousness.
It seems almost churlish then to mention its cover story about what it describes as ‘internationally sought-after items.’
This tells us jauntily about smart green sweatshirts now on sale at Darlington tourist information office.
They bear the town's logo Decide on Darlington.
‘From Albuquerque to Alice Springs, as well as closer to home, these sweatshirts are encouraging people to decide on Darlington,’ reports the magazine.
Appearing on the same page as the article is the information that Town Crier is printed in Bishop Auckland.
‘Eritage BEFORE everybody writes in to complain of dropping educational standards this was from years ago.
On an outline map of England in a school examination various areas were lettered and a corresponding answer required.
The letter B was placed on a part of Yorkshire.
The question wanted to know who lived there in Roman times.
Ignoring the correct answer, the Brigantes, one pupil wrote: ‘The Brontes.’
The informant of this space wondered if any today would know or care where the Brontes lived.
PETS could become national stars with the help of a Darlington photography studio.
Owners from all over the NorthEast are taking the lead from Studion 81, in Arden Street, where free dog portraits are being entered into a lucrative competition.
Winners of the regional heats of the Fuji contest will go to the London final with the chance of scooping a £1,000 top prize.
Studio 81 manageress Lynne Brereton said:’ Last year we took over 500 portraits and this year we hope to exceed that total.’
A GROUP of charity cyclists are appealing for support as they prepare to cover the 950 miles from Lands End to John O'Groats.
The four-strong team is looking for cash sponsorship or help in kind as they aim to raise £1,000 for the NSPCC, Darlington Hospice and several other charities.
Cyclist Robin Rutherford said he and his friends plan to leave in early June and expect to complete the ride within a fortnight.
He works for a Peugeot dealership and the company has offered a back-up vehicle with the promise of petrol from other businesses.
Chris Thompson Cycles has also helped out with discount and a sale or return deal on spares.
‘We are about to really start approaching businesses in the Darlington area to ask for money or help in kind,’ said Robin.
Robin will be joined by colleague Stuart McKenzie and Paul Collieshaw of Aycliffe and John Brown from Darlington.
Anyone who can help can call Robin on Darlington .
Sandwich course
HAROLD Wilson fashion, we took beer and sandwiches yesterday with Simon Fowler, the Tory candidate in Stockton North.
It is he whose father was rebel Conservative MP Christopher Brocklebank-Fowler standing as a Lib Dem in East Anglia but we have been down that road enough.
Nor it is worth pursuing that the sandwiches at 10 Downing Street were probably very much better than those in The Centenary at Norton.
‘This pub represents the new Norton,’ he said, but the newness didn't extend to the bread.
Young Fowler, an enthusiastic and personable chap chosen from 90 applicants, insists that he is a ‘Liberal Tory’ a phrase elucidated by his agent, retired headmaster Harry Davies.
‘Stockton North people go more for the Conservatism of Macleod and Macmillan,’ he said.
‘Like Simon we aren't extreme Tories at all.’
More belligerent than most, Fowler describes defending Labour candidate Frank Cook as a semi-retired lame duck (‘just look at his voting record’) and can quote chunks from a Central Office publication called ‘Who's Left’ on Cook's left wing connections.
‘He's in it more than Tony Benn and Ken Livingstone,’ he says.
‘People here reject that brand of Socialism.
We can win.’
Home banker?
THOUGH we aren't going to mention the B-F matter any more, Simon Fowler is also a bit vague about other personal matters.
Two election leaflets describe him as ‘an adviser to British industry’ more specifically, he is a merchant banker and as a city councillor on ‘a major local authority.’
If you must know, that's Westminster in London (though he also has a house in Stockton.)
By coincidence, Redcar Tory candidate Robert Goodwill a farmer near Helmsley was defending his localness in last night's Evening Gazette.
‘Everyone I meet seems pleased that I am not a merchant banker or barrister from London,’ he said.
Lamb tale
THE aforesaid Goodwill was almost late for his morning Press conference yesterday, after being up half the night delivering a lamb.
‘In future the people of Redcar mightn't be so keen on shaking my hand,’ he said.
Maestro, please
ONE of this paper's less chivalrous columnists (a particularly poisonous character called Gadfly, inhabiting later editions only) had cause last year to launch himself at Bishop Auckland Tory candidate David Williamson.
In a letter for publication, Williamson had drawn attention to the fact that he drove a Jaguar and was for some time after known to the Gadfly column as ‘Jaguar Man.’
The candidate was much stung.
We are happy to report, therefore, that Jaguar Man appears to have changed his spots.
He is touring the constituency in a much more populist Maestro.
THE Home Secretary's Range Rover pulled up outside Darlington's Conservative Party office to a fanfare of tinny classical music.
As the Purcell crackled over the PA Kenneth Baker emerged looking remarkably composed for a man in the middle of a punishing whistle-stop tour of the North-East.
He barely had time to greet the town's Tory candidate Michael Fallon before being handed a single iris appropriately blue by a florist working in the shop beneath the party office.
‘How kind!’ enthused Ken, before planting a kiss of gratitude on the by now blushing flowergirl.
The minister's entourage and assembled media swept into the narrow office building only to grind to a halt on the stairs while he and Mr Fallon shut themselves off for a brief chat.
Two minutes later the door swung open and everyone prepared to sally forth.
‘You'll have to wait while I nip to the loo,’ said the grinning Baker, trotting the other way.
During the Press conference Blue Ken emphasised the Conservative's traditional ‘Labour is soft on crime’ argument.
He dealt swiftly with the question and answer session, then moved onto the real business of the day meeting the voters on the streets of Darlington.
‘Hello, I'm Kenneth Baker the Home Secretary,’ he boomed to the sound of grating teeth as he strode forward purposefully to press the flesh of a pensioner.
The woman had no hope of escape but she did not seek one, revelling in the moment of attention from a Government Man.
As the walkabout progressed a middle-aged woman told Mr Baker: ‘The Conservatives have done a wonderful job for this country!’
The Home Secretary at once spun round and asked the Press if they caught the remark perhaps mindful of opinion polls which show the majority of voters think otherwise.
Mr Baker, his several raincoated minders, their constantly ringing portable phones and two slowly-moving saloon cars continued towards the department store Binns.
‘I've done a lot of shopping in this campaign,’ he admitted.
In Darlington it was ties he was after, opting for a restrained paisley pattern at £7.99 to replace his classic blue and white polka dot number.
When asked if it was silk he replied ‘I think it is,’ obligingly donning it at the cash desk to the delight of watching photographers.
Change in pocket, Ken was back on the campaign trail ready for the several handshaking sessions in other key seats standing between him and supper.
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin has recalled striker Lee Ellison against Leyton Orient at Feethams tonight.
Hankin said: ‘Ellison is ready for another first-team chance.
He lost some of his confidence and sharpness after his early-season scoring spell.’
Even though Darlington look doomed for the Fourth Division, they could hit Leyton's prospects of reaching the promotion playoffs.
Darlington will be eager to follow on from their encouraging performance at Peterborough United.
Hankin added: ‘I think fans have waited long enough for an outstanding performance at home.
‘We have done fairly well recently without winning at home.
But I think fans are seeing the potential of the youngsters.’
Central defender Adam Reed, a Bishop Auckland teenager, will be in the squad tonight.
Hankin said: ‘Reed is a terrific prospect at 16.
He has come on in leaps and bounds this season.
I don't intend to play him.
But he can sample the first-team atmosphere.
‘I am planning for next season, even though I am not sure what the future holds.
I am manager until the end of the season when my position will be reviewed.
‘Football is a game of chance and I am loving every minute of it.
I can see signs of improvement throughout the club.’
HARTLEPOOL chairman Garry Gibson rates winger Paul Dalton as First Division material.
Gibson said: ‘Dalton is especially good against better quality opposition.
He was outstanding in our Cup games, because players are allowed more space against higher-division teams.
‘At a lower level, players are tackled all over the field.
‘I would not suggest Dalton is in the Liverpool or Arsenal class, but he could fit into a mid-table side.
Technically, he is our best player.’
Hartlepool had no hesitation in turning down a bid from an unnamed Scottish Premier League club last week.
The club wanted to sign Dalton before their deadline tomorrow.
Gibson added: ‘I would value Dalton at £400,000.
We don't want to sell him but we have to keep one step ahead.
We cannot afford to wait until we are in trouble.
‘Sometimes this is not popular with fans, but no-one can argue with our progress over the past two years and our present position.’
Hartlepool report no injuries for tonight's home game against Exeter.
When did we first have a general election in this country?
General elections in a broad sense are three centuries old and have been fully representative of adults since 1928.
Unlike other countries, England has always had some form of national assembly.
Although until the crown's powers were curbed in 1688 it was limited in scope and summoned when and if a monarch felt like it.
The Reform Act of 1832 laid the foundations of electoral democracy by tidying up the system — for instance, getting rid of ‘rotten boroughs’, small or almost non-existent places that could return MPs — and setting up a register of voters for the first time.
Who could vote was something else.
Property and occupational qualifications were paramount, and extended by degrees, until the Representation of the People Act 1918 introduced adult suffrage, together with votes for women over 30, and almost doubled the size of the electorate.
In 1928 women got the vote at 21 on equal terms with men.
The first election in that sense was held on May 30, 1929 (when Labour won 287 seats, Conservatives 261, Liberals 59, others 8).
The age of majority, defining an adult in law, was reduced from 21 to 18 on January 1, 1970.
What's the word for what Peter Snow does on TV at election times?
I once started calling it ‘pepsicolagy’ as a joke, and now I'm not sure of the exact word.
Was he the first to do it?
The word is psephology, from the Greek psephos, pebble (the ancient Greeks cast pebbles as votes).
Psephology is the statistical and sociological study of election trends.
It was popularised on television in the 1950s by David Butler, a 26-year-old Oxford researcher.
He invented the concept of ‘swing’, analyzing the percentage of political change in a sample of votes to predict overall numbers of seats lost and gained.
He first demonstrated ‘swing’ on February 23, 1951, when the Conservatives regained office.
The introduction of psephology encouraged the growth of opinion polls as a guide to voting trends.
Dr Butler was dropped by the BBC in 1983, but is this time on Radio 4 and listed in the April 9 TV team.
I'm confused about the reported danger of holes in ‘the ozone layer’ letting harmful solar rays through.
When I was young, all we heard about ozone was that it was bracing sea air.
What has changed?
Ozone is a colourless gas with a chlorine-like odour, an oxidising agent used in bleaching, sterilising water and purifying air, etc.
It is formed by an electrical discharge in oxygen, and thus by the action of lightning on oxygen in the upper atmosphere.
There is almost none below 8,000ft.
Why it was ever identified as seaside air is a mystery.
Possibly someone assumed it was a concentrated form of oxygen, and therefore invigorating.
It is indeed a special form of oxygen, an allotrope, but with very different chemical properties.
It can be used as a germicide and, if we could smell it, our eyes and nose would stream, as if it were chlorine.
Does anyone know the earliest date that a cuckoo has been heard?
I believe it is possible in March.
Possible, but rare.
The earliest authenticated cuckoo was for years a literal early bird seen as well as heard on March 27, 1936, in Kent, but one was reportedly heard and seen on March 2, 1972, in Berkshire.
Some traditional dates for the cuckoo's arrival, known as Cuckoo Day, are Sussex April 14, Hampshire April 15, Worcestershire April 20, and Bedfordshire April 21.
There have been some amusing mis-hearings.
In 1913 a Mr R. Lydekker, Fellow of the Royal Society, claimed in The Times that he and his gardener had heard a cuckoo on February 6 in Hertfordshire: ‘There is not the slightest doubt.’
Six days later he wrote: ‘In common with many other persons, I have been completely deceived.
The note was uttered by a bricklayer's labourer at work on a house in the neighbourhood.’
And in 1987 a lady wrote to the Cambridge Evening News that she had heard what sounded like a cuckoo on February 12.
Ornithologists were puzzled — or sceptical — not only because of the date but because the ‘hearing’ was in a street close to the city centre.
A music lecturer at the College of Arts and Technology cleared up the mystery.
His student orchestra had been rehearsing Haydn's Toy Symphony, with its imitation of the cuckoo's call.
We have had the house painted, and I caught my dress on a door.
It had to be dry-cleaned, but could I have done anything myself?
If a paint stain is fresh and the fabric washable, it can be softened with salad oil, white spirit or turpentine, afterwards washing the garment in warm soapy water.
A non-washable fabric needs white spirit or turpentine and then a dry-cleaning fluid.
Cold water washes off fresh emulsion paint, and acetone removes cellulose.
Send your queries to Burning Questions, Echoes, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington.
DL1 1NF.
I was reading an article (Echoes, March 3) by David Isaacs about an old soldier's experience in Singapore and it reminded me of a conversation with a friend in Carlisle.
His name is Bob Skinner and he was a pilot officer in the last war and then became a teacher at the technical college in Carlisle.
He told me that his squadron landed at Singapore and took the surrender of the Japanese pending the arrival of the Burma army or the Navy.
He said they had to allow the Japanese to retain their arms because they had not enough men to collect them.
He also said that the storm drains were full of dead bodies.
What an experience.
—
May I pay tribute to Mr Corrie for his letter (Echoes March 3).
I too remember when Darlington was a county borough and we had a lovely town when we were responsible for our own efficiency and everything in the garden was lovely.
A lovely letter, Mr Corrie.
I also admire Bethany Megan Robinson for efforts to try and improve the Skerne Park Estate.
Make no mistake, it's only a handful of problem people who are causing the trouble on the estate and it is totally wrong that good people should have to suffer for them.
I wish BMR the best of luck and others who are doing their best to get rid of these people.
—
Picture this
TEESSIDE TEC's first set of youth training awards brought a frisson of controversy to the plush surrounds of Marton Country Club last week.
After the presentation of the well-deserved awards by the Sunday Times' editor Andrew Neil, TEC director Les Bell rose to say a few words.
He told the 400-strong audience that ‘a highly-trained workforce equals high productivity equals high profitability’.
Andrew Neil nodded sagely.
However, he looked rather bemused when Mr Bell started ad-libbing that if the Sunday Times wanted to pen a profile of the self-styled King of the Corner Shop then ‘for God's sake get a better picture of me than The Northern Echo is using.’
And would the paper, edited by the man who had the crotches and armpits cut out of his suits by Pamela Bordes, be featuring Mr Bell at all?
‘Er, I don't think so,’ improvised Mr Neil.
Ballroom blitz
AS befitted an industrial training awards evening the ballroom of the Marton Country Club was decked out with glittery disco balls and flashing coloured lights.
Dry ice was also pumped into the room as a grand finale.
According to a TEC person, with his tongue only slightly in his cheek, the razzamatazz had been laid on in attempt to put Andrew Neil at his ease, given his recorded fondness for visiting Tramp, the beautiful person's London nightclub.
Jobs swop
DICK Newby, the former publicity man for Newcastle's East Quayside developer Rosehaugh, has left the troubled property company.
His task had been bad enough trying to persuade the region that a company with £310m of debt had any credibility at all.
But his new job as campaign adviser to Paddy Ashdown may only be marginally easier.
Cash in hand
IT was widely assumed that Sir Lawrie Barratt was working for nothing when he re-took the reins of his housebuilding empire last summer.
He told shareholders he would forego his salary until the Barratt group was back in the black.
Last week, Barratt returned to profit-making, and consequentially Sir Lawrie was back on their payroll.
According to the Financial Times, Sir Lawrie is not only on a salary of £220,000 a year, but is to have his pay backdated seven months.
If this is an example of working for nothing, then I am sure there will be a flood of volunteers wanting to mirror Sir Lawrie's sacrifice.
Regal name
CONGRATULATIONS to Darlington-based Prodescon on opening its plush new headquarters on Duke Street.
The neo-Georgian building pays testament to the company's undoubted skills as a design and build outfit.
Less clear, however, is the company's name for the new HQ.
In keeping with the street's regal nomenclature, the board of Prodescon have opted to name the HQ Regent House.
However, it's a name ripe for confusion.
A little further down the street is a second, somewhat older Regent House.
However, this is less famous for design and build for it is the headquarters for the Darlington's social services department.
True blue
FEW company directors are keeping quiet about their political affiliations in the run up to the General Election.
As the prospects of a Tory victory recedes, the likes of Sunderland car magnate Sir Tom Cowie and Tyneside bus burgher Martin Ballinger have been banging on about the Tory cause.
Likewise computer king David Goldman and Newcastle's ‘Fishfinger’ Ken Bell have picked up Labour's red rose and backed Mr Kinnock.
Prodescon, meanwhile, have taken the Tory cause to heart.
Welcoming Darlington Tory candidate Michael Fallon to Prodescon's new offices, director Malcolm Palmer was keen to point out the blue carpeting and wallpaper gracing the new building as proof positive of the his own, if not the company's, political leanings.
Nomination for Gold Medal
PETER Rice, the Irish structural engineer who has collaborated on some of the most notable buildings of modern times, has been chosen as the RIBA's nomination for the 1992 Royal Gold Medal for Architecture.
It is extremely rare for the medal to be presented to a non-architect, although past winners include the architectural writer Nikolaus Pevsner and Peter Rice's former employer the engineer Ove Arup.
Mr Rice has worked on buildings as diverse as the Sydney Opera House, the Pompidou Centre in Paris, where he designed the structure, and the de Menil Museum in Houston.
The citation from the RIBA said Mr Rice is ‘one of the foremost structural engineers of his time.
His work has greatly advanced architecture, reaffirming the deep creative interconnection between humanism and science, art and technology.’
Motor deal: Sanderson Townend & Gilbert has let a 980 sq ft shop at 146 High Street Redcar to Motor World.
The Prudential Assurance-owned unit has attracted a rent of £8,000 a year for a 15-year lease and has subsequently been put up for sale.
Mitchell Roberts acted for Motor World.
GPA on site: Newton Aycliffe-based design and build company GPA has started on site with its new 10,000 sq ft office scheme at Heighington Lane Business Park.
The company aims to be operational in its new building by June.
GPA's Heighington scheme will be its headquarters, complemented by its existing offices in Glasgow and Burton-upon-Trent.
The company has recently carried out the £2m contract to provide brickwork and blockwork for Conder on its Teesside Retail Park scheme.
Listed site: Southlands Management, a subsidiary of Ian Waller Developments, the Eaglescliffe-based property investment company, has bought a 5,710 sq ft grade 2 listed building at 3 to 5 Crown Street (above), Darlington, for around £500,000.
A rent roll of £48,500 a year is produced from tenants that include Murrays, Leisure Promotions and solicitor Ward Hadaway.
The purchase from Benchlane Developments shows an initial yield of just over 10pc with rent reviews within a year.
Sanderson Townsend & Gilbert and Healey & Baker acted for the vendor, while Lowther Scott Harden acted for Southlands.
Berlin start: Norwich Union and Taylor Woodrow have started construction of their joint 20,000 sq ft office scheme at Uhlandstaresse 14 in the centre of Berlin.
Just off the Kurfurstendam, it is the first British project to come out of the ground in the city.
According to Stuart Reid of Weatherall Green & Smith, the first property agent to open up in Berlin, the scheme will appeal to the banking, insurance and professional sectors.
UNDER her wide-brimmed hat, crowning a buttoned-up two-piece suit she might be the world's smartest potato picker.
Certainly she was the most elegant of ‘Mr Dawson's potato scratters, November 1921.’
Perhaps this improbably-garbed woman knew that Louisa Kruckenberg, the vicar's daughter, was coming to photograph her and her companion ‘scratters’, in a field at Lower Dunsforth, in the Vale of York.
For most of the folk immortalised by Louisa's busy camera seem to have wanted posterity to find them in their Sunday best.
So white blouses remain spotless, as pigs are fed in cluttered stackyards.
Stiff suits hold the men erect in family groups.
And two women pictured chatting at a cottage door ‘Miss Jewitt and Miss Carter, Mickley 1921,’ as Louisa's typically matter-of-fact caption notes sport fanciful bonnets that can't have been part of their everyday dress.
At least not if their gnarled hands, betokening lifetimes of hard toil, are a guide.
But clean blouses and fussy headgear aside, the hundreds of pictures taken by young Louisa open an authentic window on the past.
Chiefly everyday scenes of village and farm life early this century they capture the final phase of the Real Rural England before its social and physical fabric was torn apart by the motor car.
One picture shows children sharing a village street with scratching hens and a horse-drawn delivery cart.
Another has a cow loitering up a dusty lane.
That track might have been the boundary of the world for some villagers, most of whom rarely ventured beyond their nearest market town.
Like Frank Sutcliffe at Whitby, Louisa lovingly recorded the vanishing way of life the ploughing horses, craftsmen in their dusty workshops, villagers trailing home behind the laden hay wagon, rakes on their shoulders.
But the existence of her precious archive was unsuspected until a suitcase containing about 450 glass negatives was discovered during a house-clearance at Ripon in 1988.
The suitcase bore a North Eastern Railway label, with the printed instruction: ‘From Darlington RIPON.’
But the only clue to the identity of the photographer was the word ‘self’, written on a box of negatives.
‘Self’ turned out to be a dark-complexioned, somewhat solemn- looking young woman, with large eyes and swept-back hair parted in the middle.
Local publicity soon established her to be Louisa Kruckenberg, whose father, the Rev Frederick Thomas Kruckenberg, who became vicar of Lower Dunsforth, between Boroughbridge and York, in 1911.
‘A few people remembered her riding around the district on a sit-up-and-beg bike, with her photographic equipment in the basket,’ says Sue Furness, of Yorkshire Image, which cares for the ‘Kruckenberg Collection.’.
‘She was regarded as a bit of an oddity, but likeable,’ adds Sue.
During the last two years Yorkshire Image, a Ripon-based project dedicated to preserving and presenting historic film and photographs of traditional Yorkshire, has been mounting exhibitions of Louisa's work in villages near Boroughbridge, where she took most of her pictures.
But this summer a series of exhibitions is planned in villages around Richmond, where Louisa was also active.
‘She took more than 60 pictures in places like Whaston, Dalton, Kirby Hill and Ravensworth,’ says Sue.
‘Before we can present the exhibitions, we need to raise cash to produce and mount suitable prints from the glass negatives.
We hope we can do this through Yorkshire Arts and the Rural Development Commission, but local sponsorship would be very welcome.’
The Darlington railway label almost certainly reflects Louisa's ‘Richmond’ connection.
This stemmed from her brother, who became vicar of Kirby Hill.
Sue hopes the display of Louisa's pictures there and in neighbouring villages will stir more memories of the eager young photographer, about whom very little is known.
‘The biggest mystery is why she gave up photography, at which she showed such flair, in 1923,’ says Sue.
Remaining a spinster, Louisa settled in Ripon, where she taught in the Sunday school and held embroidery classes.
But she apparently never mentioned her early interest in photography.
After her death in 1957, an album of Louisa's photographs, bought by Ripon bookseller at an auction of her possessions, was given to Harrogate Library.
But Louisa remained forgotten until the discovery of that suitcase, perhaps sold at the original auction as part of a job lot.
Now, however, Louisa is winning the recognition her well composed and deeply appealing pictures deserve.
The latest accolade is a display of her work at York's Impressions Gallery.
On view until April 25, alongside contemporary photographs of rural North Yorkshire, it includes all but one of the examples shown here.
Perhaps the gallery should add the exception Louisa's vital self portrait.
For it does more than simply put a face to the pictures.
The wide eyes seem to ask questions.
And about the closed lips is the merest hint of a Mona Lisa smile.
Glimpses of the enigma to come?
Mountain rescuers
MY WIFE and I were walking in the Lake District when I slipped and fell.
The result was a severely sprained left ankle which left me unable to walk.
My wife went down the fellside to a cottage and the lady kindly called 999 for help.
It was not too long before the Mountain Rescue team arrived, accompanied by police and a young lady doctor.
I was carried down to the ambulance and taken to a Kendal hospital.
All of these people, apart from the NHS ambulance, were volunteers and giving their time and energies willingly and without charge.
No praise is high enough for their efforts and the kindness shown to myself and my wife.
I shall be sending them a donation in appreciation of this service and if any other walkers in the Lakes read this, perhaps they too might like to help.
The address is: Ambleside/ Langdale Mountain Rescue Team, Ambleside, Cumbria.
One only appreciates these marvellous people when need arises, but they go out in all weathers, all year round to help others.
They deserve all the help they can get.
Hugh Pender, 30 Worsley Park, Darlington.
PYLON STAND:
I am writing to thank you for the coverage you gave my launch as the No More Pylons candidate (Echo March 26).
I was, however, astonished by the Conservative candidate's comments about my wasting a £500 deposit on the election.
Is he worried about his seat or is he living in fairy land?
The £500 deposit would hardly pay for the barristers' lunches at the public inquiry, whereas my standing for Parliament will concentrate the other candidates' minds solidly on the issue and emphasise the public's outrage at National Grid plc's proposals.
What on earth can Mr Hague do to stop the pylons?
After all, he voted with his Government for the privatisation Bill which caused the sorry state of affairs in the first place.
A U-turn on this issue would be embarrassing for the Conservatives and should not be expected.
The only foolproof way to register your opposition to the pylons is to vote for Mike Barr Independent No More Pylons.
The price of my vote in a hung Parliament sir?
Even Mr Hague can probably guess.
A.M. Barr, Independent No More Pylons, Richmond Constituency.
MPS' SHAME:
I strongly disagree with the letter from Stephen Loveridge (HAS March 23) who claimed that MPs voting for the recent Bill to outlaw fox hunting were not voting against cruelty.
Of course they were.
Fox hunting is an evil and cruel pastime.
The RSPCA agrees and mounted a campaign against this abomination.
It is only a shame that Tory and some Liberal MPs voted against the Bill.
People should know exactly how to vote for animal rights in the election and that is for one of the parties that unanimously supported this Bill.
This would certainly exclude both Conservative and Liberal Democrats.
The plethora of letters from the pro-hunt lobby only serves to reinforce the view that hunting is a relic of the past and that its supporters are ‘running scared’.
Their days of cruelty are numbered and the fewer days before fox hunting is banned the better.
Gareth Edwards, Green Party candidate for Newcastle East, 4 Parkside Avenue, Benton, Newcastle.
TIGHTER hygiene controls aimed at stopping the worrying growth in food poisoning cases come into effect today.
Figures released by the Department of Health this week show that the number of reported cases rose from around 40,000 in 1988 to nearly 56,000 in 1990.
To combat this trend, a rolling programme of new regulations is being introduced over a three-year period.
The latest phase obliges vehicles delivering a wide range of food products to keep them at a temperature of no more than 8C.
And from the beginning of May, all businesses selling food will for the first time be required to register with their local council.
This is to enable environmental health officers to organise a comprehensive monitoring programme.
Mac's Caterers of Blaydon, a sandwich firm that supplies outlets between Ashington and Darlington, has spent almost £50,000 fitting out an industrial unit with a refrigerated production line.
Managing director Gary McEwan said: ‘These regulations should eliminate the cowboys.
You still occasionally see people delivering a tray of sandwiches from a car boot.’
Last month 16 Mac employees gained a food hygiene certificate following a course organised by environmental health officers from Gateshead Council.
A WOMAN living in Belgium is undertaking a comprehensive study of a tiny North Yorkshire village.
She has published an appeal in the village newsletter for information and anecdotes which will help her complete the survey of Melsonby, near Richmond.
Vanessa Thompson, who lives in Brussels, decided to make the study when her husband's job forced her to leave the pretty village where she lived for eight years.
Preliminary research shows that Melsonby was originally a Viking settlement and merits a mention in the eleventh century Domesday Book.
‘The main aim of this exercise is to preserve a precious part of our heritage which is in danger of being lost,’ she said.
She has appealed to local people to give as many details as possible about the legends, history and myths which have grown up around the village over the years.
Mrs Thompson said: ‘This is something I have intended to do for some time but somehow never got round to.
Perhaps I will have time to do it now I, very sadly, no longer live in the village.
Her friend Jan Archer, who runs the village Post Office, said yesterday: ‘She was very sorry to leave the village and I think she would like to come back here.’
Mrs Thompson has supplied a map with every copy of the Melsonby News which she hopes readers will use to mark names for local places.
Mrs Thompson said: ‘A lot of the history of the village is bound up in the names of local places.’
Already she has been able to list such exotic places as Mucky Lonnin, Swinsy and Never ‘Eed Em Blacksmith.
Anyone with information to help the research should contact Gilbert Hird on Darlington .
WHEN Queen Victoria visited Darlington's temporary railway station at Bank Top it was reported that she was not amused.
The monarch twice interrupted journeys to give a royal address and complained it seemed unworthy of the birthplace of railways.
The temporary station put up in 1841 was replaced more than 40 years later with a building designed by William Bell.
Another hundred years on, the station has undergone a multimillion-pound facelift and British Rail is confident its ambitious refurbishment and future development plans will meet the approval of even the most regal travellers.
Work began restoring the roof of the Grade Two listed building, extended to other parts of the station and eventually cost around £10m.
Money for the project aiming to restore former elegance came from BR, the European Community, Darlington Borough Council and Durham County Council.
BR spokesman Barry Speke said renovation planners had to consider how best to combine the character of the building with modern facilities demanded by passengers in the 1990s.
‘The roof restoration began in 1982 and we then went on to the rest of the building repainting emblems throughout the length of the station,’ he said.
‘The portico was cleaned and repainted and there was substantial refurbishment of the clock tower.
‘It was getting very dirty, some of the stonework needed repair and the paintwork was redone.
‘The clock itself also had attention and work on what proved to be a fairly major project finished in 1991.’
The station's platforms, travel centre and retail areas also came under scrutiny with terazzo tiling introduced and refurbishment of a combined waiting and buffet area.
The Railside Revival Fund also put up cash for replacement gates at the North end of the station and working replicas of old lamps at the subway entrances.
‘Outside on the far side of the station we built a new car park in 1989 with 200 spaces,’ said Mr Speke.
MUCH of the improvement scheme has concentrated on cosmetic rather than structural problems.
It was done because of Darlington's prominence on the east coast rail route.
‘Work was done to improve the station's appearance both inside and out for the benefit of customers,’ said Mr Speke.
‘It's done as part of a rolling programme we decided to spend at each of the stations on the electrification route and Darlington got a significant amount.
‘The station is a grade two listed building and it has always been our policy to keep buildings of this age and sort in character while providing modern facilities people want.’
Further improvements at Bank Top are already on the drawing board and BR plans to improve the northern approach to the station and move engineering sheds to tidy up the area.
A major refurbishment of the travel centre is also on the cards within the next three years.
Mr Speke said: ‘We are reviewing the future so that when market factors change and when money becomes available to improve the environment we can put plans forward.
‘A station like Darlington, which is quite a substantial building with a big overall roof, is a very difficult one to continue to maintain.
‘It needs money spending on it all the time to keep it going and in a fair state of maintenance.
‘We have a five-year programme and are looking to extend that to ten years very soon.’
The restoration was singled out for praise in 1986 when it was highly commended by the Association of Railway Preservation Societies.
YESTERDAY'S Northern Echo carried an article on Labour and Conservative housing policies.
We wish to point out Darlington's Tory candidate Michael Fallon said £22.4m had been ploughed into housing association grants for the town since 1979 and not housing authority grants as was stated.
STEPHENSON sent steam locomotives all around the world, but sadly out in India today there are none in service.
A few, however, have been retained for posterity.
The most elegant of these Darlington-crafted locos can be viewed at the Delhi Railway Museum.
Eastern Bengal's broad engine works at Saidpur feature two superb examples of inter-war Stephenson 0–6–0 tender heavy goods locos, slightly modified in West Bengal in 1936 I was reliably assured by the works' superintendent that both of the black-painted engines were recently in steam.
The scattered relics of some 34 steam locomotives, destroyed by rampaging mobs in 1971, lie forlorn throughout Bangladesh.
Most noteworthy are seven at the Dacca Loco Works, four in Asukari, three at Mymensingh and six at Saidpur.
Included in this motley assortment of carnage are five metre gauge Stephensons, of which two are pre-1910.
By far the most interesting of all steam locomotives for rail-buffs is the 1909 4–6–0 Stephenson engine fully restored by expatriates at Gazipur Jamboree Park.
Preserved in its original Assam Bengal Railway livery, this locomotive clocked some 1,186,000 miles over the Eastern Region metre gauge track, which is claimed as the record for any locomotive in Bengal another great Darlington achievement.
ROBERT Stephenson and Hawthorns Limited were not strictly a Darlington firm, but for 64 years ‘Stivvies’ provided employment for thousands of men in the town.
For the first 77 years of its life, the company was based in Newcastle and established with great help from possibly the most famous Darlingtonian, Edward Pease.
But even Pease isn't as famous as George Stephenson, the man responsible for such engines as the Rocket and the Locomotive.
It was George's son, Robert, who founded the firm and assisted his father in building those first locos and in getting the Stockton and Darlington Railway running.
One of the major incentives to the founding of the firm in 1823 was the need to provide for the S&DR which started in 1825.
The opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1829 provided further impetus.
As the British railway network grew, so did Stephenson's, and as the century neared its end, so the company George died in 1848; Robert in 1859 came to the conclusion that the Newcastle Works were becoming too small.
Fifty-four acres of land were acquired down the line in Darlington in 1899.
A part from its obvious centre-point in railway history, Darlington was ideally placed on the rail network with connections running to all points of the compass from Bank Top.
And with the ports of the Tees estuary, the town had foreign accessibility as well.
Work began in early 1900 on the Springfield site towards the Harrowgate Hill end of town.
The mainline tracks bordered the entire length of Springfield, and numerous sidings ran into the works.
Stephenson's was built to employ 2,000 men who would turn out 72 locos a year.
Land nearby had been bought up for 300 workers' houses.
The first engine rolled out of the Springfield sheds on November 4 1902, and it would have been one of the last to use the level crossing at Thompson Street because very soon the council seem to have ordered Stivvies to replace it with a bridge.
The opening of the Springfield Works not only marked a change of base but also a change of direction for the company.
In the last century, Stivvies had been able to compete for contracts with the numerous small British railways, but now they were beginning to amalgamate.
Many of these larger, amalgamated companies had their own shops (like North Road in Darlington), so Stephenson's had, more than ever, to cast their eyes overseas.
This did not prove a problem because since 1828 Stephenson's had been building for abroad.
That first contract had been for America, and then came Russia, France, Italy, Germany, South America, the list is endless.
Springfield exported large numbers to South America, India, Ceylon and South Africa.
The first three decades of Springfield's life was probably its most successful.
Then came the problems of recessions, another war and the changing ideas of politicians no longer committed to nationwide public transport.
A merger with R&W Harthorn, Leslie and Company of Newcastle also railway engineers was announced in 1937.
In 1948 the Vulcan Foundry of Lancashire gained a controlling interest (strangely enough, Vulcan was an off-shoot of a firm founded by George Stephenson in the 1820s) and in 1962 the name changed to English Electric.
On June 23 1963 The Northern announced that the works were to close.
The last diesel loco D6898 for the fact fans rumbled out on April 28 1964.
Lard had to be cut from 28lb blocks; every portion of sugar, flour and dried fruit was weighed out from big sacks; bacon was cut from the joints that hung from the ceiling.
It was a different world when John King took over the village shop early in the 1950s.
The shop and post office at Middleton Tyas, near Richmond, had already been in the King family for well over 80 years then.
It had been built for Mr King's grandfather in the days when he was known as Collector of Mails.
Throughout the three generations, the shop had sold anything and everything.
But it has probably changed more in the last 40 years than at any other time.
‘When I came back from the war, we still had rationing for a few years.
‘Two rashers of bacon a week was all you could have and a small amount of sugar,’ said Mr King, who with his wife, Agnes, ran the shop for the next 35 years.
In those days there were two other shops in the village ‘and a couple of house shops — people just selling sweets or things from their kitchen.’
There were a lot more travelling shops too.
Lewis and Cooper from Northallerton would deliver regularly.
And a man from the Co-op in Croft would cycle over each week to take orders, the goods coming later by van.
The really posh people would sometimes by-pass all the local shops when they wanted something extra special for a big occasion.
‘They'd ring the big stores in London, give them an order in the morning and it would be on the train in the afternoon, and here by evening.
It seems amazing now, but that was quite a regular thing with the big houses.’
Meanwhile, back in the village shop, all that weighing out meant serving customers took time.
‘Many sent a weekly order in, of course.
But people usually just waited.
Everyone had more time in those days.
‘Most people bought most of what they needed in the village.
And most of the women were at home.
Not so many went out to work as they do now.’
The Kings always specialised in bacon and cheese ‘not a lot of varieties the way you have now, but what we had was good, the best’.
They didn't sell many cakes.
Those were the days when to present a visitor with ‘shop cake’ was the sign of a right feckless housewife.
But there were plenty of biscuits, sold from the rows of big square tins, with broken ones a bargain.
‘Everyone just dipping their hand in.
No hygiene regulations like now when everything's wrapped and wrapped again.’
He was one of the first to stock frozen food in the Fifties.
Not that villagers were impressed by this innovation.
They were very suspicious of frozen vegetables especially.
‘Being in the country we were used to good fresh stuff.
But it eventually got accepted.’
Other shops in the village closed as more women went out to work, often to Darlington or Richmond, where they'd do the bulk of their shopping.
‘They didn't have the time any more and we started stocking things like cook-in sauces.
They wanted more adventurous meals, but didn't want to have to cook them.’
Life was getting harder for village shops: ‘All the little firms we dealt with started to disappear, getting swallowed up by the big boys.
The companies we dealt with didn't want to be bothered with small orders from small shops any more.
It was a different world.’
Having seen and made many changes in their time, the Kings retired five years ago — though only as far as next door, and the sign above the shop still says King, maintaining the links back to 1870 and before.
Jim and Nan Hall took over the shop.
They introduced a modified self service system and an off-licence section, which does very well, especially for wine.
‘Times change and you have to keep up with them,’ says John King.
You can hire a video from the village shop to watch with your gourmet meal and bottle of wine.
And if you spill your supper in your lap, well, the shop's a dry cleaner's agent too.
They still know most of their customers by name.
And in an increasingly unsafe world, it's still the sort of place where you can send a small.
We've come a long way since a 1953 bride-to-be wrote a despairing plea to a weekly magazine for someone to offer a more varied menu than cold ham, salad and trifle for her wedding breakfast.
Now star fruit and okra jostle root ginger and mangoes on supermarket shelves.
We can buy cardamom and coriander, fromage frais and Greek yoghurt.
Some of the most colourful new arrivals can be found in the fruit section.
To mark 40 years of Elizabeth's Britain we are giving away a truly royal prize to the first person out of the hat who identifies this tropical fruit.
The winner will receive a free copy of Chronicle Of The Royal Family (Random Century, £29.95), which brings to life 1,000 years of monarchy, from King Alfred to Elizabeth II.
Entries must reach us by April 15.
Send them to: Fruit Quiz, Echoes, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 1NF.
I couldn't go without my red plastic bucket, or rather three of them; I brought up five children without a washer — by choice.
But the most indispensable thing is my sharp knife.’
—— winner of our £10 prize
‘Why do non-stick pans become sticky so quickly?
My good old cast-iron frying pan is heavy, but at least it's non-stick.
But the outright winner has to be the microwave.
Used many times every day, it is the most time and labour-saving device ever invented for cooks.
I would give my last penny to replace it.’
—
‘A Kenwood Chef we bought about eight years ago.
I use it every day for various things.
I do lots and lots of baking and it just puts up with it.’
—, 38, clerical worker, of .
‘A food processor.
It has taken a lot of chef's skills away but it speeds everything up.
Apart from that, a good, nice, sharp set of knives that stay sharp.’
—, 24, head chef at the Cricketers Hotel,.
…
AND WHAT THEY WISHED THEY'D NEVER BOUGHT
‘Quite an expensive standard lamp.
I've never found a satisfactory place for it.
It's in the attic.’
—, 59, of  ‘I came across a very classy furrier's in Nottingham just as the shopkeeper was putting a jaunty looking ocelot hat on a stand.
I already had a coat, which in those days was my pride and joy, so I went in, tried it on and paid £55.
But by the time I saw my husband I had chickened out of confessing the price and told him I bought it in a charity shop for 50p — how gullible can husbands be?
Needless to say, I never wore the hat and it eventually went into one of my charity bags.
Dare I hope that it was sold for 50p?—
DARLINGTON motorcycle ace Ian Todhunter faces a race against time after a freak accident during a shakedown race at Mallory Park.
Ian, 27, broke his wrist when his Honda CBR 600 spat him off over the high-side during a race.
Now he faces an uphill struggle to be fit in time for the British Clubman's championship a series he had hoped to win this season.
‘I have given up hope of racing in the first round at Snetterton, later this month,’ he admitted.
‘However, if the wrist heals sufficiently I hope to be back in action for the second race or, at the worst, the third.’
Last year Ian found his championship chances hobbled after a series of freak spills during the mid-season.
Then, he put the problems down to a lack of top speed compared to other machines in the series.
But a winter of hard work, tuning and rebuilding the engine, has rounded up more speed and Ian knows he can stay with the very best.
‘Before the accident I was right up with the leaders,’ he said.
‘At least I proved to myself that I can do the business.’
NORTH-EAST haulage contractor Nigel Shield had good excuse to celebrate recently when he notched up his first victory on an international rally.
Nigel won his class on the Vauxhall Sport International Rally, the first round of the Mobil Top Gear Rally Championship.
Driving a Renault Clio 16 valve, Nigel's event almost ended in disaster when he slid into a ditch on the first forest stage, near Chester.
Luckily he was able to drive out and the Middleton in Teesdale driver was soon in contention for 1300cc honours.
Nigel and co-driver Tony Walker, an engineer from Mickleton, near Barnard Castle, won their class by a massive 10 minute margin.
The rally was won outright by flying Scot Colin McRae, who led from start to finish in his Subaru Legacy.
SPAIN'S Carlos Sainz overcame a broken gearbox to win the 4,338-km Kenya Safari rally yesterday and move level with Finnish rival Juha Kankkunen at the top of the drivers' championship.
Sainz, 30, driving a Toyota Celica, had an accumulated penalty time of two hours and 35 minutes, 52 minutes ahead of reigning world champion Kankkunen.
‘People were hugging and kissing each other as my car powered its way to the finish as they joined me in an early celebration.
This was tremendous support,’ said Sainz.
Argentina's Jorge Recalde, who had been Sainz's main challenger through the six-day rally fell to third place, 59 minutes behind the leader after both the rear and front drive shafts of his Lancia HF Integrale failed.
Bowls
DARLINGTON indoor bowls club beat South Tyneside in the final game of the Durham County A team league championship to retain the title for the second year.
This record-breaking year, which has seen the men's team collect the national championship silver medal and now prove themselves to be the best club team in the North augurs well for the future of the Darlington club.
While the Morrison Centre bowlers beat the Tynesiders by 111–103, their nearest rivals Gateshead lost to lowly placed Houghton.
The final placings saw Darlington three points ahead of the field with the league table reading: Darlington 160 pts+10, 55+161; Gateshead 52 (130); South Tyneside 41+16; Hartlepool 37–28; Stanley 361/252; Sunderland 341/2+20; Great Aycliffe 30–108; Houghton 22–109.
Against South Tyneside Andrew Kirtland, Eddie Taylor, Peter Welburn and skip Eric Ramsdale collected five shots at the second end and went on to dominate C Brider, W Robertshaw, G Loughlin and K Donkin to win in style by 31–12 collecting 13 shots over the last five ends.
Equally impressive at the Morrison Centre were Ken Bousfield, Ken MacMaster, John Lynch and skip Alan Moore who conceded only eight singles while collecting a string of twos and threes at the start and after a strong finish to register 23 shots in all.
Jim Weston, George McLennan, Fred Edwards and skip Ken Lamb started with a four and led 9–5 at six ends, but surprisingly scored only two more shots in the 21-end game eventually losing 11–24 to F Johnson, A Hunter, R Baker and skip Tom Martin.
The pace is certainly hotting up in the Hathaway £1,000 fours tournament in Darlington with 12 strong teams in two well balanced groups battling for a grand final place schedule for April 24.
George McLennan, Les Knight, Peter Richardson and Adrian Robins recovered from being 1011 down at ten ends to beat J Willey, J Caldwell, J Jarvis, A Jones on a winning line by 16–12.
They are so far unbeaten with two games to go ahead of the Bishop Auckland rink skipped by Derek Dowson.
Eric Ramsdale, Eddie Taylor, David Ramsdale and skip David Joyce had a purple patch from the fifth to 12 end to beat Les Nicholson, Pearl Wright, Mort Mooney and skip Arthur Dobson narrowly by 14–11 to lead their group after an earlier defeat of 11–12 against group leaders David Bowes.
Following the success of last year's inaugural event of the Great Lakes Mixed Triples tournament, the event will be held at Oak Leaf Sports Complex between May 2 and May 4.
The sponsors have increased prize money to £400.
This year's champions will take away £200, the runners-up awarded £100 and there is also £50 for each of the losing semi-finalists.
The entry fee is only £6 per team and entry is restricted to 32 teams who will then be split into eight groups of four in the round robin stages.
The closing date for entries is April 19 and application forms are available from the sports complex on .
DARLINGTON last night named West Hartlepool's record try scorer Peter Robinson as the coach who will spearhead their drive for higher standards.
Robinson, 38, who began his West career as a winger 20 years ago but has played mostly as a back row forward, will also play for Darlington next season.
But his chief duty will be as coach to a club looking to overhaul their playing structure ready for the move to top-class new facilities the season after next.
Robinson, who has scored 246 tries for West, is a former county captain who has played 60 times for Durham.
‘It's a new start for me and I feel 18 again,’ he said.
‘Darlington are one of the oldest and biggest names in the county.
They have had their problems, but they are going for a fresh start with a new ground, a new clubhouse and a new approach to playing matters.
That's what excites me.
‘During my first season at West we only won 13 games and that was against local opposition.
‘Now we are on the verge of Division One, and my new challenge is to reach the top with Darlington.
‘The first thing we have to do is analyse the playing strength and establish the club's needs.
‘At the same time the support structure for the players is fundamental and we are already discussing that at working party level.’
Darlington's chairman of rugby Brian Richardson said: ‘The timing is perfect.
The rebuilding programme has started and Peter's decision to join us comes at just the right time.
‘Our priority must be the players and a strong coaching policy is imperative.
Peter will provide us with that.’
Robinson, made redundant by the takeover of Camerons Brewery, where he had worked for 19 years, will continue to play for West for the rest of the season.
But his involvement in Darlington's planning for the future takes immediate effect.
Darlington have finally sold their McMullen Road ground after five years of trying.
They will lease the first team pitch and clubhouse back from the buyers next season and expect to move to new premises in 1993.
They are looking at four possible sites.
The seventh oldest club in the country, Darlington have been in Durham and Northumberland Division One five divisions below National Division Four since league rugby began five years ago.
Their highest finish was third two years ago, but they have slipped to their lowest placing of eighth this season, losing to all their local rivals Mowden Park, Darlington RA and Bishop Auckland.
DARLINGTON boss Ray Hankin could hand Bishop Auckland teenager Adam Reed his debut at promotion chasing Stoke tomorrow night.
Reed, 16, is the latest product of the Quakers' youth policy, and has impressed Hankin in youth and reserve games.
Hankin said of the young midfielder, who can also play in defence: ‘It is a big opportunity for the lad in front of a crowd of 13,000 or 14,000.
‘No disrespect for the other players who may be left out, but I want to give the kids a bit of experience.’
With relegation now a virtual certainty, Hankin has nothing to lose by including the likes of Reed, to prepare for next season.
Reed's involvement in Friday night's game means there are four players in the squad who have appeared in the youth team this season Mark Sunley, Sean Gregan and Tony Isaacs being the others.
Hankin will take a squad of 16 to the Potteries.
Defenders Kevan Smith and Steve O'Shaughnessy as well as Reed, are added to the 13 who were on duty on Tuesday.
SCARBOROUGH will be without leading scorer Tommy Mooney for Saturday's home match against Gillingham.
Mooney has received a onematch suspension for reaching 21 disciplinary points this season after picking up a booking at Carlisle 12 days ago.
Mooney has hit 11 goals this season and been the side's most dangerous striker.
He was valued at £500,000 by chairman Geoffrey Richmond last month after being watched by a string of top clubs including Chelsea.
Mooney's absence could give former Hartlepool striker Ricardo Gabbiadini his chance.
The trialist is with Scarborough for the rest of the campaign and is keen to impress manager Ray McHale in a bid to earn a contract.
But McHale will also consider youngster David Holmes, who has resumed training after recovering from a thigh injury.
Winger John Ashdjian (leg) and midfielder Gary Himsworth (tonsillitis) are both battling to be fit for Saturday's match.
Brain twain
THE Brain Club, whose attention to detail (oh, all right, its intelligence) was questioned here a couple of months ago, has been back in touch.
Once more, the letter arrived thanks to the Royal Mail's tolerance rather than any accuracy from the Brain Club.
Name, firm and address were wrong, albeit slightly.
But it was the contents which counted.
The club was announcing its Brain of the Year for 1991.
Having sifted through the finalists (Madonna, the Prince of Wales, Ted Turner and Liz McColgan were among them) it found it impossible to separate two.
Step forward then Chiyonofuji, great Sumo wrestler, and the late Gene Roddenberry, creator of Star Trek.
Block booking
INQUIRIES for membership to Durham County Cricket Club are eliciting a swift, grateful response.
Together with essential information required for watching cricket the club is also sending: a leaflet on postcodes, an estate agent's brochure, a building society's promotion, some information about a firm of accountants, an application form for an upmarket credit card firm, an offer to buy a gas fire, an announcement from a cigarette manufacturer, a letter from another firm of accountants, and a list of paints.
It will take most of the summer to read this lot.
Nobody could ever have thought that joining a cricket club was like opening a Sunday paper colour supplement.
You get enough bumph for a year.
FUNDRAISERS had a double surprise in store when they handed over two cheques to charity.
Staff at Marks and Spencer in Darlington presented £2,000 to the Alzheimers Society and £1,500 to Hearing Dogs for the Deaf.
The money was raised at various sponsored events and raffles and charities were chosen by the staff.
Pictured from left are Betty Lee, Helen McGuinness, Angela Heaton of St Hilda's Alzheimer centre, Barbara Jones, also from the centre and Kym Nicholson of the hearing dogs for the deaf organisation.
FUND-RAISERS have held the first official meeting at their new Harewood House base.
Members of the hospice staff and committee also met a group of general practitioners from Darlington and South Durham to discuss plans for the Day Hospice.
Harewood House is open from 9am to 5pm every weekday and visitors are always welcome.
Forthcoming fund-raising events include a sponsored walk organised by Hopetown and Whessoe Working Men's Club on April 12.
Walkers will visit every working men's club in the area, and the money raised will be presented to Darlington Hospice representative Tony Morris at the club's Grand Charity Concert a few days later.
A big summer event is the Durham Constabulary Charity ProAm Golf Tournament at the Brancepeth Castle Golf Club in June.
An information pack is available from the hospice office for any firm interested in entering a team or helping to sponsor the tournament, which hopes to raise more than £7,000.
Volunteers are needed for the flag day on May 16.
The hospice aims to beat its previous record of £1,400, and anyone with an hour or more to spare on the day should contact Deirdre Shaw or Dorothy Davison on .
St Teresa's Hospice car stickers are now on sale at 50p each and should soon be appearing all over town.
The hospice wishes to thank the Springfield Mission for inviting the hospice chairman to address its members this week and to all those who have generously sent donations in memory of Mrs Hope, Mrs Ducker, Mr Brown and Mr Reed.
An auction:
An Auction of Promises will be held at the Bowes village hall on Monday April 13 at 7.30pm doors open at 7pm.
Among the items for sale will be ten bags of logs, vegetables for Sunday dinner, and free ironing for a week.
Money raised will go toward the hall's refurbishment fund.
Gainford Table top sale:
A table top sale will be held in the village hall on Friday at 7pm to raise money for the adventure playground.
Tables cost £5 and can be reserved by contacting Darlington .
Ingleton Fun day:
Ingleton Primary School will host a feast of activities at its Easter Fair on Saturday.
The event, beginning at 2pm, includes pony riding (weather permitting), a bouncy castle and decorating chocolate eggs.
There will also be a paste egg competition and various stalls.
Melsonby Info appeal:
Vanessa Thomas, who lives in Brussels, has issued an appeal for information about the village for a project she is doing.
She wants to discover more about the history and local legends of Melsonby.
She hopes eventually to make a thorough map of the village and also publish a book.
Any information should be directed to Gilbert Hird on Darlington .
Diplomatic work:
Mark West, 26, of St James' Close has been appointed to work for the British Embassy, in Ankara, Turkey.
Mr West, who works in Catterick, will be leaving soon to take up his new post.
People in the village have wished him every success in his new position.
Youth disco:
Children in the village will be wearing their smartest outfits tomorrow night for a disco in the school.
The dancing begins at 6.30pm until 8pm for nine-year-olds and from 8.30pm to 10.30pm for children up to the age of 16.
Admission costs £1 and refreshments will be available.
Special concert:
Two young musicians from the village have performed a special concert in Darlington following high scoring in the Associated Board music grades.
Alison Pinchin played a grade two recorder piece while Christopher Loughran played grade four pieces on both piano and trombone.
Funds boost:
The Parent Teacher Association is anxious to continue boosting its funds with the recycling project which includes used stamps and phone cards, aluminium foil and aluminium cans.
The materials go to raise money for the Guide Dogs For The Blind Association, Breast Cancer Research and PTA funds.
Middleton in Teesdale Carnival Queen:
The Middleton-in-Teesdale Carnival will hold the Carnival Queen Disco at the village hall on Saturday at 7.30pm.
Admission is £1 and refreshments are available.
Domino drive:
A domino drive will be held at the village hall tomorrow.
Entry is 50p and includes refreshments.
Fashion show:
A fashion show by Ann Eddon of Winters will be staged at the village hall on April 8 at 7.30pm.
Children's wear and shoes will be on sale.
Tickets are £1.25 from Winters or Middleton School on Teesdale .
The event is in aid of the Friends of Middleton School.
Middleton St George Parish council:
The next meeting will take place on Monday April 13.
WI news:
The WI met on March 26 when the subject was vegetarian cookery.
The second round of the darts competition will be held in the hall on April 24.
Middleton Tyas Grant approved:
A grant of £100 has been approved by Richmondshire District Council to help with roof repairs to the Memorial Hall in the village.
The money was given by the council's recreation committee.
Neasham WI news:
As the April meeting would coincide with election day it has been brought forward a week to April 2 when Richard Wood of Durham Wildlife Trust will be the speaker.
Members will provide a theatrical entertainment at the group meeting on April 16.
Contributions of jars of preserves for sale at the Houghall sponsored walk should be brought to the June meeting.
Sadberge Thank you:
Malcolm and Judy Carvell would like to thank all their friends for the wonderful surprise party arranged for their return from Australia, especially Millie, Wendy, Debbie and Olga, and hope everyone enjoyed the evening as much as they did.
Race night:
A race night will be held at the village hall on Saturday, May 16 to raise money for hall association funds.
Tickets priced £2 are available from Sheila Glew on  or Mal Heath on .
Jumble sale:
A jumble sale will be held in the village hall on Tuesday at 6.30pm in aid of the church.
Parish council:
The parish council will not meet again until the end of April as the parish AGM is taking place on Saturday.
Staindrop Scout event:
The Staindrop Scouts will hold a table top sale in Scarth Hall on Saturday at 1.30pm.
Tables are £5 each.
For further information contact Pat Thompson on Teesdale .
Tea and biscuits are 50p.
Church events:
A host of events will be held at St Mary's Church on Easter Monday, starting with a decorated egg competition at 1pm.
There will be judging in three age groups.
At 2pm a five-mile sponsored walk will be held from the church, finishing at about 4.30pm with refreshments.
For those not wishing to walk there will be music by two church choirs and an exhibition of old photographs to view inside the church.
Money raised will go to church funds.
Coffee morning:
A coffee morning will be held at Scarth Hall in Staindrop at 10am tomorrow.
Stapleton and Cleasby Annual dinner:
Arrangements are being made for the annual dinner for the institute which is at the Stanwick Arms, in Aldbrough St John on April 29.
Startforth Flower arranging:
A flower arranging demonstration will be held at Barnard Castle parish hall tomorrow at 7.30pm.
The event is being staged to raise funds for Startforth Church Flower Festival.
Tickets are £2 and are available at Waistell's florists and Clarke's chemist in Barnard Castle.
BUSINESSMAN Jim Edgeworth has done well under 13 years of Tory rule, despite two bad recessions.
He runs a small electronics firm in Darlington with a turnover of just over £1m and drives a brand new top of the range BMW.
In 1979 he voted for Margaret Thatcher, backing her again at the last election after a switch to the SDP in 1983.
His business, which now employs 60 people, has prospered in the UK recession because of its reliance on export markets.
About 85pc of the company's product is sold overseas, a feat which won it the Queen's Award for Export two years ago.
Europe is the main campaign issue for Jim because of the overseas outlook of his company.
But it is not policies on Europe which will decide Jim's vote but the ability of party leaders to get the best deal for Britain from the Continent.
‘At Maastricht John Major proved that he can do the business for us in Europe,’ says Jim.
‘But people I speak to over there have very little to say about Neil Kinnock and none of them have even heard of Paddy Ashdown.’
On the UK economy Jim admits small business is taking a hammering but blames the banks, and problems in Germany and the U.S., ahead of the Tories.
Jim, married with three children, thinks the big domestic issue is not education, or the health service, but law and order.
‘The Conservatives have not performed that well on this issue in recent years,’ he says.
‘But I don't think Labour would do any better.’
So far no party has really impressed Jim but he will vote for the Tories on April 9, more to keep Labour out than the Conservatives in.
One of his big fears is that big business, especially the multinational and foreign firms, will flee the country if Labour is elected.
‘I will vote Tory, but I'm not a Tory.
Quite honestly I don't have a lot of time for any of them.
It's a choice between the lesser of three evils.’
HIGH-KICKING Frankie Vaughan presented a video camera to Boys' Clubs between appearances at Darlington Civic Theatre.
His fan club, Frank and Friends, donated the camera to a mobile unit shared by the Northumberland and Durham Associations of Boys' Clubs.
Frankie is seen with the Boys' Clubs' Nigel Voules and fans Phylis Gumburd, Jackie salmons, Mavis Bates, Hazel Kidwell and Chris Lester.
AIR travellers came down to earth with a bump yesterday when they joined in some charity aerobics.
Passengers disembarked at Teesside Airport on the outskirts of Darlington to join TV's ‘Green Goddess’ Diana Moran for a workout on the turf.
The session was in aid of The Yellow Brick Road campaign, which aims to give the North the world's best child health care.
The day's action, which included activities throughout the North, was titled Be A Brick on April Fools Day.
Ms Moran then led a step aerobics class at Billingham Forum and Newcastle's Eldon Square shopping centre.
At Dunston Activity Centre Don Estelle, of It Ain't Half Hot Mum fame, danced a disco version of Whispering Grass while in Consett and Stanley ambulance drivers took part in stretcher races.
Staff at Presto stores throughout the region wore Yellow Brick Road T-shirts and caps while a charity disco and pea and pie supper was held at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
‘We're offering people the chance to build a Road to Health for the Northern region.
The real April Fools were the people who didn't join in,’ said Colin Gregg, administrator for the Yellow Brick Road.
AIr travellers came down to earth with a bump yesterday when they joined in some charity aerobics.
The passengers disembarked at Teesside Airport on the outskirts of Darlington to join TV's Green Goddess Diana Moran for a workout.
The session was in aid of The Yellow Brick Road campaign, which aims to promote child health care in the North.
The day's action, which included activity throughout the North, was titled Be A Brick on April Fools Day.
Ms Moran then led a step aerobics class at Billingham Forum and a session in the Eldon Square shopping centre in Newcastle.
At Dunston Activity Centre Don Estelle, of It Ain't Half Hot Mum fame, danced a disco version of Whispering Grass while in Consett and Stanley ambulance drivers took part in stretcher races.
Staff at Presto stores throughout the region wore Yellow Brick Road T-shirts and caps while a charity disco and pie and peas supper was held at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The ‘hit squad’ nurses from the Royal Victoria Infirmary dressed in St Trinians costumes leapt on and off the bus.
‘The real April Fools were the people who didn't join in,’ said Colin Gregg, administrator for the Yellow Brick Road.
DOUBTLESS it doesn't always rain in Barnard Castle, that's just the way it seems.
It rained on April Fool's Day like it was intent on making wets of all of us ‘on the just and unjust alike,’ observed Derek Foster without (gentleman that he is) further categorisation.
Foster, 54, has been Bishop Auckland's comfortably seated MP since 1979.
For most of his life he has been a Salvation Army member and for seven years the opposition Chief Whip.
Yesterday his entourage of canvassers included the indomitable 72-year-old Walter Nunn, from Shildon, Arnold Makepeace, probably older still, from Cockfield, and Bishop Auckland bookmaker Billy Neilson, who wore a box on his head to prevent political leaks.
Billy, not half so vociferous at Easington dogs, is the Chief Whip's whipper-in.
‘I run on Duracell,’ he said, explaining the non-stop patter.
Though Barney is on the capacious constituency's right wing, its friendliness is both non-political and rain resistant.
Even the passing policeman was giving out liquorice sweets from a big bag in his pocket.
Ann Foster, the defending candidate's wife and House of Commons secretary, had flowers and election leaflets in her basket and two liquorice sweets in her hand.
‘I told the policeman he had a bonny face,’ she explained.
Originally from Wearside, the Fosters are doing up a house in Woodland.
‘It's a ten-year plan,’ she said, resignedly.
And when the rain threatened to overflow our collective high water mark, we adjourned for coffee and a chat about Neil Kinnock.
‘He once said that one of my weaknesses was that I wasn't vindictive enough,’ said the urbane and distinctly ungrudging Foster, hugging a radiator.
Kinnock's weakness, he riposted thoughtfully, may be that he is becoming too autocratic.
From 1983–85 he was the leader's Parliamentary Private Secretary, before becoming Chief Whip and one of Kinnock's closest confidantes.
He expects a place in a Labour cabinet: Chief Whip for a short time, perhaps, then a portfolio of his own ‘something where I could really help the North.’
In the past nine years, he says, he and Kinnock have been to hell and back together but (unless Sisyphus intrude these columns again) paradise now seems tantalisingly close.
‘Neil's tremendous strength is his sense of direction, determination and organisational flair.
‘The way he has transformed the Labour Party into a position of strength is something that couldn't have been achieved by any other leader in our history, and not by any other Party member at the moment.’
Particularly, he admires the Welshman's oratory.
‘Because I come from chapel stock, and Salvation Army stock, I fully appreciate the speaking gift.
‘I recognise in Neil an exceptional gift and a tremendous ability to move people.
After nine years association with him he can still move me to tears, and other people in the Labour Party who might be more cynical than I am.’
After the 1987 count Foster returned to Party headquarters on a breakfast time train.
Next Friday he drives to London about 3am, immediately the Bishop Auckland result is declared.
‘I was with Neil in the misery of a defeat that was far greater than we had expected.
He bore himself with great dignity, and not a little humour, but he was disappointed to the innermost core.
‘For nine years I have virtually lived with him.
I have seen the effect of the struggle on him intellectually, emotionally and physically and I have seen the affect on his family life.
‘Now I want to share with him from the earliest moments the joy, the vindication, the victory after all that we have gone through together.’
Should Labour win, it is likely that the new Prime Minister will be celebrating in something rather stronger than his Chief Whip.
‘I will be drinking apple juice,’ says Derek Foster, ‘but I can tell you that already the feeling of anticipation is utterly indescribable.’
Hair piece
MICHAEL Fallon remains much the most favoured subject for our limerick competition, as in this pithy effort from Robert Friend of Cowshill up't top of Weardale: Mr Junior Minister Fallon, Dispensed unctuousness by the gallon, It was not to win votes, This ‘soft soap’ in quotes, But for care of his hair at the salon.
Many other entries express a world weariness born of the belief that the candidates are all much the same anyway.
From Spennymoor Joan Ruddock (not, presumably, the defending Labour candidate for Lewisham, Deptford) tells another hairy story: There was a young fellow called Blair, Who's hirsute (that means he's got hair), With that stupid grin, He's sure to get in, Does anyone really care?
Winners, here and elsewhere, will be announced next Friday.
Entries to Election Diary, Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Stupendous prizes.
Lamp post
IN the improbable event of the Green party winning York, they could certainly be expected to nurse the constituency.
City spokesperson Helen Nightingale is the great, great something or other (a couple of times removed) of the lady with the lamp.
Dry wit
OLD sober sides Robert Goodwill, the Tory in Redcar, points out that the gentlemen of the Press will be able to cover his result after all (Yesterday's Diary).
Though it's in the stage area of the Coatham Bowl and Redcar counts in the bar, the bar itself will be closed.
Langbaurgh Council's catering arm, he adds, loses £25,000 a year.
‘No wonder if they close the bar when there's a room full of reporters.’
Gable end
LEFT winger Alan Meale, Coundon lad and former Aycliffe councillor, is defending Mansfield for Labour.
Since the 1987 majority over the Tory was a feeble 56, 42-year-old Meale (‘a Geordie’ according to yesterday's Guardian) has taken to giving women voters photographs of himself, signed with a kiss.
The Guardian says the man with the moustache looks like Clark Gable.
He must have changed.
Golfers gather for annual outing
GOLFERS from Barton near Darlington will have their annual outing at Easingwold Golf Club on June 29.
The event tees off with an 18-hole game, followed in the afternoon by an 18-hole medal competition for the Campbell Dawson Trophy.
Golfers from outside the parish will be able to join in, but will not be eligible for the trophy.
The day will end with dinner at the George Hotel, Easingwold.
Application forms and details available by telephoning Darlington .
Town crest:
Richmond Town Council is to send a town crest shield to the council in the city of Marong, Australia, after its mayor extended hospitality to Coun John Blenkiron, mayor elect of Richmond, during his visit to the area.
Pupils putting charity in picture
DARLINGTON pupils are working hard in a bid to put a charity in the picture.
The youngsters from secondary schools are working on posters for National MIND week, which runs from May 10 to 17.
The slogan for MIND, which caters for the mentally ill, is Feelings Count Too.
Copies of the winning entry will be on display throughout the town and at Darlington Building Society.
The prize money is to be spent at the Art Shop in Bondgate and Just a Fiver in Skinnergate.
Centre open:
Killhope Lead Mining Centre in Upper Weardale opened to the public for the 1992 tourist season yesterday.
The centre, billed as Britain's highest tourist attraction, is open only to youth groups and schools during the winter.
Illegal ‘urnings:
Two stone urns worth £500 have been stolen from a house in Coniscliffe Road, Darlington.
MICHAEL HEMSLEY was nearing the end of his nine-year navy contract when the Task Force was put on red alert.
‘The initial reaction was ‘where's the Falklands?’.
Nobody had ever heard of them.’
He sailed with HMS Antelope, a Type 21 frigate, which escorted supply ships Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram to Ascension Island.
The trip took three weeks and by the time she arrived, South Georgia had been recaptured.
Antelope made her way down to the Falklands to guard HMS Invincible, the troop carrier.
‘The captain said we were going into the Falkland Sound.
We were only going to be in 24 hours so we wouldn't bother having a meal we'd have a slap up on the way out,’ said Michael.
The frigate slipped into the Sound under cover of darkness on the morning of May 23, acting as a decoy as the carrier landed men on the beach-head.
‘We spent the time avoiding bombs,’ he said.
‘We took three on board.
One of my mess-mates was killed by a beer barrel, of all things.
This bomb came through and whacked this barrel and it took the side of his head away and dragged him to the end of the ship.’
The third bomb lodged just feet below where Michael was working.
‘I heard a vroom and a thud and then just lay there waiting for an explosion.
I was saying to myself where's it gone, where's it gone, and praying to God, praying to God, and my thoughts went to the family for a few minutes.
‘But nothing happened.
And then I got on with my job.’
None of the three bombs exploded because the Argentinians were using World War Two propeller bombs which need to be dropped from a great height to detonate.
To keep clear of British radar and stay undetected, the bombers had to fly at low level and so never attained the necessary height.
‘They defused the first two and had three attempts at the third, but on the third attempt it blew up killing a major and his assistant lost his right arm when a hatch-door blew off.’
Helicopters buzzed overhead, shining spotlights onto the beleaguered vessel.
Attempts were made to put out the fire.
‘It was too close to the ship's munitions and therefore it was deemed necessary to abandon ship.
As we were leaving, a matter of half-a-mile away or so, there was one big boom and the sky lit up red.
‘You get attached to a ship, and I feel very sentimental about it.
The last I saw of it was the bow sticking out of the water as the ship broke its back, and it went up in a V-shape, a Victory sign if you like, but we knew there were two men on board, one of whom I knew as a mess-mate.’
Michael and the survivors from HMS Antelope reached the safety of HMS Fearless as darkness was closing in as May 23 drew to a close.
May 24 opened in similar fashion to the previous day, only this time it was Fearless dodging the bombs.
Michael was transferred to the QE2 after two days and then began the long voyage home.
‘I was informed by my supply officer on the QE2 that there was a newspaper on board with a picture of my wife and son in it.
She'd gone into labour when she was told about the Antelope, and Martin was born about a month premature.
The ship sank on May 23; he was born on May 25.’
Born in Darlington and still living there, 36-year-old Michael now works as a chemical processor at Seal Sands, and is a member of the naval reserve.
‘I heard a story from one of our Wrens that her husband was killed in an accident out there in the Falklands a couple of weeks ago.
‘I didn't have nightmares but I do think about it a lot.
I remember my mess-mate and how he was engaged to be married, and today he would be happily married with kids.’
‘LOUTISH’:
One recent Saturday afternoon I was walking along High Row and was treated to the sight of a Labour Party vehicle giving out an election message closely followed by a similar van in Conservative colours broadcasting loud music, presumably to drown out the opposition.
Then while watching an election programme on TV that evening I heard Mrs Angela Rumbold saying how badly-behaved the Labour Party was in that their loutish supporters (my words) had tried to shout down John Major.
Definitely a case of don't do as I do.
J.T.Barraclough, 4 Barnard Close, Woodham Village, Newton Aycliffe.
A RAILWAY museum dedicated to NorthEast pioneer Timothy Hackworth is in danger of running out of steam, according to a secret report.
Just 1,000 people visited the Hackworth Museum in Shildon last year.
The 14.8 acre attraction costs £38,100-a-year to run more than £38 per visitor.
But Sedgefield District Council's publicity and advertising budget for the museum has been slammed as pitifully inadequate.
A secret report obtained by The Northern Echo says the authority has earmarked just £590 for publicity and advertising in a bid to drum up more visitors.
An extra £3,500 had to be transferred from the leisure services central budget because there was not enough to produce publicity leaflets and posters.
The report, drawn up by a special council management team, says drastic measures are needed to stop the decline.
Councillors have backed a three-year development package which will give the museum a £50,000 kick-start.
They hope the fund will attract further grants and donations.
External funding will come from the EC, Northumbrian Tourist Board and the North England Museum Service.
Extra funds will allow the council to press ahead with plans to create a better attraction and secure the museum's future.
Proposals in the development plan include laying track for steam locomotives, a steam passenger service between Shildon and Darlington, rebuilding work to make the museum reflect the Victorian era, and sound effects and computer graphics to explain exhibits.
The report adds: ‘Timothy Hackworth Museum is of unique historic importance.
Options to close or maintain the status quo cannot be tolerated.’
Officials hope the number of paying visitors will increase to 6,000 by 1994.
But the report says: ‘The museum must be attractive enough to persuade customers to make the effort to visit for the first time.
For the museum to attract the same visitors more than once there must be some evidence of change.’
But independent councillor Tony Moore said: ‘We should be looking to private business to help bail out the museum.
‘This council can ill afford to spend money on such a project.’
Owen goal
AND speaking of thespians, the magnificent Bill Owen will be downing some of the first of the summer wine in a York pub tonight in support of Labour candidate Hugh Bayley.
Since the ubiquitous Robert Goodwill (Tory, Redcar) keeps asking us his Labour opponent's whereabouts, we can tell him that Marjorie Mowlam will be having one in the Punch Bowl too.
Man power
BILL Wade, the Lib Dem in Bishop Auckland, has been joined on the stump by an out and out Tory his brother Harry.
Harry stood for the Isle of Man parliament in November officially Independent, ideologically Conservative.
‘They wear blue rosettes and everything,’ says Bill, who yesterday gained his first granddaughter (Sarah Jane) after five lads.
Harry sported a yellow rosette in Co Durham but declined to have ‘Liberal Democrat’ in the centre.
He lost the Manx election.
‘I'm going to reverse the family honour,’ says his brother.
THE most coveted trophy in North-East athletics history is to be auctioned at Christie's in London a week today.
Organisers of Britain's oldest road race, the annual New Year's Day Morpeth to Newcastle event, will be surprised to discover that the original prize is up for sale at a special sporting memorabilia auction.
It was presented, to Darlington Harrier Andy Campbell, when the race was established as an open event in 1904 and given to Duncan McLeod-Wright to keep when the Scottish runner became the first man to win three times, in 1929.
McLeod-Wright went on to win another four times — he was the most prolific winner in the history of the race — and his replica trophies and medals from 1930, 1931 and 1932 are also up for auction, together with the Commowealth marathon gold medal he won in Hamilton in 1930.
The original prize, The North Mail Trophy, is expected to fetch £1,000.
Race officials decided not to award McLeod-Wright the second cup, The Journal Trophy, outright after his sixth win and it is still presented to the winner at Newcastle's Civic Centre each year.
McLeod-Wright, who competed for Maryhill Harriers, became a BBC broadcaster and Scottish AAA president before his death in 1976.
DARLINGTON face a formidable challenge against leaders Stoke City at Victoria Ground tonight.
Stoke are favourites for automatic promotion with an impressive home record of 12 wins and five draws.
Darlington midfielder Mick Tait has recovered from a knock in the home game against Leyton Orient.
Tait is named in a squad that also includes veteran Kevan Smith and teenager Adam Reed.
Manager Ray Hankin has no injury worries but has delayed a final choice.
HARTLEPOOL United are not having the best of luck with strikers.
Former Blackburn Rovers forward Lenny Johnrose has an arm in a sling.
With Paul Baker and Andy Saville out for the season, Pool hope Johnrose recovers from a sprained wrist before tomorrow's game at Leyton Orient.
Skipper John MacPhail could be back in action after a knee injury.
THE date is drawing nearer when the day care centre appeal raffle will be drawn, with the chance of winning a Vauxhall Nova car and many other exciting prizes.
The top tickets will be drawn by Darlington Mayor Rita Fishwick on April 15 so buy yours soon.
Raffle tickets will be sold at the East Row kiosk tomorrow and Monday, and from British Home Stores in Darlington on April 11.
Appeal organisers, led by Age Concern, are still looking for local people to organise fund raising events on their behalf so they can attract big donations from charitable trusts.
This week the William Webster trust donated £1,000, bringing the appeal total so far to £115,957.
Another £200,000 has to be found this year to keep the appeal on target.
Don't forget the rescheduled step aerobics session at the Dolphin Centre on May 3 between 10.30am and 12.30pm, admission free.
And an information day is being planned for anyone wanting to learn more about the day care centre appeal.
If you would like to attend the information evening contact Moira Shields at Farmway.
IT was claps, crackles and pop at the first night of a new comedy venue in Darlington.
Claps, admittedly quite reserved at first, from the audience, crackles from the sound system, and pop drank in large quantities.
First up was Bob Mills, a loudmouthed diamond geezer from Hackney.
Bob's humour was based on everything from swearing to drug-taking and bodily functions.
Even Fergie got a mention in a spurious gag about how he and the Royal got together.
There were a funny few minutes about John Major's working class credentials but like Mills the rest of the act was a bit hackneyed.
The Rubber Bishops meanwhile provided a refreshing change.
Dressed in religious vestments their dry delivery and material was new and original.
The pair have taken classic rock songs like Stairway to Heaven and given them their own distinctive treatment.
They also do a superb rendition of Dire Straits Romeo and Juliet sung by a drunken man.
Everyone will recognise themselves or somebody else in the song.
Last up was Jeff Green, winner of the Comedy Store's Best Newcomer Award in 1990.
Jeff had problems with his microphone and problems with the munchers and talkers in the restaurant upstairs.
It's a bit unnerving when people in the gallery laugh to their own jokes rather than to the ones the comedian is making.
Jeff had some funny lines on sleeping together and swimming lessons at school strange how Len Fairclough kept cropping up.
It's good to see Darlington encouraging a comedy venue and hopefully it will continue.
But please sort out your lights and bouncer first.
No-one wants to have a glare lamp in their face at closing time nor to have a doorman shouting ‘Drink up’ in the middle of an act even if it did get a laugh.
The Comedy Store continues every Wednesday at The Institute, Skinnergate, Darlington, at 8pm.
THE nicest chocolates we've tried lately are called Cerisettes, have a real cherry stone in the middle and liqueur that runs all down your chin.
They cost £2.50 a quarter, but are so rich they're a small treat you can spread out.
You can get them from The Chocolate Soldier in Wellington Court Mews in Darlington, as part of their range of proper Belgian chocolates.
They also have chocolate eggs from £7.95, also filled with Belgian chocolates.
These eggs are wrapped and trimmed like works of art, almost a shame to open them.
(But you will, you will).
Or, for the children, you can get a lovely old-fashioned papier mache egg filled with solid chocolate animals.
Prices from £2.65 and the egg will last a lot longer than the chocolate.
— WHAT'S the difference between a cleansing bar and a bar of soap?
The cleansing bar uses no animal fats or chemicals which can irritate the skin.
Made from palm and coconut oils they're gentle and usually fragrance free.
Women on the continent have been using them for years and they're gradually becoming available in this country.
Try Boots or Body Shop, or Ultima II foaming Cleanser or Christian Dior's Equite.
THE two blue birds snuggled up on a branch, the smaller one lovingly stroking her mate's neck while he chewed contentedly on a piece of coconut.
But, by rights, the smaller one shouldn't exist.
Her sub-species was formally declared extinct over 80 years ago.
She is now rarest parrot in the world, but please don't tell customs.
‘She's a right little cat, you know,’ said Yvonne Scales.
‘She snacks at anything you give her.
And she's full of fun.’
By the end of yesterday, having had half of the region's press beating a path to her cage door in deepest East Cowton (and a simultaneous announcement of her existence was being made in New York), she was feeling distinctly tired but kept her pecker up by chewing on a favourite piece of banana.
She moved into North Yorkshire a few weeks ago from Mulhous Zoo in France with everyone believing her to be one of only eight Lears Macaws in captivity anywhere.
She came to Harry Sissen's farm between Darlington and Northallerton as he is the only person in the world actively trying to breed Lears Macaws (named after Edward Lear in 1856) and save the species.
But when Harry clapped eyes on her, he knew something was not right: the colour, the beak, the size.
Fellow aviculturalists ‘don't call them twitchers, it's the ultimate insult,’ said Yvonne, Harry's daughter Robin Pickering and Peter Banks from Stanhope were called in, and after much research and consultation they came to the extraordinary conclusion that this was a Glaucous Macaw.
Imagine how surprised you'd be if a dodo popped up in your back garden.
‘It just hit us in the face,’ said Robin.
‘When you know there's a bird that matches it's description but you know it's extinct, it just doesn't sink in.
‘But once you've seen all the Lears that exist, as I have, you can tell that it's different.’
The Lears is a beautiful deep dark blue, but the Glaucous (from a Greek word meaning slate-blue) does have a different hue, perhaps sea-green, perhaps smokey-blue, or even, perhaps, slate-blue.
The Lears are unusual in that they live in colonies (two are known to exist) in North Brazil, where the natives regard them as food and not an endangered species.
The birds don't help themselves because when they are frightened they fly into the air and circle around rather than head for the trees.
This makes the whole colony a sitting duck for a man with a gun.
It is believed that the Glaucous, a geographical variation of the Lears, lived originally in Paraguay.
Indeed, the markings on this one indicate that it was initially caught by a peculiar trapping practice used in Paraguay.
The last recorded Glaucous died in France in 1910; the last recorded man to see a Glaucous died in the late Seventies.
Unbeknown to all, though, Harry's bird arrived in Lisbon in 1975, where it's Swiss owners gave it the wrong name a nom-de-plume if you like.
Which is where Harry falls foul of the customs, for on all paperwork connected with the macaw's movements over the years it is listed as Lears.
So if it turns out to be a Glaucous, he has imported something without permission.
‘We were raided on Monday by customs with the specific intention of confiscating it and sticking it in a zoo somewhere,’ he said.
‘But it is not a scientific novelty.’
Here's the rub: if genetic fingerprinting proves this to be a real Glaucous Macaw, Harry and Robin fear the bird will be removed; but without that proof they will not be able to convince sceptics.
‘We are saying she's a Glaucous but not swearing it until customs say she's safe,’ said Robin, who is trying to enlist Prince Charles in the struggle.
In the meantime, she stays in East Cowton where hopefully she will mate.
Harry admits he'd be ‘phenomenally lucky’ to find a male Glaucous, but at least she may be able to save her species.
Aged about 25 (macaws can live and breed up to 70), she hasn't mated yet, but like some gardeners are ‘green-fingered’, some aviculturalists like Harry are ‘blue-fingered’.
Whatever species she may be, to Harry she is priceless. ‘£50m,’ he said off the top of his head.
‘She's worth everything just to breed from,’ said Robin.
But she's not for sale.
And security is very tight.
But if she really is a Glaucous, it will, of course, mean there is one less Lears in the world.
WITH more than 80 pages of recipes, this is the book for your kitchen if you're interested in staying healthy.
Just answer the following questions.
1.
Which of the following should we cut down to help reduce the risk of heart disease.
a)
Dietary Fibre.
b) Saturated fat.
c) Polyunsaturated fat.
2.
Are any of the following high in saturated fat? a) Salami b) Baked beans c) Double cream d) Cottage cheese.
3.
Which two of the following foods are high in polyunsaturated fat? a) Egg yolks b) Butter c) Oily fish d) Soft margarine made with sunflower oil.
4.
Which of the following factors can increase the risk of heart disease? a) Smoking b) Lack of exercise c)
High blood pressure 5.
If you cut down on your sugar intake, you will lose some of your energy and feel lethargic.
True or False 6.
What will ensure that we are eating enough dietary fibre? a) Adding bran to our foods b) Eating plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables every day.
c) Using more cereals, peas and beans and lentils in our cooking.
7.
To reduce weight quickly it is a good idea to cut out bread, potatoes and pasta.
True or false?
We've got 50 copies to give out, so if you didn't win anything in our last quiz don't worry, you're in with a fighting chance this time.
— Send your answers on a card to Health and Fitness, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, DL1 1NF.
Stoke City 3 Darlington 0
DARLINGTON were always second best to table-topping Stoke, who put a run of poor results behind them to leave rock bottom Quakers a step nearer the seemingly inevitable drop back into Division Four.
Darlington created very little themselves and were torn apart by Stoke's new-look forward line, which included former Everton star Adrian Heath.
The Quakers had to withstand a barrage of early pressure, with both Biggins and Stein causing problems in the visitors' defence.
Stoke took the lead on eight minutes when Mark Sunley needlessly handled an Ashley Grimes free kick and top scorer Biggins coolly slotted the ball into the net.
Gary Hinchley was the first to show for Darlington, making the most of a mix-up in the home defence but blasting his early cross harmlessly into the crowd after five minutes.
Striker John Borthwick wasted his side's best opportunity of the half, latching on to a loose ball on the edge of the Stoke penalty area and making space for himself, only to fire lamely at keeper Ronnie Sinclair.
On 20 minutes Darlington found themselves two down when Heath, returning to the club, put Biggins through again and he shrugged off two challenges before beating the helpless Prudhoe from six yards.
Steve Gaughan should have made more of a dangerous free kick on the edge of the Stoke box but fired his 20-yard effort wide.
Darlington started the second half brightly, with Hinchley again causing problems in the Stoke defence.
When Tony Isaacs replaced Andy Toman, the home side looked to be losing their way until Carl Beeston put Mark Stein clear with a through ball and the danger man made no mistake.
Discharged too early
HAVING had the misfortune to break my ankle, I was discharged from hospital after a three-week stay.
I was told I should go to a convalescent home to complete my recovery.
This I did for five weeks returning to hospital to have my X-rays checked.
I had to pay over £1,000 to the Anne Charlton Lodge, Redcar, a home caring for Multiple Sclerosis sufferers, of which I am one.
My break was not completely healed and would be in plaster for a further two weeks.
My husband, just recovering from hospital treatment himself, must now care for me, entailing 24-hour supervision.
Why are hospital patients discharged so quickly and what happens to people who cannot afford the expense of convalescent care.
Mrs Joan Fitt,.
Price hike
I AM worried about Northern Electric's latest tariff charge increases.
There can be no justification whatsoever.
It is to be hoped they will be bombarded with complaints in an endeavour to have the increases revoked and for consideration to be given for a reduction of the already high charges.
J.
Craddock, The Estate Office, Oak House, Bedale.
IN reply to the letter from the carer whose son is ‘mentally retarded’(March 16th), you rightly point out that there are no easy solutions.
A carers group might help, but what about some form of respite care for both the carer and the son?
There is a Durham County project for children up to the age of 19 Banardos Durham Shared Care.
This is a scheme which matches families with ‘care parents’ who look after the children on a regular basis while the carers take a break.
There are also schemes for adults around the county and Social Services or the Health Authority should have further details.
THIS letter is from Gill Parsons, Project Worker in Darlington and Teesdale, with Banardos Durham Shared Care.
If any reader would like further details please write to Banardos, c/o Maiden Law Hospital, Lanchester, Durham, DH7 0QN.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Harrogate Model Car Club competitive racing of 1/10th scale, electric off road cars, St John Fisher RC High School, Sports Hall, Hookstone Drive, Harrogate, 12noon.
Details, tel .
MONDAY:
Volunteer Stroke Scheme Club, Harlow Over 60s Club, Harlow Avenue, Harrogate, 1.45–3.45pm.
Every Monday.
Woodlands Retired Men's Fellowship meeting, French Leave Alan Warwick, Woodlands Methodist Church, Wetherby Road, Harrogate, 2pm.
Lindon Singers practice, group of singers who give concerts for charity, 14 Beech Road, Oatlands, Harrogate.
Details, tel .
New voices welcome.
Scottish Dancing, Strathspey and Reel Club, St Lukes Hall (behind the old church in Kings Road), Harrogate, 8–10pm.
Harrogate Lions Club, Oatlands WMC, 1 Coronation Grove, Harrogate, 8pm.
Ripon Dog Training Society meeting, Hugh Ripley Hall, Skellbank, Ripon, 7pm.
WITH no obvious metamorphosis, the Diary spent part of yesterday among an organisation called Teesside Women at a ‘meet the politicians’ lunch.
These being serious issues, the meeting was very serious (which must not, of course, be taken as a synonym for tedious.)
It would be even more frivolous to mention the editor of Another Paper who made a gallant attempt on the world kebab eating record.
Joyce Quin (Labour, Gateshead East) said her party favoured a Minister for Women, Suzanne Fletcher (LibDem, Stockton North) was opposed because it marginalised the issue and Brenda Thompson, a Tory on Cleveland County Council, said the appointment would be patronising.
Suzanne Fletcher knew all about being patronised, too.
When Cleveland's Liberals held a Press conference to announce their three women candidates, all that the silly men reporters wanted to know was who'd be at home doing the washing up.
‘I really don't know how they thought we'd got this far with that sort of thing,’ she said.
Brenda Thompson talked at some length about her daughter, her friend who was poorly and her ever so humble beginnings.
‘I started with nothing and it didn't do any harm,’ she said, in the look-at-me-now manner of the comfortably off.
Suzanne Fletcher said she used to make lamp shades for £2 a time.
Joyce Quin, the Parliamentarian, kept talking of level playing fields.
‘Level playing field’ is without doubt the buzz-phrase of the 1992 election.
Women, it is perceived, kick uphill on the sociological equivalent of the Ironworks Ground at Tow Law.
Straight afterwards we headed home, from where the Diary is being written, to welcome the bairns back from school, make their tea, and while doing the washing up generally box them round the lugs.
The Lady of the House is out earning her living.
On this playing field, actions speak louder than words.
Members needed:
Darlington branch of the Friends of the Earth has launched a recruitment drive.
The group meets monthly in the arts centre and more information is available on .
Pony cash:
A street collection in Darlington raised £100.56 for the Horses and Ponies Protection Association.
Church plan:
Darlington Borough Council has been asked to allow a disused church building on Clifton Road to be turned into a shop.
Today
BRAFFERTON:
Old time and modern sequence dancing, Village Hall, 7.30–10.30pm.
CLEASBY:
Concert by the East Layton Singers, Village Hall, 7.30pm.
Tickets £2 including tea & biscuits, tel.  /.
CROFT ON TEES:
Jumble Sale, Village Hall, 2pm.
Proceeds to Village Hall funds.
DARLINGTON:
Coffee morning, in aid of Darlington Family Help Women's Refuge, Walkington House, Vane Terrace, 10am-12noon.
Admission 50p.
Jumble Sale, Walkington House, Vane Terrace, 2.30pm.
Admission 5p.
All proceeds to the playgroup.
Darlington Ramblers, Hexham circular, meet ED Walker Homes, Coniscliffe Road, 11.30am.
Details, tel.
Leader Ken Edgar .
Grand auction sale, Elm Ridge Methodist Church Hall viewing 12.30pm, auction 2pm.
Admission 20p.
Proceeds in aid of Northlands Methodist Church Raise the Roof fund.
50/50 dance, Dolphin Centre, 7.30–10.45pm.
All welcome.
HAUGHTON:
Table top sale, organised by St Andrew's playgroup, 10am.
Admission 20p.
All welcome.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Dolphin Sunday Dance Club presents old time and sequence dance, Central Hall, Dolphin Centre, Darlington, 2–4.30pm.
Admission 80p.
Old and new members welcome.
Details, tel..
I READ with dismay your report (Echo March 28) on the signing of my nomination papers.
Most of those approached seemed to recognise my name and the rosette.
Others had to ask.
A few voters have confused me with Mr Bergg, but none with our other two opponents.
I am surprised and sorry that two now feel misled.
The holocaust is an immense and vile red herring.
Mr David Irving and other historians who question the scale of crime and the methods have nothing to do with the British National Party.
And even if, I repeat their findings were valid, enough unchallengeable evidence would remain to make them immaterial.
I welcome the efforts of the AntiFascist League to expose fascism whenever and wherever it may rear its ugly head.
It will not seek my advice.
My advice, if it did, would be to bear in mind that ridicule works best better than invective.
Donald Clarke, British National Party Candidate, PO Box 61, Darlington.
I WROTE a letter to The Northern Echo in 1966 (above) about the 13 wasted years.
This letter could almost apply today.
After another 13 years of getting the country into a mess the Tories tell us of all the good things they are going to do if re-elected.
John Major says ‘don't throw away our achievements’.
Well, what are those achievements?
The doubling of VAT, introduction of dental and eye test charges, the ever increasing prescription charges.
There are record levels of unemployment in spite of their fiddled figures.
A price worth paying, says Mr Lamont.
The nation's assets have been sold off to all and sundry and who has really benefited?
There is a deteriorating health service which today is reported as becoming increasingly reliant for charity for vital equipment.
The poll tax is quite rightly played down by the Tories, but what has this debacle cost the nation?
The Tories are, as in 1966, once more devoid of ideas and can only resort to attacking and insulting the other parties.
J. J. Stephens, 45 Cardinal Gardens, Darlington.
IMMEDIATELY outside Caerphilly railway station, next to the bilingual gent's, the notice of election has been posted.
Caerphilly does it just like everybody else.
Ron Davies, defending pugnaciously for Labour, is campaigning a few hundred yards down the hilly main street, swept along by dozens of supporters.
‘The only local issue,’ he says, ‘is Get the Tories Out.’
Davies tops the nomination list alphabetically as he will top the poll numerically.
Lindsay Philpott, the Tory, is said to be at an even greater disadvantage than he would otherwise be because he lives in Cardiff.
Between Cardiff and Caerphilly, physically and metaphorically, there is a mountain.
Caerphilly is in the Valleys rugged, insular, jingoistic and rock solid Labour.
Cardiff is seven miles away.
Geoffrey Whittle, Plaid Cymru's man, lives in Caerphilly and still finished fourth out of four last time.
And then there's Stanley William Wilson, the Liberal Democrat, proposed on the Notice of Election by a couple of Jenkinses, an Evans, a Williams and a dead giveaway a pair of Clutterbucks.
Stan Wilson's only previous experience of Wales came 45 years ago ten weeks basic training (‘Private No. ’) with the Welsh Regiment in Brecon.
‘There must be a few votes for an old soldier in the British Legion clubs,’ he says optimistically.
Stan Wilson is from Redcar.
‘For the Liberal Democrats to send an elderly gentleman from the NorthEast of England shows how seriously they treat the people of South Wales,’ says Davies.
Big Stan, as he likes to call himself, is a retired physical education teacher and Langbaurgh district councillor who in the 1950s played outside left for Shildon, Redcar Albion and once or twice Darlington.
His task in Caerphilly is the political equivalent of storming the moated thirteenth century castle Britain's second biggest, after Windsor with a single mortar chisel.
And yet he remains ever cheerful, as happy as a Redcar sandboy doing an impression of King Canute.
He has even invented a punning, almost paradoxical, nickname for himself the man with the yellow rosette and the smile has become Never Say Dai Wilson.
‘Someone has to draw the short straw,’ says Big Stan, 60.
‘When Paddy Ashdown parachuted me in, I asked him what happened if I was taken prisoner.
‘He told me that in every war there had to be some casualties.
This is like playing for Shildon against Bishop Auckland and finding you were being marked by Bobby Hardisty.’
He has paid his own £500 deposit.
He has no committee, no funds, and apart from Stella, his wife hardly any workers.
While Labour's campaign is slick and glossy, the Lib Dem election literature was run off in his back bedroom in Redcar.
He brought down 200 posters as well, of which our bairns counted just two on display (Labour 138, Plaid Cymru 16, Conservative 0) during a constituency tour in the back of his Volvo.
‘Perhaps I might have to take one or two back home,’ concedes Stan.
(The only sign of Tory life is an empty corner shop where a huge poster says: ‘Kinnock for Prime Minister, what a joke.’
Beneath it there's a Sun cartoon of a chap being polled on his doorstep: ‘I think Kinnock is marvellous,’ he says, ‘it's that windbag husband of hers I can't stand.’)
Not even on the candidates' list, Coun Wilson was asked to put himself forward while having a coffee on the Welsh stand during last year's Party conference.
‘I think I'd just made quite a good speech but I thought they were joking,’ he says.
‘I'd only gone to that debate because my wife was a steward.’
His first visit to the constituency was in January, on a Boots train ticket.
Caerphilly, he suggests, is a bit like Bishop Auckland (Bishop Auckland with a few more chip shops) but the outlying villages belong, uniquely, to the Valleys.
Still undecided, he was persuaded to stand by 82-year-old Elias Evans, local historian and Lloyd George eulogist.
‘Stan's just what the doctor ordered, a man with personality and I'm a great believer in personality,’ says Mr Evans, leaning against his walking frame at Caerphilly's Abbeyfield Home.
‘He could be from Timbuctoo.
Redcar's not so very far away, now is it?’ he adds, his ‘r's’rolling like chucking out time in Bedlington.
Stan Wilson became a sergeant in the Army Educational Corps ‘it's said that the only battle they ever won was the 1945 General Election for Labour’ before spending 34 years at what he terms the chalk face.
A Labour party member until 1974, when he helped form Redcar Liberals, he polled 74 per cent of the vote (against Labour) at the last municipal election on the Lakes estate.
This one, he admits, is a shoestring campaign.
Nor has he done ‘a whole host’ of canvassing.
‘My morale won't be shattered if we don't win, I suppose we're going for second place.
If I get a decent vote I intend going to the Guinness Book of Records for the highest number of votes for the smallest expenditure.’
‘Whatever happens I shall have enjoyed it no end.
The people of the Valleys have been welcoming and courteous.
It has been an adventure and a privilege.’
The Volvo tour takes in solidly Socialist villages like Senghenydd and Abertridwr, includes a couple of detours for navigational error (‘I'm new here’ says Stan) and ends back at the station with just seconds before the train departs.
The Liberal Democrat candidate for Caerphilly yells after us as we sprint for a non-political platform.
‘It won't be as close as that on Thursday,’ he says.
Mail marathon
THE Royal Mail is gearing up for the General Election.
The biggest part of the operation, which nationally will involve 100m extra items, is sending out the poll cards, candidates' campaign literature and postal vote papers.
In Darlington and Durham, the region's 800,000 voters will receive 2m items while in Tyne and Wear the figure is 2.5m for the 1.2m electorate.
TWO footballers from Darlington are to mix business with pleasure in America.
Ian Taylor, right, and Matthew Mulroy have won athletic scholarships to study for degrees and play soccer in Pennsylvania.
Ian, 20, of Briar Walk, is to study business management, while Matthew, 22, of Stanhope Road, is to do leisure studies.
Pride returns
GONE are the days when people had a pride in keeping the fronts and backs of their houses clean.
The back lanes in the North Road area have been atrocious, people were dumping their rubbish in them.
Last summer they were like ghettoes.
What a change the council has made in the regular sweeping of these lanes.
The improvement has been tremendous, in fact I am more willing to pay the dreaded poll tax just to see this part of Darlington looking as nice.
It has long been neglected.
May I say, while on the subject of North Road, how lovely our little park is kept under the most trying circumstances.
For many years now it has given much pleasure to both young and old.
Just now with the flowers it is a profusion of colour and our cemetery leaves nothing to be desired.
The flower beds there are a picture.
It is a pleasure to walk through it.
Long may the overdue improvement continue.
All credit to the council and workers alike.
It is very much D.M. Shaw,.
Pedestrianisation
I AM totally in agreement with your leading article on pedestrianisation in Darlington (Echo March 31).
I was stationed outside Bath when they were partially pedestrianised, lived in Norwich and York when the same process took place in those cities and in each case there was uproar.
No thought for us poor traders etc, was the cry.
But try and get them to change now, in fact York seems to be finding more excuses for closing off streets all the time.
Of course, you will always find a minority of inhabitants will complain, some with good reason, but the remainder complain because that's their hobby.
I'd like to see a campaign to keep traffic out of Northgate (M and S to Prospect Place) as well.
M. Pattison,.
Diabetes
REPLYING to the letter from Brian Hunter (HAS March 30) in relation to food for diabetics in hospital, he has obviously not understood what the trouble was.
It was not about special food for diabetics, but that there was no food to give them and family members had to go out to get something because there was nothing available and these were insulin-dependant diabetics.
At a meeting with the catering management, they understood the importance of this and are taking steps to solve the problem.
Regarding the diabetic specialist nurse, yes, of course we would welcome a special unit, but that does seem a bit extravagant when they say they cannot find enough money for one nurse.
Y. Simpson, British Diabetic Association, Darlington and District Branch,.
Public spirit was a joy
AFTER reading about so much dishonesty I would like to share an incident of real public spirit and honesty.
Early on Monday morning, March 30, I had the misfortune of losing some personal property on High Row, Darlington.
After a conversation with two traffic wardens and taking their advice I went to the police station and reported my loss.
On making a very despondent journey home my wife greeted me at the door with the astounding statement that the property had been found and handed into a branch of a building society and the member of the staff had telephoned to inform my wife that it was there to collect.
Whoever was responsible for this most kind and honest act did not leave a name or address.
This being the case, I cannot thank personally in any way other than through your column, but if this person should read this letter I would be very pleased if I am contacted on Darlington .
The person concerned will obviously know the time and property concerned.
NAME AND ADDRESS WITHHELD BY AGREEMENT
Saving grace
CRITICS of the proposal for a supermarket at Blands Corner, Darlington, say it would be an eyesore.
Did they complain about the Fujitsu factory, which takes some beating when one is considering eyesores?
The saving grace for both developments is that they are creating jobs which are needed in the area.
N. Tate, 34, Harrowgate Village, Darlington.
A LITTLE piece of history was made at Darlington market at the weekend when fish trader Oswald Cloke put up his stall for the final time.
Oswald and his wife Jenny have been selling wet fish from their stall for 45 years.
The pair, both 73, decided to quit on the same day they celebrated their golden wedding.
They were inundated with good luck cards and bunches of flowers from fellow market traders and long-time customers.
Oswald's father, Abraham, traded on the Cloke and Moore stall from 1902.
Mr Cloke senior sold fish right up until the day he died.
Oswald, who lives in North Road, did not plan to become a market trader.
In 1939 he went to work in the shipyards and did not leave until 1947.
‘By then it was obvious to me that the business had become too much for my dad on his own.
I offered to join him and continued after his death.’
A wet fish van was added to the business, so customers could place their regular orders which were delivered on days when the market was not open.
Oswald has been chairman of the Darlington Brown Trout Angling Association for 38 years, and jokes: ‘On the one hand I catch a fish then put it back into the water.
On the other I sell them to make a living.’
The pair are planning a quiet retirement.
None of their three sons Roy, Robert and Clive have decided to carry on the family tradition.
SUNDERLAND's red and white army of supporters were celebrating a famous victory yesterday which put their team into the FA Cup Final.
More than 20,000 joyous Wearsiders were in jubilant mood after new Roker hero John Byrne scored the goal that saw off First Division Norwich City in a poignant semi-final at Hillsborough.
It was the first such game to be played at the Sheffield stadium since 95 Liverpool fans died there in 1989.
Before yesterday's game, both sets of supporters, who won plaudits for their rapport at the 1985 League Cup final, joined in a chorus of You'll Never Walk Alone the Liverpool supporters' anthem.
Yesterday's result put Sunderland on course for a money-spinning final tie against either Liverpool or Portsmouth who drew their semi-final at Highbury.
One Sunderland councillor, Stuart Deacon, who grew up near Roker Park, said last night the win marked another achievement in one of the most remarkable years in Wearside's history.
He said: ‘All good things come in threes.
We have been granted city status, the Polytechnic is to become a university and Sunderland are on their way to Wembley.
Where will it all end?’
Former Sunderland striker Billy Hughes, who played in the 1973 Cup winning team and is now steward at Stressholme Golf Club, Darlington, said: ‘It brought all the memories flooding back.
I had butterflies all over again and I couldn't be more delighted.’
Former Sunderland captain Charlie Hurley, who became a legend in his days at the club between 1957 and 1969, came to the telephone singing: ‘Howay the lads.
Isn't it fabulous, what a day.
I heard the Roker Roar and it all came back to me people were cheering and singing and happy.’
Police last night praised both Sunderland and Norwich fans.
Chief Supt John Nesbit of South Yorkshire police, in charge of the operation, said: ‘This April afternoon has produced winners all round the fans, British football, Hillsborough stadium and the South Yorkshire police.
‘The fans responded to our request to arrive early, sober and by suggested routes, and were prompt and courteous in complying with police requests both inside and outside the ground.
‘Both sets of supporters have brought great credit to their clubs and to the reputation of British football by their exemplary behaviour.’
There were only 18 arrests for minor public order offences out of a 40,000 crowd.
‘Hillsborough stadium and its staff have once again proved to be a suitable venue to stage major sporting events.
‘South Yorkshire officers have played their part in a team effort with sound and professional policing methods,’ he said.
Several Sunderland fans were escorted from the ground after running on the pitch when their team scored the winning goal.
The only disappointment for the Sunderland fans was that the team did not come out to be saluted after their 1–0 victory as happened when the 1973 side also won through to Wembley at Hillsborough.
Mr Nesbit, who took this decision, said: ‘When the match ended I was conscious of part of the Sunderland crowd starting to leave the stadium and if the team had come out people attempting to leave might have tried to return and this could have led to conflict on the steep Spion Kop terraces.’
Praise indeed
MEANWHILE, The Journal — sister publication to the Newcastle Chronicle — continued to write laudatory pieces about the embattled Mr Young.
In the leader column last week, on the same day Young Group's shares were suspended, the newspaper felt sufficiently confident of Mr Young's expertise to write: ‘He is a man who has until recently made a great success of his business and it would be sad for the North-East if he did not continue to have a part to play.’
Sad indeed, but for who?
EIGHT lucky readers have earned a special night out at Durham Wasps' final home play-off match.
Their names were the first out of the hat in our prize draw, run in conjunction with the club's major sponsor Appletise, for tickets for the clash with Norwich and Peterborough Pirates on Sunday.
The first four winners will enjoy a VIP night at the game, which includes a wine reception, buffet and a seat in a hospitality box.
The second four lucky entrants will receive main stand tickets for the game and a case of Appletise.
The first prize winners are: Neil Glaister, of Spennymoor; Malcolm Henley of Consett; Pamela Joyce of Newton Hall, Durham and Patricia Bage of Darlington.
The second prize winners are: Becky Hodson of Houghton-le-Spring; Pauline Holt of Belmont; Mrs M Boocock of Norton and Cathy Storey of Ushaw Moor.
DARLINGTON defender Kevan Smith is set for a recall against Bradford at Feethams tonight.
Mick Tait is rated ‘very doubtful’ with a calf strain and Smith is in line to return after a three-match absence.
Darlington have a chance to record their first double following their 1–0 win at Valley Parade last month.
Manager Ray Hankin said: ‘It has been a disappointing season all round but we will give it our best shot to the final match.
‘We had a bad result at Stoke City last Friday night, but it was all part of a learning experience for young players.
‘Adam Reed came on for the last half hour and did well for a 16-year-old.’
Team from: Prudhoe, Hinchley, Pickering, Sunley, Gregan, Smith, Tait, Gaughan, Toman, Cusack, Borthwick, Cork, Isaacs, Reed, McJannet, O'Shaughnessey, Coverdale.
Bradford could include former Darlington defender Jim Willis, who joined Leicester City for a £200,000 fee earlier in the season.
Willis struggled to make his mark in a higher division and manager Brian Little thought he would benefit from a loan spell at Bradford.
Bradford striker Sean McCarthy is set to return after a three-match suspension.
Ten-goal McCarthy was sent off against Exeter City last month.
Player-manager Frank Stapleton said: ‘We will be seeking revenge for our home defeat.
It will be difficult though, because of Darlington's position.’
Stapleton, a former Republic of Ireland international, has played in every game since he took charge at Valley Parade in mid-December.
FORMER Darlington manager Frank Gray would welcome a chance to team up again with Denis Smith.
His former Sunderland boss has yet to appoint a right-hand man at Bristol City.
Sunderland's success in reaching Wembley appears to rule out any chance of Malcolm Crosby going to Ashton Gate, and Gray, who was sacked by Darlington with the team heading towards relegation, said: ‘I have spoken to Smith.
The job was mentioned in a general chat.’
No brakes
THE unflappable Simon we long for him to anger, in order to write the headline ‘Wild Fowler’ has quickly changed his tune.
It's not that he's got anything against the party's Purcell anthem, he says, but young voters in particular prefer Bryan Adams.
Hence Can't Stop This Thing We've Started now emanates from the direction of his battle bus.
Young Fowler thinks it entirely appropriate.
Meale ticket
WHO'S Who lists Alan Meale's recreations as ‘reading and writing’.
Appropriately, he has sent us a letter about a piece he saw in last Thursday's Diary.
In it we incredulously quoted a Guardian story suggesting that Bishop Auckland born Meale defending a tiny Labour majority in Mansfield bore a resemblance to Clark Gable.
Meale, who began working life as a merchant seaman and was later an Aycliffe councillor, is unamused.
The column is ‘silly’, he says.
‘I would like to comment,’ he adds, ‘that I notice there hasn't been any improvement of your journalistic content.’
Readers may also be interested in his final paragraph.
‘I would ask however that the next time you attempt plagiarize said that you take the opportunity of confirming your remarks to someone you know rather than one you purport to.’
One of Labour's priorities, incidentally, is education (You know, reading and writing).
Mother superior
MO Mowlam (recreations: travelling, swimming, jogging, jigsaws, watching football) has been explaining how she sometimes gets by during the campaign on just two hours sleep a night.
As well as defending her Redcar seat, Dr Mowlam is Labour spokesperson on city and corporate affairs necessitating much shuttling between Cleveland and London.
‘It's my mum,’ says Mo, 42.
‘She brings me breakfast in bed every day, lays out my clothes and irons my knickers.
‘It's nice, because I don't iron them otherwise.’
We also hear, incidentally, that Dr Mowlam and Tory candidate Robert Goodwill shared the last waltz (‘not quite cheek to cheek’ says the gallant Goodwill) at the Langbaurgh council's chairman's ball on Friday.
One of the Labour lads is said to have a picture.
A donation to his favourite charity if we get a copy by Wednesday evening.
Ad lib SHOULD she win, Labour's city and corporate affairs spokesperson will doubtless be at the Institute of Directors annual convention on April 28 (cost £120, including lunch).
Dave Gill of Eaglescliffe, who sends us an advert from The Independent for the event, observes that the IoD, at least, is confident of Thursday's outcome.
Speakers, says the ad, include ‘the Prime Minister’.
Gaffe metre
THOUGH happily appreciative of the Diary, several of your election limericks have incorporated pleas for the return of our other columns.
They'll be back when we've recovered from this one (unless, of course, there's another election in May.)
Vanity and a nod towards Alan Meale compel that we also include this: A short-sighted scribbler called Amos; Recorded the gaffes of the famous; And if ever his column; Becomes faintly solemn; He'll be sacked on the spot (who would blame us)?
This is the last call for limericks with an electoral theme.
The winner will now be announced on Saturday.
Last minute entries to Election Diary, Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF. £25 winner, £10 runners-up.
FOR a while, the Mystery of the Lost Constituents baffled everyone.
High Row, Darlington, on an overcast Monday and it seemed like the town's electorate had decided to move lock, stock and barrel somewhere else.
Former Tory party chairman Cecil Parkinson was on the trail of the floating voter but it was proving more difficult than perhaps he would have expected.
‘Are you voting for Michael Fallon?’
Cecil asked the busy shoppers along High Row.
‘No, sorry I'm just over on holiday from Northern Ireland.’
On to the next one.
‘No, sorry I'm German.’
Erm, are you voting for Michael?
‘Not me, I'm voting for Tim Devlin.’
‘No, I'm voting for William Hague.’
Oh well, at least it's the right party.
Had the floating voters, floated off?
Or perhaps the don't knows didn't know where to demonstrate their indecision.
But then success at last as some locals appeared.
‘Michael's getting my vote,’ said one distinguished looking lady.
A sigh of relief.
‘Oh yes, he has been a very good MP, quite a cult really and he does deserve your vote,’ beamed Cecil.
‘He works like a beaver for Darlington.’
But the beaver was badgered by an impoverished law student who wanted to know what the Conservatives were going to do about grants and a mother concerned about education.
Cecil, however, was the one everyone wanted to talk to.
On his fifth visit to Darlington and 29th constituency since the campaign started, he may look slightly grey and older but his charm with the ladies and twinkle in the eye has not dimmed.
‘Oh I recognised you straight away but I thought you would be a lot taller,’ said a cuddly-looking woman.
Throughout Cecil was followed by a bobble-hatted man, who seemed to have forgotten the former party chairman was not standing in the election.
He kept telling him what a marvellous job he was doing.
‘It's going to be a hard fight but I think you'll be okay,’ he said.
‘You are much too nice to be a politician.’
‘Oh, I don't know what to say to that,’ replied Cecil almost embarrassed.
Off then down to the bakers for another chat with the ladies.
‘You all look so attractive I thought I would come in and say hello.
You don't mind do you?’ he politely asked.
The assistants blushed behind their wholegrains.
Ever the gentleman he even managed to pick a Michael Fallon sticker off the bottom of a ladies' shoe, only to get it stuck on his own.
Last stop was Williams' music shop where Cecil and Michael were shown a £4,000 organ.
The strains of Somewhere Over The Rainbow filtered through as they left perhaps someday their dreams will come true.
Meanwhile down at the Arts Centre it was music of a different kind with Melvyn Bragg, presenter of ITV's South Bank Show.
Darlington band Rhythm Street entertained Melvyn and Labour candidate Alan Milburn with a reggae version of the South Bank Show theme tune.
Everyone tapped their toes and got into the swing a reggae one rather than an electoral one.
And Melvyn, who had come to complain about the state of arts funding under the Conservatives, joined Alan in an impromptu duet.
Cozy Powell need lose no sleep as Alan took to the drums like, well, like a Parliamentary candidate takes to drums.
There are only certain ways, it seems, you can drum up support.
A NORTH-East karate expert has been awarded the prestigious Senior Coaches Certificate.
He is believed to be the first Karate expert in the region to receive such an award and one of only a handful in the country.
Peter Jones, 32, of North Road, Darlington, qualified for the certificate when he gained his Third Dan in Shoto Kan karate at an event held at the Primrose Holly Holiday Centre on the outskirts of Scarborough.
Already a qualified coach and the holder of a First Dan in WadoAnshin Ruy, another style of Karate, Peter runs the Shinko School of Karate in Darlington.
He also operates popular self-defence classes for women at Larchfield Sports Centre, where he is assisted by Debbie Harris, former English women's karate champion.
Debbie also travelled to Scarborough for the event, where she gained a First Dan.
The awards were presented by Ray Wilson, head of the Northern Karate Association and director of coaching for the Federation of English Karate organisations.
CANNON and Ball have been lined up as the latest Christmas cracker for North-East pantomime fans.
The comedy duo follow will be following in the footsteps of Orville the Duck and Little and Large as recent big-name acts to bring festive crowds flocking to Darlington's record-breaking Civic Theatre.
Cheeky Bobby Ball and ‘Rock On’ Tommy will be appearing as ‘good and bad robbers’in Babes in the Wood from December 5.
Their marathon run will feature shows twice daily most weeks until January 30, 1993.
The rest of the cast has yet to be decided, but the Civic panto has become established as a major regional attraction and demand for tickets is bound to be fierce.
The duo came to Darlington about 18 months ago for a one-night show, but have not played panto in the North-East before.
Brian Goddard, theatre director, said: ‘We are so thrilled to have Cannon and Ball, we are announcing the news before having the full cast placed.
‘They're usually a city theatre booking, so we are even more delighted Cannon and Ball are to be at Darlington.
‘This year's pantomime should bring in the family audience, which is what we always aim for at pantomime time.’
The booking office for the panto and the spring-summer season opens today.
Babes in the Wood tickets are priced from £4.50£10.50, and dress circle boxes at £15.
The spring-summer season offers a variety of productions, beginning with the D'Oyle Carte Opera Company performing The Mikado on May 18–23.
Subscription tickets are available for that and The Yeomen of the Guard which the Gilbert and Sullivan specialist company are performing from September 7–12.
The Civic Theatre has three series of subscription ticket offers, the second being for the plays The Heiress, with Frank Finlay heading a strong cast, from June 1–6, and Shakers from June 8–13, and the production of My Cousin Rachel on June 22–27, starring Anita Harris, Edward (Leo Howard) Highmore and Fleur Bennett.
A number of one-nighters in May include The Bootleg Beatles on May 26, The Band of the Royal Air Force Regiment on May 27, The Northern Festival of Fashion on May 28 and American Pie review of rock ‘n’ roll on Saturday May 30.
Bobby Davro, The Krankies and Freddie and the Dreamers are in a brand new Rock With Laughter show, directly prior to Blackpool's summer season, running from June 30-July 4 at Darlington Civic.
During the month of July, the third subscription ticket offer is for the repertory season of four thrillers, beginning with A Murder Has Been Arranged, from July 7–11, Deadly Nightcap by Francis Durbridge from July 14–18, Peril at End House by Agatha Christie which runs from July 21–25, and her spinning tale of adventure the Spiders Web the last week of July.
Mr Goddard gave assurances that the children's pop musical The Butterfly Children will go ahead as billed for June 1620.
Box office for Darlington Civic Theatre is 
Jolly Jack is all set to sail
REBEL Whitby sea captain Jack Lammiman is preparing to set sail on his latest expedition a voyage to America to celebrate the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus.
Department of Transport inspectors are due down at his boat the Helga Maria today to check that everything is shipshape for the 4,000 mile trip, and Jack hopes to set off tomorrow.
Jack, 55, was fined £400 by Teesside Crown Court last month for sailing to the Arctic in breach of DoT detention orders after officials said his 70 year-old vessel was unseaworthy.
Walker poorly:
An elderly walker was still poorly in hospital yesterday after being rescued by helicopter from the Yorkshire Dales.
Thomas Bailey, 72, of Lancashire, had been near the summit of Ingleborough when he collapsed with severe chest pains.
THERE are big games and big games.
They abound now at an ever-increasing rate.
But there is one in Durham that remains the biggest.
In the 143 years since it was played it has probably never been surpassed.
Its significance then was not underestimated, meriting copious coverage in the local public prints and a handsome report with pictures in the eminent Illustrated London News.
Now it would command television crews, gangs of itinerant Press men and jolly serious ball by ball radio commentary.
It was billed in May, 1849 as the Grand Cricket Match at Durham between 11 of All-England and 22 of the Durham Club.
Durham County may stand on the threshold of a magnificent new era but it is difficult to imagine them matching that sort of fixture.
The excitement at the time was quite clearly rife, as can be judged from this mildly hysterical report: ‘This match, which has, for a considerable time past, created intense interest amongst the cricketing community, was commenced on Thursday morning, the 3rd instant at half past 11 o'clock, by All England placing Messrs Wisden and Clarke at the wickets, to the bowling of Messrs Joy and P. Smith.’
On the dawn of another new season (England A play county champions Essex in a four-day match beginning at Lord's on Monday, both sides apparently being restricted to eleven players) it was uplifting yesterday to be reminded of the Grand Match.
It is evidence of cricket's longevity, of its ability to withstand changing moods.
This is marked, nay celebrated, in Cricket!
There in the DLI Museum in Durham the game's wonderful past is laid out, its future pointed to.
It gives but a flavour of what has gone before and what is to come but how the appetite was whetted.
The subject is merely touched on, as it must be in setting out to take a sport, an integral part of English society, from the early 18th century to the late 20th.
A portrait of one Sir William Bennett, president of the once all-powerful Hambledon Cricket Club in 1786 leads round the room to an artist's impressions of the new Durham county ground which will open in the 1990s.
Bennett is standing by an early two-stump wicket, a return to which batsmen may favour.
Between, there is cricket in India as played by the 16th Light Infantry, there is English cricket, there is W.G. Grace, there is Ruskin Spear's brooding painting of Fred Trueman, there is Seaton Carew in 1888 and Ryton in 1912.
The competitive Durham sides of recent years are rightly given much space, for this is to mark their elevation.
‘I'm not a cricket buff,’ said the museum curator Dr Patricia Andrew, ‘or at least I wasn't.
I had to study something of it to put the exhibition together.
Choosing what to include took some time, though I wanted to give it an artistic flavour.’
During her researches she went to Lord's to examine the immense collection which belongs to the MCC and went into the Long Room.
This is still fairly uncommon towards the millenium, to the point of never happening, which shows how far the great game has come.
As a gentle reminder that women play, watch and have served cricket, Dr Andrew has included an old photograph of one holding a bat.
That Grand Match at Durham, however, is what captures the eye more even than Grace's Jubilee ball, his old blazer and a photograph of his 1891–92 team.
Cricket was just beginning to take off in the mid-19th century.
William Clarke of Nottingham had formed his All-England team, a sort of travelling circus of the top players in 1846.
Where there was money they played.
Gambling and crowd disorder was customary but there is no question that Clarke and his boys were missionaries.
This is how they came to arrive in Durham in May, 1849.
Even then it could be confidently reported that ‘the ground was acknowledged to be in excellent condition for the game, and one of the prettiest in the kingdom’.
The drawing which accompanied the Illustrated London News report was done by Edward Bradley, described as a Durham correspondent.
The original, feared Dr Andrew, had been lost.
Nobody knew where it was, not even Lord's.
This was more than a shame, if not quite a disaster, for it was Durham's first seminal moment in cricket.
All is not lost, however.
A fortuitous meeting and a few phone calls seem to have turned up Bradley's majestic depiction.
Not normally being in the business of art detection it was still a pleasure to help.
The drawing was sold by Lord's at auction five years ago and now resides, fittingly, in Darlington.
It would be a treat if it could enhance Cricket! for the next couple of months.
The match itself was low scoring.
None of the four innings was above 91.
All-England beat the 22 of Durham by 40 notches.
That was a big game all right.
Platt denies transfer talk
FOOTBALL: David Platt has pushed transfer talk to the back of his mind and promised that his only concern is helping Bari to avoid the disaster of relegation.
England midfielder Platt, already linked with Roma and Juventus, is now said to be booked for a £5.7m summer move to Napoli.
But Platt insisted that his only interest in Diego Maradona's old club was beating them at the weekend to boost Bari's survival chances.
Makita draw
FOOTBALL:
Leeds and Nottingham Forest will be joined by Italian champions Sampdoria and German title contenders Stuttgart in this summer's Makita international tournament.
Elland Road stages the event between August 1–2 as the tournament moves out of London for the first time.
Ritchie surgery
FOOTBALL:
Oldham's injury-dogged striker Andy Ritchie is to undergo back surgery.
Ritchie, 31, will go into hospital when the results of a scan are known later this week but manager Joe Royle hopes to include him for Saturday's home relegation battle against Luton.
Ritchie has made only eight starts this season.
McNally fined
FOOTBALL:
Chester manager Harry McNally has been fined £150 plus costs by the FA for making ‘improper comments’ to a linesman in a match against Darlington.
Manager goes
FOOTBALL:
Kilmarnock manager Jim Fleeting and part-time assistant Jim McSherry have resigned following Saturday's defeat by Partick which ended their Scottish first division promotion hopes.
Former Celtic and Scotland midfielder Tommy Burns takes over until the end of the season.
Webster back
MOTORCYCLING:
World sidecar racing champion Steve Webster makes his first appearance of the season at Donington Park on Easter Monday April 20, in the third round of the MRPC national championship, part of the support race programme to the British round of the world superbike championship.
Edberg wins
TENNIS:
World No 1 Stefan Edberg coasted into the second round of the Japan Open in Tokyo yesterday after a 6–3 6–4 victory over New Zealander Kelly Evernden.
The Swede, who regained the world top spot from American Jim Courier two weeks ago, said he was much improved since making some adjustments to his game.
Darlington 1, Bradford City 3
DARLINGTON boss Ray Hankin dropped England cap Nick Pickering, but his reshaped defence still leaked goals as Quakers sank to their fifth successive defeat at Feethams.
Again, the defence let them down, and despite reducing the deficit to only one goal before the break, Bradford won with plenty in hand against a stuttering home side.
Quakers had plenty of the early play but failed to create any clear chances from the six corners they forced in the opening period.
Former Darlington defender Jim Willis put in a saving tackle on Steve Mardenborough when Nick Cusack found him in the clear, while Willis was caught in possession by Cusack inside his own box but the centre forward's shot was blocked.
Bradford slowly got into the game and nearly took the lead when Mark Prudhoe could only parry a piledriver from Mike Duxbury, then punched the ball away from the onrushing Sean McCarthy.
However the Bradford striker was not to be denied on the half hour.
Steve O'Shaughnessy weakly headed away a left wing cross to Lee Duxbury who powered a shot goalwards.
Prudhoe, who had called for the original cross, could only tip the ball on to the bar and McCarthy headed the rebound home.
Quakers were caught napping again two minutes later.
Paul Reid caught the defence square with a perfect through ball from the halfway line for McCarthy to race clear and beat Prudhoe with a right foot shot.
But Quakers hit back four minutes before the break.
Andy Toman and Steve Gaughan combined to find Mardenborough in the Bradford box and the striker slipped the ball past Paul Tomlinson for his sixth goal of the season.
The home side were almost level just before the break, but after cleverly creating room on the edge of the box Gaughan fired straight at the keeper.
In fact it seemed to be only Gaughan who seemed capable of creating chances as Darlington struggled.
He fired just over following a charging run then Tonmlinson could only parry another full blooded drive.
Bradford, however, always looked dangerous, with Mike Duxbury volleying wide, Paul Jewell forcing Prudhoe into a full length save and Stephen Torpey having a goal disallowed.
The third goal arrived after 82 minutes.
Mike Duxbury found his namesake Lee Duxbury wide on the right and the winger cut speedily past Drew Coverdale and beat Prudhoe with ease.
Cusack headed against the post in the last minute.
MATCHFACTS Goals: McCarthy (30, 0–1),(32, 0–2), Mardenborough (42, 1–2), l Duxbury (82, 1–3).
Att: 1946.
Referee: W C Burns (Scarborough).
Darlington (5–3–2): Prudhoe 7, Hinchley 6, Coverdale 6, Sunley 6, Gregan 6,(Isaacs 70 mins 6), O'Shaughnessy 6, GAUGHAN 8, Toman 6, Cusack 6, Cork 6, Mardenborough 7, Sub not used Borthwick.
Bradford City: Tomlinson 6, James 6, Williams 6, M Duxbury 7, Willis 7, Babb 7, L Duxbury 7, Torpey 6, MCCARTHY 8, Jewell 7,(Tinnion 80 mins), Reid 7.
Sun not used (Stapleton).
Darlington 1 Bradford City
DARLINGTON boss Ray Hankin dropped England cap Nick Pickering, but his reshaped defence still leaked goals as Quakers sank to their fifth successive defeat at Feethams.
Again, the defence let them down, and despite reducing the deficit to only one goal before the break, Bradford won with plenty in hand against a stuttering home side.
Quakers had plenty of the early play but failed to create any clear chances from the six corners they forced in the opening period.
Former Darlington defender Jim Willis put in a saving tackle on Steve Mardenborough when Nick Cusack found him in the clear, while Willis was caught in possession by Cusack inside his own box but the centre forward's shot was blocked.
Bradford slowly got into the game and nearly took the lead when Mark Prudhoe could only parry a piledriver from Mike Duxbury, then punched the ball away from the onrushing Sean McCarthy.
However the Bradford striker was not to be denied on the half hour.
Steve O'Shaughnessy weakly headed away a left wing cross to Lee Duxbury who powered a shot goalwards.
Prudhoe, who had called for the original cross, could only tip the ball on to the bar and McCarthy headed the rebound home.
Quakers were caught napping again two minutes later.
Paul Reid caught the defence square with a perfect through ball from the halfway line for McCarthy to race clear and beat Prudhoe with a right foot shot.
But Quakers hit back four minutes before the break.
Andy Toman and Steve Gaughan combined to find Mardenborough in the Bradford box and the striker slipped the ball past Paul Tomlinson for his sixth goal of the season.
The home side were almost level just before the break, but after cleverly creating room on the edge of the box Gaughan fired straight at the keeper.
In fact it seemed to be only Gaughan who seemed capable of creating chances as Darlington struggled.
He fired just over following a charging run then Tonmlinson could only parry another full blooded drive.
Bradford, however, always looked dangerous, with Mike Duxbury volleying wide, Paul Jewell forcing Prudhoe into a full length save and Stephen Torpey having a goal disallowed.
The third goal arrived after 82 minutes.
Mike Duxbury found his namesake Lee Duxbury wide on the right and the winger cut speedily past Drew Coverdale and beat Prudhoe with ease.
Cusack headed against the post in the last minute.
MATCHFACTS Goals: McCarthy (30, 0–1),(32, 0–2), Mardenborough (42, 12), l Duxbury (82, 1–3).
Att: 1946.
Referee: W C Burns (Scarborough).
Darlington (5–3–2): Prudhoe 7, Hinchley 6, Coverdale 6, Sunley 6, Gregan 6,(Isaacs 70 mins 6), O'Shaughnessy 6, GAUGHAN 8, Toman 6, Cusack 6, Cork 6, Mardenborough 7, Sub not used Borthwick.
Bradford City: Tomlinson 6, James 6, Williams 6, M Duxbury 7, Willis 7, Babb 7, L Duxbury 7, Torpey 6, MCCARTHY 8, Jewell 7,(Tinnion 80 mins), Reid 7.
Sun not used (Stapleton).
When looks are so important
VOTERS will be influenced by the appearance of the candidates.
The leaders of the main parties and the Darlington candidates have left me with the following impressions.
John Major scholarship boy who made it to the local grammar school and was lucky to obtain patronage from the local squire.
Neil Kinnock former idealist who realised that he has to temper idealism with reality and also persuade his dyed in the wool colleagues that their ideas were out of date.
Paddy Ashdown gives the impression of an officer exhorting his men to go over the top and kick a football towards the enemy lines and to die bravely against unbeatable odds.
Michael Fallon superior school swot who feels that he is too good for his fellow men and appears to be out of his depth in his Government post.
Probably a bad impression as I feel that he is good at heart.
Peter Bergg popular school teacher who is good with the boys and hopes that he will be their headmaster.
Alan Milburn smart young executive seeking managerial post in progressive company.
Has eye on the boss job once he gets a foot on the ladder.
Les Parsons, 11 Kelso Walk, Darlington.
Bun fight
AFTER a decidedly bread and butter campaign, a Darlington bakers is putting its money on hot cross buns.
On Thursday, Murrays will offer buns iced in the three main party colours at seven of its shops in the Richmond and Darlington constituencies.
By similar random selection, says chairman John Murray, they came ‘very close’ to predicting the 1989 Richmond by-election at 5.30pm on polling day a claim that's a couple of currants short of a teacake.
Not only did the Murray poll forecast an SDP victory with 25.7pc of the vote, they had Miss Whiplash (7.8pc) just 0.2 behind Labour.
In the event the Tories polled 37.8pc, SDP 32.08 and the lovely Lindi just 0.14.
‘We're confident this time,’ say Murrays.
Icing on the cake
GREGGS, a bakery chain with 95 branches across the region, have been attempting some similarly sweet toothed psephology.
On a two-week poll of different coloured cupcakes Labour has 46pc, Conservatives 28 and Lib Dems 26.
Or perhaps people just like red icing.
Not before time
AT just after 3pm yesterday the Press Association put out a story about Prime Minister Neil Kinnock kissing the Queen's hand.
Another message followed shortly afterwards they'd forgotten the embargo.
NHS reforms ‘do not work’
I HAVE worked in Darlington Memorial Hospital for some nine years and have seen many changes.
I have seen jobs lost through privatisation, ward closures, cuts in staff hours and short staffing on wards in general.
All these measures were carried out in the name of cost improvements cost-cutting would be a more appropriate name.
All of these cuts in the main affect ancillary and nursing staff.
Once again, I understand this year over £1m has to be found again by Darlington Health Authority to meet this shortfall.
This has to ultimately mean more cuts in jobs and services.
During my time in the Health Service, I have never known morale be so low amongst the staff and that includes middle management.
We hear so much talk about cost effectiveness yet every time the management structure changes, resources are wasted on needless things.
Once again, not one but two new management structures are being implemented with the introduction of business managers.
The major problem with the new reforms and the disappearance of publically accountable health authorities is who monitors the managers?
Yes, there may be some waste in the Health Service, but I would suggest if we are to look for savings then start at the top.
The fact is, I work in the National Health Service, and regardless of what the media or politicians may say, the reforms are costing millions of pounds setting up a system which is not working.
Mr. E. Richardson, Branch Secretary NUPE, 31 Buxton Moor Crescent, Darlington.
NINETY-one-year-old Blanche Ridley takes pride in her beautiful gardens.
Sightseers who stroll past her Darlington home sometimes spot her pottering away, arranging the plants and making sure everything is in its proper place.
The sprightly pensioner likes to share her love of nature and once a year throws open the gates to her home in Abbey Road.
In doing so, Blanche has raised thousands of pounds for her favourite charity the Red Cross.
Blanche is the oldest member of the Darlington branch of the Red Cross.
She hosts the money spinning Spring Day which includes cake stalls, raffles and her own garden centre.
The date for this year's event is Wednesday April 29.
Blanche's commitment is typical of volunteers at the Darlington branch of the Red Cross.
Throughout the year the voluntary members spend their time providing care and emergency services for people in need.
Anyone who has attended a local event will have seen the Red Cross carrying out first aid duties but its work is far wider than most people realise.
There are 118 members of the Red Cross in Darlington, 20 of whom are youth members, who are kept constantly busy.
At Darlington Memorial Hospital the Red Cross run an escort service, helping patients move from one clinic to another.
Although this may seem a rather small task it is greatly appreciated by patients whose movement around the hospital would otherwise be severely restricted.
The escort service extends to anyone in the community who needs assistance in getting from one place to another.
Recently Darlington's centre organiser, Barbara Murchie, travelled to London to escort a disabled woman to her new home.
This act of kindness like all others performed by the Red Cross was free of charge.
The Red Cross is often asked to trace family members and friends who have become separated.
Mrs Murchie was recently contacted by a woman in Canada who had lost touch with her son after he left the British army.
Through its network the Red Cross manages to connect people who might otherwise have lost touch forever.
The Red Cross work closely with disabled people in the community.
Annual trips and holidays are organised for disabled children, providing them with an opportunity to experience different environments.
Fund raising plays an integral part in the work of the Red Cross.
Each year the organisation hosts a ‘Red Cross Week’ when members nationwide hold money raising events to keep their funds afloat.
This year Red Cross Week will be May 3–9.
Darlington Red Cross are confident they will be able to beat 1991's total of £4,000.
Last year a tombola held in Morrisons supermarket, Darlington, proved very popular.
This year the Red Cross hope a new idea of buskers across the country will be even more successful.
Volunteers will be needed during the week to collect envelopes, stand with collection tins and hold money raising events.
Mrs Murchie, 48, who has been a member for nine years, believes everyone needs some kind of first aid training.
She joined the Red Cross after witnessing a horse riding accident.
Mrs Murchie added:’ I did not know what to do so I just kept talking to her until the ambulance arrived.
It was then that I realised I needed some first aid training.’
During the summer the Red Cross will be providing a first aid service at Durham County Cricket ground.
Mrs Murchie said: ‘This will be perfect for anyone who can combine a training in first aid with a love of cricket.’
Children as young as six have joined the Darlington Red Cross youth group enjoying all kinds of activities from first aid training to camping holidays.
If you can help please contact Mrs Murchie, Red Cross Shop, Duke Street, Darlington, tel .
A MAJOR push to make Darlington a centre for tourism was discussed by the council's development committee yesterday.
The North Road Railway Museum could be a possible area for expansion, said economic development officer, Alan Wallis.
He said he wanted to bring industry to the town.
‘Whether that is manufacturing, office based or tourism does not matter.’
Mr Wallis said the town should be thinking in terms of an attraction of equal size and prestige as the Beamish Museum.
A circular from the Department of Environment has encouraged councils to think of ways of making their area more attractive to visitors.
‘We cannot think in terms of locations until we know more about what kind of attraction is planned.’
Development director Stephen Tapper said: ‘We have very good communications and we can relieve tourist pressure on the North York Moors and the Dales.’
Mr John Williams and his wife Nancy Fond memories after 50 years
A couple who bought the last wedding ring in a Darlington jeweller's shop celebrated their 50th anniversary this week.
Mr and Mrs John and Nancy Williams were married in Heighington Church on March 30, 1942, while he was on wartime leave from the Army.
They had met four years earlier at a Christmas party in the village, where Mrs Williams (nee Theakston) lived and Mr Williams, originally from Shildon, had relatives.
‘We got the last ring in the shop in my size,’ said Mrs Williams, who also has fond memories of their wartime honeymoon in Scarborough.
Walks on the beach were impossible because the Army had covered the sands with barbed wire and netting and on the couple's first night the skating rink in front of the Grand Hotel was burned down.
‘But we had beautiful weather and a marvellous time,’ said Mrs Williams.
After their marriage, Mr Williams was posted abroad and served more than six years in several countries, including a spell in the North African desert.
Back in civilian life he was foreman for a Darlington decorating firm, Jack Stead, and the couple moved into the town's Rockingham Street.
As their family grew they moved into Greenbank Road and then to their present home in Lunedale Road.
Mr Williams eventually set up his own painting and decorating business which he ran until failing sight brought retirement more than ten years ago.
The couple's favourite pastime is caravanning in their tourer and they are the longest-serving rallying members of the Durham Centre of the Caravan Club.
‘The club gave us a presentation because they looked into their records and found we had been members the longest,’ said Mrs Williams.
‘We have rallied since the Durham Centre was formed more than 30 years ago.’
The couple have two sons, Mr Tony Williams, director of Barron Construction at Daltonon-Tees, near Darlington, and Dr. Clive Williams, a senior lecturer in civil engineering at Plymouth.
They also have five grandchildren.
The family celebrated the golden wedding and Mother's Day with an outing to Redworth Hall Hotel on Sunday.