

A £20m design and build contract in the Far East has been won by Press Construction, in Darlington.
It is to manage the project to create a gas treatment plant in northern Bangladesh.
Press Construction, a division of the AMEC, will be responsible for total control of the scheme, from basic design to the final building of the plant.
Although the order, financed under an Overseas Development Assistance grant, will have little impact on Darlington jobs, much of the equipment will be exported from Britain.
Press Construction business development director David Martin said: ‘A large proportion of the £20m project value will be invested in the procurement of capital equipment, which in accordance with the conditions of the grant, will be sourced from within the UK.’
Show you have a heart for wildlife
ON February 14, Valentine's Day, Parliament will be debating an all-party Private Members Bill introduced by Kevin McNamara MP.
The Wild Mammals (Protection) Bill seeks to make it a criminal offence to inflict cruelty on any wild animal and, in particular, to outlaw all hunting with dogs and the use of all snares.
Such cruelty inflicted on domestic animals has been an offence at least since 1911.
Their wild kin, except for badgers and one or two rare species, have no such protection.
A recent Gallup Poll showed that 80pc of the public oppose foxhunting with 79pc objecting so firmly that they favour Parliament banning this cruelty.
February 14 is a Friday a day when many MPs travel back to their homes and such is our Parliamentary process that unless at least 100 Members of Parliament attend the House of Commons to support the Bill, a few hunting MPs could destroy the Bill by ‘talking it out’.
May I appeal to your readers to send a Valentine's Day message to the Members of Parliament and urge them to ‘Have a Heart for Wildlife’, to attend the debate and vote for the Bill.
Lord Soper, President, League Against Cruel Sports, Sparling House,.
Animals' UN
WOULD it be feasible to form a United Nations-like organisation for the protection of animals?
Surely such a conscientious accomplishment should prove a lifesaver for thousands of animals throughout the world.
Close, Ferryhill.name 
POLICE suspect an organised gang of car thieves was at work in Darlington over the weekend.
In one of the worst nights on record, officers were called to investigate 20 separate thefts from cars.
A spokesman said the majority of thefts took place in the West End but there were also a series of car break-ins in the Parkside area.
In most cases the thieves targeted cars which had been left with bags or other valuables clearly visible.
The systematic way cars were broken into make police believe the thefts were carried out by thieves combing the streets looking for likely targets.
On Saturday officers were kept busy with a higher than average number of shoplifting incidents in the town centre.
A number of suspects, many of whom were juveniles, were arrested and questioned.
Musical false alarm on bomb
A BOMB disposal squad was called to blow up a suspect suitcase at Whitby railway station at the weekend — and discovered it contained a cornet and sheet music.
Special Branch officers and British Transport police were alerted after a train driver reported that a battered suitcase had been left on a train from Darlington.
The station area was evacuated while the controlled explosion was carried out.
Farm blaze:
Firemen last night tackled a blaze at a farm near Langley Park, Co Durham.
The blaze, at Esh Hall Farm, Esh Village involved around 200 tons of straw.
Arson charge:
Two juveniles appeared before magistrates in Peterlee at the weekend charged with arson.
The charges follow a fire at Peterlee's Dene House Comprehensive School last Tuesday where £5,000 damage was caused to the school library.
Lifeboat launched:
The Tyne class Redcar lifeboat was launched yesterday to escort the fishing boat Claire Louise back into the Tees.
The boat was making very slow progress in heavy seas.
Steel fire:
Firemen attended a blaze at British Steel's Lackenby Works, on Teesside in the early hours of yesterday.
Three fire engines and a foam tanker dealt with the flames which were caused when grease caught fire.
Fatal accident:
Brenda Sisterson, 45, of Ingleside Road, North Shields, died in hospital at the weekend after being knocked down by a bus as she crossed John Dobson Street in Newcastle city centre.
Boy named:
A boy knocked down and killed by a car near Denton Burn, Newcastle, was named yesterday as Jonathon Kelly, 12, of Southview, West Denton.
Youths hunted:
Police were last night hunting two youths who attacked and robbed a 23-year-old man of his wallet as he was walking near Stanhope Road, Newcastle, at the weekend.
Woman remanded:
Linda Kelly, 44, of Alston Avenue, Cramlington, was remanded in custody by Blyth magistrates at the weekend charged with murdering her husband, Michael, at their home last Friday.
Firemen's struggle with straw blaze
Firemen spent 24 hours keeping under control a fire in a barn which contained 80 tonnes of straw.
Appliances from Bishop Auckland, Barnard Castle and Middleton in Teesdale tackled the blaze at Naby View Farm, Lartington.
They worked through the night and one appliance stayed until after 4pm yesterday when the fire at last burned out.
The 20m by 10m barn was extensively damaged.
No one was hurt.
Store riddle:
Following job losses at the Rumbelows electrical chain store there is speculation over its continued interest in new premises at Darlington's Cornmill Shopping Centre.
Letting agents Sanderson, Townend and Gilbert are to check whether Rumbelows still want a 3,000 sq ft site.
Grill blaze:
Darlington firemen tackled a fire caused by a grill pan bursting into flames at a house in The Greenway, Middleton St George yesterday morning.
A CHURCH community worker stabbed a teenager in the neck and attempted to rape her in a terrifying ordeal.
Andrew Cook, of Brinkburn Road, Darlington, was infatuated with the young girl and went to the shop where she worked carrying a kitchen knife, Teesside Crown Court was told yesterday.
The court heard how Cook, who worked for the Baptist Church in Corporation Road, Darlington, locked the girl in a room.
He then pulled a knife out from his jeans and held it to her throat.
Cook told her if she did not do what he said he would kill her.
He stuffed a towel in her mouth to gag her and pulled her top and bra off.
Robin Denny, prosecuting, said Cook told her to take the rest of her clothes off.
But the girl grabbed for the knife.
Mr Denny said: ‘He then told her to put her clothes back on but out of the blue he stabbed her in the neck.
His mind was going in a frenzy.’
He said Cook, 23, took the kitchen knife from the church centre with the intention to rape the girl.
‘Cook went to the shop with a sexual urge and rape was on his mind,’ said Mr Denny.
‘He had been on a weekend retreat and said he wanted to get rid of the urges within him.’
After he stabbed the girl Cook told her he was sorry and ran out of the shop.
The girl has recovered from her wounds but is still taking tablets to sleep at night.
Cook, who has previous convictions for robbery, pleaded guilty to attempted rape and to unlawful wounding.
Sentence was adjourned pending reports.
North soldier in death crash
A NORTH-EAST soldier is among three who died in an accident in Norway.
Darren Riches, 19, of North Shields, a driver with the 42nd Squadron the Royal Corps of Transport, was based in Wiltshire.
The other two to die in the accident involving an Army Snocat vehicle were Paul Hover, 23, of Kent and Steven Laing, 20, of Dundee.
A Ministry of Defence official was unable to say if the vehicle which collided with a truck was taking part in a British Forces exercise in Voss near Bergen.
Hospital fall:
A pensioner died after a fall at Sedgefield Community Hospital, Cleveland Coroner's Court heard.
Frederick Robinson, 84, previously of The Grove, Coxhoe, fractured his femur in the fall on November 22 and despite surgery, died in North Tees General Hospital six days later.
Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of accidental death.
Hotel plans: Detailed plans for a new golf course, hotel and leisure complex together with 15 houses have been submitted to Scarborough council.
The scheme, by Trevor Wilkinson Associates of York, is earmarked for land at High Eastfield farm, Seamer.
Barracks close: Scarborough's Burniston Barracks closed yesterday after 130 years a victim of the Government's defence cuts.
The barracks, used for training by Royal Signals Regiments in recent years, is in a prime site on Scarborough's North side.
1,000 queue: More than 1,000 people queued up for interviews after the Grand Hotel in Scarborough advertised for 100 new jobs this week.
General manager Michael Prendergast said he was amazed at the response to the job vacancies.
The Grand Hotel has just reopened after the latest phase of a £1m refurbishment scheme.
Hearing off: A disciplinary hearing involving a senior education officer who went missing during the summer was cancelled at the last minute yesterday.
Christopher Horn, 45, of Hurworth Moor, near Darlington, sparked a police search when he vanished for several days in August.
Mr Horn works for Derbyshire County Council, for whom a spokeswoman said the hearing had not taken place and would not be held in the future.
Still helping: A woman was still helping police with their inquiries last night after former pit deputy Michael Kelly, 45, was found shot dead at his home in Alston Avenue, Cramlington, Northumberland on Thursday morning.
Trial venue: The trial of William Hunter, 25, of Stamfordham Avenue, North Shields, Tyne and Wear, accused of the murder of Robert Walsh, 25, from West Yorkshire, is to take place at Leeds Crown Court.
Hunter denied murder at Newcastle Crown Court yesterday.
RAIDERS smashed their way into a furniture store and calmly loaded a van full of three-piece suites.
The four man gang managed to get away with a £3,000 haul after breaking into Harper and Harper furniture store in Northgate, Darlington.
Now store owner Paul Harper has offered a £500 reward for information leading to a conviction.
Mr Harper, who runs the business with his brother David, said: ‘Although the break-in took place in the early hours of yesterday morning I am sure somebody must have spotted something.
Northgate is a very busy road at all times.’
The raiders shattered a large plate glass window then dragged two three-piece suites out of the showroom.
They ransacked the workshops, damaged other furniture and stole a fax machine.
Now Mr Harper says he plans to join other traders in the town by investing in steel shutters to prevent a recurrence.
‘Until this happened we resisted the use of shutters because we are supposed to be a furniture showroom.
It is no use having a nice display if people can't see it, but I can't afford to have this sort of thing happen again.’
Special award for ambulance man
A MEMBER of St John Ambulance will be at a special ceremony later this month.
John Byrne, of Frenchgate, Richmond, will be one of 100 people to be invested in the Order of St John in the Grand Priory Church in London on February 20.
Mr Byrne, commissioner for Cleveland St John Ambulance, will receive the insignia of officer at the ceremony.
He has been serving with St John Ambulance for six Flat fire: Firemen had to cut away floorboards and remove a hearth after fire escaped into the hearth in a flat above a shop in Friarage Street, Northallerton, on Thursday night.
Road closure:
North and northeast bound traffic will be barred from using Severus Bridge on Water End, Clifton, for seven weeks from Monday while waterproofing and resurfacing work takes place.
Traffic will be diverted via Boroughbridge Road and Shipton.
Raid foiled:
Thieves abandoned a number of computers after being disturbed while raiding a Ripon school.
The equipment was found near a forced window at Ripon City School.
Intruders strike:
Burglars forced their way into a house in Ripon.
They stole a video camera, figurines and jewellery from the property in Bishopton Park.
Jewels haul:
A quantity of jewellery was taken during a burglary in Ripon.
Thieves forced the kitchen window at a house in Kirkby Road.
Trips abroad:
County councillors have claimed £2,087 for trips abroad during the past year.
Figures show that 17 members of Durham County Council claimed £2,087 in expenses up to January 10.
The trips included visits to Kostroma, in Russia, and a conference in Rotterdam.
Birdbaths stolen:
Two birdbaths have been stolen from addresses in Darlington, one from a garden in Esk Road and another from outside a house in Prior Street.
Jumble sale:
The Ladies Guild holds a jumble sale at St. Andrew's Church hall, Haughton le Skerne, Darlington on February 8 at 2pm.
Houses approved:
Two houses are to be built on grazing land behind 71 High Street, Byers Green, Spennymoor.
Sedgefield District Council development sub-committee approved the plan which includes felling and replacing old and dangerous trees on the site.
Jobs boost:
Fourteen new jobs are to be created at a Chilton factory set for big expansion.
Plans were approved to extend the Parnaby Cyclones factory at Chilton Industrial Estate by Sedgefield District Council's development subcommittee.
Floor space at the factory is to increase by 75pc providing more workshop, office and storage space.
Wheelchair appeal:
Darlington Association on Disability urgently requires the loan or gift of unwanted wheelchairs for its popular wheelchair loan service.
DAD will arrange collection of the chairs and do any necessary repairs.
If you can help please telephone DAD on Darlington  or call in at the local office at the Friends Meeting House, 6 Skinnergate, Darlington.
Volunteer needed:
Relate, the marriage guidance group, needs a volunteer to help out in its Darlington office for approximately two hours a week.
The work will be general office chores and will include some typing.
If you have any time to spare please telephone Carol Whittingham on Darlington .
Sale time:
A table top and car boot sale will be held at St Thomas Aquinas, North Road, Darlington next Saturday from 10am until 2pm.
Bookings can be made now on Darlington .
The cost is £5.
Tree order:
Councillors in Harrogate are expected to approve a tree preservation order on Tuesday on a copper beech tree in a garden at Main Street, Upper Poppleton, near York, following the felling of a nearby sycamore.
Frozen fares:
Rider York, the main bus company in the city, has agreed to hold fares at their 1990 level for another two months to thank their passengers for their loyalty.
Hotel revamp:
Staff at the Royal York Hotel in York donned Victorian costumes as part of the celebrations marking the completion of a £3m improvement project.
Rescuers' year:
Runswick Bay rescue boat committee, which was set up ten years ago after the village lost its lifeboat, has had ten call-outs in the past year.
A new chairman has been elected, Phil Metcalfe, who takes over from Richard Cole.
The committee has been given a £200 donation from Texaco Britain which was to be used to buy a new drysuit.
Sign can stay says inspector
A SIGN outside a nursing home in the centre of Barnard Castle can stay for five years, an appeal inspector has ruled.
The sign, at the archway of the Kings Head Nursing Home, Market Place, does not detract from the arch's architectural detailing and is not considered unduly prominent, the inspector has stated in a report.
Teesdale District Council turned down an application for the sign on the ground of it contravening the town area local plan but the inspector said it was acceptable and allowed it for the next five years.
Lunch league: Officials at the Oak Leaf Sports Complex at Newton Aycliffe have announced that they will be organising a lunchtime five-a-side league with matches being played every Tuesday from February 18.
Prizes worth up to £90 are on offer.
Toy competition: The Durham Wildlife Trust had organised a soft toy competition to be judged on Easter Sunday.
Entry is open to people of all ages and the toys should have a wildlife theme.
The toys will be sold with proceeds going to the trust and the closing date for entries is March 31.
More details and entry forms are available from the Low Barns Nature Reserve, Witton-le-Wear, near Bishop Auckland.
Charity auction:
St Peter's Church in Bishop Auckland has a charity auction on Tuesday at 7pm.
Health talk: A dietician and a surgical supplies representative will be the guest speakers at a meeting of the South West Durham Ostomy Group on Tuesday.
The meeting in Bishop Auckland General Hospital assembly hall starts at 7.30pm.
Dance night: Crook RAOB holds a 50/50 dance in the Civic Hall tonight (Saturday) at 8pm.
Tickets cost £2.25 and include pie and peas supper.
New venue: Crook Local History Society has a new venue for meetings the Royal Sun.
The next meeting will be on Tuesday at 7.15pm when John Land, secretary of the Bishop Auckland History Society, will speak about his research.
Photo courses:
Photographers of all abilities are invited to join Darlington Media Group which has organised an extensive programme of evening classes and weekend workshops, starting on February 4 at the Arts Centre.
For further details call Darlington Media Group on .
Toy appeal:
A pre-Christmas collection by social services officers to collect toys for needy youngsters resulted in more than 200 gift donations.
The collection was organised by social services staff covering Aycliffe, Bishop Auckland and Spennymoor.
Trips abroad: County councillors have claimed £2,087 for trips abroad during the past year.
Figures show that 17 members of Durham County Council claimed £2,087 in expenses up to January 10.
The trips included visits to Kostroma, in Russia, and a conference in Rotterdam.
Birdbath theft: Two birdbaths have been stolen from addresses in Darlington, one was taken from a garden in Esk Road and another from outside a house in Prior Street.
Video taken:
A video recorder was stolen during a burglary at a house in Woodcrest Road, Darlington, on Thursday.
Rabbit raid: A pet rabbit was taken from a shed at a home in Haringay Street, Darlington, on Thursday.
Hotel plan:
A new plan to renovate The Gretna Green Wedding Inn, near Newton Aycliffe, has been received by Sedgefield District Council.
If the plans get the go-ahead the Inn will become a hotel, pub and nightclub with a restaurant and cocktail bar.
Factory expansion to bring new jobs
FOURTEEN new jobs are to be created at a Chilton factory set for big expansion.
Sedgefield District Council's development sub-committee approved plans to extend the Parnaby Cyclones factory at Chilton Industrial Estate.
Floor space at the factory is to increase by 75pc providing more workshop, office and storage space.
Photo courses: Photographers of all abilities are invited to join Darlington Media Group which has organised an extensive programme of evening classes and weekend workshops at the Arts Centre from February 4.
For further details call Darlington Media Group on .
Toy appeal:
A pre-Christmas collection by social services to collect toys for needy youngsters resulted in more than 200 gift donations.
The collection was organised by social services staff covering Aycliffe, Bishop Auckland and Spennymoor.
Trips abroad:
County councillors have claimed £2,087 for trips abroad during the past year.
Figures show that 17 members of Durham County Council claimed £2,087 in expenses up to January 10.
The trips included visits to Kostroma, in Russia, and a conference in Rotterdam.
Birdbath theft: Two birdbaths have been stolen from addresses in Darlington, one was taken from a garden in Esk Road and another from outside a house in Prior Street.
Video taken:
A video recorder was stolen during a burglary at a house in Woodcrest Road, Darlington, on Thursday.
Burglars strike:
Burglars made off with a video recorder, CD player, cash, a television and other items worth a total of £1,370 from a house in Grange Road, Darlington, on Thursday.
Rabbit stolen:
A pet rabbit was taken from a shed at a home in Haringay Street, Darlington, on Thursday.
Satellite swiped:
A satellite dish was taken from the outside of a house in Eastmount Road, Darlington, on Thursday.
Hotel plan:
A new plan to renovate The Gretna Green Wedding Inn, near Newton Aycliffe, has been received by Sedgefield District Council.
If the plans get the go ahead the Inn will become a hotel, pub and nightclub with a restaurant and cocktail bar.
Planning appeal:
An appeal has been lodged against the refusal of planning permission to convert buildings at the former Jesse Harold factory, Dale Road, Shildon, into flats and houses.
Jumble sale:
The Ladies Guild holds a jumble sale at St Andrew's church hall, Haughton le Skerne, on February 8.
Houses plan:
Two houses are to be built on grazing land behind 71 High Street, Byers Green, Spennymoor.
Sedgefield District Council development sub-committee approved the plan which includes felling and replacing old and dangerous trees on the site.
Relate call:
Relate, the marriage guidance group, needs a volunteer to help out in its Darlington office for approximately two hours a week.
The work will be general office chores and will include some typing.
If you have any time to spare please telephone Carol Whittingham on Darlington .
Boot sale:
A table top and car boot sale will be held at St Thomas Aquinas, North Road, Darlington, next Saturday from 10am until 2pm.
Bookings can be made now on Darlington .
The cost is £5.
Raid beater:
In a bid to deter ram raiders a Shildon shop is to have metal posts erected on the pavement outside its window.
The shop is to be extended into the next door house, 19 Main Street, after Sedgefield district councillors approved the plan.
Plant growth:
The Tomado plant at Green Lane Industrial Estate, Spennymoor, looks set to be extended.
Sedgefield council's development subcommittee has approved the plan which includes 192 car parking spaces.
Withdrawal is the only answer
IT WAS a strange coincidence that Harry Mead should write about the Northern Ireland situation on the very day that one of the worst atrocities in recent years occurred (Echo January 17).
I entirely concur with his prediction that in the end we will have to withdraw from the Province.
How many more lives will have to be sacrificed before that happens?
This will not be as a result of a concession to terrorism.
Not all of those who are dedicated to reunification are killers.
Simply people who believe that a wrong was committed, which should be put right.
The fact that a criminal offence occurred a long time ago does not absolve the wrong-doer from guilt, and justice must be done, whether it is 30 or 300 years later.
Preaching hatred, as people like Ian Paisley do, only fans the flames of vengeance.
I am sure the majority of taxpayers in the rest of Britain are now resentful of the huge cost of rebuilding and compensation for retaining the status quo in Northern Ireland.
If the Loyalists are so determined to live under British rule, it would make economic sense for them to be assisted to move to the mainland.
The sooner, the better.
Horace Wilson, 18, Ayton Drive, Darlington.
Labour's losers
ELECTION fever again and the main thing many voters found off-putting last time still troubles them today: the leadership of the Labour Party.
It is a pity the more intelligent Shadow Cabinet members are led by an intellectual lightweight.
Kinnock has not changed in five years.
He is still haranguing rallies in the usual rabble-rousing, tub-thumping, arrogant and abrasive way.
All this is fine for the feeble-minded.
But he has got to attract the more intelligent if he is to succeed.
Despite the glossy packaging he ruined Labour's chances last time and he is set to repeat the disaster.
What rubbish Labour talks about taxes.
They criticise the poll tax, but when they were in office the rates went through the roof.
Whatever they substitute for the poll tax would cost the voter dearly because they would allow Labour councils to spend, spend, spend.
These councils permanently seek more and more money.
Provision of unlimited money undermines incentives for greater efficiency which is why nationalised industries always run at a loss.
Anyway, Labour can't get their own story straight about taxes, so how can voters begin to believe what they say?
R.K. Bradley, 125 Lunedale Road, Darlington.
Test falls into trap
MR GIBBON points out (HAS January 13) that the test question (Echo January 7) for 14-year-olds shows the man has already stepped onto the first stair and begins to fall into the trap of talking about the man, when the question asks about the load!
The answer of 2,000 joules is the one which considers both man and load, but we must, of course, look at the load.
This is actually shown to be level with the sixth step, so if the man sensibly puts the load down at the top of the stairs then 100 joules is the answer.
The 400 joule answer is correct if the load is moved from floor to floor, or the man always holds the load and moves from floor to floor.
Mr Gibbon has rightly said that we don't really know what is asked.
When the Government asks for tests, so that standards can be measured, then it doesn't set the questions.
These are carefully worked out by teams of Examiners, who were once, or still are, teachers themselves.
Teams spend a lot of time in trying to pose each question clearly.
They then work out reasonable answers which shouldn't allow a student to just eliminate the impossible ones.
But Mr Gibbon and I have both got our answers.
M D Tubman, 1 Hazeldene Avenue, Stockton-on- Tees.
Airborne mystery
IT WAS in the early afternoon when information was received at this desk about the plane.
It was flying around.
But that was not all.
It was flying around and coming back again.
It appeared to have something on the side.
This could have been the world scoop.
A check with the skies proved that the informant's eyes had not deceived him.
There was a plane.
It was leaving an impressive vapour trail.
There was something on the side too.
The airport authorities nearby had heard nothing, or were telling nothing.
It could have been a cover-up though.
Maybe it was not in their interests to say so.
The photographers went out and captured the plane.
It did not look like UFO.
It looked like a plane with something on the side, possibly an early warning system.
But then the plane went away and with it the world exclusive.
Now we may never know what secrets it was towing with it in the clouds.
THE new campaign to combat solvent abuse, launched in London yesterday, is welcome in that it brings the problem before the public once more.
In recent years, greater concern has been expressed about the effects of hard drugs on young people.
As our investigation of the problem in Darlington last month demonstrated, solvent abuse is just as lethal and much more prevalent among younger children.
We doubt whether the shock-horror TV advertising campaign will directly stop youngsters sniffing solvents, but it should bring home the horrors of the practice to those who can do something about it parents.
A COMPANY has been fined more than £2,000 after two of its workers broke their hands on unprotected lathe machines.
In both cases precautionary measures could have been cheaply and easily put in place by fixing covers to the machines, Darlington magistrates were told yesterday.
Both accidents happened at Durham Tube, Brookside Works, Middleton St George the parent company, Midlands-based Senior Tube, was represented by director James Alexander Innes.
Health and Safety Executive representative Neil Anderson said Peter McKay was working on a cutting machine when his glove became entangled with a rotating bar he broke two bones in his left hand and was off work for six weeks.
Mr Anderson said the factory failed to report the injury within the required seven-day period.
The other victim, Gary Robson, was working on a Colchester Mascot machine when his gloves got entangled in a rotating bar he had tried to stop wobbling.
It was some time before the engine could be switched off, as he could not communicate with the operator on the other side of the wall.
Mr Robson suffered broken bones in both hands.
Mr Anderson said there was a risk of entanglement during operation and the company was required by law to provide covers.
Richard Penrose, defending, said the firm had not intended to conceal or cover up the accident.
He said when Mr McKay's sick note was sent in it was not picked up that it had anything to do with the accident.
It was reported 18 days later.
Mr Innes pleaded guilty to two charges of failing to provide secure fencing for the machines and to failing to report the injury.
The firm was fined a total of £2,437.
Boy is quizzed on sex attack
A TEENAGER is helping detectives with their inquiries into a vicious sex attack in Hartlepool.
The 16-year-old boy was detained yesterday after a three-day inquiry.
No charges have yet been brought.
The victim of the attack on Friday was an 87-year-old woman who lives in Hart Lane.
She was pushed inside her home and assaulted after answering a knock on her door at about 9.30pm.
A team of around 30 detectives and uniformed officers has been working on the inquiry.
Top award:
Cleveland fireman Shaukat Riasat Khaliq has achieved top marks in the Fire Services National Examination Board's leading firefighter's 1991 written examination.
He will be presented with a framed certificate at a ceremony in London.
A66 pile-up:
A five-lorry pile-up on the A66 at Penrith caused the major trans-Pennine route to be closed for six hours early yesterday.
Traffic was diverted along the A69 and through Tedale.
There were no serious injuries.
Burglary charge:
Peter O'Dwyer, 23, of Arthur Street, Darlington, was remanded in custody charged jointly with others of burglary at The Gatehouse, Ellerton-on-Swale, near Catterick, when electrical equipment and other goods worth £1,200 were stolen.
An application for bail was refused.
Fishy business:
Police are trying to hook a thief who stole specialised fishing equipment worth more than £1,300.
A fisherman left the tackle at Topcliffe Bridge on the River Swale, in North Yorkshire, to talk to a friend and when he returned minutes later his equipment had gone.
A DARLINGTON teenager was selling drugs at an open-air party, a Teesside Crown Court jury decided yesterday.
Peter Jones, 19, was found in a tent where a group of young people had gathered for a party.
Yesterday the jury found Jones, of Tyne Crescent, guilty of possessing LSD, possessing LSD with intent to supply it and possessing cannabis resin.
Sentence was adjourned for a social inquiry report.
PLANS to breathe new life into a derelict brickworks by building a new village on it have been rejected by Darlington councillors.
Members of the council's policy resources committee demanded that the owners of the land on the outskirts of Darlington restore the blighted area to a green field site.
Coun David Lyonette (Lab) said: ‘An awful lot of money has been made out of this area.
We have a right to ask for it to be put back to the state it was in.’
But Coun Tony Richmond (Con) warned that the developers, Bowater Crossley Bricks, could win a possible appeal, because of the council's inconsistency in planning matters.
He said his Labour counterparts had earlier ignored similar advice from officers when they approved a development consisting of hundreds of houses on a green field site.
Yesterday's meeting refused the plans for Skipbridge Village, comprising 200 houses on 52 acres of land, after a video presentation by the company outlining the application.
The developers told councillors they would pay £3.5m to create an infrastructure for the settlement, between Hurworth and Neasham.
They said the plans would clear up a derelict site, while providing a new community with its own character, which would relieve pressure on housing in surrounding villages.
Director of development services Stephen Tapper urged the committee to reject the plans because they conflicted with planning policies.
CAMPAIGNERS say Darlington council's decision to ban disabled drivers from parts of the town centre during peak periods could force them to shop elsewhere.
The policy and resources committee, after a fierce debate yesterday, endorsed plans to axe special exemptions in Skinnergate and High Row for the orange badge users.
Rosemary Sandford of Darlington Association on Disability, said they were saddened and disappointed they were not given the opportunity to express their views at the meeting.
And she added the move not to establish a special badge scheme would disenfranchise disabled car users from using the town centre, and force many to shop elsewhere.
Council leader John Williams (Lab) said that there had to be strict conditions.
But Tory leader Tony Richmond countered that Labour had ‘ratted’ on a commitment to provide access, while Coun Peter Jones (Con) said the planned closure of High Row and Skinnergate was a disastrous course.
Coun Williams said the measures to bar all vehicles between 10.30am and 4pm would include a cycling ban, while the requirements of the disabled would be monitored and, if necessary, revised.
COUNCILLORS keen to attract a major supermarket to Darlington have agreed to ‘nudge’ a Government minister to remind him to visit the town.
Darlington Council leader John Williams (Lab) said public transport minister Roger Freeman had pledged to meet the management of Caldaire, which owns the site in question but there had been no further word from him.
Mr Freeman said he would come to the town after meeting an all-party delegation from the council in London.
They discussed stumbling blocks to progress on a scheme to bring Sainsbury to Caldaire's Grange Road site.
The scheme would involve the relocation of the United Bus depot to another site in Darlington.
Tory leader Coun Tony Richmond said yesterday Labour members were departing from the all-party agreement by blaming Mr Freeman for not having yet visited.
Bus designer's wife dies at 88
THE wife of a Darlington man who helped design one of Britain's first passenger buses has died.
Teresa Forster, of Pierremont Road, Darlington, was 88.
She was married to the late George Forster, who introduced the Forster community bus in Darlington in the 1930s.
Mrs Forster, who leaves a son, worked for Binns and the United bus company offices in Darlington.
Foam attack:
Thieves broke into vending machines at Teesdale's new sports centre at Barnard Castle to steal £100 cash.
The new sports shop was also raided.
The burglars also sprayed the sports hall with fire foam.
Licences renewed:
Six slaughterhouses in Fishburn, Sedgefield, Shildon, Tudhoe and Ferryhill are set to have their licences renewed by Sedgefield District Council this week.
Crash probe:
Bishop Auckland police are investigating a crash on Seymour Street involving a stolen vehicle.
A spokesman said it appeared the Escort XR3i collided with parked vehicles at 9pm on Monday and the driver then abandoned the car.
Airport fire:
Darlington firemen yesterday tackled an oven fire in a kitchen at Teesside Airport on Monday.
The incident was under control within a few minutes and no-one was injured.
Stamp of authority
The break-up of the Soviet Union could be big business for one Darlington resident.
Mr Gyula Vasarhelyi, aged 62, of Oakdene Avenue, holds the Guinness Book of Stamps record for completing 6,000 stamp designs for 121 countries.
And now the states emerging from the Soviet empire are opening up new markets for him: ‘Suddenly there are 17 or so more countries all wanting their own national stamps,’ he said.
‘Besides Mongolia, I have also done preliminary sketches for Georgia, although the civil war means the postal service may have to wait.’
But the Hungarian expatriate's hopes for new business were almost dashed in November when he tore the retina in one of his eyes in an accident.
Only sophisticated treatment at Sunderland eye infirmary saved his sight.
‘I was very lucky indeed.
They said it's only in the last five to seven years that they've had the technology to do it.’
DOWNGRADING OF TOWN COULD BACKFIRE
A plea to downgrade Darlington so it could attract more Government aid is to go ahead despite an earlier warning that it could backfire.
Mr Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for the town, wants a review of its industrial grant aid status after Kimberley-Clark chose to build a £100m. plant on Humberside rather than Darlington.
He claims Humberside was able to offer a better financial package because it is a regional development area whereas Darlington was classed as intermediate.
His initial call for a switch in official status sparked an angry response from Mr Michael Fallon, the town's MP and Schools Minister.
He said Darlington had attracted a lot of new companies and businesses and if the town was downgraded it could actually deter others from coming to the town.
Mr Fallon said the town's unemployment rate on which its status was fixed was below the national average of ten per cent.
But this week Mr Milburn said he is writing to Mr Peter Lilley, trade and industry secretary, calling for a switch in status so more Government grants would be available.
He claimed official unemployment figures for last year showed Darlington's travel to work area had a higher rate than development areas such as Hartlepool and Sunderland.
‘Unemployment is rising faster in Darlington than in many development areas,’ he said, ‘It is absurd Darlington should be treated as a second-class area when its unemployment is rising faster.’
He cited Corby as one area attracting 15 per cent development grant aid while Darlington only received nine per cent, and Scunthorpe whose unemployment in November was 7.9 per cent compared to Darlington's 8.1 per cent .
AMERICAN TRADE PROMPTS HOTEL EXPANSION PLAN
American tourists wanting to spend a night in a real English castle have helped make £750,000 expansion plans possible for a local hotelier.
Management at Walworth Castle Hotel in Walworth, Darlington, saw a dramatic upturn in the number of American tourists who stayed at the Grade 1 listed building last year.
Now, with a healthy balance sheet despite the recession, the owners are planning to create a courtyard which the castle itself never had.
They are asking Darlington planning committee for permission to build a 36-bedroom extension.
The two-story building would join a previous extension to form the courtyard.
The castle itself would not be altered.
Council officers have recommended approval of plans.
Archaeologists from Newcastle University have already made a number of test excavations at the site of the extension and found nothing of historical value.
Mrs Anita Culley, manager of the hotel, said: ‘We have not noticed a large drop in trade during the recession.
We are doing more functions than ever and we have also had a lot more visitors from America.’
She said last year more than five per cent of the hotel's trade came from Americans.
SHOCKING new adverts aimed at stemming the rising death toll caused by solvent abuse have been welcomed by North-East campaigners.
According to the latest figures at least two youngsters die every week as a direct result of inhaling solvent fumes.
Only last month an investigation by The Northern drew attention to the increasing problems of solvent abuse in North-East towns and cities.
Our reporters uncovered a generation who have been sucked into a dark underworld of solvent abuse and hard drugs.
Many are sleeping rough, some are even offering sexual services in return for the next fix.
Now the Government has moved to tackle the growing problem with four hard-hitting TV advertisements, as part of a £1.4m crackdown on sniffers.
The adverts are designed to shock abusers and make parents more aware of the dangers.
They feature the noise of a boy choking to death and a mother breaking down on hearing her child is dead.
Police and solvent abuse campaigners have welcomed the commercials, the first of which will be screened at 8.15pm tonight.
Durham's Assistant Chief Constable Eddie Marchant said police were concerned at revelations in The Northern Echo.
He said: ‘We are disturbed by the recent reports showing the prevalence of solvent abuse in Darlington.
This is a very difficult problem for the police to deal with.
It isn't an offence to inhale solvents but it is an offence to sell them in the knowledge that they will be used for such a purpose.’
Durham police are taking the war against solvent abuse on to the streets and into local shops.
Officers have been visiting stores advising businessmen how to spot the signs of an abuser.
Mr Marchant added: We hope they will adopt a responsible attitude to the problem.
Solvent can kill and has done so in the past.’
Darlington MP Michael Fallon welcomed the new campaign, saying: ‘It is long overdue.
‘Glue sniffing is becoming an increasing problem in the town.
We have to tackle the issue head on.’
But a solvent campaigner who works with abusers said the campaign didn't go far enough.
He wants to see even greater spending on publicity, help and advice.
And he said: ‘A budget of £1.4m across the country simply isn't enough — but at least it's a step in the right direction.’
Announcing the new campaign junior health minister Baroness Harper said: ‘Glue sniffing is not a problem that has gone away.’
Many parents still don't realise the hidden dangers in household goods.
To help them identify the danger signs an information booklet will be made available and press ads will drum home the message.
The Government has not ruled out putting warning labels on products such as aerosols and lighter fuel.
A DARLINGTON pensioner lost hundreds of pounds when her handbag was stolen as she was getting into her car.
The woman, who has not been identified, was alone in Firth Moor Crescent when the thief struck.
Police say she was about to open her car door when she heard footsteps behind her.
Someone grabbed her bag and made off before she had time to see who it was.
The woman, who is in her 60s, was not injured in the attack on Thursday evening but lost around £560 in cash.
Anyone with information is asked to contact Darlington police on .
A MINESWEEPER with strong North-East links is back in action following an extensive refit.
HMS Hurworth, which went into battle during the Gulf conflict decorated with art work by village pupils of its namesake, near Darlington, was re-dedicated at a rousing ceremony in Rosyth.
Hurworth parish council chairman Peter Foster presented the skipper, Lt Commodore Nic Funnell, with a photograph of the River Tees by The Comet, in Hurworth with the hunt-class hunter sweeper superimposed.
And Hurworth's Bay Horse pub landlord Ian Leonard gave the ship's captain a photograph of the first HMS Hurworth, a destroyer sunk after striking a mine off Crete in 1943.
Also in attendance was Hurworth Primary School head teacher Trevor Drury and other Hurworth villagers.
The crew of the ship have become an integral part of Hurworth village life and keep in regular contact with schoolchildren.
The ship will soon be visiting Hartlepool giving Hurworth residents the opportunity to go on board and meet crew members.
A SPUR of the moment fishing trip that Michael Harty arranged to please his three-year-old son left him £90 out of pocket.
Darlington magistrates heard yesterday that a water bailiff spotted Harty fishing on the banks of the Tees at Piercebridge.
Alan Vickers, prosecuting, said the land was owned by Teesdale and District Angling Club and Harty had no licence to fish there.
Harty, 27, of Zetland Hunt, The Chase, Aycliffe, admitted fishing without a licence and attempting to take fish in water where there was a private right of fishery.
He was fined a total of £70 and ordered to pay a further £20 costs.
In his own mitigation Harty said the previous day he had been clearing out his garage and come across long forgotten fishing tackle.
When his three-year-old son saw the rods he started crying and said he wanted to go fishing, and was still upset the next morning.
‘I said I would take him, we went off and that was it.
I hadn't been there ten minutes when the bailiff came,’ he said.
Mr Harty added he had seen signs saying fishing was for members only but had not taken any notice of them.
A MAN who claims his mail has not been delivered for over two years has received an apology from the Post Office after the discovery of over 400 letters at the home of a former postman.
Douglas Gray of Middleton in Teesdale said he had been complaining for over two years about undelivered letters and hit out at the ‘uncaring attitude’ of the Post Office in Darlington.
District head postmaster John Ensoll said he had only received complaints going back to December last year.
Nevertheless he extended his apologies to residents of Middleton in Teesdale.
An ex-postman in the village is now the subject of an investigation by the Post Office following the discovery of the undelivered letters.
Mr Ensoll said the man had been interviewed by the investigation team, and stressed that he was the only person involved in the inquiry.
The postman was taken on in September 1990 and resigned recently.
But Mr Gray is adamant that he has not had letters delivered to him since December 1990.
Seed catalogues and bee magazines had not arrived even though he had been assured by the companies involved that they were sent.
Mr Gray said he first took up his complaint about missing mail in December 1990 and was told by the post office in Darlington that it would be given urgent attention.
The following February he sent another letter and received a similar response.
Again he wrote and was told that mail at Middleton in Teesdale would be checked, but he heard nothing further.
Mr Gray said he knew of one man who had been threatened with court action for not paying his water rates when he did not receive a reminder.
He paid up just in time.
Mr Ensoll said he wanted to make it clear that only one person, an ex postman, was involved in the inquiry.
He said no one working for the Post Office at Middleton at the present time was in any way part of the investigation.
A COUNCILLOR has accused Durham County Council of political tactics in closing an old people's home.
Great Aycliffe councillor Peter Bergg (Lib Dem) claimed the Labour council's decision to close Greenfields House, Newton Aycliffe, was not based on financial reasons.
‘It's political as Greenfields is in an independent and not a Labour ward,’ he said.
And he claimed the county council was keeping other homes open which needed more money spent on them.
Coun Bergg, the Liberal Democrat hopeful for Darlington, said: ‘Local people, residents and staff are all against closure.
‘Old people are being herded from place to place because of the whim of the county council.’
But Coun Bob Pendlebury, deputy leader of the county council, said the decision was not based on politics and a lot of factors were taken into account.
Coun Bergg will discuss the matter at a special meeting of Great Aycliffe Town Council tomorrow.
A DARLINGTON couple were involved in a fatal multiple pile-up on the fogbound A1 over the weekend, police confirmed yesterday.
Nena and Jeff Kemp were driving from their home in Pentland Grove, Darlington, to visit their daughter in Kent.
But they were among dozens of motorists caught up in the smash on the southbound carriageway of the A1 near Doncaster on Saturday.
Mrs Kemp, 52, suffered several fractures and is still being treated in Doncaster where she was yesterday said to be ‘fine.’
Doctors hope she will soon be well enough to be transferred to Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Businessman Mr Kemp, 53, sustained more minor injuries and is staying at the hospital to be with his wife.
Father-of-two Robert Stiff, 41, of York, was killed in the accident.
PENSIONERS at a Darlington community centre who had money and a karaoke machine stolen by callous thieves are starting a new fundraising drive.
Old folk at the Wesley Court centre had collected hundreds of pounds to pay for the sing-a-long machine.
Two weeks ago thieves broke into the building and stole the karaoke machine, and more than £700 in cash collected to pay for summer outings.
Now the club's 90 members are organising a jumble sale at Wesley Court on Saturday, February 18 to replace the missing funds.
The afternoon will feature a tombola, raffle, white elephant stall and home baking, and doors will open at 1.30pm.
Animals receive special delivery
YOUNGSTERS at a Bishop Auckland day centre made a special presentation to a local animal rescue centre yesterday.
A group from the Murphy Crescent centre prepared a hamper of food after discussing the campaign against buying animals as Christmas presents.
Alex Winwood of Eldon Hope Animal Rescue said she was delighted with the gift and every donation helped.
‘They had been discussing the idea that a pet should be for life not just for Christmas and decided to take the idea a step further,’ she said.
Club success: The success of the Wednesday morning Kiddies Klub at the Spectrum Leisure Complex in Willington has led to the introduction of new sessions on Mondays.
Parents and children are welcome from 9–11am and more information is available on Bishop Auckland .
Open evening: Bishop Auckland Sixth Form Centre has an open evening on next week to give advice and information on courses for the over-16s.
Students and tutors will be available to talk to visitors from 7pm on Wednesday, February 12.
Missing motorcycle:
A Yamaha motorbike was stolen from the Kwik Save car park, Bishop Auckland, on Saturday morning.
Squash date:
Entries are now being taken for the Wear Valley Closed Squash Tournament to be held at the Spectrum Leisure Complex, Willington, on February 28–29 and March 1.
Entry costs £2 for adults and £1 for juniors and applications should be sent to the Spectrum no later than February 22.
Fashion fund-raiser:
A fashion show in aid of the Eldon Hope Animal Rescue Centre will be held at Ferryhill later this month.
Tickets for the event featuring Jill's Seconds garments are available at £1 by calling Ferryhill .
The show gets underway at 7.45pm at Broom Junior School and there will also be a raffle and sale of clothing.
Craft fairs:
Cockfield Community Association is holding a craft fair and table top sale every second and fourth Sunday with the first one this week from 10am to 4pm in the community hall.
Country concerns:
Trimdon children are making a joint effort to improve wildlife in the countryside around their schools.
On February 12 children from Trimdon Grange Infant School will start work planting a hedge on the edge of farmland at Homeside Avenue, Trimdon Grange.
Their efforts will be continued by school parties from St Williams RC Junior and Infant and Trimdon Junior School.
Jumble sale:
Haughton-le-Skerne Ladies Guild is to hold a jumble sale on Saturday at 2pm in the church hall.
Under water:
A sub-aqua snorkelling club is being run by Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre for anyone over 14 years old.
The club runs from 9–10pm on Thursday nights.
The centre also offers courses on Saturday nights to prepare newcomers to windsurfing, lifesaving and snorkelling.
Football fun:
American football fans can learn to play the Superbowl game themselves at the sessions run by Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre on Fridays from 4.30–6.30 pm.
Musical beds:
Accommodation is wanted for 20 members of the Cambridge Christ College choir between March 15 and 17.
The choir sings at St Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, on March 15.
Anyone who can help should contact St Cuthbert's on Darlington .
Dance courses:
Special dance courses for community group leaders and youth club workers are to be held in Durham in April and May.
Applications for the dance leaders' course must be made this month to Durham City Arts, City Baths, Elvet Waterside, Durham.
Scrolls talk:
Prof Neville Birdsall gives three talks on the Dead Sea Scrolls at Holy Trinity Church, Darlington, on February 16, 23 and March 1 (7.10pm).
AN open-air party on a pitch and putt course was broken up when police were called, a court heard yesterday.
And when officers went into a tent they found Peter Jones inside with over £300 in cash in his pockets and drugs which police claim they saw him drop.
Yesterday, Jones, 20, appeared before Teesside Crown Court charged with possessing LSD, possessing LSD with intent to supply and possession of cannabis resin.
Jones, of Tyne Crescent, Darlington, has denied the charges.
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, said a large group of young men and women held a party on the course between Lakeside and Grange Road, Darlington.
They were using a nearby generator to provide lighting and music.
But she said when officers went into a tent which contained a number of crates with alcoholic drinks they found Jones holding something in his hand.
When asked to show what it was he offered a bottle opener, but Miss Sherwin said as he did so he dropped a polythene bag containing 12 LSD tabs and a small amount of cannabis resin.
The officers also discovered a syringe on Jones but when asked about the drugs he said they were not his.
Miss Sherwin added: ‘You can infer from these circumstances and the large amount of cash he had on him that he was intending to be selling those tabs that night.’
But Jones told the court he had been looking after the alcohol at the party and collecting money from people who wanted to take some of the drink.
He said he had never seen the drugs before, claiming he had picked up the syringe after seeing it lying around before the party.
He said: ‘The people coming to the party were a bit daft and probably would have picked it up and done some damage with it.’
The case continues.
THE number of mortgage repossessions in Darlington has shown a dramatic rise, according to Labour Party figures.
The town showed the tenth highest percentage rise in Britain for 1991 and the huge increase of 136pc made it one of the worst places in the North-East for repossession orders.
Prospective Labour MP for the town Alan Milburn said: ‘Hundreds of people have been forced into dire straits because the town has been so badly hit by the Government inspired economic slump’
He said the key factor was the 1,300 jobs lost by the town since the recession started.
Meeting over crime rate
SHADOW Home Secretary Roy Hattersley is to meet North Yorkshire's top policeman later this week to discuss the county's growing crime rate.
Mr Hattersley met Chief Constable David Burke last year for what were described as constructive talks.
Both agreed to meet again and a meeting on Thursday with the county police committee in York has now been arranged.
Charity run: Airmen from North Yorkshire are to run 300 miles for charity next month.
The marathon event will take them from London to RAF Leeming.
Members of engineering operations squadron at Leeming hope to raise hundreds of pounds for Gateway Clubs in Northallerton and Ripon.
Gateway helps people with learning difficulties, particularly the mentally handicapped.
Garage fire: One car was burnt out and two others damaged in a garage blaze near Northallerton.
Firemen were still investigating the cause yesterday of the fire at Mossa Grange Farm in Yafforth.
Burglars strike: Intruders raided a house in Northallerton.
They made off with a video recorder, music centre and jewellery from the property in Turker Lane.
Cottage raided: Cash totalling to £1,500 was stolen when thieves broke into a holiday cottage in Gayle, near Hawes.
Tools stolen:
Police are looking for thieves who broke into a car in Catterick Village, near Richmond, and stole various tools worth a total value of about £700.
Opening notes:
Richmondshire Subscription Concerts open their new season with a concert by pianist Artur Pizarro.
The concert takes place on Sunday at 7.30pm in the Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond.
Cheque presentation:
Richmond supporters of the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association will present their latest donation of £1,000 on Saturday at 8pm at the Talbot Hotel, Richmond.
The evening will also include country and western music and raffles.
First aid scheme:
A first aid night for the public to learn resuscitation and first aid skill takes place at the Methodist primary school, Darlington Road, Richmond, on February 11 at 8pm.
Admission costs 50p.
Artist's show:
Helmsley artists Fiona Scott, sister of TV presenter Selina, presents her first major exhibition at the Stable Gallery, Wandsworth Common in London tomorrow.
Brew up:
More than 800 brewing industry chiefs have assembled in Harrogate for the 5th International Brewing Technology Conference.
Woman hurt:
A woman suffered bruising and shock after she was mugged near Osbaldwick, York just before 10pm on Sunday.
Her attacker ran off when a passing motorist stopped.
Royal show:
The Royal Pump Room Museum in Harrogate is commemorating the Queen's 40th anniversary with an exhibition of Royal memorabilia, until March 29.
Market boost:
A new sign over Jubbergate welcoming people to York's revamped Newgate Market has been completed.
Action cash:
Action Harrogate, the campaign to improve standards and attract new business to Harrogate, has been given £1,000 by the Hotels, Guest Houses and Restaurants Association.
Crash victim:
Motor cyclist Andrew Reynoldson, 23, of Firthlands Road, Pickering, was ‘very ill’ in St James's Hospital Leeds, yesterday after being seriously injured in a three-vehicle pile-up on the A64 Scarborough to York road.
Action day:
Members of the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education at Scarborough technical College are staging a day of action this week over the new Further Education Bill.
New signs:
Scarborough Council is to spend £40,000 over the next three years on providing new sign-posting for holidaymakers to the town.
Top hotel:
The Grange Hotel in Clifton, York, has won a top accolade, after being chosen out of a national survey as one of the 30 establishments included in the British Town House Hotel Collection.
A DARLINGTON landlord leaves his pub today after crippling rent rises have forced him out of business.
Geoff Addy, of the Old Dun Cow, says he cannot afford a new 20-year lease which will put his rent and rates up to £2,000 a week.
Geoff, 43, said if he signed the lease, issued by Grand Metropolitan, his rent would increase from £57,000 to £76,000 a year.
‘With the rates it will be over £100,000, which is £2,000 a week before you even open the door,’ he said.
‘This is why Grand Met cannot find anyone to take the leases over.
It is going to be a real struggle.’
Geoff, who has been at the Post House Wynd pub for eight years, said a temporary manager would move in today.
‘But I don't see how anybody is going to make the pub pay.
They are going to end up with a lot of bankrupt people.
‘Anyone who goes into this trade wants to think very carefully about it.’
About 25 John Smith pubs in the Darlington area are affected by the Grand Met leases.
Landlords from the Travellers Rest at Cockerton, the Bay Horse at Hurworth, and the Grey Horse in Darlington also look set to leave this year because of spiralling rents.
It was revealed to The Northern Echo that Grand Met has reduced the rent for the Old Dun Cow from £2,000 to £500 under temporary management.
But a Grand Met spokeswoman declined to comment on the reduction.
‘This is confidential commercial information,’ she said.
Bollards to ease traffic problems
A MOVE to ease traffic problems near the Denes in Darlington has taken a step forward.
Bollards are to be put up outside Bells stores in Corporation Road, to prevent shoppers parking their cars on the pavement, and near Greenbank Post Office.
Northgate South ward councillor Dot Long, who took the case up with Labour colleague Eleanor Young, said: ‘The illegal parking is breaking up the paving stones and it's generally a nuisance for nearby residents.
It also creates problems for buses in that area.
We're both very pleased to have got the bollards and feel confident it should be done before the end of the year.’
Dance courses: Special dance courses for community group leaders and youth club workers are to be held in Durham in April and May.
Applications for the dance leaders' course must be made this month to Durham City Arts, City Baths, Elvet Waterside, Durham.
Under water: A sub-aqua snorkelling club is being run by Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre for anyone over 14 years old.
The club runs from 9–10pm on Thursday nights.
The centre also offers courses on Saturday nights to prepare newcomers to windsurfing, lifesaving and snorkelling.
Jumble sale:
Haughton-le-Skerne Ladies Guild is to hold a jumble sale on Saturday at 2pm in the church hall.
Furniture night:
The Darlington Furniture Scheme has a social evening on February 12 at Walkington House, Darlington at 7.30pm.
The scheme provides second-hand furniture to the needy.
Clock theft:
Two gold carriage clocks, a Sekonda watch and cash were stolen from a house in Limehurst Road, Darlington, over the weekend.
Lights out:
Bulbs were stolen from a car in Vane Terrace, Darlington, over the weekend.
Video grab:
A video, CD player and 20 CDs have been stolen from a house in Cobden Street, Darlington.
Bikes taken:
Two mountain bikes worth £335 have been stolen from Craig Street, Darlington.
Radio stolen:
Police are looking for information on a Pye radio cassette stolen from a car in Hewitson Road, Darlington, serial number 9009043504.
Club success:
The success of the Wednesday morning Kiddies Klub at the Spectrum Leisure Complex in Willington has led to the introduction of new sessions on Mondays from 9–11am.
Open evening:
Bishop Auckland Sixth Form Centre has an open evening next week to give advice and information on courses for the over-16s.
Students and tutors will be available to talk to visitors from 7pm on Wednesday, February 12.
Missing motorcycle:
A Yamaha motorbike was stolen from the Kwik Save car park, Bishop Auckland, on Saturday morning.
House break-in:
Thieves who broke into a house on Central Avenue, St Helens Auckland, took a microwave oven, food processor and a purse.
Squash date:
Entries are now being taken for the Wear Valley Closed Squash Tournament to be held at the Spectrum Leisure Complex, Willington, on February 28–29 and March 1.
Applications must be in by February 22.
Craft fairs:
Cockfield Community Association is holding a craft fair and table top sale every second and fourth Sunday with the first one this week from 10am to 4pm in the community hall.
A DARLINGTON man lost his fight for life five days after his wife died suddenly in hospital.
Jimmy Jarvie, 70, of Welbeck Avenue, died peacefully on Sunday in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
His wife Agnes, also 70, died in the hospital last Tuesday.
The couple leave a son Jim and daughter Diane and four grandchildren.
Mr Jarvie's funeral is to take place at St Andrew's Church, Haughton, Darlington, on Friday.
Credible
WILL there really be a Tory walkover in the Richmond constituency, as your editorial suggests (Echo January 30)?
When SDP Mike Potter first stood, he took votes from the Conservatives, Labour and Liberals and made the seat a marginal, for the first time in many Parliamentary elections.
Where the Tories have lost recent by-elections, the second placed party has won, and Mike Potter holds that place now in the Richmond constituency.
Standing independently or as SDP, he is the only credible alternative..
AN OXFORD
University college has denied any link with a racist newsletter circulating in the North-East.
Pat Thurston, of Kew Rise, Darlington, received a copy of the document through the post.
Headed ‘Magdalen College, Oxford’, it purports to come from someone called Verity Bough of the Students of Europe Patriotic League.
The two-page pamphlet consists of a diatribe against the philosophy of multiracialism and includes offensive remarks about ethnic minorities.
It talks of the need to succeed where Adolf Hitler failed, and refers to a ‘well-known Oxford University zoologist Dr John Baker’ who argues in favour of racial purity.
The newsletter praises John Tyndall of the British National Party and Ian Anderson of the National Front, and urges readers to duplicate and circulate it.
Mrs Thurston said: ‘It arrived at our home out of the blue.
The tone of it is really quite offensive and a lot of people could be alarmed.
I think whoever is responsible for this is quite pathetic.’
A spokeswoman for Magdalen College, Oxford, said: ‘There is no person called Verity Bough who has any connection with the college.
Clearly this is something we do not wish to be associated with; we can only imagine they are trying to get some kind of spurious respectability by using our name.
‘The typeface and letterhead is not used in this college.’
EXTRA town centre traffic measures could be on the cards to curb congestion in Darlington.
Councillors are set to consider a number of radical measures to alleviate problems with buses using the town centre.
Among the ideas under consideration are:— changes to bus lanes in a bid to speed up services;— giving buses priority at traffic lights;— contraflow bus lanes allowing public transport to travel against the main flow of traffic in a one way street;— measures to protect bus stops from careless motorists who park illegally.
The suggestions are contained in a special report produced by the Department of Transport which looks into methods of keeping public transport moving in busy towns and cities.
Councillors will consider the measures tonight prior to a meeting with the town's transport operators.
A report by development services director Stephen Tapper says bus lanes produce considerable time savings by allowing public transport unrestricted access.
But it adds: ‘If vehicles are parked in the bus lane, this can result in delays.
‘Cyclists in bus lanes may also cause delay to buses, although banning cyclists places them in danger if they are required to ride in the main carriageway, with buses passing on their nearside.’
The report also says councillors may wish to consider plans to allow taxis to use bus lanes because they are usually carrying more than one passenger.
Giving buses priority at busy junctions would also speed up travel times, says Mr Tapper.
Traffic lights can be reprogrammed to give public transport instant priority over other road users.
This system would require the fitment of special electronic transponders to each bus in order to alert traffic signals.
Bus stops could also be marked out in a bid to stop drivers parking there.
Councillors have already held talks with the town's bus operators with a view to reducing the number of vehicles using the centre.
HOSPICE staff are still appealing for furniture for their newly opened office at Harewood House, Harewood Hill, Darlington.
Numerous donations have already helped them settle into Harewood House including desks from KPMG Peat Marwick, a coffee machine from the Halifax Building Society, plants from Charlotte Carter, tables from Graham Tennant, a vacuum cleaner from Doug Race, a spin drier from Mrs Morton, a nebuliser from Mrs Burak and a freezer from Irene Hayes.
They were also helped into their new home by a team of volunteers who took on the task of cleaning the offices which had been empty for some time.
But staff still need a fridge and would welcome any offers of help with that and other furniture or equipment.
The new office is open every weekday morning and most afternoons anyone intending to visit after 1.30pm should telephone first.
A major donation was sent to the hospice this week from the estate of the late Mary Siddle Leeming who left £5,000 to them.
Covenants and bequests form an essential part of the hospice's income and staff are gratified that can care for more patients and support bereaved families through this sort of help.
There are plenty of other ways to help Darlington Hospice.
Anyone who feels they could not volunteer to sit with patients could assist in other ways.
Visitors are welcome to go to the Harewood House office to talk to staff and discuss possibilities.
Hospices around Britain are to be featured on this Sunday's Songs of Praise which will be presented by newsreader Martyn Lewis.
He is vice-president of Help the Hospices.
The hospice telephone number is Darlington .
PHOTOGRAPHER Beth Davidson is among professional artists spending two months in local schools in a brand new arts initiative.
Eight schools are taking part in the trial scheme run by Sedgefield District Council.
Ms Davidson, a Darlington artist, is based at Woodham Comprehensive where she is running a photography project for pupils.
Other schools will be designing and painting wall murals, creating an environmental sculpture, working with video and poetry.
The other seven schools are Spennymoor Comprehensive, Ferryhill Comprehensive and Ferryhill Station Primary, Broom Cottages Primary, Dean Bank Primary, Trimdon Grange Comprehensive and Tudhoe Grange Comprehensive.
Funding is coming from Northern Arts, Durham County Council and Wear Valley District Council which has six schools also trying the artist in residence scheme.
Coundon Club theft:
Thieves broke into the village youth centre last weekend and stole sweets and refreshments.
Committee call:
The village show committee is looking for new recruits.
Anyone who can help should attend the show AGM to be held on Monday March 23 at Elstob Hall Farm at 8pm or telephone Christine Tinkler on .
Top sale:
A table top sale will be held in the Village Hall on Saturday February 15 from 10am onwards.
Extension bid:
The owners of 8 and 10 Millbank are seeking planning permission for two ground floor bedroom extensions and dorma bedrooms and bathrooms at the rear of their homes.
Middleton St George Appeal help:
Children and staff of Middleton St George Junior School are organising an appeal for food, clothing and cash which will be sent out to children in the Russian town of Kostroma, Durham's twin city.
The event, run in conjunction with Durham County Council, will be held on Valentines Day, February 14, and is hoped to signify the common bond the schoolchildren feel towards their foreign counterparts.
Pupils and staff will also wear fancy-dress costumes.
Parish council:
The parish council is due to meet again on Monday.
Mother's union:
The annual general meeting of the Mother's Union will take place on Tuesday February 18 in the WI hall starting at 2pm.
Blooming Britain:
The village is to compete in this year's Britain in Bloom competition, people are asked to keep the community tidy, and British Rail is to be asked to tidy the station.
Planning applications:
Darlington Borough Council is being asked to grant planning permission to J and RM Richardson Construction of Darlington to build six flats in a two-storey block on land at Station Road in the village.
Also BH and LY Skipper of Stockton have applied for permission to build a wooden stable building on land adjacent to Ash Tree Cottage, Roman Road in the village.
WI news:
At the next meeting on February 27 Mrs Russell will bring a display of Goss china and the competition will be for a small piece of china.
There will also be an auction of unwanted gifts.
New members and visitors are always welcome, meetings take place on the fourth Thursday of the month at the WI hall starting at 7.15pm.
The date for the nearly new sale has been fixed as Saturday March 14 and good quality clothes are needed.
More details will be arranged in February.
A group outing to the Northern Counties Craft Exhibition at Beamish Hall will hopefully be arranged for the week beginning June 22, items about the village are needed for inclusion in the Durham village book.
Middleton One Row Planning application: S Gardner of Middleton St George has applied to Darlington Borough Council for planning permission to allow work to alter the appearance of the chapel at The Front.
Neasham Parish council: The parish council met on Monday.
Among items discussed were the Skipbridge village proposal and the resiting of Darlington cattle market.
The village is also to enter the Tidy Britain and Britain in Bloom contests.
Members also agreed to ask Darlington Borough Council to plant some more bulbs on the village green.
Applications are to be made to the borough council and English Heritage for cash assistance in repairing the pump house roof.
The next meeting is due to be held on Monday March 2.
WI news:
The next meeting due to take place on Thursday February 13 is a Chinese evening, with the committee providing food.
Jumble sale:
A jumble sale will be held at the village hall on March 19.
Redmarshall Club views:
Residents of Bishopton, Redmarshall and Carlton are invited to give their views on setting up a youth club for local 11 to 16-year-olds at a meeting on February 14.
The meeting is to be held at the Rectory, Redmarshall at 7.30 pm.
Sadberge Variety night:
Sadberge Village Hall will be holding a variety show on the evenings of March 13 and 14.
Any budding talents should go to the rehearsals held from 6–7pm every Wednesday before the event.
For more information contact Millie Scaife.
Planning applications:
Darlington Borough Council has been asked to grant planning permission for an outbuilding at Salter Carr Farm, Sadberge, by Mr and Mrs Knaggs.
St John's Chapel Band concert:
The Stanhope Silver Band will perform a concert at the town hall at 7.30pm on February 25.
Tickets cost £1.50 for adults and £1 for children and pensioners.
YOUNGSTERS at a Darlington school are on the move thanks to a new £14,000 minibus.
Parents, pupils and staff all chipped in to help collect the cash for a new bus for Eastbourne school.
The Transit minibus will be used for outings and visits throughout the school year.
Headteacher Bob Dingle praised the fund-raising efforts, saying: ‘The monies were raised jointly through the efforts of parents, pupils and staff and by careful management of our budget by the Governors.’
The new minibus was handed over to the school yesterday in a ceremony attended by governors and members of the Eastbourne Parent Teachers Association.
FAMILIES are facing a spiralling debt crisis, according to a prospective parliamentary candidate.
Latest figures issued by Darlington's Citizen's Advice Bureau show a massive upsurge in the number of new inquiries.
The bureau, in Horsemarket, received 259 inquiries during November last year an increase of 90 compared to the same month in 1990.
Of those figures, 95 were new inquiries from people with nowhere else to turn.
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, claims the figures are only the tip of the iceberg.
He said: ‘I am sure there are hundreds of other people throughout the town who are struggling with rising debt problems.’
Hardest hit are small businessmen and the unemployed who get sucked into a string of debt, partly as a result of easy credit, added Mr Milburn.
TRANSPORT Secretary Malcolm Rifkind visits Darlington tonight to speak to members of the town's Conservative Association.
He will stop off in the town on his way from London to his constituency in Scotland.
Mr Rifkind is working on a White Paper which could lead to the privatisation of Britain's railways and it is likely the issue will be raised by Conservatives tonight.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon will join the cabinet minister for the dinner at the Blackwell Grange Moathouse Hotel.
While in Darlington, Mr Rifkind is to present special certificates to two local businessmen.
Alasdair MacConnachie, of Sherwoods Garage, and Darlington architect Geoffrey Townsend have both been awarded the British Standard 5750 certificate to mark the quality of their work.
Mr Rifkind will meet the pair to formally congratulate them on their achievements in the town.
A HOTEL in a Grade I listed building is set to be doubled in size with a £750,000 extension.
Owners of Walworth Castle Hotel, near Darlington, will now extend the west wing to provide another 36 bedrooms in addition to the existing 34.
But a fourth application to turn nearby Oxmoor Farm into tourist accommodation was refused.
Darlington borough councillors heard the two-storey extension at Walworth Castle Hotel would not affect the ancient part of the building.
Archaeological digs by a team from Newcastle University failed to find any remains of interest in the area to be developed, yesterday's planning applications sub-committee was told.
Anita Culley, who for the last six years has co-owned Walworth Castle with her husband, said the new plans could cost around £750,000.
‘We are always busy here, and it seemed the right time to start planning for an extension,’ she said.
But the latest in a succession of applications to turn Oxmoor Farm at Heighington into a hotel and restaurant was refused.
Since August 1990 three similar schemes have been refused by the council and a subsequent appeal to a public inquiry was also rejected.
Mr Mulrine said the latest application was for a single-storey extension containing eight bedrooms to be built onto the existing farmhouse, with access for drivers from the busy A68.
He added the scheme contravened existing structure plans and traffic risk fears had been voiced by local residents.
SEVERAL opposition councillors yesterday made a last ditch attempt to block the closure of eight council-run old people's homes in County Durham.
But their efforts were brushed aside at an angry meeting of Durham County Council, which approved the social services committee's decision to close the homes.
The ruling Labour group was accused of making its decision in secret before word of the closure proposals reached other members.
And it was suggested that the closure programme had not been properly thought out, resulting in some homes being singled out for closure which should be kept open.
A farewell party was held last night at Hustledown House in Stanley, where three residents have already left and a further 13 are due to be relocated to other Durham County Council homes before the weekend.
Colin Liddle, of Wylam Road, Shield Row, Stanley, whose mother Florence lives at Hustledown House, said after yesterday's meeting the fight would continue to save the home from closure.
He has already complained to the local government ombudsman and is hoping for an investigation into alleged maladministration over the closure of Hustledown.
The eight homes due to close are: Hustledown House in Stanley; Gainford House in Chester-le-Street; Palatine House in Durham City; Ridgeway House in Station Town, near Wingate; Dene House in Bishop Auckland; Greenfields House at Newton Aycliffe; and Hollyhurst and Baydale Lodge in Darlington.
A COMPLETE confidence trickster's set was discovered in the van of a man who allegedly used a second identity to defraud a bank of thousands of pounds, a court heard.
Parvis Yousefi opened an account at the Royal Bank of Scotland in Darlington under the name of Momen Garawand.
Then using cheque books and cheque cards he began a ‘sting’ on the bank running up an overdraft of just under £6,500.
And under the name of Garawand he also applied for a loan of £43,225 to buy the house in Norton, Stockton, in which he lived.
The loan was refused after a valuation proved the house was not worth that amount.
Yesterday Yousefi appeared before Teesside Crown Court charged with two offences of attempting to obtain by deception, four offences of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception and five offences of obtaining by deception.
Yousefi, 37, has denied the charges.
But Esmund Faulks, prosecuting, said it was Yousefi who opened the account of Garawand at the bank giving his address as Victoria Embankment, Darlington.
He also opened a gold deposit account and at one stage paid in a lot of money.
The account was then allowed to lie dormant while Yousefi collected the cheque books sent out at regular intervals.
Then in June he began to write cheques at a ‘fast and furious pace’.
Yousefi was caught when he tried to cash a cheque at a London bank but the name of Garawand was on a defaulters list.
Police found credit cards in both the name of Garawand and Yousefi they also took the keys to a white Ford Transit van, which they discovered in a car park.
Mr Faulks said: ‘Inside the police found a complete confidence trickster's set with 26 different charge cards either in the name of Garawand or in the name of Yousefi and ten cheque books, four of which related to the same account at the Royal Bank of Scotland in Darlington.’
Mr Faulks said in addition there was a large amount of recently purchased property including perfume, clothing and silks and an airline ticket for Tehran worth £707 in the name of Yousefi.
Mr Faulks said of the application for the house loan: ‘What we say he was doing here is, being unable to obtain loans in any other way, he is pretending to be selling his house to this fictitious person in order to get the bank to give him £43,000 on the strength of his house which they would otherwise not have given him.’
The case continues.
COUNCIL officials have warned that cars illegally parked outside Darlington market on East Row will get parking tickets.
The warning comes after confusion among some council employees and taxi drivers about Darlington Borough Council's powers to enforce parking tickets on the land.
Council transport manager Alan Docherty says people will be prosecuted by the council if they park outside the market between 7pm and 3am, when the spaces become a taxi rank.
‘There is no excuse for drivers if they are illegally parked.
It is our land but we can issue tickets and we will,’ said Mr Docherty.
He also says council parking fines will be going up from £5 to £30 in April and police fines would rise from £16 to £30.
And anyone parking on the market side of East Row between 3am and 6pm must buy a pay and display ticket from the car park opposite.
Local taxi drivers claimed last week that public parking on the taxi rank was forcing them to park on the street and causing congestion which was putting lives at risk.
But Mr Docherty said the dilemma would soon end because the council plans to ban all parking on East Row and Horsemarket.
MAJOR rebuilding work on a town leisure centre is set to begin by the end of next month.
Darlington Council must decide by mid-March which of the building companies bidding for the contract to repair the town's Dolphin Centre will do the work.
Crumbling masonry means it needs millions of pounds of building work to make sure it is safe.
Yesterday, John Buxton, director of central services at the council, denied reports that the recession in the building trade would significantly reduce the expected repair bill of £4.5m.
The job is to be completed in two parts with the initial scaffolding already in place.
The second, more complex phase entails strengthening existing brickwork and roofing.
Members of the council's finance committee heard the price agreed for the building contract would be a final bill for repairs at the centre.
It was originally thought the contract could be given last year with work starting in late autumn.
But delays over a decision about the nature of the contract meant the deadline for tenders was postponed to February 24.
Mr Buxton would not say how many companies were bidding for the work but he hoped the successful tender would be accepted in March, allowing work to start.
The financial burden of repairs has meant the council faces a year of cost cutting in other departments.
Legal action is planned against builders Wiltshier Northern but until any damages are received the cost of repairs must come from the council's own resources.
THE teenage lover of the man accused of carrying out a vicious sex attack on a coast to coast rambler told yesterday how he asked her to give him a false alibi.
And Alana Jeanette also told the jury how Darren Nichol had unsuccessfully tried to make love to her just hours before he allegedly carried out the frenzied sex attack on Josephine Chandler.
Nichol, 23, formerly of Regal Drive, Darlington, denies attempting to murder 47-year-old occupational therapist Mrs Chandler.
Miss Jeanette, who at the time was Nichol's 16year-old girlfriend, told how a week after the attack they were stopped at a police road block.
Miss Jeanette told Teesside Crown Court: ‘As a policeman came across Darren said ‘If he asks where I was say I was with you.’’
Mrs Chandler was left permanently brain damaged by the attack on August 29 1990 in which she was repeatedly smashed about the head with a rock.
Miss Jeanette told how in the early hours of that day she had gone with Nichol to a nearby beauty spot and they tried unsuccessfully to have sex.
The court heard that Nichol then drove her home before going on to another girlfriend, Leoni Hogg, whom he had previously lived with.
But he was escorted from the house by police after a row.
The prosecution allege he then drove to Catterick Bridge and was sexually frustrated when he saw Mrs Chandler at about 10.45am.
Miss Jeanette told how Nichol had scratches on his face, neck and lip when he arrived to pick her up for work.
The prosecution allege these scratches had been inflicted just an hour earlier by Mrs Chandler as she fought back during the brutal sex attack.
The trial continues.
A BID to ease mortgage misery by asking for a bigger share of Government cash has suffered a setback.
Pauline Mitchell, head of housing services at Darlington Council, wrote to the town's MP Michael Fallon about the authority's mortgage rescue package.
But Mr Fallon has replied, saying he was ‘puzzled’ at her request that the Government matched the funding given by the Two Castles Housing Association.
He said the Government was funding the association in the first place to the tune of £3.76m this year.
He also pointed out the revenue support grant from the Government to the council of £27.8m was a 12.3pc rise.
As part of the pioneering mortgage rescue deal with the council, Two Castles pledged to spend £100,000 on relieving the burden of mortgage repayments for families threatened with repossession.
NORTHERN Echo promotions executive Ian Trotter presents an answerphone (above) to S.A. Miller, of Darlington, who was one of four prize winners in our British Telecom competition.
THE winner of the second Winter Windfall competition received his prize yesterday.
S.
Carleton (above), of Stanley, Co.
Durham, received a cheque for £1,000 and a bottle of Champagne.
Bikers hurt:
A motorcyclist and pillion rider were slightly hurt after their machine crashed on a slip road of the A1.
The accident happened at Leeming Bar.
Garage raid:
A computer and a portable cassette player worth £180 were stolen from a garage in Northallerton.
The equipment was taken from a building in Helmsley Way.
Meat haul:
Raiders escaped with more than £3,000 worth of meat from a Thirsk butchers.
The produce was stolen in the business' own van from the butchers on Dalton industrial estate.
Door theft:
Thieves have stolen the carved doors off a remote moorland chapel.
The 6ft by 2ft 6in doors, worth £1,000, were taken from the chapel which is in woodland at White Horse Bank, near Thirsk.
Getting bigger:
The Garden of India restaurant on Bondgate, Darlington, has won planning permission to extend into the neighbouring bookshop, a grade two listed building.
Pub plans:
The Kings Arms at Great Stainton, near Darlington, a grade two listed building, is to undergo alterations to extend the public bar.
Car blaze:
Firemen had to damp down a burning car which caught fire early yesterday morning on the A1(M).
No one was hurt in the blaze which happened just before 7am near the village of Cleasby.
Inquest opens:
An inquest opened yesterday into the death of unemployed football consultant Kenneth Ellis, 42, of Farndale Crescent, Darlington.
He was admitted to North Tees General Hospital on January 27 and died there on Tuesday.
Identification evidence was given by his wife, Caroll, 40.
Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield adjourned the inquest pending further inquiries.
AN eerie orange glow is all that lights the operations room deep in the bowels of the mine hunter HMS Hurworth.
It is a scene far removed from the glare of the media spotlighting the battle raging outside but the painstaking work in the darkened room forms a vital link in the war machine ranged against Iraqi president Saddam Hussein.
A relaxed expectancy permeates the silent quarters eyes glued to sonar screens search for mines lurking on the sea floor nearby giant American battleships wait to creep in.
The silence is punctuated only by the light banter among the four ops room members and radio babble with the captain on the bridge.
‘Mark.
Possible mine,’ the cry goes up, galvanising everyone into action.
Mine hunting director petty officer Simmo Simmons calls up the image on to his table screen.
Experience tells him ‘this is it’.
Following an invisible beam a miniature submarine hones in on the device, until it comes up on Simmo's television monitor.
He deftly drops a charge next to it and returns the vehicle.
A shudder shakes the ship as the mine explodes.
It's over.
The vigil continues.
This was one of ten mines scoured from the sea by HMS Hurworth and destroyed within 36 hours, at the height of the Gulf conflict last year.
Simmo, who has become a favourite of pupils of Hurworth Primary School, near Darlington, described the slow build up to the conflict and the dangers they encountered as they came within four miles of the Kuwaiti coast.
He said: ‘We were the most exposed vessels going ahead to clear a route into fire support areas for the American ships.
‘At one stage a Silkworm missile launched from an Iraqi shore battery in Kuwait passed within 600 yards of us.
That brought it home to us just what we were involved in.’
HMS Hurworth went into battle decorated with the art work of schoolchildren from its namesake village.
The crew, an integral part of Hurworth village life, had to abandon a charity run from Rosyth in Scotland after they were ordered to the Gulf.
But pupils kept in touch mapping the ship's progress, as they always have done, on a world map.
Correspondence and gunnery officer Lt Spenser Arnold said the link was important for the crew, who enjoyed getting their witty and poignant letters.
The Hunt-class ship, which also acts as a mine sweeper, is characterised by a superstructure made of glass reinforced plastic and is strong enough to withstand the explosive shock of mines.
Petty officer Dave Cockeram, who is in charge of the engines, said the crew averaging 50 men was easy going from the captain down, but definitely not laid back.
Ship captain Lt Commander Nick Funnell said there was something special about the mine hunter, known in the Royal Navy as the Happy Hurworth.
He said: ‘We are a very small group of people and there is no room for any pettiness.’
Merger talk:
Gavin Laird, the general secretary of engineering union, the AEU, will be in Darlington on Saturday 8 February to talk about his union's plans for a merger with electrician's union EETPU.
Mr Laird will speak at the ASE Club in Northgate at 11.00am.
The meeting is open to all AEU Darlington district members.
GENERATIONS of Darlington's pets are familiar with the waiting room of the Grange Veterinary Hospital, in Victoria Road.
Since before the war animals have been going to the surgery for treatment.
The species and ailments have varied from dogs needing surgery to iguanas feeling under the weather.
The Grange Road Hospital was frequently mentioned in the James Herriot vet books under a fictional name.
James Herriot, who was actually Thirsk-based vet Alf Wight, used to refer particularly complex cases to the surgery in Grange Road.
Nowadays there are three partners in the practise specialising almost exclusively in domestic pets.
Other specialist vets in the area cater for the majority of the farm animal business.
In 50 years as a vets' surgery The Grange has had to tend to many waif birds and animals brought for treatment.
At present an owl who cannot fly and a rare river bird are enjoying four-star treatment at the surgery.
The Water Rail is a rare bird which usually makes its home near water.
The one living at the hospital was found in a poor condition on the Aycliffe Industrial Estate.
It is hoped to released the bird back into the wild when it is fully recovered.
A BUSINESSMAN assaulted his wife and son in a fit of temper, a court heard yesterday.
Graham Levy broke a chair on his wife's back, hit her with a table leg and struck the boy as he tried to stop the attack.
Levy, of Harringay Crescent, Red Hall, Darlington, admitted causing actual bodily harm to his common-law wife Dianne Batey and their ten-year-old-son in January.
At Sedgefield Magistrates Court yesterday, prosecutor Richard Parcell said Miss Batey suffered a lot of bruising in the attack and the boy was ‘caught in the crossfire.’
Mr Parcell said Levy and some friends had gone back to his home and there was a ‘food fight’.
The attack started when Miss Batey came into the room and called her husband an animal.
‘He picked up a pine kitchen chair and broke it on her back.
He then picked up a stool and brought it down towards her but it smashed a ceiling light.
‘He then threw the kitchen table towards her.
It smashed and he picked up one the table legs and used it to hit her.’
Graham Hunsley, defending, said: ‘Mr Levy is thoroughly ashamed.’
Levy had been receiving medical treatment for depression stemming from his domestic and business difficulties.
Magistrates fined Levy £200 for the assault on Miss Batey but made no order of compensation for her injuries.
He was also fined £50 for the attack on the boy and ordered to pay £20 costs.
Labour challenged over plans for A1
TRANSPORT Secretary Malcolm Rifkind is set to challenge Labour over their commitment to improving the A1 at a press conference in Darlington today.
He will be joined by local MP Michael Fallon and Hartlepool Conservative candidate Graham Robb who yesterday said it was high time Labour told the voters what it was going to do about the continuing problems of congestion and accidents on the A1(M).
Mr Rifkind, who was in Darlington last night for a meeting of the Conservative Association, has said that only the Conservative party has a proper strategy for improvements to Britain's roads.
Bypass closed:
Sadberge will be congested with heavy traffic on Sunday as the A66 Sadberge bypass is closed all day while high voltage electricity wires are put up.
All A66 traffic will be diverted through the village of Sadberge.
Youths sought:
Police scoured the area around South Park and Feethams football ground yesterday searching for youths thought to have been involved in a break-in at a house in Polam Lane, Darlington.
Death fall:
Paramedics and police officers were called to a house in Devonshire Road, Darlington, yesterday morning to try and save the life of a man who had fallen downstairs.
The man was unconscious when his wife found him and despite 40 minutes of intensive life-saving efforts the man died.
Broken leg:
A 78-year-old Darlington man was rushed to hospital yesterday after he was knocked down by a car while crossing High Row.
Thomas Fitzgerald, of Jedburgh Drive, Darlington, last night underwent surgery for a fractured leg but his condition was described as comfortable.
Two raids:
Raiders have broken into a Ferryhill community centre and stole cash from a fruit machine and cigarettes.
In a separate burglary in Ferryhill, thieves took a video recorder, Aynsley clock, jug and urn, and money box containing cash, from a house on Hambleton Way.
Hospital raid:
Jewellery and a video recorder have been stolen from Winterton Hospital, Sedgefield.
Fishy theft:
Twelve fishing rods were stolen from a garage on North Terrace, Ferryhill, on Wednesday and on the same day power and hand tools were stolen from a transit van parked on Ruby Avenue, Chilton.
House scheme:
Darlington Borouch Council has granted outline planning permission to W Lax and Sons Ltd to build seven houses on land behind The Green at Cockerton.
Holiday flats:
Two farm buildings at High House Farm, Houghton le Side, can be converted into three holiday flats, Darlington Borough Council has ruled.
Down memory
THE Brain Club and this space are clearly destined for each other.
The days will be long between now and March 31 when at last the organisation, a charity it is keen to stress, names its Brain of the Year.
It was interesting to notice in a Darlington bookshop yesterday that a book called Memory Vision, written by the Club's founder, Tony Buzan, has been reduced from its original £8.95 to £4.95.
Still no takers for this ‘mirror to all you wish to remember’ and now it is down £1.95, or was there a 95p tag lurking in the corner of the flyleaf?
On account of not having read the book it is difficult to remember.
Opera Nova:
Darlington Civic Theatre VERDI'S last and arguably finest opera Falstaff is in vogue at present.
Last year we had the fine Scottish Opera production in Newcastle, now it is the turn of Darlington with this production, which ends tonight at the Civic Theatre.
The long established Opera Nova have a reputation for presenting good quality opera performance using local musicians in conjunction with some professional aid.
So, on Thursday evening their production got off to a good start with its sparse but effective scenery, sympathetic lighting and some remarkably good costuming.
To this add some good ensemble singing from the ladies in particular and some well focused if robust playing from the orchestra pit (conductor Arthur Berwick) and the stage is set for a successful run.
It is, however, Falstaff himself that lies at the heart of the opera and Colin Rees proved a master of the role.
His well rounded performance (in more ways than one) established his rascally nature and was matched by his two henchmen Michael Hunt and Peter Walker.
It's a production to be recommended there's lot of fun, good singing and the riverbank scene of Act 3 was as effective as I have ever seen, not least for Colin Rees's mercurial exploration of the fat knight's character even though the river was more Essex marshes than Windsor.
The one scenic extravagance of the evening came with the evocation of the Windsor Oak.
It made for a magnificent setting that culminated in that miracle of Verdi's old age, the choral fugue that ends the opera, here sung with brilliant clarity and precision.
The production should achieve an improved balance between pit and stage during its three-night run, but one wonders if three consecutive nights might not overtax a few vocal chords by Sunday morning.
TRANSPORT Secretary Malcolm Rifkind yesterday branded Labour's transport policies as ‘daft’.
He told a press conference in Darlington that if Labour was elected the future of the North-East's most important road, the A1, could be in doubt.
Mr Rifkind said the Conservatives have pledged to improve the A1 between London and Newcastle.
If Labour win the election all road building and improvement schemes will be delayed by at least six months.
Mr Rifkind said: ‘Quite properly this will be of enormous concern to people in Darlington and the North-East.’
But John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, responded to the criticisms by accusing the Tories of having ad hoc transport policies.
He said Labour plans to devise a comprehensive scheme of transport improvements to suit Britain's needs.
Mr Prescott said: ‘At present the Government's roads programme is unstructured with several vague promises of investment on a variety of projects.’
He said a Labour government would call a halt to road and rail improvements until a logical system had been devised.
Mr Prescott said: ‘That could mean improvements to the A1.
It could also mean a commitment to an East Coast motorway or improved rail services to the North-East.’
Mr Rifkind and Darlington MP Michael Fallon encouraged voters to support the party already committed to A1 improvements.
Yesterday Mr Prescott could not guarantee road improvements in the North-East until specific criteria had been established to judge where money needs to be spent.
‘The A1 road widening scheme was dreamed up by Cecil Parkinson in his last days as Transport Secretary.
I believe it is purely designed as a vote catcher and has nothing to do with creating the national transport infrastructure which Labour will introduce,’ said Mr Prescott.
Mr Rifkind said Labour's policies would ‘deny people in the North-East from having a choice and would harm the region's interests.’
RIGHT wing extremists have stepped up their election campaign in Darlington with Haughton-le-Skerne the latest target.
Volunteers from the British National Party toured residential areas dropping leaflets through letter boxes and putting up pro-BNP stickers.
The leaflets urge people to vote for the party's Darlington candidate Dr Donald Clarke, claiming the BNP is the only party which can help Britain by ending ‘a tide of immigration’.
Some of the residents were angered by the BNP's message.
One father who lives in Harley Grove, Darlington, said: ‘I threw it straight in the bin.
This is not the kind of thing I want my children to read.’
Yesterday Kevin Scott, BNP regional organiser, said the leafleting was part of an overall campaign targeting every house in Darlington.
‘This is an introductory message.
We are going to step up our campaign nearer the election with meetings and newspaper sales,’ said Mr Scott.
Other BNP activists were at work in the West End of the town.
Leaflets were put through doors in Milbank Road and Elton Road.
Anti-fascist campaigners have urged people to ignore the publicity.
A spokeswoman for the Tyne and Wear Anti-Fascist Association said: ‘The best thing people can do is consign this sort of rubbish to the rubbish bin which is where it belongs.’
THE man accused of attempted murder of Coast to Coast walker Josephine Chandler will not give evidence in his defence.
At the end of the prosecution case at Teesside Crown Court yesterday, James Chadwin QC, defending, said he would not be calling any evidence.
Darren Nichol, 24, formerly of Regal Drive, Darlington, has denied the charge.
Mrs Chandler, from Chepstow, was found by the River Swale, North Yorkshire, in August 1990.
The prosecution claims Mrs Chandler was attacked by Nichol.
The case was adjourned until Monday when the jury will hear closing speeches.
Print check points way to trickster
A CHEQUE book trickster was trapped by a fingerprint almost two years later, York Crown Court heard yesterday.
Jane Wrightson was arrested last year after officers matched her prints to stolen cheques, written by her in 1989, after the bank sent them for analysis.
She had acquired £171 worth of goods with the cheque book after it was stolen from a handbag at the Swan Hotel in Harrogate.
Wrightson, of Oakdale Avenue, Harrogate, admitted handling the stolen cheque book, deception and shoplifting and was put on probation for six months.
Smash and grab:
Cheeky thieves broke the window of Anthony Gordon outfitters in Westborough, Scarborough, and used a five foot long metal hook to pull out a display full of expensive sweaters.
Police said the raiders had taken £450 worth of sweaters but fled when disturbed by a passer-by.
Safe taken:
Burglars who forced a window at the Brittic Assurance office in Falsgrave Road, Scarborough, stole a wall safe and £500 cash.
Whale towed:
The body of a 57ft whale washed up on the Yorkshire coast at Flamborough Head earlier this week was yesterday towed owed off the beach by a dredger.
The 70 ton carcass was later cut into pieces and buried.
Centre ransacked:
Burglars caused havoc when they raided the Eastfield Community Help Organisation's headquarters at Burnside, Scarborough, in their search for money.
Police said the raiders caused over £1000 worth of damage and stole office equipment.
Road scheme:
A £15m scheme to upgrade the A1 between Bramham and Wetherby has been extended by nearly 1km at a cost of £1m to allow traffic to move freely by widening more of the southbound carriageway to Spen Common Lane.
Assault alleged:
Police are investigating an incident in which it is alleged leisure assistant Alan Deaton, 19 was assaulted during a roller disco at York's Barbican Centre.
He was treated in hospital for facial cuts.
University boost:
York University has won new research grants totalling £2.5m and hopes to beat its total of £10m raised from Government, industry and charities in 1990/91 by October.
Inn offered:
The award winning Blue Ball Inn at Malton has been put on the market with a price tag of £275,000 for the 30 year lease.
The pub, owned by the Fitzwilliam Estate, has won several awards for its food in recent years.
Precarious future:
The controversial high-tech pyramid structure at the cliff top entrance to Whitby Spa could disappear as part of plans to improve sign-posting of the complex.
Scarborough Council's tourism committee is planning to remodel or replace the feature which has been strongly opposed by conservationists in Whitby, claiming it is out of character with its heritage.
Roses available:
The famous Old Roses Brewery premises at Malton is on the market at £300,000.
The town centre property in Castlegate is owned by brewers Tetley who now operate from a depot on the outskirts of the town.
Burnt out:
Police are investigating a car found burnt out near Ripon.
The vehicle was discovered near Marton-le-Moor.
Car break-in:
Thieves got away with property from a car in Thirsk.
They broke into the vehicle, which had been parked in Front Street, Sowerby, and stole sunglasses, cassettes and a bag containing sports equipment.
Plans victory:
A Government inspector has given permission for a mixed development including a food superstore on land formerly occupied by Octavius Atykinson at Starbeck, Harrogate, following a public inquiry and local plan inquiry.
Harry going:
Harry Collett, Whitby's youth and community worker for the past 11 years, is taking early retirement.
North Yorkshire County Council says the post is being axed after 45 years as a result of changes in youth work.
A new position of community tutor is being created.
Rescuer honoured:
Mike Woodhill, a member of Upper Teesdale and Weardale Fell Rescue team, will receive a bravery award at Bishop Auckland police station on February 17 after his rescue efforts at the scene of a road accident on the A9 in the north of Scotland last year.
Today
BECKWITHSHAW:
Whist Drive, Village Hall, nr Harrogate, 7.30pm.
HARROGATE:
Gardening day courses, Introduction to Propagation with tutor Nick Fforde, Harlow Carr Botanical Gardens, Crag Lane, 10am-4pm.
Details, tel.
.
Fee £13.
Embroiderers' Guild Harrogate Branch, Greek Folk Embroidery by Dr S Hogarth, St Paul's Church Hall, off Victoria Avenue, Harrogate, 2pm.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Fell & Dale Club 10 mile ramble, meet outside the Library, Harrogate, 9.15am.
Antique Fair, Royal Baths, Harrogate, 11am-6pm.
York Museum of Mechanical Music celebrates a successful year with a first anniversary concert starring Arnold Loxam at the mighty Compton Cinema Organ, Bradley Grange, Bradley Lane, Rufforth, York, 2.30pm. 12.30pm for a mechanical organ demonstration.
Price £3.99.
Details, tel..
THREE Darlington men embarked on a trail of violence and destruction in the space of a few hours, a court heard yesterday.
Carl Haywood, Angus Spence and Alexander Woods appeared at Teesside Crown Court following one night in Darlington last June during which two men were assaulted and a third had his car badly damaged.
Brian Sommerville, prosecuting, said Spence and Haywood beat up two youths Woods spotted near a churchyard.
Spence later caused £681 worth of damage when he jumped up and down on an Escort.
Haywood, 17, of Argyll Close, Darlington, admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm and theft and was sentenced to 120 hours community service.
Spence, 21, of Argyll Close, Darlington, pleaded guilty to assault occasioning actual bodily harm and criminal damage.
He was given 160 hours community service and ordered to pay £200 compensation.
Woods, 19, of Bramall Lane, Darlington, admitted two counts of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, reckless driving, and additional charges of burglary, theft and making off without payment.
He was ordered to perform 160 hours community service and disqualified from driving for six months.
Dangerous drugs missing in town
POLICE yesterday appealed for the return of potentially lethal antidepressant and tranquillizer tablets which went missing in Darlington town centre in the afternoon.
Fifty pink and red Lentizol capsules and a box of blue and white Stelazine capsules were lost.
A small amount of Lentizol can kill and a wrong dose of Stelazine can cause serious side effects.
Sgt Paul Robinson said: ‘These are dangerous if taken by the wrong people.
We would urge anyone who finds them to return them to us.’
Anyone with any information on the tablets should ring Darlington police on .
Coal plan:
Sedgefield District Council's development sub-committee yesterday recommended refusal of a plan for an opencast coal mine at Metal Bridge, West Cornforth despite backing for the scheme from council officers.
Wrong details:
In Tuesday's Northern it was reported that Celia Williams, aged 63, photographed with Dr Iestyn Williams, was his wife.
We regret that this was incorrect and apologise to Mrs Dorothy M Williams, of St Ninian's Close, Darlington, for any embarrassment caused.
The article was based on information provided to us by Dr Williams.
Action call:
Frank Malton, 77, of Acacia Street, Darlington, has called for action on a dangerous broken grating on Brinkburn Road which he reported two months ago but found yesterday that nothing has been done.
A spokesman for the borough engineer's department said the matter would be looked into.
Net game:
Sedgefield Racers Basketball Team play North London Red Hall at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre on February 15.
Tip-off starts at 7pm.
Man remanded:
Martin Paul Kelly, of Wordsworth Road, Darlington, was remanded in custody until February 10 by Darlington magistrates yesterday.
Kelly, 28, is charged with stealing money and jewellery worth £1,624 from the Nags Head, Darlington.
Case adjourned:
The case against Paul Anthony Jenkinson, of Hundens Lane, Darlington, was adjourned until February 21 by Darlington magistrates yesterday.
Jenkinson, 33, is charged with grievous bodily harm.
He was released on unconditional bail.
Trio bailed:
Brian Garrett, 28, of Warwick Square, Frank Park, 27, of Harringay Crescent, and Stephen Liddle, 29, of Lansdowne Street, were released on unconditional bail by Darlington magistrates yesterday on charges of violent disorder.
Liddle is also charged with grievous bodily harm.
Golf theft:
Brian Colin Smith, 32, of Thames Way, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates charged with theft of a golf bag and clubs.
The case was adjourned until February 28.
Smith was released on unconditional bail.
Green backing:
Councillors on Sedgefield District Council's estates and environmental health committee have backed a Government plan to unite key pollution regulators to form an independent environment agency.
‘Unsightly’ plans:
Councillors want to stop a plan for three factory units and an office block on All Saints industrial estate, Shildon.
Yesterday's meeting of Sedgefield District Council development sub-committee recommended that the council bar the development because it would be unsightly at the entrance to the town.
Bar changes:
The Kings Arms pub at Great Stainton is to go ahead with alterations to a small, historic bar.
Darlington Borough Council planning committee has given listed building consent for Whitbreads to extend the snug into a former private lounge and reposition the bar, provided soundproofing is carried out.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland ; Ailsa MacKenzie at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale ; Martin Shipton, Gavin Engelbrecht, Christine Fieldhouse, Nigel Burton, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington .
Court contempt
THE case must be made again for judges to stand down at 70 years of age.
The judge who jailed both father and son for their outburst in court over the sentencing of the man who killed a member of their family showed no compassion.
The contempt is his in the ridiculous sentence for the loss of two young lives by someone intoxicated by both drink and drugs.
I would have behaved in the same manner, but I would not have apologised to a man who had just given such a small sentence for the criminal act of killing two innocent victims.
He deserves contempt not respect and his ability to handle further cases as serious as this should be looked at by the Lord Chancellor's office.
If he has any thought of true justice he should retire.
A. Anderson, 27 Watson Close, Wheatley Hill.
Gutter journalism
I REFER to the slanderous reports aimed at the leader of the Opposition that is, supposed collusion with the Communists.
The national Press must be very short on good news stories to stoop to these levels of reporting.
But Roy Hattersley's performance on BBC radio's The World this Weekend was not only laughable, but downright pathetic.
For him to place the blame for this report at the door of the Conservative Party chairman is nonsense.
We in the Conservative Party have no truck with that style of gutter journalism which we were forced to endure last Sunday.
In fact, quite the reverse, we don't have to do anything but stand on our record over the past 13 years.
County Councillor Derek Mason, 24 Greencroft Road, Darlington.
Money for Russia WHERE on earth is the money coming from to help the Russian economy?
When anything is needed in this country, be it education or homes, there is no money.
America is just as bad.
There are some blacks who are born and die without even a decent roof over their heads or a job.
So why this great donation to Russia?
I do not think Russia means to remove the missiles pointed at the West.
Eventually, Russia will sell the nuclear armaments to any country who will pay for them and that is the beginning of the end of the world.
IN HIS letter (HAS Jan 21), K. Richardson says the Gulf War was senseless and that hundreds of thousands died, most of them innocent people.
If that many did indeed die, I would question the premise that most of them were innocent.
Almost all who died were Iraqi soldiers and in any war the soldier is not innocent.
One outstanding feature of that war was how few civilian casualties there were.
Even Saddam's propaganda machine failed to bring that lie to life.
The war in the Gulf was not fought to liberate Kuwait from a medieval fiefdom, it was fought to liberate it from Iraqi occupation.
This was done with consummate skill and professionalism.
If the West had not reacted, Saddam Hussein's brutal regime would now have a stranglehold on the oil of Saudi Arabia thus holding us all to ransom.
I agree the West must not support such despots by arming them to the teeth, but one thing the war did show was that if any other would-be adventurist in the Middle East tries to do the same as Saddam, he knows what to expect..
I refer to John Wainwright's column (Echo January 11) regarding the falsity of the so-called trauma of the Gulf war participants.
How true, how true.
Whatever has happened to the youth of today?
A few weeks of war and from what the psychiatrists are saying more than half of them are shattered for life.
If the same thing had happened after World War Two, when many of us had six years of war, we would all have crept under the table and wept.
How sad, how sad.
And what do we say of the present day psychiatrist how mad, how mad?.
A JURY heard yesterday there is no forensic evidence to link a man accused of a vicious riverbank sex attack with the crime.
Darren Nichol is accused of attempting to murder coast-to- coast walker Josephine Chandler as she hiked through Catterick Bridge, North Yorkshire.
Mrs Chandler, a 47-year-old occupational therapist, was left for dead after being repeatedly hit over the head with a rock.
Forensic scientist Andrew Hunt told Teesside Crown Court he did extensive tests on blood on Mrs Chandler's clothes, behind her nails and on nearby rocks.
He compared the samples with a blood sample from Mr Nichol.
He said: ‘The tests show the blood could not have originated from Darren Nichol.’
He also carried out fibre and hair tests, but found nothing that connected Nichol with the crime.
Earlier the court heard that in the days after the attack Nichol turned up for work with scratches on his face.
The prosecution claims these were inflicted by Mrs Chandler as she fought back.
Nichol, 24, formerly of Regal Drive, Darlington, denies attempted murder.
The trial continues.
Cross town route to a worse life
WHAT a waste of taxpayer's money to create a monstrosity such as the proposed cross town route.
Is it right that the people who reside along this route, particularly Coombe Drive (which is totally residential) are to pay through the poll tax for lowering their standard of living?
The character of the town overall will be affected, as it will cut off Haughton, Springfield and Harrowgate Hill.
The health and safety of our children will be put at risk, as current surveys show definite links between traffic pollution and chest ailments such as asthma and the wildlife inhabiting the hedgerows will disappear.
I always thought the A66 bypass was supposed to take traffic round the town.
What is wrong with adding a northbound link near Blands Corner?
This link would affect far fewer people, there would be less disturbance to Darlington and its residents, and the bypass would be utilised fully.
Mrs AR Ormerod, 17, Wheeldale Close, Darlington.
Insulting ban:
I must express my disgust at the Cats Protection League Darlington blacklisting Coundon.
May I suggest to the CPL Darlington contact Alex and Fred Winwood who run the Eldon Hope Animal Sanctuary.
Alex and Fred could (if they can spare the time) advise the CPL staff on assessing each potential adoptee on their merit regardless of where they live.
I'm a member of CPL and feel insulted at their attitude.
F MacDonald, 31 Grey Gardens, Coundon.
BR bicycle ban to be lifted PROTESTS against a bicycle ban on peak time trains have won a relaxation on the ruling.
Following objections by Darlington Cycling Forum, British Rail is to allow cycles to be carried on board trains on Sundays on the Saltburn, Darlington and Bishop Auckland line.
Blakelock review:
Evidence gathered in the investigation into the death of Sunderland-born PC Keith Blakelock is to be reviewed using the most modern scientific methods, says Scotland Yard.
PC Blakelock was hacked to death in the Tottenham riots of 1985.
T-shirt row:
Anti drugs workers say T-shirts sold in the T-shirt Gallery, High Bridge, Newcastle, which feature the names of designer drugs, promote the use of drugs.
A HOTEL employee was burned when flames shot out at him from a log fire he was stoking.
Mark Williams, the assistant food and beverage manager at the Blackwell Grange Moat House Hotel in Darlington, was tending the fire in the hotel lounge when the incident happened late Friday afternoon.
Flames set light to his jacket and Mr Williams was helped into a nearby toilet where his hands were drenched with water.
Ashley Booth, the hotel's general manager, said: ‘He was just stoking up the fire when it blew back on him and burned one of his hands.’
Mr Williams was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital and he was later allowed back to the hotel.
Two tiers
RECENT Tory boasts about the health service simply won't stand up to close scrutiny.
Since 1979, 500 hospitals have closed and one in eight hospital beds have been lost.
Hospital waiting lists have grown to almost one million people awaiting treatment.
Their reform of the NHS is leading to a two-tier system far removed from the local community.
The Tories' new charges for eye and dental checks have led to a 30pc drop in tests performed, this has resulted in eye and dental diseases being detected later if at all, making them more difficult and expensive to treat.
Liberal Democrats recognise that the NHS is one of our greatest assets and would guarantee an annual increase of 2pc funding.
We would repeal the GP contract which rewards quantity rather than quality and abolish eye and dental charges.
Garry Huntington, Prospective Lib-Dem candidate for Sedgefield, 5 Central Parade, Shildon.
POLICE are hunting a masked attacker who pounced on a young woman on Saturday night.
The 28-year-old was walking along a footpath near Pendleton Road, Darlington, when the was jumped on from behind and pushed to the ground.
She screamed and the man ran away, leaving the woman shaken but unhurt.
Det Sgt Hardy Jones of Darlington CID said police would be stepping up their surveillance of the area and advised women walking around Harrowgate Hill to be on their guard.
The attacker was described as white, wearing dark clothes and a black mask.
WORK is to start next month on the first stage of a £6.5m scheme to improve access to Teesside Airport and the link between Darlington and Cleveland.
Durham County Council says the two-stage scheme will provide a carriageway bypassing the village of Middleton St George and will include access to the airport via a new bridge over the Darlington/Saltburn railway line.
It will mean the replacement of Low Goosepool bridge which, because of its restricted headroom, has meant lengthy detours for high vehicles.
The bridge has also been the scene of a number of serious accidents in recent years.
Its closure to through traffic is said to be an important safety feature of the scheme.
A new road running from the bypass to the Cleveland boundary is also to be built, eventually providing a link to A66 junction at Long Newton proposed by the Department of Transport.
The first stage of the contract, valued at just under £2m, has been awarded to Sheffield firm Henry Boot.
Work is to start early in March.
The project is scheduled for completion by early 1994.
A COMMITTEE chairwoman has quit over a row about postal votes at a Darlington community centre.
Julie Peeke, chairwoman of Red Hall Community Centre for the last nine months, sent in her resignation after the committee decided to end postal votes at the centre's annual general meeting.
Mrs Peeke, who has been involved with the centre for the last ten years, claims many of the area's old, sick and disabled needed the old system to elect committee members.
And her husband George, a previous chairman, plans to organise a petition in a bid to overturn the decision.
He has also complained to County Hall at Durham about county councillor Charles French who spoke against the postal vote at the meeting.
‘I felt so strongly about it I had to resign,’ said Mrs Peeke.
‘A lot of people who are disabled or old can't get out to vote.
Some could even be in hospital.
I think the decision made is disgusting.
A lot of people will miss out on the chance.’
Coun French, who represents Darlington on Durham County Council, said yesterday that he criticised the system for being open to abuse.
And he volunteered to give a lift to anyone who couldn't get to the annual general meeting in March.
‘The matter was discussed fully and the majority of people voted to abolish it,’ said Coun French.
SHADOW Environment Secretary Bryan Gould has supported Darlington council's hopes of organising its own services.
Darlington council leader John Williams has already urged the Government to treat the town as a priority for opting out of county council control.
Now Coun Williams, deputy council leader Coun Bill Dixon and Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, have held talks with Mr Gould.
In a statement Mr Gould said Labour was committed to unitary authorities.
Mr Gould said: ‘Local people and local consultations must be the basis of re-organisation, but there is an extremely strong case for the old county boroughs such as Darlington to be made unitary authorities controlling their own services.’
After the meeting, Mr Milburn said: ‘We were delighted that such a clear commitment had been made.’
Five injured in crossroads crash
FIVE people were taken to hospital yesterday after a two-car accident at the Kinninvie crossroads on the road between Staindrop and Eggleston in Teesdale.
Police said two adults and three children were taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital but their injuries were not thought to be serious.
The vehicles involved a Vauxhall Cavalier and a Ford Orion were extensively damaged.
House fire:
Firefighters were called to a house blaze in Sedgefield in the early hours of Saturday morning.
The fire, at Cragside, was in a first floor bedroom and was believed to be caused by electrical equipment overheating.
The occupants, a couple, and their two children, were not injured in the blaze.
Car thefts:
Cars belonging to visitors at a Teesdale beauty spot were broken into at the weekend.
Barnard Castle police said there had been several incidents reported at Winston Bridge.
Town scheme:
Renovation work at Bishop Auckland town hall is progressing well, Wear Valley District Council officers say.
Parts of the building have been demolished and work has started on the roof.
The town hall is set to reopen next year and will include a tourist information centre, library and concert room.
Flat break-in:
A colour television and video recorder worth more than £500 were stolen from a flat on Newgate Street, Bishop Auckland, at the weekend.
Missing bikes:
Three children's bikes, worth £75 and a skateboard valued at £90 were taken from a garden on Proudfoot Drive, Bishop Auckland, on Saturday.
Van blaze:
Firefighters attended a blaze involving a van on the A66 off Neasham Road, Darlington, on Saturday night.
Mowers taken:
Two lawnmowers worth £120 were taken from a garage in Abbey Road, Darlington, on Friday.
Bike theft:
A Raleigh mountain bike worth £366 was stolen from a garage in Mowbray Drive, Darlington, on Friday.
House burglary:
A quantity of food and a baby sterilizer unit were taken from a house in Hammond Drive, Darlington, on Saturday.
Cabinet grab:
On Saturday thieves broke into the Victorian and Edwardian shop on North Road, Darlington, and took a pine cabinet worth £110.
Trims taken:
Wheel trims worth £60 were taken from a Ford Cortina in Corporation Road, Darlington, on Saturday.
Clock stolen:
A mantel clock worth £200 was taken from a home in North Road, Darlington.
Car raid:
A JVC radio-cassette player was stolen from a Honda car in Beaumont Street car park on Saturday evening.
Radio theft:
A radio-cassette was taken from a Malaysian-made Kia Pride car parked in Melsonby Crescent, Darlington, on Saturday.
Whisky gone:
Burglars entered a house in Harrison Terrace, Darlington, on Saturday evening and made off with a man's gold watch valued at £100 and two bottles of whisky.
Cassettes taken:
On Saturday radio cassette players were stolen from a Lancia car parked in King William Street and a Vauxhall Cavalier in Holland Road, both in Darlington.
Celebrations for soldier who survived explosion
A part-time soldier who was nearly killed when a grenade exploded just six feet from him celebrated his 50th birthday at home.
Lance Corporal Andrew Samson, of Barnard Castle, suffered extensive shrapnel wounds and a broken arm in the explosion during a Territorial Army exercise at Catterick Garrison three weeks ago.
Mr Samson, in the Barnard Castle-based 223 Field Ambulance Unit, threw a grenade from a trench but it bounced off a wall, rolled back and exploded just six feet away.
His injuries would have been worse but for Territorial Army training supervisor Mr Colin Wilberforce, who risked his life to drag Mr Samson away before the grenade exploded.
Speaking at home, Mr Samson said: ‘I can't talk about it too much because it is still the subject of an inquiry, but I was still conscious after it went off.
‘The force of the blast ripped the buckle off my watch and I still have some bits of shrapnel inside me, which will make their way out.’
Mr Samson was taken to the Duchess of Kent military hospital in Catterick, where doctors discovered he had internal bleeding.
He is now recovering at home in Barnard Castle after three operations and celebrated his 50th birthday on Monday.
Mr Samson works as a technician and driver for Durham county council museum education service at Darlington.
He served as a regular soldier in the Royal Artillery for five years, visiting Malaysia, Hong Kong and Singapore.
By his own admission he has led a charmed life.
He survived a train crash at Allendale between Newcastle and Edinburgh in the Sixties.
And Mr Samson had a lucky escape in 1990 when a van ploughed into the side of his car.
MALCOLM Rifkind was apologetic.
Edwina Currie had kept him talking and Edwina is not a woman to be rushed.
He was giving me 40 minutes on all matters transport and 10 had just been forfeited to the interests of the constituents of Derbyshire.
The Transport Secretary is a very genial Scot who has had a bad press but can take it with a smile.
‘I was reading some rubbish in The Guardian…it's almost as bad as The Observer…‘he said.
He laughs, which isn't easy when your credibility is being sorely tested by the papers who claim to know what's going on.
He occupies a 12th floor office in a building about as typical of a government department as you can get.
A large monolithic Sixties block, void of character, swarming with people clutching files and looking important.
Mr Rifkind is keen to explain why the railways should be opened up to competition and dampen all that dreadful speculation in the papers that there is a split between himself and the Cabinet over exactly how they'll do it.
If there is no split, why has the White Paper been delayed?
He doesn't answer because his press officer has told me beforehand that he doesn't intend to talk in any detail about it.
He says privatisation, or denationalization as he calls it, will make the railways run better.
Most daring of all, he calls his plan a national transport policy.
He promises me privatisation will not lead to a smaller railway and if subsidies are needed, he'll pay them.
He'll even pay more if it means saving services.
This is remarkable.
A Tory Transport Secretary pledging a national transport policy and oodles of public money for services that don't make money.
What would Mrs Thatcher say?
The problem is BR's monopoly, he says, which he intends to break up.
Get private operators on the railway and everything will work just fine.
There's fine enterprising young men like Richard Branson wanting to put trains on the line complete with champagne and bathrooms.
How much this will do for the hard hit Darlington to Hartlepool commuter is anyone's guess.
But there we are.
He told us last May he wanted to see freight switched from road to rail.
He told me last week there had been more than 100 applicants for the Section Eight grants which encourage it.
If all were successful the government would be giving ‘substantially’ more than the measly £10m that had been paid out in previous years.
He couldn't say exactly how much more, but it was an indication that things were improving.
Mr Rifkind says that many people in industry are telling him they would ‘switch to rail tomorrow’ if they knew British Rail was reliable.
So is reliability the problem?
What about British Steel switching its transport of limestone from Wensleydale from rail to road?
BS never mentioned reliability as a problem.
And if it's costing too much how about offering some of those giveaway subsidies?
Will BS get a Section 8 grant to keep 100 lorries a day off the roads?
‘I don't know if they've applied.
Every company will come to its own commercial judgement and you win some and you lose some,’ he said.
Don't know if they've applied?
Win some and you lose some?
And he calls this a national transport policy?
BUS company officials are to travel to London this week for high-level talks with a Government minister about their firm's future.
In December borough councillors from Darlington met transport minister Roger Freeman in London to discuss plans for a supermarket on a site occupied by the Caldaire bus company.
Sainsbury's want to develop the Grange Road site but Caldaire said the move was not financially viable for them because under privatisation rules the Government would be entitled to half the money from any sale.
Mike Widmer, group managing director for Caldaire, said yesterday that a deputation from the firm would ask Mr Freeman to waive the clause when they meet him in London on Thursday.
A BUS firm's decision to scrap a service because it is unprofitable has sparked a local outcry.
Hundreds of residents have signed a protest petition, organised by Linda Howe, of Grey Street, attacking the Darlington Transport Company move to axe the 11a route to Albert Hill from February 24.
Already more than 300 people have added their names backing the assertion that the bus is crucial for those living in the Albert Hill area.
But Stuart Hyslop of DTC said yesterday he would accept the views if 300 people were regularly using the buses.
He said: ‘We have three buses every hour on that route and figures from the council show the average number of passengers is three.’
He said the company could not afford to run any of its services on a charitable basis.
‘We are in business to make a profit and we cannot do that with so few passengers.’
But Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington Alan Milburn said it was vital the service be maintained, especially as many elderly people relied on the 11a to take them to shops in North Road and the town centre.
Mr Milburn has contacted Durham County Council to explain the situation and push the case for the local people in the hope the council may subsidise the route.
Mr Hyslop said: ‘If the council offers a subsidy for continuing the service we would more than likely continue with one bus every hour on that route.’
ANTI-RACISM campaigners visited Darlington yesterday to speak to Asian market traders who have been the victims of racist abuse.
Members of the Tyne and Wear Anti-Fascist Association spent the morning distributing leaflets to shoppers warning about the growth in ultra-right wing politics in Darlington.
One 42-year-old market trader who did not want to be named, said: ‘It is good to know that there is someone who is doing something about the problem.’
The right-wing British National Party is fielding a Parliamentary candidate in Darlington.
FEARS are growing for a Chinese man missing for over three weeks.
Qi Can Huang speaks no English and has not been seen since he left the family home in Yarm Road, Darlington, on January 16.
Mr Huang, 41, arrived in Darlington from China last year and was staying with his family, who run the Green Cottage Chinese Take Away.
It is believed he may have left home of his own choice as he did take some of his clothes, but there have been no reports of him trying to leave the country.
Darlington police are appealing for public help to find Mr Huang, who is 5ft 7ins tall with black hair.
THE jury in the trial of a man accused of attempting to murder walker Josephine Chandler is expected to retire to reach a verdict today.
Yesterday James Chadwin QC, defending, warned the Teesside Crown Court jury not to convict Darren Nichol just ‘in case he did it’.
Nichol, formerly of Regal Drive, Darlington, has denied the attempted murder of Mrs Chandler on August 29, 1990 as she walked to Scorton, North Yorkshire.
Mrs Chandler, then 47, was found near the River Swale.
She was half naked and had been beaten about the head with a rock.
Mr Chadwin told the jury: ‘There is a danger for you.
You find this young man guilty if and only if you are sure.
Put out of your mind any notion that he ought to be convicted in case he did it.’
Mr Chadwin said there were no witnesses to the attack.
A lorry driver passing the scene saw Mrs Chandler walking with a man slightly smaller than her, about 5ft 8in tall.
After the attack another lorry driver saw a man of the same height scrambling away from the river bank.
Nichol is 5ft 3in tall.
Mr Chadwin said there was no evidence to put either Nichol or his car in the area at the time of the attack and there was no forensic evidence.
He was first spoken to by the police in November before being charged with attempted murder on February 28.
Nichol's teenage girlfriend Alana Jeanette said she had seen scratches on his face the day of the attack.
But Mr Chadwin said when police officers spoke to him in the early hours of the following morning when he was in the car with Miss Jeanette near Catterick Bridge they had not noticed any dramatic injuries.
The case continues.
FIVE new cases of Hepatitis A have been reported in Darlington within the last week, it has been revealed.
And now GPs in affected areas are advising patients to consider having a vaccine, which would give immunity for up to six months.
The disease, which affects the liver and causes jaundice of the skin and eyes, spreads where personal hygiene is poor and tends to be found among children.
But yesterday Dr Edwin Pugh, director of public health at Darlington Health Authority, revealed adults had also suffered from the condition, which can be transmitted through infected water and food.
He said there had been an average of five cases in Darlington every week for the last two or three months.
‘Once it gets into the community it tends to spread around,’ said Dr Pugh.
‘But it's more unusual for older people to get it.
The majority of cases are people under 16 and usually children under eight.
‘But in adults it's like a flu that lingers for several weeks.
‘It is being left to the GPs’ discretion in certain parts of the town as to whether they believe families should be immunised.’
A JUDGE is considering recommending deportation of a man convicted of deception.
Parvis Yousefi was found guilty at Teesside Crown Court yesterday of four offences of attempting to obtain a pecuniary advantage, five of obtaining property by deception and attempting to obtain property by deception.
Yousefi, 37, of Southfield Crescent, Norton, Stockton, denied the offences.
The court heard he set up a bank account with the Royal Bank of Scotland in Darlington in the name of Momen Garawand and then used cheque books to spend almost £6,500.
The jury found Yousefi not guilty of attempting to obtain £43,225 by applying for a loan in the name of Garawand to buy his own home.
The cheques were used in the North-East and in London, where Yousefi was eventually caught.
Judge William Hannah remanded Yousefi in custody for social inquiry reports.
He warned Yousefi he had a prison sentence in mind and added: ‘I am also considering the appropriateness of a recommendation that you should be deported from this country because of your activities.’
Child witness screens on way
SCREENS to shield child witnesses when giving evidence against adults they know and fear are to be installed at Darlington magistrates court.
The portable screens are designed to fit round the witness box when needed to block the child's view of the defendant but allow them to see magistrates and lawyers in the case.
Clerk to the justices Robert Whitehouse said the £400 screens should arrive within a few weeks.
‘They will be useful for children giving evidence for abuse cases in the widest sense, from sexual abuse to physical cruelty,’ he said.
Signs bid:
C&A has applied to Darlington Borough Council for permission to erect three store signs on the Cornmill Centre.
The £27m development is due to open in late summer with C&A the main anchor store.
Other shops hoping to move in to the complex include Rumbelows, Dorothy Perkins and H. Samuel.
Light work:
Thieves stole two security lights from the side of a property at Burnside Road, Darlington, on Saturday night.
Degree success:
Kay Helen Downing, 22, of Claxton Avenue, Darlington, has been awarded a BA degree in textiles by Birmingham Polytechnic.
The former Branksome Comprehensive and Darlington sixth form college pupil is now doing a postgraduate teaching course in Birmingham.
Case adjourned:
Paul Bell, 23, of Pateley Moor Crescent, Darlington, appeared before the town magistrates yesterday on two charges of threats to kill and one of criminal damage.
The case was adjourned until February 24.
Theft alleged:
Martin Paul Kelly, 28, of no fixed abode, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with the theft of £1,624 worth of goods from the Nags Head.
He was remanded in custody until Friday.
Kidnap bid charge:
John Wade, 20, of Hickstead Court, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with attempted kidnapping and possessing an offensive weapon.
He was released on unconditional bail until March 9.
Three Rochdale men were also charged in connection with the alleged incident.
A Proper Job:
Live Theatre, Newcastle IN the programme, author Michael Chaplin pays thanks to a list of actors whose ‘insight, reminiscence, anecdote, and plain idle chat’ helped him with his writing.
It's a sign of what's wrong with the play that the quoted comments could serve equally well as a thumbnail summary of the text itself.
This is Chaplin's third collaboration with Live Theatre and director Max Roberts, and very much the weakest.
But it remains frequently entertaining in much the same way that reminiscences, anecdotes and so on can be, and particularly because of the three-member cast.
The show purports to be a potted history of the average actor's life not one of the starspangled knights who represent the tip of the thespian iceberg, but the common-or-garden variety likely to be found filling out the bill in a panto or carrying a spear in the background of a TV costume drama.
John Peace (Donald McBride) narrates his tale, taking us from his beginnings through university and professional training into his ‘anecdotage’.
Judging by the way he has padded out his script with old theatrical chestnuts, this is the stage Chaplin himself has reached: the few passages of real insight are surrounded by yards of whiskery patter, strained attempts at sophisticated wit and specious topical references.
Yet for the first half at least, one is carried along by McBride's sheer charm and inventiveness, qualities shared by fellow Live regular Dave Whitaker and Su Elliott, who perform more than 20 characters between them.
At its best the show resembles a kind of collective autobiography.
At worst, it seems merely second-hand or self-indulgent, as in those cringe-making moments when the actors step out of character and address the audience as ‘themselves’.
Sheldon Hall The Miser: Darlington Civic Theatre SCROOGE looks positively generous compared to Harpagon, the miser in the title of Moliere's tale of greed and avarice.
This is a man who calculates everything, even the price of love, in monetary terms.
‘The hardest, most tight-fisted ingrate you will ever meet’ as one character describes him.
This updated to the 1930s translation by Robert Cogo-Fawcett and Braham Murray affords the leading actor a role into which he can sink his theatrical teeth.
And Tom Courtenay, in a rare stage appearance, doesn't miss a chance to behave disgracefully as his son and daughter strive to match their romantic aspirations with their father's penny-pinching ways.
The result is a broad comedy directed at a fast lick by Murray on a marvellously cluttered set by Simon Higlett in a Manchester Royal Exchange production.
The cast are not always as economical with their actions as the miser is with his money, mistaking shouting and flinging their arms about as a substitute for comedy.
But the chief joy despite several eye-catching supporting roles remains watching Courtenay milk the script for all its worth.
The production continues at the Civic until Saturday.
Steve Pratt Bournemouth Sinfonietta and Evelyn Glennie: Newcastle City Hall TYNESIDE is already familiar with the awesome virtuosity and musicianship of Evelyn Glennie and the audience welcomed her return to the city.
The concert featured two new ear-opening works.
Chief interest was centred on Dominic Muldowney's Percussion Concerto written for Glennie.
The composer conducted the work, interesting mainly because of the ingenious exploitation of rhythmic shapes, some so antagonistic that passages require the help of a second conductor in this performance, the leader of the orchestra.
Aurally and visually the performance was an exhilarating experience, with the agile, sequined, Scottish soloist gliding among the percussion instruments dazzling the eye as much as the ear.
James MacMillan, a young Scottish composer musically nurtured as much in Durham and York as in Scotland, was represented by Tryst, based on a Scottish love poem.
The interest was again chiefly rhythmic and required the most meticulous playing by all sections in the orchestra.
The elegiac slow movement exploiting the dark colours of the violas and the lower strings was the most moving and memorable music in the work.
Tamas Vasary, a former Northern Sinfonia director of music, conducted and secured am impressive performance.
The solace of the evening came with the performances of the most agreeable music in the programme Stravinsky's delectable Danses Concertantes and Prokofiev's elegant and effervescent Classical Symphony.
A CROWN court judge is considering recommending the deportation of a man convicted of deception.
Parvis Yousefi was convicted of four offences of attempting to obtain a pecuniary advantage, five offences of obtaining property by deception and attempting to obtain by deception.
Yousefi, of Southfield Crescent, Norton, Stockton, had denied the offences.
He had set up a bank account with the Royal Bank of Scotland in Darlington in the name of Momen Garawand and then used cheque books which he saved up to spend almost £6,500.
Yousefi was found not guilty of attempting to obtain £43,225 by applying for a loan in the name of Garawand to buy his home.
Yousefi, 37, was caught in London as he tried to cash a cheque at a bank.
Judge William Hannah adjourned the case for social inquiry reports but said: ‘I am considering the appropriateness of a recommendation that you should be deported from this country because of your activities.’
THE war of words over the £4.5m repair bill for a crumbling leisure centre is set to end in court action in the next few weeks.
Officers at Darlington Borough Council say the gloves are off in the battle for compensation over the town's £12m Dolphin Centre sports complex.
A team of London-based solicitors will be issuing writs claiming damages on the authority's behalf within the next month.
The identity of those at the centre of the row remains a closely guarded secret, but council officers are known to have spoken with management from Wiltshier Northern, the company that built the complex.
Councillors are hoping for a settlement without the need for court action but are prepared for a legal battle which could take several years during which time both sides could run up massive costs running into many tens of thousands.
Rebuilding work is due to get under way in the next few weeks when councillors decide which bid to accept for the contract.
Serious structural problems mean the building which is just 10 years old needs around £4.5m worth of repairs.
Borough solicitor Peter Kearsley said writs would be served within the next month.
He added: ‘This has all taken rather longer than we anticipated.
Our consultant architects have done a very thorough job of preparing the background papers.’
Mr Kearsley said he hoped for an out-of-court settlement.
If not, he warned: ‘It could be a couple of years before we even get into the courtroom itself and no-one can say how long the case will run.’
Officials elected:
Harold Svennson was appointed chairman of the Darlington CHA and HF Rambling Club at the group's 56th annual meeting at Darlington Arts Centre.
Joan Blewitt was appointed secretary and John Carter treasurer.
Cars damaged:
Vandals poured paint over two cars parked in Arthur Street and Salisbury Terrace, Darlington.
The value of the damage caused was £1,200.
Sports gear haul:
Thieves who broke into a car parked in the Vane Terrace area of Darlington made off with 20 black and white Darlington rugby shirts and a sports bag worth £500.
Home raided:
Burglars made off with a video recorder, television, hifi, microwave and jewellery worth £2,439 from a house in Aviemore Court, Darlington.
Demolition backed:
Planning permission and listed building consent have been granted by Sedgefield District Council's development committee for the demolition and replacement of the extension to historic Shellam House in Kirk Merrington.
Sea liner hero lands award
A SCARBOROUGH entertainer who helped rescue 500 passengers on a sinking liner last August, is to receive a top national award.
Julian Russell was working on the Greek cruiser Oceanos when it went down in the Indian Ocean.
He helped man the bridge and co-ordinate the rescue operation after the crew allegedly abandoned ship.
He is to receive the Daily Star's Gold Award which is given for outstanding bravery.
Julian whose home is at Seamer, near Scarborough is currently the assistant cruise director in the Caribbean and is returning home for the presentation ceremony next month.
Sheep stolen:
Fifteen sheep have been stolen from West Farm, near Chopwell, Gateshead.
Police are appealing for anyone with information about the theft to contact them.
Relatives appeal:
Police are appealing for relatives of James Sant, 77, found dead at his home in Vallum Court, Newcastle, earlier this week, to contact the city's coroner's office.
Hotel sold:
One of Scarborough's leading South Cliff hotels, the 43 bedroom Ambassador on The Esplanade, has been sold in a £600,000 deal.
The new owner is local publican Richard Frank and his wife, Kathryn, who plan to operate the hotel all year round.
Husky rally:
The third husky dog rally to be held in Kielder Forest, Northumberland, begins on Saturday.
The two-day event is the last of four in the rally series sponsored by Labatts lager.
Battling for honours will be 111 teams with dogs pulling sleds, of if there is no snow, wheeled rigs.
Raid review:
Detectives who carried out a raid at an exclusive house at Coatham Mundeville, near Darlington, have held talks with the Crown Prosecution Service which is now considering the content of a number of articles seized.
The investigation was carried out under the Obscene Publications Act.
Decision delayed:
Hospital nurses opposing a plan to make them wear their own clothes for work have put off a decision to take action in protest.
Nursing unions at Greenbank Hospital, Darlington, yesterday said a decision to invoke dispute procedure was delayed until next week because management had called a joint meeting with staff and unions next Monday.
Stepping up:
Prof Michael Rawlins, Professor of Clinical Pharmacology at Newcastle University, has been appointed chairman of the Committee on Safety of Medicines by Health Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
Prof Rawlins has been a member of the committee since 1980 and is at present vice-chairman.
Arson attack:
Police say arsonists hurled petrol bombs into the Romada pub in Victoria Road, Hebburn, causing £3,400 worth of damage.
A policewoman discovered the blaze which occurred in the early hours of yesterday.
Nurse robbed:
A 29-year-old nurse from Gateshead's Queen Elizabeth hospital was robbed when a white car pulled up beside her and a youth snatched her shoulder bag.
She was unhurt in the attack in Salkeld Gardens.
Site raids:
Thieves stole a wide range of equipment from building sites at Humshaugh, Corbridge and Whittle Dene.
The thefts took place within a 24 hour period.
Woman hurt:
A woman motorist suffered minor injuries when her car was in collision with an ambulance at a junction on Newbiggin Road in Ashington, Northumberland.
Holiday theft:
Thieves stole £900 worth of property from a car parked in Hexham town centre, Northumberland, by a man on holiday from Finland.
Winning ways:
Beverley Brown, a hairdresser from Georgian House Hair Salon, Richmond, has snipped her way through to the Newcastle regional heat of the fourth Young Protege Scholarship, organised by Wella.
The event offers hairdressing education valued at £3,000 to the winner of the national final.
Cars attacked:
Vandals poured paint over two cars parked in Arthur Street and Salisbury Terrace, Darlington.
The value of the damage caused was £1,200.
Shirts taken:
Thieves who broke into a car parked in the Vane Terrace area of Darlington made off with 20 black and white Darlington rugby shirts and a sports bag worth £500.
House raid:
Burglars made off with a video recorder, television, hifi, microwave and jewellery worth £2,439 from a house in Aviemore Court, Darlington.
THE wife of a man who went missing from his Darlington home three weeks ago last night pleaded for him to come home.
Wong Yuen Shan, who runs the Green Cottage Chinese take away in Yarm Road, Darlington, said her husband's disappearance was a complete mystery.
She last saw him on January 16 when he packed a few items of clothing and left home.
Although she has lived in England for 17 years she only married her husband, Qi Can Huang, three years ago.
She met him while on a return visit to Canton, in China.
It was only in autumn last year that Mr Huang, 41, came to England to make his home with his wife.
Last night she said he experienced several difficulties when he arrived in England.
‘He could speak no English, not even yes or no,’ she said.
He had been depressed and refused to help his wife in the restaurant.
A neighbour said he often saw Mr Huang spending hours walking aimlessly up and down the town's Yarm Road.
Police have repeated their appeal for anyone who can help to call them on Darlington .
Car rammed:
A policeman was injured last night when burglars rammed a panda car.
PC Keith Fletcher was attending a call at Merchants Wharf, St Peter's Basin, Newcastle, after neighbours reported a house was being raided.
A stolen XR3 car was used to ram the police car.
A man was last night helping police with their inquiries.
Ballet success:
People have been flocking to see a controversial production of Swan Lake.
The Northern Ballet Theatre's production which comes to Darlington next month was criticised by a Mail on Sunday reviewer who said it was more like soft porn than ballet.
But staff at the Grand Theatre, Leeds, where the ballet was premiered, say people have not been put off.
Electrical fault:
A gas fire in a Teesside street yesterday was caused by…
Northern Electric.
Workmen melted a gas supply pipe in Queen Street, South Bank, and the gas caught fire, damaging two bay windows.
Pleasing response:
There has been a good response to Bishopton/Redmarshall School's appeal for supplies for the needy children in the Russian town of Kostrama.
This week the school is collecting medical supplies, including plasters, vitamins and antiseptics.
Tomorrow, along with many other schools in County Durham, Bishopton/Redmarshall will celebrate Kostrama Day to mark the fund-raising efforts for Durham's twin town.
East Layton Site visit:
A site visit was held on Monday by councillors, council officers and employees from Tilcon quarries to Forcett Quarry.
It will be March 3 before a decision is taken by North Yorkshire County Council whether to allow 2.56 million tonnes of limestone to be extracted from the quarry.
Eppleby Musical date:
A Valentine's Night country and western event will be held in the Travellers Rest pub tomorrow night starting at about 8.30pm.
Admission is £3, including a pie, peas and chips supper.
Education service:
A special service for Education Sunday will be held at All Saints, Hurworth, on Sunday at 10.30am.
Representatives from Hurworth Comprehensive, Hurworth Junior and Infants School and Hurworth House Preparatory School in attendance.
Two hurt:
Two people were badly hurt when a car crashed at Darlington Back Lane, Whinney Hill, Stockton, just after 11pm yesterday.
One had to be cut from the wreckage by firemen.
Both casualties, as yet unnamed, were ‘poorly’ in North Tees Hospital.
A NEWLY-WED died after his car collided with a wagon on the A66, an inquest heard yesterday.
Simon Pickering, 22, of Lindisfarne Road, Spennymoor, had been married just six weeks when he was involved in an accident near the Brough by-pass.
Mr Pickering, a welding inspector, was travelling to work in the Lake District last October when he collided with a white Mercedes wagon.
He later died in Darlington Memorial Hospital from head injuries and brain swelling.
PC Nicholas Hodgkinson, from Cumbria police, said Mr Pickering's Ford Granada car was ‘substantially damaged’.
‘It was underneath the rear of a white Mercedes wagon,’ he said.
‘I broke the car windows with a stone to try to reach Mr Pickering.
There was a certain amount of movement and noise and at that time he was unconscious.’
The inquest at Darlington Memorial Hospital heard how Mr Pickering's gearbox, handbrake and milometer were completely smashed from the impact.
Colin Penna, coroner for South West Durham, recorded a verdict of accidental death.
SOLDIERS gave a devastating display of military muscle when they were called in to recover a truck dumped in a river.
Civilian breakdown organisations more used to recovering cars from the nearby A66 broke out in a sweat when businessman David Gresty told them where his truck had been ditched.
In desperation Mr Gresty turned to soldiers at nearby Catterick Garrison who agreed to recover the truck stuck in the River Skerne, on the outskirts of Darlington.
Corporal Philip Ainsworth and Lance Corporal Andrew Zolden turned up in a 27-tonne Foden six-wheeler capable of hauling a light battle tank with its remote-control crane.
And the £170,000 military breakdown gear made light work of pulling the battered truck out of the waters.
Corp Ainsworth, of the REME's 15 squadron workshops, said: ‘Something like this gives us the opportunity to put our equipment through its paces.
‘We get a few calls from people who have lost heavy vehicles which can't be recovered by civilian companies.’
Lance Corp Zolden, of the Royal Corps of Transport, added: ‘It is a standing joke that we are the Army's AA I guess you could say that is true.’
The truck was stolen from Mr Gresty's business in Richmond before being dumped.
Mr Gresty, whose business has been broken into several times, said: ‘I am extremely grateful to the Army for getting me out of a very sticky situation.’
A BAN on cigarette advertising would not threaten jobs at a Darlington tobacco factory, it was claimed yesterday.
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective MP for Darlington, met staff at the Rothmans factory in McMullen Road.
And he said the 800-strong workforce would not be affected by a proposed EC blanket ban on tobacco advertising.
Labour supports the ban but Conservatives and the Tobacco Advisory Council say it could have a knock-on effect on sports like motor racing and snooker, which are sponsored by tobacco companies.
They also claim up to £70m in advertising revenue could be lost.
But Mr Milburn said fears about job losses was only scaremongering.
‘Business is booming at Rothmans, especially since they have introduced the 25-pack Royals,’ he said.
‘I am delighted that they are doing so well in Darlington.’
Mr Milburn said cigarette advertising has been banned in Italy for 30 years, yet cigarette consumption has gone up.
‘I have no doubt that Rothmans success will not be dented by an advertising ban,’ he said.
Darlington's Tory MP Michael Fallon said: ‘There is no doubt that jobs would be lost at Rothmans if advertising was banned.’
AN industrial centre in Russia could become Darlington's new twin town.
Pavlovo is about 300 miles east of Moscow and has a history of metal craft.
Recently its factories have made parts for buses, tractors and cars.
The population is believed to be similar to Darlington's and there is a technical college devoted to metal work.
Pavlovo has been earmarked as the ideal Russian town for Darlington to twin with and borough councillors will consider the idea on February 27.
Darlington councillor Frank Robson, chairman of the town's twinning sub-committee, said: ‘We already have twin towns in Germany and France and have been looking for a twin in Eastern Europe for some time.
‘Pavlovo has been recommended.’
Pavlova, near Gorky, lies beside the river Orka, and is about 200 miles south east of Kostrama, County Durham's twin town.
But the twinning plans could be hit by possible spending cuts.
Coun John Williams, leader of Darlington Borough Council, said: ‘Because of the threat of poll tax capping we have to consider cutting the twinning budget.’
But Coun Robson said: ‘It will not prevent us corresponding with Pavlovo but whether it will delay any civic visits from Russia remains to be seen.’
A BAN on tobacco advertising would not threaten jobs at Rothmans' Darlington factory, it was claimed yesterday.
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, met staff at the factory in McMullen Road.
He said the 800-strong workforce would not be affected by a proposed European Community blanket ban on tobacco advertising.
The Labour Pary supports the ban but Conservatives and the Tobacco Advisory Council say it could have a knock-on effect on sports like motor-racing and snooker, which are sponsored by tobacco companies.
They also say up to £70m in advertising revenue could be lost.
But Mr Milburn said fears about job losses was only scaremongering.
‘Business is booming at Rothmans, especially since they have introduced the 25-pack Royals,’ he said.
‘I am delighted that they are doing so well in Darlington and that the company has expanded over the last few years.’
Mr Milburn said cigarette advertising had been banned in Italy for 30 years, yet cigarette consumption had gone up.
‘I have no doubt that Rothmans success will not be dented by an advertising ban,’ he said.
A SHIFT worker rushed out to witness a ram raid on a Darlington fashion shop in the early hours of yesterday.
Peter Young, a night telephonist with North of England Newspapers, grew suspicious when he heard a loud bang in the town centre at about 5.20am.
He ran a few yards to discover the raiders reversing a stolen grey Japanese jeep through the front of Pursuit, the men's designer clothing shop in Crown Street.
They then loaded the haul of jeans, tops and jackets the value of which is not yet known into another stolen Isuzu jeep.
Yesterday shop manager Balraj Babuta said: ‘We took all the precautions.
We can't really improve the security we had.
‘There were shutters on the windows and there was an alarm, but now there isn't even a frame on the front.
They've driven straight through it.’
Police are appealing for information about the incident.
Contact Darlington Police on .
Man accused of blackmail
CHRISTOPHER Close, 31, of Sandy Crescent, Newcastle, accused of a £25,000 blackmail plot, was remanded in custody for a week by city magistrates yesterday.
He was alleged to have threatened to poison food unless the Co-op store in Newgate Street, Newcastle, gave him the money.
An application for bail was refused.
Smash injuries:
Two teenagers were hurt when their car hit a telegraph pole in Cleveland.
Driver Glyn Harrison, 18, of Low Goosepool Farm, Middleton St George, broke his leg in the smash at Whinney Hill, on the edge of Stockton.
Passenger Edward Wade, 19, of Ouston Moor Farm, Darlington Back Lane, Stockton, received chest injuries.
Search continues:
The search for a missing 44-year-old businessman who left a note in his abandoned car at Scarborough six days ago, continued without success yesterday.
Stephen Knowles, of Scunthorpe, parked at Scalby Mills, Scarborough, last Friday.
Retrial ordered:
A judge last night ordered a retrial in the case of a man accused of murdering a sex offender after a jury at Newcastle Crown Court failed to reach a verdict.
Paul Marshall, 27, of Norham Road, North Shields, denied the charge that he ran down James Longstaffe, 45, after hearing him taunted for being a sex offender.
Cigarettes haul:
Thieves stole a large quantity of cigarettes from the garage in Dean Road, Ferryhill, last night.
The raiders smashed the front door panel of the garage shop and helped themselves from the cigarette shelves.
Barred:
Burglars who broke into the Spennymoor Leisure Centre were thwarted in their efforts to break into the bar.
At some time between 11pm and 2am yesterday the intruders broke through the main doors of the leisure centre but were unable to get into the bar area.
Pair bailed:
Housemates Sean Patrick Spowart, 21, and Kevin Patrick Howard, 24, of Lightfoot Terrace, Ferryhill, appeared before Sedgefield magistrates.
Spowart faces charges of theft, criminal damage and burglary while Howard is charged with burglary, possession of class B drugs with intent to supply and dishonestly obtaining and receiving goods.
They were both released on conditional bail until March 26.
Caravan raided:
Thieves have stolen seating worth £500 from a caravan at the Burtree Caravan Centre in Burtree Lane, Darlington.
Vandal attack:
Vandals smashed the glass front door of Jaze hairdressers in Yarm Road, Darlington, with a rock in the early hours of yesterday.
A search of the shop was carried out, but nothing was stolen.
Shop break-in:
Burglars broke into the card shop Pomme D'Or in High Row, Darlington, and stole an unknown amount of cash from a stamp machine.
Two charged:
Sean Patrick Spowart, 21, and Kevin Patrick Howard, 24, of Lightfoot Terrace, Ferryhill, appeared before Sedgefield magistrates charged with a variety of offences.
Spowart faces charges of theft, criminal damage and burglary while Howard is charged with burglary possession of class B drugs with intent to supply and dishonestly obtaining and receiving goods.
They were bailed until March 26.
Car charge:
Michael John Parker, 38, of Eden Grove, Middridge, was charged yesterday with stealing a Renault car worth £5,500 and dishonestly obtaining £5,500.
Sedgefield Magistrates decided the case should be dealt with by the Crown Court and gave Parker bail pending committal.
New scorebox:
A cricket scorebox is to be put up at Mainsforth recreation complex in Ferryhill to replace the recently demolished box.
Sedgefield District Council's development committee have approved the plan.
The following cases were dealt with by Richmond magistrates: Michael Kevin Mark, 25, of Charles Street, Darlington, admitted driving a car with excess alcohol in his breath, and using a car without insurance, fined £575 plus £25 costs, disqualified for 15 months.
Philip Earl, 19, of Gladstone Street, Darlington, was convicted of driving a motor pick-up without due care, failing to stop after an accident, failing to report an accident, driving without a licence and without insurance, fined £285, licence endorsed, disqualified for nine months.
A CRACKDOWN was announced last night on people who park cars in their gardens.
Coun Bill Dixon (Lab) told councillors he was fed up with private and council tenants who flout the law by parking cars and motorbikes in their gardens.
He said the council is pledged to quality service throughout the town and cars parked in gardens did not match that pledge.
Throughout the town fences and hedges have been ripped down by tenants who want to use their gardens as impromptu garages.
‘We should not expect our tenants to have to look at the mess caused by their careless neighbours,’ said Coun Dixon.
Tory housing spokeswoman Coun Heather Scott supported the crackdown.
Her Conservative colleague Coun Barry Lamb said the problem was particularly bad in some parts of Middleton St George.
Coun Dixon said where possible the council would consider introducing hard standing areas where people had no alternative for parking their cars.
LABOUR ‘deadbeats’ must carry the can for failing to secure a jobs bonanza in Darlington, it was claimed last night.
A row blew up at the borough council meeting when Tories said Labour lost the chance of attracting Kimberly Clark to Darlington by refusing to involve the town's Tory MP Michael Fallon in the negotiations.
Coun Peter Jones (Con) said it was madness to use Labour candidate Alan Milburn in the attempt to bring the company to the town.
‘Why did they use such a lightweight to do Darlington's heavyweight business,’ he said.
But Coun David Lyonette (Lab) said the reason the company went elsewhere was because Government legislation meant Darlington cannot compete on equal terms with other parts of Britain.
He said if anyone thought Michael Fallon knew nothing of the possible move ‘they are absolutely out of their minds’.
His colleague Coun Frank Robson said the reason Mr Fallon was not involved stemmed from his lack of interest in what happened in his own constituency.
Coun Lyonette said Mr Fallon never claimed he was kept in the dark.
‘He knew and he refused to take any part.’
Kimberly Clark negotiated at length with the council and the Department of Trade and Industry before opting to set up in Humberside.
Tory leader Coun Tony Richmond said the blame for that lost opportunity lay completely with Labour breaking the golden rule and failing to use a Government minister in the effort to attract the company.
Tories claim Darlington has become a victim of its own success.
They said because Mr Fallon had achieved so much in bringing industry to Darlington it could no longer be treated as a depressed economic area.
Two firms in High Court:
Darlington businesses have been wound up by the High Court in London.
Northern Fuels of Northgate House in the town was shown to owe £10,045 in rent arrears to its office landlord the Equitable Life Assurance Society.
Other unspecified creditors meant the company was unable to meet its debts, the insolvency petitioner alleged.
Passco of Leith Road was also wound up due to a £9,420 debt owed to Lombard Natwest Factors after repeated demands for payment.
A YOUNG mother has criticised Darlington council for saying damp in her house was caused by her lifestyle.
Tracy Brown, 27, complained to the council after damp in her home made her family ill.
She claimed compensation for peeling wallpaper and damage to furniture.
But a reply from Darlington Borough Council said: ‘We cannot offer a guaranteed cure for condensation particularly when it is often caused by a tenant's lifestyle.’
It also said the council could not reimburse Tracy for any damage.
Tracy said: ‘I am very angry about this as they are saying the damp is due to the way I live.
‘But there wouldn't have been any damage to my property if they had fixed the damp in the first place a year ago.’
Tracy, of Aldborough Walk, said her one-year-old son Jamie has developed asthma from the damp and suffered from colds and chest infections.
Her other sons, Philip, five, and Liam, three, also suffered health problems.
The council have since installed a humidistat and extractor fan in their house to combat the damp.
Pauline Mitchell, director of housing, said the council was not suggesting that Tracy had been negligent.
‘We thought it would not be fair to raise Tracy's hopes of getting compensation.
But we will refer the case to our insurers.’
DETECTIVES hunting a man who robbed a Darlington building society are hoping to have the incident featured on the TV programme Crimewatch.
The raider escaped with £760 after demanding cash from a cashier at the National and Provincial in Bondgate at 2.55pm on December 27.
Detectives launched a search for a man aged between 30 and 40, about 5ft 10in tall, with a short and tidy hairstyle.
He was wearing a brown imitation sheepskin coat.
He indicated to the 38-year-old cashier he had a gun, but no weapon was seen during the incident.
Now Darlington detectives are hoping the crimebusting programme will bring forward more clues as to the man's identity.
Police in hunt for city mugging duo
POLICE in York are hunting two muggers who assaulted a 25-year-old civil servant in Layerthorpe and stole a small amount of money.
Their victim needed hospital treatment for cuts and bruises.
One of the attackers was wearing a sweatshirt with Weetabix written across it.
Hall sell-off:
Hard-pressed church authorities are being forced to sell off Church House in St Hilda's Terrace, traditionally used as the venue for one of the town's biggest events, Whitby Folk Week.
The asking price is £300,000.
Body found:
An inquest has been opened and adjourned following the discovery of the body of James Morse, 64, of Manor Drive, Pickering, in a garden shed.
There were no suspicious circumstances.
Sex pests:
Police in York are looking for two sex pests following indecent exposure incidents in Salisbury Terrace and Heslington Road.
Crash ordeal:
A motorist was freed by fire fighters after being trapped in his wrecked car for an hour yesterday following a head-on crash on the A64 Scarborough to Malton road at Knapton.
Peter Hardcastle of Ridgehill, Dartmouth, was taken to hospital after passing motorists gave him first aid.
Dowager dies:
The Dowager Lady Grimthorpe of Ampleforth has died at the age of 90.
One of Yorkshire's most renowned horsewomen, she was an active supporter of racing and hunting.
Civic candidates:
Coun Jack Warwick (Lab) a retired Yorkshire Water authority official and Coun Eric Dixon (Ind) a retired education authority officer, have both been nominated to be next Mayor of Scarborough.
Witness appeal:
Police are looking for witnesses to a road accident between a motorcycle and a car outside Dean's Garden Centre, Seamer Road, Scarborough.
Motorcyclist Philip Hague, 26 of Langdale Road, Scarborough, is recovering in hospital after the crash.
No licence:
Sarah Bell, of Gordon Crescent, Richmond, and Malcolm Green, of Finghall, near Leyburn, were each fined £100 and ordered to pay £20 costs by Leyburn magistrates yesterday for using a TV set without a licence.
Prowler fears:
Police were called after a prowler was spotted near the army married quarters in Ripon.
A man was seen loitering in Clotherholme Road but had disappeared by the time officers arrived.
It was the second incident this week.
In the first a house door was kicked in.
Coins warning:
Police in Seaham have urged members of the public and traders to be on their guard following the discovery of a counterfeit £1 coin.
A woman shopper who received it in her change, noticed the forgery when the gold colouring began to rub off.
Shop blow:
The recession and a consequent loss of business is forcing the closure of Fosters menswear shop in Baxtergate, Whitby, only a few months after plans were passed for extensive modernisation work to be carried out.
School break-in:
Television and video equipment were stolen in a raid at Husthwaite County Primary School.
Garage raid:
Thieves raided a kiosk at a Stokesley petrol station.
Cigarettes worth £415 and £20 cash were taken from Meadowfield Garage.
Clock stolen:
A grandfather clock worth £1,000 was stolen from a house at Kepwick, near Thirsk.
Clock stolen:
A grandfather clock worth £1,000 was stolen from a house at Kepwick, near Thirsk.
Oil spill:
The National Rivers Authority placed oil-absorbent booms in the Derwent at Malton after an oil spillage during preparatory work for a bridge facelift.
Staff fall:
The number of people employed by Sedgefield District Council fell by two last year.
During the quarter ending December 1991, 923 people were working for the council.
Bach chorus:
The Northern Sinfonia Chorus will be playing a celebration of J S Bach at Darlington's Dolphin Centre on February 22.
Bible Study:
A bible study group takes place at St. Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, on February 27.
Hound show:
The North East Afghan Hound Society is holding a show on February 16 from 11 am to 5pm.
The show is in the main sports hall at the Sunnydale Leisure Centre in Shildon.
Big match:
A National League Basketball match between the Sedgefield Racers and North London will be played on February 22.
The game takes place in the Red Hall at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre at 7.30pm.
Bowls clash:
Durham County Carpet Bowls Association is holding a competition on March 1.
It will be played in the Red Hall from 9am to 6pm.
Canine competition:
Newton Aycliffe Canine Society is holding an Open Mixed Breed Dog Show at the Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre on March 8.
It is to be held in the Red and Yellow halls, starting at 9am and finishing at 6pm.
Panic stations in by-election
THE reaction of the Labour Party to our campaign in the Willington East by-election can be summed up in one word panic!
Despite holding the seat only last May with a 70pc majority, Labour are running scared that they will now lose their last remaining stronghold in Wear Valley.
For years Labour leader John Richardson has condemned newcomers to the area (he calls them immigrants).
Now Labour's Willington candidate is a newcomer, while Liberal Democrat Dorothy Allan is Willington-born and bred.
My remark about Coun Richardson losing his grip was a genuine comment of political reality and echoes what many Labour people themselves are saying privately.
As for Coun Richardson's ‘leadership’(HAS February 2), it has been a financial disaster for Wear Valley poll tax Coun Chris Foote Wood, leader, Wear Valley Liberal Democrats,.
The cost of Labour?
SPENNYMOOR Town Hall was built by the Liberals/Tories.
The closure of the steel works and the declining coal mines saw a lot of unemployment in the area.
Lord Hailsham along with Edward Heath poured millions of pounds into the town making it an industrial centre.
Along came Courtaulds, Tomado, Black and Decker, Rothmans.
Michael Fallon Conservative MP for Darlington expressed concern for Rothmans' workers with the possible decline in that industry.
Byers Green was designated category D. Peggy Hutchinson objected and fought and saved it from demolition.
Dr Brauer, an Independent councillor obtained a surgery for Byers Green.
Under the administration of the Independent council, Kirk Merrington was landscaped, telephone and electric poles lined the village, these services were placed underground.
A sports and community hall was built on the sports field.
A modern sewerage works was built at Tudhoe Village.
The leisure centre was built.
These councillors were not paid for their services and paid their own expenses.
After council meetings they adjourned to a local pub for a refreshing drink paid for out of their own pockets.
Can anybody tell me what Labour has done for Spennymoor?.
R.D. Long, Maupaul, Rock Road, Spennymoor.
Budgets fear
WILLIAM Waldegrave's announcement of an extension to the budget-holding GPs' schemes will reduce the rural residents of Wear Valley into second class citizens as far as NHS treatment goes.
Many of the GPs who are now budget holders are proudly boasting of the better service they can offer patients but all freely admit that it is at the expense of the patients of nonbudget-holding GPs.
William Waldegrave's budget-holding GPs are only those with lists above 7,000 patients.
The majority of Wear Valley's GPs don't have anything like 7,000 patients due to Wear Valley being a rural community and so are in danger of becoming second class citizens.
The NHS safe in William Waldegrave's hands?
Not for rural Alan Nicholson, Wards End Cottage, High Stoop, Tow Law, Bishop Auckland.
Parking plea
MY husband and I are both disabled and 77 years of age.
Not feeling too well I parked in the small road by the National Westminster Bank, Bishop Auckland, to go to the bank and Marks and Spencer.
When we returned the traffic warden was waiting and launched into a tirade of abuse and threatened me with a ticket for all my disabled badge was displayed.
I usually park in Newgate Street, but when feeling unwell have occasionally parked on this road to cut down the walking.
It should be remembered that disabled drivers don't always have only walking disability, but probably other illnesses as well which is not helped by officious traffic wardens.
My car is a Metro, quite small compared with the many large cars without disabled badges that continually park (presumably with this warden's blessing) in this particular road.
Probably the answer would be to make it a No Entry.
M.B. Skelton,.
How green?
I NOTE that in Durham County Council's publication Charter for the Environment it is stated that the council intends to reduce domestic and industrial waste by preparing a recycling plan for County Durham and encouraging district councils to collect waste for recycling.
It would appear, however, that their Labour counterparts on Sedgefield District Council either have not got the message or more likely have decided to turn a deaf ear.
This is proven by the fact that they have recently given the go-ahead to introduce a wheelie-bin scheme which envisages no recycling whatsoever and at a cost to poll tax payers of £1.25m.
I believe that spending money on continuing to dump our rubbish into holes in the ground is an act of gross irresponsibility and shows just how green the Labour Party really Coun Garry Huntington, Lib/Dem District Councillor,.
It's unclear
IN THE light of the recent debate on defence in the House of Commons, perhaps now is a good time for the people of Darlington to be told where the prospective Labour candidate stands on the issue of nuclear disarmament.
It has to be noted that he no longer lists his membership of CND in The Northern ‘s Who's Who.
Does that mean he has had a drastic change of heart or is it just that he thinks, along with many of his colleagues, that there is electoral advantage in keeping this quiet at the moment?
With the uncertainty caused by the break-up of the Soviet empire it would seem to be very unwise to drop our defences.
Kathy Lever, Secretary, Darlington Conservative Association.
Bring back our bus service
A YEAR ago the residents of Albert Hill were delighted to hear that at long last, after years of asking, a bus service was to operate in this area.
Now, less than 12 months later we are told it is to be withdrawn on February 23.
At a meeting, our ward councillor Mr I. Hartley informed us the reason for this decision was because it was not viable.
Three buses an hour are presently run around the estate.
Surely they could see if two buses or even one bus an hour would be more economical.
Albert Hill is an island surround by main roads.
Whichever way we leave the hill we take our lives in our hands.
This service was a Godsend, especially for senior citizens and young mothers with babies and toddlers.
Albert Hill is normally a forgotten area of Darlington.
The residents thought for once we were getting a bit of recognition as a vital industrial and residential area of the town when the bus route was Mrs M. Gillan,.
It's people, not cash
AS a resident and on behalf of the residents of Prescott Street, Albert Hill, I am appalled that our bus service we fought so hard to get is going to be taken away from us.
This service has been a boon to all who use it, pensioners, disabled and able-bodied residents.
Maybe a bus every 20 minutes is not profitable, but every 30 or 45 minutes might pay.
It would make a difference to bring the bus back up Albert Road.
I hope Darlington Transport have second thoughts on the matter.
The residents of Albert Hill need this service as much as any other area of the town.
This is a plea from the heart.
Please save our Mrs M.
Chisman,.
Disabled suffer in parking abuse crackdown
I REFER to the report about Darlington Town Council banning parking for the disabled in the town centre (Echo, February 1).
As my wife is disabled and cannot use public transport the only way that she can get around is by car and wheelchair.
I am the driver and pusher but have had a hip replacement which restricts the distance that I can push the wheelchair.
My wife, an orange badge holder, and myself, know the badge system is abused by certain people but is it necessary to discriminate against the genuine case?
In your report the council leader states that they would be increasing parking for the disabled in Abbot's Yard.
Has he ever tried to push a wheelchair and try it for himself?
I am afraid that while this ban is in force my wife and I will not be trading in Darlington as we have done for the last 20 years.
We will go elsewhere and don't suppose we will be the only J F Richardson,.
Blaze wrecks farm building
A FIRE broke out in a farm building yesterday morning, causing thousands of pounds worth of damage to machinery.
Farmworkers led animals to safety as firemen tackled the blaze in a garage and storeroom at East House Farm, Kelloe, near Durham at about 4am.
It took them half an hour to get the fire under control, and the building, two tractors and a number of farm implements were severely damaged.
Nobody was injured.
Young hit:
The recession is hitting young people hardest in the North-East with unemployment among under 25s growing faster than across the working population as a whole, said Steve Pickering, regional secretary of the General, Municipal and Boilermakers Union.
Ram leads:
Newton Aycliffe police investigating an incident when a stolen car was smashed into a policeman's house last week say they have had good response from their appeal for witnesses and are waiting for forensic test results.
Hospital help:
A fourth consultant is to be appointed to the ear, nose and throat department at Darlington Memorial Hospital to help cut junior doctors' hours.
The move is likely to be approved by Darlington Health Authority's meeting on Friday.
Long waits almost over at hospital
WAITING lists have been cut significantly at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
A report to Friday's meeting of the district health authority says: ‘The number of two-year waiters was reduced from 74 (December 31, 1991) to 43 (January 31, 1992) with the most significant reduction in oral surgery where numbers fell from 34 to six.
The number of patients who have waited for 12 months or more also decreased significantly from 367 to 293,’ says the report.
The hospital now looks set to achieve the April target of no patients waiting more than two years for surgery.
Special clinic:
A new young persons clinic is open every Friday at Park Place Health Centre, Darlington.
The clinic runs from 5pm to 7pm and there is a confidential appointment or ‘drop-in’ service for any young person.
More equipment:
Darlington Health Authority looks set to spend more than £48,000 on the latest equipment to improve treatment for patients who need gall bladders removing and alternative treatment for women who would otherwise need a hysterectomy for problems with the womb.
The health authority will decide at its meeting on Friday whether to buy the two machines before April.
£5m to spend:
A sum of £5m is set to be spent on top priority areas in Darlington's health service such as cutting waiting lists and funding the Patients' Charter.
Mystery blaze at warehouse
A MYSTERY fire at Debenham's furniture warehouse, behind Stockton High Street, is being investigated.
It took 11 firemen almost half an hour to bring the blaze under control and bingo players had to be evacuated as smoke seeped into the auditorium of the Mecca Social Club, next door.
Hotel hopes:
Management at the Redworth Hall hotel and country club near Darlington say they set for a record breaking year by using an aggressive marketing campaign.
Flying high:
Three young fliers have been presented with their stripes by the Mayor of Darlington, Coun Rita Fishwick.
Cadet Ian Scullion, 15, and Cadet Sharon Stoker, 16, of the 405 Squadron Air Training Corps, Neasham Road, have been promoted to corporal.
And Corporal James Ellerby, 17, has been promoted to sergeant.
Yamaha stolen:
A blue 350cc Yamaha motorbike, registration number VHH 466Y, was stolen from Park Place, Darlington, at the weekend.
Diving gear:
Diving equipment and clothing worth £1,145 was stolen from Beaumont Street car park, Darlington, at the weekend.
Windows smashed:
Three windows were smashed at the Denmark Street surgery, Darlington, at the weekend.
Britannic break-in:
Thieves broke into the Britannic Assurance office, Tubwell Row, Darlington, yesterday.
Kawasaki taken:
A Kawasaki 125cc motorbike, registration number H710 OVN, was stolen from Fenby Avenue, Darlington, yesterday.
Pedestrian hurt:
A pedestrian suffered a slight head injury after being hit by a taxi in Parkgate, Darlington, just before midnight last night.
BANKRUPT former publican Maurice Siddle was contemplating suicide before police stopped him for drink-driving on Christmas Day, a court heard.
Darlington magistrates were told Mr Siddle had been suffering from clinical depression triggered by business problems.
In 1989 he was sacked as steward of Haughton Working Men's Club, Darlington, over his organising of Red Nose Day activities.
An industrial tribunal later ruled Mr Siddle, 54, had been unfairly dismissed and he went on to run pubs in Sunderland and Sedgefield.
In November it was revealed a petition had been filed at Durham County Court by an unnamed creditor and he was declared bankrupt.
Yesterday magistrates heard Mr Siddle was stopped by police at 11.30pm on Christmas Day as he drove his Toyota Celica along Whinfield Road, Darlington.
Christopher Morrison, prosecuting, said he had been almost twice over the drink-drive limit.
Mr Siddle, of Brighton Road, Darlington, admitted driving with excess alcohol and was fined £300 with £25 costs and disqualified from driving for five years.
In mitigation Ronald Coia said Mr Siddle had been at his son's home but decided he had to get away from the festivities.
He had driven to Roker in Sunderland and had walked for a long time on the beach, contemplating suicide, but had driven back to his son's home.
On the way he had stopped at a pub for three pints of Guinness, then arrived back in Darlington around 11pm when he was stopped.
Poll tax likely to be set this week
THE new poll tax for Darlington is likely to be set at a special meeting on Thursday.
The sum of £300.24 per person is likely to be approved an increase of £24.76 on the previous year's poll tax.
The figure was calculated from a population of 74,014 taken from the electoral register at September 10 last year.
The sum is likely to be amended in parishes ranging from £300.38 in High Coniscliffe to £303.81 in Piercebridge.
Felt theft:
Burglars made off with 75 rolls of roofing felt worth £2,300 from business premises on the Yarm Road Industrial Estate, Darlington.
Ladders stolen:
Two sets of aluminium ladders worth £170 were stolen from a van parked in Nickstream Lane, Darlington, over the weekend.
Burnt out:
A stolen Ford Granada car was found burnt out in a back lane near Victoria Road, Darlington, on Sunday.
Car attacks:
Ten cars were broken into during one night in Ferryhill and Spennymoor at the weekend.
Eight vehicles in Aycliffe, Shildon and Sedgefield were broken into on Sunday.
Baby shop:
A baby shop is to be opened at Darlington Memorial Hospital so that new mums can buy clothes and essential items for their newborn babies.
Forged notes:
Newton Aycliffe police are warning that forged notes are still circulating after a fake £20 note was handed to a Ferryhill newsagent.
Blind contract:
The homes of British servicemen based in Falkland Islands are to be fitted with blinds from Apollo, a company which has a showroom on Skinnergate, Darlington.
A DARLINGTON woman has been jailed for six months.
Anne Marriner, 23, admitted attempting to obtain property by deception and two counts of criminal damage all committed on the same day during January.
Sentencing had been adjourned from an earlier date during which time it is alleged Marriner committed other offences.
She will appear again before Darlington magistrates on three dates in March in connection with a further eight charges.
Christopher Morrison, prosecuting, said Marriner had tried to obtain money from Crown Street post office in Darlington with a Giro cheque which had been written over and smashed windows at two health centres in the town.
Tons of potatoes lost in barn blaze
HUNDREDS of tons of potatoes had their chips yesterday when fire swept through a barn in North Yorkshire yesterday afternoon.
About 20 firemen, many wearing breathing apparatus, tackled the blaze at Manor House Farm, North Otterington, near Northallerton.
Water had to be ferried from the nearest hydrant using a bowser.
The 40m x 20m building contained 400 tons of potatoes and several tons of baled straw.
RAF man fined: Graham Morris, 18, of the RAF Regiment, RAF Catterick, near Richmond, was fined a total of £280 and ordered to pay £20 costs by Richmond magistrates yesterday after he admitted driving a car without insurance and with a defective light.
Unemployment blues:
The jobless rate for Richmondshire now stands at 7.5pc compared with 4.6pc 18 months ago, according to figures given by Richmondshire District Council's economic development officer.
Wedding bells:
A member of European Parliament who grew up in Teesdale has announced her engagement to a top businessman.
Ann McIntosh, a Tory MEP for North-East Essex, will marry John Harvey, a director of Delta Airlines and Gatwick Handling, who lives in Sussex.
Miss McIntosh's parents, Dr Alastair and Greta McIntosh, live in Alston Road, Middleton-in-Teesdale.
C&A windows:
C&A has applied to Darlington Borough Council for permission to build new roof windows and a fire escape doorway at the Cornmill Centre.
Building changes:
The Northern Rock Building Society, Darlington, has applied to the borough council for permission to alter ground floor windows at its High Row office.
Angry workers' strike ballot
COUNCIL workers are considering bringing services to a halt in their anger over proposed redundancies in one of their departments.
They are considering strike action over York City Council's plans to make six architectural staff redundant and downgrade three others.
The local Nalgo branch has called a general meeting for tomorrow when members will be balloted on whether to withdraw their labour.
Snow to go:
Weathermen predict no more snow will fall in the region over the coming days.
Staff at the Newcastle Weather Centre say yesterday's snowfall was a one-off and the main problems were caused by snow melting and turning into slush.
In County Durham the A689 at Killhope was blocked but police said there were no major incidents on the roads.
The A66 was passable with just a light coating of snow.
Elsewhere there was thick snow on the A68 and slushy snow on the A1 near Alnwick.
AA Roadwatch advised motorists to use common sense when driving and to stay on the main roads.
Benefit scheme:
Details of a North-East pilot scheme aimed at increasing awareness of benefits available to working people were announced yesterday.
The scheme, due to start in April, is a co-operative venture between Newcastle City Council, the Citizens Advice Bureau and the Benefits Agency of the Department of Social Security.
Eel free:
A slippery customer got the taste of freedom yesterday when a 7ft long conger eel was released back into the wild by the Scarborough Sea Life Centre.
The eight-year-old female eel was put back into the sea so she can breed.
The eel had to be prepared for her journey by staff at the centre who gradually acclimatised her in their newly built quarantine unit.
Flat raid:
Thieves made off with property worth £5,760 from a Scarborough flat.
The haul included five stereo stacking system, a colour TV, video recorder, computer and a quantity of jewellery.
Going up:
Three North Yorkshire firemen have been promoted.
Peter Shead, 38, has been made assistant county fire officer.
Patrick Sweeney, 42, has been appointed divisional commander at Harrogate.
Peter Jackson, 44, is now the brigade's training and development officer.
Celia chosen:
A Peterlee pensioner has been chosen to represent the Durham constituency at a forthcoming European pensioners' parliament.
Celia Weetman, 63, was selected by a national committee headed by Jack Jones.
She will travel to Luxembourg for the parliament on March 30 and 31 where she will put forward the views and concerns of local pensioners.
She will be one of 518 delegates from 12 EC member countries.
New deputies:
Two new people have been appointed Deputy Lieutenants of County Durham by the Lord Lieutenant, David Grant.
They are David Clifford, of Rosedale, Dene House Road, Seaham, and Alasdair MacConachie, of Ashcroft Road, Darlington.
£4m tidier:
More than £4m has been spent on reclaiming derelict land in Darlington over the last ten years.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon yesterday revealed 134 acres of land had been restored thanks to £4.3m in Derelict Land Grant.
Fast food:
A Cantonese take-away could soon be built at a £500,000 development at the Springfield Hotel, formerly the Trades Council and Springfield Social Club, Whinfield Road.
Inquest opens:
An inquest opened yesterday into the death of Joanne Robinson, 21, who died after suffering head injuries on November 26.
The inquest heard that Miss Robinson, a single mother with four children from Kirkstone Place, Newton Aycliffe, died as a result of bruising and other damage to the brain caused by blunt head injury.
Adjourning the inquest, North Durham Coroner Geoffrey Burt said further decisions had to be taken before a full inquest could be held.
Cutting costs:
Finance experts UBS Philipps and Drew are to help Sedgefield District Council cut borrowing costs.
The move was agreed by councillors at a special finance sub-committee meeting.
Rats spotted:
Rats have been sighted several times in the Hundens Lane area and Darlington Council's environmental health department say all rubbish should be kept securely bundled and no scraps of food should be left.
The council will put poison down to deter the rats.
A MAN was killed yesterday when the van he was travelling was in collision with another car near Darlington.
The accident happened on the C38 back road from Darlington to Sedgefield shortly after 1pm.
The dead man has not yet been identified although it is known he was 39years-old and was travelling as a front seat passenger in a Ford Escort van.
The other vehicle involved was a Vauxhall Cavalier.
The drivers of both vehicles were taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital for treatment but neither was seriously injured.
Investigations are continuing to discover how the two cars came to collide at the Great Stainton crossroads on the narrow road.
An inquest will be opened shortly to formally identify the dead man but it will be some weeks before the police accident investigation unit is able to offer a complete explanation for the crash.
A DRIFTER broke into a warehouse and stole hundreds of pounds worth of Christmas presents for a hospital.
Nicholas Oddy, an ex-airman, of no fixed abode, was ‘drifting and rootless’ after leaving the security of the RAF, a court heard yesterday.
Northallerton magistrates sentenced the 20-year-old to a total of seven months in a youth custody centre after he admitted two burglary charges and asked for another seven offences to be taken into consideration.
The court heard that Oddy had broken into P W Archer and Son, a removal depot at Springwell Lane, Northallerton, making off with biscuits, sherry, wine and perfume worth about £300.
They were Christmas presents for patients at the Friarage Hospital.
He also burgled the Northallerton Jehovah's Witness centre, Kingdom Hall, in Romanby Road.
More than £2,000 worth of vandalism was caused to the hall but no evidence was produced connecting this with Oddy.
Peter Furness, defending, said his client had experienced problems after leaving the security of the RAF regiment and was ‘drifting and rootless’.
He had lost his job and spent some time in bail hostels in Darlington and Northallerton.
‘He could not cope with this rather alien environment of civilian life,’ he said.
Oddy did not know the stolen items were for presents and was sorry to learn the truth, Mr Furness added.
DETECTIVES investigating a building society robbery will go on national television tonight to name a man they want to question.
The BBC Crimewatch programme will also carry photographs of the suspect, whose name has not yet been released.
Police believe the man could help with inquiries into a robbery at the National Provincial Building Society in Bondgate, Darlington, on December 27.
The man is believed to have been involved in a series of robberies in the north of England over recent months.
Detective Chief Inspector Harvey Harris, of Darlington CID, will travel to the BBC studios in London to take calls from viewers.
A team of officers will also be waiting for calls at the Durham Police headquarters.
Soldier demolishes police station wall
AN army lorry demolished a wall at Ripon police station.
The soldier from the Dishforth-based Army Air Corps had stopped at the station to ask directions but on the way out of the car park he crashed his four ton truck into a wall knocking it down.
Beam fire:
A wooden beam in a chimney caught fire at a house in Darlington Road, Northallerton.
Firemen said the joist had been installed too close to the flue.
Motorist hurt:
A driver was injured when his car was in collision with a lorry near Northallerton.
The crash happened on an acute bend at Hallikeld Corner on the A684 road to Osmotherley.
TVs stolen:
Thieves helped themselves to a number of televisions off the back of a lorry parked at Woodside Cafe, at Knayton, near Thirsk, while the driver had his breakfast.
Police are trying to trace a white Ford Escort seen in the area.
Hairdressers' plea for new customers
A HAIRDRESSING lecturer yesterday made a plea for new customers for the college beauty salon.
Sandy Whitaker, lecturer in charge at the salon at Bishop Auckland College, said local people could get their hair cut well and cheaply.
Sandy said: ‘It is very nice to see regular clients but we would love to welcome some new faces as well.’
A spokeswoman for the college said prices just covered costs.
Only environmentally friendly products were used by the students.
Swimming total:
A total of 4,940 people used the swimming pool last month at Newton Aycliffe Leisure Centre, Sedgefield District Council figures have revealed.
Tidy up:
A demolition site in a Wear Valley village is to be tidied and grassed over.
The district council's planning committee last night approved plans for the upgrading of land in Leeholme, near Coundon.
Railway route:
County councillors have agreed to make the former Stockton and Darlington Railway into a public bridleway between Haughton Road and McMullen Road, Darlington.
Noise concern:
Ward councillors in the Lingfield area of Darlington have expressed concern about possible noise due to intensified use of the Paton's Beehive ballroom, McMullen Road.
Couns Frank Robson and Alan Robinson (Lab) have asked people living nearby to let them know of any problems although they are optimistic the new owners will run the club responsibly.
Cylinder fire:
Darlington crews have tackled a fire in a cylinder at the back of Hickstead Court in the town.
No one was injured in the incident.
Video stolen:
Burglars have stolen a £500 Mitsubishi video recorder from a house in Kitchener Street, Darlington.
Machine theft:
A Kew high pressure car wash machine worth £500 has been stolen from a compound in Chesnut Street, Darlington.
Jacket taken:
A sheepskin jacket worth £69 was stolen from a washing line in Hewitson Road, Darlington.
Cash theft:
Thieves made off with £50 in cash from an old folks' home in Windsor Court, off Newton Lane, Darlington.
Scaffolding taken:
Scaffolding worth £200 which had been put up at Firthmoor Infants School in Estoril Road South, Darlington, has been stolen.
Two break-ins:
Cash and a briefcase were stolen when burglars broke into business units at Agriculture House, Salters Lane South, Darlington.
Tools stolen:
A grinder and four drills have been stolen from a business unit in Eastmount Road, Darlington.
House raid:
A VHS video recorder, three boxes of cassette tapes, a shaver and a Quartz wall clock worth £632 have been stolen from a house in Severn Way, Darlington.
Pupil hurt:
A pupil from Hummersknott School, Darlington, was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital after she hurt her back in the playground.
Amanda Kitchen, 15, was later discharged.
Farm blaze:
Fire crews were called out to Farmway at Piercebridge in the early hours of yesterday to tackle a blaze involving animal feed.
Sweet theft:
Thieves made off with about £600 worth of sweets and crisps after breaking into a vehicle parked in Nelson Terrace, Darlington.
House burgled:
Camera equipment, gold earrings, two beer kits and cash have been stolen from a house in Hirst Grove, Darlington.
The value of the haul is £276.
Camcorder stolen:
Burglars made off with a Sony camcorder, three video tapes and a zoom lens worth £910 from a house in The Mead, Darlington.
House burgled:
A washing machine, a kettle and a loft hatch cover worth a total of £430 have been stolen from a house in Barron Street, Darlington.
Dog dies:
A guard dog died in a fire at a Ferryhill garage yesterday.
The pit-bull terrier was found at 5am in the Hilltop Garage on the Dean and Chapter Industrial Estate.
Police said there were no suspicious circumstances.
Cigarettes stolen:
About £15,000 worth of cigarettes were stolen from Martin's Newsagents, Spennymoor, yesterday.
Anyone with any information on the theft should contact Spennymoor Police on .
Video stolen:
A video and £1,000 worth of cigarettes were stolen from Bells Store, Chilton, yesterday.
Man and pet dog die in road smash
A MAN and his pet dog were killed in a crash near Darlington.
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier was in a van with its owner Michael Armstrong, 28, from Newbiggin by the Sea, in Northumberland.
Both died in the smash on Wednesday afternoon as the van was travelling between Sedgefield and Great Stainton.
Driver Peter Turnbull, 26, of Westmoreland Avenue, Newbiggin, escaped serious injury.
The driver of the other vehicle involved, Paul Simeon Scott, 40, of St Edmund's Green, Sedgefield, was released after treatment at hospital.
An inquest into Mr Armstrong's death opens in Darlington this afternoon.
New office:
A post office in Armstrong Road, Newcastle, fire bombed in last year's riots, is to reopen inside a chemist shop also in Armstrong Road, on Monday.
Safety fears:
Coun Brian Wilson is calling for improved security to youngsters using houses under renovation as playgrounds in St Aidan's Cresent at Thornley, near Peterlee.
Bungalows plan:
A plan by Durham City Council to build five old people's bungalows on land at Front Street in Coxhoe has been approved by planning chiefs.
No waiting:
Waiting restrictions are to be put on parts of Green Street and South Railway Street, Seaham, to prevent congestion from parked cars.
Village homes:
The Church Commissioners have been granted outline planning permission for residential development on a plot of land at the corner of the main road and Colliery Road at Auton Stile, Bearpark.
Double raid:
Woolworths store in Grange Road, Jarrow, was hit twice on Wednesday when raiders got away with large quantities of children's clothes including the theft of about £7,000 worth of clothes by a group of about ten youths.
Council praised:
Sunderland Council has been praised by the district auditor in his annual appraisal where he pointed to several areas where the council had given value for money.
Manager retires:
One of the longest serving managers at Sunderland's Cherry Knowle Hospital, George Wilkinson, retires today, after 40 years service.
Mr Wilkinson, patient care manager, will be presented with a leaving gift this afternoon.
MILLIONS of television viewers last night heard the voice of the kidnapper of estate agent Stephanie Slater.
Detectives were manning special hotline phones after a tape was broadcast on BBC 1's Crimewatch UK in the hope that someone may recognise Britain's most wanted man.
The programme prompted a huge stream of calls from viewers who thought they may know the man who abducted Stephanie and held her captive for eight days before escaping with a £175,000 ransom.
One anonymous caller told police he thought he had been in prison with the man during the 1960s and another believed he may have worked with the kidnapper two years ago.
On the tape which last about three minutes the man speaking in a brisk matter of fact manner is heard giving instructions to Kevin Watts Stephanie's boss at Shipways Estate Agency in Birmingham on where and when to deliver the ransom cash.
Detectives now believe that 25-year-old Stephanie was held in a large workshop or warehouse type building.
Also on the programme police named a man they want to question about a Darlington robbery.
He was Alan Stephen Wild, 38, said to be five feet nine inches, with fair hair.
Police believe he could help with inquiries into a robbery at the National Provincial Building Society in Bondgate, Darlington, on December 27.
EARLY figures from the 1991 British population census show slight population decreases throughout County Durham.
Although figures from the census have not been fully collated, preliminary findings show population decreases of more than 4pc in some areas.
The biggest population change was a fall of 4.5pc in the Easington district to 96,300.
Other local authority areas: Chester-le-Street, 51,600; Darlington, 96,700; Derwentside, 84,800; Durham, 85,000; Sedgefield, 89,200; Teesdale, 24,200; and Wear Valley, 62,100.
JOBS at two cigarette factories would be in jeopardy if Labour wins power and bans advertising, the company's chairman claimed.
Rothmans' chairman Lord Swaythling, a Tory Peer, warned of the threat to 1,800 workers at the Darlington and Spennymoor plants in a letter to Darlington MP Michael Fallon.
Mr Fallon urged all Rothmans employees and their families to take heed of the comments.
‘To claim that a ban would not affect jobs was always naive.
It has been blown out of the water by this stark warning,’ he said.
But yesterday Alan Milburn, Labour's parliamentary candidate for Darlington, said: ‘It is Conservative Party policy as well as Labour Party policy to bring about a reduction in tobacco consumption.
‘Surely the Schools Minister supports steps which will prevent children from smoking cigarettes.’
He said 75pc of cigarettes produced by Rothmans in Darlington went outside Europe and would not be affected by the ban.
DARLINGTON'S new poll tax was set at £300 last night amid angry scenes in the town hall.
Councillors exchanged insults and accused each other of mismanagement before the new community charge for the year from April was approved.
The £300.24 figure is an increase of £24.76 per person or around 9pc on the present level, and well up on the Government's estimate of £257.
Most of the increase is to cover higher county council spending plans £19.66 of it will be spent by the county while only £1.61 will go towards borough expenditure.
Councillors heard the authority had to set a budget of £11,614,000 for the new financial year and the calculations were based on a community charge to be levied on 74,014 residents.
For residents in 12 parishes around Darlington the charge will be a couple of pounds higher.
John Williams, leader of the ruling Labour group, said last year under the Conservatives the authority's budget had been increased by 4pc but this year was only up by 2.4pc.
And he said Tory plans would have placed an additional £20 per person on the annual bill.
Conservative group leader Tony Richmond accused finance committee chair Jan Taylor of saying the council would have set a higher budget if it were not for government spending constraints.
But Coun Taylor said the budget had been carefully worked out.
Conservative councillors who voted against the new charge were joined by Liberal Democrats.
Assault charge:
A man who is alleged to have knocked a police woman unconscious was bailed by Darlington magistrates yesterday.
Anthony Wilkinson, 39, of Belgrave Street, Darlington, is charged with assault, resisting arrest and criminal damage.
House burgled:
Burglars have stolen a CD player, midi system and a colour portable television from a house in Montrose Street, Darlington.
TV stolen:
A colour television, video recorder and an iron worth £525 have been stolen in a burglary from a house in Chepstow Court, Darlington.
Electrical haul:
Thieves made off with a television, video recorder, midi system, microwave oven, Vax cleaner, computer, 12 games and 20 CDs worth £1,960 from a house in Whorlton Moor Crescent, Darlington.
Video stolen:
Burglars took a video recorder and a midi hifi system worth £800 from a house in Lanethorpe Crescent, Darlington.
A DOG died with its owner in a car crash near Darlington yesterday.
The Staffordshire bull terrier was in a Ford Escort van with Michael Armstrong, 28, from Newbiggin by the Sea, Northumberland, which crashed on the C38 between Sedgefield and Great Stainton.
The driver of the van, Peter Turnbull, 26, of Westmoreland Avenue, Newbiggin, escaped serious injury.
The accident happened when the van turned right at the Great Stainton crossroads towards Newton Aycliffe and was hit by a car driven by Paul Scott, 40, of St Edmund's Green, Sedgefield.
Mr Scott was not seriously hurt.
An inquest will open in Darlington today.
JOBS could be under threat at a NorthEast cigarette factory if Labour comes to power and bans tobacco advertising, a company chairman has warned.
Rothmans' chairman Lord Swaythling, a Tory Peer, told of the threat to jobs at the company's Darlington and Spennymoor plants in a letter to Darlington MP Michael Fallon.
But yesterday Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, and union representatives said business was booming.
In the letter to Mr Fallon Lord Swaythling said there was no doubt that Labour's policies about tobacco advertising and sponsorship could lead to a reduction in jobs at Rothmans in the North-East of England.
He pointed out the ban could result in an increase in the number of cheap cigarettes to arrive in Britain from the EC.
‘This company prides itself in the quality of its totally unsubsidized products,’ wrote Lord Swaythling.
‘The loss of tobacco advertising would result in cheaper, imported brands stealing market share.
Loss of market share means less production, which will inevitably lead to a reduction in the workplace.’
Mr Fallon urged all Rothmans employees and their families to take heed of the chairman's comments.
‘To claim that a ban would not affect jobs was always naive.
It has been blown out of the water by this stark warning,’ said Mr Fallon.
‘This is a very significant statement.
It's the first time the Rothmans chairman has spelt out the risk to jobs from Labour's policy.
‘To ban advertising and sponsorship can only hit the company hard.
A future Labour government would be very bad news indeed for over 1,800 jobs in the North-East.’
But Mr Milburn said: ‘It is Conservative party policy as well as Labour Party policy to bring about a reduction in tobacco consumption.
‘Surely the Schools Minister supports steps which will prevent children from smoking cigarettes.’
He said 75pc of cigarettes produced by Rothmans in Darlington went outside Europe and would not be affected by the ban.
And he criticised the Tories for launching a ‘desperate, scare-mongering exercise’.
‘There is only one job they are interested in saving and that is Michael Fallon's,’ he said.
John Bibby, conveyor of the Amalgamated Engineering Union, said: ‘I don't think there is any genuine threat.
It will be equal competition on the domestic front.
I don't see how it can affect Rothmans any more than any other firm.’
DARLINGTON football supporter Lee Eyles attacked a Boris Becker look-alike after an away match, a court heard.
Eyles, 21, went to Bournemouth to watch his team then went drinking with friends.
But when they saw Paul Holloway walking towards them in a Bournemouth park they began shouting that he looked like Boris Becker and began jostling him.
Eyles stepped forward and punched Mr Holloway in the face.
Yesterday Eyles, of Berwick Road, Darlington, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted three offences of assault causing actual bodily harm and using threatening words or behaviour.
Judge William Hannah deferred sentence for six months.
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, said Mr Holloway was able to pick out Eyles after police took him around the town to look for his assailant.
A BURGLAR took advantage of a front door left open, a court heard yesterday.
Ian James walked in during the early hours of the morning and stole a leather jacket and a handbag from the hall.
He also took the keys to the car parked outside and drove off.
Yesterday James, 22, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted two offences of burglary and taking a car without consent.
He asked for seven offences to be considered.
Judge William Hannah jailed him for 12 months and disqualified him from driving for six months.
Tim Roberts, prosecuting, said the couple, who lived at the house in Brankin Road, Darlington, had forgotten to shut the front door when they went to bed that night.
When James, of Clifton Road, Darlington, saw it ajar he went in.
The car was abandoned in George Street, Darlington, and the leather jacket and handbag were recovered at his home.
Ken Gillance, defending, said the burglaries occurred when James and his girlfriend were in debt and James had nowhere to live.
Mr Gillance said: ‘He turned to dishonesty in the hope of providing something for the two of them because by then they were in debt.’
Darlington transport users' consultative committee ‘Crown Street move a threat to bus operators’
A row about changing the bus routes through Darlington town centre rolled on this week.
Bus company operators insist they will lose custom if the plan to move bus stops from the High Row to Crown Street goes ahead.
The council says the shift will improve safety, as the present system causes traffic jams and poor visibility.
Two people have been injured in accidents involving buses.
United proposed buses should use Horsemarket but the council has rejected the idea.
Mr Andrew Guest, of United buses, said: ‘We have done market research and have found that 41 per cent of people were against using Crown Street, which is a tremendous amount.
‘At least six per cent said they would use the bus less often and I do not know of any business in this town which can afford to throw away six per cent of its income.’
Mr Guest insisted his company was dedicated to improving safety and speeding up the traffic flow but said there was no need for new measures to result in a loss of custom.
‘I appeal to the people of Darlington to make their views known to the council,’ he added.
At a recent meeting with bus company representatives councillors and officers were sceptical about the claims in lost business.
They believe Crown Street is the best option.
But Coun. Nicholas Thorne-Wallis (Lab), chairman, said that no final decision had been taken over the proposals and Coun. Mrs Rose Davison (Lab) called for more options to be considered by the council.
‘Bus lanes would benefit motorists’
Bus lanes could keep cars flowing on Darlington's traffic-choked roads.
Mr John Godfrey of Eden Bus Services said there would still be traffic queues, but motorists would find they would move quicker than at present.
The special bus lanes are one of the highlights of the Department of Transport's ‘Keeping Buses Moving’ report.
And although they felt some roads would be too narrow, committee members on Thursday gave it their general support.
Mr David Armstrong, who owns Station Taxis, welcomed the idea of taxis being allowed to use the lanes.
It would benefit the elderly and disabled people who use taxis.
He called for tougher action by police on motorists who illegally park in and around existing bus stops.
Coun Jim Skinner (Lab) said the proposals would be considered by other committees and suggestions would be discussed with Durham county and the police force.
Other ideas to free the town's roads include contraflow lanes, which allow buses to go against the main traffic flow, and giving buses priority at busy junctions and traffic lights to speed up the service.
Maximum road safety must prevail
As opposition mounts to the proposed threat of 9,000 tonnes of limestone switching from rail to road, villages throughout North Yorkshire go on the alert amid growing fears over safety.
Transfer of limestone shipments from rail to road would send heavy lorries along a route with several accident blackspots, a North Yorkshire councillor warned on Wednesday.
The moor road above Leyburn to Catterick Garrison and Catterick Village, leading to the A1 to Darlington and the A66 bypass to Teesside, was emerging this week as the most likely and direct route.
Some local people fear that if the transfer goes ahead on March 31 there will be a repeat of a crash at Hawes last April in which 13 people were hurt when a limestone lorry ran out of control.
They are also worried that road damage caused by existing lorry movements will be made worse, and that there will be problems of noise and dust.
On Wednesday County Coun. Colin Grant, who represents the Catterick area, said he had been alerting the Army, parish councils and schools to the apparent threat of about 140 additional lorry movements one every four minutes for a ten-hour day through the garrison.
He said a number of safety measures would have to be introduced if more lorries took the moor road to reach the A1.
He would try to arrange a site meeting with the police to see what could be done to improve safety not only for other motorists but for pedestrians.
Coun. Grant said the first accident blackspot was the descent from the moor road to the centre of Catterick Garrison, where he thought an arrester bed would be needed in case of brake failure.
This was followed by White Shops, next to the Duchess of Kent's Military Hospital, where there were also bus stops and two schools but no crossing patrol, which was withdrawn several years ago.
Coun. Grant said he and Colburn parish council had been pressing for improved pedestrian safety at this point.
‘The road is too narrow for a pedestrian refuge but we have to consider a pedestrian crossing or something to improve safety.’
Other blackspots included Colburn Lane, with heavy rush hour traffic; Tunstall Lane in Colburn; a blind spot and a dangerous junction beside the racecourse at Catterick Bridge; and a hazardous crossroads at Gatherley, where there had been a number of accidents.
Coun. Grant said: ‘We have to look at every junction and every area of road to try to improve safety and take whatever traffic calming measures we can.
‘I would not rule anything out, not even sleeping policemen to keep traffic speeds down.
‘Catterick will soon be the biggest garrison in the country, with increased military movements, and the Army share the same concerns.
‘There are a lot of young families and young children on the garrison and we have to ensure that we improve safety for them.
‘It is absolutely crazy to have 9,000 tonnes of limestone a week going by road when the Government is offering grants to try to ensure that freight is carried by rail.
‘We are going to find even more road traffic in the area when lorries start carrying hardcore for the A1 motorway work.
‘Once road haulage of limestone starts the railway line will very quickly fall into disrepair and there will be pressure to improve the A684, especially by removing the bridge and traffic lights at Spennithorne.
‘It will then be very expensive to bring the railway back into service.
‘It is not as if we will be stuck with lorry traffic for the next three years we will be stuck with it for ever more.
‘Already we have quarry traffic using Tunstall village and that is a long running problem on a narrow road.
Two vehicles cannot pass without mounting the pavement.’
Euro advert ban no cause for fears by tobacco workers
An MP was this week accused of scaremongering when he warned that a European ban on tobacco advertising could bring job losses at a Darlington factory.
Mr Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington, claimed the decision by the European Parliament to ban cigarette adverts could be ‘extremely damaging’ for Rothman's International, which employs 800 people in the town.
But Mr Alan Milburn, Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for the town, said he was ‘sick and tired of scare stories about a threat to jobs at the factory.’
Mr Milburn paid a three-hour visit to the McMullen Road factory on Thursday afternoon when he toured production lines and met management and workforce representatives.
‘The factory seems currently to be booming and increasing its market share,’ he said.
‘The introduction recently of the 25-pack Royal cigarette seems to have been very successful.
‘Rothman's has expanded in recent years despite a ban on cigarette advertising on television, at the cinema and on hoardings outside school gates.’
Most of the cigarettes made in the Darlington factory, opened in 1977, were exported outside Europe and would be unaffected by the ban.
‘Italy has had a tobacco advertising ban for 30 years and cigarette consumption has actually risen during that time,’ said Mr Milburn.
‘I am sure that Rothman's reputation as a world leader will not be dented by the proposed changes.’
Government policy was aimed at reducing the number of smokers in the country and an advertising ban would go a good way to achieving this, he said.
The ban was supported by the majority of Euro MPs, including Mr Stephen Hughes, who represents Durham, and is expected to be approved by the council of ministers.
It would ban all advertising of tobacco products except at the point of sale, ie the newsagent's shop or supermarket counter.
Tories fail to halt pedestrian plan
A last-ditch attempt to delay the introduction of pedestrianisation in Darlington town centre was defeated.
Conservative councillors called for further talks with the disabled before traffic is banned from the Skinnergate and High Row area on March 29.
They renewed their claims that the disabled would be ‘disenfranchised’ by a 10.30am to 4pm ban on all traffic, including cyclists.
Fears that disabled drivers particularly the severely disabled will find it impossible to shop in the town were raised.
Coun. Barry Lamb (Con) said a survey had shown 45 disabled drivers parked in the High Row area.
Planned car parking spaces would not be sufficient to cope.
But Labour councillors stressed if disabled motorists arrive before 10.30 they will still be able to park in the area for three hours before having to drive out.
They have said the planned 44 disabled parking spaces in the Abbots Yard car park, which currently has two, will be strictly controlled to prevent the able bodied using them.
Town hall officers are also investigating the possibility of Shop mobility buses and even electric buses to go backwards and forwards between disabled car parking areas and the shops.
Coun. John Williams, Labour group leader, stressed it was an experimental scheme which would be closely monitored.
If there were problems for the disabled they could be ironed out.
The conditions were tight but could be relaxed if necessary.
It would not be possible to start with loose conditions and tighten them.
The present situation in Skinnergate and High Row was one of absolute chaos.
The scheme was approved by the Labour majority and Coun. John Cresswell (Lib Dem).
Diocese faces cash crisis
The Church of England's Durham diocese is to lose one eighth of its clergy, churchgoers will be told tomorrow.
The Bishop of Durham, the Rt.
Rev. David Jenkins, has written a pastoral letter which will be read out at parish churches.
The job cuts have been forced on the church by the severity of the recession.
The Church Commissioners, who supply parishes with about half their funds, have had to cut their contribution by about 20 per cent.
Each church is to be asked to find more money.
The Rev. Janet Chapman, deacon at St Cuthbert's, Darlington, said that to some extent, parishioners would determine the extent of the cuts.
‘The more the parish can raise the less severe the cuts will be,’ she said.
She added that local decisions on merging parishes and losing priests had yet to be made, but each deanery was in the process of reexamining its structure.
Of the 318 clergy jobs in the diocese, ten have already gone with 26 yet to be found.
These will take place when the incumbents move on or retire.
Durham is the fourth Church of England diocese to announce job cuts.
LIMESTONE CONTROVERSY: GLIMMER OF HOPE
British Steel on Thursday appeared to add a faint glimmer of hope into the controversy over a plan to switch thousands of tonnes of limestone dust from rail to road.
A day-long private meeting took place at County Hall in Northallerton on Tuesday involving the North Yorkshire planning and highways departments, British Rail and British Steel.
The aim was to explore the differences between the two sides following the BS announcement that, from March 31, it will abandon rail transport from a quarry at Redmire to its works at Redcar in favour of road haulage.
The three-year road contract will involve between 65 and 70 lorry movements for ten hours each day in each direction six days a week.
About 350,000 tonnes of limestone will be carried every year.
The articulated lorries will use the tank road to Catterick from the quarry entrance at Scarth Nick to reach the A1 and the A66 Darlington bypass to Teesside.
A senior county council official said later on Tuesday he was not optimistic that the decision would be reversed.
Mr John Rennilson, the county planning officer, said: ‘Unless we can achieve something in a short time the inevitable will happen on March 31.’
One councillor who attended the meeting, however, believed much still depended on whether BS might apply for a Department of Transport grant to enable the rail service to continue.
Mr William Hague, the MP for Richmond, is to meet BS at Redcar on Monday.
He will tell them that the proposal has caused great alarm and anxiety, and will ask the company to examine alternative ways of improving the efficiency of its limestone transport system, possibly with a conveyor system.
GERIATRIC WARD AT SCORTON MIGHT CLOSE
A geriatric ward at St. John of God Hospital, Scorton, might close if patients are moved to a new £4m. mental health unit at the Friarage Hospital in Northallerton, it was revealed this week.
Mr Haydn Cook, chief executive of the Friarage, said negotiations were going on with the Scorton hospital about its contract for the forthcoming year.
He said there could be changes, but would not confirm that the St.
Augustine's ward of the hospital would close.
‘The new mental health unit opens next month and that has facilities for both acute psychiatric patients and elderly patients with dementia,’ he said.
‘That has obviously prompted us to review facilities for elderly patients with dementia.’
He said some patients from Darlington and York would move to the Friarage and a review of beds for elderly patients throughout the district was being carried out.
Health officials were handed the keys to the new building at the Friarage last month, but the unit will not become fully operational until March.
It will provide a comprehensive district-wide service for the first time, and act as a central focus for the community.
River polluters face prosecution
Polluters who were responsible for an oil spillage in the River Tees which closed a treatment works could be prosecuted.
Homes throughout the North-East were forced to use emergency stored water supplies for 40 hours after a diesel oil spillage near Barnard Castle led to the closure of Broken Scar Treatment Works in Darlington.
And Mr Bob Midgley, senior pollution prevention officer for the National Rivers Authority, said prosecutions were being considered after the spillage.
NRA officials placed booms across the river at Barnard Castle and a tributary further upstream after being alerted by Northumbrian Water.
Walkers on the banks of the River Tees first spotted the oil spillage.
The booms, which were due to be removed yesterday absorbed the oil spillage and stopped it from flowing downstream.
Northumbrian Water closed water inlets at Broken Scar on Tuesday night, but they were extracting water from the River Tees again by Thursday lunchtime.
Broken Scar supplies half the water for Teesdale, Darlington and Teesside homes, with the remainder coming from Lartington Treatment Works.
Mr Midgley said the spillage had been traced to near Lartington treatment works, but there were no reports of wildlife or fish being affected.
A Northumbrian Water spokesman said there was no danger of running out of water because there were always at least seven days of water supply from tanks at Broken Scar and Longnewton.
‘River pollution is a fact of life, and these things happen.
Unfortunately a very little amount of oil goes a very long way,’ he said.
He confirmed that Northumbrian Water stored oil at Lartington Treatment Works and the spillage could have come from there.
Hummersknott sixth form plan shelved
Disappointed governors at Hummersknott School in Darlington have had to shelve their plans to reopen the sixth form after being told that they have no legal right of appeal against Durham county council's rejection of the scheme.
They had hoped to appeal to the Education Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke.
The believe that reopening a 150-place sixth form would increase parental choice and win back pupils from independent schools.
County councillors, however, claim it would reduce parental choice by restricting the number of 11-year-old pupils at Hummersknott.
If other schools were to follow, the viability of courses at the town's sixth form and technology colleges could be threatened.
Mr Peter Carberry, chairman of the Hummersknott governors, said: ‘I am very annoyed but it is just one of those things.’
He hoped to revive the idea after the general election.
Nursery school campaigners scent victory
Victory is in sight for campaigners fighting for nursery places in the north end of Darlington.
More than 2,500 people have signed petitions in the Haughton area calling on Durham county education officials to provide facilities.
On Wednesday the county schools subcommittee will be recommended to consider providing 52 nursery places in an extension at Springfield Primary School.
It would offer 26 places each morning and afternoon, saving some families a long trek to Corporation Road and even further afield.
Mr Alan Milburn, Labour prospective parliamentary candidate, has backed the campaign and on Thursday welcomed the news that the scheme was likely to go-ahead.
The Haughton area has had many new houses built with many more planned.
Although the extension would provide only a small number of places, he hoped they would be the first of many in that area of Darlington.
Kitchen firm shuts factory units to expand showrooms
A kitchen fittings firm is closing three factory units with the loss of two jobs.
However, Mr John Hammond, who founded Country Manor fitted furniture with his father 11 years ago, said the manufacturing units on Cockfield industrial estate were being closed to expand the firm's retailing operation.
Country Manor is expanding its Grange Road showrooms in Darlington, to install and sell furniture from two manufactures Sie Matic from Germany and the Traditional Furniture Company, of England.
Mr John Hammond, design director, said: ‘Until recently there have been two sides to our business namely furniture manufacture at our Cockfield site and retailing from our Darlington showrooms.
‘After being approached by several manufacturing companies it became obvious that the manufacturing aspect to our business could be handled by others, leaving us free to concentrate on our core business the design, specification and installation side.’
The restructuring was a large step forward for Country Manor, which would make it a leading kitchen, bedroom and bathroom furniture studio in the North, he said.
Two workers at the Cockfield site have been made redundant but other employees have been transferred to the installation team.
Country Manor has put the three 1,500sq ft industrial units up for sale and lease.
UP AND UP:
Government Ministers may well be right in saying that Labour Party policies would bring the country to its knees.
As the country is at present face down in the mire, such a development could only have positive benefits for us all.
Colin Robinson,
A FORMER drug abuser who injured a shopkeeper during a fracas was jailed for four months yesterday.
Ian Cowper, 27, was given a three month sentence after admitting being in breach of a 200-hour community service order.
Darlington magistrates gave Cowper, of Mallard Road, Darlington, a month to run consecutively after he admitted an assault and two thefts.
Ian Walker, prosecuting, said Cowper had been caught with £280 worth of goods stolen from the Alpha House Project and £106.50 worth of china and glass taken from Victoriana in Bucktons Yard.
He said Christopher Davies who was working in the shop Butterflys on Grange Road, Darlington, was injured during a fracas with Cowper over the theft of a £11.75 torch.
On January 20 he was spotted leaving British Home Stores with a pair of £29.99 jeans.
But Graham Hunsley, for Cowper, said: ‘He had had some involvement with drugs.
A relationship broke up and there was an even deeper involvement with drugs thereafter.
He did go to an addiction centre and at present he is clear.’
Theft from car:
A radio-cassette player worth £80 was stolen from a car on Melrose Drive, Bishop Auckland.
A NORTH-EAST woman has lodged a complaint after an ambulance took almost an hour to arrive at an accident.
Heather Countley dialled 999 at 12.35pm a minute after the car accident involving her son outside her home at Peghorn Lodge, Harwood-in-Teesdale, near Barnard Castle.
But Mrs Countley, whose son suffered a broken arm, said the ambulance arrived at the scene at 1.30pm.
‘My complaint is about the time taken for the ambulance to arrive.
Had this been the case of life or death the latter would have happened,’ said Mrs Countley, who plans to contact Bishop Auckland MP Derek Foster about the issue.
She has also been in touch with Reg Watson, Chief Officer of Darlington Community Health Council, which is to discuss the problem at its meeting on Thursday.
But Ken Threlfall, general manager of the county ambulance service, said a duty on-call system, which involves staff responding from home, was in operation on December 22 when the accident took place.
He said the Dales crew was on its way to an emergency in Newton Aycliffe when alerted of the Harwood incident.
In a letter Mr Threlfall explained: ‘The vehicle responded immediately, having been informed that a paramedic vehicle had also been activated from the scene from Newton Aycliffe, that the patient had been removed to a nearby farmhouse and that he was suffering from a suspected broken arm.’
He said the number of emergency calls received in the Dales area of County Durham rarely exceeded one or two.
At least 95pc of emergency calls were responded to within the agreed 19 minutes and the remaining 5pc were delayed due to exceptional circumstances.
Alert after drugs taken from clinic
POLICE have issued an alert after a man walked into a doctor's surgery and stole a leather case containing drugs and syringes.
Officers say some of the pills could prove dangerous if taken by children.
The young thief, in his 20s, described as about 5ft 5ins tall with a spotty reddish face, and short dark brown hair, walked into the practice in Park Parade, Harrogate, at 9.15am yesterday.
He entered a private room and stole the distinctive leather Gladstone bag.
A spokesman for North Yorkshire police appealed to anyone who might know the man, or be offered drugs or syringes to get in touch immediately Harrogate police can be contacted by telephoning .
Lift blaze:
Firefighters were called to the county library in Grammar School Lane, Northallerton, when a blaze broke out in the lift shaft.
The fire started in the lift's transformer.
Vote bid:
York's Prospective Parliamentary Candidate for the Labour Party is urging housebound voters to register early for a postal vote.
He has criticised the Government for not launching an advertising campaign on the issue until the general election is called.
Fishing boost:
Fishermen will be allowed double their quota of Norse cod from next year following the agreement linking the EC with EFTA countries.
York Euro MP Edward McMillan-Scott welcomed the move which he says overturns 1000 years of history dating back to Viking raids on Britain.
Schools debate:
The head of Britain's oldest school will meet education secretary Kenneth Clarke and his Labour shadow Jack Straw next week to discuss the future of the assisted places scheme.
Robin Pittman, head of St Peter's in York, says 200 of his pupils from less-well off families have benefitted from the scheme.
Car fire:
A car was badly damaged by fire in West Witton, Wensleydale.
An electrical fault is believed to have been the cause.
Ornament taken:
Thieves have stolen a £70 free standing stone ornament from a garden at a house in Brompton Road, Northallerton.
Shop hit:
Burglars caused £2,000 worth of damage when they broke into a greengrocers' shop in Castlegate, Thirsk, and stole £45 in cash.
Cash stolen: Thieves who broke into Ryedale Travel in Market Place, Thirsk, stole £10.
TV taken:
A six-inch TV set and radio cassette player, £15 cash and lemonade were stolen by thieves who broke into a fish and chip shop in Millgate, Thirsk.
Clinic raided:
Burglars stole about £100 from a cash box at the clinic in Zetland Street, Northallerton.
Damage caused:
Burglars caused £90 worth of damage but stole nothing when they broke into the Lunn Poly shop in High Street, Northallerton.
Plan appeal:
Former Pickering and Ryedale District councillor Stan Langton has appealed against council refusal of planning permission for his bid to convert his Pickering home and guest house at Vivers Mill, Mill Lane, into a 14 bedroom hotel.
DETECTIVES were yesterday following up a number of leads after an appeal on national television for information about a Darlington building society robbery.
On BBC TV's Crimewatch programme on Thursday night, police named the man they want to question about a robbery at the National Provincial Building Society in Bondgate as Alan Stephen Wild, 38.
They revealed that Wild is five feet nine inches tall with fair hair.
A number of callers who believed they had recently seen the man telephoned the London headquarters after the programme and several called the Durham police headquarters at Akeley Heads.
One caller believed the man had recently been on an internal flight in Britain and could now be in the south of England.
Others revealed he had a south Yorkshire accent.
HOSPITAL waiting lists in Darlington are among the lowest in the country, according to a health authority boss.
The news was welcomed by members of Darlington Health Authority which has now reversed a trend, after having some of the fastest growing waiting lists in the region this time last year.
John Flook, authority deputy chief executive, said at a meeting yesterday: ‘We have just about cracked the problem.’
The authority aim to cut the number of patients waiting more than a year, and meet the national target of no patients waiting more than two years.
‘Numbers waiting more than a year have already been significantly reduced from 367 to 293 at the end of January,’ said Mr Flook.
‘And I am aware that they have also fallen quite significantly in the last two or three weeks.
Even if we don't quite achieve it by March 31, we will have significantly reduced the number of patients waiting 12 months or more,’ said Mr Flook.
Darlington Health Authority unit manager Peter Stewart said: ‘We are doing additional work on Saturday mornings and most consultants have cooperated fully.’
A PACKED public meeting last night saw the launch of a major six month campaign to keep quarry traffic on the rails and off the roads.
Protestors aim to bring all the weight they can muster to persuade British Steel not to transfer its quarry freight from Redmire, Wensleydale, on to the roads, threatening the future of the Wensleydale rail line.
Mass lobbying, research and monitoring lorries are among the tactics planned in a campaign that would unite various communities, groups, and more than 6,000 petitioners from the Dales to Teesside.
The meeting, held in Leyburn Methodist church hall and organised by the Wensleydale Rail Association, Wensleydale Environmental Supporters Group and the Council for the Protection of Rural England, drew about 100 people from villages and towns from Hawes to Yarm.
Geoff Close, chairman of Redmire parish council, said: ‘To have a vast fleet of trucks on the road with tourist traffic and military traffic is a recipe for disaster and destruction.’
The most likely routes for the lorries would be out of Redmire quarry and across to the tank roads in the Catterick training area, through Catterick Garrison and Colburn, or Tunstall, to the A1 and Darlington bypass, or through Scorton and Yarm to Teesside.
British Steel had intended to transfer to roads from the end of March but after public pressure has delayed the move until September.
Stan Abbott of Wensleydale Rail Association, which wants passenger trains reinstated on the line, said the new date was only a stay of execution and the pressure needed to be kept up.
The 6,860-name petition against British Steel's decision, collected in two weeks, will be given to Richmond MP William Hague to present to Parliament.
Table turned
SPEAKING of Sunderland, Michael Lathan from that fair city is jumping up and down on the table (Backtrack, February 11) of the club's most successful managers.
Knighton, McColl and Elliott all get a statistical raw deal, he insists, but none is more wronged than bottom of the table Len Ashurst.
(Now unemployed and living in Newport, incidentally.)
‘Len had a poor League record, but unlike many of the others his reign was in the first division.
He also turned Sunderland's finances round by reaching the Milk Cup final.’
And the windfall?
‘It was subsequently wasted by Lawrie McMenemy.’
Dunn Roamin…and still speaking of Sunderland, Kip Watson reports that former Gas Board fitter and Roker left winger Barry Dunn has just passed two score.
Signed by Ken Knighton for £10,000 from Newcastle Blue Star, he also played for Darlington and then commuted each Sunday between Wearside and VVC Kokciede in Belgium.
Last Saturday he made another debut for Grove Steels in the Vaux Bluebell Over 40s League.
Sadness over mining deaths
I FEEL so incredibly sad about the miners who died and were hurt at Wearmouth Colliery.
I left the NorthEast five years ago because of redundancy, unemployment and Norman Tebbit; my husband and I, a typical working-class family with both fathers and grandfathers with their roots in mining.
It tears my heart out whenever I hear of a mining tragedy and because I am not there to help or even to sympathise, something inside me feels the need to shout to all people, southerners especially who have never had fathers, husbands, sons to worry about when each day they are swallowed into the apron of the earth.
I would like and I feel humble for asking, for anyone to write to me about the above.
C.
Reed, 3 Wheatleys Close, Steventon, Basingstoke, Hants.
INNOVATIVE schemes to reduce council tenant waiting lists could be scuppered after Darlington's housing budget was cut in half.
Coun Bill Dixon, chairman of the Labour-led authority's housing committee, said the housing programme had been slashed from over £5m last year to just £2.8m.
The authority has gained a reputation for innovative housing schemes.
In the last few months it has introduced a mortgage rescue package and plans to use empty flats above shops in a further bit to get waiting lists down.
But Coun Dixon said a budget of £2.8m, when the authority had originally hoped to spend £6.7m, simply wasn't enough.
He warned: ‘We cannot be expected to come up with good ideas if the Government continues to reduce our budget every year.
‘Darlington has made a name for itself with imaginative use of housing capital.
But the Government won't let us get on with our work.’
He said the cut would mean a slow down in the housing programme and consequent problems for prospective tenants.
CONTROVERSIAL plans to redevelop a dilapidated shopping arcade in a town centre have been delayed for at least a year.
Two Castles Housing Association has been told it will not receive funding to build a block of flats for pensioners on the Court Arcade site in Darlington during the current financial year.
The group has now been forced to stall the plans until 1993/94 when Housing Corporation funds will become available.
And a report to Darlington borough councillors says the plans could affect small housing developments to the south of Court Arcade.
Mike Bennett, the authority's director of community services, claims the development could also have ‘possible implications’ for a nearby quaker burial ground.
Housing committee chairman Coun Bill Dixon said the boundary wall separating the graveyard and Court Arcade could be demolished.
He said: ‘Removing the boundary wall would make the site much more pleasant for both parties.’
Councillors have already met representatives of housing association to discuss parking and security arrangements for the new development.
Talks have also been held with the Darlington Society of Friends and the Churches Housing Association which has small developments nearby.
Coun Dixon said both organisations had offered encouragement and support.
‘Everyone has been very positive,’ he said.
Funding delays are the latest controversy to surround the building, which used to be a busy shopping centre off Skinnergate.
Tory plans to sell it for a small shopping mall were scuppered when Labour seized control last year.
They said Labour had squandered a golden opportunity to improve part of the town centre which could be hard hit when the new Cornmill Centre opens in a few months' time.
But Labour councillors believe flats will be popular with pensioners offered the chance to be close to the town centre and other local amenities.
Mr Bennett said the cash aid delay would give time to work-up a scheme ‘satisfactory to all parties’.
HOUSES could soon be built in a conservation area in Sadberge.
Members of Darlington council's development committee will tomorrow consider the future of a one-acre site at Town Farm.
The site was bought by the borough council in 1974.
The housing committee says it no longer has any use for the site and it will now be open to private development.
Officers have recommended any development on the land, which is in the Sadberge conservation area, should make a ‘positive contribution’ to the village character.
POLICE yesterday picked up a discarded safe which was stolen from Darlington Health Authority's offices.
Although it is thought it contained only a small amount of money, there is concern about confidential documents which also went missing.
A Darlington police spokesman said the gang had broken into the offices, just off Hollyhurst Road, after 10.30pm on Friday night and the size of the safe indicated there must have been at least three people involved.
The safe was found forced open and abandoned yesterday in Arnold Road, Darlington.
Darlington police want to speak to anyone who may have seen suspicious activity around the health authority offices at the estimated time of the incident.
Cash stolen:
Thieves who broke into Bishop Auckland bowling pavilion stole money from a telephone box.
Missing bike:
A mountain bike worth £350 was stolen from outside a shop on Newgate Street, Bishop Auckland, on Friday morning.
Scaffold stolen:
Aluminium scaffolding worth more than £1,000 has been stolen from outside Evenwood Community Centre.
Triathlon presentation:
H J Banks have received a memento of the fifth Weardale triathlon to mark the company's continuing support for the event.
District councillor Richard Groves presented a photographic keepsake to commercial manager Mel Hunt.
Cash stolen:
Thieves have made off with more than £2,000 from the safe of Yeoman's Garage, in Valley Street, Darlington.
Police are asking for any witnesses to come forward if they saw suspicious activity near the garage at any time on Saturday night.
Battle continues:
A lengthy battle between a scrap car dealer and Sedgefield District Council remains unresolved.
It had been suggested John McClacklan, owner of the scrap yard at the old swimming baths, Eldon, near Bishop Auckland, should increase the height of his perimeter wall.
But permission was turned down by councillors so officers have demanded any future breaches of conditions could result in officers taking action.
PLAN TO PUT MORE POLICE ON STREETS
Police inquiry desks in Darlington will be staffed by civilians rather than policemen, leaving more officers to go out on the beat, if the Chief Constable of County Durham gets his way.
Mr Frank Taylor wants Durham county police committee to agree a £259,000 increase in police spending for the financial year 1993/94, to pay for the salaries of 20 administrative staff.
He said uniformed sergeants were particularly needed at section station level.
‘Constables have difficulty in obtaining the guidance and advice these key supervisors are there to provide,’ he said.
The police committee had previously agreed to seek an increase in the establishment of the force by 20 officers each year over a five-year period.
He said it was envisaged that this would either take place through increases in manpower approved by the Home Office or through ‘civilianisation’ of police posts to release officers to other duties.
He urged the police committee to approve his plans in principle to be implemented ‘when the financial situation improves’.
Civilians would replace six uniformed policemen on the front desks at Darlington and Durham, and would replace research and communications staff throughout the county.
FIRM WINS HOSPITAL CONTRACTS
A Darlington company has won two hospital contracts worth a total of £6.3m.
Prodescon has already started work at Haywards Heath in Sussex, where it is building a £3.3m. 50-bed private hospital for Independent Care, and at Bradford, where it is building a £3m. extension and refurbishing the Yorkshire Clinic for Community Hospitals.
Both projects are due for completion early next year.
The company director, Mr Gordon Smith, said his company was chosen because of its speciality in building hospitals and healthcare developments,.
‘We are now on our tenth such scheme in the three years since we set up the company,’ he said.
It had proved a good move as the sector had avoided the worst excesses of the building slump.
The company, with a current turnover of about £10m, will open a new office in Duke Street, Darlington, in March.
Rail link reprieve but the battle goes on
The fight for a vital rail link must continue despite a six-month reprieve, campaigners said this week.
The threat of more heavy lorries pounding roads in Wensleydale receded on Wednesday with news that British Steel will continue to send thousands of tonnes of limestone dust by train from Redmire to Redcar until the end of September.
British Steel originally announced on January 30 that the shipments would go by road after March 31 because increased costs meant that the rail service was no longer viable.
News of the proposed transfer was exclusively broken by D&S on January 25, sparking a public outcry throughout Wensleydale and further afield.
Councillors, conservation groups and the public joined forces to condemn the transfer, which would have involved between 65 and 70 articulated lorry movements for ten hours a day in each direction, six days a week.
About 9,000 tonnes of limestone would be carried every week.
The favoured route was the tank road from the Redmire quarry entrance to Catterick, the A1 and the A66 Darlington bypass to Teesside.
This week, however, British Steel agreed to continue carrying lime-stone by train until the end of September following the intervention of Mr William Hague, MP for Richmond.
At the same time, British Rail agreed to withdraw for the next six months a proposed price increase for carrying the high quality limestone to the BS works at Redcar.
Mr Hague said Mr Malcolm Rifkind, transport secretary, had agreed to host joint discussions with all concerned, including the North Yorkshire highways department, to look at ways of saving the line.
Mr Hague said his discussions with BS, BR and Mr Rifkind had been constructive.
He added: ‘There is a genuine willingness to try to find a solution.
‘I do not know what the final outcome will be and would stress that there is no obvious solution at this point, but at least we now have adequate time to look at all the alternatives.’
The limestone is carried by Trainload Freight, a division of Railfreight, which operates in a deregulated freight market and receives no government subsidy.
Mr Julian Worth, director of TLF, said his side would co-operate in the discussions but the solution must be one that allowed TLF to meet its commercial objectives set by Mr Rifkind.
A BS spokesman said he could see no possible solution to the problem at this stage but the issue would be examined closely over the next six months.
Last week BR suggested that BS might apply for a special Government grant, possibly 100 per cent, to modernise the Redmire railhead by installing a conveyor system.
This would eliminate a half-mile journey by lorries, increase operating efficiency and enable BS to reduce its fleet of rail wagons, which need constant maintenance.
The suggestion was made at a joint meeting of all sides organised by North Yorkshire county council.
A county council spokesman welcomed the reprieve and said both the highways and planning departments were ready to play a full part in discussions.
The spokesman said the authority would be pressing the department of transport for an early meeting.
On Thursday, supporters of the rail service welcomed the breathing space offered by the reprieve but stressed the campaign was not over.
A public meeting went ahead as planned in Leyburn last night and a petition to Parliament will still be handed to Mr Hague in the town today.
The petition calls on the secretary of state to ask BS not to go ahead with the planned transport switch and to urge BR to promote the Red-mire branch for freight and passenger traffic.
It was organised by several local groups, including Wensleydale railway association, which sees the present 22 mile branch as a vital link in its campaign to restore the last 17 miles of the Wensleydale line between Redmire and Garsdale.
Mrs Ruth Annison, association secretary, thought the Redmire branch would become a test case for similar lines elsewhere.
She said: ‘Everyone appears to agree it is more sensible to keep this traffic on rail but it has taken the efforts of hundreds of people to get a six-month reprieve.
‘We don't just want a reprieve for limestone but for other freight and for passenger services.
‘Charter train operators must be told of the reprieve so they can approach BR about running trains this summer to test the water.
The opportunity is there if there is real goodwill.
‘Without public opinion there would have been no reprieve.
‘Every single letter, every telephone call and every signature helped to get a reprieve.
‘People can be greatly encouraged that their efforts have had this response but the longterm solution has not been found.’
— Lorry threat still there; the chances for freight and passenger traffic; the limestone line on video: Page 9. — Letters: Page 8.
Wheelchair hire: the next step for disabled shoppers?
Electric wheelchairs carrying commercial advertising may be one solution to Darlington's pedestrianisation row.
Borough council officers are looking at several ways of helping disabled motorists to shop in the town once High Row and Skinnergate become off bounds to them on March 29.
One possible solution is to run a ‘Shopmobility’ scheme like those operating in around 20 other towns and cities in Britain.
CHAIR HIRE The scheme involves disabled drivers leaving their cars at a site near the town centre and then hiring an electric wheelchair to take them around the shops.
Panels attached to the sides of the chair could carry advertising reducing the hire cost.
Mr Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington, has given a guarded welcome to the idea of a shopmobility scheme: ‘The search for that sort of solution gets my support.
‘It is the kind of approach the council needs to take if we are to avoid the kind of apartheid against disabled people which this town may develop.’
However, he had some reservations about the concept.
‘It will mean disabled people doing all their shopping in these wheelchairs.
It will not be much fun for them when the weather is bad.
‘And I wonder if anyone has considered how delivery vans and wheelchairs are going to mix.’
He also dismissed claims that the parking ban was not as severe as many people believe.
Orange badge holders will be allowed to park on High Row and Skinnergate for three hours up to 10.30am; those arriving just before the deadline can stay the three hours.
Mr Fallon said this did nothing to help those people with mobility difficulties who wanted to park in the afternoon.
More than a dozen letters have been sent to Mr Fallon by disabled individuals and groups worried about the parking ban.
‘High Row and Skinnergate really are the heart of Darlington.
I do not want to see disabled excluded from it,’ he said.
‘This is not a political matter.
The council must simply rethink it and find a better way of allowing disabled people with cars into town.’
Council officials have already promised to make 44 car parking spaces available in Abbot's Yard for disabled motorists.
But a welter of criticism from disabled lobbyists and politicians from both Labour and Conservative groups have convinced the council to rethink their proposals.
Council officers have been instructed to look at new ways of increasing access to town for disabled motorists.
SAFE DEPOT
Mr Steve Tapper, director of development services, has drawn up a feasibility study analysing different access options.
‘Many local authorities are running some sort of shopmobility scheme,’ said Mr Tapper.
‘In my home town of Nottingham disabled drivers can drive to a car park and hire one of about 25 electric wheelchairs which they then use to go shopping.’
He said the drawbacks of such a system were the need for a safe storage depot for the wheelchairs, and the cost of installing drop kerbs all over the town centre.
BUS SERVICE
One other restriction could be the price of electric wheelchairs.
They can cost up to £2,000 each.
Council officers are also looking at the feasibility of a dial-a-ride system.
This would involve a small bus ferrying disabled shoppers from their homes and taking them into the heart of the town before returning them direct to their front door.
TEESDALE MART LOSES ITS LICENCE
Farmers face more expensive journeys to certify their cattle after confirmation that a local auction mart has lost its licence.
Mr Guy Stapleton, chief executive of the Intervention Board, said this week that certification at Barnard Castle mart could not be justified on its steer throughput of less than four animals each week.
‘Retention of a certification facility at Barnard Castle cannot be justified in terms of either efficient administration or public expenditure,’ he said in a letter to Mr Derek Foster, MP for Bishop Auckland.
But the Opposition Chief Whip is continuing the fight to regain its licence to certify steers castrated bulls which was withdrawn at six weeks' notice.
He has asked Mr John Gummer, the Agriculture Minister, to overturn the Intervention Board decision against ‘this crucial facility’.
‘The decision is unacceptable to all Teesdale farmers, who can now expect more expensive journeys to marts in Darlington and Bishop Auckland.’
The Intervention Board withdrew certification facilities at six weeks' notice last month.
Mr Phil Barber, Barnard Castle branch secretary of the National Farmers' Union, said the auction mart had spent money to improve the facilities and service to customers.
‘The operators should have been given at least another 12 months, rather than having to face a judge and jury overnight decision by someone on the Intervention Board.’
Hotel sale:
The Coverdale Hotel in the Yorkshire Dales village of West Scarfton near Leyburn has been put on the market at £275,000.
The hotel was converted from a farm eight years ago and is set close to several Dales walks.
EC aid sought in line battle THE European Community could be asked to step in to help the threatened Wensleydale railway.
Cleveland and Yorkshire North MEP David Bowe has told campaigners that the EC could grant money for a feasibility study if the line whose future is threatened by British Steel's decision to transfer Redmire quarry limestone from rail to roads from September was part of a regional transport plan…
As part of the campaign bidding to reverse the decision and stop up to 140 truckloads a day using roads to Teesside, a 7,033-name petition urging Government action will be presented to the Commons today by Richmond MP William Hague.
Ex-inspector dies:
A former inspector in Durham police has died at the age of 77.
Bill Wood, of Woodhouse Lane, Bishop Auckland, transferred from the Metropolitan police force in 1951 and served in the traffic branch, communications, control room and at Darlington.
Airmen tribute:
Plans are under way for a memorial, probably a cairn, to commemorate both RAF and Canadian Air Force bomber squadrons which flew from RAF Leeming in North Yorkshire during World War Two.
Raid foiled:
Thieves tried to break through shutters on a store in Battle Hill, Wallsend.
They caused about £800 worth of damage but fled empty handed when the alarm went off.
Forged £20 notes warning issued
POLICE issued a warning to shops and pubs yesterday about fake £20 notes circulating on Tyneside.
More than £300 worth have been handed in to police stations, mainly in North Shields and Whitley Bay, in the past two weeks.
The forgeries are said to be good quality copies.
They have a silver thread running through them and the Queen's head watermark, but the quality of the paper used is not so good, said a police spokesman.
Man killed:
One man was killed and another hurt when a car hit a lamp post and overturned on a roundabout at North Seaton, Ashington, Northumberland, yesterday.
The name of the dead man is not being released until relatives are contacted.
Blade charge:
Paul George Wilson, 25, was fined £50 by Durham magistrates after he admitted carrying a knife with a blade over 3in long.
Wilson, of Low Moor, Darlington, told the court he had previously been told by police that the knife was not an offensive weapon.
House raid:
Burglars broke into a house in Uphill Drive, Sacriston, and stole electrical goods worth £460.
Windows smashed:
A dustbin was thrown through a window at the George and Dragon pub, Sacriston, causing £35 damage.
A trolley was thrown through the window of a shop in Middle Street, Consett, and hand towels and a quilt stolen from the display.
Cash taken:
Burglars broke into a house in Brecon Place, Perkinsville, near Chester-le-Street, and stole £165 cash.
Club raid:
Cigarettes and cash have been stolen from The Grove Workingmen's Club, near Consett.
Safe bid:
Burglars tried unsuccessfully to steal the safe from the Corals betting shop in Front Street, Consett, at the weekend.
Varsity council:
Nigel Sherlock has been appointed vice-chairman of Newcastle University's senior governing body, the Council.
A director of The Newcastle Initiative and former High Sheriff of Tyne and Wear, he succeeds the late Roland Cookson.
Bar to reopen:
A controversial wine bar which was ordered to close after complaints from members of the public about noise and disturbance, is set to reopen with the backing of the police.
The proprietors of Angels in Horden, near Peterlee, have been told they must follow a stringent set of conditions.
Foul problem:
Dog owners have been urged to stop their pets from fouling the playing field at Shotton Hall Comprehensive School in Peterlee.
The dog dirt problem has led to fears for the health of pupils.
Lights chaos:
Traffic lights throughout Seaham were thrown into chaos yesterday after a heavy goods vehicle hit a post on the Times Inn bank, bringing down an electricity cable.
VANDALISED fencing near a railway line in Darlington could soon be tidied up.
Engineers from British Rail are to visit the site at Wylam Hill, near Thompson Street East, in a bid to improve safety.
The move comes after ward councillor Nick Thorne-Wallis (Lab) wrote to BR over the lack of fencing.
He said a derailment was likely if it was not replaced soon.
BR engineers have now agreed to meet Coun Thorne Wallis to inspect the site.
And yesterday Coun ThorneWallis said: ‘There are many holes in the fencing and it could be dangerous for children playing.’
MORE speed checks have been called for in Darlington streets where motorists regularly flout the law.
Following a fatal accident in Easson Road, Darlington, councillors asked Durham County Council's highways department to install speed monitoring equipment.
But county hall staff say there are practical problems which prevent them from laying speed monitoring cables.
The highways department has also ruled out police-style speed detector guns because of inaccuracy.
Yesterday members of Darlington council's transport committee asked officers to think again about solving the problems of speed monitoring.
Coun Philip Stamford Bewlay (Con) said speeding motorists are ignoring 30mph restrictions in several parts of the town.
Borough engineer Jim Gordon said the practical problems of installing monitoring equipment could be solved.
But the county council also questions devoting resources to roads which do not have a high number of accidents.
TRAINS and work on a multimillion pound redevelopment project ground to a halt yesterday because of a 78-year-old blast from the past.
Workmen unearthed a two feet long First World War artillery shell while excavating a navigational channel next to the River Tees at Stockton.
The river is to be diverted along the man-made channel later this year to allow for the construction of a barrage on the natural river bed.
Trains between Darlington and Cleveland were stopped, the site evacuated and cordoned off and the Army bomb squad summoned from Catterick Garrison, North Yorkshire.
It is not the first piece of mouldering ammunition discovered on the site made famous and earmarked for redevelopment by former premier Margaret Thatcher's ‘Wilderness Walk’ there.
Last year a cache of Second World War shells were unearthed on the site of what had previously been a scrap yard.
A ONE line appeal for Government help to collect the poll tax in Darlington has received a curt response from the town's MP.
Richard Collin, director of central services for Darlington council, was instructed to write to Michael Fallon asking for cash help.
He did so in a letter to the Conservative MP which was just 26 words long.
He wrote: ‘Dear Mr Fallon, I have been requested by the council to urge you to ask the Government to assist local authorities in the collection of essential poll tax revenue.’
Yesterday the MP said he was taken aback by the abrupt nature of the request.
‘I have replied at slightly greater length,’ he said.
He told Mr Collin that ‘no new assistance is needed’.
He said: ‘It is high time the council chased the laggers who refuse to pay through the courts.’
There has been increasing anguish among law-abiding poll tax payers who are being surcharged £19 to make up for the shortfall caused by uncollected tax.
THOUSANDS of dentists are set to take industrial action by refusing to treat NHS patients in a row over Government cash subsidies.
Although ministers have suspended moves to reduce subsidies until May, many dentists in the North-East say they still believe a reduction is on the cards.
And they have warned the Government that any attempt to impose cuts will be met with fierce opposition.
Many of Britain's 18,000 dentists say they will simply refuse to see any new NHS patients.
People who can't afford private treatment will be forced to visit school dentists or mobile dental surgeries.
Others have already given notice that they will quit the NHS altogether.
Industrial action could have a devastating effect on dental surgery in the NHS.
If practices quit the health service many patients could be faced with a staggering increase in costs.
Dentist Simon Allum, who has a surgery in the village of Hurworth, near Darlington, said: ‘If the Government goes through with this we will refuse to take any more NHS patients.
‘Anyone who gets toothache but isn't registered with a dentist won't be accepted.’
Under the present system NHS patients have 25pc of their costs met by the Government.
But the Department of Health believes payments to dentists are too high.
Suggestions that the level of fees could be slashed by up to 13.8pc provoked an outcry in the profession.
The Government has now agreed to suspend any cuts pending a joint inquiry between the Department of Health and the British Dental Association.
Results are expected to be published in May.
A spokeswoman for the BDA, which represents 15,000 dentists, said: ‘For the moment we are ruling nothing out.
However, before we could recommend our members to take industrial action we would have to hold a ballot.’
Darlington MP, Conservative Michael Fallon, said he would be pressing the Government for a change in the current financing system.
But he added: ‘I hope any profession would think twice before risking patients’ health care.
‘However, I can fully appreciate the level of anger felt by the profession over these moves.’
A CAR salesman sold a vehicle under a false description, a court heard yesterday.
Brian Thomas Jackson, of Danek Motors, Darlington, admitted three charges of selling the Austin Montego as a 1.6 rather than a 1.3 engine.
Darlington magistrates heard how Jackson, of Yew Walk, Long Newton, placed an advert in The Northern Echo which said the Ereg had a 1600cc engine.
An insurance cover note also said it was a 1.6 and Jackson sold it as such to Robert Ross, of Bridgegate, Barnard Castle, for £3,695.
Martin Harrison, prosecuting, said: ‘Mr Ross thought the car was a 1600cc.
But when he received the registration document, it detailed a 1275cc engine.
The difference between the two cars was £200.’
Neil Douglas, defending, said some of the adverts in The Northern Echo had got the engine capacity wrong.
He said: ‘It was described as a 1.6 engine.
But Mr Jackson realises he still had a duty to correct the advert.’
He said Mr Ross had still got a bargain as the quoted price for a 1.3 E-reg Montego was about £3,900.
Mr Douglas said: ‘Mr Jackson would have taken the car back from Mr Ross or alternatively tried to arrange compensation for the mistake.
But these were mistakes rather than deliberate deceptions.’
Jackson, who has previous convictions for mileage discrepancies or clocking, was ordered to pay £200 compensation, costs of £193.12 and £900 for the three false description charges.
After the case Trevor Lee, advertisement manager with The Northern Echo said: ‘We were asked by officers of Darlington Trading Standards to produce evidence of a mistake or otherwise.
The details were as submitted by the garage.
The advertisement appeared more than once, but no error was pointed out to us or alteration made to correct the description.’
Missing tools:
Thieves stole power tools worth £410 from a garage at West View, Butterknowle.
Cashpoint hit:
Burglars who struck at Barclays Bank in Barnard Castle immobilised the cashpoint in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Police said yesterday some damage had been caused but it appeared no money was missing.
Sedgefield village green has two more trees thanks to the town council and the local WI.
The Mayor of Sedgefield, assisted by pupils of Hardwick and Rectory Row primary schools, planted a Norwegian maple to mark the 40th anniversary of the Queen's accession to the throne.
Another tree was planted to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the founding of the Durham County WI.
Wheels taken:
Thieves jacked up a car on Horndale Avenue, Newton Aycliffe, in the early hours of Sunday morning and stole four wheels and tyres worth £430.
Car raids:
Chilton and Ferryhill Station were hit by a spate of thefts from cars at the weekend.
Thieves broke into five cars, smashing the nearside windows and taking radio cassette players and cash.
Club burgled:
Tudhoe Workingmen's Club was burgled on Saturday night when thieves smashed a window and took £600 cash from a gaming machine.
Case adjourned:
John Anthony Hoggart, of Minors Crescent, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
The case was adjourned until April 27 and Hoggart, 40, was released on unconditional bail.
Drug charges:
Neil Newton, 26, of Pierremont Crescent, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with possessing a controlled drug, intent to supply a controlled drug and handling stolen goods.
The case was adjourned until March 9.
Jail term:
Angela Kinsella, 28, of High Northgate, Darlington, was sentenced to a month's imprisonment yesterday for causing fear or provocation of violence, resisting a police constable and stealing a shirt from a clothes shop.
Kinsella, who admitted the charges, had to have medical treatment after a scuffle with a policeman in Darlington town centre last year.
Bike alert:
Police have issued a warning after a 14-year-old Darlington boy was tricked out of his £150 chrome coloured BMX bike on Sunday afternoon.
The boy was in Nunnery Lane when another youth asked him for a ride on the bike and never returned.
House burglary:
A Camcorder, video recorder, cash and a watch worth £1,078 have been stolen in a burglary from a house in Leafield Road, Darlington.
Thieves strike:
Burglars made off with a £350 Marlin cycle after breaking into a house in Wycombe Street, Darlington, on Sunday afternoon.
Pushchair taken:
A grey child's pushchair worth £100 has been stolen from a front garden of a house in Smithfield Road, Darlington.
Wheels stolen:
Thieves jacked up a car on Horndale Avenue, Newton Aycliffe, in the early hours of Sunday morning and stole four wheels and tyres worth £430.
Car thefts:
Chilton and Ferryhill Station were hit by a spate of thefts from cars at the weekend.
Thieves broke into five cars, smashing the nearside windows, and taking radio cassette players and cash from five cars between Saturday and Sunday morning.
Club hit:
Tudhoe Working Men's Club was burgled on Saturday night when thieves smashed a window and took £600 cash from a gaming machine.
Farm blaze:
A fire at a farm on Harrowgate Hill, Darlington last night destroyed around 25 tonnes of straw.
The blaze, reported around 9pm, was quickly contained by the fire brigade.
A ROADSWEEPER driver was fined yesterday after a serious road crash on a busy road.
Neil Butterfield was driving the roadsweeper along the A66 towards Scotch Corner when he overtook a pick-up van towing a trailer, Richmond magistrates were told.
Butterfield, 32, of Gladstone Street, Darlington, was confronted by an oncoming car which braked and swerved.
Butterfield then lost control of the roadsweeper, veered to the nearside and crashed into the van.
Both vehicles left the road, overturned and crashed into a hedge, the court was told.
Butterfield was injured and taken to hospital.
The accident happened half a mile west of the Melsonby crossroads last September.
He pleaded guilty to careless driving in a letter to the court and was fined £300 and ordered to pay £20 costs.
AN old Darlington building and car park could be transformed into a nursery or a church.
Under the first option Darlington Christian Fellowship would use the former Corn Exchange in Victoria Road for Sunday meetings while the second plan is to convert the building into a private nursery for youngsters between two and four.
Yesterday councillors agreed in principle to the options but gave a preference for the church activities because of traffic problems from the nursery.
Conservative councillor Sheila Brown said: ‘I don't think a nursery is suitable for that location.
Even if you fence it in you still have the additional traffic that would be regenerated in picking the children up and dropping them off.
But Labour councillor Gordon Plummer said it would be difficult to find anyone to take the building on on an annual tenancy until the future of the cattle market nearby was sorted out.
The options will now be discussed by the council's land and property sub-committee.
Warning sounded over deadly drugs
POLICE have issued a warning after lethal drugs were stolen from premises in Red House, Sunderland.
Raiders got away with a quantity of drugs, including adrenaline hydrochloride, hydrocortisone and cocaine between 1pm on Sunday and 9am on Monday.
The drugs, most of which are contained in glass phials, will kill if taken, said police.
Councillor's comments:
In yesterday's edition of The Northern Echo it was reported that at a meeting of Derwentside Council's development control sub-committee Labour councillor Eric Turner criticised a fellow councillor, Derek McVickers.
In fact the comments were made by Coun Eric Edwards.
We apologise for the error, and any embarrassment it may have caused.
Car complaints:
Second-hand cars were the main cause for complaints from consumers in County Durham between July and September last year, according to the county council's consumer protection department.
Surgeries to close:
Consumer advice surgeries in Cork, Peterlee, Consett and Chester-le-Street are to end after April because they were not being used enough.
Instead, complaints will be dealt with at main centres in Durham, Darlington and Bishop Auckland.
Heat winner:
Youngest contestant Graeme Suddick, 16, of Consett, won a place in the regional semi-finals of the Young Horticulturist of the Year competition in a heat at Houghall College last week.
In second place was Tony Jones, of Langley Park, who also qualifies for a place in the semi-finals at the Rose Manor Hotel, Boroughbridge, near York.
Celebrity launch:
Author and broadcaster Denise Robertson launched the new Tunstall Hills Protection Group at a meeting in Sunderland.
The group, which successfully blocked a plan to extend a golf club over Tunstall Hills, is now aiming to get the local landmark protected.
New charge:
Gateshead Council is being recommended to approve a new poll tax of £271.
The proposed charge represents an increase of £45 on the current year's figure.
TV stolen:
A television, video player and cassette player, worth about £160, were stolen from Edmondsley Junior School, near Chester-le-Street.
Windows broken:
Vandals have broken windows at Fyndoune Comprehensive School, Sacriston, causing £120 damage.
Frames stolen:
Six window frames worth £600 were stolen from a construction site at Station Lane, Chester-le-Street.
Office raid:
Burglars broke into a builder's office at The Mill, Shotley Bridge, and stole a swivel chair worth £50.
Computer theft:
A computer, monitor, keyboard and printer, worth £1,000, were stolen from Burnopfield Junior School, near Stanley.
ARMED police surrounded a house in Thornaby after a young woman was threatened, a court heard.
But the siege ended peacefully after two unarmed men gave themselves up.
A third was arrested in Darlington.
Yesterday Teesside Crown Court was told the armed response came after Sadhana Nazir tipped off the police that her boyfriend Asaf Mansha had returned to their home in Grange Road, Thornaby, with two other men with stolen goods.
As she drove off to alert her sister, who was a policewoman, she was followed by Lackwinder Randhawa and Ifzal Khan who forced her to stop.
Randhawa threatened her.
Randhawa admitted obtaining by deception, burglary, handling stolen goods and making a threat to kill Miss Nazir.
Mansha and Khan admitted burgling a house in Selbourne Terrace, Darlington.
Judge Harold Hewitt sentenced Randhawa, 21, of Heron Drive, Darlington, to 15 months imprisonment suspended for two years and attached a supervision order.
He sentenced Khan, 23, and Mansha, 24, to two years probation with an order they attend a probation day centre for 30 days.
Randhawa was ordered to pay £450 costs.
Mansha and Khan, of Mansfield Avenue, Thornaby, were ordered to pay costs of £134 each.
Keith Miller, prosecuting, said the burglary at Selbourne Terrace occurred on the night of October 20 last year when Khan and Mansha broke into the house.
Randhawa handled the goods worth over £5,000 which were stolen.
The goods were then taken back to Mansha's home where his girlfriend heard the men and saw Randhawa throwing the stolen jewellery around the kitchen.
Miss Nazir warned them to get rid of the stolen property and then went to alert her sister.
But her car was stopped.
Randhawa and Khan then approached her and Randhawa threatened to blow her and her family up.
Roderick Hunt, defending Randhawa, said his actions that night were influenced by drink.
Carl Gunnersley, defending Khan, said his behaviour was also affected by drink and peer pressure.
Jamie Hill, defending Mansha, said he was now separated from his girlfriend because of the incident.
A BILLINGHAM woman has ended years of history at one of Darlington's last male bastions.
Geraldine Percy ended the male domination at the Mechanic's Institute club, in Skinnergate, by applying for membership alongside the distinguished gentlemen who maintain the 150-year-old traditions.
It has been a year of change for the Mechanics Institute which has seen its crumbling headquarters re-vamped into a fashionable pub.
Now the few surviving members of the once thriving club have just two rooms behind The Institute pub where they meet to play snooker and enjoy an all-male sanctuary.
But Geraldine's application was welcomed by secretary Ernest France and club member John Ingram.
And members agreed Geraldine would be an asset.
Geraldine, who works for Classic Leisure, owners of The Institute, said:’ Because I'm on site all day I thought it would make sense to join the club.’
The Mechanics Institute does not have a policy of barring women but none have applied to join.
Now members are hoping Geraldine's arrival could give the club's image a healthy boost.
HIGHWAYS officials have announced plans to close Darlington's A66 bypass for resurfacing work as part of an upgrade of main roads in the region.
The Department of Transport plans to throw up roadblocks on a stretch of the busy road effectively barring traffic from approaching Darlington via Blands Corner, Neasham Road and Yarm Road.
Drivers will be forced to follow diversion signs to reach the town centre when work begins a week on Sunday.
Officials say that they have tried to keep any disturbance to a minimum by limiting the closures to Sundays only.
But the work could last for as long as 11 weeks and local councillors have claimed that they should have been consulted about the scheme.
The work will take in several stretches along the length of the road which links Blands Corner just outside Darlington with the A66 from Teesside.
Other roads affected by the resurfacing scheme include a short section of the A1 and the A167 at Chilton and Thinford in County Durham.
A spokeswoman for the Department of Transport said that diversions would only be in use at the weekend.
‘Other than Sundays we don't plan to cause any major disruptions to the traffic,’ she said.
If the weather holds out work could be completed in a short time.
But if not, contractors may need all 11 weeks, she said.
Darlington borough councillor Alan Gibson said that he was shocked at the scale of the resurfacing work.
‘This news has left me totally flabbergasted.
It is the first I have heard of anything going on around Darlington,’ he said.
‘I would have thought the Department of Transport could at least have told us what was happening.’
The Department of Transport stressed that only certain stretches of the A66 would be closed at any one time in an attempt to minimise the amount of disruption and keep traffic moving.
Hopeful sign:
David Gettings, manager of Binns, Darlington, has presented certificates to four of six members of staff who have successfully completed a sign language course to enable them to communicate with deaf customers.
Office burglary:
Bishop Auckland's probation office was broken into on Monday night.
Police said computer equipment and petty cash had been stolen.
Farm plans:
A planning brief has been prepared for the disposal of land at Town Farm, Sadberge, which the Darlington council bought and cleared of farm buildings in 1974.
Officers have been authorised to investigate and have the existing access widened.
Petrol leak:
A car on the Melsonby to Aldbrough St John road, near Richmond, was badly damaged by fire after petrol leaked from a loose pipe and ignited the hot engine, setting fire to the car.
The incident was dealt with by firemen from Darlington.
Raid leads:
Detectives are still following up leads after an appeal for information about Alan Stephen Wild, 38, in connection with a robbery at the National Provincial Building Society, Bondgate, Darlington, on December 27.
The appeal was broadcast on BBC television's Crimewatch programme on Thursday.
Primary election
TEACHERS are obviously more popular than politicians despite Kenneth Clarke's best efforts to prove otherwise.
In one go yesterday Stephen Burge, a history teacher from Northfield Comprehensive, Billingham polled 18,000 votes.
There are definitely more where that came from.
The Burge campaign wagon now seems set to roll all the way till polling in the Teacher of the Year elections closes on March 14.
His total so far is the highest in the country and puts him thousands ahead in the TFM Radio area.
In all, 27 local stations are taking part in the contest.
Mr Burge's claims to the title (to get the votes his pupils had to write down his name separately all 18,000 times) were strongly backed by his headmaster, David Youldon who could have been a campaign manager.
The school was extremely pleased with the news, he said, because Mr Burge was precisely the sort of teacher who deserved such a vote.
‘It isn't just his teaching but his keen involvement in other activities like football, table tennis and cricket.
It's just the positive approach that the pupils and school need.
We wish him well.’
As for Mr Burge, it was impossible to talk to him.
In lessons all day, he bounded out to a school meeting immediately afterwards.
Not, of course, a campaign meeting.
KEN Bates has vowed to go all the way to the House of Lords if necessary in his fight for Stamford Bridge.
The High Court yesterday ordered the club to pay landlords SB Property Company the full £22.85m purchase price for the ground.
Bates described it as confusing and needing clarification.
Cost fears over dangerous wall
A town centre wall feared to be in danger of collapse could cost up to £60,000 to put right.
More tests are to be carried out at the allotment wall in Castle Hill, Richmond, to find out its exact condition.
Surveyors for Richmond Town Council say the wall is badly cracked in places and leaning by as much as 500mm.
They say repairs could cost between £20,000 and £60,000 if it had to be rebuilt.
Blaze probe:
Police and fire chiefs are investigating the cause of blaze at a former school at the old Linton School in Linton, near Grassington.
Two crews from Skipton and volunteers from Grassington tackled the blaze.
Prison thefts:
A storeman in a North Yorkshire jail stole prison shirts, a court heard yesterday.
Richard Coburn was wearing one of the T-shirts the day police arrested him.
The 46-year-old, of Grasmere Road, Darlington, admitted theft.
Northallerton magistrates adjourned the case for reports.
Cinema fears:
Richmond councillors are worried about plans to turn the old cinema on the Ryders Wynd/Queens Road junction into a DIY shop.
They feel the building's lack of parking space and difficult access could cause problems.
Shop raid:
Thieves broke into a takeaway food shop in Northallerton.
They stole a portable telephone worth £248, £50 worth of cigarettes and cash totalling £170.
TV theft:
Raiders broke into a Land Rover parked at a Northallerton supermarket.
They took a portable television from the vehicle.
Congestion blow:
Villagers in Middleton St George have been advised they will have to wait until the bypass is built before bus stop congestion problems are solved.
Requests to establish a clearway to prevent cars parking in the stop zone have been turned down on the grounds the restriction would be difficult to impose.
Roads action:
Give Way signs are to be erected at one of Darlington's most dangerous junctions the intersection of Willow Road and Pierremont Road.
House burgled:
A television, video recorder and tools have been stolen in a burglary from a house in Flamingo Close, Darlington.
Garage raid:
Burglars have stolen a Kawasaki generator, a transformer and an angle grinder worth £860 from a lockup garage in John Street, Darlington.
Video theft:
A £300 video recorder and 25 pre-recorded video tapes worth £260 have been stolen from a house in Fryer Crescent, Darlington.
Furniture haul:
A three piece suite, a fridge freezer, a table, a video stand and curtains altogether worth £1,280 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Hundens Lane, Darlington.
Inquest opens:
An inquest opened and adjourned yesterday into the death of Charles Pratley, 78, of Berry Court, Sadberge, who died on February 23.
Top band:
Stockton band The Motive stole the show at The Northern Echo's Talent 92 Search for a Star contest held at The Mall nightclub.
The musicians will now go through to the final on April 20.
Meanwhile, the search for a star continues with the second heat on Monday, March 9.
Seat damaged:
Vandals have damaged a new seat in Woodham Burn, Newton Aycliffe.
The seat has been replaced by a stronger version.
A 15-YEAR-OLD Darlington girl admitted in court yesterday she stole to subsidise her 20 a day smoking habit.
Yesterday the girl, who cannot be named, appeared before Darlington Juvenile Court where she admitted theft.
The prosecutor said she had stolen a pair of jeans worth £9.99 from Woolworths in Northgate.
The girl told the magistrates she stole to get money to pay for cigarettes.
She said she was spending £12 a week on smoking.
Her mother told the court that her pocket money was far below that.
‘I didn't know she was smoking and I don't know where she was getting the money from,’ said her mother.
The teenager said she has now given up smoking and is looking for a job.
A report from a social worker revealed the girl had not been to school since November last year.
Her social worker said the stealing was also the result of boredom and keeping bad company.
The girl was also fined £30 and given a 12 month supervision order for breaching a conditional discharge given last year for a burglary at a cycle shop.
DARLINGTON police have issued a warning after a man conned his way into a pensioner's home and made off with £120 from her purse.
One man identified himself as a jobbing builder and chatted to the woman, who was in her seventies, while another searched the house in Brougham Street, Darlington, on Tuesday.
Now PC Dave Fishwick has urged residents to check identification before allowing anyone into the house.
‘If anyone does require any building work doing, they should contact a reputable builder,’ said PC Fishwick.
A 14-year-old boy was also the victim of a trickster when he was riding his £150 chrome BMX bike in Nunnery Lane, Darlington.
He was asked for a ride by another boy, who never returned the bike.
There were about 50 burglaries in the last week, with televisions and video recorders being the most popular.
A grandfather clock was stolen from a house in Arthur Street while burglars made off with £2,100 worth of jewellery, including the box, from a house in Grange Road.
A Victorian fireplace, hot water cylinder and skylight were stolen from a house in Victoria Embankment while burglars took a three-piece suite, a fridge freezer, a table, video stand and curtains from a house in Hundens Lane.
There were 34 thefts from vehicles in the Darlington area, with wheel trims being the most popular.
PC Fishwick advised: ‘If your car is fitted with wheel trims and it stays out overnight, I'd suggest people remove the trims.’
Fifteen vehicles were stolen from the streets of Darlington, including Gladstone Street, Bellburn Lane, Salters Avenue and St John's Crescent.
More than £1,450 in damage was caused to vehicles, the more serious attacks being in Lowe Street and Eastbourne Road.
More than £2,000 worth of bicycles have been stolen.
Obscene articles case can go ahead
THE Crown Prosecution Service in London has given the authority for a case involving a number of articles seized under the Obscene Publications Act to proceed.
The items were discovered on a raid at a house at Coatham Mundeville, near Darlington.
The local CPS is now expected to prepare papers for the case.
Tory removed:
Conservative councillor Bill Stenson has been removed from the governing body of Darlington's Mowden infants school.
Coun Stenson did not attend a governor's meeting for 12 months.
Assault claim:
A 15-year-old Darlington boy appeared before the town's Juvenile Court yesterday facing accusations of assault.
There will be a delay before the case proceeds while his solicitor finds out more information about the alleged incident.
The boy will be back in court on March 19.
Girl absent:
A Darlington teenager who is accused of seven different criminal offences did not appear before the town's juvenile court yesterday.
The 17-year-old girl is accused of two incidents of causing harassment, alarm or distress and assault, failing to surrender to bail.
She is also alleged to have stolen goods to the value of £330.
Tools haul:
Burglars stole £8,000 worth of engineering tools and equipment from Liebherr factory in Sedgefield, on Wednesday night.
Newton Aycliffe CID are investigating the break-in.
More cases of food poisoning are reported
Cases of food poisoning and food-borne diseases more than doubled in Darlington during 1991.
A total of 617 cases were recorded in the health district, which includes Teesdale, over the year compared with 269 in 1990.
A report by Mr Michael Bennett, borough director of community services, said much of the increase was due to outbreaks of shigella dysentery and hepatitis A in Darlington schools.
A 21 per cent rise in cases of salmonella and 24 per cent for campylobacter were also recorded.
Part of this could be due to people's increased awareness of the importance of reporting all diarrhoea and sickness symptoms to their doctors, said the report, due before the works and health committee on Monday.
Judge tells Mr Finnegan to quit
A businessman whose Darlington and Richmond-based moneylending company crashed last year was yesterday ordered to leave his Middleton St. George home.
Mr Tom Finnegan was also ordered by a judge at Darlington county court to pay rent arrears of £2,400.
His civil court appearance came ten days after another brush with the law.
On Tuesday last week he was detained and questioned by North Yorkshire fraud squad officers investigating alleged offences under the Banking Act.
Mr Finnegan, his wife Sylvia and Mr Barry Braund, his business partner from Cleveland, were released on bail without charge after being questioned at Northallerton police station.
In court yesterday Mr Finnegan, who ran North of England Investment from premises in Richmond and above Zhivago's nightclub in Darlington, denied he had received a notice to quit but did not dispute the arrears.
Property Management, based in Duke Street, Darlington, claimed the notice was served by post in September 1991 and required Mr Finnegan, his wife and two teenage children to quit by the end of November.
WOULD-BE MP No rent had been paid since July last year but arrears up to the end of November were already the subject of a previous court order and Mr Finnegan had arranged for his wife's small income to be made available to cover those.
Rent arrears from the beginning of December to the present time at £800 a month would be paid, said Mr Finnegan.
He had applied to make available some of his pension benefits accrued during his 20 years as a businessman.
He said his financial problems arose from bankruptcy last year.
A further matter concerning alleged damage to five trees and lawns at the house was adjourned.
Mr Finnegan, a former Birmingham police officer, also ran companies called Contractraven and Pine Rigg, which also crashed last year.
A spokesman for North Yorkshire police said officers still wanted to hear from anyone who had invested money with Mr Finnegan's companies.
Mr Finnegan was to stand as Tory candidate for Stockton South at the 1983 general election but withdrew when it was disclosed he had been a member of an extreme right-wing party.
No sack claim
I NOTED with interest your report on the Darlington v Huddersfield match, particularly the primacy you gave to an alleged comment by ‘a fanzine seller’ who purportedly said ‘this is the Sack Frank Gray issue’.
An interrogation of all our fanzine sellers has revealed that none of these devoted Darlington fans actually said those fateful words.
Indeed, the latest issue of Mission Impossible will reveal that, after a reasoned examination of the facts, we called upon Frank Gray ‘to do the decent thing’ ie resign.
This is subtly different, if less dramatic, than ‘Sack Frank Gray’.
One can only assume that this is another example of the popular press indulging in unwarranted smears, this time against the Mission Impossible Party of Labour and the loyal supporters of Darlington FC.
Steve Raine, Editor, Mission Impossible.
EDITOR'S FOOTNOTE: The remark ‘This is the sack Frank Gray issue’ was uttered to a senior Echo journalist on buying his copy of Mission Impossible at Feethams.
It was not a smear.
It was a fact.
Not good enough:
DARLINGTON supporters must feel the players let down Frank Gray very badly while some will question his signings, tactics and discipline.
Gray did not appreciate at the start of the season that the team was just not good enough.
Pickering, with all his experience, has been the biggest let down.
Fitness also seems a problem.
Mardenborough hardly seems to finish a game.
Why also do we nearly always play without someone on the wing?
Tactically we seem bereft of ideas.
I wish Ray Hankin the best of luck but I question the choice.
He was a very volatile character when playing and I can only hope that age has quietened him down.
Ken Snowdon,.
A desperate search for Tory support
IMAGINE my surprise on getting through the post an appeal on behalf of the very rich a personalised letter from Chris Patten MP exhorting me to give generously to the Conservative Party or else I might ‘wake up on the morning after polling day to find Neil Kinnock and the Labour Party are in power’.
So Tory Central Office in their desperate search for support can't even filter out the Labour councillors on a council they apparently despise.
A council they oppose so much that they give us one of the lowest grants per head in the country, poll tax cap us, take us to court over redundancy payments, criticise us over the Meadow Well management and so on.
Since they don't even know who the councillors are, I can only assume that North Tyneside is being victimised through ignorance and dogma.
The Conservative government has deprived North Tyneside of £300m in grant money since 1980, What a cheek now to ask me for a donation.
Annie Lockwood, Labour councillor, Buttle Hill Ward, North Tyneside Council, Wallsend.
Darlington:
Thieves have stolen four trays of eggs from a car in Shakespeare Road.
Darlington:
A video and income support book worth £400 have been taken from a house in Marshall Street.
Darlington:
A mahogany fireplace surround has been stolen from a house in Greenbank Road.
Camera gear theft court sequel
A TRAINING officer lost his prized camera equipment worth £2,325 after he left it outside his front door, York Crown Court heard yesterday.
Thieves made off with the gear after spotting it outside Peter Mountain's flat in Victor Street, York.
Yesterday one of the thieves, Steven Craig, of Hewley Avenue, Tang Hall, York, was fined £150 after he admitted stealing one of the cameras, an Olympus worth £180.
Craig also admitted a charge of attempted deception.
A charge of burglary was withdrawn.
Rail call:
Tim Hurren, the Liberal Democrats' prospective Parliamentary candidate for Harrogate, has called on British Rail to electrify the Leeds, Harrogate, York line following the start of work between Skipton and Ilkley.
Service boost:
York's dial-a-bus service for the elderly and disabled is to be extended to weekends and evenings for a trial three-month period from the end of March.
It will allow users to attend events at the Barbican Centre.
Street closure:
Bootham Bar in York is to be closed to traffic from March 7–20 as British Gas workmen continue laying a new main.
An alternative route will be via St Leonard's Place and Duncombe Place.
Star opening:
Actor Ian Carmichael officially opened Malton's newest charity shop for Help The Aged on Wheelgate.
Memorial survey:
Retired fire officer Terry Cooper has carried out a comprehensive survey of all the war memorials within a ten mile radius of York.
Mr Cooper, of Hopgrove Lane, undertook the project for the Imperial War Museum.
Car theft:
Thieves made off with the loan car of a woman who had her vehicle stolen.
The Ford Cortina contained hundreds of pounds worth of tools and was taken from Kirby Sigston, near Thirsk.
House raid:
Burglars forced their way into a house near Great Ayton.
They made off with hi-fi equipment, three cameras, two antique clocks, china and an anorak worth a total of £1,500 from a house at Easby.
Burning car:
Thieves set alight a stolen car in a field near Stokesley.
Firefighters were called to Middleton Lane, Seamer, but the vehicle was burnt out.
FOUR men tied up a middle-aged builder and his wife and threatened them with machetes before ransacking their home, a court heard yesterday.
Masked and armed, they tied up 52year-old John Bayles and his wife, Elizabeth with a washing line, threatened to burn their home down if they did not reveal where their money was and ransacked the house.
The raiders struck at the Bayles' home, Newsham House, in the village of Little Newsham, near Barnard Castle, Teesside Crown Court heard.
Stephen Muise, 29, of Warwick Square, Barry Hayman, 18, of Garthlands Road, Michael Lowther, 25, of Cross Street, all Darlington, and Robert Lowther, 27, of no fixed address, all admitted aggravated burglary and stealing £100 from Mrs Bayles.
Judge William Hannah told them: ‘These victims were bound and terrified, and their house violated in the most appalling manner.
‘You tied them with a line and taped Mrs Bayles mouth so she could not speak, threatened them with weapons and left them tied while you ransacked their home a truly terrifying experience for them.’
Michael Lowther was jailed for six years and a further year for being in breach of a probation order.
Muise was jailed for six years.
Robert Lowther was sentenced to six years, with a further year for possessing five petrol bombs with intent, taking a car without consent and making off without payment, offences unconnected with the burglary.
Hayman, a first offender, was sent to a young offenders institution for three years.
Stephen Duffield, prosecuting, said Muise had worked for Mr Bayles and had seen him carrying money about.
The defendants made a ‘recce’ of the house on October 20 last year before returning later that night.
Said Mr Duffield: ‘A threat was made to burn the house down if they did not say where the money was.’
The men ransacked the house before making off with mainly jewellery valued at £2,000.
The defendants made off after cutting the telephone wire, immobilising Mr Bayle's mobile telephone and slashing the tyres of his van and car.
In mitigation Lawrence Hazell, for Muise, said he committed the offence because he owed some people £110.
Ken Gillance, for Hayman, said he had been a youth of impeccable character.
Keith Rankin, representing Michael Lowther said his client had had a childhood of abuse and was of limited intelligence.
Peter Armstrong, for Robert Lowther, said his defendant only began offending in 1988.
Stable lad crashed car
A STABLE lad who had been drinking all day took a colleague's car and smashed it through a wall.
Leyburn magistrates yesterday banned Adrian Pinnell, 20, from driving for two years and ordered he pay a total of £730 in fines and costs.
He was a stable lad at Kingsley House, Middleham, at the time.
He admitted taking the car without consent, driving while unfit through drink, without insurance and unaccompanied by a qualified motorist, and failing to report an accident.
The court heard Pinnell, now of Halsway Cottage, Crowcombe, Taunton, Somerset, had taken the car on several occasions but on the last one crashed it into a dry stone wall.
Theft sentence:
Andrew Tombs, 27, of Stokesley, North Yorkshire, agreed to carry out 150 hours community service after admitting at Teesside Crown Court stealing equipment worth £7,400 from Tarmac Construction, while working for them as a drainer on a building site in the town.
TRAVELLERS had no warning of a terrorist bomb blast which ripped through a packed London station yesterday.
At 8.20am the police were informed that Ulster Television's London office had received a coded warning of a bomb at a station.
At 8.29am London Bridge station was rocked by an explosion.
Twenty-eight people were injured, four seriously.
Within minutes all the capital's tube and main line stations were closed for searches.
The bomb had been designed to kill, said anti-terrorist Branch head Cmdre George Churchill-Coleman, blaming the IRA.
It took until mid-afternoon for the rail network to get back to normal by which time London businesses were reckoned to have lost £8.6m.
Four of the casualties received serious injuries when the device ripped through a gents lavatory on Platform Four.
‘A train pulled in just 15 seconds after the blast if it had been a bit earlier then the casualties would have been a hell of a lot worse,’ said eye-witness Andy Anderson, a Financial Times journalist.
Prime Minister John Major said the pointless and cowardly bombing would make ‘not a shred’ of difference to Britain's anti-terrorist policy.’
The bombers were described as ‘psychopaths’ by Labour leader Neil Kinnock, and politicians in both London and Dublin condemned the attack.
A North-East woman caught up in the blast criticised British Rail for not acting quickly enough.
Andrea Godfrey, 25, who comes from Darlington and works for a London-based advertising agency, said: ‘I had just got on the train when I heard this tremendous bang.
All the windows in my carriage shattered, and sent glass flying across the people inside.’
In the confusion hundreds of commuters panicked, jostling with each other in a desperate headlong rush to get out.
‘We didn't know if another bomb had been planted on another platform,’ admitted Miss Godfrey, who uses the station three times a week.
‘Everyone was frantic to get out but no one seemed to know the quickest way.
I asked several times but eventually was just caught up in the crowds.’
Miss Godfrey, who was shocked but otherwise unharmed, is now recovering from her ordeal.
She criticised British Rail for not closing all mainline stations after it received the warning.
‘It doesn't matter what they said something should have been done to get people out immediately.
Before this I would probably have agreed with British Rail that it would cause too much trouble.
After what I have been through I have changed my mind completely.’
FASCIST parliamentary candidate Donald Clarke has predicted a blood-soaked general election campaign in the battle for Darlington.
The British National Party candidate said there could be violent clashes between fascists and left-wing supporters when he bids to unseat local Tory MP and schools minister Michael Fallon.
Dr Clarke, who is a retired headmaster and leading butterfly expert, said: ‘There is going to be a lot of violence.
‘But as long as our side don't start it, then it's all right with me.’
BNP activists have already clashed with left wing anti-fascist groups when Dr Clarke visited Darlington last year.
Crowds of chanting protestors gathered in the town centre as the 65-year-old Edinburgh man addressed a bunch of supporters at the King's Head Hotel which did not realise it was to be the BNP's venue.
Since then Dr Clarke, who travels with a pair of burly minders, has avoided doorstep campaigning preferring to communicate via BNP leaflets and press releases issued in his name.
The right wing candidate does not make himself available for interview and could not be contacted over the weekend.
However, Dr Clarke was quoted as saying: ‘There are BNP people who relish a good scrap but they are more than matched by militant left thugs.’
Talking about forced repatriation, he said: ‘The white population is declining every year, while theirs particularly the Moslems is tripling.
They are the fastest breeders in the country.’
He wants to see the Government withdraw passports from all immigrant groups and ethnic minorities.
But Dr Clarke's comments have been re-buffed by rivals in the battle for a Parliamentary seat in Darlington.
Mr Fallon said: ‘The people of Darlington will find his policies repulsive and offensive, especially those who fought in the war against fascism.’
And Labour's Alan Milburn said: ‘The BNP has no part to play in British democratic politics.
They are following the example set by Nazi Germany and, if they get the chance, will bring the Nazi doctrine of bigotry to Darlington.
‘The only people who are unfortunately going to have to deal with the BNP's thugs are the police.’
EURO MP Stephen Hughes will today open a national conference which aims to give a better view of European society.
The conference is for those working in education for the over-16s and the Youth and Community Services and will demonstrate the multi-ethnic, multicultural nature of European society.
Mr Hughes, MEP for Durham, said: ‘Events of this sort are essential if we are to reverse the growing tide of racism and fascism sweeping Europe.
‘We tend to think that it's a problem restricted to the Republikana Party in Germany or the Fascist followers of Jean-Marie Le Pen in France.
‘But the truth is that the threat is here on our own doorstep as well.
There will be after all a fascist candidate in Darlington in the forthcoming election.’
Mr Hughes added: ‘It is through educationalists and the message they will relay to our young people that we can tell the truth of the strengths and benefits to be gained from a multi-racial, multi-cultural society.’
Bikes stolen:
A £400 Saracen Toughtrack cycle was stolen from a yard in Wales Street, Darlington.
Thieves also stole a £250 Ranger cycle from a garage in Woodland Road and a £200 cycle from Skinnergate, Darlington.
Security plea:
The Hallgarth Country House Hotel, Coatham Mundeville, has applied to Darlington Council for retrospective planning permission for security bars.
The bars have been set up on ground floor windows of Coatham Mill, a listed building.
Rent increase ‘will lead to hardship’
COUNCIL house rents in the Sedgefield district are to rise by £2.50 per week.
But yesterday Independent councillor Tony Moore, who opposed the increase, warned it could lead to more hardship.
‘To put this rent increase on the council house tenant at the same time as a rise in poll tax isn't on,’ said Coun Moore, who called for an increase of £1.50 per week.
‘It is going to cause hardship to a vast number of families.
This is a massive blow to council house tenants.’
Road closed:
Newton Cap bridge on the A689 at Bishop Auckland was closed for several hours yesterday afternoon when a lorry shed its load.
Annual meeting:
Bishop Auckland RAF Association holds its 46th annual meeting on Friday March 27, at , starting at 8pm.
Depot damage:
A container at the council depot at Fylands, Bishop Auckland, was forced open on Wednesday night.
Police said £300 worth of damage was caused but nothing was stolen.
Thieves strike:
Thieves stole a pair of jeans from a washing line on Biglands Terrace, Bishop Auckland, on Wednesday night.
Challenge winner:
February's winner in the Wear Fit Gold Rush Challenge is Avril Summerbell of Heather Lane, Crook, who receives a £15 voucher from the local Co-op superstore.
There is still a month of the fitness challenge to run and participants are being invited back for a second assessment.
Easter fair:
A few places are left for stalls at an Easter fair to be held in Crook Civic Centre on Saturday April 4.
Anyone who would like to book a stall or needs more information should contact Jillian Aldred on .
Security plea:
The Hallgarth Country House Hotel, Coatham Mundeville, has applied to Darlington Council for retrospective planning permission for security bars.
The bars have been set up on ground floor windows of Coatham Mill, a listed building.
A CAMPAIGN has been launched to bring stricter speed restrictions on a stretch of road notorious for accidents.
Two weeks ago a mother was seriously hurt in a crash while taking her three children to school on the A167 at Ferryhill.
It is the only town along the Darlington to Durham road where traffic is still allowed to drive at up to 60mph, said campaigner Ann Kilbourn.
Mrs Kilbourn and her husband George work at the Mobil garage on the A167 at Ferryhill.
They were so fed up with people asking to use the phone to report an accident that they decided to do something about it.
They have started a petition which has already gathered 450 signatures from residents of Ferryhill and drivers calling at the garage.
‘We sit here and hear the screech of brakes and the bang.
It's a lethal stretch of road and there are near misses every day,’ said Mrs Kilbourn.
Now Sedgefield MP Tony Blair has joined the campaign and the Kilbourns have won support from county councillor Charles Magee who is raising the matter with council highways officers.
Mrs Kilbourn said: ‘The main problem is cars going too fast.
There's a bad junction with the Darlington road and Dean Road, where the mum and children were hurt two weeks ago.’
She said there were speed restrictions on the A167 at Aycliffe, Croxdale and Chilton, and Ferryhill people ought to be given the same protection.
Car stolen:
Thieves have stolen a purple Lotus Elan (registration number DYG564B) from a farm building at East Harlsey, near Northallerton.
A police spokesman said the vehicle was not in working order and the thieves probably took it away on a trailer.
Sneak thieves:
Thieves stole a leather wallet containing credit cards from a jacket hanging in McKenna and Browns in High Street, Northallerton between 3.30pm and 4.40pm on Friday.
House raided:
Raiders entered a house in Thornton-le-Beans, near Northallerton.
They removed goods worth £400, including a Samsing VHS video recorder (serial number 8021004458) and jewellery.
Ornaments stolen:
Two mushroom-shaped stone ornaments have been stolen from Romanby, Northallerton.
Shop vandals:
Staff at the Darlington branch of Richards Shops, in Queen Street, had to clear up when vandals smashed a plate glass window over the weekend.
Hysteria and desperation
LABOUR'S hysteria over their by-election win in Willington East is surely a sign of desperation.
Labour retained their safest seat in Wear Valley with a reduced majority.
The Liberal Democrat vote increased significantly on our good result last May.
The ‘swing’ from Labour to Liberal Democrat was 6.4pc, enough to win us both seats in the Willington West ward.
Far from ‘smashing’ the Liberal Democrats, Labour is continuing to lose support to us.
If the by-election results were repeated throughout the district, the number of Labour councillors on Wear Valley Council would be reduced from eight to four with the Liberals increasing from 28 to 32 scarcely a reason for rejoicing in the Labour ranks.
C. Foote Wood, leader, Wear Valley Liberal Democrats, 28 Cockton Hill Road, Bishop Auckland.
Votes and vandals I
LIVE in Willington where the recent council by-election has been held.
Approximately 500 flysheets with Mrs Allen's name on were plastered across a shop and garage showroom windows which are both empty.
I am trying to teach my children to have some respect for the place in which they live and play, but if the so-called adults in the controlling Liberal Party are vandals, what chance do the children have with that example?
I am not a member of any party.
K. Lee,.
AN angry warden has slammed thieves who stole cash collected by a group of pensioners to go towards a new hospice in Darlington.
Doreen Johnson, warden at the Dalkeith House old folks complex said villains who made off with a large whisky bottle filled with coins were the lowest of the low.
Pensioners at the complex have been collecting money to help the town's hospice appeal for the last two years.
Mrs Johnson said: ‘We left the bottle on a table in the communal lounge and whenever a resident had a pocketful of change they would put it in.
The bottle held about £17.’
But the bottle disappeared last week and, despite a thorough search, it has failed to turn up.
Undaunted, Mrs Johnson said she hopes pensioners continue fund raising.
‘I am sure the residents will continue.
They know that every little bit helps.’
BLUNDERING builders who have made residents' lives a misery are set to be hauled over the coals by angry councillors.
Neighbours say a new flats development in Sun Street, Darlington, has created no end of problems.
They have complained about the noise and mess caused by builders working on apartments for the elderly.
Others have called on the council to step in and tell the firm to put its house in order.
One resident says he has been unable to get out of his back garden after a lorry backed into the wall and buckled the gate.
Another says he has been unable to open his garage door for days after a skip filled with bricks was dumped outside.
Now fed-up councillors are planning to meet officials from the Re-Roof Housing Association.
They say contractors are infringing the authority's new builders' code of conduct.
And Coun Bill Dixon, chairman of the Labour council's Housing Committee, has warned that the authority would think twice about any future developments unless something is done.
He said: ‘We have put an awful lot of money into the site.
It was sold to the Housing Association at a reduced value in order to make it viable.
‘Ward councillors have received a number of complaints and we will be contacting the Association, asking them to make the builders behave in a responsible manner.’
If the problems were not put right, Coun Dixon warned: ‘We would be very sceptical of any housing association which used them in future.
‘They are supposed to be doing a job of work to house people not making residents’ lives a misery.’
Ward councillor Eleanor Young visited the site after receiving a number of complaints.
She said: ‘The mess was unbelievable.
There was mud all over the place.
I know they are working on a building site but we are just fed-up with this disruption.’
Teenagers hurt as car goes into ditch
TWO teenagers were taken to hospital after their car went out of control and plunged into a ditch.
Ann Pattinson, 15, of Daddryshield, Weardale, is believed to have suffered a broken leg and minor head injuries.
The driver, David Esteris, 18, of The Causeway, Wolsingham, suffered cuts and bruises.
Both were taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital for treatment.
The accident happened at about 11.30am yesterday on the A689 near Stanhope.
Barn plan:
Planning applications have been received by Wear Valley District Council to convert a barn at Stockley Burn, Frosterley, into a house, to use a shop at Maude Terrace, St Helens, Auckland, as a veterinary surgery and to use a shop at Laurel Gardens, Crook, as a hot food take-away.
House burgled:
Burglars forced a window at a house on St Andrews Road, Bishop Auckland, on Friday night and stole a video and television.
Bungalow plans:
Plans have ben submitted to Wear Valley District Council to build two bungalows on land next to Hillbeck Street, South Church, Bishop Auckland, a bungalow at Acorn Drive, Oakenshaw, and a bungalow on land off Salisbury Place, Bishop Auckland.
Market theft:
Tricksters stole £200 in cash from a stall at Darlington covered market on Saturday afternoon after diverting the attention of staff.
Drivers warned over break-ins
POLICE have warned motorists to be on their guard after another spate of car break-ins in Darlington.
A spokesman said motorists should never leave valuables in their vehicles and make sure all doors are locked.
Cars in Arran Walk and Gleneagles Road were broken into over the weekend.
Knocked down:
An 82-year-old woman was knocked over by cyclists outside her home in Staindrop Road, Darlington, on Saturday.
Bikes stolen:
Three mountain bikes worth a total of £670 were stolen from outside the Co-op in Fenby Avenue, Darlington, on Saturday evening while their owners were shopping inside.
Radio thefts:
Thieves stole a £200 radio cassette player from a Vauxhall Cavalier car in Surtees Street, Darlington.
A £165 radio cassette player was also taken from a car parked in North Road.
Video taken:
A Sanyo video worth £325, £90 in cash and jewellery were stolen in a burglary at a house in Hazel Avenue, Darlington, on Saturday evening.
House burgled:
Burglars stole a video recorder and stereo worth £864 from a house in Lynton Gardens, Darlington, on Saturday evening.
Spirits haul:
Nineteen bottles of assorted spirits and £600 in cash was stolen in a burglary at a house in Belgrave Street, Darlington, on Saturday.
House raid:
A Mitubishi video recorder worth £475 was stolen in a burglary at a house in Widgeon Road, Darlington, between Friday evening and the early hours of Saturday morning.
SUNDAY trading laws were branded a ‘farce’ yesterday by Darlington councillor Bill Dixon.
Coun Dixon (Lab) said the borough council had paid up to a week's salary in overtime in November and December last year to monitor Sunday opening.
But he said: ‘Monitoring is all it is as we cannot prosecute.
This really is a farce and the Government needs to do something about it.’
Teenager hurt in car smash
TEENAGER Ann Pattinson, 15, of Daddry Shield, was said to be ‘fairly comfortable’ in Darlington Memorial Hospital yesterday after breaking her leg in a car crash near Stanhope on Sunday.
Driver David Esteris, 18, of The Causeway, Wolsingham, has been released from hospital.
He had suffered cuts and bruises.
Wall vandalised:
Spennymoor town councillors will this week consider the vandalism of a stone wall, repaired last year, at the Holy Innocents closed churchyard.
Bike reward:
The owner of a £370 mountain bike stolen from a garden in Fenby Avenue, Darlington on Sunday evening has offered a reward of £50 for information leading to its return.
Anyone who can help should contact Darlington CID on .
House raid:
A satellite receiver, a portable television and video recorder and a teletext television worth £800 were stolen in a burglary at a house in Headlam Road, Darlington.
Burglary haul:
Burglars made off with a Sekonda watch, a Panasonic television, a video recorder and a music centre worth £750 from a house in Humber Place, Darlington.
False claim:
Karen Noddings, 18, of Emley Moor Road, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with making false representation to obtain social security benefit.
She was ordered to pay £568.04 compensation and £50 costs.
Case adjourned:
Ian Shaun Pritchard, 27, of Forest Moor Road, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with fear or provocation of violence and resisting a police constable.
The case was adjourned until May 1 and Pritchard was given unconditional bail.
Burglary charges:
Trevor Baird, 30, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with theft, burglary and receiving stolen goods.
The case was adjourned until March 9 and Baird, of Chandos Street, was given conditional bail.
Bound over:
Three women appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with causing harassment, alarm or distress.
Jacqueline Hopps, 30, of Parkside, Andrea Michelle Kindred, 19, of Martindale Road, Michelle Ann Wood, 23, of Leafield Road, were bound over in £100 for fighting outside Brannegans bar.
Richard William Dunn, 39, of Vine Street, was also bound over for obstructing a police constable.
Persecution of the heroes
REPORTS state that Romania is breaking the Peace Treaties of Paris and the Helsinki Agreement.
The Securitate has regained its former power and keeps the minorities in the same old state of terror and repression.
Threats have been made against Bishop Laszlo Tokes, including the confiscation of his official residence, the fouling of his house, circulation of false rumours that he harboured King Michael, letters predicting the deaths of him and his relations, threatening his children's teacher, and his doctors.
A people's court sentenced him to death, and put a bounty on his head.
Virtually all the Hungarians, particularly their leaders, are similarly treated.
A trial of 100 Hungarian intellectuals accused of persecuting Romanians has begun.
Bolyai University for the Hungarian minority has not been reopened.
In Tirgu Mures an institution for Hungarians most Hungarian professors have been retired, and not replaced by younger Hungarians.
The Hungarian Autonomous Region has not been reconstructed.
Minority schools have not been returned.
The property of the Uniate Church remains alienated.
Many from Transylvania who fought for the downfall of Ceaucescu are persecuted, whilst his defenders are treated as heroes.
N.G. Lillywhite,.
Keep up pressure
IT IS pleasing that there has been a stay of execution on the proposed closure of the Redmire branch line and that it will remain open for the next six months.
I would say to the people of the Yorkshire Dales that the problem has not gone away, and this time should be used to write to British Rail and British Steel, and to call upon local authorities to get together to retain this line and to stop heavy lorries disrupting in the Dales.
This is a unique chance for them to retain the use of this line and I urge them to keep up the pressure.
David McGregor, Divisional Organiser, National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers, North East Division,.
CONSCIOUS:
As reported (Echo, Feb 12) the solicitor defending British Steel against a charge of polluting the River Tees said: ‘The company is extremely environmentally conscious.’
I should be interested to hear how this consciousness can square with their proposal to instigate over 100 heavy lorry journeys a day from Wensleydale to Redcar instead of one train in each direction.
Sally Hoddy, 21 Mere Drive, Pity Me, Durham.
IN his attempt to retain power John Major is, not unnaturally, trawling the country in search of support.
He may be judged excessively optimistic, however, if not utterly desperate, in seeking the votes of leading opposition politicians.
A letter from the Prime Minister outlining his record and his vision for the future was sent last week to the Labour leader of Darlington Council, Coun John Williams.
The same missive (it has characteristic Mr Nice Guy touches like ‘I hope I have shown that you can trust me in difficult times as well as easier ones’) went to the deputy leader, Coun Bill Dixon.
It brings to mind the old dictum that a Tory soliciting the vote of one prominent Labourite may be regarded as a misfortune, but to solicit the vote of two looks like carelessness.
As at least four other Darlington Labour councillors have received Mr Major's plea, a fifth of the ruling group, it begins to look as if the wheels may have fallen off the Conservative administrative process altogether.
‘Not at all,’ insisted the press officer at Tory HQ in Smith Square, London, sounding as a Tory lady should.
‘These letters go out very largely in areas which are already mainly Conservative so that we are not wasting our time.’
‘Like every other organisation we buy a copy of the electoral register and distribute letters using that.’
Upon being reminded that Darlington was the sort of marginal constituency the Party may like to win she assumed then that the recipients must live in Tory wards.
(Coun Dixon does, Coun Williams doesn't).
It was not at all, she emphasised, now sounding the kind of Tory lady who wears large hats, embarrassing that the PM's letter had gone to two Labour men.
After all, there was bound to be an element of cross matching, was there not?
‘We're quite happy, you know, to take donations from anybody,’ she said.
Couns Williams and Dixon confirmed that their view of Mr Major's achievements and thoughts for the future differed from his, that they would not be sending donations and that they thought it was a complete cock-up.
‘I think it's going to be an extremely dirty campaign,’ said Coun Dixon and wondered if the Labour candidate Alan Milburn had received the letter.
‘But we won't be asking for any of the Conservatives to join us.’
His leader, musing on the fact that target mail was well wide of the target just like Tory policies, said he would reply.
Succinctly.
Moorland blaze:
A dropped light is being blamed for a moorland blaze that broke out on the Catterick Training Area, near Richmond, early yesterday.
The fire, which broke out at about 1.30am, destroyed a 25m by 30m patch of gorse on the Gandale Farm part of the training area.
Firemen from Richmond were at the scene for about 90 minutes.
Cafe break-in:
Thieves escaped with about £4,000 in cash after they broke into a safe at Marwood's Garage in Darlington Road, Richmond.
The burglary happened between Sunday night and Monday morning.
Raiders strike:
Burglars raided a Northallerton factory.
They made off with £200 cash from Sashless Windows, on the edge of the Standard Way industrial estate.
A LONG-DISTANCE driver died yesterday as he cleaned his lorry.
Tony Dobson was found dead in the yard at Roundhill Farm, Roundhill Road, near Hurworth, where he often used steam equipment to clean the Volvo articulated lorry.
Last night a County Durham police spokeswoman revealed Mr Dobson's death appeared to be connected to the steam cleaner, which was still working when his body was found.
There were no suspicious circumstances and an inquest would be opened.
The Health and Safety Inspectorate was informed of the incident and representatives from the electricity board had been asked to go to the scene.
Darlington police and ambulance were alerted just after 10am, but Mr Dobson, of Lewes Road, Darlington, was certified dead at the scene.
Frank Robinson, who lives at Roundhill Farm, told how Mr Dobson used his son-in-law Keith Tinkler's equipment usually when he returned home from abroad.
He said he had got to know Mr Dobson through his girlfriend Angela Bell who kept a horse at the farm.
And he added Mr Dobson had returned just last week from a working trip to Turkey.
‘He was one of the nicest young men you could wish to meet,’ said Mr Robinson.
‘He was always very helpful and polite.
He was often away a fortnight or three weeks at a time, but he came back here to use the cleaner.’
Mr Dobson, whom police said was about 40, had lived with Ms Bell, a receptionist, at their Darlington home for the last two years.
His neighbour Margaret Mace said: ‘We used to chat on the doorstop.
He was a very nice person, always pleasant and friendly.’
A COUNCIL leader has defended the decision to snub a delegation from the South African government visiting the NorthEast.
Darlington borough council refused to see the South African visitors including diplomat Pierrette Grobler, who has special responsibility for the North-East.
Labour leader John Williams said it was the authority's policy not to have an official contact with the South African government.
But Tories have attacked the decision and say a golden opportunity to boost foreign trade links could have been lost.
South Africa counsellor Peter Schabort and Miss Grobler contacted the authority as part of their North-East fact-finding mission.
Mr Schabort said: ‘At first they seemed quite eager but then I received a letter saying it was not council policy to meet with South African officials.
‘It is just one of those things which happens from time to time.’
Miss Grobler said she hoped the council's attitude would soften and members would agree to meet her.
‘So many things are changing in South Africa at the moment it would be nice to discuss them,’ she added.
Coun Williams said he had merely been following council policy.
But he added: ‘I think it might have been a little bit too early.
The South Africans have made strides forward but let's wait and see what happens.’
Tory Peter Jones said it was time South Africa was brought in from the cold.
‘Darlington could miss out on foreign trade opportunities if it doesn't begin an enlightened dialogue with these people.’
Vagrant stole from freezer
A homeless man who was sleeping rough around Darlington appeared before the town's magistrates yesterday after he was stopped by police walking through the town with a bag of frozen food.
Lee Lawson, 21, admitted he had stolen the food from a private garage where there was a freezer crammed with groceries.
He was given a 12-month probation order after admitting burglary and breaking a community service order.
Buyers aware:
Car buyers in the North-East are racing to check vehicles against national computer records as part of a new initiative against auto crime.
Vehicle information organisation HPI, which has opened its computer register containing details of four million cars, says its switchboard has been swamped after it launched a pilot scheme in the region last month.
Founder's day:
A new national organisation will be launched this weekend to campaign to protect small historic towns and villages and among the founder members is Kirsty Thomas, secretary of the Save Our City group, which has been at the forefront of battles over development schemes in Durham City.
Hammer gang:
Four men were on the run last night after smashing their way with a sledgehammer into Harper's jeweller's shop in Montpelier Parade, Harrogate.
They grabbed trays of rings and brooches before escaping in a stolen car.
Truck stop:
Euro MP Stephen Hughes is taking up the case of lorry driver Bob Elder, 47, of South View, Tantobie, Stanley, who faces financial ruin because his truck has been impounded after he was involved in a fatal accident in Italy.
Couple injured:
A 75-year-old man and his 73-year-old wife suffered burns and smoke inhalation after a fire at their home in Wiggington, near York yesterday.
Women's own:
Durham Green Party is launching its own women's campaign this week in the run up to International Women's Day on Sunday March 8.
BRIAN Thomas Jackson, of Danek Motors in Darlington, last week admitted three charges under the Trades Descriptions Act.
Gadfly readers may find his name, and that of his company, rather familiar.
It is the same Brian Thomas Jackson who in May 1990 was described by a Crown Court judge as ‘quite plainly a thoroughly dishonest and unscrupulous motor trader.’
It is the same Brian Thomas Jackson who in 1982 was refused a credit broker's licence because of previous convictions for dishonest dealing.
Yet Jackson and his company continue to trade.
In a town where the council uses its powers to insist on the colour of a brick wall or to ban taxi drivers virtually for picking their nose on duty there seems nothing to prevent such a man from selling cars.
In last week's case Jackson was fined a derisory £900 on three charges involving an Austin Montego.
He had claimed its 1.3 engine was 1.6.
In court Jackson's defence suggested that The Northern Echo had wrongly printed his advertisements.
Our readers may have their own views on whom to believe about that.
They may also like to think very carefully about where to go when buying a second hand car.
WHAT with Paddy Ashdown dancing attendance on Friday night and their laugh-a-minute Victoria making him an uncle again come May, these are clearly happy days for Wear Valley council leader Chris Foote Wood.
As one of the Northern League's two unpaid Press officers, he was doubtless pretty pleased also at Monday's announcement that the council is to provide a major financial leg up for the district's four NL clubs.
While cost cutting elsewhere, Wear Valley will give the clubs up to £8,000 apiece to help meet new League ground regulations with the proper proviso that they first raise a similar amount themselves.
Each of the four clubs West Auckland, Crook, Tow Law and Willington has known very much better days.
Facilities need major improvement; crowds are often below 50.
Bishop Auckland are the best known team of all, of course, but they're now in Another League and doing badly.
(And so much, in any case, for the suggestion that Bishop gets preferential treatment from the Liberals.)
Whatever others might say, Gadfly is also a Northern League man and cheers the proposal to the rafters.
It may not be echoed up on Stanley Hill Top, however, where once mighty Stanley United are chasing promotion from the Wearside League second division.
Stanley have ambitions to rejoin the Northern League.
We understand, however, that the council's offer of assistance has so far been rather less generous.
Something in the region of two footballs, apparently.
DETECTIVES are investigating after a teenager was threatened and robbed of cash on his way to the bank.
Two men thought to be about 19 struck when the 18year-old was on his way from work in Crown Street, Darlington, with the firm's takings.
They took him to Melland Street near Darlington Civic Theatre, where they stole the money he was carrying.
Yesterday Acting Detective Inspector Colin Gibson, of Darlington CID, said the teenager suffered a slight cut to his face after trying to struggle away from the two.
A police spokeswoman said the men got away with ‘a large amount of money.’
The victim told police one man, who was about 6ft 2in, had ACAB tattooed across the knuckles of his right hand.
He had short dark hair and was wearing a red sweatshirt with black and yellow writing on it and green tracksuit bottoms with a yellow stripe on the side.
The other man had brown hair and a wispy moustache and wore faded denim jeans and a grey woollen jumper.
Police want to talk to anyone who was in the Crown Street, Priestgate or Melland Street areas at about 4.40pm on Monday or anyone who saw the three as they walked to Melland Street.
Contact Darlington Police on .
Driver so drunk he had to stay in cells
AN Edinburgh man was so drunk when police stopped his car he had to be kept overnight before he could be charged, a court heard yesterday.
Patrick Wilson, 46, appeared before Darlington magistrates charged with driving with excess alcohol on Woodland Road, Darlington.
Magistrates banned Wilson, who is working as a labourer in the Darlington area, from driving for three years and fined him £350.
Mystery death:
Mystery still surrounds the death of 42-year-old widow Yvonne Patterson, of Geneva Road, Darlington.
An inquest opened yesterday where the coroner heard Mrs Patterson had been depressed and receiving hospital treatment.
Veteran's medal:
Navy veteran Bert Pallister, 73, of Raby Road, Ferryhill, proudly showed off a medal awarded after 50 years for his service protecting Soviet merchant ships during World War Two.
Getting the medal has spurred him to try to make contact with old friend and ship's cook on HMS London, Alfie Freeman.
Mr Pallister believes Mr Freeman, who was from Darlington, could still be living in the area.
Buyer looking for suppliers
THE Darlington Business Link is a free service from Darlington Business Venture aimed at matching customers' needs with suppliers in the area.
DBL would like to hear from locally-based companies able to supply the following:— Gold card edge connectors for the electronic industry.
— Printed carrier bags.
— Plastic delivery trays for a bakery. — Good second-hand commercial motor spares.
— Laboratory services for analysis equipment.
Enquiries should be made to Ken Lee, at Darlington Business Venture, Telephone .
In receivership:
Style Jewellery of Byker Bridge, Newcastle, has been placed in receivership with the loss of 14 jobs.
Michael Appleby, joint administrative receiver of Sunderland accountant Latham Crossley & Davis said the company has been hit by the reduction of public spending on luxury goods.
FARMER'S wife Mary Watson drowned herself when she heard her husband had only six months to live.
An inquest in Darlington heard that the 56-year-old woman was distraught at the news her husband Thompson Watson was terminally ill with cancer.
Her daughter Brenda Robinson, of Middleton-in-Teesdale, told South-West Durham coroner Colin Penna how she found her mother's body in a remote water tank on her parents' farm.
Mrs Robinson said: ‘I went with my husband to the farm and we found a note which said ‘I can't live without him’.’
They raced across the fields at Roger Moore Farm, Egglestone, until she got to the water tank.
Two days earlier the family had been told that tests at Darlington Memorial Hospital confirmed Mr Watson was terminally ill.
She described how over the next 24 hours her mother's mood swung from the depths of depression to coping well.
Mrs Watson had never suffered from depression before and a pathologist confirmed she had no signs of natural disease.
Mr Penna said Mrs Watson's death was a sad case of a hardworking and healthy woman who had decided she could not live without her husband.
He recorded a verdict that Mrs Watson took her own life.
DARLINGTON councillors are to debate their controversial policy of shunning links with South Africa.
Members of the local authority are set to review their links after a South African delegation, on a fact finding mission to the North-East, were refused a meeting with council leaders.
The South African visitors have said they are not surprised at the local reaction and have expressed a wish to re-open dialogue.
But furious Tories say the authority could have thrown away a golden opportunity.
Coun Peter Jones has put forward a special motion to the next full council meeting on March 26.
He wants the authority to re-think its policy.
Coun Jones said he was also writing to the South Africa embassy to apologise, adding: ‘I want them to know that not every councillor in Darlington believes their country should be an international pariah.’
The visit could have been a chance to establish links with another country, he added.
Coun leader John Williams says he was just following official policy and any attempt to re-establish links before the South African referendum later this month would have been premature.
DISTRICT councillors have agreed to go ahead with plans to introduce car parking charges despite objections.
Richmondshire District Council agreed to make the order announcing the pay and display scheme which will start on June 1.
The scheme will make The Fosse at Richmond riverside into a short stay car park at 50p for a maximum of two hours between 8am and 6pm.
The same charge will apply to the north and south car parks in Victoria Road, which were made short stay car parks a few years ago.
Charges at long stay car parks Nun's Close and Yorke Square, both in Richmond, rear of Leyburn Market Place, Gayle Lane, Hawes, and Muker car park in Swaledale will have a maximum waiting time of ten hours with a scale of charges running from 40p for the first two hours and thereafter 20p per hour up to a maximum of £1 per day.
Annual parking permits will be available at £10 for Richmondshire residents and £50 for non-residents.
A quarterly one will also be available for £15.
There were objections to various aspects of the proposals.
People who work in Richmond but live in Darlington feel it is unfair to be charged £50 for a permit.
Those who live near Yorke Square car park fear drivers will park around The Green and up the narrow nearby streets rather than pay for the car park.
The Coach Drivers Club felt that £5 per day or part of a day for a coach was unreasonable for coaches only visiting the town for up to two hours.
Richmond Town Council believes The Fosse should be a long stay car park because it used by day trippers who spend their day at the riverside.
Leyburn parish council feels that the charges will worsen parking problems in the town.
However, district councillors felt that none of the objections justified any changes to the proposed order and agreed to go ahead with the scheme.
The car park charging scheme will cost £67,000 but the council expects the income from charges to be greater than the cost of setting up the scheme in the first year.
The introduction of car parking charges ends years of debate about the issue.
Richmondshire District Council said it was forced to bring in charges if money was to be found to maintain existing car parks and create new ones.
TWO Darlington men brandishing a handgun and a crowbar forced their way into the home of a business partner, a court heard.
Christopher Boyle and Darren Mills had struck a deal with David Hawthorne over the sale of t-shirts.
But they were unhappy with the deal and allegedly forced their way into Mr Hawthorne's home in Hopemoor Place, Darlington, two days later, the court heard.
Yesterday Boyle, of Edge Moor Road, and Mills, of Emley Moor Road, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and denied aggravated burglary and assault causing actual bodily harm to Mr Hawthorne.
Duncan Smith, prosecuting, said the two men were unhappy with the business deal and went to Mr Hawthorne's home with a crowbar and a handgun.
He said: ‘With these articles they forced their way into the house by knocking on the door and when Mr Hawthorne answered they entered.
‘There was a struggle during which Mr Hawthorne was hit on the head by Boyle with the crowbar.
He managed to escape and alerted police.’
But Boyle, 21, said he and Mills had gone to ask if Mr Hawthorne had managed to sell the t-shirts.
He then asked Boyle for £30 for cannabis which he had given them earlier and when Boyle refused to pay until the t-shirts were sold Boyle claims he was attacked.
Boyle said: ‘He just freaked out on us.
He grabbed the crowbar and went to hit me with it.
I put my hand up to stop it and he caught my hand and cut me.’
Boyle showed the jury a scar which he claimed had been caused by the crowbar.
He said Mr Hawthorne then tried to grab a bowl but Mills, 18, knocked it out of his hand.
Boyle said: ‘I was trying to keep hold of him so he couldn't get at me.
‘He got away from me and came for me with his fists.
I went to punch him but I caught him with the crowbar instead.’
The case continues.
PEOPLE living near a disused engineering works in Darlington yesterday welcomed the news that it could soon be demolished.
The North View Engineering Works, in Harris Street, has been branded an eyesore which has become home to rats who scavenge in nearby houses making life misery for neighbours.
A woman living in Melsonby Crescent, which backs on to the plant, told Darlington council's planning applications committee she would no longer put up with the ‘disgraceful conditions’.
But planning officers were unhappy with building new houses on the site.
These would overlook homes in Melsonby Crescent.
Labour councillors say they would rather have flats backing on to the gardens than rats and rubbish.
The Labour councillors voted to overturn the officers' recommendation and give permission for the works to be demolished.
A FISH and chip restaurant which has stood empty in Darlington for the last three years looks set for a new lease of life.
Schooners Restaurant, in Bondgate, has been the subject of planning applications since 1989 when the restaurant closed.
Yesterday members of Darlington council planning committee heard it was doubt over the future of the Darlington inner ring road which had delayed the decision.
Now Leeds-based developers Dockbuild have three options for altering the building.
They have permission to turn it into a pub, a small office block or a complete three storey office.
Company architect Duncan Biggin said yesterday Dockbuild is a responsible company.
‘We are not the kind of developers who drive around in Rolls Royces puffing big cigars,’ he said.
But he and his colleagues have been frustrated by the continued delays over the future of the property.
It was to have been compulsorily purchased to make way for the final stage of the inner ring road until that scheme was dropped.
Mr Biggin said several companies have expressed an interest in the property but pulled out because of the delays.
If the building is turned into a pub the distinctive glass canopy, which dates back to the days when it was a garage, will be retained.
If it is turned into an office it will all be demolished.
Coun Philip Stamford Bewlay (Con) said he did not want to see another pub in the town centre but officers said that was not an issue the planning committee is entitled to discuss.
POLICE want graffiti threatening a Darlington officer to be removed.
The 2ft letters are on a wall opposite the junction of Haughton Road and Hundens Lane, Darlington.
Anyone with information should contact police on Darling ton .
ELECTRICAL problems set a car on fire in the centre of Darlington yesterday causing traffic tailbacks on the inner ring road.
The X-registration Ford Cortina estate was being driven down Commercial Street when a fire started beneath the dashboard.
The driver escaped without injury.
He contacted the fire service who hosed the burning car.
Long queues had formed before the car was towed away by police.
AN animal lover has hit out at youths who use catapults to injure ducks in a Darlington park.
The Darlington woman, who does not want to be named for fear of reprisals, launched her criticism after spotting four boys aged about ten pelting stones at ducks near South Park.
She inquired at the trading standards department about the legality of catapults but was told they were sold at fishing tackle shops because anglers use them to hurl their bait into the water.
LIGHTS should be put up in dark Darlington lanes to help cut down crime, a shopkeeper said yesterday.
Frank Allen, from Frank and Chris's corner shop in Corporation Road, has gathered a 300-name petition for lighting in the back alleys of the Denes area.
He said: ‘These are all old back-to-back properties and a haven for thieves.
So many houses have been burgled here and old people are afraid to come out at night.
‘I am sure putting up lights would not cost a lot and it would give us peace of mind.’
Ward councillor Eleanor Young (Lab) said: ‘It would be an excellent idea.
The petition has now been passed on to Durham County Council.’
Alert over conmen:
Police have issued a warning after tricksters stole money from a 71-year-old woman's home in Hundens Lane, Darlington, at about 11am on Tuesday.
While one man talked to her, the other ran into the house and stole cash and property.
Lifted:
Darlington police want to hear from anyone who has had weights and bars stolen in burglaries at their homes.
Anyone who would like to see the property should contact Darlington Police on Darlington  extension 204 between Monday and Friday.
Taken:
Thieves stole an Osaki UR410 video recorder from Bright Street, Darlington; a tent from Teesway, Neasham; and a video recorder from Emley Moor Road, Darlington.
DARLINGTON MP Michael Fallon has been accused of abusing the House of Commons post system by sending party propaganda to his constituents.
The claims have been made by Jarrow Labour MP Don Dixon.
He told the Commons he has passed on complaints about Mr Fallon's alleged abuse of Parliament's pre-paid mailing facilities to the Serjeant at Arms.
Yesterday a spokesman for the Serjeant at Arms, who is responsible for monitoring members' behaviour, said the accusations against Mr Fallon would be investigated ‘in due course’.
The Conservative junior minister was unavailable for comment last night but issued a statement through his secretary claiming the investigation has been dropped.
Mr Dixon, who is Labour's deputy chief whip, said he made the public allegation because he was tired of Tory MPs using Commons Points of Order to accuse opposition MPs of misdemeanours.
He told the House on Tuesday: ‘Any type of combat suits me.
If the Tories want to bring up cases at Points of Order I am prepared to do so.’
Mr Dixon told the House that Francis Maude (Con), financial secretary to the Treasury, has had to repay postage on 4,552 pre-paid envelopes.
The Serjeant at Arms has accepted £1,406 from Mr Maude's constituency party for stationery, envelopes and first class postage.
Yesterday Mr Dixon confirmed he had made a formal complaint about Mr Fallon based on information received from another member.
The row broke out in the Commons after Tory MP Robin Squire claimed Labour party propaganda had been found beside a Commons photocopier.
BRITISH Rail is well within its target for trains arriving on time, said a spokeswoman.
The North-East network has set a target that 90pc of short distance trains for example from Newcastle to Sunderland should arrive within five minutes of scheduled times.
Long distance trains from Darlington to Hartlepool or Newcastle to Carlisle should arrive within ten minutes.
The spokeswoman said: ‘We have already exceeded the Charter this year.
In the first two months 90 per cent of short distance trains turned up after five minutes and 96 per cent of long distance trains turned up after ten minutes.
‘We admit there was a time when the North-East service was among the worst in the country in terms of reliability but we have had a massive turnaround of fortune.’
BRITISH Rail is to unveil a multi-million pound project to improve the scenery for travellers on the North-East network in the next few weeks.
BR has joined forces with 15 local authorities to carry out improvements to the trackside view on key routes.
The North-East Railside Revival project follows the success of a £6m upgrading of the Darlington line which won several environmental awards.
A BR spokeswoman said experts were still working on plans to improve links between Bishop Auckland and Saltburn, Hartlepool and Newcastle and the East Coast main line.
Among ideas being considered are landscaping, tree planting, screening of trackside eyesores and a big clean-up campaign.
Work is expected to take several years.
BR hopes to officially launch the scheme in a few weeks.
The spokeswoman said: ‘We are considering a wide variety of schemes which will make a significant improvement for people using the North-East rail network.’
Officials believe the trackside improvements will encourage more people to let the train take the strain.
‘Millions of people travel to the region every year many of them for the first time and we want to make sure that the lasting impression they take with them is a good one.’
District and county councils have given the scheme their full support and hope the programme will meet with the same success as Darlington's pioneering Railside Revival scheme.
The five-year project has resulted in a facelift for the line which has been recognised with several national awards.
Ray Sunman, the Darlington council officer who helped coordinate the project, said: ‘I believe our success has influenced a great many projects that came after it.
‘The North-East programme will result in a better service and a more pleasant journey for rail travellers.’
TEN passengers escaped injury when their train was derailed after it collided with a herd of cattle straying on a line in Co Durham, last night.
Eight cows were killed and three badly injured just outside Shildon station, on the Darlington to Bishop Auckland line.
Car theft:
Thieves stole a car from the Applegarth in Northallerton.
It was later recovered but valuables worth £250 were missing.
These included a green wax jacket, walking and rubber boots, tapes and a rug.
Burglars strike:
Intruders broke into a garage and used tools from it to break into a bungalow.
Nothing was stolen from the bungalow in Morton-on-Swale, near Northallerton, but £30 damage was caused to the bathroom window.
Fares up:
Taxi fares in Darlington could rise next month after cabbies objected to a rise in the cost of taxi vehicle licences.
From April 1 a single hackney carriage licence will go up from £150 to £220 and a private hire will go up from £150 to £200.
This will give Darlington Council an extra £25,600 a year.
Convent plan:
A convent on Stanhope Road South, Darlington the former home of the Daughters of Charity is likely to be transformed into a block of 16 bedsits by Stephen Thompson who bought the building a year ago.
Burnt out:
A Bedford van stolen from Lowson Street, Darlington, has been found burnt out near the disused railway bridge in Arnold Road.
Vandals had caused £2,000 worth of damage.
A PEDESTRIANISATION scheme which has angered disabled groups in Darlington is to come into force from March 29.
The scheme, which is to be put into action on an experimental basis, was approved by Durham County Council last month.
Under the new rules all traffic, including cyclists, will be excluded from Darlington's Skinnergate and High Row between 10.30am and 4pm.
And there are to be no special exemptions for disabled drivers.
A report to Darlington Council's Town Centre Policy Group today reveals Duke Street is to be narrowed at the east of Raby Terrace to one lane over the weekend of March 28 and 29.
A bollard will be put up to prevent unauthorised traffic entering between 10.30am and 4pm.
A leaflet, which outlines the plans as a way of making the town a safer and better place is to be, is available for traders and their customers in the pedestrianised area.
SECURITY procedures have been upgraded after thieves stole keys to 500 old people's homes in Darlington.
A small army of council workers and private companies were called in to change hundreds of locks after the keys disappeared last week.
All the locks have now been replaced.
Mike Bennett, Darlington Council's director of community services, ordered a sweeping review of security procedures.
He said: ‘We have taken police advice on security and steps have been taken to tighten up our procedures.
‘However, there is no question of anyone being put at risk as a result of the disappearance of these keys.’
The keys were taken from a car parked in another town.
Thieves broke into the vehicle and gained access to the boot.
‘It was more than likely that the thieves didn't even realise what they had,’ said Mr Bennett.
‘However, we couldn't afford to take any chances and steps were taken to replace the locks as soon as the theft was reported.’
Coun Bill Dixon, chairman of the authority's housing committee, praised the efforts of council workers and private companies.
He said: ‘Obviously it was a very regrettable occurrence, but it is a sign of the times and the current crime wave we find ourselves suffering.’
TWO Darlington men were yesterday cleared of an attack upon a business partner.
A Teesside Crown Court jury found Christopher Boyle, 21, and Darren Mills, 18, not guilty of aggravated burglary and assault causing actual bodily harm to David Hawthorne.
It had been alleged that Mr Boyle, of Edge Moor Road, and Mr Mills, of Emley Moor Road, had walked into Mr Hawthorne's home with a crowbar and a handgun.
Mr Boyle was alleged to have struck him with the crowbar in a row over the sale of T-shirts.
But Mr Boyle told the court Mr Hawthorne, of Hopemoor Place, Darlington had become angry when he refused to pay £30 for cannabis until the T-shirts had been sold.
He said Mr Hawthorne had attacked him first, striking him with the crowbar on the hand.
A FORMER Darlington convent is likely to be transformed into a block of bedsits, it has been revealed.
Stephen Thompson wants to convert the Stanhope Road South convent, the home of the Daughters of Charity, into 16 bedsits.
Mr Thompson, who bought the building a year ago, has applied for planning permission from Darlington Council to change the use to a house in multiple occupation.
He said he hopes to live in the building himself.
He said members of the London-based Order had once lived at the convent but numbers had reduced when he bought it.
THE FUTURE of a controversial chemist's shop in Darlington is still in the balance.
The owner was yesterday due to appeal against a county court decision granting possession to Darlington Borough Council.
But Maurice Denham, council property manager, said the hearing at the Court of Appeal in London was postponed and will not now take place for months.
Mr Denham said he understood the pharmacy owners had wanted more time to prepare their case.
The council brought a civil action to regain control of land at Denmark Street leased to Plansweep Ltd which built a chemist's there.
The council says the 1987 lease states a pharmacy could only be built there if a doctor's surgery was on the site as well.
POLICE are appealing to the public to be on the look-out for stolen goods after an industrial estate suffered a blitz of crime.
Newton Aycliffe's industrial estate has suffered a series of burglaries and car crime this week.
The incidents included a break-in at a furniture factory when several three piece suites were stolen, a raid on a secure compound when steel barrels were stolen and theft of soldering equipment.
Sgt Alan Bewley, of Newton Aycliffe police, said a red and green lorry, registration E817 CVO with ‘C Butts Ltd’ on the side, had been stolen and a car broken into.
‘People should be aware that these have been taken.
If they are offered three piece suites they should be suspicious and if they see any of these things they should report it to us.
‘Anyone with any information about these incidents should telephone us on Darlington  we would appreciate any help we can get,’ said Sgt Bewley.
Man in court on indecency charge
A NEWTON Aycliffe man charged with indecent assault has been committed to Teesside Crown Court.
Douglas McDonald, 41, of Kirkstone Place, was committed by Sedgefield magistrates yesterday and released on conditional bail.
DIY theft:
A lawnmower, a hedge trimmer and a hammer drill worth £250 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Denton Close, Darlington.
Stacks stolen:
Thieves have stolen ornamental chimney pots in two separate incidents at Darlington homes.
They struck in Milbank Road where the pots were worth £50 and in Stanhope Road, where they were worth £100, on Wednesday afternoon.
Music burglary:
A Philips stack hifi system and CDs worth £850 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Haughton Road, Darlington.
Cans taken:
Two cans of Carlsberg lager worth £2.30 were stolen when vandals broke into a vehicle parked in Borough Road, Darlington, on Wednesday evening.
Bike alert:
A spate of mountain bike thefts in Newton Aycliffe has prompted a call by police to all bike owners to postcode and insure their cycles.
Car plea:
Police are asking the public to be on the look-out for blue Vauxhall Cavalier car stolen from Trimdon Colliery on Tuesday.
The car registration E566 BRB was taken from Laurel Crescent between 9pm and 10pm on Monday.
Any information should be given to Newton Aycliffe police on .
LIVES could be at risk if a traffic calming scheme goes ahead, it was claimed last night.
Residents from Lakeside, Darlington, said Durham County Council's plans to narrow their road and add speed humps could lead to serious accidents.
About 40 residents turned up at Darlington's Feethams Cricket Club to protest at the plans.
They said it would create more traffic and be dangerous for children and old people.
The county council plans to close the junction at Hammond Drive and Lorraine Crescent, making Lakeside and Coleridge Gardens the main entrance into the Skerne Park estate.
Yellow lines and speed humps would be put on the narrow road and a mini roundabout set up at the junction of Lakeside and Parkside.
But residents say this will make it difficult for emergency vehicles to get through.
Lakeside resident Denton Bell said: ‘Will we have to wait for somebody to die or for a building to burn down before something is done?’
Durham County Council say the increase in traffic would be minimal.
But residents were concerned about the traffic problems and danger from parked cars.
They felt the scheme would only create additional problems and would send more cars into Skerne Park which has already been earmarked by the county council as an accident blackspot.
Residents agreed to write individually to Durham County Council and Darlington MP Michael Fallon.
TWO YOUTHS miraculously escaped injury last night when the car they were travelling in crashed off a busy road and into a subway.
The incident happened at about 10.30pm at the subway in Northgate, Darlington.
The car, a Ford Fiesta, lost control on the nearby roundabout before crashing through railings and dropping about 15 feet into the subway, blocking the walkway completely.
The subway is popular with revellers walking from town centre pubs to late night bars, restaurants and a nightclub in Gladstone Street and North Road.
The accident happened just minutes before the usual Thursday night rush to late night drinking spots began.
The car is understood to be owned by the mother of the driver.
Both youths shaken but unhurt declined to talk about the incident.
SCHOOLS minister Michael Fallon last night underlined the Government's commitment to tackling dyslexia.
Speaking to the Darlington Branch of the Dyslexia Institute Mr Fallon, the town's MP, said: ‘Dyslexia is now a widely recognised term and more and more information is available to help those who are dyslexic.’
The treatment of dyslexia is a controversial issue in County Durham, where parents are campaigning for changes in the local education authority's attitude to the disability.
Mr Fallon said: ‘The Dyslexia Institute has come a long way since 1973 and has raised the profile of dyslexia in the country.
Its publications are widely read and genuinely helpful in clarifying issues for parents, teachers, and local education authorities.
‘My own department has not been standing still.
It has shown its commitment to ensure that all children with special needs, including dyslexics, receive the help they need as early as possible.’
He said the Department of Education had spent £10m on a reading recovery scheme to identify and remedy reading difficulties in young children.
About £250,000 had been spent over three years for work at the Dyslexic Centre and £34,000 went on research into the early identification of dyslexia.
The DoE has also published a Guide for Parents for Children with Special Needs and given advice to student primary teachers.
‘All the above indicates the serious way in which my department is fully committed to tackling the needs of children with special needs, including those with dyslexia,’ he said.
But provision for treating dyslexia in Mr Fallon's own constituency was described by an expert last night as mediocre.
Liz Brookes, from the Dyslexia Institute, said: ‘We have come a long way during the last year and progress is being made, but it is not enough.
And we would question the reading recovery amount.
But this whole thing is not about money, it's about policy and commitment.
‘It depends entirely where you live whether it's down to the school you are in or the local education authority.
It's very mediocre in the Darlington area and there is still a lot to do.’
One in 25 schoolchildren about 300,000 pupils are dyslexic and Ms Brookes said more work and effort was needed to help them.
— A feature on the campaign to improve the treatment of dyslexia in County Durham will appear in The Northern on Monday.
£8,000 haul by ram-raiders RAM-RAIDERS escaped with camcorders worth more than £8,000 after driving a stolen car through the windows of Northern Electric's showroom on Clifton Moor, York early yesterday.
The car, a Sierra, had been stolen on Thursday night from nearby Bilsdale Close and neighbouring forces have been alerted to look out for a stolen blue Ford Orion, registration number H814 FYM, which may also have been used in connection with the incident.
Food raid:
Thieves climbed on to the roof of The Little Chef at Staxton, broke in and raided food stores.
Nuts warning:
The RSPB has warned kindness could be killing finches at Whitby.
Nuts have been put out by bird lovers but it has resulted in several greenfinches being poisoned.
The society says only peanuts should be used.
House break-in:
Intruders at Kirklington, near Ripon.
They made off with a television and a video recorder worth £550.
Bird claim:
Police were interviewing a man yesterday alleged to have tried to steal a golden pheasant from a cage at a house at Chapelgarth, Great Broughton.
Car blaze:
Firefighters were called to a field near Masham to deal with a blazing Ford Sierra, believed to have been stolen.
Drivers unhurt:
A car and a tractor crashed near Bedale.
No one was injured in the accident on the A684 at Scruton crossroads.
Treasurer's death:
York Archaeological Trust has announced the death of its honorary treasurer, David Moulds, at the age of 59.
Moor blaze:
Firefighters spent much of yesterday tackling a blaze on Strensall Common near York.
Their efforts were hampered by recent dry weather and moderate winds fanning the flames.
Burglar ordered taxi to take haul
A BURGLAR stole a hi-fi from a house in Sunderland and then ordered a taxi to take it home.
The man is known to have ordered the taxi from a telephone kiosk between 5am and 6am at the junction of Ryhope Road and Askrigg Avenue in Sunderland on Sunday.
Police have appealed for witnesses.
School blaze:
Arsonists caused substantial damage to the roof of High Usworth Junior School in Washington on Thursday night.
Forest work:
Community wildlife officer Dave Muir and Ann Lolley of the Tidy Britain Group join local people to plant British wildflowers at the Children's Forest in Pennywell, Sunderland, on Wednesday.
MoT tests:
Drivers of light goods vehicles can now have MoT tests carried out in South Tyneside at the council's Middlefields depot.
THE two main title contenders both had bad results, and opened the door for two more teams to launch championship challenges on Saturday.
League leaders Whitby, with former Darlington assistant manager Tony McAndrew in their line-up at left back, were beaten 1–0 by fast-improving Peterlee.
The home side had plenty of pressure, but they were beaten by a goal from Peterlee centre half Stephen Routledge after half an hour.
Peterlee have now won their last five matches.
Second-placed Gretna, meanwhile, closed the gap by a point, but they were held to a 1–1 draw by second-bottom Shildon.
Les Armstrong gave Gretna the lead with a shot from the edge of the box midway through the first half, but Shildon levelled fifteen minutes from time through Micky Taylor after being set up by Colin Blackburn.
Those two results gave others hope.
Guisborough are now four points off the pace in third after hammering Langley Park 7–1 away from home.
They never looked back after Neil Hodgson put them in the lead after 24 minutes, Joe Peel adding tow more before half time.
Peel added another two after the interval, and hit the bar twice, with further goals coming from Mark Davis and Hodgson.
Gary Steadman grabbed Langley's consolation.
Murton also have enough games in hand to make a late challenge after winning 1–0 at Blue Star, Dave Evans heading the winner after 36 minutes.
Blue Star dominated the second half, but the Murton defence held on.
Northallerton surprisingly crashed 52 at home to Easington, after being level at half time.
Eddie Freeman gave Easington the lead, with Graham Curry cancelling that out, but Easington surged into the lead early in the second half with goals by Freeman, Micky Skirving and Allan Martin, and even though Jimmy Lagan pulled one back, Skirving wrapped up the points.
Billingham Synthonia finished off Blyth's championship hopes by beating them 2–1 at Central Avenue.
Paul O'Brien and Andrew Banks gave Billingham a two-goal interval lead, and even though Keith Mills pulled one back with a header, Blyth could not score another in a thrilling finish.
Two teams fighting relegation, Brandon and Whickham drew 3–3, with Brandon, who gave former Durham striker Robbie Dunbar his debut, coming from behind three times.
Derek Parkin, Darren Alberts and Ian Campbell put Whickham in the lead, but Martin Spragg, Andy Cunningham and Darren Palmer in turn equalised.
The other games finished as they started, goalless.
Consett and Seaham produced plenty of entertainment in their game, while the closest any side came to scoring in Ferryhill's clash with Tow Law was David Thompson's shot which Ferryhill player manager Kevin Simpson cleared off the line.
Second Division leaders Stockton stretched their lead at the top to points after they beat Hebburn 4–1.
Mark Jones gave Stockton a half time lead, with Tony Robinson equalising after the break.
But Stockton moved up a gear, and Mark Webster and Marty Moore (2) made sure of the points.
Hebburn's Les Tatum was sent off late in the game.
Second-placed Durham never recovered from a three goal blast in the first 20 minutes at Ryhope, going down 4–2.
Two goals from Peter Ould one of them a penalty after Tony Coyles was brought down and another from Lee Jensen put Ryhope well in command, and even though Micky Taylor pulled one back, Ould completed his hat-trick in the second half, with Ian Hindmarsh replying.
Chester-le-Street took advantage to overtake Durham by beating Bedlington 2–0, with second half goals by Steve Smith and Scott Bone.
Dunston surprisingly dropped points, in a 1–1 draw at Horden.
John Peacock gave them a perfect start with an early goal, but Steve Lonsdale cancelled it out.
Willington picked up their second win in three games with a 3–2 win over local rivals Crook Town.
They cruised into a three-goal lead with goals by Keith Adamson (2) and Craig Fish, but two strikes from Steve Wheldon set up a nervous finish.
Norton easily won 3–0 at Cleveland Bridge, with goals by George Woodhouse, Micheal Gilhooley and Chris Teesdale.
Evenwood were pegged back by a Darren Rawlston goal at home to Billingham Town after Sean Monaghan had put them ahead.
Shotton were held to a draw by Ashington.
Craig Smith put them ahead before Kevin Harmison levelled from the penalty spot.
SECURITY procedures have been upgraded after thieves stole keys to the homes of 500 old people in Darlington.
A small army of council workers and private companies were called in to change hundreds of locks after the keys disappeared last week.
All the locks have now been replaced.
Mike Bennett, Darlington council's director of community services, ordered a sweeping review of security procedures.
He said: ‘We have taken police advice on security and steps have been taken to tighten up our procedures.
‘However, there is no question of anyone being put at risk as a result of the disappearance of these keys.’
The keys were taken from a car parked in another town.
AN investigation is under way to discover why a train collided with a herd of cows.
British Rail engineers and workers will be combing the crash site near Shildon after the Saltburn Darlington train was derailed.
The two-car Pacer train had just emerged from a tunnel when it ploughed into 11 cows.
None of the 10 passengers were injured.
‘Our driver didn't stand a chance of stopping in time,’ said a BR spokesman.
Eight of the animals were killed instantly and the other three had to be put down.
The impact derailed the leading carriage and commuters had to use buses between Bishop Auckland and Shildon.
A team of BR investigators, including British Transport Police, are trying to establish how the cows strayed on to the line.
The BR spokesman said: It could have been something simple like a gate left open or something sinister like vandalism.’
VANDALISED fencing along a rail line in Darlington is to be repaired.
British Rail engineers visited the site at Wylam Hill, near Thompson Street East, yesterday to assess repair work.
The move comes months after Labour councillor Nick Thorne- Wallis wrote to BR over the lack of fencing at the site.
He said vandals could cause a train derailment if the fencing was not replaced soon.
Coun Thorne-Wallis said: ‘I was pleased they came along to check the fences.
There are whole stretches along the line where there is no fencing and posts have been pulled out.’
He said BR had agreed to repair the fence and planned to send out more people to monitor the situation.
A BR spokeswoman said the fencing would be repaired as quickly as possible.
Driver jumped a red traffic light
A DRIVER who jumped a red light did so by overtaking an off-duty policeman in his private car.
David Elliott overtook two waiting cars to go through temporary traffic lights at roadworks at Catterick Bridge, near Richmond, Leyburn magistrates were told.
He admitted failing to comply with a red signal and was fined £50, had three penalty points imposed on his licence and was ordered to pay £20 costs.
Rail cash:
Richmondshire District Council has agreed to give £500 to the Settle-Carlisle Railway Development Company, towards its work and development in 1992/93.
The company had asked for a £2,000 grant.
Man cut free from car after accident
A PENSIONER was taken to hospital with broken ribs after a two-car crash in Spennymoor.
John Byrne, 64, of Cleveland Avenue, Trimdon Village, had to be cut free from his car after the collision at 11.40 am yesterday.
Mr Byrne's wife, Esther, was also taken to hospital suffering from shock after the accident at the junction of Weardale Road and North Road, Spennymoor.
The other driver, Neil Graver, of Widdicombe Walk, Ferryhill, was unhurt.
Election hope:
Conservative parliamentary hopeful in Bishop Auckland, David Williamson, has said there is ‘everything to play for’ in the general election.
Circus skills:
Circus skill sessions will be held at the Teesdale sports centre in Barnard Castle today and tomorrow from 10am till noon.
Olympic award:
Richard Devin, an officer at Deerbolt Young Offenders Institution, will be presented with a Butler Trust Award at Buckingham Palace on Monday, in recognition of his work with the Special Olympics for Disabled Athletes.
Big response to treasure trove
POLICE have received hundreds of inquiries from victims of burglaries and car crime after they appealed for owners to identify £10,000 of stolen property.
Newton Aycliffe police wanted to hear from people throughout the region after finding goods during police raids on a Newton Aycliffe house and a Darlington business.
Man hurt:
John Byrne, 64, of Cleveland Avenue, Trimdon Village, was comfortable in Bishop Auckland General Hospital last night after a two car crash in Spennymoor yesterday.
Bag theft:
Thieves stole a woman's clutchbag containing £36 in a subway in Commercial Street, Darlington.
House break-in:
A video recorder, microwave oven and cash worth £700 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Headingley Crescent, Darlington.
Dance time:
The Dolphin Sunday Dance Club is to hold an old time and modern sequence dance tomorrow from 2.15pm until 4.30pm at the Dolphin Centre, Darlington.
Road alert:
Road works on the A167 Darlington to Durham road will cause traffic disruption tomorrow.
Resurfacing work is to be carried out at the Thinford roundabout and diversions will be in operation via Ferryhill, Kirk Merrington and Tudhoe.
United bus services 723 and 56 Durham and Darlington services will be diverted from Ferryhill bus station, via Kirk Merrington and Croxdale between Croxdale roundabout and Ferryhill.
THE detective who spearheaded a campaign to provide Darlington with a child protection suite is to leave the town's CID to head the fraud squad at Durham Police headquarters.
Det Insp Gordon Williams has recently been involved with raising money to set up a suite in Darlington where child abuse and rape victims can be interviewed in pleasant surroundings.
‘One of my regrets is leaving this project just as it has started to get off the ground,’ said Det Insp Williams, who started out as a PC in the Cheshire Constabulary in 1963.
‘But I am looking forward to my new role as it will be a fresh challenge for me.’
He was a detective sergeant from 1975 to 1982 when he was promoted to the rank of inspector.
He has previously worked in Peterlee and Newton Aycliffe.
He was a member of the regional crime squad in County Durham before coming to Darlington as a detective inspector in January 1987.
His successor in Darlington is to be Det Insp Tom Ryan.
BRITISH Rail has launched an investigation to discover how a herd of cows came to be wandering down the Saltburn-Darlington line last week.
The errant animals were hit by a two-carriage Pacer train doing no more than 45mph.
The train was derailed and eight animals were killed immediately.
A further three were put down by a vet.
BR has rightly refused to speculate on how the animals came to be on the line in the first place.
They are determined to find an answer to what could so nearly have been a tragedy.
And as they go about the painstaking task of piecing the problem together there is one solution which everyone fears.
The possibility that this accident may have been caused by vandals.
If the investigation does pin-point hooligans as the cause of this incident one hopes British Transport Police will spare no effort in bringing the guilty to book.
Anyone who is stupid enough to try and derail a train should be locked away for a long time.
Of course the investigation may discover a perfectly innocent explanation.
But that doesn't mean that the person responsible should be allowed to get off lightly.
A hefty fine would help concentrate the mind and could save the lives of commuters.
Window problem:
The huge expanse of windows on Darlington's new Cornmill Centre has presented window cleaners with a headache.
A machine to lift cleaners to the atrium's 258 panes of glass would cost £70,000 so the owners have contacted a team of four Coventry abseilers who will hang beside the windows to do the cleaning work.
House theft:
A house in Clifton Road, Darlington, was burgled between Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning.
Window damaged:
A glass window valued at £400 was smashed at Woolworths in Darlington on Saturday night.
TV taken:
A black and white television and cash were taken during a burglary at a bedsit in Corporation Road on Saturday.
Bike thefts:
A black Townsend boy's mountain bike valued at £300 was stolen from Geneva Road on Saturday, and another cycle valued at £100 was also taken from High Northgate.
Car taken:
A V-registered Ford Fiesta worth £600 was taken from Commercial Street car park on Saturday.
Cash grabbed:
Burglers struck at a house in Portland Place, Darlington, on Saturday when they pushed past the occupant and grabbed £90 from a handbag.
MORE than 60 tonnes of hay and straw blazed at a Darlington farm last night.
The fire started at 4.15pm yesterday at Coniscliffe Grange Farm, on Staindrop Road.
Four fire engines attended the blaze in a storage barn close to the farmhouse itself.
Station officer John Finlay said there were 50 tonnes of hay and an estimated ten tonnes of straw which he had no option but to allow to burn out.
The barn, which has an asbestos protection layer, prevented the fire spreading through to a neighbouring potato store.
Firemen could only watch and keep hoses trained on the burning barn, which overlooks the A1 motorway.
Ralph Manners, who owns the farm, was unable to tell firemen what the final cost would be in terms of lost hay and damage to his buildings.
Last night Darlington police said a 14-year-old boy has been questioned about the fire and has been released pending a decision whether to charge him with any offence.
Garage job for tyre slasher
A TEENAGER who slashed £1,500 worth of tyres at a Scarborough garage has now been given a job by his victim.
Former police officer Christopher Hardcastle, owner of Quarry Garage, Crossgates, said 17-year-old Darren Habberley had gone to his garage to apologise before the matter was reported to the police.
Mr Hardcastle said: ‘It took a lot of guts.
He wanted work and to pay for the damage so I offered him a job.’
Darren, a national indoor long jump champion and decathlon athlete, is now a petrol attendant at the garage.
Election hopes:
Darlington MP Michael Fallon said North-East Conservatives' key objectives in the forthcoming election should be to regain Langbaurgh and Newcastle Central.
Speaking at a meeting of Northern Conservative candidates at the weekend, the Schools minister said Tories should also hope to increase their share of the vote in Durham City, Hartlepool and Bishop Auckland.
Security increased:
The go-ahead is expected to be given for camera surveillance equipment to be installed at the exits of the Cathedral multi-storey car park in Durham city centre in a bid to cut car crime.
The total cost for installing and running the system this year is £19,428 and then £1,500 a year after that.
NFU secretary:
The National Farmers' Union has appointed a new secretary for the branches in Haswell, Trimdon, Sedgefield and Hartlepool.
Stuart Ward has taken over from Bill Davidson who retired at the end of last year.
Mr Ward, 24, works in the agrochemical industry near York.
Firm offer:
Japanese firm Fujitsu, based at Newton Aycliffe, is selling a collection of household items to raise money for Oxfam.
Fujitsu will hand over the goods from houses in Darlington that it used for Japanese staff while the new factory was being built and equipped.
Missing pictures:
Thieves who broke into a house on York Close, Coundon, on Saturday night took pictures and a clock depicting scenes of Durham Cathedral.
Batteries taken:
Four batteries worth £225 were stolen from Abrahams Transport, St Helens Auckland, at the weekend.
Bicycle stolen:
A blue and black Supernova mountain bike was stolen from Newgate Street on Saturday lunchtime.
Police said the bicycle, valued at £200, had been left chained to railings but was cut free by the thieves.
Rider fined:
Patrick Guy-Fisher, 20, of Fairfield, Evenwood, was convicted at Richmond magistrates of using a motorcycle without insurance.
He was fined £150, plus £20 costs, and had his licence endorsed.
HERE is the list of Darlington College of Technology advanced students successful in studies in 1990–91:
BR takes the strain to give passengers brighter outlook British Rail is set to unveil a multi-million pound project to up-grade the North-East network in the next few weeks.
BR has joined forces with 15 local authorities throughout the region to improve the trackside view on key routes.
The North-East Railside Revival project follows the success of a £6m up-grade for the Darlington line, which has scooped several environmental awards.
A BR spokeswoman said experts were still working on plans to improve links between Bishop Auckland and Saltburn, Hartlepool to Newcastle and the East Coast mainline.
Among the ideas under consideration are landscaping work, plans to plant thousands of shrubs and trees, screening for trackside eyesores and a major clean-up campaign.
The scheme will be officially launched to the public in several weeks time when BR hopes to present its blueprint for action.
The spokeswoman said: ‘We are considering a wide variety of schemes which will make a significant improvement for people using the North-East rail network.
‘Millions of people travel to the region every year, many of them for the first time, and we want to make sure the lasting impression they take with them is a good one.’
District and county councils throughout the region have given the scheme their full support.
They are hoping the programme will meet with the same success as Darlington's pioneering Railside Revival scheme.
The five-year project has resulted in a facelift for the line, which has won several national awards.
Mr Ray Sunman, the Darlington council officer who helped co-ordinate the project, said: ‘I believe our success has influenced a great many projects that came after it.’
Pub and office plan approved for Bondgate
A former fish restaurant in Darlington town centre could be turned into a pub and office complex after standing empty for three years.
Planning councillors on Wednesday approved a scheme by Darlington-based developer Dockbuild to convert the old Schooner's restaurant on the corner of Bondgate and Salt Yard.
The glass canopy, dating from when the property was used as a garage, and the existing facade would remain intact but the building behind would be demolished and rebuilt.
The property, which Dockbuild bought in 1989, was due to be demolished to make way for the fifth stage of the inner ring road.
However, plans for the road were ditched following a public inquiry.
Two applications for the building fronting on to Bondgate one for a pub and first floor flat and the other for offices were submitted.
Wolverhampton and Dudley Breweries, which owns the Turk's Head pub next door, objected and said the area already had too many pubs.
The same objection came from Darlington Civic Society.
A two-storey building behind the main property would be demolished and a three-storey office block built.
POOR STATE Mr Laurie Mulrine, senior planning officer, said the existing building was in a poor state of repair and the back of the site was vacant.
The block would have a reclaimed slate roof and timber sash windows and 13 car parking spaces would be included in the scheme.
English Heritage claimed this part of the development would ruin the character of Salt Yard and objected to the plans.
However, planners felt the scheme would enhance the Conservation Area and improve the setting of Bondgate Methodist Church opposite.
Conditions attached to the granting of planning permission included not demolishing the existing building until work was ready to begin on rebuilding.
Details of toilet and other facilities for the disabled must also be drawn up before work began.
Mr Duncan Biggin, architect for the scheme and chairman of Dockbuild, said it was hoped demolition could begin as early as March 16 and building would start as soon as possible.
‘We want to start, we have people very interested in the site,’ he told the committee.
‘This planning process has gone on long enough and Darlington deserves a development on this site.’
There was no question of demolition taking place and the site standing derelict for a long time, he said.
Flats development for rat-infested site
Building two blocks of flats on an old engineering works could remove a rat-infested eyesore, said residents of a Darlington street.
Councillors approved plans for flats at North View Engineering Works, Harris Street, after hearing from people living in nearby Melsonby Crescent that the existing site was a disgrace.
Ward councillors had tried to improve the works for the last 12 years and were delighted planning permission was given, despite an officer's recommendation to refuse.
Planners felt one block of flats would be too close to houses in Melsonby Crescent only nine metres from the boundary when the usual minimum distance was 21 metres.
However, no residents in affected houses had complained and many had spoken out in favour of the proposals.
Coun. Gordon Plummer (Lab) said vermin was a problem with rats escaping from the works and invading gardens and houses.
One mother of small children opened her garden shed to find a rat which jumped over her hand and ran out.
Another residents discovered rats had got into a kitchen cupboard and eaten packets of food.
Rubbish, including gas bottles, was strewn across the land and the entire site was a health hazard.
Mr Laurie Mulrine, senior planning officer, had asked the developer to reconsider his plans and create one L-shaped block instead of two separate buildings with six flats each.
However, the developer wanted to stick by his original scheme and Coun.
John Williams (Lab), council leader, said it was better to accept these plans than risk losing the chance to have the site improved.
But Conservative Couns.
Philip Stamford-Bewlay and Mrs Sheila Brown claimed the council was ‘lowering its standards’ and setting a dangerous precedent for future developments.
Builders bump up number of houses
House builders were this week accused of going back on their word by increasing the number of homes they intend to build on a Darlington estate.
Coun. Frank Robson (Lab) said that Leech Homes had again decided to add more houses to their plans for The Pastures, off Hunden's Lane.
The committee agreed to allow the developer to increase the number of homes from 44 to 47 and to change house types on ten plots.
But Coun. Robson said residents felt they had been let down by the original developers of the site and by Leech.
Garner's, which won permission to develop the site in 1985, built 22 bungalows and planned to develop the rest of the site in the same way.
However, Leech took over the site and in 1991 won permission for 44 more homes, some of them two-storey houses.
Coun. Robson claimed this would generate more traffic along Larkspur Drive than if the estate was all bungalows.
Labour accused of snubbing chance for new business
A South African emissary snubbed by a Labour council has been welcomed with open arms by a Conservative group.
Darlington's Tory councillors met a small South African delegation on Wednesday at the town hall.
They said the South Africans were ready ‘to do business’ with many of Darlington's exporters and said further meetings to discuss trade links were planned.
Earlier in the week Darlington council's controlling Labour group refused to meet the all-white delegation.
Tory group leader Coun. Tony Richmond slammed the decision, calling it ‘a disgrace’ which would mean lost orders for local firms.
But his opposite number in the Labour group defended the snub, saying South Africa still had to show real signs of change before normal relations could be established.
‘The need for action is more than ever apparent,’ said Coun. John Williams (Lab).
‘If the white-only referendum on March 17 does not back President De Klerk's reforms, then we are back to square one.
‘We do hope Mr De Klerk gets his mandate but I do not want to say there will be a review of policy in our dealings with his administration.
‘I am suspicious of their motives.
Why does the South African embassy want to speak to us?
When we asked them for details about their visit they were very coy.
He said it was ‘spurious’ to suggest South Africa wanted to develop trade links with Darlington at the moment.
South African counsellor Mr Peter Schabort and Miss Pierrette Grobler contacted the authority as part of their North-East fact-finding mission.
Coun. Richmond said: ‘They said they were looking to form trade links with Darlington because they liked what they saw here.
‘The Labour group had an ideal opportunity to do this but they refused to do so.
‘To the best of my knowledge, Darlington was the only local council to refuse to meet them.
‘South Africa will become a very rapidly expanding market soon for Darlington's exporters and the Labour group was prepared to jeopardise that.
‘It's a disgrace that they weren't allowed to meet the Labour group.
Drinkers at a new pub may see more than pink elephants hovering overhead if they have one too many this weekend.
For a new bar in Darlington has a huge pink cadillac hanging from the ceiling.
The unusual decoration is a feature of Buzz, which opened yesterday.
Workmen rushed to have everything ship shape by lunchtime when the bar was officially opened by Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick, Mayor of Darlington.
Miss Sally Dickinson, above, general manager for Lucknext Leisure, said: ‘It's totally unlike any other pub in the town and the name reflects the atmosphere we hope to create.
‘As well as the car we have scooters and all kinds of memorabilia on the walls.
‘We wanted it to give an impression of America in the 1950s and '60s.’
LISTEN pal and listen carefully.
Another attempt is being made to run an assertiveness course in the North-East.
The difference is that this one is for men, see.
This is no joke, mister, it's for real.
They had one go before but not enough men turned up.
They had to cancel it.
Which man wants to admit that he's a wimp and needs to assert himself?
Anybody who comes round here trying to recruit people gets a poke in the chest at the very least.
Anyway, shut up over there, because the idea is to help men grow in confidence and esteem.
On trying to get this going in Hartlepool the other week they attracted about six men.
Huh, it's hardly surprising.
Now they are at it again.
The idea is to move the venue to Stockton this time.
Maybe more men in Stockton need to assert themselves.
The man behind the idea for the Workers Educational Association is Paul McGee.
It was necessary to give him a pretty assertive grilling about it all.
What's it all about, pal?
It is difficult to predict with any WEA course the numbers that may be interested in enroling, he said.
That was the case if it was assertiveness or French.
It was always difficult to judge.
‘But we do think there is a place for it round here.
There are a lot of young people who have never worked and many men who have been made redundant.
There are also others whose role in the home has changed or who have taken perhaps lesser jobs than they once had.’
These are the sort of men whose confidence may have suffered and who may come forward.
They had to change tack, agreed Paul McGee.
Of course, this is a world where it is thought that men are too assertive, bordering on the aggressive.
It is women who are not thought to be assertive.
But for everyone there is a better way of expressing yourself at work or in complaining at the garage, for instance.
Yeah, well, so what.
Any problems with the garage, get round there and sort them out.
Tell it like it is.
That's assertiveness, boyo.
It is intended that the course, differently slanted, will start soon after Easter.
It will be run by Lorna Jones, who is, of course, a woman.
Canine control
SAM the dog was asleep yesterday afternoon, slumbering testimony to yet another unlikely triumph.
‘Cured,’ said Lyn Watts, ‘he's not just cured, he could be a different dog.
He's asleep at the moment, as quiet as a baby.’
Sam was so quiet, there was not a snore in earshot.
Yet only two weeks ago he was quite gladly chewing anything which dared to hove into view.
It was fortunate that this did not extend to people.
Sam, a corgi cross who belongs to the Watts family in Marton, was excitable, though not malicious.
The trick appears to have been performed once more by George Grayson, this space's resident dog expert, who is on something of a canine roll at present.
He suggested to the Watts that his invention the Kumfi muzzle may help.
It has the advantage of restricting a dog's more exaggerated movements while still allowing him to eat, drink and in Sam's case, yawn.
‘We wouldn't have thought it possible,’ said Lyn, daughter of Angela, who has taken Sam to classes.
‘He'd have a go at anything.’
A week or two in the muzzle and Sam should indeed be a different dog.
Meanwhile, the Grayson expertise is also being brought to bear on the chattering teeth and highly strung ways of Holly, part Jack Russell companion of Joan Mason of Durham.
More, if all goes well, in a fortnight.
Gunsmoke
WITH No Smoking Day blowing our way it was a particular pleasure to receive two giant cigars yesterday.
They came courtesy of Elliot Conway, prolific Darlington author of western novels, who likes a cigar himself.
In western movies they all seem to be chewing tobacco or smoking brown cheroots but a cigar sits well in Elliot's lips.
Most cowboy-like.
Elliot, real name Albert Hill, which is not so cowboy-like, mentioned the other day that another book is on the stocks.
Not only that, but he is preparing to be interviewed by a Teesside literary magazine.
He was looking forward to the occasion, though in those circles westerns of the type he writes are frequently looked down on, if not scorned.
Not literature, old boy.
But they are a rattling read.
It will be intriguing to see how Elliot Conway as literary icon turns out.
Meanwhile, thanks for the brace of King Edwards, Albert.
Sweet tooth
THE great British public turns to the sweet things in life when the tide turns against them.
Tyneside-based baker Greggs yesterday unveiled a £1m drop in profits for 1991, reflecting the impact of the retailing recession.
Sales of bread and sandwiches fell, but were offset by buoyant demand for more expensive sweet lines such as cakes and doughnuts.
Apparently, crumbs of comfort are needed when contemplating fears of meeting the mortgage payments, unemployment and other staple features of everyday life.
An education
RICHARD Lines, the acquisitive chairman of Hutton Rudby chemical company MTM, has announced his retirement from the board of governors of Teesside Polytechnic.
The retirement has nothing to do with MTM's announcement of less than expected year-end profits, the company stresses.
However, had the hiccup in the company's meteoric rise to the top of the fine chemicals tree come a little sooner Mr Lines would probably have saved himself around £100,000 the personal cost of founding three academic chairs at the Poly.
A Budget for home buyers
CONFIDENCE boosting measures should be the main thrust of the Budget, according to the group chief executive of the North of England Building Society, Robert Linden.
He said: ‘We have all learned harsh lessons from the recession and the results have indeed hurt.
Now is the time for tonics to help us forget the pain and step out on the road to recovery.
Confidence is the main missing ingredient that is preventing an upturn in the economy.
Tuesday's Budget is an opportunity to revive homebuying and encourage savings.’
Record month:
February has been a record month for the Mortgage Advice Shop in Darlington.
The number of inquiries are higher than in any other month since the branch opened in November 1991.
Alison Binks, financial adviser, puts this down to the suspension of stamp duty and realistic selling prices now being asked by most vendors.
Stamp duty suspension for properties up to £250,000 has certainly encouraged householders wanting to move up the housing ladder to start looking again.
It is also helped by the property bargains created by vendors who had had to dramatically cut their asking prices in order to sell.
Relief consideration:
As the end of the tax year approaches many people who are eligible for personal pensions and those with the old retirement annuity contracts need to plan their contribution strategy carefully.
To help those in this position Scottish Provident has published a free Guide to the Carry Back and Carry Forward of Tax Relief.
A copy of the Guide is available from local Scottish Provident area offices.
Fixed rates:
TSB Bank has announced details of a new fixed rate mortgage offer available immediately at any TSB Bank branch in England, Scotland and Wales.
The mortgage is fixed for three years at 10.3pc (APR 10.9pc) and is designed to appeal to home buyers seeking an affordable mortgage with inbuild stability of payments.
The fixed rate will apply until April 30, 1995.
The minimum loan for new mortgages at the fixed rate is £25,000.
For TSB customers transferring and existing mortgage from another lender to TSB, the minimum loan is £8,000.
Homebuyers will be free to choose between endowment or pension mortgages.
THE Northern Echo's assistant chief photographer Tony Bartholomew has been commended for his portfolio in the British Sports Association For the Disabled Media Awards.Tony received his award from England rugby captain Will Carling at a gala lunch in London.
The judges were particularly impressed with his photograph of 14-year-old Clare Bishop diving into the Dolphin Centre pool in Darlington at last year's BSAD swimming championships which they said ‘captured her athleticism rather than her disability.’
The awards were inaugurated by the Princess of Wales to encourage media coverage of disabled sport alongside able-bodied achievement.
Call over convoy gifts
CHARITY worker Rod Jones has urged Darlington ‘godparents’ to hand in their gifts for the children of Romania before the next convoy departs.
Mr Jones, founder of the Romanian aid convoys, said there had been a huge response from Darlington people wanting to sponsor babies in the Eastern Europe country.
Gifts should go to Convoy Aid coordinator Marlene Wyldbore, at 22 Harringay Crescent, Darlington.
Fact finding:
Plans to send a fact finding mission to Birmingham have been criticised by a Liberal Democrat on Sedgefield District Council.
Ben Ord said the cost of attending the conference on recycling was a waste of money.
Burglary charge:
John Simon Howley, 36, of no fixed abode, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with burglary and attempted burglary.
He was remanded in custody until March 20.
On bail:
A man who gave a false name to police was released on conditional bail yesterday by Darlington magistrates.
Ian Scott, 28, of North Road, Sadberge, is charged with attempting to pervert the course of justice.
For trial:
Andrew Philip Mark, 17, of Chandos Street, Darlington, will be tried at Teesside Crown Court after Darlington Magistrates Court heard allegations he stole an oak fireplace surround.
He also allegedly broke the conditions of a community service order.
A TELECOMMUNICATIONS link is to be established between students in Darlington and their counterparts in France.
Plans for the link between Darlington College of Technology and the Lycee Romain Rolland in Darlington's twin town of Amiens should be finalised tomorrow.
Peter Tickner, head of the college's publicity and marketing, said the system has been set up using telecommunications equipment pioneered by British Telecom and the French service Numeris.
The system, Information Services Digital Network (ISDN), is more sophisticated than a normal fax machine.
It has the same services, of sending letters and graphics, but also has the capacity for a visual link-up.
Students and lecturers should be able to use the system to compare notes and ideas.
The principal of the Lycee Romain Rolland will visit Darlington college tomorrow to meet his opposite number Peter Shuker.
A ROW has erupted over plans for a Chinese takeaway in a residential part of Darlington.
Ward councillor Nick ThorneWallis (Lab) says the proposed takeaway off Whinfield Road would cause parking, litter and noise problems.
And he said the application would be strongly opposed by residents.
Northern County Leisure Ltd hopes to build the takeaway at the Springfield Hotel.
The building, formerly the Trades Council and Social Club, has undergone a £500,000 transformation and now boasts a luxury bar and pool rooms.
But Coun Thorne-Wallis said residents were concerned about parking near homes in Warkworth Way, and there was no need for another takeaway as there was a Chinese fast-food restaurant 100 yards down the road.
A NEW environmental charter for Darlington was launched yesterday.
It aims to improve awareness of the environment and looks at energy, transport, pollution and recycling.
Coun John Williams, Labour leader of the council, and Labour parliamentary candidate Alan Milburn unveiled the charter at the Rockwell Nature Conservation Area, the first phase of a conservation scheme.
Coun Williams said: ‘It is particularly appropriate that the day after the first anniversary of the successful Railside Revival, we are unveiling a new Environmental Charter.
‘This first phase of our Skerneside Revival will carry on the very important initiative of the Railside Revival.’
The Rockwell Nature Conservation Area is the first stage in the scheme and is already home to 60 different types of birds.
Maggie Bosanquet, from Darlington Environmental Watch, welcomed the charter but was cautious about its benefits.
AN eight-year-old boy was taken to hospital yesterday suffering the effects of smoke inhalation from a fire at a Darlington house.
Darren Atkinson, of Eldon Street, was released after treatment at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Firefighters attended the blaze at the terraced house just off North Road, Darlington, where they were told there were four people inside the burning house.
Fire officers wearing breathing apparatus searched the building but there was no one trapped.
A PUB customer flung an ashtray at a barmaid who refused to serve him, a court heard yesterday.
Philip Raper, 38, of Honeypot Lane caravan site, Darlington, admitted assault causing actual bodily harm to the barmaid at the Archdeacon Pub, in Newton Lane, Darlington.
Chris Morrison, prosecuting, said Raper went to the pub to find out why he had been barred.
The barmaid recognised him and, on the landlord's instructions, refused to serve him.
Raper shouted a string of obscenities at the woman, then threw an ashtray at her, striking her on the side of her head and causing bad bruising.
Raper was later arrested in another pub.
Paul Pacitto, defending, said the offence was committed while Raper was drunk and unable to control himself.
The magistrates, bailing Raper until March 30 for probation officer's reports, warned him to stay away from the Archdeacon.
AN INVESTIGATION has been launched after a 37-year-old man was found dead in Darlington police cells.
The man, of no fixed address, was found collapsed in his cell in the early hours of yesterday.
Police called for help but the prisoner was certified dead at the scene.
And last night it emerged that the man was being held in police cells because there wasn't enough space for him at Durham prison.
A police spokesman said the man was arrested last Thursday and appeared before Darlington magistrates on a drink-driving charge.
He was remanded in custody and, because of a shortage of space at Durham prison, was kept at the station.
Police became increasingly concerned for their prisoner's health over the weekend.
The spokeswoman said: ‘During his time in custody the man twice fell ill.
Once shortly after he was arrested and over the weekend when he was examined by a police surgeon.’
Half-hourly checks were kept on the prisoner in case his condition deteriorated.
He was last examined by an officer at 1am.
A spokeswoman said an investigation would be carried out in a bid to establish what had happened.
She added: ‘At this stage we believe there are no suspicious circumstances.’
A PRIVATE medical centre in the grounds of Darlington's Memorial Hospital has been scuppered after a Government inquiry.
A planning inspector rejected plans to build a £3m private clinic because he believed it would create traffic chaos and disturb NHS hospital patients.
He said the proposals, by Surrey-based Bioplan, would make a difficult situation worse.
Bioplan hoped to build a 30-bed complex and car park next to the town's Memorial Hospital.
Management said the centre which would have included an x-ray and physiotherapy department could create 50 new jobs.
They claimed the private hospital development would have a negligible effect on residents.
But, in his report, Government inspector H Stephens says: ‘The banging of car doors, the starting of engines and the noise from car alarms would be introduced close to habitable rooms and adjacent to residents’ gardens which might normally be expected to be both peaceful and quiet.’
Mr Stephens report also says a private facility would add to parking problems in Hollyhurst Road.
He slams the company's parking proposals as ‘wholly inadequate’ to catering for the extra visitors.
Labour borough councillors, who threw the plan out last year, say the inspector's report vindicates their view that a private hospital in the grounds of the Memorial was out of the question.
Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate Alan Milburn, who campaigned against the plan, added: ‘I am absolutely delighted to hear Darlington won't be getting US-style private medical care.’
But Tory ward councillor Peter Jones said the planning inquiry had ‘missed the point’ and a golden opportunity had slipped through Darlington's fingers.
IMPROVEMENTS to Darlington's railway museum look likely to be put on ice because of cash shortages.
Permission has been requested by Darlington Council's recreation committee to build a platform on to the railway museum at Hopetown Lane as part of general improvements.
But last night the chairwoman of the committee, Coun Dot Long (Lab), said lack of cash will almost certainly prevent improvements from being made.
Coun Long said there was no reason not to apply for planning permission for the platform even though work would probably not begin until 1993 at the earliest.
THE GREEN party has decided not to field a candidate in Darlington or Richmond in the General Election.
Dr Robert Upshall, the Green Party's prospective parliamentary candidate, yesterday revealed the decision was taken for financial reasons.
‘It would cost at least £1,500 for a candidate to stand and it is likely we would lose that money,’ he said.
‘We are disappointed but we intend to still be involved in the debate.
‘Although we will not be contesting the election in Darlington and Richmond, we shall be involving ourselves in the debate about environmental issues which have attracted scant attention from the other main parties.’
Dr Upshall said the other main parties gained funds from corporate finance but the Green Party had to rely on its own fund raising.
He said Government funding should be available for political parties as in other European countries.
He said the uncertainty of the election date believed to be April 9 also made it difficult for candidates to organise their activities.
A STUDENT from Darlington's German twin town has travelled to Britain to study life on a British newspaper.
Thomas Kretzschmar, 22, who is studying Social Science and English Language and Literature at the University of Duisberg in the Ruhr district of Germany, is spending a month at The Northern Echo.
‘I am interested in journalism,’ said Thomas, who is staying with the Kilcran family in Dale Road, Darlington, ‘but I am training to be a teacher.
I am hoping to improve my English while I am here.’
So far Thomas has visited Darlington magistrates court and Darlington Town Hall to cover stories with a reporter.
He also went out to the streets of Sedgefield to interview villagers on their feelings about the Sedgefield ball game.
So far he has visited Durham and he hopes to see the Lake District, Whitby and South Park, Darlington before he leaves.
‘From what I have seen so far Darlington is a very nice town,’ said Thomas.
A WELL-KNOWN face from Darlington's business community has died suddenly aged 81.
Alan Snow worked as an accountant in Darlington from the late Thirties until his retirement in 1975.
He was regularly to be seen walking through the town with bowler hat and rolled umbrella.
In his retirement he spent many hours on the golf courses either at Dinsdale Spa or Blackwell.
He leaves a wife Marion and two children.
The funeral and cremation will take place at Darlington Crematorium tomorrow morning at 11.45.
Patrols plea:
Lingfield councillor Alan Robinson has written to Darlington police asking them to step up patrols round Presto's car park in Yarm Road after reports that youths are disturbing nearby residents by driving around it late at night.
Home charge:
John Simon Howley, 36, of no fixed abode, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with two offences of burglary and one of attempted burglary.
The court heard one of the burglaries occurred at an old people's home.
Howley was remanded in custody until March 20 when he will face further proceedings.
A Darlington bar is still overcrowded despite warnings from environmental health officers.
The licensing committee heard that a bar in Perry's Brasserie, Beaumont Street, had double its capacity when health chiefs made a surprise visit.
Barry Pearson, principle environmental health officer, said 150 people packed into the Conservatory bar on Friday night its capacity is 75.
But he said the rest of Perry's bars were within the required.
The bar's management have been asked to report to a future meeting of the committee.
SEDGEFIELD MP and Labour's Employment Spokesman: ‘This is a budget that leaves Britain in recession.
It does nothing to increase prospects for employment, training or investment or to improve public services.
The question people will ask is whether it is a budget for Britain or a budget for the Tories and the answer is that it is clearly the latter.
In particular, it provides no new measures to help the North.’
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington said: ‘People will see that this budget is merely an election bribe and it won't wash.
‘The tragic thing about the budget is that the Chancellor acknowledged quite unashamedly that unemployment will continue to rise for the foreseeable future.
The budget could have been used to get this region and the country generally out of recession.
Instead, it's been wasted.
‘It did not do anything for manufacturing investment.
It did nothing to provide better child care for women wishing to return to work.
It did not do anything for pensioners.’
TEENAGER David Zipfel stole from his family to feed his addiction to gaming machines, a court heard yesterday.
Zipfel, 17, of Merrybent, Darlington, stole £85 cash from the electricity meter in the home of his aunt and uncle in Melsonby, near Richmond.
He played the machines all next day and on the following day broke into his sister's home in Melsonby and stole £10 cash, Richmond magistrates were told.
The meter break-in caused £25 damage.
The break-in at his sister's house caused £15 damage.
Kay Wimhurst, defending, said Zipfel had no full-time job but earned £15 helping out at stables.
She said that he committed both offences to feed his addiction to gaming machines.
He came from a good, supportive family and had never been in trouble before.
His family were standing by him and he had started to repay his sister.
He admitted stealing £85 from the electricity meter and burglary involving £10.
He was fined a total of £50 and ordered to pay £135 compensation and £30 costs.
Magistrate Caroline Thornton-Berry told him: ‘To steal is always wrong and despicable but to steal from people who love you is particularly low.’
AN IRANIAN conman behind an elaborate fraud which stung a bank for thousands could be ordered out of Britain later this year.
Parvis Yousefi could be ordered to leave his home in Southfield Crescent, Norton, Stockton, when he becomes eligible for parole in a few months' time.
The 37-year-old father-of-three was jailed for 18 months after he was found guilty of cheating the Royal Bank of Scotland out of nearly £7,000.
Sentencing Yousefi at Teesside Crown Court, Judge William Hannah recommended he be deported.
Home Office officials have ordered an investigation into the case.
A Whitehall spokesman said the investigation would be extremely thorough and a decision should be ready by the time Yousefi comes up for parole after a third of his sentence.
He added: ‘Obviously the judge's comments will be taken into account by members of the immigration department.
We take this sort of thing very seriously indeed.’
Foreign nationals found guilty of serious crimes sometimes manage to escape deportation if they face a grim fate back home.
But the spokesman said: ‘In other cases it is thought desirable that they should no longer stay in this country.’
During the trial it was revealed Yousefi set up a false bank account in the name of Momen Garawand at the Royal Bank of Scotland, in Darlington.
He collected cheque books for the account and used them to obtain nearly £7,000 in cash and property.
Yousefi was caught as he tried to cash a cheque in London.
When police searched Yousefi's van they discovered 26 different charge cards, ten cheque books, perfume, clothing, silks and an airline ticket for Tehran worth £707.
A YOUNG girl has been made homeless after fire swept through her bedsit home in Eldon Street, Darlington.
And Carolyn Dalzell, 18, claims her landlord has thrown her out of the house blaming her for the fire.
An eight-year-old boy was slightly injured in the fire at the terraced house.
Miss Dalzell was out but she says the bedsit was not properly equipped.
Yesterday her boyfriend Philip Earl said: ‘There was only one socket for the whole flat.
It's not surprising there was a fire.’
He said Miss Dalzell is now being temporarily housed by Darlington council at the Arts Centre.
But the landlord of the property Hans Kukreja said he has never threatened Miss Dalzell with eviction.
Yesterday he said: ‘I have not spoken to Miss Dalzell and I certainly have not thrown her out.
If she continues to pay rent she can stay there.’
POLICE last night appealed for information about the whereabouts of a missing antiques dealer as a man claimed he owes him £1,600.
Col James Bradshaw said Alan Jackson, who mysteriously vanished from his shop in Barnard Castle town centre, had given him three cheques but all had bounced.
Col Bradshaw, of Abbey Road, Darlington, said: ‘He has disappeared without honouring his debt.’
Mr Jackson, a well established trader, has apparently left without trace and his shop was stripped of its goods.
Twenty horses he kept at stables on the Lartington Hall estate were taken away overnight.
Col Bradshaw said when he visited Jackson's Antiques on The Bank, Barnard Castle, about three months ago, Mr Jackson told him he intended closing.
‘Mr Jackson said he was struggling because his wife was ill and he couldn't get to London to buy stuff.
He asked if I was interested in coming in as partner.’
Col Bradshaw said he decided against the move but decided to help Mr Jackson fill his showroom by supplying him with furniture to sell on his behalf.
He said Mr Jackson later told him he had sold £1,600 worth of the furniture, including a desk, military chest and chair, and had promised him full payment.
Col Bradshaw said he went to ‘rescue’ the rest of his goods after a cheque presented by Mr Jackson was returned by the bank, which would not honour it.
A further two cheques of £160 also bounced.
Three charged on kidnap bid
THREE men appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with offences relating to an attempted kidnap incident in Darlington on January 18.
Paul Lowe, 27, and William Young, 21, both of Rochdale, were each charged with carrying offensive weapons.
Lowe is also charged with causing an affray.
John Wade, 20, of Hickstead Court, Darlington, was charged with carrying an offensive weapon and attempted kidnap.
The case was adjourned until the end of April.
Man remanded:
Former club steward Peter Bishton, 34, of Corporation Road, Darlington, charged with stealing nearly £4,000 Christmas savings from Richmond Comrades Club, was committed for trial at crown court by Richmond magistrates and remanded on bail until April 7.
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont's election Budget got a stony reception in the City last night.
Mr Lamont shocked analysts with the news that Government borrowing would double to £28bn next year.
And hopes weakened of a long-awaited cut in interest rates which would give a real boost to the Government's election prospects.
Mr Lamont's Budget will give a tax cut of £100 a year to the average family.
A new 20p tax rate on the first £2,000 of taxable income will help every taxpayer in the country and specifically targets low earners.
But predictions of a big giveaway vote-winning budget with expectations of a £3b kick-start for the economy were dashed by ballooning Government spending.
Mr Lamont clearly had his hands tied by the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement figures and made the best of a bad job with £1.5bn in tax cuts and other incentives mainly for small businesses.
Tory backbenchers claimed the Budget was a General Election winner.
But Opposition leader Neil Kinnock branded it a ‘panic-stricken, pre-election political sweetener’.
Kevin Darlington, economist at stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew, described the tax package as meagre.
‘Public sector borrowing is growing so quickly, the Chancellor obviously couldn't afford any more,’ he said.
Nigel Richardson, of merchant bank S G Warburg, said Mr Lamont had faced a fine judgment between an electoral giveaway and financial prudence, but had fallen between the two.
Beleaguered businessmen welcomed the moves to help them out of the recession, but some sectors of industry were unhappy.
Small firms benefited from a reform of the Uniform Business Rate, which effectively freezes increases for firms over the next year, inheritance tax changes and new powers to curb late payment of bills.
Mr Lamont said the Budget ‘maintains the policies that have slashed inflation and reduced interest rates’.
He said about four million people would have their tax cut by a fifth.
‘What I have done is to take our policy further towards a target of 20p.
This cut is the equivalent of 1p off,’ said Mr Lamont.
Labour leader Mr Kinnock said: ‘What our country needed today was a Budget for strengthening Britain and promoting sustainable recovery out of a recession caused by the Government.
What we got was a Budget to try to bribe voters with borrowed money.’
A party official later served warning that Labour would reverse the decision to create a new tax band.
‘It is an income tax cut funded by borrowing.
Therefore we will vote against it and reverse it,’ the official said.
The Federation of Small Businesses said it was a ‘lifeboat Budget’ which would give £500m to business ratepayers.
Trades Union Congress general secretary Norman Willis said: ‘We needed a Budget for jobs and investment.
Instead we have a mixture of measures that will not be enough to bring about recovery.’
Running out of burial space
ADVANCE bookings for burial plots in Hurworth has led to a shortage of space.
Parish Council chairman Peter Foster yesterday said so many people were booking their plots the village was running out of burial space.
‘There are about 16 places here at the moment but most of them are already booked.
Residents have realised they need to book early if they want to be buried in Hurworth.’ he said.
The parish council was obliged to provide burial land and was now desperately looking for other sites.
Case adjourned:
Denise Flanagan, 22, of Edgemoor Road, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with obtaining property by deception.
The case was adjourned until April 7.
Man remanded:
Gary John Williams, 22, of no fixed abode, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with taking a vehicle without consent.
He was remanded in custody until March 31.
Going equipped:
Alan William Britton, 26, of Farrer Street, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday and admitted going equipped to steal.
He was given a 12-month conditional discharge and ordered to pay £50 costs.
Police investigate sex offence claim
POLICE have confirmed they are making inquiries following an allegation of a sexual offence against a 16-year-old girl in Barnard Castle.
The crime is alleged to have taken place in premises between Saturday night and Sunday morning.
No further details were available last night.
EURO MP Stephen Hughes received a welcome worthy of a pop star when he visited a Darlington junior school.
Children in year four at St Augustine's RC primary school in Beechwood Avenue, invited Mr Hughes, Euro MP for Durham, to the school to explain various aspects of the European community to help with a project they are studying.
Class teacher Jerry Connor said he was surprised by the children's reaction.
He said: ‘Many of them were aware of him and the job he does, but the first thing they did was to rush over and ask him for his autograph.’
Mr Hughes answered questions from the children on a wide range of European subjects including the Berlin Wall and the EC mark of quality on toys.
BILL Clinton defeated Paul Tsongas in Florida's key presidential primary today, to establish the Arkansas governor as a clear front-runner for the Democratic nomination.
With voting in 11 states making up Super Tuesday, computers projected President George Bush an easy winner on the Republican side but forecast an embarrassing economic protest vote for rightwing challenger Pat Buchanan in Florida.
Wall fall youth A
YOUTH needed hospital treatment after falling off a wall at the Darlington Transport Company depot in Haughton Road early today.
He was found bleeding by police at about 1am.
He was treated at Darlington Memorial but was said to be not badly hurt.
What BNP man really said
I READ with interest the article about me (Echo March 2) which draws on an interview I gave with two journalists from the Sunday Mail.
In the Sunday Mail we read that I had said ‘I am a fascist and proud of it,’ that I expected ‘a blood-soaked campaign’and that ‘lots of violence’would be ‘all right with me’.
My name was Dr Hate.
Dr Hate's name appeared in big black capitals.
A person who spoke on behalf of Michael Fallon is reported to have said that Mr Fallon would never agree to share a platform with anyone like that.
Neither would I. He appears to be impossible.
I have never in my life, in public or in private, in earnest or in jest, either called or even thought myself a fascist.
I foresee violence, but did not refer to blood.
‘Blood-soaked campaign’ was the intemperate language of the Mail's own staff.
Asked whether I feared the threat of violence, I answered no.
From no developed an ‘all right by me’.
As for Dr Hate, poor soul, he can be sorely tried, as when immigrants demand their own schools, parliament, laws and the right to hunt and slay their critics, but he does not hate anyone on the grounds of faith or race.
Donald Clarke, Prospective Parliamentary Candidate, The British National Party, PO Box 61, Darlington.
TORIES have broken council policy to meet a South African delegation on a fact-finding mission to Darlington.
Members of the opposition group on Darlington borough council were furious when Labour leaders refused to see the South African diplomats last week.
But Conservative leader Tony Richmond said the latest approach from embassy staff in London was ‘a golden opportunity’ to improve trade links with a foreign power.
He contacted the South Africans who had been told they couldn't meet a council delegation independently and invited them to a meeting in Darlington town hall.
He believes the talks may have laid the foundations for a future visit by a South African trade delegation.
He said: ‘We are now living in a post-apartheid era and it is about time member of the Labour group came to realise that.’
Council Labour leader John Williams believes it is too early to discuss closer links with South Africa.
He said: ‘I don't wish to comment on the use of town hall rooms for this meeting, except to say it looks like another cheap political stunt by the Tories.’
A WOMAN who was dismissed from her job at Europe's biggest nursing home faces more delays before she knows the outcome of her appeal.
Michelle Dixon claims management at Trees Park Village nursing home at Middleton St George, near Darlington, sacked her because she complained to Darlington Health Authority about declining standards.
An industrial tribunal was to have been held at Newcastle this week but has been delayed.
Mrs Dixon, of Haxby Road, Middleton St George, was upset by new work practices introduced at the home after it was bought by businessman Praby Sodhi.
Mr Sodhi is the respondent in the case.
He denies Mrs Dixon was sacked because she complained to the health authority about the new working arrangements.
A COUNCILLOR has criticised Durham County Council for not meeting the needs of disabled people in his town.
Coun Donald Fraser, a district and town councillor for Newton Aycliffe, said disabled people could not get specially adapted buses for day trips or holidays.
Next month he will try to persuade Great Aycliffe Town Council to spend £44,000 on a bus adapted for disabled people.
A county council spokesman said there were buses at day centres around the county available for hire.
There were also buses based at social services centres at Stanley, Peterlee, Darlington and Spennymoor.
But Coun Fraser said: ‘Admittedly there is a county service but people in Aycliffe are not getting very much from it, either because they do not know about it or they can't get the benefit because the buses aren't available in here.’
PROPERTY to be made available for a would-be council tenant is expected to raise some interest and a few eyebrows.
For the isolated detached property, situated in a few acres of land, is a cemetery lodge.
The lodge, at Easington Lane Cemetery, was until May last year occupied by a Sunderland council cemetery keeper.
But attempts to find a suitable tenant failed and the building, along with the rest of the cemetery, has suffered vandalism ever since.
A petition signed by hundreds of people from as far afield as Darlington, Ashington and Durham called on the council to repair the lodge and install a cemetery keeper.
Sunderland's housing committee is to be asked to take over the property with a view to renting it to a would-be tenant who could buy it outright in future under the right-to-buy scheme.
MEMBERS of the Weardale branch of the NFU have voted unanimously against National Park status for the North Pennines.
Secretary Mick Hodgson said more than 90 members of the local farming community attended a meeting with district councillors in Ireshopeburn but there was not one voice in support.
He said the matter would be put to the executive committee in Darlington for further discussion.
‘The experience of most people has already been bad in planning terms,’ he said.
‘There would be some money available with National Park status but far more restrictions.
‘The area would be promoted for leisure and increased awareness would mean people coming in and thinking they can trample all over the place.
‘This is already an area of outstanding natural beauty and we would welcome the extra money without the extra bureaucracy.’
Mr Hodgson said local branches would use their national powers to campaign against the proposal.
What local ‘MPs and candidates had to say on the day the election date was named:
Darlington Tory MP Michael Fallon: ‘Over the last five years the Government has transformed the economy of Teesside and rejuvenated the area's industry and infrastructure.’
Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn ‘Labour will bring lasting prosperity to Darlington and put people's talents to use rather than allowing them to go to waste.’
Darlington Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg: His party's campaign would focus on the health service, the economy and the need for Parliamentary reform.
Hartlepool Tory candidate Graham Robb: Conservatives would fight opponents on any and every issue and were the only party to be trusted with the NHS.’
Sedgefield Tory candidate Nick Jopling: Said Conservatives were the only party with law and order at the top of the agenda and accused Labour of being soft on crime.
Sedgefield Labour MP Tony Blair: ‘Our commitment to the NHS, and to the elderly and families by increasing pensions and child benefits will bring to Government a sense of community and the need to help others so obviously missing from the Conservative party's agenda over the last 13 years.’
Langbaurgh Tory candidate Michael Bates: Said 75,000 people on low pay in Teesside would benefit from the Chancellor's announcement of 20p in the pound income tax for the first £2,000 of taxable earnings.
Langbaurgh Labour MP Ashok Kumar: ‘Langbaurgh is now firmly Labour and I am confident that on April 9 Britain will follow suit.’
Langbaurgh Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Allen: ‘In the last 45 years this country has suffered whichever government has been in power.
The only way we can face the challenge of the 90s is by having a new type of government.’
DARLINGTON MP Michael Fallon is to contact the Roads Minister over plans for a traffic calming scheme in the town.
Mr Fallon plans to ask Christopher Chope to look into plans for road narrowing and speed humps at Lakeside, Darlington.
He visited residents yesterday to hear their grievances about the Durham County Council proposals.
The county council plans to close the junction at Hammond Drive and Lorraine Crescent, making Lakeside and Coleridge Gardens the main entrance into the Skerne Park estate.
Yellow lines and speed humps could be put on the narrow road and a mini roundabout set up at the junction of Lakeside and Parkside.
Durham County Council says the increase in traffic would be minimal.
But Lakeside residents say the plans will make it difficult for emergency vehicles to get through and would be dangerous for children and pensioners.
AN RAF policeman forced to do 12-hour lone sentry shifts while his marriage crumbled took his own life, an inquest heard.
Westley John Turnpenny, 24, was a corporal stationed in Germany.
Coroner Colin Penna heard yesterday it was the job which led to his depression.
His wife Ann-Marie Turnpenny, of Sheerwater Avenue, Darlington, said their marriage had been going through a difficult period.
The couple, who have a baby daughter, had split up but got back together.
Mrs Turnpeny had returned to Darlington but rejoined her husband at the airbase near Munden.
Despite earlier threats to kill himself, Cpl Turnpenny had never attempted to take his life.
On the night before his death he again said he would commit suicide.
Mrs Turnpenny said: ‘He gave no indication that this threat would be any different.’
She told the inquest how her husband tried to take the baby after a late night row.
The next morning German police found Mr Turnpenny's slumped inside his car.
A post mortem revealed the young officer died from carbon monoxide poisoning and the coroner yesterday returned a verdict that Cpl Turnpenny took his own life.
A COMBINATION of domestic worries led a woman to take her life with a lethal cocktail of drink and pills an inquest heard yesterday.
Irene Greenhow, 42, of Hercules Street, Darlington, was found dead in bed by her husband Raymond.
She had taken 30 tranquilizers and drunk several glasses of sherry.
Mr Greenhow said at an inquest in Darlington yesterday his wife became depressed because of anxiety over her health and home.
A pathologist gave the cause of death as toxic poisoning from a combination of Coproximol and alcohol.
South-West Durham Coroner Colin Penna recorded a verdict that she took her own life.
A VILLAGE pub landlord looks set to leave his business because of crippling rent rises.
Alan Steele, from the King William, Barton, says his rent would more than double under a new 20-year lease and he cannot afford to stay.
Alan is just one of dozens of landlords affected by new leases issued by Grand Metropolitan, a pub property company which bought the estate of John Smith.
‘The lease is just not viable,’ he said.
‘It's not just the rent.
It's the other stuff like repairs and maintenance you have to carry out.’
Alan, 45, fears within a month he could be out of a job and home.
‘I've been in the trade all my life.
Ideally I would like a free house of my own but I have got nowhere to go.
We love the area, that's why we are here.’
Grand Met representatives met about 20 Darlington landlords last week.
They say they now plan to negotiate rent rises.
BURGLARS stole a pensioner's savings while she was at her sister's funeral, using a key to sneak into her empty home.
The thieves took £80 that 73-year-old Peggy Metcalfe had been saving for the past three months.
The burglary happened at the end of February when Darlington Borough Council were changing locks at 500 old people's flats after spare keys went missing.
And Mrs Metcalfe, of Ascot View, in Redhall, Darlington, said the burglars must have used a key to get in.
She said: ‘There was no break-in and no damage.’
But Mike Bennett, director of community services for the council said it was not clear whether one of the missing keys had been used.
Emergency teams were working round the clock to make the homes secure but the work was not finished until a week after the keys went missing.
Mrs Metcalfe said: ‘The money was for the electricity bill.
They'll be sending the bill out on March 21.
‘I don't know how I'm going to manage to scrape together that much money by then.’
POLICE have advised people to make sure their garages and sheds are locked following a series of break-ins this week.
Three Vax cleaners, videos, stereo equipment, Nintendo games, cash, an Alba satellite receiver, microwave and sports bag were among the items stolen from Darlington houses.
The burglaries took place in Berrybank Crescent, Edgemoor Road, Thompson Street West, Hundens Lane, Lynton Gardens, Elton Parade, Stanhope Road South, Goodison Way, Lansdowne Street and Headingly Crescent.
Radio cassettes, golf clubs and wheel trims were also stolen from cars in Darlington.
The thefts happened in Corporation Road, Oaklea Court, Abbey Road, Streatlam Road, Langholme Crescent, Hutton Avenue, Geneva Road, Brankin Road and Bramall Lane.
Police are still looking for a Phillips radio cassette serial number PH 620 FB 5028714.
Vehicles were damaged in Bowman Street, Corporation Road, Greenwell Street, and Gilling Crescent.
And cars were stolen from Elton Parade, Bowman Street, Coatham Mundeville, Arkle Crescent, Victoria Embankment and Neville Road.
Anyone with information should contact Darlington police on .
Paid leave
SCHOOL governors should be treated like magistrates and given paid leave of absence from work, the Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association has told the National Commission on Education.
AMMA says governors are not receiving enough training and are having problems getting time off work to carry out their complex job in schools.
Special case A
SPECIAL school wants to be treated as a special case because the summer holidays are too long for children with profound difficulties.
The Dales School at Morton on Swale near Northallerton wants to shorten the long summer holidays from six to five weeks, putting the extra week onto the summer halfterm.
Law change
THE Further and Higher Education Bill is now law, clearing the way for polytechnics to be renamed universities and turning further education colleges into independent companies free from local government control.
THE Mayor of a Lancashire town returned to her old school in Darlington yesterday for a trip down Memory Lane.
And Kathleen Shore said she was amazed at how little had changed since she left Reid Street school at Easter 1945 aged 14.
Coun Shore, now mayor of Pendle, contacted Darlington's mayor Rita Fishwick for permission to visit the school in her official capacity.
Yesterday she and her mayoress, daughter Linda Charles, toured the school in the company of Coun Fishwick.
Afterwards Coun Shore, who still has family in Darlington, said: ‘I always fancied coming back and it's been lovely.
‘When I was here it was Reid Street senior school for girls but of course now it's a mixed primary school.
‘It hasn't changed much, though the hall looked a lot smaller than I remembered.’
Coun Shore's maiden name was Mothersdill and she went to primary school at Corporation Road.
She worked at the old Co-Op in Priestgate and a clothing factory, then in 1950 she married and moved to Nelson, Lancashire.
A DARLINGTON pensioner's high sex drive is to be controlled with pills after he appeared before a court yesterday charged with indecently assaulting young boys.
Albert Ninham, 75, admitted indecently assaulting two boys aged 12 and 11 in November last year.
Mr Recorder Shaun Spencer QC placed Ninham on probation for two years on condition he takes medication to control his libido.
‘I think the public will be better protected if for the next two years and possibly afterwards you are on a regime of medication which will ensure you don't do anything like this again,’ he said.
‘If you go to prison you will simply be back to square one on your release a few months later.’
Teesside Crown Court was told Ninham had offered to give the boys money for fireworks and encouraged them to go for a walk with him and his dog.
But Keith Miller, prosecuting, said Ninham took the boys into a Northern Echo depot where he pushed his hand down the backs of their trousers.
After the incident Ninham, of Hilda Street, gave both boys £5 and told them to keep their mouths shut.
Mr Miller said: ‘When the defendant was seen by the police he made full admissions.
‘He stated it had all started a very long time ago when he was serving in the army in India and he admitted to still being sexually frustrated.’
When the police asked if he would do it again Ninham admitted he would.
The court was told Ninham had been convicted of indecently assaulting youngsters in 1990 and had been placed on probation medication to control his sex drive.
That medication was stopped in July 1990.
Brian Sommerville, defending, said: ‘He is well known in the area for this sort of thing because of the last occasion.
‘He has to suffer constant insults and talk from people in the neighbourhood and children and threats from some of the older relatives of children.’
Mr Sommerville said Ninham's condition could be treated by drugs.
He said: ‘I suppose one hopes the day will come when he will be so old his urges and fantasies will leave him and he will be able to conduct himself without these things having the effect they do.’
THREE detectives received commendations for ‘first class police work’ in finding the men involved in a terrifying pub robbery.
Det Insp Paul Green, Det Sgt Martyn Lowrie and Det Con Stephen McLean of Bishop Auckland CID received commendations from Durham Constabulary Chief Constable Frank Taylor.
Mr Taylor said their work was ‘in the best traditions of Durham Constabulary’.
The detectives were faced with a difficult job after Thomas and Margaret Wright were robbed of their £4,800 New Year's Day takings at the Bay Horse pub in Bishop Auckland on January 2, 1991.
But the officers' dedication led to the conviction of Carl Dodds, of Blackfell, Washington, who was jailed for six years at Durham Crown Court last December for robbery.
Two other men, David Parker, of Heath Road, Middlestone Moor near Spennymoor and George Taylor, of Bridge Street, Bishop Auckland, were jailed for seven years each on charges of conspiracy to commit robbery.
Det Ch Insp John Blake at Bishop Auckland said: ‘The investigation was extremely difficult.
The officers had very little to go on.’
He said his men ‘thoroughly deserved’ their commendations.
The chief constable also commended the work of PC David Beverley, WPC Karen Chestney and Special Con Andrew Holmes who tackled a wanted man at a Spennymoor nightclub last July.
The man, brandishing a kitchen knife, was disarmed by the three, whose actions were described as an ‘excellent example of team work’.
PC Edward Walls was commended for his ‘professional and caring’ although unsuccessful efforts to resuscitate an elderly heart attack victim last November at Blackhall.
In the same month, PC Kevin Marshall was injured after grabbing a 19-year-old thief in Darlington as he jumped into a moving car.
PC Marshall hung on until the teenager fell out and then arrested him.
PC Marshall was commended for his work.
Also commended was PC Stephen Huntrod who saved the life of a drunken youth stranded on the fourth floor of a derelict building in Stanley last November.
BURGLARS doped a doberman dog and stole almost £1,000 worth of tack from a riding school.
Rocky the guard dog was drugged while the thieves broke into locked tack rooms at Murton Blue House riding school, near Wingate, when stable manager Keith Taylor was out.
Four Saddles, eight bridles, horse blankets and boots were among the tack stolen in the raid on Thursday.
‘When I came back from town Rocky was asleep so I knew something was wrong because normally he's rushing to be let off the chain,’ said Mr Taylor.
‘They took absolutely all the tack we had.
‘I don't know what they gave Rocky but he came round within 24 hours and seems back to normal now,’ said Mr Taylor.
The stables, owned by Darlington man Cliff Forster, are set to be developed into a top class riding centre.
THE FATE of a handful of Tory MPs in the North-East will almost certainly decide the outcome of the General Election.
Tory campaign managers know they must hold key marginals like Darlington, Stockton South and York to ensure a historic fourth successive victory.
But it is no easy task.
Britain is still gripped by recession, public sector borrowing is high, inflation running at 4.1pc and there are 2.6m registered unemployed.
And opinion polls show the number of voters satisfied with the Government's management of the country has fallen to its lowest level since November 1990.
It's all a far cry from June 1987 when Margaret Thatcher was returned to power with a handsome majority of 101 seats, although it was down on the 1983 win.
Pundits who believed the Falklands factor played a crucial part in her 1983 victory were astounded by the size of the third straight Conservative victory, five years after victory in the South Atlantic.
Now Mrs Thatcher has gone and her successor, John Major, has had to launch the biggest gamble of his political career by entering an election race with his party trailing in the polls.
Five years ago, the Conservatives picked up 42.2pc of the vote, Labour 30.8pc and the Liberal Alliance 22.6pc a 1.7pc swing from the Conservatives to Labour.
Now, Labour needs a further swing of eight per cent to be sure of an overall majority but six per cent would make it the biggest single party.
They haven't achieved such a swing since its landslide victory in 1945.
However, independent political analyst Andrew MacMullen says Labour could still secure victory with a smaller swing in its favour.
Across the North-East, they have 25 seats, the Conservatives 16 and the Liberal Democrats just one.
A swing to Labour in the region's key marginals, plus gains in the West Midlands and in the South could be enough to put Neil Kinnock into No.10 Downing Street as Prime Minister.
If just one per cent switch from Tory to Labour, Conal Gregory with the country's slimmest Tory majority of just 147 in York will be looking for a new job.
Michael Fallon, the MP for Darlington and a junior education minister, is in a similarly precarious position.
He is defending a lead of 2,661 and a 2.5pc swing to Labour would be enough to elect his Labour rival Alan Milburn.
But Mr Fallon claims to relish a fight and Mr MacMullen says the outcome of Darlington cannot be predicted.
He says: ‘Although Michael Fallon is in an extremely vulnerable seat, he has adopted a high profile in the constituency.
Unlike some MPs he hasn't let his duties as a minister come between him and the people who elected him.
He has worked very hard and the result is bound to be very close.’
But Mr Fallon has his problems.
Mr MacMullen says: ‘He is very much a Thatcher loyalist and it is an open secret that he isn't happy with the way in which things are going under John Major.
Clearly, these are areas of possible strain within the Tory party itself.’
Stockton South is another Tory marginal, but one which throws up an unexpected factor.
The 1987 election returned Tim Devlin to the Commons with a 35pc share of the vote but Labour and the Liberal Democrats put up a very strong showing with 33.7pc and 31.3pc respectively.
‘All three parties are starting from a strong base.
Tim Devlin, of course, has an advantage as the sitting MP but it is too close to call at the moment.’
Mr MacMullen, a lecturer in politics at Durham University, believes Labour will bring its biggest guns to bear on the Tories' record and the Conservatives may no longer be able to rely on traditional Tory vote winners, like defence, management of the economy and crime.
Despite Norman Lamont's pre-election Budget most analysts believe the Chancellor didn't do enough to secure a victory.
Economist Dr Rodney Wilson believes previous mistakes left the Government with little room for manoeuvre.
He says: ‘When he was Chancellor Nigel Lawson made mistakes in his last Budget which eventually cost him the job.
He gave the market a stimulus just as it was starting to recover, a stimulus it didn't need.
‘This brought about an artificial market surge with the result that Britain faced boom or bust.
Unfortunately, we went bust.’
Dr Wilson says Conservative economic policy will help pull the country out of recession ‘towards the end of the year or possibly next.’
And he adds: ‘The Government made a mistake.
They overheated the economy, people borrowed too much and that has undermined consumer spending, but every Government since the war has made mistakes.
‘Labour made mistakes when it was in power during the 1970s.
The important thing is whether or not either party has learnt from past errors.’
Law and order is also likely to become a burning election issue, particularly in the North-East where car crime and house burglaries have soared since the Tories came to power in 1979.
Here, Dr Dick Hobbs, one of Britain's foremost criminologists, believes Labour has learnt an important lesson from the Conservatives.
He says: ‘Mrs Thatcher received a pat on the back from the electorate by making crime an issue in the 1979 election.
Labour has successfully shed its image of a party of sandal-wearing social workers from the 1960s.
They have adopted the same macho rhetoric which, until recently, was the sole preserve of the Tories.’
Dr Hobbs said both parties were caught by the need to appear tough on crime while not wanting to further drain resources by jailing more people.
All of this makes the outcome difficult to call.
Since 1945 the largest swing to Labour has been 3.1pc in 1964.
The largest switch to Conservatives was 5.3pc in 1979.
If the Opposition is to achieve even the most limited of its ambitions, and push John Mayor into a minority government, Labour's bottom line is to achieve a swing larger than that seen at any election since the war.
SPOT CHECKS on MOT garages have shown up a series of rogue mechanics who break rules and cheat the system.
Random undercover checks at 50 MOT garages in the Durham and Cleveland area showed almost half were not up to scratch.
Some of the garages are still carrying out MOTs on cars.
Darlington and District Vehicle Inspectorate, who carried out the incognito tests, have now put three MOT garages out of action and banned eight MOT testers from testing more cars.
Twenty of the 50 garages checked were giving sub-standard tests, using poor equipment, lax testing procedures or passing cars in a dangerous condition.
Michael Hutton, manager of the Darlington inspectorate office, said: ‘These are very disappointing results.
It's the first time we have analysed the results of our testing like this and it isn't good.’
He also said he expected some of the banned garages and testers to appeal against the rulings, and meanwhile they were allowed to continue MOT testing.
Final warnings were slapped on 15 of the garages and if they put a foot wrong in the next five years they will also be barred from further MOT testing.
They inspectorate aims to check each of the 360 MOT garages throughout Cleveland, most of County Durham, and Northallerton.
Mr Hutton said: ‘One of the things they often slip up on is having an assistant in the car who should operate the brakes and steering so that the mechanic underneath can check everything is working properly.
‘People should know we are the body responsible for checking MOT test facilities in private garages and if they think something is wrong at a garage they should get in touch.’
A BLEAK picture of how the recession has Darlington in its grip will be discussed by councillors next week.
Borough council chief executive Clive Owen has looked at unemployment statistics, business confidence and the housing market to determine the state of the town's economy.
And his wide-ranging report suggests Darlington is in the middle of a severe recession which shows no sign of ending.
‘Over the last two years Darlington has once again mirrored the national picture of widespread recession due to depressed demand,’ he writes.
‘The effects of the Chancellor's Budget are not expected to be felt in the local economy for some time.’
The report states the number of unemployed people in Darlington's travel-to-work area was 4,049, or 8.4pc of the workforce, in December 1990.
A year later the figure was 4,948, or 10pc, and by January 1992 was up to 5,229, or 10.5pc.
More shops, offices and industrial properties are vacant today than in April 1990.
A total of 65 industrial premises are empty now compared with 30 two years ago, and Mr Owen estimates if they were all occupied around 2,780 new jobs would be created.
In April 1990 the town had 28 empty offices but now the figure stands at 52, while the number of vacant shops has risen from 20 to 46, not including 68 shops under construction at the Cornmill centre.
Council records show in the last 18 months a total of 44 businesses have stopped trading in Darlington including Miniprint, Initial Garments and Stenga Engineering.
Substantial job cuts have also taken place at major firms over the last two years including Cummins, Cleveland Structural and Whessoe.
After reviewing surveys by the Confederation of British Industry and Northern Development Company, Mr Owen reports confidence among industrialists has slumped.
The town's housing market has remained stagnant over the last year and an Abbey National survey showed property prices did not significantly alter during 1991.
House repossessions in Darlington also increased, and the county court dealt with 565 cases for non-payment of mortgage in a year.
The report will be discussed by Tuesday's meeting of the borough council's policy and resources committee.
A DOCTOR and a student will warm up for an Arctic adventure by spending tonight in a seafood freezer.
Dr John Apps and 18-year-old student Nick Scott are to spend 13 hours in temperatures of minus 23 degrees Centigrade to prepare for their trip in three weeks time.
Dr Apps, who has a practice in Neasham Road, Darlington, and Nick, of Hexham, are trying to raise money for a three-month trek with the British Schools' Exploration Society.
Their party will carry out research on the hole in the Ozone layer.
Ice cool Dr Apps said of their big night out: ‘It will be a bit boring but we'll take a walkman and try to get a good night's sleep.’
NEW crime-beating initiatives will be discussed by Darlington councillors next week.
Recent statistics show recorded crime has almost doubled in County Durham in ten years, with a 20pc rise during 1991 alone.
Nearly one quarter of all the crime in the county is recorded in Darlington, more than in any other district.
The Home Office has nominated 1992 Car Crime Prevention Year.
Council officers in Darlington have looked at ways of supporting the campaign.
Among their findings to be presented to Tuesday's meeting of the policy and resources committee they suggest:
offering employees who buy cars with a council loan the chance to include security devices in the amount they borrow.
giving higher priority to the lighting and security of public car parks.
having free registration etchings at public car parks.
carrying out regular visits to car parks for checks on lighting.
training all council staff who could help spot car thieves, such as environmental wardens and town hall attendants.
Further reports on lighting and car loans will be presented to the council in coming months.
YORK Conal Gregory (Con) Majority: 147 (0.2pc of the vote).
Percentage swing required for Labour gain: 1pc.
Independent political analyst Andrew MacMullen's opinion: ‘I doubt he would get any insurance cover on keeping his seat.
Mr Gregory could be looking around for a job at the moment.’
STOCKTON SOUTH Tim Devlin (Con).
Majority: 774 (1.3pc).
Swing required for Liberal Democrat gain: 1.5pc.
Expert opinion: ‘A difficult one to call.
Any one of the three main political parties could take the seat because they were within a few percentage points of each other at the last election.
Tim Devlin must be worried.’
DARLINGTON Michael Fallon (Con).
Majority: 2,661 (5pc).
Swing needed for Labour gain: 2.5pc.
Expert opinion: ‘Michael Fallon will put up a great fight and won't be unseated easily.
Labour are fielding a strong candidate in Alan Milburn.
Much depends on the national picture but the final result will be close.’
TYNEMOUTH Neville Trotter (Con).
Majority: 2,583 (4.4pc).
Swing needed for a Labour gain: 3pc.
Expert opinion: ‘Much will depend on how the electorate saw Neville Trotter's performance in the light of recent unrest.
Could produce an upset.’
AN AMBITIOUS pedestrian-only scheme starts in Darlington this month.
The council says the scheme will give pedestrians greater comfort and safety as well catering for the needs of the disabled.
But some fear it will cause chaos in the town centre and disrupt local trade.
Under the scheme, which starts on March 29, vehicles and orange badge drivers will be not be allowed down Skinnergate between 10.30am and 4pm and traffic along Skinnergate between Duke Street and Bondgate will become one-way northbound.
Vehicles will also be prohibited from entering High Row between 10.30am and 4pm.
All service vehicles apart from bullion and post office vans will also not be allowed to enter the areas between restricted hours.
Free reserved parking will be provided in the town centre for disabled drivers.
A TERRIFIED pensioner who has been burgled eight times during the last year said she had become a prisoner in her own home.
Madge Earley, 85, said she dare not leave her house in Shakespeare Road, Darlington, in case it is ransacked by teenage vandals.
In the last 12 months hooligans have smashed windows, twice stolen her handbag, made off with her television and taken her pension money.
Mrs Earley's grand-daughter Mandy made an urgent appeal to council housing officers.
They have agreed to look into the pensioner's plight as a matter of urgency if Miss Early gets in touch.
Miss Earley said her grandmother was at the end of her tether.
‘She doesn't know what will happen next.’
In the latest incident, Miss Earley said a teenage thug broke in while her grandmother was in the house.
‘He just walked in, pushed her aside and made off with the handbag,’ she claimed.
Housing chief Pauline Mitchell said the council would look into the complaints.
‘If Mrs Earley or her granddaughter would care to make contact we will certainly look at her application for a move.’
Mrs Mitchell said there had been no other complaints of re-occurring trouble on Shakespeare Road.
A Darlington police spokesman said: ‘We are aware of the latest incident at Mrs Earley's house and are looking into the situation.’
Raid foiled:
Police believe a man walking his dog may have foiled a bank raid.
He spotted men wearing ski masks with ladders against the wall of Barclays Bank at Sedgefield and called the police at about 1am on Thursday.
The men fled before officers arrived.
Fashion show:
The parent teachers' association of St John's RC Comprehensive School in Bishop Auckland is to stage a fashion show at the school at 7.30pm on March 23.
Disgust at Europe con
THERE are no advantages in Britain being part of the European Community.
It is disgusting when folk in Brussels overrule my country's decisions and decide what our representatives in Westminster can or cannot do.
In my opinion the European Parliament is very expensive and will get worse.
We have been ripped off rotten with their metric and decimal.
Like many others in my age group (72 years), I learned about pounds, shillings and pence, yards, feet and inches, gallons, quarts and pints until the EC decided we would be better their way.
What a con.
I am sure others like me do not want to be part of this.
Mrs P. Taylor, 12 Church Close, Marske-by-the-Sea, Cleveland.
Affection for BNP I REFER to Anne Kostalas's article (Echo February 24) referring to rival demonstrations in Sunderland by the British National Party and the Tyne and Wear Anti Facist Association.
There are four interviews and reported comments with supporters of the latter and none whatsoever for the former.
Are you frightened some of your readers will agree with the aims as outlined in what I believe form part of the BNP manifesto: support for reintroduction of both capital and corporal punishment, withdrawal from EEC membership, return to National Service, to name but a few items.
Many readers, particularly those 50 years and above, remember the day very clearly and with affection when the above were part of everyday life in this country.
Francis B.H. Davies, Elmhirst, Winton, Northallerton.
The price of justice THERE are so many maladministrations of justice exposed by successful appeals in the law courts that many people wonder what is the cause.
Perhaps too many all-embracing laws are drafted in such a slipshod manner that police may think it gives them authority to frame any charge and judges are given the power to determine the law according to their own opinions.
My own opinion is that the salaries of judges are so low that they do not attract the best brains.
The low salary paid to the recently appointed DPP is a disgrace for such an important post.
We can't buy justice on an economy label.
John Lowe, 7 Dene Park Court, Darlington.
A POLICE officer who grabbed a car thief and hung on as he drove off has been commended for his bravery by Durham chief constable Frank Taylor.
PC Kevin Marshall was dragged 15 yards in the incident in Darlington last November.
They both fell from the getaway car and the 19-year-old man was arrested.
Seven other County Durham officers and a special constable have also been commended by the chief constable.
Det Insp Paul Green, Det Sgt Martyn Lowrie, and Det Con Stephen McLean were all praised for their investigation into an armed robbery in Bishop Auckland last January.
PC Stephen Huntrod climbed four storeys to rescue a 19-year-old man who had got stuck on the roof of the unsafe Old Vic theatre in Front Street, Stanley, in November.
PC David Beverley, WPC Karen Chestney and special constable Andrew Holmes restrained a knifewielding man at a night club in Spennymoor last July.
PC Edward Walls spent 20 minutes trying to resuscitate a 71-year-old heart attack victim at a Remembrance Day parade in Blackhall, Consett.
BURGLARS stole a pensioner's savings while she was at her sister's funeral.
The thieves took £80 that 73-year-old Peggy Metcalfe had been saving for her electricity bill.
The burglary happened at the end of February when Darlington Borough Council was changing locks at 500 old people's flats after spare keys went missing.
Mrs Metcalfe, of Ascot View, Red Hall, Darlington, said the burglars must have used a key as there was no damage.
But Mike Bennett, director of community services for the council said it was not clear whether one of the missing keys had been used.
Road accidents in the North-East have fallen dramatically in the last ten years.
Statistics show the number of accidents dropping 15pc since 1981 to give the region one of the lowest rates for fatal and serious accidents.
The rate could decrease further this year as more than 100 local safety schemes are set up along roads in the region.
Working groups hope to reduce all road casualties by a third in the region by 2000.
Millions of pounds are being spent on improvements to roads and the upgrading of the A1 is hoped to be complete by 2000.
Communications will improve when the Channel Tunnel opens.
One train will leave Edinburgh each morning, stopping at Newcastle and Darlington en route to Paris.
A night-time service will also run from Glasgow to Paris and Brussels via Carlisle.
Passenger traffic through the North's airports increased by four per cent between 1989 and 1990, compared with a 6pc decrease nationally.
More than 42m people used the Newcastle Metro last year.
Other transport schemes currently being considered include a new metro system in Sunderland and a Light Rail Transit System on Teesside.
Man burgled pub to pay for drugs
A MAN burgled a pub just a few weeks after he was caught with the proceeds from a break in at the same place.
Colin Marron forced his way into the Tam O'Shanter in Lawrence Street, York and made off with £171 worth of cigarettes.
York Crown Court heard yesterday that he had committed the offence to finance his drug addiction.
Unemployed Marron, 23, admitted carrying out the burglary.
Sentence was deferred for six months.
Two months ago Marron, of Seventh Avenue, York, had been caught with cigarettes stolen the pub.
He said he had found them on a tip but was convicted of theft by York magistrates.
Jobs programme:
York city council has published its new economic programme for the forthcoming year, outlining its efforts to attract jobs to the area.
It hopes to discuss policies with local industry and business.
Singing date:
More than 400 people are expected to attend auditions for the Sainsbury's Choir of the Year competition at York's Barbican centre on March 21.
Ten adult and youth choirs will bid for two titles and £5,000 in prize money.
Archbishop visits:
The Archbishop of York, Dr John Habgood, is to take part in centenary celebrations at Snainton Church of England School, near Scarborough.
He will be attending a special service on Monday, March 23 at the school.
Motorbike fans:
Owners of BMW motorcycles from all over Britain will be converging on the Folk Hall at New Earswick, near York, today for the annual meeting of the BMW Club of Great Britain.
Homes grant:
The Housing Corporation has allocated £1.8m to housing associations to build homes in the Scarborough council area in the next financial year.
As a result 60 houses and flats will be built at Muston Road, Filey; Keld Close, Newby; Prospect Mount, Scarborough; Seavegate, East Ayton; and a site to be determined at Whitby.
Heritage mark:
Scarborough council is to spend £3,000 to provide 45 plaques for landmark buildings on the resort's heritage trail.
The Rotary Club and Civic Society are to be asked to help finance the project.
Shop fire:
Fire broke out in the Ghyll Foot tearooms, Gunnerside, Swaledale, yesterday lunchtime when heat from a flue set alight a wooden frame in a false wall.
The fire was dealt with by retained firemen from Reeth, Swaledale.
Charity boost:
Thirsk based Madeira Threads (UK) has given more than £550 to the UK charity, Families for Children, which cares for destitute and deprived Third World children.
The money was raised in various ways, including donations from the public and from firms exhibiting at the company's craft, embroidery and fashion event in Harrogate last year.
Music evening: Knaresborough Accordion and Fiddle Society presents a Scottish evening of music and song at the Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond, today at 7.30pm.
THINGS are looking rosy for one Darlington businessman thanks to the election.
Frank Allan, who runs a corner store in Corporation Road with his wife Christine, landed an order for red roses from the local Labour party.
Labour leaders are anxious to make sure volunteers sport a fresh red rose every day while on the campaign trail with Labour candidate Alan Milburn.
Mr Allan, 56, who has voted Tory in previous elections, said: ‘Things have been pretty hard for the small businessman recently.
This order came like a bolt from the blue and I'm very grateful for it.’
Accepting the first dozen roses, Mr Milburn commented: ‘Small businessmen like Frank's have been hard hit by the recession and the poll tax.
They are looking for someone to give them a helping hand.’
He said 300 similar small businesses had gone out of business in Darlington since the last election.
A RAID on a Post Office turned into a ‘Whitehall farce’ when the robbers got more than they bargained for.
The three men got away with six times the amount they expected from the raid on a West Auckland Post Office.
Stephen Elstob, Reginald Wishart and Gary Drummond had expected around £5,000 but instead collected £29,980.
In their haste to dispose of the money some of it was burned and some ended up in a sewer.
Yesterday, at Teesside Crown Court they admitted robbery.
Tim Roberts, prosecuting, said the Post Office in East Green was robbed in November.
Drummond, of Thompson Street West, and Elstob, of Trafalgar Terrace, both Darlington, smashed a reinforced window as post master Thomas Hutchinson was opening the safe at 5.10pm.
Mr Hutchinson was knocked to the ground as they broke their way in.
Elstob was brandishing a pick axe handle and both men were wearing balaclavas.
Mr Hutchinson managed to raise the alarm but the two men helped themselves to the cash and made off in the car driven by Wishart, of no fixed abode.
The stolen car was damaged as they made their getaway and the three men transferred to Wishart's own car and drove to his mother's home where they shared out the money in the attic.
Mr Roberts said when the men were arrested, Angela Wolfe, 18, of Thompson Street West, Darlington, Drummond's girlfriend took £14,267 to Newcastle where she tried to put it in a safety deposit box.
She was arrested when she returned to Newcastle with the cash because none of the banks had accepted it.
Drummond, 24, and Wishart, 23, also admitted taking a Vauxhall Cavalier without the owner's consent.
Elstob, 23, admitted being carried in the car.
Deputy Judge Harold Hewitt jailed them for eight years each.
Wolfe admitted handling some of the stolen money and was placed on probation for 18 months.
Aidan Marron, defending Wishart and Drummond, said the men had not expected to get such a large haul.
He said: ‘If they really had contemplated they would get such a sum of money a part of the plan would have been where to put the money for a temporary period.
‘It was like a Whitehall farce the way that money was passed around when they got it.’
Brian Sommerville, defending Elstob, said he had become involved because his girlfriend was pregnant and he needed money to help her.
He said: ‘He was completely out of his depth in this matter and never dreamed there would be anything like the £30,000 that they in fact took.’
The court was told Wolfe was seven months pregnant and had become involved because Drummond was her boyfriend and another of the defendants was her brother.
POLICE caught two burglars as they broke into a Darlington house, a court was told.
Jay Disley was spotted by the police looking in through a broken window and his accomplice Simon Brooklyn was found in the kitchen of the house in Berrybank Crescent.
Yesterday Brooklyn, 22, and Disley, 17, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted burglary.
Judge Harold Hewitt placed Brooklyn, of no fixed abode, on probation for 18 months with a condition he attend an alcohol education course.
Disley, of Spring Court, Darlington, was given a community service order for 80 hours.
Both were ordered to pay £85 costs.
The court was told the house was unoccupied when the pair broke in but the police received information that a burglary was in progress.
Roderick Hunt, defending Brooklyn, said he had been in custody for five weeks.
He said: ‘This young man is ashamed of what he has done.
‘Quite clearly the motive and source of the offences is his excessive alcohol consumption.’
Laurence Hazell, defending Disley, said this was his first and last offence and he apologised to the householder for the burglary.
AN anti-apartheid group has offered its support to councillors who boycotted South African government delegation.
A spokesman for the Durham Anti-Apartheid Group said the Labour Group in Darlington Borough Council had been right to refuse to see the delegation.
The spokesman said Tories who did meet the South Africans should remember that white minority rule still existed there.
The spokesman said: ‘It is worth remembering 85 per cent of the population of South Africa are denied any voting rights.
‘The time to meet the South African government is when it is truly representative of all South African people.’
Adoption meeting:
Bill Wade, Liberal Democrat hopeful for the Bishop Auckland seat, will be formally adopted by members of his party at a meeting at 8pm in the Old Manor House Hotel, West Auckland at 8pm tomorrow.
Party appointments:
At the annual general meeting of the Willington Labour Party, Ron Henfrey was appointed chairman, Brian Myers was appointed secretary and press officer, and Alan Townsend was appointed treasurer.
Meeting called:
Tenants' individual rent arrears will be on the agenda at a meeting of Wear Valley Council's housing and environmental services sub-committee next Wednesday.
Planning meeting:
Wear Valley District Council's planning committee will meet at 6pm on Wednesday at Crook Civic Centre.
Road closed:
Tonight the A167 through Ferryhill will be closed from midnight until 6am on Monday morning.
The closure is to allow work to replace the Ferryhill footbridge which spans the road.
It is planned that the road will be closed again between those times from midnight on March 21.
Diversions through Ferryhill will be signposted.
Bound over:
Thomas Edmund Carr Stuart, 40, of Bath Terrace, Seaham, was bound over by Darlington magistrates yesterday for being drunk and disorderly on a train from Kings Cross to Newcastle.
Stuart, who denied the charge, was taken off the train at Darlington's Bank Top Station following an argument with the ticket collector.
Shop break-in:
Police are hunting thieves who broke into the VG Stores, at The Green, Hurworth, and stole more than £5,000 worth of cigarettes early yesterday.
Police say the thieves managed to interfere with the alarm system before breaking into the shop.
An unknown quantity of cash has also gone missing.
Traffic-free zone starts this month
A PEDESTRIAN-only scheme starts in Darlington starts on March 29.
Vehicles and orange badge drivers will be not be allowed down Skinnergate between 10.30am and 4pm and traffic along Skinnergate between Duke Street and Bondgate will become one-way northbound.
Vehicles will also be prohibited from entering High Row between 10.30am and 4pm.
Free reserved parking will be provided in the town centre for disabled drivers.
Man fined:
Darrell Clayton Henderson, of Malvern Crescent, Darlington, was fined £50 and ordered to pay £20 costs by town magistrates yesterday for being drunk and disorderly.
Henderson, 24, admitted the charge.
Bound over:
Thomas Edmund Carr Stuart, 40, of Bath Terrace, Seaham, was bound over by Darlington magistrates yesterday for being drunk and disorderly on a train from Kings Cross to Newcastle.
Stuart, who denied the charge, was taken off the train at Darlington's Bank Top Station following an argument with the ticket collector.
Diversions through Ferryhill will be signposted.
Access move:
Moves to reopen the access between Milton Street and Dundas Street in Saltburn will be discussed at the next parish council meeting.
Langbaurgh council decided to take no action in view of a likely cost of £7,000-plus possible difficulty in achieving a compulsory purchase order.
Fans bailed:
Fifteen football supporters 13 from Hartlepool and two from Darlington were arrested after Saturday's Third Division derby match.
All were bailed to appear in court to face public order charges.
TV find:
A patrolling policeman found an Hitachi colour television on land at the rear of the Nissan garage in West View Road, Hartlepool.
It is thought to have been taken in a burglary and police want to hear from anyone who believes they own it.
They can be contacted on .
Car stolen:
Police are appealing for witnesses following the theft of a C registered Ford Fiesta from Raby Road in Hartlepool at the weekend.
Burglary warning:
Detectives in Hartlepool are investigating a series of burglaries in the Welldeck Road area in which electrical equipment and jewellery was stolen.
All break-ins occurred during early evening and householders are being urged to be on the guard.
Factory fire:
Two fire engines were called to the Sweet and Savoury factory on the Oakesway Trading Estate in Hartlepool to tackle a fire which destroyed the thermostat and motor on a packaging machine.
House raids:
A team of burglars is thought to be operating in the Chester Road area of Hartlepool.
Detectives have issued a warning following raids on home in Acclom Street, Chester Road and Marston Gardens.
Club burgled:
Thieves stole cash from fruit machines when they broke into the working men's club at Great Ayton on Saturday morning.
Tools taken:
Various tools and car spare parts were stolen by thieves who broke into a Vauxhall Astra car at the Black Swan on the A19 near Stokesley.
Car break-in:
Police are investigating a break-in of a car parked at Hambleton leisure centre, Stone Cross, Northallerton.
It is not known what was stolen.
Bike stolen:
A grey mountain bike valued at £630 has been stolen from the back of the Crown and Anchor pub, Sowerby, near Thirsk.
MANY of County Durham's buses should be sent on a one-way trip to a wrecker's yard, according to a report from transport chiefs.
Almost 15pc of single and double deckers in service in the county are more than 15 years old the limit of their economic life.
And it is feared Durham County Council may have to find more cash to subsidise bus services as operators could either put up fares or scrap unpopular routes because they cannot afford to replace worn out vehicles.
In a report to members of the county council's highways and transportation sub-committee, director of environment David Newbegin says it would take about £19m to replace the old buses.
The council's survey shows that 50 out of the 340 double and single decker buses in the fleets of County Durham's six major operators are more than 15 years old.
Ten single decker buses currently in service in the county are just a few months away from their 20th birthdays and there are still three 1973-registered double deckers trundling around Durham.
The survey of buses from Go-Ahead Northern, United, Darlington Transport, Eden, Diamond, and the Bishop Auckland depot of OK Travel shows that in January this year the typical double decker was 11.1 years old.
The average age of single deck vehicles was 10.3 years, while the county's 88 more recently introduced mini-buses had been on the roads an average of 5.3 years.
Mr Newbegin said Go-Ahead Northern is currently taking delivery of 30 new single deck buses which will bring the average age down to 9.1 years by May.
He said: ‘Older vehicles can be operated satisfactorily given appropriate maintenance, but eventually this becomes uneconomic.’
He said the life expectancy of a large bus was about 15 years, while minibuses would be unlikely to be viable for longer than eight years.
Working on those figures, he predicted that 58pc of double deckers, 52pc of single deckers and 92pc of minibuses currently operated by the six major companies would need to be replaced by mid 1996.
He warned: ‘It is much harder to encourage people to travel by public rather than private transport if buses are old, uncomfortable and unreliable.’
NORTH-EAST politicians clashed yesterday over the health service in the first major debate of the election campaign.
Labour employment spokesman Tony Blair, MP for Sedgefield, claimed health staff faced enormous problems ‘under a Government not committed to the health service’.
But Tory schools minister Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington hit back: ‘No one wants to go back to the old days of councillors running hospitals, of Nupe deciding whether or not your operations should be carried out.’
The debate was on Tyne Tees TV's Point of Order.
Mr Fallon, said the Government had a proven track record which would carry it to victory.
Mr Blair claimed the people of Britain were ready for a change after years of Conservative mismanagement.
And Liberal Democrats treasury spokesman Alan Beith, MP for Berwick, said he is confident of a surge in support for his party.
Mr Fallon defended the Government's record on unemployment blaming the soaring number of jobless in the South for the Tories present unpopularity.
His comments were seized by Mr Blair, who said: ‘In this region, we still have the highest level of unemployment than any other region in the country.’
On education, Mr Beith blamed the Government for constantly changing the rules and making teachers' lives a misery.
Mr Fallon fired back: ‘Education in this country is run by the councils and largely they have been running it very badly.
Since the mid-eighties we have had to take it over.’
Triple joy:
A mother who gave up fertility drugs after they failed to bring results has given birth to triplets.
Annette Rennoldson, of Tyne Avenue, Leadgate, Consett, had three girls thought to be the first all-female trio born at Shotley Bridge Hospital.
Bouncer training:
Cleveland police are offering to run a scheme to vet, train and register pub and club doormen.
Police are preparing to make a presentation of their proposal to councillors and town hall officials in the near future.
Thieves hunted:
Whitby police are looking for thieves who preyed on an elderly woman living alone and made off with family heirlooms worth £15,000.
The woman, 90, was asleep in the house in Rosedale Lane at Port Mulgrave, between Staithes and Whitby, when the thieves struck at night.
Their haul included a painting valued at £7,500 dated from between 1680–1720.
Pond purloined:
A Scarborough school's nature garden has been scuppered by thieves who made off with their fish pond.
The £4  ft by 8ft plastic pond was taken from the yard of Overdale Primary School in Eastfield where it was being stored before being sunk into the ground as part of a nature garden.
Seaman hurt:
The Amble lifeboat was called out yesterday to take a crewman with a gashed hand off an oil rig support ship in the North Sea.
Wedding car firm probed
POLICE are investigating a Darlington wedding car company which has vanished from its Yarm Road premises in Darlington.
The Northern Echo revealed on Saturday that Darlington Wedding Cars had disconnected its phone and left no forwarding address.
One man who booked a Rolls Royce and two Mercedes with the company last July said: ‘We booked it and paid a £120 deposit and then found out later that things were not right.
I've written that money off now.
But we have managed to get another car booked with another firm.
We have been lucky but there might be other people who will not be.’
Anyone with any information should contact Darlington police on .
POLICE are investigating the disappearance of a wedding car company.
Darlington Wedding Cars operators have vanished from the firm's Yarm Road premises and it is feared many engaged couples could find themselves stranded on their ceremony day.
The Northern Echo revealed on Saturday that the company had disconnected its phone and left no forwarding address.
Trading standards officers are looking into the matter following complaints.
One man booked a Rolls Royce and two Mercedes with the company last July.
He does not wish to be named but said: ‘We booked it and paid a £120 deposit and then found out later that things were not right.
I've written that money off now.
‘We have managed to get another car with another firm.
We have been lucky but there might be other people who will not be.’
His next-door neighbours, who are getting married at the same time, also booked with Darlington Wedding Cars but they too have changed their booking.
‘I've been to the police about this and they are trying to take it further.
They are trying to get as many people affected to come forward to do something, the main stumbling block is they can't find the company.’
A CID spokesman said the matter would be investigated further when all the information had filtered through.
‘We would need to look closely at allegations of this nature,’ he said.
Richardson hospital: ‘fear of closure’
A health authority is asset stripping a Teesdale hospital trust, a councillor has claimed.
Coun. John Watson told town councillors that Darlington health authority was using funds from the R. T. Richardson Trust for health care outside Teesdale while residents were forced to fund raise to keep open the hospital.
‘Darlington Health Authority is asset stripping the Richardson Trust and I have a nasty feeling they will spring a closure of the hospital on us,’ he said.
And the interest generated from its sale of trust land near Richardson Hospital for a nursing home and residential development was funding health care outside Teesdale, he warned.
Fears that the sale of land would add to car parking problems in Barnard Castle have prompted councillors to demand a special meeting with Darlington health authority.
Coun. Bob Deacon said, however, that a condition of the sale was that 35 parking spaces must be retained.
‘My objection was that we would lose the car park but on reading the prospectus I see it is not the case,’ he said.
Hospital land at Barnard Castle will be sold for development, a health authority official confirmed after winning a planning appeal last Thursday.
Mr Jim Williamson, estates and properties director for Darlington health authority, has already confirmed there are no future plans to enlarge Richardson Hospital.
Proceeds from the sale of the two-acre plot will be kept in perpetuity, with the interest used to provide extra health services for Teesdale residents, he said.
High profile, but Greens will not fight seats
The Green Party plans to keep a high profile throughout the general election campaign, despite its decision not to field candidates in Darlington and Richmond.
Dr. Robert Upshall, who would have fought for a seat in Parliament, said party supporters would continue to hammer home the environmental message.
The three main political parties were really only paying lip service to green matters and not tackling the underlying economic issues, said Dr.
Upshall, a Darlington GP.
THE COST ‘We have an initiative which is still under wraps for the moment but which we will be taking during the election campaign,’ he said.
The Greens had decided against contesting the two seats because it would cost £1,500 to enter each candidate and the money would probably be lost.
The party relied on its own fund-raising while other political parties were helped financially by business and other organisations.
Tuesday's budget had done little to further the environmental cause.
‘Reducing car tax is not really taking on board the long term interests,’ he said.
‘Maybe in the short term it is an advantage to a few people working in the car industry but it only encourages more people to generate more pollution.’
Unleaded petrol and encouraging the public not to buy CFC aerosols only touched the tip of the environmental iceberg.
He praised Mr Michael Heseltine, environment secretary, for trying to bring forward the target date for reduction of carbon monoxide emissions.
‘However, he seems to be having problems with his friends in the cabinet on that one,’ said Dr. Upshall.
‘That just about sums up something which is a short term political advantage being given priority over the fate of the planet.
In 100 years they would regard that as pathetic.’
Dr. Upshall stood in the Richmond by-election in 1989, the last county council elections and Darlington borough elections last May.
Rival MPs unite against health authority merger
Local politicians from both main parties this week said they would resist any plans to merge Darlington and SouthWest Durham health authorities.
Mr Michael Fallon MP and his Labour rival, Mr Alan Milburn, said it was important that Darlington kept control of its own hospital services after health unions expressed concern over what they feared could be a ‘hidden agenda’ of merger plans.
Sources inside the health authority believed proposals for purchasing consortia linking together districts throughout the Northern region could be the forerunner of a fully fledged merger, possibly developing into a system of county-wide authorities.
However, the Northern Regional Health Authority denied there were any plans for such a link-up.
Already Darlington and South-West Durham authorities had joined forces to increase their service-buying power and other districts were keen to follow suit, said Mr Gary Smith, director of finance and business strategy with the NRHA.
The move would create seven powerful purchasing consortia which would secure the best deals for patients in the region.
‘Darlington and SouthWest Durham pioneered the concept almost two years ago and this is just an extension of that,’ said Mr Smith.
North and South Tees and Hartlepool were looking at getting together in the same way, as were other districts in the North of the region.
No hard and fast rules governed the setting up and running of the joint authorities, which could simply go for post-sharing and joint-buying or could opt for combined contracting.
‘It needs to be worked through at local level and discussions will be taking place for some time,’ said Mr Smith.
However, unions were worried health care could suffer as a result of further merging.
Services currently available in all districts could be concentrated in just one hospital and patients might have to travel many miles for treatment, it was feared.
Also, replacing 16 existing district authorities with perhaps six larger bodies would make it more difficult for health managers to identify with particular communities and their needs.
Mr Fallon said streamlining services and ‘getting rid of a few managers’ would benefit patients but moves towards a full merger would not win his support.
‘We must have our own authority here in Darlington,’ he said.
Mr Milburn blamed NHS reforms and the move towards health privatisation for the fears.
‘The changes have been driven by the government's introduction of market forces into the health service,’ he said.
‘The aim is to provide a bigger market place.
I will resist any moves that would mean Darlington losing control of its health services.’
Rumours circulating among some health authority staff that the chief executives of Darlington and South-West Durham would be replaced by one officer brought in from another area were hotly denied at regional level.
Mr David Ryan, who held the post in SouthWest Durham, had been on extended sick leave for some time and Mr Smith suspected rumours could have sprung from that fact.
Mr Geoff Nichol, Darlington chief executive, had been asked to help with a project looking at community care but would still hold his position with the district, said Mr Smith.
‘A number of district officers have been asked to look at a variety of projects across the service,’ he said.
‘Mr Nichol has a lot of knowledge in the fields of mental health and this is one area we have wanted to look at for a while.’
However, union officials believed more merger proposals were in the pipeline.
Mr Phil Lenton, assistant divisional officer for Nupe, said: ‘We are looking at another reorganisation of the NHS in the Northern region with all the demoralisation and uncertainty that creates.
But things are being done by stealth.’
Staff already worried by changes in the health service might also be tempted to leave their jobs because of added uncertainty about their futures.
Reflecting a gloomy nation
Almost 3,000 jobs could be created in Darlington if all the empty industrial units and factories were occupied.
Instead unemployment in January was the highest for ten years and economic recovery still a long way off.
The gloomy prediction is made by Mr Clive Owen, chief executive of Darlington borough council, in a report to councillors on Tuesday.
There are currently 65 industrial premises standing empty, more than double that in April and May 1990.
And Mr Owen calculates that as many as 2,780 jobs could be created if the premises were occupied.
His report also says 52 offices are empty against 28 premises a year earlier.
Forty-six shops are vacant compared with 20 two years ago.
Today's figure does not include the Cornmill Shopping Centre which opens later this year.
The report on the state of the Darlington local economy between 1989 and 1992 was ordered by Coun. John Williams, Labour group leader and chairman of the policy and resources committee.
Unemployment in the Darlington travel to work area in January this year was the highest for ten years at 5,229 or 10.5 per cent.
The number of long-term unemployed has continued to increase and in January totalled 2,286.
Council records show that during the last 18 months 32 companies and 12 sole traders stopped trading in the town ‘for one reason or another.’
The officer's report quotes CBI and Northern Development Company reports of falling business confidence within the Region.
Information from local estate agents shows the housing market to remain stagnant.
Darlington County Court, which also covers Northallerton and Richmond, in 1991 saw 565 homes repossessed for non-payment of mortgages.
In conclusion Mr Owen says Darlington has mirrored the national picture of ‘widespread recession due to depressed demand.’
‘Most significant has been the continuing increase in the number of long-term unemployed and the slump in business optimism.
This is also reflected in the increase in vacant industrial and commercial floorspace, and business failures.’
He does not expect the effects of the Budget to be felt locally for some time.
HEALTH CHIEF RETIRES
Mr John Tholen this week announced he would retire as chairman of Darlington health authority at the end of March.
Mr Tholen, aged 67, was appointed to the post in 1988 after almost a decade as chief executive of the Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority.
His business background enabled him to guide the health authority through some of the biggest changes in the NHS since its inception.
During the war he served with the Royal Navy Combined Operations in the Far East before working as an overseas executive for Fison's.
He then joined ICI on Teesside where he became commercial director of the petrochemicals division.
Mr Tholen, of Girsby, has two sons, one an RAF Jaguar pilot who served during the Gulf War and the other a marine engineer.
‘I will be sorry to leave the health authority,’ he said.
‘But I am certain that the progress made in the quality of service to patients in the face of fundamental changes to the health service will continue apace.
‘I can look back on many significant achievements by the staff.
More patients are being treated in more specialities and with more up-to-date methods than ever before — a reflection of the hard work and high levels of professionalism of the staff who serve the people of Darlington and Teesdale.’
Private hospital plan is blocked
Plans for a private hospital for Darlington have been scuppered by the environment secretary following a planning inquiry earlier this year.
Parking problems and noise in the mainly residential area around Darlington Memorial hospital, where the development would have taken place, were given as the main reasons for dismissing the appeal by Surrey-based Bioplan.
The company wanted to build a £3m., 30-bed unit which would create up to 50 jobs.
However, the borough planning committee said the proposals would add to already serious traffic problems in the Hollyhurst Road area.
The government inspector who headed the two-day public inquiry in January upheld the local authority's fears.
Up to 90 parking spaces could be lost from the hospital car park and the 86 staff and 30 visitor spaces planned for the private hospital were ‘wholly inadequate’, he said.
The Bioplan proposal would ‘materially increase the demand for car parking at the Memorial hospital site and this would lead to further substantial on-street parking at Hollyhurst Road, which would be detrimental to highway safety’, said the inspector's report to the environment secretary.
Increased noise and fumes from traffic would inconvenience residents, despite plans to build a screening wall around the car park.
Coun. Mrs Eleanor Young (Lab), chairman of the borough works and health committee and chairman of Darlington community health council, was pleased the inspector's report supported her fears.
‘When planning permission was refused because of the traffic problems some people gave us a very hard time,’ she said.
‘This bears out what we were saying at the time.’
Mr Alan Milburn, Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, was pleased the appeal had failed but suspected Bioplan might have abandoned its plans for the town anyway due to financial problems.
Mr Peter Stewart, hospital unit general manager, would not comment on the outcome of the appeal until he had heard officially that it had been defeated.
Labour planning policy attacked
THE Labour Party's land policy paper, Planning a New Agenda, has been called partially flawed by Christopher Jonas replying to it for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
‘I find it difficult to see how a future Labour Secretary of State would be able to rule out completely any development in the Green Belt,’ he said.
Other Labour proposals which the RICS disagrees with include an end to the submitting of duplicate planning applications and a review of development plans every two years.
DARLINGTON'S twin-town wants local students to work in Germany during the summer.
Mulheim is offering two posts in the town library and two in a summer camp in north Germany.
Students must be 18, live or study in Darlington and have good knowledge of German.
Details are available from the Economic Development Unit, 10 Houndgate, Darlington.
HEALTH secretary William Waldegrave has been called in to settle the row over an impending shake-up of health care in the North-East.
Mr Waldegrave has been asked to provide a full explanation of the changes planned by the Northern Regional Health Authority.
Senior consultants and local politicians fear plans to create powerful purchasing consortiums among the region's 15 districts are the first step towards merger.
They say any moves to create larger district authorities would be a disaster leading to chaos within the service and widespread job losses.
Regional health authority officers have denied any plans for a merger but have failed to rule out the idea altogether.
Now the Labour candidate defending Bishop Auckland, Derek Foster, has written to the Health Secretary over his fears of a hidden agenda.
He believes any merger with Darlington could have a devastating effect on health provision for Bishop Auckland.
Mr Foster also called on the region's chairman Peter Carr to issue a statement clarifying the position, adding: ‘So far the NRH has failed to provide any kind of explanation or issue any credible public statement.
‘People are getting very worried about all this.
They think we are moving inexorably towards a merger situation without any form of discussion or consultation.’
Mr Foster said only a statement from the Health Secretary would allay public fears that care in the North-East is about to undergo its most radical shake-up for years.
Alan Milburn, Labour's Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, said he would be writing to the RHA calling on management to halt further moves towards purchasing consortiums.
He added: ‘These changes are being made to the organisation of the NHS in Darlington by the back door.
With a General Election pending and the prospect of a new Government it would be quite wrong to force these changes through now.’
Mr Milburn said he thought plans for purchasing consortiums would be the thin end of the wedge.
POLICE are being paid thousands of pounds in overtime to look after convicted prisoners housed in North-East police stations.
Officers have been guarding inmates who cannot be accommodated in overcrowded jails following the riots at Strangeways jail in Manchester.
They are part of a nationwide operation which has cost millions of pounds after the disturbances which destroyed hundreds of prison cells.
The overtime bill run up by police forces throughout the country already totals several hundred thousand pounds.
In County Durham police officers at Bishop Auckland, Darlington, Chester-le-Street and Consett have all been required to guard convicts from time to time.
Prisoner numbers fluctuate from week to week and there are currently only four convicts in the county's cells.
Cells in North Yorkshire have also been used for the operation and there are currently 28 prisoners locked up in the region's jails.
A Home Office spokeswoman said: ‘We realise that this is not a very satisfactory state of affairs.
It costs a lot of money but the demands on our prison system mean there is very little else we can do.’
The Northern Echo prompted a public outcry last year when it revealed how a night in the cells at Bishop Auckland police station cost £200 dearer than a room at the Savoy Hotel in London.
A spokeswoman for Durham police said officers were paid overtime to look after prisoners.
She added: ‘Prisoners have to be checked at regular intervals and given proper exercise.’
The Government spends £1.4bn per year on the prison service and hopes to open 11 new jails by the end of 1992.
Police hunt for missing girls
POLICE last night issued an appeal for help to find two schoolgirls missing from their homes since Sunday.
Kathleen Armstrong, 13, of Queensland, South Shields, and Jeanie Ryder, 13, of Allanville, Camperdown, Northumberland were born in Zambia and are described as being of mixed-race appearance.
It is believed they were heading for the South Shields area when they disappeared Witness plea: Police have appealed for witnesses to a disturbance in the Albert Street and Princess Square area of central Harrogate on Friday.
Officers say up to fifteen young men were involved in the incident, in which a white Rover car badly damaged.
A pick-axe handle was found nearby.
Teacher leaders
IN what will surely go down in history as one of the most popular elections of all time almost six million votes were cast.
The winner will be announced on Thursday morning both here and on TFM Radio.
He or she will be of course one of the nation's teachers of the year.
Pupils were invited to join the poll, casting as many votes as they wished simply by writing down a teacher's name again and again.
Time was repetition of the same words over and over again was called lines and constituted a punishment.
Yet throughout England school pupils have banded together to launch campaigns for teachers in their school.
TFM of Stockton have had a phenomenal response throughout its region, said its station manager Brian Lister.
‘The voting is finished and the figures are now all in,’ he said last night.
‘Students took them to their Woolworth stores and they are then passed on to us.
There are so many they are still being collated.’
The town which took Teacher of the Year to its collective satchel was Billingham which provided two of the early leaders in the race.
Thirteen teachers received votes altogether in a total of 2,203,000 cast.
Of course, it is possible that the favourites' votes may have been split, allowing other contenders to sneak in.
The radio folk have some homework to do between now and Thursday.
Spooky snooze
BY the time he had finished his latest enterprising but utterly unproductive search for phantoms Brian Smith was already planning the next.
The Houghton-le-Spring ghostbuster (if he was getting paid on piece work his income would be nil) intends to sleep in a graveyard where the victims of a murderess are buried.
Later in the year he will again keep all-night vigil in a couple of the NorthEast castles said to be haunted.
‘They're always very helpful indeed when you explain what you want to do,’ said Brian after the latest fun but fruitless escapade round 13 graveyards.
As a part of a bet all the proceeds of which will as usual go to charity he will stay in East Rainton churchyard in the spring.
He probably will not sleep in the unlikely event of the ghost of mass murderess Mary Ann Cotton showing up to see the graves of her victims.
He is not bothered in the slightest by the dark or confrontation.
He has slept in graveyards since being a boy and six years ago slept in a coffin to win a bet.
The latest jaunt made £100 for charity.
People still pay up despite the complete lack of ghosts.
Weel spoken A
RATHER neat addition to this space's collection of accents, dialogue the English language in general and the collapse of dialect in particular is provided by this month's Dalesman.
On the way back from the shops a young lad and his mum called in on granddad, a Yorkshireman of the old school.
The lad's sister had pains of one sort or another for which grandad's suggested treatment was: ‘Tha wants to rub her reight weel.’
The boy said nothing until he and his mum had departed.
On the way home he asked his mum: ‘Mum, where is our Janey's right wheel?’
Improvements should make roads safer
I REFER to the reports regarding the proposed traffic scheme for Skerne Park Estate (Echo March 5 and 6).
The only proposed narrowing of the road in Lakeside will be at the junction to Hammond Drive, the purpose of which will be to filter the traffic using the junction.
These junctions are also proposed for other parts of the estate.
The scheme also provides for the installation of speed humps on the estate, seven of which will be installed in Lakeside.
That number is considered necessary to reduce traffic speed to 20mph.
Durham County Council has given assurances that a close watch will be kept on the parking situation, especially at the weekends and if it was warranted, yellow lines would be placed down the west side of Lakeside.
It should be noted that there are no houses on this side of the road.
The local emergency services have stated that the proposals will not cause any significant delays.
One would think placing speed humps in a road and narrowing the junction would result in improved safety even after taking into consideration an anticipated increase in traffic.
G.J. O'Neill, Loraine Crescent, Darlington.
Russia's latest proposal, the banning of arms in outer space in exchange for closing Western military bases, is dismissed by the USA as ‘wholly unacceptable’.
Meanwhile, the USA announces it is to explode a nuclear weapon in outer space during the tests in the Pacific next month.
It is unlikely that miners will be asked to work Saturday shifts this summer, reports The Northern Echo.
This is because of a National Coal Board drive for efficiency.
Charlie Kunz, the pianist whose signature tune was Clap Hands, Here Comes Charlie, dies at his home in Sussex, aged 61.
A brand new weekly women's magazine, Woman's Day, is launched.
Price 5d., it is ‘brimful of practical advice for home lovers,’ according to advertisements.
Atomic power stations to be built in areas of outstanding natural beauty in Britain will have an initial life of only 20 years and will then be left derelict, the president of the Ramblers Association tells members in South Durham and North Yorkshire at their annual meeting in Darlington.
lf The Midland League, Scarborough are defeated 6–3 at home by Boston, shattering a proud record this season of only 35 goals.
There is a vacancy for a female shorthand typist (minimum age 20) at the County Hall, Northallerton.
The salary offered is £306-£535, according to experience and qualifications.
A COLLECTING box in the Horseshoe chip shop at Kirkby Stephen signals British Rail's greatest oddity.
The station at Ribblehead, near the venerable viaduct, has one platform and no cross-over.
South bound trains on the Settle and Carlisle stop several times a day; North bound uniquely they never stop at all.
Since a day return to Ribblehead may be something of a unilateral occasion, the collection aims to give it a proper station in life.
Like many more, presumably, we mention Ribblehead in passing.
We'd alighted at Kirkby Stephen's spruce little station, 19 miles down the line, especially to bag supper at the Horseshoe.
‘Delightful’ says the Gourmet's Guide to Fish and Chips, and there's certainly no down side here.
A take away and caff at the South end of the main street near sign posts in miles and furlongs, also unique in our experience it serves the finest battered cod we can ever recall eating.
(And that's a cod-almighty lot of fish.)
Chips were pretty good too, though the best in memory remain those at the Lord Stones Cafe on the top of Carlton Bank near Stokesley.
A test bag from another fish shop further up Kirkby Stephen main street tepid, soggy, so-so was further evidence of the first lot's incomparability.
We mention it particularly with Blackpool trippers in mind.
They'll be lucky if they stop at the Horseshoe.
— Darlington station has four platforms and, last Tuesday, long faces.
The 8.16 being late enough to be posthumous, we departed to the Coachman (North Eastern Hotel as was) for sustenance and lamentation.
Both dining room and staff are pleasant; while-you-wait breakfast is of the curate's egg sort: cremated bacon, terrific fried bread, sunny eggs, single splendid sausage, bloody awful black pudding.
(Oh, and beans.)
The menu also offers kippers and prunes ‘on request’ as in Qatar, and Darlington; with trimmings the full English was £7.50 for starters.
It was Budget Day; unless the Coachman becomes part of BR's passenger charter, ours is unlikely to run to it again.
— Since John Constable left to brew beer in Butterknowle the Chain locker in North Shields opposite the ferry landing has vanished from the Good Pub Guide.
It remains a welcoming, cosmopolitan sort of pub nonetheless, with much careful emphasis on real ale (not yet from Butterknowle) and a short bar menu with dishes like grilled fresh sardines and mussels in garlic.
Creamy crab cocktail was fine, but the smoked fish pie it's only meat pies we've given up for Lent wasn't so much smoked as immolated.
Immediately outside they're building a major new sewer.
Could it explain why the pub was so quiet?
‘Possibly,’ said the barman, and returned to his newspaper.
— This is the last of these little Wednesday waysgooses until after the election; our appetite is being diverted elsewhere.
This lunchtime we're missing a Co-op beer-tasting and nosh up at the excellent Dragon House Chinese restaurant in Newcastle these politicians have much for which to answer.
— Slightly pluralist, but never mind, the elder bairn wanted to know why the mushroom went to the disco.
Because he was a fungi.
WORK is expected to finish shortly on Darlington's Cornmill shopping centre which is due to open in August.
Builders started on the complex three years ago and have had to overcome a number of difficulties.
The main problem for engineers was the location of underground rivers in the area, and more than 300 columns had to be put in to support the shopping centre.
The site's location in the heart of a built-up area also presented developers with other headaches to overcome including the location of four pubs in the immediate vicinity.
Stephen Gray, senior associate of the APP Partnership, the firm of architects behind the Cornmill, said: ‘We had to avoid vibrations which would turn the beer cloudy potentially the biggest disaster that could befall the town.
‘Putting in the foundations was like building on geological custard.’
It has taken 876,000 bricks, 24,300 cubic metres of concrete, 700 concrete piles, and 3,500 tonnes of reinforcement to build the Cornmill.
When open, it will have space for 64 shops and its total floor area will be equivalent to five football pitches.
The Cornmill's central feature is a giant glazed atrium spanning almost ninety feet and consisting of 258 panes of glass.
HANGING on the wall at Ted Fletcher Court is a picture known as The Crying Boy.
According to popular folklore anyone who owns such a picture is in for bad luck.
The media has delighted in telling tales of people who bought a picture then watched as their house burnt down or their car blew up.
If Roy Hattersley, Labour's deputy leader, noticed the painting hanging at the sheltered housing scheme he visited in Darlington yesterday he didn't say.
Mr Hattersley's visit, so early in the campaign, shows how important the two main parties view the marginal seat, held since 1983 by Tory schools minister Michael Fallon.
It will be a fight to the finish.
The east-west split between the richer and poorer parts of the town makes it now an obvious marginal.
Ossie O'Brien held the seat for Labour at the 1983 by-election but sat for only three months.
Michael Fallon won in the 1983 General Election.
Before that Darlington was solidly Labour But a drive through the town illustrates the contrasts: from the deprivation of Skerne Park with its graffiti and vandalism, to the large detached houses and tranquillity of the West End.
The haves plan to vote Tory: the have nots support Labour.
Alan Milburn, 34, has been Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for more than two years.
During that time he has been pushing hard to make up any lost ground.
On the face of it Labour has a real chance of overturning the Tory majority of 2,661.
But political pundits agree Michael Fallon has done a good job as a constituency MP.
Independent political analyst Andrew MacMullen says Mr Fallon said: ‘Michael Fallon has worked his patch.
He has been a very high profile MP and the voters tend to like that sort of thing.’
Mr Fallon also has the advantage of being Schools Minister with special responsibility for the local management of schools, teacher training and capital spending.
If a Conservative Government is re-elected he could be in line for promotion.
Mr Fallon is Scots by birth.
He began his political career at St Andrew's University, where he ran a campaign to elect Tory Nicholas Fairbairn as rector.
During the seventies he was a researcher and advisor to Lord Carrington, before seeking election himself.
Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg could pick up a significant number of protest votes which will boost his party's previous showing.
They were a distant third in 1987 with 6,289 votes.
Neither Mr Fallon nor Mr Bergg can expect any help from the borough council.
Tories were swept from power during last year's local government elections.
They have been replaced by a Labour leadership keen to blame many of their problems at the Government's door.
Councillors have found themselves at loggerheads with the Government on a number of occasions, most recently over the grant allocation for the 1992/93 financial year.
Unemployment is sure to play its part.
Darlington has the highest jobless figure in County Durham.
In January 4,365 people were registered as unemployed in Darlington.
Tories say it is essential to win the battle against inflation if they are to reduce the dole queues.
Labour has a number of job creation schemes in its manifesto which, it claims, will slice thousands off the unemployment register.
The jobless question cropped up earlier this year when Darlington's status as an intermediate development area prompted a public row between the two biggest rivals.
Mr Milburn claimed the Government's refusal to make Darlington a full-fledged development area cost the town a multi-million pound American factory.
Mr Fallon says any move to make Darlington a development area would create a wrong impression.
He believes some firms could then reject the town as an unemployment blackspot.
What must be most worrying for Michael Fallon's campaign team is the poll tax factor.
How much Tory support has dwindled away following the community charge debacle is open to question.
Darlington's middle class voters, who swung the 1983 and 1987 elections in Mr Fallon's favour have certainly felt the pinch.
Predicting the outcome is a game of chance.
If the national swing to Labour is a couple of percentage points, Mr Fallon's personal standing among the town's electorate will be tested to the limit.
It is certain much will depend on how the campaign develops in the next three weeks.
A DARLINGTON couple are collecting tins of unwanted pet food for an animal rescue centre.
Gordon and Julie Wellsted, from American Heartbeat, Whessoe Road, hope to collect as many tins of dog and cat food as possible for the Eldon Hope Kennels, Shildon.
Julie said: ‘Anything people want to donate will help.
We'll take dog food and cat food or anything that animals can eat.’
The couple will collect the tins from homes and plan to send a convoy to the kennels on April 12.
Anyone who can help should contact Julie on Darlington .
A VIDEO dealer yesterday denied controlling a nationwide company which supplied counterfeit tapes.
Timothy Sturdy, 29, denies eight different charges that his Darlington-based company, Classic Video, supplied counterfeit videos to small video libraries around the country.
Darlington magistrates heard that during 1990 and 1991 Classic Video, based in Victoria Road, Darlington, set up computerised video leasing arrangements with small general stores and post offices.
But, after shopkeepers received complaints about the poor quality of tapes, trading standards officers investigated.
With help from officers from the Federation Against Copyright Theft (Fact), which made the prosecution, they uncovered a wide network of shops throughout the North-East, and as far south as Cambridgeshire, which had received videos from Classic Video.
The court heard that in April last year the company went bankrupt, leaving several small businesses owing thousands of pounds to finance companies which backed deals made by Sturdy.
Kenneth Wiper, defending, said the financial dealings were not at issue.
He told magistrates: ‘What you must decide is whether Mr Sturdy knew the tapes to be counterfeits.’
David Hoskins, a Fact investigator, told the court counterfeits are made to look like genuine cassettes, whereas pirate videos are copies of unreleased or banned films.
Witnesses from shops in Darlington, Gainford, Houghton-le-Spring and Peterborough told the court they had signed leasing agreements costing thousands of pounds for videos to be supplied.
David Greenland, of North Terrace, Gainford, said Sturdy, whom he knew from school, offered him a deal which he thought would boost trade and which he could terminate if he wanted to.
When exchange tapes for old titles did not come Mr Greenland traced Sturdy to Darlington.
It was then he found he could not get out of the finance deal.
Later Fact investigators seized several counterfeit films, all popular titles like Uncle Buck and AWOL.
Sheila Batey, from Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, now faces legal demands totalling £14,000 from the finance company involved in the deal between herself and Classic Video.
David Singleton, prosecuting, called witnesses who said Sturdy should have had ‘high suspicions’ that the tapes he leased were forgeries.
Experts pointed to several simple tests which hint that a tape is counterfeit.
The case continues next week.
SHADOW Home Secretary Roy Hattersley yesterday pledged to boost police manpower to combat soaring crime levels in the North-East.
Mr Hattersley, in Darlington to meet Labour's northern candidates, said he would make extra police manpower a top priority.
Crime levels in County Durham hit an all-time high last year, but the police force is still waiting to hear if their Home Office bid for an extra 20 officers will be successful.
Labour plans to finance its bid to boost police manpower from extra savings within the Home Office.
Scores of existing officers will be released for active duty by the creation of a police civil service.
A Labour government would reexamine police manpower levels throughout the country.
Mr Hattersley said: ‘We are not talking about huge sums of money, millions rather than billions.’
But on a visit to Newcastle, former Tory Home Secretary Lord Waddington yesterday attacked Labour's law and order record.
He said: ‘There comes a time when you have to ask yourself is Labour serious in the fight against crime.
I see no evidence of it.’
The Leader of the Lords said spending on the police and law and order had increased 80pc in real terms since 1979.
He said when Labour left office the police were 8,000 under strength but since then 10,000 officers had been appointed along with 12,000 civilian support staff which freed manpower for beat duty.
Lord Waddington criticised Labour call's for the repeal of the Prevention of Terrorism Act and its opposition to ‘community penalties’ for non-violent young offenders.
TRAINEE beauty therapists face an uncertain future because of a decision to cut funding to their college.
Darlington's Bishop College of Beauty has been told that because of budget restrictions its training contract is not to be renewed from next month.
Jane Hinton-Clifton, who runs the college in Duke Street, said: ‘I was visited by two officials of the North Yorkshire TEC who told me our funding was being cut off.
It is quite heartbreaking.
They didn't seem to care that a number of girls are only part of the way through their courses.’
Jennie West, of Catterick Garrison, said: ‘This has been a very good course and I've learnt a lot.
If I have to leave without getting both parts of the qualification it will be a waste of time, and I shall be very disappointed.’
Jane Mahmoud, of Harrogate, said: ‘I am a single parent with two children, and I want to be able to support myself.
Last night North Yorkshire TEC issued a statement saying: ‘Because of a reduction in the number of training places available for unemployed adults, the TEC has been forced to review its training provision throughout the county.
Regrettably this has resulted in the TEC being unable to give a permanent contract for 1992–93 to a very small number of training providers, including Bishop College of Beauty.
The TEC is, however, making arrangements with the college for all existing trainees to complete their training and, hopefully, progress to employment.’
DARLINGTON would lose out if Labour plans for a Newcastle-based Northern Regional Assembly were introduced, it was claimed last night.
Michael Fallon, who is defending Darlington for the Tories, said the town would have the same status as a parish council if the proposals went ahead.
He told Darlington Conservative councillors: ‘We would be controlled from Newcastle by an assembly even more remote than County Hall in Durham.
‘The Assembly would mean more bureaucrats, more expense and higher taxes.
‘The last thing this region needs is yet another layer of local government.
We should be getting rid of unnecessary layers, not adding new ones.’
Mr Fallon said the proposed assembly would mean all important decisions would be taken in Newcastle leaving Darlington with the rank of a parish council.
Alan Milburn, Labour candidate for Darlington, said: ‘Labour is clearly supporting county borough status for Darlington so that decisions about services are made in Darlington by the people of Darlington.
‘We do believe in regional government, but a regional government that draws powers from Whitehall so the powers currently exercised by central government are brought to the North and other regions.’
Peter Bergg, Liberal Democrat candidate for Darlington, said: ‘Regional government has been our policy for some years now, I'm flabbergasted by how many of our policies the Labour Party are taking on board at the moment to try and win the middle ground.
‘We believe regional government is the best way to get power down to the people.’
A MAN whose honeymoon turned into a nightmare has returned to work in a bid to regain his memory.
Martin Stevens, 22, of Cumberland Street, Darlington, went into a coma after falling from Brimham Rocks near Pateley Bridge last year.
But he has now returned two days a week to Magnet in Darlington, where he was a systems analyst, to try and improve his memory.
Yesterday he said: ‘I'm pleased I've got back to work as I was getting bored at home.
‘But I can't remember my old job.
I've got a very poor short-term memory.
Anything I learn has to be written down.
‘I seem to be getting better but my balance is still poor.’
Now he is hoping his speech which slowed down by the coma will quicken up.
Mr Stevens and his 21-year-old wife Andrea are planning a second honeymoon in the Austrian mountains this spring.
Their wedding was marred by the death of Andrea's mother Margaret from cancer a fortnight earlier.
And while Mr Stevens's bride was keeping a round-the-clock at his hospital bedside, burglars ransacked their home.
COUNCIL tax bills in Darlington are set to be at least £75 more per property than Government projections, councillors heard yesterday.
The Government has estimated if the replacement for the poll tax were in force this year the bill for a Darlington house worth up to £40,000 would be £301.
But Richard Collin, the council's director of central services, said the calculations were based on unreliable assumptions and were some 25pc out.
TRADE unionists have hit out at letters to hospital workers which they claim are ‘begging for money’ to fund the health service.
The documents from the Friends of Darlington Memorial Hospital ask employees to make a regular donation to the charity, which aims to spend more than £30,000 on equipment this year.
Yesterday Eddie Richardson, Nupe's branch secretary, said: ‘We have a number of people on low pay, such as part-time domestics, porters and catering staff, who have enough money problems of their own without being asked to give money to support the Friends.
‘The majority of low-paid members feel it's an insult to be given such a letter.’
Among the projects which would benefit from the fund raising are a creche, and health care bursaries.
And if successful at the hospital the Friends aim to Darlington engineering, construction and commercial firms for cash help, according to the letter.
‘We are being asked to ensure patients get certain benefits, but surely this is down to the Government,’ said Mr Richardson.
‘The Friends do a worthwhile job, but the health service is trying to raise money from outside when it should be coming from the Government.
No one was available for comment from the Friends yesterday.
New measures to beat car crime
NEW initiatives to beat car crime are to be introduced to coincide with a nationwide campaign.
1992 is Car Crime Prevention Year and Darlington council has backed a series of measures including free window etching sessions and regular monitoring of security and lighting in council car parks.
New magistrate:
Farm secretary Anne Rose, of Ellerton-on-Swale, near Richmond, was sworn in as a magistrate at Richmond court yesterday.
Protection order:
Richmond magistrates yesterday granted a protection order for the licence of the Turf Hotel, Richmond, to Stephen Moss.
Paper meets:
Richmond and Dales talking newspaper group holds a meeting in Richmond library on Monday at 7.30pm.
Presto surprise:
Mr and Mrs Waterson, of Low Willington, Crook, yesterday were presented with a Fiat car by staff at Presto's, Cockerton, Darlington.
The couple won the car in the Presto Autumn Windfall competition.
In Court The following cases were dealt with by Richmond magistrates: Robert Charles Scott, 21, of Roper Course, Richmond, admitted driving motor vehicle with excess alcohol in breath, fined £200 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for one year.
John David Saunders, 23, of West Layton Farm, West Layton, Richmond, admitted driving motor vehicle with excess alcohol in blood, fined £200 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for two years.
Andrew Watson, 25, of 58th Squadron, RAF Catterick, Richmond, was convicted of permitting another to use motor car without insurance, fined £200 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, seven points.
Ian David Harlow, 26, of Anti-tank Platoon, 1 Duke of Edinburgh Royal Regt, Bourlon Barracks, Catterick Garrison, was convicted of using motor car without insurance, fined £250 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
Stephen William Davies, 29, of Anti-tank Platoon, 1 Duke of Edinburgh Royal Regt, Bourlon Barracks, Catterick Garrison, was convicted of permitting another to use motor car without insurance, fined £250 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
A FORMER toilet roll tester is teaching Darlington people the art of creative writing.
Author Kevin Wilkins once worked in a factory near his home town of Barrow-in-Furness where he tested the quality of toilet tissue.
The 41-year-old writer said: ‘We had machines which determined the precise strength of the toilet paper by seeing which way it would stretch.
It was an unusual job but I found it quite interesting.
You would be surprised by what goes into your average roll of toilet paper.’
Now Mr Wilkins is forging a new career as a poet, author and songwriter.
He has been installed as writing development worker at Darlington Library and plans to inspire would-be authors to follow his example.
‘I have been amazed by the amount of creative talent to be found in Darlington,’ he said.
‘It would be great if we could organise some kind of writers’ festival sometime in the future.’
Testing toilet paper isn't the only unusual job Mr Wilkins has tried his hand at.
He once sung for an international audience of 1,000, in the middle of a moat in Israel.
‘I worked in the country for a while and met some people who were trying to recreate Woodstock.’
Mr Wilkins will be working at the library during the next year.
He said: ‘I just want to introduce others to the pleasures of writing and sharing that writing with others.’
DANDELIONS have come a long way in Darlington.
Back in Saxon times they were used as diuretics and were just one of dozens of herbs, plants and berries taken for medical purposes.
Horseradish was used for coughs and colds, wild strawberry for anaemia and nervousness and honeysuckle was the first example of aspirin.
Former nurse Joan Young, from Darlington, explains: ‘Most children must have been told not to pick dandelions when they were younger or else they would wet the bed.
But it is well-known as a diuretic.’
She said homeopathy had come full circle now and it was quite the in-thing to be treated by herbal remedies.
In a fascinating new book Joan, who worked at Darlington Memorial Hospital, has traced the development of health care in Darlington from its rudimentary beginnings to new advanced technology.
For Joan it has been a labour of love and provides an amusing and detailed insight into medicine in the town.
Medical conditions in Darlington were dire until the middle of the 19th century.
Diseases and infections were spread through poor sanitary conditions and efforts were slowly made to combat this.
The first dispensary in Darlington was set up in 1808 to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of King George 11.
Back then the population of Darlington was just was 5,000 but the facility was open only to men.
‘Women had to just grin and bear their illness,’ said Joan.
However Darlington was one of the first towns to apply to the Public Health Board to clean up its area.
In the mid 1850s the market place was unpaved and manure, offal and dung were often thrown into the square.
Pigs scavenged among the rubbish and there were fines for not ringing swine.
Drainage was poor with open sewers and gutters.
One well in Bondgate stank so much that when it was drained the decomposed body of a three-month-old baby was found.
But it wasn't just illness doctors had to cope with.
In 1850 drunkenness was a huge problem in Darlington town centre.
Over three months 933 gallons of brandy, 1,414 gallons of rum, 654 gallons of whisky and 2,048 gallons of gin were drank between just 12,000 people.
‘Old Darlington was quite some place to live in and I reckon daily life must have been some sort of gamble,’ said Joan.
‘Gin really was the mother's ruin then.’
Darlington's first hospital opened in Russell Street and it was later replaced by Greenbank Hospital in 1885.
A rule book from the hospital in 1917 said all patients had to be discharged within four weeks of admission and could only stay on if absolutely necessary.
It went on: ‘No persons suffering from infectious diseases, dropsies, disordered in their intellect, nor any who are considered to be incurable will be admitted as in-patients, except in special cases.
‘Patients are expected to come clean and be provided with a change of linen.
They shall not gamble, swear or use improper language.
And men shall not go into the women's ward, nor the women into the men's ward unless required to do so by the house surgeon or matron.’
One of the more off-beat medical men in the town was Lord Thomas Williamson, a self-styled weather prophet.
In a letter to town magistrates in 1892 he asked if his body could be stuffed and placed in a glass cabinet next to the Pease Monument when he died.
But the taxidermy process would have been an expensive business and would have included soaking his skin in tan pits for 14 days, scraping and sandpapering his body, paying the barber for shaving him and cutting his toe nails and one final payment of a shilling for a strong cork.
Thankfully there were no such practises at Darlington Memorial, which was opened in 1933 by Prince George.
The hospital has gone from strength to strength and is now recognised as one of the leading hospitals in the region.
Joan, 58, started her training there in 1954.
‘I'm very proud to have trained there,’ she said.
‘It was a great time.
I trained under Nurse Gatenby and at the time we were known as the Gatenby girls.
It was a very disciplined and strict training.’
Joan nursed at the Memorial for more than 30 years before she retired due to ill health.
She has spent her free time researching the book and is now looking for a publisher.
All proceeds will go to the Darlington and District Hospice Fund.
A RACIAL equality council could soon be set up in Darlington.
The move follows the announcement that a British National Party candidate is to contest Darlington in the General Election.
Dr Donald Clarke, the BNP candidate, wants to see forced repatriation and passports taken away from immigrant workers and ethnic minorities.
A racial equality steering committee has now been set up to monitor discrimination in Darlington and the county as a whole.
And a branch looks set to open next month.
A spokesman said: ‘Darlington has got the most ethnic minorities in the county and this branch will cover the whole of the county.’
He was concerned about discrimination, particularly in work and education.
‘And we have to look at the movements of the BNP and what they are doing.
We feel there is a need for a branch in the town.
All the groundwork is done now.’
But a BNP spokesman attacked the decision to spend up to £40,000 on the Darlington branch.
‘If the money is provided it surely indicates the priorities of Government at a time of supposed financial restraint,’ he said.
‘The BNP contends it will take more than a Race Equality Council to smooth over the cracks of the fragmenting edifice that is the multi-racial society.’
The steering committee has applied to Durham County Council and eight district councils for funding.
POLICE inquiries into alleged systematic vandalism attacks on a Darlington woman's car continued yesterday.
Pauline Golightly, 24, of Vernon Gardens, Harrowgate Hill, says that since she moved into the house last October her Nissan Sunny has been vandalised four times.
Yesterday Insp Gerry Rodgers, of Darlington Police, said a WPC had twice visited Miss Golightly to investigate the attacks.
Insp Rodgers said: ‘It seems this could have stemmed from a dispute over parking.’
Miss Golightly said she has left the car in the back lane behind her house but only late at night when it could not have caused an obstruction.
On previous occasions her car has been scratched, the windows broken and tyres slashed.
On Sunday night vandals threw paint stripper over the car.
NEW crime-beating initiatives are to be introduced in Darlington to coincide with a nationwide campaign.
Borough councillors heard yesterday that 1992 is Car Crime Prevention Year and officers had been looking at ways of getting the message across.
The policy and resources committee backed a series of measures including arranging free glass etching sessions and regular monitoring of security and lighting at the council's car parks.
Employees who buy cars with a council loan may be able to include the cost of security devices in the amount they borrow.
TRADE unionists have hit out at letters which they claim are ‘begging for money’ from hospital workers to fund the health service.
The documents, from the Friends of Darlington Memorial Hospital, ask employees to make a regular donation to the charity, which aims to spend more than £30,000 on equipment in the present financial year alone.
But yesterday Eddie Richardson, Nupe branch secretary, said: ‘We have a number of people on low pay, such as part-time domestics, porters and catering staff, who have enough money problems of their own without being asked to give money to support the Friends.
‘At the end of the day the majority of low-paid members feel it's an insult to be given such a letter.’
Among the projects pinpointed to benefit from the fund-raising are a creche and health care bursaries.
And if successful at the DMH, the Friends aim to target Darlington engineering, construction and commercial firms for cash, according to the letter.
‘We are being asked to ensure patients get certain benefits, but surely this is down to the Government,’ said Mr Richardson.
‘As soon as some of our members received these letters, they threw them straight in the bin.
‘The Friends do a worthwhile job, the health service is trying to raise money from outside when it should be coming from the Government.
‘It's a bit like blackmail, especially the part which points out all the money raised would be spent in their hospital.’
No one was available for comment from the Friends yesterday.
COUNCIL tax bills in Darlington are expected to be at least £75 more than the Government's projections, councillors heard yesterday.
The Government has estimated if the council tax the replacement for the poll tax was in force this year the bill for a Darlington house worth up to £40,000 would be £301.
But yesterday Richard Collin, director of central services with the borough council, said the calculations had been based on unreliable assumptions as to the rate of collection and administration costs.
Members of the policy and resources committee agreed the Government had also failed to take into account inflation, changes in grants and transitional arrangements.
As a result Mr Collin estimated the actual bills were likely to be at least 25pc higher than the official estimate.
Council backs green strategy
RESEARCH is to be carried out in Darlington to look at how the borough council can coordinate its green policies.
Councillors heard yesterday the authority considers environmental issues on a piecemeal basis at present.
A strategy is to be drawn up so environmental issues are given equal priority, and to ensure the council's response is consistent.
Skateboard theft:
Two skateboards and a plastic bag containing a child's plastic tea service have been stolen in a break-in at a shed in Geneva Crescent, Darlington.
The total value was £40.
The BFG:
Darlington Civic Theatre YOU only have to look at young Roald Dahl booklovers, eager to see the stage play, to wonder at the gap in theatre material for such a ready audience.
For the tweeny years, fed on pantomimes, theatre-in-education tours of schools and TV series stage spectaculars, there are few plays taken from popular children's books (could you include Shakespeare?).
I'm sure if founding a National Children's Theatre was included in a political manifesto, that party would win-over Dahl fans the country through.
Such a recognised company is sorely needed to develop the next generation of theatre-goers.
They don't need telling twice to see David Wood's stage version of The BFG!
Dahl is an alternative language, rich with silliness and phizzwizardry.
The couple of niggles were a flat, painted giant's face at the window of Buckingham Palace, and a slipped accent by the Queen of Sweden.
But the BFG was well paced, varied and skilful in special effects, enhancing the story not distracting from it.
Anthony Pedley as the dream-blowing BFG (Big Friendly Giant), excelled in his whizzpopping jumps: they were so funny.
His nimbleness around the three clever stage sets, Sophie's room, the BFG's Cave in the Giant's Country, and the palace ballroom, made one forget he was just an ordinary person.
Fiona Grogan, 17, portrayed orphan Sophie with the right quality of childlike credibility without patronising children.
The story of orphans being eaten by horrible, scary giants such as curdblooding Fleshlumpeater and Bloodbottler on their way to conquer England's juicy ‘human beans’ but captured by Her Majesty's army and air force was quintessential fantasy that children love.
The scary bits created tense silence, while relieved cheers followed the good moments.
Praise must go to Paul Aylett and the makers of the 20-foot BFG mechanical puppet, small hand-held rod puppets, and shadow-puppets for bringing make-believe alive which was enthralling.
This was delunctious grubble.
A TEAM of expert mountaineers were called into Darlington as work continues on the Cornmill Shopping Centre.
Architects employed by the developers, Burton Property Trust, have asked the mountaineers to erect a huge sign on the East facing wall of the new building.
Because the wall is 60ft of sheer brickwork, access is difficult.
It is impossible for the builders to get a platform to the point where the sign is to be sited.
The mountaineers are working by abseiling down the side of the building to attach vast metal letters spelling out the word ‘Cornmill’.
A spokesman for the team of climbers said the work was precarious and painstaking.
So far only two letters are in place and the mountaineers will be in the town until the end of the week finishing the job.
THE 150TH anniversary of a Darlington landmark could still be celebrated, despite fears it would go unnoticed.
The Northern Echo revealed last month that Darlington council failed to give any money to celebrate the anniversary of North Road railway station.
And Barrie Lamb, chairman of the Darlington Railway Preservation Society, said it meant Darlington had lost the chance of a major tourist attraction.
But Mr Lamb met council officers last night to discuss ways of raising money to celebrate the event.
‘We all agreed that we should try and commemorate this event,’ he said.
The society now plans to write to Durham County Council for a grant.
Mr Lamb, a former mayor of Darlington, said they hoped to reenact the opening of the station with Victorian period costumes.
A LANDLORD has called in the ombudsman to investigate claims that he was shortchanged by Darlington council.
Norman Hannis, of the Grange Guest House, Grange Road, says he is owed about £1,000 for DSS guests.
He said: ‘I've got just £476 from them but I am owed about £1,300.
The council say they only pay the level they see fit.
I have now called in the ombudsman.’
Mr Hannis said he took two people in for ten weeks.
And he now fears other landlords will be put off taking DSS guests if they do not get paid.
Mr Hannis says the couple he took in stayed in separate rooms.
But Darlington council say they claimed as a couple.
Jeanette Crompton, a housing benefit officer, said the council had paid Mr Hannis all it could.
She said: ‘We gave the couple £40 a week between them and Mr Hannis was charging £165 a week.
We have paid all we are able to.’
A DARLINGTON furniture store dogged by break-ins has been attacked again.
Thieves broke into the Harper and Harper store in Northgate, at the weekend and made off with almost £1,500 worth of equipment the third break-in in a few months.
Staff installed an alarm system and security cameras after the last two break-ins.
But the thieves dodged it.
‘We are just spending more and more to protect ourselves,’ said partner David Harper.
TWO weeks after a South African diplomat was snubbed by Darlington Borough Council, a trade delegation has been invited to the town to create business links with local firms.
Coun Tony Richmond, leader of the Conservatives on Darlington Council, has already been in touch with the South African Embassy in London to organise the high-level trade visit.
He is to ask for all-party support of the event at next week's council meeting.
Coun Richmond said: ‘South Africa is a vast market place which has not been developed.
With a population of 30 million there is great potential for business links with Britain and I want Darlington to benefit.
‘There has clearly been change in South Africa let's take advantage of it and get more work for the town's companies and more jobs,’ he said.
But Coun Richmond is flying in the face of strong opposition from the ruling Labour group.
It recently boycotted a visit by a South African diplomat to Darlington, saying it was too early to allow the economic barriers erected against the country's apartheid policies to be brought down.
Coun John Williams, Labour group leader, said Coun Richmond's invitation to a trade delegation was premature.
‘He is being too hasty.
This sort of delegation needs to be invited on a considered basis and international consensus and not by 18 Conservatives in Darlington.
‘And it's a bit rich after the failure of the Conservative Government and this town's MP to do anything for the economy in this town it looks like an election gimmick,’ said Coun Williams.
Liberal Democrat Coun Ken Walker said: ‘While I would not like to jeopardise any move that would benefit the town, I am rather wary.
‘The way it has been done looks very irregular.
It should be the trade delegation which approaches the chief executive, not a Conservative councillor inviting them,’ said Coun Walker.
But Coun Richmond said: ‘If the council doesn't take this on board, I and my colleagues will continue establishing links with South Africa for Darlington businesses on our own.’
LABOUR yesterday claimed funding for Durham Training and Enterprise Centre would be cut by almost £1m from next month.
Alan Milburn, candidate for Darlington, said youth training wages would fall from £31 to £28 for non-endorsed training and from £65 to £51 a week for other trainees.
But Michael Fallon, Conservative candidate, criticised the claim.
He said Durham TEC was still negotiating its training fund and had not finalised its figures.
No one from Durham TEC was available last night to comment on the claims.
Mr Milburn said a Labour Government would boost training skills with a £300m fund.
He claimed funding at the Durham TEC would be cut by nearly £1m to £15.1m from April 1 a fall of 7.3 per cent.
He said Labour would set up Skills UK, an emergency employment package to provide new jobs and training programmes for the unemployed and people returning to work.
Under the programme employers would be required to invest at least 0.5 per cent of their payroll in training.
Mr Milburn said: ‘The need for training investment in Darlington has never been greater.
According to Government statistics unemployment in Darlington is 4,685 and more than 1,000 people have joined the dole queue since John Major became Prime Minister.’
Darlington needed a proper training system and the £300m Skills UK project would lead to this.
He said: ‘There is no greater investment than in giving people new skills.’
But Mr Fallon said Labour's compulsory training levy would be damaging and put up costs for many small businesses.
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg said: ‘We have made it perfectly clear that we intend to invest lots of money in training.
But the difference between us and Labour is that we would invest more.’
A TRADE delegation from South Africa is being invited to Darlington just two weeks after a diplomat from the country was snubbed by the borough council.
Coun Tony Richmond, leader of the Conservatives on the council, has already been in touch with the South African embassy in London to set up the trade visit.
He is to ask for all-party support at next week's council meeting.
Coun Richmond said: ‘South Africa is a vast market place which has not been developed.
With a population of 30 million there is great potential for business links with Britain and I want Darlington to benefit.
‘There has clearly been change in South Africa let's take advantage of it and get more work for the town's companies and more jobs,’ he said.
But he is flying in the face of opposition from the ruling Labour group who recently boycotted a visit by a South African diplomat saying it was too early to bring them in from the cold.
Coun John Williams, Labour group leader, said Coun Richmond's invitation to a trade delegation was also premature.
‘He is being too hasty.
This sort of delegation needs to be invited on a considered basis and international consensus and not by 18 Conservatives in Darlington,’ he said.
‘And it's a bit rich after the failure of the Conservative government and this town's MP to do anything for the economy in this town it looks like an election gimmick.’
Liberal Democrat councillor Ken Walker said: ‘While I would not like to jeopardise any move that would benefit the town I am rather wary.
‘The way it has been done looks very irregular.
It should be the trade delegation which approaches the chief executive, not a Conservative councillor inviting them,’ he said.
But Coun Richmond said: ‘If the council doesn't take this on board I and my colleagues will continue establishing links with South Africa for Darlington businesses on our own.’
VILLAGERS have called for lay-bys at bus stops on a busy road following concerns about safety.
Winston Parish Council has written to Durham County Council urging the authority to install two lay-bys on the A67, between Barnard Castle and Darlington.
Parish clerk Jennie Flintoff said there had been a few accidents at the entrance to the village.
She said school buses come into the village to pick up pupils after parents expressed fears for their safety waiting on the A67.
The county council had said it would consider installing the lay-bys during the 1991/92 financial year.
A letter had been sent to remind the authority.
A county council spokesman said it was hoped that councillors would agree to a site visit to see for themselves if lay-bys were necessary.
A WORRYING increase in suicides in Teesdale has led to a swift response from The Samaritans.
But a spokeswoman for the Darlington group said there was no obvious explanation for the rise.
She is concerned publicity and gossip in the dale has spurred others to take their lives.
Last night, Darlington Samaritans, which has a volunteer staff of more than 90, held a meeting to discuss where the group's priorities should lie.
The 24 hour telephone service is staffed throughout the year and volunteers have reported a marked increase in the number of calls being received from the Teesdale area.
Last month a group from Samaritans travelled to Middleton-in-Teesdale to publicise the service and speak to some of the people who regularly deal with the depressed.
Many of the suicide incidents have taken place in remote areas where people suffer physical as well as emotional isolation.
The group's spokeswoman said: ‘We are here to listen.
There is less neighbourly feeling these days, we hope to always provide a friendly sympathetic ear.’
Some of the deaths in Teesdale have been young people depressed about failed relationships.
‘People in Teesdale are worried about this.
There seems to be no reason for the high number of suicides,’ said the spokeswoman.
A former Samaritans volunteer also spoke last night on another issue about which the group is also receiving numerous calls.
Mark Rees, from Tunbridge Wells, is a transsexual who has fought a lengthy battle for legal recognition of his sex change.
Now in his late 40s Mr Rees says he has seen many changes in attitude to transsexuals in the 20 years since he first asked for treatment.
‘The reaction used to be ‘There there my dear — you'll get over it in a while.’
People are more sympathetic nowadays,’ said Mark.
EDUCATION minister Michael Fallon last night revealed the five major issues at the centre of his bid to retain Darlington for the Tories.
More jobs, better public services, law and order, Darlington's forthcoming independence and leadership were the most important factors to ensure Darlington continued to prosper, he said.
‘Since we last fought in 1987 I can report that Darlington is in better shape,’ he told more than 100 members of the Darlington Conservative Association at his adoption meeting.
Mr Fallon said companies such as Fujitsu and Millicom, now Hutchison, had located in the North-East thanks to conditions, such as generous grants and lower inflation and taxation, achieved by the Conservative Government.
He said the Government now aimed to improve public services by taking the cash away from the bureaucrats at the Northern Regional Health Authority and Durham County Hall, for example, and handing it to the schools and GPs who knew better how it should be used.
And he told of his pledge to fight the growing crime rate in Darlington by calling for stiffer sentences and more responsibility placed upon parents for offenders under 17. — Labour candidate Alan Milburn, speaking at his adoption meeting, said the Conservatives had failed Darlington.
He said: ‘They have given the town record job losses, record home repossessions, record hospital waiting lists and record under-funding in the schools.’
He said voters had to choose between Tory recession or Labour prosperity: ‘We will bring back hope the hope that comes from restored pride in our town, a cleaned up environment and Darlington running all its own services.’
Mr Milburn claimed a fourth Tory term would mean ‘more of the same brand of Tory extremism.
‘Labour's economic policies will create an opportunity society.
We will start by giving people the chance to prosper.’
THE lovely spring crocuses are almost as pretty as sisters Sarah and Samantha Barker, who were clearly enjoying a stroll among the early flowers making a colourful backdrop in Southend Avenue, Darlington yesterday.
Firefighters tackle farm straw blaze
FIREMEN last night spent several hours tackling a fire at Mordon Southside Farm near Mordon, Sedgefield.
Two hundred tonnes of straw was ablaze and firemen were on the scene throughout the evening.
Inquest opened:
An inquest into the sudden death of Carol Lowery, 25, was opened in Darlington yesterday and adjourned to a date to be fixed.
David Lowery discovered his common law wife's body at their home in Pensbury Street, Darlington, on Saturday.
Dr Paul Newman, a consultant pathologist, told coroner Colin Penna he needed results from tests before being able to give the cause of death.
Swift theft:
A man who momentarily left a computer game outside his house in Greenbank Road, Darlington, found it had been stolen when he returned.
Police have warned the public to keep valuables secure and not to leave them lying around.
The following case was dealt with by Richmond magistrates: Christopher Nigel Goodwin, 27, of Thorntree Gardens, Middleton St George, Darlington, was convicted of using motor car without insurance, two charges of using motor car with defective lights and defective indicators, fined £325 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, seven points.
Simon John Monaghan, 23, of Westfield Drive, Hurworth, Darlington, was convicted of using motor car without insurance, fined £200 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, seven points.
Buyers in search of suppliers
THE Darlington Business Link is a free service from Darlington Business Venture aimed at matching customers' needs with suppliers in the area.
DBL would like to hear from locally-based companies able to supply the following:
Engineering inspection instruments.
Aluminium nuts and bolts.
Rubber stamp manufacture.
Safety clothing.
Screen printing of bottles.
Analysis of materials.
Enquiries should be made to Ken Lee, at Darlington Business Ventrue, Telephone .
THE heat is on as cub reporters throughout the North-East put the finishing touches to their schools' entries to School Scoop.
The deadline is next Friday and the winning primary and secondary schools will be announced next month.
Winning schools will collect a £200 cash prize when their editorial teams visit The Northern Echo's head office in Darlington to learn how to edit their stories which will appear on the education page.
Each entry should include ten news stories or features, three of which should be 350 words or more with one giving a pupils' view of what the next government's policies should be.
Rules are flexible for younger children.
Entries should be sent to School Scoop, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF by Friday March 27.
FOREIGN Secretary Douglas Hurd yesterday said Labour's plans to introduce a minimum wage would lead to job losses.
Speaking to businessmen in Darlington, he said: ‘Labour's plans for a minimum wage would involve greater public expenditure, and, therefore higher taxes.
It will also hit part-time jobs and be a backward move for the country.’
Mr Hurd said the Conservatives had helped the North-East through its regional policy and encouraged investors.
‘The North has been through hard times but things are changing,’ he said.
‘Employment is widening and more jobs are available.
Several months ago we were in the depths of recession but signs are encouraging that we are moving out of it.’
But Alan Milburn, Darlington's Labour candidate, said no jobs would be lost because of the minimum wage.
‘A minimum wage will keep people out of benefit dependency,’ he said.
‘The Tories poverty pay policy has not protected jobs.
There has been a record job loss under a Tory Government.
Labour will end poverty pay.’
He dismissed suggestions that the country was coming out of a recession.
‘Darlington's future is at risk from a Government that simply will not act to end this slump,’ he said.
Later, on a visit to Stockton, Mr Hurd told shoppers at Dickens Home Improvement Centre he was feeling optimistic about the Tories' chances in the General Election.
Tory candidate Tim Devlin, MP for Stockton South since 1987, accompanied Mr Hurd during his visit to the town.
Mr Devlin's constituency was a marginal seat before Parliament was dissolved last week, having a majority of 774.
Mr Hurd greeted and chatted to many visitors at the store, including pensioner Lillian Deakin, of Newcastle, who is moving to Cleveland.
She said: ‘I live him very much and have always admired him.
I'm not telling you which way I vote but I wouldn't change it for anybody.’
Mr Hurd also visited Hartlepool's new £160m marina yesterday where he was greeted by Conservative candidate Graham Robb.
DARLINGTON Labour candidate Alan Milburn was yesterday accused of taking jobs away from the town to Tyneside.
The news came after figures showed the unemployed in Darlington had risen by 113 to 5,342.
Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Conservatives, claimed Mr Milburn had attracted jobs to North Tyneside in his role as the council's business development officer.
He said: ‘His loyalty therefore is to Tyneside and not to Darlington.
Mr Fallon said: ‘Mr Milburn could be taking jobs away from Darlington he should make it clear what his real campaign is.’
But Mr Milburn said Mr Fallon's claim was nonsense.
‘It's very sad he has to start his campaign with a personal smear,’ he said.
‘I and my family live in Darlington.
I want to see Darlington prosper and indeed the whole region prosper.’
He said Mr Fallon would better spend his time explaining why 300 businesses had gone bust in Darlington in the last year.
Mr Fallon said unemployment had fallen 30pc in Darlington since 1986.
‘The number of people in work has also gone up from 33,000 to 37,000,’ he said.
‘It is wholly misleading to suggest the jobs picture in Darlington is bleak.’
Peter Bergg, Darlington's Lib Dem candidate, said: ‘The figures show the recession is still biting.’
Testing time
THE media has received details of Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn's movements on Thursday 18th March.’
Since we were unsure if they meant Wednesday 18th March or Thursday 19th March yesterday's correct date we didn't follow him.
Darlington LibDem man Peter Bergg, meanwhile, launched his daily Press conference yesterday with an audience of one.
Mr Bergg has now decided that it was the first and last.
Clearly a man who knows what day it is.
Gang way A
LONG promised evening off tonight for Kay Kirkham, pointing up the three cornered fight in Stockton South for the Lib-Dems.
She's off to watch her daughters, aged 12 and 15, in the play at Dene School, Thornaby.
That it's Bugsy Malone is pure coincidence ‘we've no gangsters in the Liberal democrats,’ says Kay.
Tories:
The score
PURCELL won't wash with York Minster.
Since the Tories (arr.
Andrew Lloyd Webber) half inched the composer's Rondeau as their election theme, the Dean has advised a period of diplomatic silence at services.
‘It could be politically sensitive,’ says the Very Rev John Southgate.
Labour has no such discord, its theme having been specially written by Michael Kamen.
Someone has pointed out, however, that he seems to enjoy writing scores to accompany unpopular tax policies.
His last great work was for Robin Hood Prince of Thieves.
Poll stars
AS we foretold yesterday, astrologer Jonathan Cainer said on Tyne Tees Telly last night that Neil Kinnock would be the next Prime Minister.
Cainer, based near York, also claimed that Paddy Ashdown would be Foreign Secretary in a hung Parliament, there'd be proportional representation by mid-1993, Kinnock would quit within a year and wait for it there'll be another election.
EASINGTON:
Tory candidate Bill Perry said the Conservatives would give more power to the people by giving them help and encouragement.
NEWCASTLE NORTH:
Doug Henderson, Labour candidate, has written to Energy Secretary John Wakeham to protest at electricity price rises in the North.
Mr Henderson claims North customers have been overcharged £12 million in the last year.
NEWCASTLE CENTRAL:
Conservative candidate Mike Summersby presents his nomination papers with the other three Newcastle candidates Jeremy Lucas, Ian Gordon and Charles Liddell-Grainger this morning.
RICHMOND:
Tory candidate William Hague, allegedly the House of Commons' fittest man, yesterday canvassed in Great Broughton, Great Ayton and Stokesley before addressing a public meeting in Skeeby.
RICHMOND:
The Liberal Democrats' campaign for the Richmond seat will kick off tonight with the formal adoption of candidate George Irwin in Northallerton Town Hall at 7.30pm.
DARLINGTON:
The Green Party has issued a challenge to all election candidates to sign a Green Charter setting out the principles it hopes candidates will adopt.
Michael Fallon, the Tory candidate, has declined to sign.
SEDGEFIELD:
Gary Huntington has been selected as the Liberal Democrat candidate.
DARLINGTON'S Liberal Democrats formally launched their campaign yesterday saying a vote for them is not a wasted vote.
Candidate Peter Bergg said his party would not be getting involved in the negative campaigning used by Labour and Conservatives.
Mr Bergg said: ‘When you approach Darlington the first thing you see are two posters from Conservative and Labour criticising each other that sums up their campaigns.’
He added: ‘We are battling against an unfair electoral system but more and more people realise that and proportional representation is gaining popularity.’
He pointed to a recent Mori opinion poll which showed more than 30pc of the electorate would vote Lib Dem if they believed the MP was in with a chance.
He said the Lib Dems would encourage school opting out but stop hospitals taking control of their own finances.
A Liberal Democrat Government would scrap City Technology Colleges.
Poll Tax would be replaced by Local Income Tax.
A 15-YEAR-OLD turned to car crime in a bid to finance his addiction to hard drugs, Darlington Juvenile Court was told yesterday.
The Darlington youth was given a 12-month conditional discharge after admitting attempting to steal a radio cassette and being in possession of cannabis resin in February.
Police found the youth sitting in a car in Russell Street car park after he had smashed its window.
Graham Hunsley, defending, said he was now off hard drugs, had been to see his doctor about the problem and was hoping to undergo treatment at an addiction centre.
The teenager was ordered to pay £54.34 compensation for the damage to the car.
A TEENAGE arsonist trapped himself in a blazing school, a court heard yesterday.
The 15-year-old, who had admitted damaging a classroom at Whinfield School, Darlington, by fire at a previous hearing, was given a 12-month supervision order with £25 costs.
Darlington Juvenile Court heard how the youth had escaped with cuts to his hand and stomach in the £14,000 blaze.
Lesley-Anne Rawlings, prosecuting, said he had at first claimed he had gone into the school on August 9 to try and put the fire out.
But young children had reported spotting him inside the school, putting paper on to the fire.
But after reading reports magistrates were told the youth had had difficulty coming to terms with his father's recent death.
His solicitor David Smark said: ‘He was very frightened at the time because he was almost trapped inside the building.
He had to rely on a passer-by to let him out.
He was banging on the window trying to seek help.
‘He then panicked because he realised what kind of trouble he has been in.’
THE head of County Durham's ambulance services yesterday attempted to reassure health watchdogs about the level of cover in Upper Teesdale.
But local people remained sceptical about the time it can take crews to reach emergencies.
Ken Threlfall, the service's general manager, addressed Darlington Community Health Council which had heard at February's meeting that an ambulance had taken an hour to reach a patient with a broken arm in Harwood in Teesdale.
Mr Threlfall said the incident arose because two emergency calls had been made in Teesdale within an hour.
He said doctors had attended the patient before the ambulance crew arrived.
He said ambulances reached well over 95pc of calls within 19 minutes the Government standard.
But Teesdale district councillor Kath Toward said she knew of other ambulance delays.
Heather Courtley, whose son was the patient who had to wait for an hour, said she was not reassured.
SAFETY measures at a Darlington car park failed to come up to standard after tests, it has been revealed.
And work carried out to make the top deck of the National Car Park in East Street, Darlington, waterproof has also been branded a failure.
Now the problems have sparked a dispute between NCP and Darlington Council over which party is responsible for the repairs after the previous contractor went into liquidation.
Faults were discovered in the mountings on the crash barriers around the top deck of the car park in July.
The car park was immediately closed upon advice from Darlington council, which carried out the tests in line with national safety standards.
John Buxton, director of property services at Darlington council, said the authority had given NCP a quote for that work.
But a London-based spokeswoman for NCP said there had been no structural faults with the car park.
Instead, she said, there had been a problem when the council employed a contractor to lay a new waterproof surface on the top deck, to which NCP contributed half the cost.
‘The job turned out not to be satisfactory and the waterproof membrane started to break up,’ she said.
‘NCP is looking to the council to put the job right as the council approved the work before they paid the contractor.’
But Mr Buxton said the council did not accept NCP's statement.
He said the contractor had held discussions with NCP about the method to be used before the council was introduced to the contractor.
He added NCP was represented at all site meetings.
SEDGEFIELD:
Gary Huntington has been selected as the Liberal Democrat candidate.
Mr Huntington, 50, works for a local hotel and is the opposition leader for Sedgefield Council.
DARLINGTON:
The Green Party has issued a challenge to all election candidates to sign a Green Charter setting out the principles it hopes candidates will adopt.
Michael Fallon, the Tory candidate, has declined to sign.
REDCAR:
Robert Goodwill, of Richmond, has been adopted as the Conservative candidate.
RICHMOND:
Tory candidate William Hague, allegedly the House of Commons' fittest man, yesterday canvassed in Great Broughton, Great Ayton and Stokesley before addressing a public meeting in Skeeby.
RICHMOND:
The Liberal Democrats' campaign for the Richmond seat will kick off tonight with the formal adoption of candidate George Irwin in Northallerton Town Hall at 7.30pm.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Conservatives last night re-adopted Tim Devlin, MP since 1987, as candidate.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Labour health spokesman Robin Cook visits North Tees general hospital maternity and special baby care unit today.
EASINGTON:
Tory candidate Bill Perry said the Conservatives would give more power to the people by giving them help and encouragement.
DARLINGTON'S junior mayor and mayoress for 1992 took office yesterday.
Jared Oysten, 11, from Alderman Leach Junior School, and Victoria Grant, 10, from Heathfield Primary were picked by the Mayor, Coun Rita Fishwick, after they had written essays on how they thought a mayor in the year 2000 would spend a typical day.
More than 100 children entered the competition, and suggestions for the future included personal helicopters and jet boots to carry the mayor to meetings.
Victoria made it clear any schedule would have to make time for both shopping and relaxing, with official duties including opening hospital wards and presenting medals at swimming galas.
Coun Fishwick said she was overwhelmed by the enthusiasm shown by all the children who entered, and the two chosen were a credit to Darlington.
The couple were chauffeured from their homes to the town hall where they put on the replica mayoral chains made specially for the occasion.
They made a special trip by 225 train to York, accompanied in the train's cab by a British Rail line inspector.
Then after tea in the town hall and a quick break at home, the day climaxed with a trip to the Civic Theatre to see Roald Dahl's tale The Big Friendly Giant.
Neither want to replace Coun Fishwick as mayor.
Victoria hopes to study law at University while Jared plans to follow a career in the church.
SAFETY measures at a Darlington car park failed to come up to standard after vital tests, it has been revealed.
And work to make the top deck of the National Car Park in East Street, Darlington, waterproof has also been branded a failure.
Now the problems have sparked a dispute between NCP and Darlington Council over who is responsible for the repairs after the previous contractor went into liquidation.
Faults were discovered in the mountings on the crash barriers around the top deck of the car park in July.
The car park was immediately closed upon advice from Darlington Council, which carried out the tests in line with national safety standards.
John Buxton, director of property services at Darlington Council, said the authority had given NCP a quote for that work.
But a London-based spokeswoman for NCP said there had been no structural faults with the car park.
Instead, she said, there had been a problem when the council employed a contractor to lay a new waterproof surface on the top deck, to which NCP contributed half the cost.
‘The job turned out not to be satisfactory and the waterproof membrane started to break up,’ she said.
‘The council paid the contractors in full and the contractors have since gone into liquidation.
‘NCP is looking to the council to put the job right as the council approved the work before they paid the contractor.’
But Mr Buxton said the council did not accept NCP's statement.
He said the contractor had held discussions with NCP about the method to be used before the council was introduced to the contractor.
He added NCP was represented at all site meetings.
‘The council did award the contract but there is no evidence to support NCP's claim that the council should put right the defect,’ said Mr Buxton in a statement.
‘NCP have a lease from the council that requires them to keep the car park properly repaired.
NCP were informed in January, of this year, by the Director of Property Services, that responsibility for repairing the car park was NCP's, not the council's.’
CHEEKY thieves have got away with money and equipment from the offices of a group set up to tackle crime.
Police are investigating a break in at the Duke Street office of the Darlington Victim Support scheme.
Volunteers handle hundreds of cases every year helping Darlington people to come to terms with being victims of crime.
Yesterday deputy co-ordinator Sandra Watson said: ‘Now we definitely know what it feels like.’
Police said the thieves had broken through a rear entrance and stolen an electric typewriter, an answering machine and £40 cash.
Staff have feared a break in ever since neighbouring premises were damaged by fire.
Ms Watson said the empty building means intruders can reach the rear of the office.
The group's present offices were intended as a temporary base before staff moved into better premises which cannot be used because of fire damage.
REDCAR:
Robert Goodwill, of Richmond, has been adopted as the Conservative candidate.
RICHMOND:
Tory candidate William Hague, allegedly the House of Commons' fittest man, yesterday canvassed in Great Broughton, Great Ayton and Stokesley before addressing a public meeting in Skeeby.
RICHMOND:
The Liberal Democrats' campaign for the Richmond seat will kick off tonight with the formal adoption of candidate George Irwin in Northallerton Town Hall at 7.30pm.
SEDGEFIELD:
Gary Huntington has been selected as the Liberal Democrat candidate.
Mr Huntington, 50, works for a local hotel and is the opposition leader for Sedgefield Council.
DARLINGTON:
The Green Party has issued a challenge to all election candidates to sign a Green Charter setting out the principles it hopes candidates will adopt.
Michael Fallon, the Tory candidate, has declined to sign.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Conservatives last night re-adopted Tim Devlin, MP since 1987, as candidate.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Labour health spokesman Robin Cook visits North Tees general hospital maternity and special baby care unit today.
EASINGTON:
Tory candidate Bill Perry said the Conservatives would give more power to the people.
Factory man's arm caught in machinery
A worker at a Darlington factory needed hospital treatment yesterday after his arm was caught in machinery.
The man, who has not been named, was working at Bowater's on the Faverdale plant.
Firemen had to use cutting equipment to free the man, who was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Last night no one from Bowater's was prepared to comment.
Music stolen:
A Yamaha four-track cassette recorder worth £500 and a Yamaha drum machine worth £350 have been stolen from Greenbank Road, Darlington.
Garden raid:
A £400 three-feet high ornament with a concrete base has been stolen from a front garden in Blackwell Grove, Darlington.
College theft:
A large dark green Adidas holdall containing a compass set, two lever arch files and 20 three-and-a-half inch computer discs worth £145 has been stolen from outside the library at Darlington College of Technology.
In court
The following cases were dealt with by Northallerton magistrates: Anthony Charles, 29, of Shearwater Avenue, Darlington, admitted using motor car without excise licence, fined £150 plus £20 costs and £58.33 back duty.
Buttonholed with 2,000 flowers
2,000 home-grown carnations in his garden, it isn't surprising that when he wants to please his wife, Mr John Tholen says it with flowers.
What IS surprising is that the flowers are usually BOUGHT from a local nursery.
Mr Tholen, who retires at the end of this month as chairman of Darlington Health Authority, is a dapper man of 67 who is never seen without a carnation in his lapel except, he says, when he is shooting or flying.
And the buttonhole might never have become his trademark had he not been accused of being ostentatious.
He was working at ICI Billingham at the time and it had become habit, from his days as a London businessman, to wear a flower.
‘A director asked me if I was a gardener and when I said not, he said it was ostentatious.
So I thought I would grow my own,’ said the determined Mr Tholen, who is of Dutch extraction.
That was 33 years ago and today he has a 27ft greenhouse full of every hue of carnation, one of which he picks daily for his buttonhole.
This apart, he hates to pick them, preferring to drink in their beauty in the confines of his greenhouse.
Only when he has an embarrassingly large crop does he present a bunch to his wife, Pat.
Mr Tholen is a man who cannot resist a challenge and when, just before his 50th birthday, he was told he was too old to learn anything new, he set out to prove that theory wrong by learning to fly.
He has a share in a four-seat Piper based at Teesside Airport and, as he prepares to retire on March 31, he is looking forward to putting in more than his usual 70 hours a year flying time.
He has been a member of Dinsdale Golf Club for seven years and only played there about ten times and that is something else he hopes to expand on, he says.
The couple have lived at Girsby House at Girsby, near Hurworth, since 1963 and Mr Tholen says with conviction: ‘Nothing will move me from the North-East,’ citing his reasons as the ‘incredibly friendly and outspoken people and the proximity of the countryside.’
It is ironic that the man from Windsor who was nursed back to good health in a London hospital by the woman he later married should end up as a health authority magnate.
And his appointment to the position four years ago has certainly opened a whole new world to the former Tees and Hartlepool port authority chief executive.
Mrs Tholen, who went on to specialise in theatre work, has proved herself to be the gardener of the family despite her husband's success with carnations carefully nurturing the acre of gardens in which their four-bedroomed detached home is set.
There is a great difference between being a gardener and growing carnations, said Mr Tholen, whose wife is secretary of Northallerton Flower Club.
The perpetual flowering carnations he grows are ‘decent enough not to even shed their petals,’ he adds.
‘If I am wearing a pure white carnation I am best avoided on that day because it means I am in a bad mood,’ he said, adding that he always warns new acquaintances of this fact but has as yet not lived up to the threat.
Mr Tholen is a governor and trustee of Yarm School and says: ‘The one thing the area was lacking when I came was day education for boys.
There was no choice locally so I became very interested in that.’
His two sons had already been educated at Pocklington when Yarm opened as a result of efforts by a handful of parents whose enterprise he describes as ‘the boldest thing I have ever known.’
Mr Tholen chaired their appeal committee which raised £250,000 in three months and he continues to invest a small covenant in the school.
The couple's elder son, Jonathan, who served for 12 years at sea with the Dutch Merchant Navy, is a marine engineer.
He married a Dutch girl and they live at Leiderdorp, south of Rotterdam, with their four children.
Their other son, Peter, who has done 13 years in the RAF, served in the Gulf War and, says his proud father, was mentioned in despatches.
A Jaguar pilot, he completed 31 missions.
His wife, a dentist, is a former WRAF squadron leader.
Of his own interest in flying, Mr Tholen said: ‘I was using air taxis a lot to go to the Continent when I was working at Billingham.’
And with son Peter living at Norwich, he and his wife can travel there in a third of the time it would take by road.
Although when flying Mr Tholen doesn't sport one of his famous carnations, artist Alfie Alderson used a little licence when he completed a watercolour of him flying his plane wearing a red carnation.
Mr Tholen is a member of the Middlesbrough-based Teesside and District Chamber of Commerce and computers are another hobby.
Although he admits having joined the authority as a complete outsider to the health service, his wide experience in the business world has been of great help.
Of his time at Darlington, he says: ‘I can look back on many significant achievement by the staff.
More patients are being treated in more specialities and with more up-to-date methods than ever before a reflection of the hard work and high levels of professionalism of the staff who serve the people of Darlington and Teesdale.’
MoD stalwart rewarded for loyal service
The Imperial Service Medal has been presented to Mr Jimmy Ward, 65, of St. John's Road, Hipswell, for 29 years' service with the Ministry of Defence.
Mr Ward, who was born in Walker, Newcastle, started his working life in the shipyards of the Tyne.
He moved to Catterick in 1961 and joined the Accommodation Services Unit, Royal Army Ordnance Corps in January 1962, as a labourer.
From 1983 until his recent retirement he worked at HQ Training Group, Royal Signals and Catterick Garrison.
Mr Ward is married to Mrs Maisie Ward and the couple have one son who lives in Darlington.
Sitting no more in judgement, and making way for youth
A YOUNGER set of judges would provide a better image to the public: so says Mr Harold Hewitt, who last weekend sat for the last time, retiring for the second time at the age of 75.
‘I think it is important that judges should retire earlier than they do,’ said Mr Hewitt, of Etherley, near Bishop Auckland, who retired in his 73rd year but who has regularly been recalled to sit in judgement during the past two years.
And the man who became articled to a firm of solicitors at the age of only 16 says his days as a judge were by far the most enjoyable of his career.
For more than 30 years Mr Hewitt was coroner for South West Durham, retiring from that position when he became a judge in 1980.
He comes originally from Witton-le-Wear, the son of Mr Trueman Hewitt, a Bishop Auckland JP and councillor and one-time chairman of the old urban district council.
His mother, Bertha, did a lot of public work, says Mr Hewitt, who was educated at King James Grammar School when the family moved to Bishop Auckland and whose sister, Madge, still lives in the town.
‘In those days you could take articles to be a solicitor at 16 subject to certain academic qualifications,’ he recalled.
He was articled to Ernest Proud, a well known firm in which he was later to become a partner.
From there he went as an assistant solicitor to Tynemouth county borough council, returning to Bishop Auckland after the war to take over an old-established firm of solicitors which had belonged to Colonel Dowling and which later merged with Ernest Proud's old practice.
That is where he remained until his appointment as judge.
‘For four years before being appointed full time I sat as a recorder so I have really been sitting in the crown court for 17 years,’ said Mr Hewitt, whose work on the North Eastern Circuit has taken him to courts from Humberside to the Scottish and Lancashire borders.
He and his wife, Doris, live in idyllic surroundings with beautiful views across Weardale in the home they had built at Etherley 40 years ago.
The two acres of grounds provide relaxation for the pair, whose love of gardening shows in the beautifully-kept lawns and borders.
Their elder son, Christopher, is a solicitor in Darlington and the youngest, Timothy, is a barrister with chambers in Newcastle.
They each have two sons, both families living in the Lanchester area.
Mrs Hewitt, a former teacher, has been involved in social work throughout their 45-year marriage.
She was secretary of the local Red Cross for many years and on retirement was made an honorary life member and awarded a badge of honour.
She is still involved in charity work and is on the committee of the South West Durham Macmillan Nurses hospice appeal and is also involved with the NSPCC.
Mr Hewitt is a member of Bishop Auckland Rotary Club and is north regional president of the YMCA, which is planning to open a residential centre in Darlington in two years' time.
‘The YMCA has now taken on a much more important role,’ says the genial Mr Hewitt, who is very concerned about the homeless.
He has been involved with the organisation for 30 years and has been its regional head for a decade.
He enjoys music his one regret is that he never learned to play a musical instrument and is chairman of the newly-established music society which is putting on a season of classical concerts in the throne room at Bishop Auckland Castle.
In retirement Mr Hewitt is looking forward to having more time for reading, preferring biographies and works of historical interest, with French literature his main love.
And, at the end of his busy career, he adds: ‘It is rather interesting to be able to read The Times and The Northern Echo in the morning instead of at night.’
Bus chiefs stand up for older vehicles
Bus chiefs have responded angrily to claims that many of County Durham's buses are fit for the scrap heap.
A survey has shown that nearly 15 per cent of county's buses are more than 15 years old and Mr David Newbegin, county environment director, said this week that older buses put people off using public transport.
They were ‘uncomfortable and unreliable’ and they eventually became uneconomical to run.
County transport officials also feared that bus companies would face huge bills within the next five years as stock had to be replaced.
They said the county might have to subsidise less popular bus routes or companies would raise fares to provide the cash to buy new buses.
The directors of Darlington's two main bus companies this week condemned Mr Newbegin's comments to the county's highways and transportation subcommittee as wholly unfounded.
‘Older buses are often more reliable than newer models for the simple reason that workmanship meant they were built to last,’ said Mr Stuart Hyslop, director of Darlington Transport Company.
‘I notice he made no mention of London Transport's 30-year-old double deckers which are some of the oldest and most reliable in the country.’
Nine of DTC's 50 strong fleet of single decker buses and 13 of United's 216 fleet have been on the road for almost 20 years.
‘Our buses have to pass a Ministry of Transport test every year and they are perfectly safe and reliable,’ said Mr Hyslop.
‘The seating on older buses is replaced to make it comfortable and the buses are easier for people to get on and off as they have a lower floor.’
Mr Andrew Guest, managing director of United Buses, said he was concerned the report gave the impression that the buses were unsafe.
‘The highest safety standards are maintained and claims like this are likely to put people off using public transport,’ he added.
Both Mr Hyslop and Mr Guest said Mr Newbegin was wrong to suggest that 15-year-old models were uneconomical.
‘We run a business like any other and I would not say any of my vehicles are uneconomical,’ said Mr Hyslop.
Whilst a new bus cost about £82,000, a second hand one was a fraction of the price at £14,000.
DTC said it had found using older models a reliable and cost effective way of keeping fares down.
Parts were easy to replace and the chassis and main body built to withstand mileage.
Mr Guest said United had a rolling programme of renewing its fleet and planned to buy 13 new buses this year.
Regional childcare training centre plan supported
Darlington College of Technology should become a regional centre for childcare training, Labour and Conservative candidates agreed.
Mr Alan Milburn visited the college on Monday with Ms Hilary Armstrong, Labour spokesman on education and candidate for NorthWest Durham.
They talked to Mr Peter Shuker, college principal, about how nursery nursing training could be improved including new courses to allow nurses to upgrade their skills in a new degree course.
‘We see no reason why a top quality college of technology like Darlington should not start to build links with the University of Durham,’ said Mr Milburn.
Later in the week Mr Michael Fallon said he agreed but argued that the best way forward was through the Government's plans to make colleges self-governing.
‘Under our proposals colleges would be much freer to make links with universities and polytechnics.
But Mr Milburn would vote against such a move despite the fact that the college is looking forward to it,’ he said.
Mr Milburn said Durham had a relatively large number of nurseries but there were still gaps in Darlington.
‘I look forward to new nurseries, for example in the West End of Darlington and in Cockerton, as Labour sets new targets for growth in nursery provision.’
Mr Fallon said the gaps were the fault of the Labour county council which had ignored nursery provision in Darlington until the election.
‘Durham has suddenly remembered that Darlington is part of the county.
It could have provided new nursery schools years ago as it has done elsewhere in the county.
‘The question is why hasn't Durham built them before?’— Every child would be given a statutory right to education from the age of three under a Liberal Democrat government, its Darlington candidate vowed.
Mr Peter Bergg said it was important to realise the difference between nursery education and playschools.
‘We want to see proper education and we have said we will put a penny on income tax to provide it at all levels from the age of three upwards.’
Tory invites SA trade delegation
A South African diplomat who was snubbed by Darlington borough council has now been invited to the town.
Two weeks ago the ruling Labour group on the council boycotted a visit by a South African diplomat saying it was too early to bring that country in from the cold.
But Coun Tony Richmond, leader of the council Conservatives, has now been in touch with the South African embassy in London to set up a trade visit to the town, and is to ask for all-party support at next week's council meeting.
Coun Richmond said: ‘South Africa is a vast market place which has not been developed.
With a population of 30 million there is great potential for business links with Britain and I want Darlington to benefit.
‘There has clearly been change in South Africa let's take advantage of it and get more work for the town's companies and more jobs,’ he added Coun. John Williams, the Labour group leader, said Coun. Richmond's invitation was premature: ‘He is being too hasty.
This sort of delegation needs to be invited on a considered basis and international consensus and not by 18 Conservatives in Darlington.
‘And it's a bit rich after the failure of the Conservative government and this town's MP to do anything for the economy in this town it looks like an election gimmick.’
Transsexual calls for understanding
A woman who became a man 20 years ago says there may be up to 60 transsexuals living in County Durham.
At a meeting of Samaritans in Darlington he called for a more understanding attitude from the general public and the Government.
Mr Mark Rees, of Tunbridge Wells, Kent, made news in 1986 when he took a case to the European Court of Human Rights.
British law, he claimed, unfairly discriminated against men who had undergone surgery to become women and vice versa and, despite losing the case, he launched a national campaign for transsexual rights.
On Wednesday this campaign brought him to St Augustine's parish centre, Larchfield Street, Darlington, where the local branch of the Samaritans were holding their annual meeting.
Mr Rees, a former member of the WRNS, told the meeting that suicide rates were very high among transsexuals.
‘It is especially high among transsexuals who have had the operation and have then regretted it later,’ said Mr Rees, who himself spent five months in a psychiatric ward during his teens because of depression.
Now in his late 40s, Mr Rees told the meeting of about 150 Samaritans that transsexualism, if untreated, might lead to mental illness.
He said the transexual condition was not a chosen one.
‘We do not choose this condition any more than someone chooses to be a diabetic,’ he said.
‘It is not a form of homosexuality.
When I was living in my former role I went along to a lesbian meeting, thinking that might be what I was, but what I wanted was a relationship with a woman as a man.
‘Nor should the transexual be confused with the transvestite who simply dresses as the opposite sex.
The transexual gains no sexual satisfaction from putting on clothes.
Transsexuals want to change their role permanently.
‘Another strange comment I once heard from a doctor was that transsexuals were obsessed by sex, which was great news to us, especially to me, who lives like a monk.’
Mr Rees said one reason for the condition could be a hormonal imbalance before birth which created ‘a male body but a female brain’.
He said the biggest problems faced by transsexuals occurred when they decided to change their sex after marrying and having children.
Telling friends, workmates and parents was also a difficult task, said Mr Rees.
‘My mother could never have grandchildren through me and that is a great loss for a parent.
We have to try to understand our families and support them,’ he said.
He said operations were available on the National Health Service.
LOCAL CALLS
More than 10,000 telephone calls and visits were made to the Samaritans in Darlington last year.
Statistics given to the annual meeting showed that 1,400 of them were from people who had never called upon the Samaritans before.
Suicidal callers accounted for 16 per cent of all telephone calls and visits made to the Darlington Samaritans, who have an office in Woodland Road.
The Samaritans can be reached on .
Mr Mark Rees, a transexual who spoke to the annual meeting of Darlington Samaritans.
NORTH EAST JOBS TREND GETS BETTER
Unemployment in the North-East has bucked national trends by falling this month.
Despite a rise in Britain of 37,530, the number of people out of work fell in more than half of the region's local authorities.
In County Durham the number of unemployed people fell in February from 26,987 to 26,870 a fall from 11.1pc of the workforce to 11pc.
In Cleveland 13.2pc of people who are able to work are jobless compared to January's figure of 13.3pc, or 280 people fewer than last month.
But North Yorkshire saw an increase in unemployment.
In January it was 20,285 (5.9pc) and this month it was up to 20,992 (6.1pc).
There were almost 90 fewer people on the dole in Stockton this month.
The total fell there from 9,847 to 9,758.
However, in the Darlington travel-to-work area there were 5,342 people out of work this month compared to 5,229 last month.
Despite a county-wide increase unemployment was down in several North Yorkshire towns.
In Northallerton it was 875 (4.1pc) this month compared to 887 (4.2pc) last month; in Richmondshire it was 925 (5.7pc) down from 950 (5.9pc); And in Thirsk the number of unemployed people fell by 0.1pc from 332 to 326.
Nationally the jobless total rose to 2,606,602.
Ambulance delay is under spotlight
A woman who waited more than an hour for an ambulance is to meet senior health managers to discuss the problem in Teesdale.
Mrs Heather Courtley, of Harwood, Upper Teesdale, and Coun. Mrs Kath Toward, of Teesdale district council, were invited to join other members of Darlington community health council on a visit to the ambulance station at Middleton-in-Teesdale.
The invitation came from Mr Ken Threlfall, general manager of County Durham ambulance service, who attended the CHC meeting on Thursday to explain the difficulties involved in serving remote parts of the dale.
HEAD INJURIES
Mrs Courtley had told the CHC of an incident when the ambulance she called took an hour to arrive.
Coun. Mrs Toward said her son had also waited an hour for an ambulance after being injured in a car crash.
Although he had suffered only a broken arm, it had been feared by two doctors at the scene that he had suffered serious head injuries.
It was only after hospital examination that this was ruled out.
Mr Threlfall said covering the more remote parts of the upper dale was a problem.
Crews answered an average of just 1.7 accident and emergency calls in Teesdale every week, although weeks would go by when there were no calls.
It was unfortunate when calls coincided and an ambulance had to be summoned from Barnard Castle, Bishop Auckland or Darlington, but this was bound to happen occasionally.
It was difficult to justify stationing a second vehicle and crew in the upper dale because it would rarely be needed.
DEADLINE
Keeping the Middleton-in-Teesdale station open cost around £90,000 a year about £1,000 each time the ambulance was called out.
The Darlington service cost about £250,000 a year about £40 for each callout.
More than 95pc of calls were answered within the government's deadline of 19 minutes but it was inevitable that a handful would cause problems.
‘Short of massive cash injections and having an ambulance on every village corner, which would not be used 99.9 per cent of the time, it is very difficult to know how to deal with this,’ said Mr Threlfall.
However, Coun. Mrs Toward said one-hour waits were not as uncommon as Mr Threlfall made out.
‘The upper dale considers an hour is now the response time, particularly on Bank Holidays and Sundays,’ she said.
Going for a second triumphant retirement
Behind every great candidate, there has to be a great agent and who could be better than Mr Joe McLean MBE, the Conservative agent for Bishop Auckland, with his 41 years' experience?
Mr McLean got off to a flying start in his first campaign, the 1951 General Election, where as Conservative agent for Darlington he helped Sir Fergus Graham beat sitting Labour MP Mr David Hardman.
Conservative victories in Darlington since then proved a little harder, so the action moves swiftly to early 1983.
Mr McLean and other northern area agents were visiting Downing Street you guessed right, his MBE was for political services when Mrs Thatcher and Mr Cecil Parkinson asked anxiously about Conservative prospects in the forthcoming Darlington by-election.
‘Darlington was due for a win, the feeling was right in the town, and I told them so,’ said Mr McLean.
Sadly Mr McLean, who had always promised he would retire with a final Conservative win after his successful opening in 1951, was to be proved wrong.
Mr Ossie O'Brien defeated Mr Michael Fallon with a 2,412 majority in the March 1983 by-election.
Mr McLean was making preparations for his retirement when Mrs Thatcher called a General Election that June.
And, famously this time, he successfully campaigned for Mr Fallon who won the Darlington seat with a 3,437 majority.
Mr McLean was as good as his word, and ‘retired’ after the 1983 election to become a part-time helper at Bishop Auckland constituency offices where he still remains.
Some years later he met Mr Parkinson again during a campaign meeting for the Penrith and Borders constituency.
‘You had us worried at Central Office after the by-election Joe, but you certainly proved us wrong three months later,’ said Mr Parkinson, slapping him on the back.
Mr McLean, with a little help from Conservative candidate Mr David Williamson, has the small matter of a 7,035 majority to overturn if he is to enjoy a second ‘retirement’ on April 9, 1992.
Time for tea:
Mr Hurd enjoys a break during his meeting with Mr Fallon.
DMr Hurd welcomes new jobs as unemployment rises Mr Douglas Hurd, the Foreign Secretary, visited the region on Thursday to meet Conservative candidates and welcome new jobs at Fujitsu in Newton Aycliffe.
At a press conference at the Peat Marwick McLintock offices in Northgate House, Darlington, he said the constituency was a ‘very important one for us.’
He described Mr Michael Fallon, the Conservative candidate, as an energetic minister who should be returned to parliament, not just for the town but for the North as a whole.
‘The North has been through some hard times, and things are changing.
Employment is widening and more jobs are available.
‘As a result it is better protected against cold winds than it used to be.’
He said the government had helped the North help itself.
‘We did not say you have got to come to Darlington or Newcastle of Teesside, we said look at the North and here is the help that you can get.’
He said the rise in unemployment figures in the town, from 4,365 to 4,482, was an indicator of the state of the economy several months ago.
The decisions being made by businesses now were the ones which would show the way out of the recession.
Mr Fallon said he had been told by Mr Shiro Fujimoto, the managing director of Fujitsu, that the company would be increasing its workforce by between 140 and 240 by 1993.
His comments were later confirmed by Mr Len Davies, health and safety manager at the semi-conductor factory.
He said the increase in production operators and technicians would take place gradually throughout the year.
Mr Hurd said Labour's policies, especially in introducing a minimum wage and its taxation policy, would hit hard.
‘That would do a hell of a lot of harm to job prospects in the North.’
Before lunching in Darlington he had met Mr Nick Jopling, Conservative candidate for Sedgefield, and Mr David Williamson, Tory hopeful for Bishop Auckland.
He went on to campaign with Mr Tim Devlin, running in Stockton South and then moved to Hartlepool and Newcastle.
— Mr Alan Milburn, Darlington Labour candidate, said the increase in the jobless figures marked another disappointing day for Darlington.
‘Another rise in the town's unemployment is an indicator of just how lost the government's economic policy has become.’
At his conference that morning he said unemployment had cost £17bn.
just in the North since 1980.
‘In 1987, Michael Fallon said in his election literature that unemployment would go on falling.
But since John Major became Prime Minister, 1,000 more people are unemployed in Darlington.
Norman Lamont admitted unemployment would keep on rising.
The people of Darlington cannot afford any more empty Tory Party promises.
Mr Peter Bergg, Liberal candidate in Darlington, said the unemployment figures showed the depth of the recession.
‘The government tell us all the nice things that are happening in Britain and yet all the indicators show us that this is not the case.
‘In the first two years of a Liberal Democrat government we would produce 600,000 jobs, 400,000 in the first year and 200,000 in the second.
He said the money would initially be put into repairs and maintenance of buildings, with a knock-on effect throughout business.
Business and Quakers too much for chairman
Dick Corden has resigned as chairman of Darlington's relegation threatened football club.
His unexpected decision leaves the troubled Quakers with just a two-man board of directors.
And this week Mr Corden, who owns a scaffolding company in Middlesborough, spoke about his reasons for quitting.
‘I was in an important business meeting last week and the telephone just kept on ringing and ringing with people wanting to talk about the club,’ said Mr Corden.
‘We are all going through hard times in the construction industry and I just can't deal with endless interruptions and keep a firm on the rails as well.’
‘The decision to resign was not a sudden one.
I have wanted to relinquish the chairman's job since Brian Little left.
‘Things have never really been the same since Brian left.’
He denied allegations he was leaving because the Quakers are in Division Three's relegation zone.
‘I joined the club when it was going into the Vauxhall Conference and people were saying it was going under.
No one can question my commitment to Darlington Football Club.’
Mr Corden took over as chairman in 1989 and pulled off an immediate coup by appointing Brian Little as manager.
There was initial disappointment as the Quakers slipped into the GM Vauxhall Conference, but then the fortunes of the club enjoyed a dramatic upturn.
Last season they won the Fourth Division title and Corden believed the club were heading for second division football.
However, his hopes were shattered when Mr Little left to join Leicester and Darlington were back in trouble.
Mr Corden announced his decision to Feethams staff on Wednesday and remaining directors Mr John Brockbank and Mr Richard Tonks are urgently trying to sort out the club's cash problems.
THE fictional firemen from ITV's hit series London's Burning have been looking at how American actors tackled blazes in the movie Backdraft, released this week on CIC Video.
Hollywood stars Kurt Russell, William Baldwin and Scott Glenn, who play Chicago firemen in Backdraft, took their roles and their safety seriously enough to train as firemen for several weeks before filming began.
British actors Glen Murphy, Sean Blowers and Richard Walsh did the same for London's Burning.
Now, after four years on the show, they know their way around a hosepipe, having tackled fire, flood and disaster on screen.
So what did they think of Hollywood's treatment of the kind of scenes they know so well?
Walsh, who plays Sicknote, says: ‘The shots of fire exploding flashovers as they call them in the trade were absolutely mind-blowing.
Much bigger than anything we could attempt on London's Burning.’
Glen (George) Murphy agrees: ‘It's incredible the amount of fear that comes from that fire in the film, you know it's behind the door waiting to leap out that's the ‘backdraft’ in the title.
‘I loved the way they made the fire a monster in itself.
In a movie you've got to have good and bad: in Backdraft the fire brigade is the good and the fire is the bad it even has a kind of growling sound.’
The worst injuries suffered by Kurt Russell on the film set were singed eyebrows.
The London's Burning lads sympathise: ‘You sometimes get your hair, or the tops of your ears burned,’ says Murphy.
The general opinion seems to be that the only really dangerous thing that happens during the filming of London's Burning is Murphy driving a fire engine.
Sean (Hallam) Blowers chips in: ‘The brilliant thing about Backdraft was that no-one had actually done a film about firemen before.’
This prompts Walsh to beg to differ: ‘With the exception of Will Hay!
What was it called Bells of London or something.
Or was that Stanley Holloway?
There was The Towering Inferno, of course, but it wasn't really about the business of fighting fire.
‘There's no real comparison, this is a far better movie.
In The Towering Inferno you always felt you were standing outside the fire, in Backdraft you're right in the middle of it.’
Blowers studies Backdraft's dynamic video sleeve, depicting Russell striding manfully out of the flames after rescuing a child.
‘This picture sums up the film.
He's got a little kid in one hand and he's walking out of a burning building.
You could only really believe it if the fire behind him was about 100 yards away he'd be frying!’
Murphy points out that Russell's character is supposed to be a brave, devil-may-care type, but Walsh says: ‘Yes, but even so, he'd have worn breathing apparatus surely I suppose you've got to see his mug on screen, though.’
Keep Pennine peace quiet
SO WE have The Last Wilderness in the Northern Pennines an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Peace, quiet, empty roads, farmers getting on with farming.
Oh for goodness sake, let's keep is that way.
Just keep quiet about it.
Don't even contemplate making it a national park.
See what's happened to the Dales and the Lake District.
See what publicity has done for them.
Nowhere is remote any more.
Is it too much to hope that the last wilderness will be allowed to carry on in its own independent way?
Molly Baker, Garth House, Sedbusk, Hawes.
Scargill's foresight
I AM an ex-miner, having been forced into redundancy at the healthy age of 53 due to the policies of the Thatcher Government towards the British coal industry.
I could not agree more with V.E.
Newson (HAS March 11) when he expresses concern at the rapid decline of the industry and the rather callous abandonment of the skilled workforce within it, a testament no doubt which many a Durham and Yorkshire mining village could bear witness to.
But wasn't it Arthur Scargill himself who almost a decade ago warned the nation that a national fuel policy was essential in order to conserve our energy stocks?
Our offshore reserves of gas and oil are not unlimited.
Rather sadly, Mr Scargill's reward for his caring contribution has been a further 837 pit closures and lifelong castigation by a large section of the national media.
Gayles Fitzpatrick,.
Fairer rates
I READ with some amusement R.K. Bradley's letter (HAS March 17).
This attitude is typical of the ‘I'm all right Jack’ syndrome.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I cannot remember major riots and civil disorder against the old rates system, nor did it contribute to the downfall of a Prime Minister.
The old system had its flaws, but nevertheless, it seemed fairer than the poll tax.
J.
Stasiak, 104 Bates Avenue, Darlington.
European advice for small firms
SMALL businesses in the North-East can find out how to take advantage of business networks in the EC when the European Week for Business gets under way next week.
A number of seminars are being held around the region including three entitled Training for Europe, Profiting from Europe, and Doing Business in a Bigger Europe.
For information and venues contact Susan Miller at the Northern Development Company on .
DEBATE:
Mr Kinnock says (Echo March 13) he is the first Labour leader to advocate a head to head televised debate with the Tory leader.
Have we not already witnessed on the television his Scargill-type debate on the floor of the House during MPs' Question Time?
What useful purpose will a re-run of that debate serve?
Is Kinnock simply worried about his low popularity rating against Mr Major?
A St Julien, Magdalene Avenue, Carville.
A ROW broke out yesterday over disability pensions for war veterans.
Pensioner Frank Bevan, at a Press conference with Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn, said he had to pay tax on his war disability pension as it was classed as income.
But Michael Fallon, who is defending Darlington for the Conservatives, claimed the pensions were tax free.
Frank, 73, served with the Royal Marines and was severely burned while on the HMS Suffolk.
He underwent cosmetic surgery and had three nose operations.
Frank, of Headingley Crescent, said: ‘The problem with my war disability pension is I have to pay the top whack tax.
But no other European country charges for this.
‘I have pensioner friends on the Continent who are much better off they get free telephones and television licences.
But being a pensioner in Britain is gradually getting worse.’
Mr Milburn said Labour would stop the anomaly of taxing disability pensions by abolishing the poll tax.
He added Labour would raise pensions by £5 per week for single people and £8 a week for couples.
But Mr Fallon claimed most war disability pensions were tax free: ‘They are only taxed if pensioners’ income exceeds £4,000 a year.’
Peter Bergg, Liberal Democrat candidate for Darlington, said the Liberal Democrats would link pension increases to wage settlements and not to inflation.
COUNCIL tenants on the Branksome estate, in Darlington, have been given details of a series of home improvements.
At a meeting on the estate Darlington council housing officers explained that 37 houses and flats in Eggleston, Dryburgh and Fountains View are due for large scale revitalisation work costing £350,000.
Among the improvements will be new kitchen units, new UPVC windows, modern bathroom suites and full gas central heating.
Housing chairman Coun Bill Dixon (Lab) said the improvements in the area are a crucial part of the general cross town council house revitalisation programme.
But he said the full programme has had to be reduced because of spending limitations placed on the council's housing budget.
SUNDAY:
The Tories launched the John Major chat show.
The Prime Minister answered questions from supporters in a specially staged meeting in his Huntingdon Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown in his first set piece speech attacks the Tories over voting reforms.
He also claimed his party would ‘kick-start’ the Mike Potter, who stood for the SDP in the 1989 Richmond by-election, said he wouldn't be standing in the forthcoming general Labour's Tony Blair, Tory Michael Fallon and Lib Dem's Alan Beith clashed in a live TV debate over the NHS.
MONDAY:
Labour's shadow chancellor John Smith unveils their alternative budget promising everyone earning up to £22,000 a year they would be better Dr Ashok Kumar launched his campaign to retain Langabrugh pledging ‘I'm here to Opinion polls show the Tories with a three point Labour say they would scrap the City Technology Colleges if they won power.
TUESDAY:
Opinion polls show Labour back in the lead on course for a nine seat John Major unveils the Tories’ 39 steps to education reform claiming they will achieve higher Roy Hattersley, on a visit to Darlington, pledged to give Durham's Chief Constable the number of extra bobbies he Darlington Tory candidate Michael Fallon claimed a Newcastle-based regional assembly, as proposed by Labour, would harm the town.
THURSDAY:
The unemployment figures rose to their highest level for four years.
Michael Fallon claimed Alan Milburn was taking jobs away from Darlington because he is a business development officer for North Tyneside district Tory Foreign Minister Douglas Hurd visited the North-East saying Labour's minimum wage plans would lead to job losses.
Teleworking ideas under microscope
OVERCOMING rural isolation through teleworking came under the spotlight in Stanhope.
Delegates met at the Durham Dales Centre to discuss developing enterprise by making use of locally-offered fax, copying and word-processing services.
Centre manager Carl Bendelow said visitors heard an outline of the national growth in teleworking in response to a growing number of firms needing to get away from expensive city offices.
‘The second part of the seminar featured workshops where delegates discussed the sorts of services teleworkers offer,’ said Mr Bendelow.
‘Lively discussions took place into how teleworking could be more actively carried on in the Durham dales of Derwentside, Weardale and Teesdale.’
The day was sponsored by Derwentside and Wear Valley district councils, the local Enterprise Agency and Durham County Council.
Euro-MP visits:
Durham Euro-MP Stephen Hughes visited a Bishop Auckland school on Thursday.
He spoke to sixth formers at St John's RC Comprehensive about European politics and took part in a question and answer session with 40 pupils.
Diplomas presented:
Wear Valley District Council chairman Marie Land will present diplomas to Information Technology students on Wednesday.
She will be at Wear Valley Training at the Durham Dales Centre, Stanhope, handing out certificates to 12 students.
School appeal:
Duke of Edinburgh pupils at St John's RC Comprehensive School, Bishop Auckland, raised £155 for the Kostroma appeal by being sponsored to complete an assault course.
This total was boosted to almost £200 by staff at the town's Asda store where teachers shopped for goods to send to the Russian town.
The school also collected 100 sacks of food, clothing, toys and medicine to be sent to Kostroma.
Picture clue over stolen silverware
POLICE have issued the above photograph of a stolen silver plated service almost 100 years old.
The coffee pot, jug and pepper pot were among items stolen in a burglary of a house in Aiskew, Bedale, between 1.30pm on March 8 and 1.30am the following day.
The three items are made of identical embossed plate and bear the markings, Sheffield 1897 1899 and the marker's initials, RW and RH.
The whole set weighs a total of 26 troy ounces.
The thieves, who broke in through a back door, also stole a 24in gold link chain, a gold bracelet and a JVC video recorder.
BT workshop:
North Yorkshire teachers have answered BT's call and are giving up their weekend to learn about the technology of modern communications.
Theft from truck:
A gear box was stolen from a breakdown truck in Anchorage Lane, Northallerton.
Bike stolen:
A Peugeot 21-gear mountain bike has been stolen from Ashlands Road, Northallerton.
Cash raid:
Thieves who broke into Betty's in Northallerton High Street chiselled open the safe and stole £2,000 cash yesterday morning.
Break-in thwarted:
An attempted break-in at King Hope accountants in Romanby Road, Northallerton, was thwarted when the alarm went off and the would-be thieves fled.
Jewellery theft:
A microwave oven and jewellery were stolen by thieves who broke into Castle Hill dairy house, Romanby, Northallerton.
The value of the haul is unknown.
Hospital break-in: A security box was forced open during a break-in at the recreation room in the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton, but nothing was stolen.
In court
The following cases were dealt with by Northallerton magistrates: Paul G. Poulter, of Sladeburn Drive, Northallerton, was convicted of failing to return excise licence after cheque dishonoured, fined £100 plus £30 costs and £50 additional penalty.
Morris Bashford, 51, of Turker Close, Northallerton, admitted using motor car without excise licence, fined £75 plus £30 costs and £20 back duty.
Roger Stephen Chilcott, 39, of Fishergate, York, admitted driving motor car with excess alcohol in blood, fined £250 plus £30 costs, disqualified for three years.
Andrew David Roberts, 24, of Winton Road, Northallerton, admitted using motor car without excise licence, fined £150 plus £20 costs and £8.33 back duty.
Sedgefield Tory candidate Nick Jopling whose father Michael has long occupied a safe seat at Westminster has been telling the Diary the poignant story of the lowest point of his life.
‘The saddest thing of all about it,’ he says, ‘is that it was meant to be the proudest.’
The nadir came in 1983, when his dad was Minister of Agriculture and young Nick was due to receive his degree from Newcastle University.
‘Dad had said he'd be there and then got a call from Brussels to talk about herring quotas or something,’ says Nick.
‘I asked the University if I could be last to get my degree, I was so sure he'd make it back in time.
‘I never believed he wouldn't make it.
I was actually second last before I realised.
I can remember having a certain amount of resentment towards politics.’
Michael Jopling, standing just two feet away as the tale unwound, said that he knew the feeling.
‘I can remember Nick as a small boy, maybe five, begging me not to go back to London that Monday morning and to stay at home with them.
‘It's not terribly easy to go away with that sort of thing ringing in your ears, but for all that I couldn't have chosen a more marvellous or rewarding life.’
Both Joplings live and farm near Thirsk.
The affable Michael, 61, has been MP for Westmoreland since 1964 after cutting his political teeth at Wakefield in the 1959 general election.
He's a former government Chief Whip and remains (slightly more surprisingly) the president of the Auto Cycle Union.
He's also just chaired a Select Committee on MPs' working hours, which frequently collide head on with the following day.
‘I know a lot of MPs who work more than 80 hours a week and none who work fewer than 60,’ he says.
Nick personable, Eton educated, slightly big boyish looking is 30 and married with two very young children.
So why apply, more or less, for an awful job that seriously threatens domestic harmony?
‘You just get slowly immersed in politics,’ he says, already finance committee chairman of Northallerton based Hambleton District Council.
His farming experience may prove particularly useful for the vast acres of Sedgefield a constituency stretching from Piercebridge in the West, round the skirts of Darlington and to Wheatley Hill and Wingate.
Though it's 75pc rural, there'll be no no-go areas.
‘Not even Wheatley Hill or Wingate,’ he says.
We arrived at Sedgefield Parish Hall, standing room only, just as his adoption meeting finished.
People said his speech had been very stirring, as perhaps they might; Nick (as perhaps he might) said the seat (defending champion T Blair, majority 13,058) was ‘genuinely winnable.’
Win or lose, though, he has an important diary date in May, when Newcastle University confers an honorary Doctor of Civil Law degree on his father.
Michael says it's ‘very decent’ of them; Nick says he wouldn't miss it for the world.
HILARY Armstrong is a second candidate who knows exactly what she's letting herself in for.
Her father, another member of the Parliamentary class of ‘64, was NW Durham's Labour MP until succeeded by his daughter at the last election.
‘I'm no shrinking violet, but he's still more gung-ho than me,’ she says.
Before that Ernest Armstrong had been chairman of Sunderland Borough Council's education committee, responsible for introducing comprehensive schools to the town.
‘It was my first memorable political experience,’ says Hilary.
‘The teachers told me he'd let the clots in with the cream.’
Though he didn't actively encourage her, Mr Armstrong had no objections to putting his daughter on the same stage.
A splendid lady as convivial as her father, and with the same passion not far beneath she also served on Michael Jopling's working hours Select Committee.
‘It's the chaos of the House of Commons that gets to you; you just don't know what's going on,’ she says.
‘The Whips love it because it means they can have power over the Backbenchers, but as a system of organising the world it's lunacy.’
Sittings that drag beyond midnight particularly concern her.
‘It's the quality of work, the efficiency, that worries me.
Parliament is overloaded.
It has far too much legislation and far too much centralisation.
‘If you think someone can work at his best at half past two in the morning after being at it since eight the day before you know nothing about human beings.
‘A woman could really sort the place out.
Women think things through before they go into them.
Every so often I just block out time and disappear, so no one can get hold of me.
I haven't done it since Christmas.’
Election campaigns are no less hectic, she says, and more stressful.
The Diary's attempts to arrange a late night drink with her (‘she has to be home by 10.30,’ said her secretary, stealing 90 minutes on Cinderella) were re-routed into breakfast at 8.15am.
Unmarried, she lives in a former doctor's surgery in Crook which doubles as the constituency office.
When we arrive there's a three inch pile of mail on the floor, the day's diary overruns one of the computer screens and the breakfast table is set with grapefruit, muesli, cereals, Frank Cooper's marmalade and a vase of flowers that may or may not have been pinks.
Though we threaten her with a headline reading ‘Real Labour candidates don't eat muesli’ she insists that it's not for her own consumption.
The Frank Cooper's, adds Hilary, is also for guest use also.
‘I buy enough marmalade at local fayres to see me through the year.
One of the many things my parents taught me was how to entertain properly.
‘You can have scrambled egg and smoked salmon if you like.’
By 9.15 (toast, corn flakes, coffee) the telephone had already rung five times.
‘My dad says I work much harder than he did,’ she said.
‘Just like him, though, I enjoy every minute of it.’
THE three main parties are to debate their policies on nursery education at a public meeting in Darlington.
The event follows a similar meeting in the House of Commons which attracted 200 people.
‘I am thrilled that all three parties will be represented,’ said Ela Robinson, chairman of the National Campaign for Nursery Education.
‘The future of state nursery education is at stake and it is essential that people understand that there are three different policies being offered.’
The meeting is on Monday at 7.30pm at Darlington Arts Centre.
CHURCH wardens dug up a surprise for their vicar yesterday.
The Rev Leslie Gready was led from the Friday morning service to the grounds of St Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, where he has been vicar for the last ten years.
He and his wife Beryl discovered churchgoers had gathered to see the two plant a beech tree to celebrate the vicar's anniversary which falls on Easter Sunday.
But church wardens led by Barbara Smith appropriately chose yesterday, St Cuthbert's Day, for the early planting.
‘It was a complete surprise for him,’ said one member of the congregation.
‘He looked very stunned, but very pleased.’
Man bailed:
Andrew Metcalfe, 23, of Branksome Terrace, Darlington, appeared before the town's magistrates yesterday charged in connection with an alleged incident at a Darlington kebab shop in January.
It is claimed Metclafe inflicted grievous bodily harm to a man and then attempted to pervert the course of justice.
He was released on conditional bail pending committal proceedings.
Suspended sentence:
Kenneth Brian Dodsworth, 47, of Hope Moor Place, Darlington, was given a seven-day suspended prison sentence by the town's magistrates yesterday after admitting failing to pay a fine.
Dance date:
The afternoon dance publicised in The Northern Echo yesterday and run by the Dolphin Sunday Dance Club at the Dolphin Centre, Darlington, is not taking place tomorrow.
It happens on April 5.
But the evening event will take place at 7.30pm tomorrow.
Bike stolen:
Thieves stole a Raleigh mountain bike worth £235 from a garage in Pierremont Crescent, Darlington.
Home raided:
A television, two cameras and lenses, a Chinese rug, cutlery and jewellery worth £1,405 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Elmfield Terrace, Darlington.
Jumble sale:
A jumble sale by auction will be held in Elm Ridge Church Hall, Carmel Road South, Darlington, today.
Begins at 2pm.
All welcome.
Church venture:
A jumble and bric-a-brac sale will be held at St Cuthbert's Church Centre in Darlington Market Place today.
Begins 10am.
Admission 10p, all welcome.
Credit cash:
The North Darlington Credit Union holds a car boot sale tomorrow at 2pm at Welbeck Avenue, outside St. Anne's Church.
Admission is £10 for vans, £5 for cars and £5 for tables.
Further details from Phil Watson on Darlington  or .
TWO MEN were questioned by police soon after riding round the town on stolen motor bikes.
Teesside Crown Court heard that Andrew Burnside and Alan Sture had stolen the bikes from a garage in Lansdowne Street, Darlington.
They were later seen wearing ski masks and driving the vehicles across the Denes area.
Later the park's bowling pavilion was ransacked, fire extinguishers let off and keys went missing.
Burnside, 19, of Coronation Street, and Sture, 21, of North Road admitted two counts of burglary, one of taking a vehicle without the owner's consent and one of theft, while Burnside also admitted handling stolen goods.
Burnside was given 12 months in a young offender's institution and Sture jailed for a year.
Warning over noise threat
RESIDENTS in Billingham were warned today of the possibility of increased background noise from an ICI plant over the next few weeks.
The company has written to several hundred people living near its acrylics production area informing them of the possibility.
A spokesman for the company said the noise could occur in daylight hours and was due to the steam cleaning of various pipes that will supply the new Monomer 8 plant currently under construction.
Climbing fund:
A fund is being set up in memory of climber Tim Melton, 23, from Sleights, near Whitby, who fell to his death when he was climbing at Peak Scar in North Yorkshire two weeks ago.
The fund will be dedicated to the training of young climbers.
Heritage site:
The Majuba boating lake area in Redcar is one of six sites being considered for a national maritime heritage centre.
A RNLI spokesman said a feasibility study has concluded that the resort has the potential to be chosen for the prestigious tourist attraction.
Romania aid:
A lorry loaded with clothing, medical supplies, food and furniture left Clifford Street police station in Newcastle yesterday bound for Brasov in Romania.
The supplies will be given to old people.
THE
North Tees hospital trust will be a ‘nine-day wonder’, Labour's health spokesman Robin Cook said yesterday.
On a visit to the Stockton hospital, Mr Cook said if Labour won the election, they would end the hospital's trust status which is due to begin on April 1.
Mr Cook, who was accompanied by the Labour candidates for the Stockton North and South constituencies, Frank Cook and John Scott, said: ‘We have made it clear that we will run an integrated health service in which hospitals work together within local health authorities, rather than as trading enterprises.
‘We want to bring back trusts into health authorities accountable to the local community, as quickly as possible and without any disruption to patient care.’
His words were echoed by Kay Kirkham, Stockton South Liberal Democrat candidate: ‘We want to bring health in general back under democratic control which it is not at the moment.
But Simon Fowler, Stockton North Conservative candidate hit back, saying he was ‘fed up’ with North Tees Hospital, which he regarded as one of the best institutions in the area, being ‘slagged off’by Mr Cook.
He added: ‘I have been visiting North Tees for over a year now and there is no doubt in my mind that the majority of staff want the trust and are looking forward to it.’
While at the hospital Mr Cook spoke to staff about their fears for the future when the trust comes into operation.
After his visit to the hospital he spoke to shoppers in Stockton High Street about the community charge and Labours plans for a fair rate.
He also held a meeting with Alan Milburn, Labour candidate for Darlington, about the Northern Regional Health authority's proposals to merge local health authorities.
DARLINGTON Tory candidate Michael Fallon was yesterday accused of economic illiteracy over claims that Labour's tax plans would hit public services.
Mr Fallon claimed Labour's tax proposals would take money away from Darlington Memorial Hospital and schools.
But Alan Milburn, Darlington Labour candidate, said Mr Fallon was economically illiterate.
Mr Milburn said: ‘Labour will spend an extra £1bn on the National Health Service and £600m on education to improve services.
‘People who earn more than £40,000 will pay a new tax rate of 50p in the £1 and that additional money will go into the health service and education.
Mr Fallon is either very confused or deliberately misleading.’
But Mr Fallon said higher taxes and National Insurance contributions would damage Darlington's public services.
‘Each doctor will spend on average £1,500 more under Labour,’ he said.
‘And theatre sisters and registrars will all pay higher National Insurance contributions.
It makes a nonsense of Labour's claims to support the welfare state.’
Mr Fallon enjoys his job schools minister so much he has asked to remain in the Department of Education and Science if he wins the Darlington seat.
Looking back on his achievements in the 21-months since he took Ministerial office, the Tory candidate said he wanted to complete the programme of reforms with which he had been involved.
‘I have enjoyed it so much I have asked to stay in the DES.
That should please teachers and local authorities.
They hate change,’ he said.
Controlled fishing
THERE have been a number of articles and letters published recently about North-East drift-net fishery for salmon, which suggest that the Government's proposal to phase out this fishery is unreasonable and that it is based on political expediency under pressure from owners of rod fisheries.
The Atlantic Salmon Trust, which is devoted to the conservation of the wild Atlantic salmon, believes that the issue should be seen clearly.
The Trust is not an anglers' or owners' association and takes no side in the arguments between the supporters or sporting and commercial fishing, but it does believe that salmon should be taken only in their rivers of origin or their estuaries so that the total level of fishing effort can be controlled in order to ensure that enough fish reach the spawning sites to maintain stocks naturally.
Interceptory fisheries such as the North-East drift-nets take fish from many rivers and prejudice this local management.
It is this point which was recognised in the Government's review and which led to the intention to phase out drift-netting.
D.J.
Mackenzie, Director, The Atlantic Salmon Trust, Moulin, Pitlochry, Perthshire.
Education mess
ONCE again Michael Fallon criticises local authorities for all the bad things in education (Echo Education March 13).
The truth is that without the assistance and support of local education authorities in helping schools manage the many drastic, rushed and ill conceived changes forced upon them by the Tory Government during the past 13 years, the education service would by now be in total disarray.
Mr Fallon speaks of education without all the bureaucracy of local politicians.
The aim, of course, is to have education dominated and totally controlled by the massive central bureaucracy of the Department of Education and Science which in turn is dictated to by a Minister of Education.
This of course is the Tories' version of democracy at work.
The old USSR would have been proud of such central control.
P.A. Frame, 14, Burnhope close, Thistleflats, Crook.
HEALTH service managers from Darlington and South-West Durham will launch a local patient's charter on Wednesday.
The charter outlines patient's rights along with standards for areas such as waiting times and hospital child care.
Dr R Williams, director of health care purchasing, said: ‘This is a positive step towards improved care and will help increase awareness of the range of services and standards available.’
LABOUR in Darlington has launched an advertising campaign on Darlington Transport Company buses to get its message across.
From now until polling day passengers on DTC services will see the series of Labour slogans on issues including the poll tax, health, employment and crime.
Candidate Alan Milburn said the bus campaign would reach many of the people who would do best under his party.
A CALL has been made for town hall officers to solve a dispute with National Car Parks in a bid to make full use of Darlington's parking spaces.
A Tory councillor has called for an end to the row which broke out after Darlington council checks revealed faults in the crash barriers around the upper deck of the NCP car park in East Street.
The council and NCP have clashed over unsuccessful waterproofing work carried out on the upper deck.
Neither wants to accept responsibility for the repairs needed since the previous contractor went into liquidation.
Darlington councillor Peter Jones, Tory spokesman on the transport committee, said: ‘Obviously it's a waste of space and I do hope such an excellent facility can be brought into service as soon as possible.
‘Darlington is in great need of car parking in that area, especially as a new development in Russell Street will be taking many spaces away.’
Coun Jim Skinner, chairman of the transport committee, said: ‘Our officers are working on the situation, but there are problems with that car park.
I'm beginning to think that car park has been nothing but trouble since it was built.’
Liberal Democrat councillor Ken Walker said: ‘Car parking is a problem and we need spaces, but there is a considerable amount of money involved.’
A DRIVER was seriously injured and his wife, child and dog hurt in a crash on the A66, east of Bowes.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the collision which happened at 7.20 am on Saturday, near the junction with the Stonebridge road.
The collision between a BMW and a lorry was the third serious crash in three weeks on the road.
A driver died last week and two football fans returning from a Newcastle United game, were all killed on the A66 east of Bowes, in separate incidents.
BMW driver Anthony Hastelow, was still in a critical condition at Darlington Memorial Hospital last night with serious head injuries.
His wife Colette suffered facial injuries and nine-year-old son Jamie was treated for a fractured elbow.
Their dog was also seriously hurt in the crash which pushed the HGV down an embankment.
But driver James Dick, 37, of Dumfries, escaped without injury.
Police said: ‘The BMW had overtaken a series of vehicles while.
After negotiating a long, sweeping left hand bend the car collided with a lorry which was travelling in the opposite direction.’
POLICE have appealed for information in a bid to identify an elderly woman found wandering along a busy road.
The woman, wearing a camel coat, was discovered on the A167 at about 7pm on Saturday between the Reg Vardy garage and Croft.
Yesterday, a Darlington police spokesman said she was ‘confused’ and suffering from amnesia but unhurt.
Anyone who can help should call police on .
AS the self-proclaimed party of law and order the Tories appear to have the most to lose in the emotive debate on escalating crime.
After 13 years in power statistics show that offences are continuing to increase.
The latest figures reveal that recorded crime in England and Wales rose 16pc during 1991 to 5.3m offences.
Ram raids, muggings, burglaries and car thefts have all become common daily occurrences.
And this trend has sparked frequent claims that many people are living in fear, often too afraid to go out at night.
But the Tories have been quick to draw comfort from the latest figures, pointing out that the underlying trend showed that the rate of increase appeared to be levelling off in 1990 and 1991.
Home Office minister John Patten said they revealed a ‘welcome slowdown.’
A Home Office statistical bulletin said nationally police recorded an 11pc increase in offences in the last quarter of 1991 over the same period in 1990.
This was the ninth consecutive increase of more than 10pc but the smallest for two years.
The bulletin said: ‘This gives rise to the hope that the rate of increase may start to fall over the next few quarters.’
But criminologists weren't so sure.
They said the trend was an unusually low blip and it was possible that crime rates would continue to rise in 1992.
Locally, the Conservatives are also keen to highlight their achievements.
Graham Robb, typical of the new urban Tory, points to work carried out in Hartlepool where he hopes to become MP.
He said: ‘In Hartlepool there are now over 200 neighbourhood watch schemes and a Government project called Safer Cities.
It has spent around £1m over its four years in our town to tackle crime in difficult areas.’
He also said the Government was spending more on law and order and pointed out that since 1984 the length of prison sentences had increased by 31pc for robbery and 73pc for rape.
But Labour has produced its own alternative action plan to reduce crime.
Deputy leader and shadow Home Secretary Roy Hattersley said the party would work with local authorities and the police by modernising vulnerable estates, improving street lighting, demolishing derelict buildings and fencing off waste land.
Speaking in Darlington last week he said: ‘Elected police authorities will use the extra resources available for the war against crime to ensure that more police officers are visible on the beat, backed up by the modern technology which is essential to crime prevention and detection.’
John Cummings, who is defending Easington for Labour, is no stranger to the effects of crime.
The constituency is in County Durham, where 65,000 offences were committed in 1991.
He said: ‘There has been an unacceptable increase in the crime figures year by year since this Conservative government came to office in 1979.
‘The increase in assaults against the elderly nationally should be a source of concern to any responsible government.
‘I believe our communities expect the number of uniformed police trying to combat these crime should also be increased ‘It seems ridiculous that the Home Secretary should turn down County Durham Constabulary's bid for only 20 additional officers.’
The Liberal Democrats intend to concentrate on the prevention of crime by putting more policemen on the beat and setting up special committees to discuss law and order.
Ian Cameron, the party's candidate in Hartlepool, said: ‘When I was a child you could leave your back door open all night but you can't now.
‘I am fighting for the return of the community spirit, that is basically what my whole campaign stands for.’
He added: ‘At present, we are putting our pensioners in prison.
They are too frightened to leave their homes at night because they are terrified of what they will come back to.
‘We need to get our priorities right.
It is the villains we should be locking up.’
A NEW fund raising drive has been launched in the North-East following huge success over the last year.
The Northern regional director of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund paid tribute to the region's fund raisers who helped the charity make £635,000 in the past year.
Denise Alexander said: ‘People throughout the North of England have been fantastically generous to us in the past year.’
The new project Focus on the North will highlight the charity's work in the region and raise extra funds.
It is being backed by TV's Green Goddess Diana Moran, who has suffered breast cancer.
As part of the push, the 41 Imperial Cancer Research shops in Durham, Cleveland, Tyne and Wear, Yorkshire, Northumberland and Cumbria are to have window displays throughout the week.
Volunteer staff at the Darlington and Bishop Auckland Imperial Cancer shops are hoping as many local people as possible will visit the branches during the week.
And tickets are to go on sale for an Easter draw with a huge Easter Egg as first prize.
Imperial Cancer Research employs over 1,000 scientists, doctors and support staff in its laboratories and units attached to hospitals throughout the country.
Its work covers the causes, prevention, treatment and cure of cancer.
A new brochure Imperial Cancer Research Fund Leeds and the North, which explains the ICRF work, is available from the Darlington centre at 43 Coniscliffe Road, Darlington.
Ms Alexander said: ‘We would welcome with open arms anyone who would like to join us in our important fund raising work.’
FIREMEN were called out to rescue a man and a boy trapped in a river on Saturday night.
Lee Dowson, 12, from West Auckland, and Duncan Robertson, 21, from Catterick Village, were stranded on an island on the River Tees at Dalton at about 7pm.
Darlington firefighters used rocket-propelled rescue lines to reach the two who were uninjured.
The rescue was over in about half an hour.
A North Yorkshire police spokesman said neither was in any danger.
ELECTION candidates are renowned for kissing babies Labour leader Neil Kinnock said last week there was no place in politics for people who didn't like them.
But at least this one escaped as Darlington Tory candidate Michael Fallon preferred adult conversation.
Mr Fallon was campaigning on High Row on Saturday.
SHOE repairer Alan Potts announced his good news in big letters after being inundated with inquiries about his daughter's new baby.
Alan, owner of Potts' shoe repairs in Bondgate, Darlington, put up a congratulatory banner to answer well-wishers' questions.
His daughter Amanda Hill, 22, who gave birth to Lee Michael at Darlington Memorial Hospital, has worked in the family business for five years.
Never so good
IF the Health Service were to be given all the money it says it needs we should need to double every worker's NHS contribution.
So if a person prefers to go private instead of waiting, surely that person would reduce the waiting list and save the NHS the cost of the operation.
It seems to me that there is a trace of truth in the Australian phrase ‘The land of the whinging pom’ because we are always grumbling.
Yet one only needs to travel in the town on Saturdays to see well clothed and healthy children and upstanding young men and women, to realise that the people of this country are better off than they have ever been.
Our ships no longer plough the seas to seek cheap food at the cheapest price, and children no longer go to school in poor clothing.
J. Lowe, 7 Dene Park Court, Darlington.
Blaze tragedy:
An 81-year-old woman died at the weekend in a fire at her flat in Gatrigg Court, Hexham, Northumberland.
Mrs Ellen Morpeth is thought to have been overcome by fumes after the chair she was sitting on caught fire.
Children rescued:
Three 12year-olds were rescued by the Tynemouth inshore lifeboat after being cut off by the tide just south of the Marsden Grotto at South Shields.
The alarm was raised by a passer-by who heard one of the youngsters, clinging to rocks, shouting for help.
Gastric boost:
A gastroscope for children is to be set up in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The £11,000 instrument, which examines the insides of stomachs, is being provided with the help of funding from the Dawn Craggs Appeal Trust Fund and the Gastroenterology Research Trust.
Happy tree-turns:
Mary Hope-Sykes is celebrating her 90th year by having the same number of saplings planted in her home town of Kirkbymoorside, North Yorkshire.
She said she did not want any birthday presents unless they could be enjoyed by everyone, so her friends spent £500 on young trees and got permission to plant them around the town.
Planting plan:
Pupils from schools in Newcastle will start planting about 1,500 trees in the Benfield area this week as part of a plan to turn ten acres of land into a community woodland.
RADICAL:
Your editorial (Echo March 17) criticises the Liberal Democrat economic policy because it is ‘bound to undermine the money markets.’
Yet Stockbrokers Phillips and Drew say the economic programme of the Liberal Democrats ‘is the most logically argued and most radical.’
Your criticism is based on the fact that the Liberal Democrats propose a Public Sector Borrowing Requirement of £30bn compared with the £28bn put forward by the Tories.
But over the lifetime of a Parliament the Lib Dem PSBR would fall below the Tories because ours is short term borrowing for investment and not longer term for tax cuts.
Your comment was made in a week when manufacturing output fell for the seventh successive quarter and unemployment rose for the 23rd successive month.
All this under a Tory Government which admits its PSBR is to be double that proposed a few months ago.
How can anyone have confidence in the economic policies of such a Government?
As for Labour, John Smith says his party will accept whatever PSBR the Tories produced in the recent budget.
How much faith can we have in a possible Chancellor who does not have any independent view on something as important as the PSBR.
Alan Sykes,.
BRIBERY:
When Norman Lamont announced plans to borrow to finance reduced taxes for the low paid, Labour accused him of bribery.
Now John Smith has plans to borrow to increase tax allowances.
Why is this not bribery too?
Is it not a case of double standards and hypocrisy from Labour?
Andrew Wright, 30 The Headlands, Darlington.
Plea to fly flag for American-style fair
PARENTS of Escomb School at Bishop Auckland are searching for cowboys and cheerleaders to help out at their summer fair.
The PTA is holding an American Independence Day fair on July 4, and needs displays and performers to join in.
‘We're looking for lasso shows and majorettes, American cars and even a popcorn maker,’ said organiser Chris Bell.
We had a good response to our appeal for Americana, with flags and documents and American Indian artefacts to put in an exhibition.
But we want some outdoor activities on the U.S. theme, too.’
‘We hope to find a Country and Western group and we'll be serving hot dogs and hamburgers.’
Anyone who can help should contact Mrs Bell on .
Tools theft:
Thieves stole a Black and Decker hammer drill and drill parts, 20 spanners in a black leather case and a 36-piece socket set in a metal case worth £130 from an outhouse in Coleridge Gardens, Darlington.
A DISPUTE which has emerged between Darlington Council and National Car Parks is threatening to cause problems when the new Cornmill shopping centre opens later in the year.
NCP leases the car park above Presto in East Street, Darlington, from the local authority which recommended the upper deck be closed eight months ago after crash barriers were discovered to be unsafe.
But NCP claims the car park is closed because work carried out by local contractors to waterproof the top deck went wrong.
Now the council is waiting for the car parks firm to solve the crash barrier problem.
But NCP believes the council should solve the waterproofing problem.
Whatever happens and whoever is to blame, time and car parking spaces are being wasted while the two parties dither.
Motorists report long queues for the spaces on the lower deck at peak times.
Many are said to give up and drive off.
Darlington is on the brink of unveiling a multimillion pound shopping complex and ambitious plans are under way to pedestrianise parts of the town.
Surely now just months before the Cornmill is due to open is the time to ensure the town's assets such as easy town centre car parking are in good working order.
Darlington has been boasting about its forthcoming attraction at the Cornmill.
It would be a great shame to see shoppers travel from miles to the jewel in the crown of Darlington only to discover all the spaces in one of the town's most central car parks had been snapped up and no more were available because of a council and a car park company going round in circles.
THREE people were injured when a number of vehicles crashed on the Rushyford-Woodham back road at Eldon junction last night.
A man and woman were taken to Darlington Memorial and a man to Bishop Auckland General after being freed by firemen.
NO doubt David Mellor, Chief Secretary to the Treasury and Conservative parliamentary candidate for somewhere in England, is promising the earth to all he meets.
Pity he didn't fulfil a promise he made to Darlington Business Venture when he came up last November.
He said he would look into a dispute which was holding up the release of Brussels cash to help build some factories on the site of the old Darlington forge.
The deal which DBV and Darlington council struck went like this: each agreed to put in £150,000.
DBV hoped to get £120,000 Euro grant which, topped up with another £30,000, it could use to pay off the council.
DBV would therefore get £300,000 worth of factories for £180,000, the council would get its money back and local businesses would get factory units at affordable rents.
Sounds like a good deal.
Except the Treasury would not allow it.
The Government refused to regard EC money as additional to its own.
Local authorities across the country have therefore been unable, and unwilling, to part with their own meagre resources.
Mr Mellor, who was handed a dossier on the Darlington case during a lunch at Teesside airport, promised to look into it.
But when Alan Slater, chief executive to the DBV, contacted the Treasury in January a spokesman knew nothing about it.
Mr Slater sent him a copy of the application.
Later that month industry minister Edward Leigh signalled a hardening of the Government's position when he wrote to The Northern Echo outlining its case.
Then last month new hope was raised.
The Government conceded defeat on the whole ‘additionality’ issue and the Euro money could be released for the former coalfield areas.
But DBV's application came under another part of the programme.
And it has still not received a word from the Treasury.
Alan Slater is not a happy man.
As he says, even a letter of acknowledgement would be nice.
THE Labour Party appears to be more concerned about industry than the Conservatives.
It has plans for an industrial policy the Tories don't appear to have one and has modelled its industrial manifesto on the demands of the CBI, the Tories traditional bedfellows.
It is particularly keen to help the manufacturing sector, which has been decimated over the past 12 years.
Yet according to a MORI survey last week, only 1pc of leading British executives plan to vote Labour on April 9.
Businessmen fear a Labour victory would cause the pound to fall in value even though they would probably benefit.
Why do they remain so faithful to the Conservative Party?
William Keegan in The Observer claims, perhaps a touch cynically, that top earning businessmen are more interested in their own personal taxes than the wider concerns of industry.
There must be something in this.
Under the Conservatives the top rates were slashed from 83pc to 40pc which handed top earning executives some mighty large salary increases without them even having to ask.
The latest big rises to leading businessmen a 17.6pc rise for British Gas chairman Robert Evans and an 11.3pc rise for ICI boss Sir Denys Henderson are four and three times the rate of inflation respectively.
Wage restraint, say Conservative Treasury spokesmen, is important to company viability and to controlling inflation.
But it doesn't seem to apply to those already making a mint.
LABOUR'S claims that a national minimum wage would benefit workers were denied by a Conservative industry minister.
The plan for a £3.40 minimum hourly rate of pay is a key part of the Labour party's manifesto.
John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB Union, yesterday visiting members at Bowaters and Cleveland Bridge with Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn, said the minimum wage was crucial to help Britain rebuild its industrial strength.
But industry minister Edward Leigh, on a visit to the town, said it wouldn't benefit Britain's workforce.
Michael Fallon, who is defending Darlington for the Tories, joined Mr Leigh in pointing to industrial success stories in the town.
At Malcolm Engineering, in Banks Road, which makes parts for Nissan, Mr Fallon said: ‘Labour continually paints this gloomy picture of Darlington's economy.
But since 1987 160 companies have come to, or expanded into, Darlington creating 2,185 jobs.
Unemployment is worse in Stevenage.’
Vernon Malcolm, managing director of Malcolm Engineering, said: ‘Almost all my staff earn above £3.40 an hour but I need to be able to dictate my own rates of pay.
Interference of this sort could make difficulties.’
Mr Milburn quoted two job advertisements from Darlington Job Centre.
A night porter would receive £2.66 an hour while a leather sewing operator would get £2.67.
He said: ‘Low pay is common in several service industries.
Often it is part time women workers who suffer most.’
Mr Edmonds said all companies would have to pay the same base rate so they could not complain of unfair competition.
He added that Tory claims that militant extremists were still rife in Labour's hard core support was daft.
DIVORCED Eric Thompson drunkenly dialled 999 threatening to kill his ex-wife, a court heard yesterday.
And when he wasn't making threats he used the emergency line to discuss illegal drink driving offences in North Yorkshire.
Thompson, 61, of Stanhope Road, Darlington, had admitted improper use of public telecommunications at an earlier hearing when Darlington magistrates had adjourned the case for psychiatric reports.
He asked for three other similar offences to be taken into consideration.
Yesterday Ian Walker, prosecuting, said Thompson had admitted making a threatening call to his ex-wife at Eppleby and misusing the 999 system when interviewed by police.
But the following morning Thompson rang the police and threatened to kill his ex-wife's boyfriend at Eppleby.
‘Further calls were made on the 999 system in which he repeatedly swore and mumbled about drink driving offences in the North Yorkshire police area,’ said Mr Walker.
‘When a police sergeant revisited Mr Thompson he was still clearly the worse for drink and was in an agitated state.’
But his solicitor Geoff Cardwell said Thompson had been worried about a man who had been carrying out some work for his ex-wife.
He said Thompson had been involved in a traffic accident in which he had suffered a head injury and been concussed for a short time.
‘His mental state was not all it might have been,’ said Mr Cardwell.
‘He was depressed and has suffered a great deal of mental anguish.’
He was given a 12-month conditional discharge and ordered to pay £30 costs.
Stamps stolen:
Thieves who broke into a house on Fawcett Close, Bishop Auckland, stole £12 worth of electricity stamps.
Ram raid:
Police are investigating a ram raid after a farmer reported a Suffolk ram had been stolen from his field at Grove Farm, Bradbury, near Sedgefield.
Gates stolen:
Thieves stole two wrought iron gates worth £300 from a house on West Auckland Road, Shildon, on Saturday night.
Team stripped:
Twelve blue and red striped football shirts worth £120 were stolen from a washing line in The Broadway, Darlington, on Sunday afternoon.
Police appeal:
Police have renewed an appeal for information about an elderly woman discovered on the A167 between the Reg Vardy garage and Croft on Saturday night.
The woman, who was wearing a camel coat, is suffering amnesia and can give no details of her identity.
She is now in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Anyone with information should contact Darlington Police on Darlington .
TWO people were critically injured in a three car crash on a back road near Woodham, Newton Aycliffe.
The driver of a Mini, 19-year-old Simon Godding, of Arncliffe Place, Aycliffe, suffered multiple injuries.
He is critically ill in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The driver of a Set saloon Irene Grieveson, 56, is also critically ill in the hospital.
Mrs Grieveson, of School Aycliffe, was in collision with Mr Godding's Mini and then hit a Ford Escort on the rebound.
Last night hospital staff said Mr Godding was in a stable condition and Mrs Grieveson was ‘very poorly’.
Mr Godding's passenger Andrew Walton, 20, of Aysgarth Close, Newton Aycliffe, is receiving treatment for leg injuries at Bishop Auckland Hospital.
Escort driver Brain Scaife, 41, of Newton Aycliffe, escaped unhurt from the accident at Rope Moor Cottages, on the Rushyford Woodham road.
Anyone who saw the accident should contact Durham police on 091–386 4929.
A TORY councillor says Labour advertising on buses in Darlington will put people off using them.
Peter Jones says the Labour poster campaign will be ‘the biggest financial blow any bus company could suffer.’
Labour candidate Alan Milburn launched the campaign on buses run by the council-owned Darlington Transport Company.
Passengers on DTC services will see the series of Labour slogans on issues including the poll tax, health, employment and crime.
But Coun Jones, Tory spokesman on Darlington Borough Council's transport committee, said: ‘Conservative-minded DTC bus pass holders will next month be driven in droves into the arms of United.
‘We cannot afford to allow political decisions to come before the commercial consequences of such an act.’
But last night Mr Milburn said: ‘The Tories are clearly rattled by this new campaign.
It really is a very silly remark to make.
‘The people of Darlington have been made poorer by the poll tax and by 13 years of Conservative misrule.
That is the issue in this election and that is why the Tories are running scared.’
DARLINGTON chef Michael Pearson found the recipe for success in a prestigious nationwide cookery competition.
Michael from Bedale has just come first in the Caterbility contest for cookery students organised by British Gas.
The Darlington College of Technology part-time student won a regional heat to be one of 12 finalists who travelled to London last week.
They were asked to make a mouthwatering meal for four using two ducklings, a savoy cabbage, potatoes and up to 3lbs of other ingredients.
Michael prepared with pan-fried duckling breasts in a port and wine sauce, cabbage leaf parcels stuffed with Cumberland sausage, sour apple and apricot, and potatoes shaped into barrels and flavoured with yoghurt.
Michael, 28, of Wyville Grove, Hunton, won the judges over including the head chef of London's Savoy Hotel to claim the £500 first prize along with a commemorative medal and certificate.
Delighted course team leader Alan Brookfield said Michael had spent hours testing out various recipes before discovering the winning combination.
‘It's the first time anyone from the Northern region has won this competition which makes it even more special,’ he said.
Another Darlington student, Gillian Elders, 19, got through to the final in the kitchen design section but was unplaced.
A COUPLE charged with burglaries and shotgun offences appeared before Sedgefield Magistrates yesterday.
Michael Thomas Bartley, and his girlfriend Julie Saint, both of Newton Aycliffe, are jointly charged with having a pump action shotgun and a Wingmaster shotgun without a firearms certificate.
Bartley, 23, of Bell Walk, Newton Aycliffe, was also charged with having the two guns after a 12 year prison sentence which barred him from owning firearms.
Saint and Bartley were also jointly charged with stealing thousands of pounds worth of property from Sissons Gallery, Thirsk, in 1991; Victorian Edwardian Furniture, Darlington, in February this year; and Swineside Ceramics, at Leyburn, in January, 1992.
Saint, 31, of Shafto Way, Newton Aycliffe, is also charged with dishonestly receiving stolen goods and stealing a van.
A third man, Anthony Martin Morgan, 28, of Bewick Crescent, Newton Aycliffe, was jointly charged with Bartley of burglary at Stokesley retained fire station, handling stolen goods, attempting to steal a car in Aycliffe and having tools for use in thefts.
Morgan was also charged with 11 motoring offences.
The case was adjourned for two weeks until April 6.
All three were remanded on conditional bail.
A PENSIONER died when a juggernaut carrying steel girders from Darlington knocked a heavy street sign on top of her head, Cardiff Crown Court has heard.
Grandmother Annie May Morgan, 61, was standing at the junction of two roads when the accident happened.
Leighton Davies, prosecuting, told the jury that the 72 foot juggernaut mounted the pavement and knocked the sign over while trying to negotiate the bend in the centre of Porth.
Mr Davies said: ‘Mrs Morgan was right back against the fence but was struck as this juggernaut continued on its way.’
Lorry driver Brian Steggles, 54, of Brougham Street, Darlington, denies causing death by reckless driving on May 22 last year.
The trial continues.
RAIL chiefs yesterday celebrated the tenth anniversary of an agreement which led to a £10m facelift for a mainline station.
A decade ago yesterday, British Rail signed a million-pound contract for repairs on the Victorian Darlington Station's roof.
The restoration process lasted for several years, extending to other parts of the station, and eventually cost around £10m.
CONTROVERSIAL plans for a motel complex and petrol station in a picturesque County Durham village have been revived.
The application for development at Hill House Farm, Aycliffe Village, is to go before Sedgefield District Council's development committee on Thursday.
A similar scheme was given outline planning permission in 1989 but the applicants did not go ahead and let the planning permission lapse.
Neighbouring Darlington Borough Council had said the plan would spoil the village, was contrary to the structure plan and was an unwanted development.
The new scheme will include a fastfood restaurant, farm shop, picnic area, toilets and car park if it gets the go ahead from councillors.
Planning officers have already recommended approval.
A MAN yesterday remained silent throughout court proceedings at which he was accused of stealing clothes from a chain store.
The man, who had a spikey haircut and was wearing a white jumper, is charged with stealing jeans from Marks and Spencer in Darlington.
Ian Walker, prosecuting, told Darlington magistrates the man had been followed by a member of staff and had been seen to drop a bag containing the jeans.
He said: ‘He has maintained a silence throughout the time he has been in custody.
He has been seen by the police surgeon who certified him fit to be detained.
The doctor was unable to give any reason as to this man's silence.
‘Inquiries are going on identify this man with fingerprints.’
The case was adjourned.
A WIFE accused of punching a woman who had an affair with her husband has been cleared of assault.
Susan Swales, 38, of Fenby Avenue, Darlington, denied assaulting Christine Wilson during a scuffle in a nightclub's lavatories.
Yesterday Ian Walker, prosecuting, told Darlington magistrates Mrs Wilson was in the ladies at Club Lucy's in Darlington when a young woman asked who she was.
He said the woman then punched Mrs Wilson twice and she realised Mrs Swales was nearby.
‘Susan Swales hit her with her clenched right fist four times in the face and three times in the head,’ said Mr Walker.
When called as a witness Mrs Wilson said: ‘I didn't do anything to retaliate or to provoke that attack.
I had been having an affair with her husband.’
Mrs Swales told the court she saw a lot of shouting and arguing, but she did not intervene or try to get involved.
‘I said she deserved it.
I wasn't very sympathetic, but I did not strike any blows to her face,’ said Mrs Swales.
‘I think her lip was bleeding.
I didn't speak to her.’
Mrs Swales's friends Liz Metcalfe and Gail O'Keefe said they were with her on the night and had never seen her assaulting Mrs Wilson.
Summing up, Graham Hunsley, for Mrs Swales, said: ‘The woman was assaulted but Mrs Swales took no part in it.’
Spate of break-ins could be linked
A SPATE of burglaries in Barnard Castle may be linked, town police say.
A spokesman said there had been several break-ins at town centre premises over the weekend, including at Mowbray Vale Insurance on Galgate when the roof was damaged and cash taken, Stoneleigh residential home, also on Galgate, and the Kings Head Hotel.
An attempted raid was also been reported at a solicitors office in Horsemarket.
‘Inquiries are continuing but we do believe these incidents may be connected,’ said the spokesman.
Deception admitted:
Robert Wilkinson 25, of Thornton Street, Hartlepool admitted two charges of deception and asked for 40 more involving bouncing cheques worth £4,000 and committed all over Cleveland and Durham to be taken into consideration.
Hartlepool magistrates ordered him to carry out 240 hours community service and pay £250 compensation.
Compensation order:
Elaine Dulston, 33, of Balmoral Road, Darlington, who claimed benefit while she was working as a shop assistant was yesterday ordered by Darlington magistrates to pay £891 compensation to the DSS.
She admitted four charges of making a false representation to obtain benefit and asked for 18 others to be taken into consideration.
Fencing success:
Six pupils from Polam Hall School had success in the Amateur Fencing Association's North East section at the weekend.
In the under-12s first place overall went to Lynsey Watson, second to Lauren Little, third to Philippa Parkin and fourth to Vikki Hamilton.
In the under-14s first place went to Emily Pickles and second to Kirsty Snowball.
Bike vanishes:
A racing bike worth £150 was stolen from a backyard of a house on Bury Road, Newton Aycliffe.
House break-in:
Burglars have stolen a Panasonic television worth £400, an Amstrad video recorder worth £200 and jewellery worth £600 from a house in The Broadway, Darlington.
Home hit:
Two televisions, two video recorders, a Hi-fi system, a cordless telephone and a CD player worth £2,360 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Winchester Way, Darlington.
TWO Darlington candidates have refused to appear on a television programme with Donald Clarke, of the British National Party.
Labour's Alan Milburn and Michael Fallon, who is defending the seat for the Tories, said they would not appear on the same political platform as Dr Clarke.
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg has agreed to appear.
All four Darlington candidates have been invited to a political debate on the Tyne Tees TV's Point of Order.
Mr Milburn said Labour had a national policy not to appear with the BNP.
Mr Fallon said: ‘I would have to think very seriously about it as I do not think Dr Clarke's views should be given air time.’
But Mr Bergg said: ‘Although I am totally opposed to what they stand for I am too much of a conformist to free speech.’
A spokesman for Dr Clarke said: ‘We are official candidates so in a democracy we have as much right to appear as the others.’
He said Dr Clarke would be canvassing in Darlington over the next three weeks and the party intended to hold public meetings.
The BNP is opposed to coloured immigration.
A Tyne Tees spokesman said: ‘We are currently making inquiries concerning candidates for a number of seats.
So far we have not made any decisions about who will be featured.’
AN ESCAPED prisoner is back behind bars after police arrested the runaway in a primary school.
Alarm bells began ringing at Mount Pleasant Primary School, Darlington, when Sophie the school hamster broke out of her cage, setting off burglar alarms and alerting the police.
For two days she remained at large despite a posse of pupils carrying out an inch-by-inch search of the building.
Wanted posters offering a substantial reward failed to bring news of any sightings.
But a night-time break for freedom failed when the escapee triggered the burglar alarm and the school's security firm called in sharp-eyed PC John Zissler and WPC Tracey Walker to apprehend the fugitive.
PC Zissler said: ‘We scoured the building until Tracey spotted two eyes watching us from behind a pile of papers.
There was a chase and we managed to corner the prisoner, then I grabbed her and she was returned to custody.’
With Sophie back behind much stronger bars, the intrepid PCs went back to the school yesterday to claim their reward chocolate coins.
Stand at ees
ON a bus from Northallerton to Thirsk yesterday a sign stated that the vehicle could hold 24 seated passengers and six standees.
It was the sort of notice that one might have expected to read on a bus going from New York to Philadelphia.
Standees does exist as a word despite initial doubts from this direction.
The dictionary states quite clearly that it comes from the United States.
Before long anybody standing for anything, committee, council, carrots will be a standee.
And if standees why not settees?
You what?
DARLINGTON directors Richard Tonks and John Brockbank are making every effort to raise cash and strengthen a two-man board.
A chairman has yet to be appointed following the resignation of Dick Corden last week.
Tonks said: ‘We are looking at the situation on a day-to-day basis.
We would welcome interest from anyone prepared to put money into the club.
‘The board certainly needs strengthening.’
Manager Ray Hankin has had inquiries for players but no concrete offers.
The transfer deadline is 5pm tomorrow.
Players registered after this date will only be eligible for League matches with Management Committee permission.
Promotion and relegation issues are invariably not settled before the last week of the season, so there would be no point in clubs signing players only for them to kick their heels after the deadline.
The League has issued a warning to all clubs about goalkeepers.
A spokesman said: ‘We have advised all clubs to ensure they have a sufficient number of goalkeepers registered before the deadline.
‘Special dispensation will not be given to clubs to sign and play goalkeepers after that date.’
A PEDESTRIAN who was knocked down by a taxi earlier this month has died in hospital.
Joseph Hayton, 62, of Geneva Road, Darlington, died early yesterday in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Mr Hayton suffered head injuries in the accident on March 5 in McMullen Road opposite the entrance to Darlington Rugby Club.
DARLINGTON Transport Company Ltd has defended a decision to allow Labour advertising on its buses in the run-up to the General Election.
Managing Director Stuart Hyslop said the posters with slogans on issues including the poll tax, crime, health and employment are carried on a commercial cash basis and no other party has approached the company to book space.
The posters provoked a complaint from Tory councillor Peter Jones who said they would drive passengers away and prove ‘the biggest financial blow any bus company could suffer’.
Labour candidate Alan Milburn hit back saying the Tories were rattled by the campaign and the people of Darlington had been made poorer by 13 years of Conservative misrule.
Mr Hyslop said he had made it clear during the 1987 campaign that any political party was free to advertise.
A ROW has broken out between two Darlington General Election candidates over the number of under-fives in nurseries.
Labour's Alan Milburn has accused Tory Michael Fallon of not understanding his own department's figures.
In a debate at the Arts Centre on preschool education Mr Fallon claimed the proportion of children in nursery schools was 48pc.
The figure was challenged by Ela Robinson, chairwoman of the National Campaign for Nursery Education, who arranged the meeting.
Mrs Robinson referred to figures given to Labour's Hilary Armstrong and said only 25pc of children were in special nursery classes, while the 48pc figure included under-fives in school as well.
Mr Fallon told the 60-strong audience: ‘That's nonsense, I gave the figures to Hilary Armstrong.’
Yesterday Mr Milburn's office produced the Hansard written answer to Ms Armstrong, which puts the total for all under fives in England in pre-school education at 48pc compared to 25pc at nursery school or in primary nursery classes.
Commenting on the figures Mr Milburn said: ‘Mr Fallon claimed these were his own figures.
He clearly doesn't understand them.
‘I would challenge Michael Fallon to withdraw his remarks and accept only 25pc of under fives are in nursery education.’
But Mr Fallon he said: ‘Mr Milburn continues to think of nursery education as only council nursery schools.
‘That is a slur on private nurseries and good quality pre-school play groups.’
Mrs Robinson yesterday said: ‘Mr Fallon was definitely wrong, he was reading his own figures wrongly, but whatever the statistics that won't give us one more nursery place.’
She said she did not accept under-fives at school received true nursery education as they had inadequate resources and the pupil-teacher ratio could be three times that at nursery schools.
Mr Fallon said the Tories were committed to encourage the creation of nursery places but not just through local authorities.
He added if independent nurseries were included in the statistics more than half of three and four-year-olds now attended school, a figure only bettered in Europe by France and Belgium.
Mr Milburn said Labour wanted to provide adequate child care facilities for all because it would benefit children, and would allow parents, especially women, to return to work.
He said his party's policy was to ensure there was a nursery place for every three and four-year-old whose parent wanted it by 2000.
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg said his party would spend £525m on pre-school education and £150m on a child care voucher system for working parents.
He said Britain spends proportionately less of its national wealth on education than its economic competitors.
AN INVESTIGATION launched after a 37-year-old man died in police cells should be completed by the end of the month, police say.
The man, who has not been named at the request of his family, was found collapsed in a cell at Darlington police station on March 8 and was certified dead at the scene.
A police spokesman said yesterday the investigation, carried out under the supervision of the Police Complaints Authority, was ongoing but she hoped an inquest would open very soon.
‘We are waiting for a pathologist's report but it would be fair to say the investigation is nearing completion,’ she said.
The man had appeared before Darlington magistrates on a drink-driving charge and was remanded in custody.
He was being held in police cells because there was no room for him at Durham prison.
Police have said he fell ill twice, once shortly after he was arrested, and half-hourly checks were made in case his condition deteriorated.
They said they were not aware of any suspicious circumstances.
THE environment was top of Labour's election agenda in Darlington yesterday.
Ann Taylor, the party's spokeswoman on green issues, visited Darlington to back candidate Alan Milburn in calling for environmental improvements.
They joined up with local environmentalists who were extending a pond at the Victoria Nursing Home, Barton Street.
The pond is a breeding ground for the greater crested newt.
Mr Milburn said: ‘Environmental issues continue to affect us all.
The failures of Conservative environmental policies are clear in Darlington.’
He cited deterioration in the quality of the River Skerne and Baydale Beck, and increase in town centre traffic as local problems which needed resolving.
He said: ‘I recently launched a major initiative to rid Darlington of bus congestion.
I am pleased to say that discussions with the bus company and the local and county councils are progressing well.’
Michael Fallon, his Conservative opponent, said: ‘The Labour Party are the last and most recent converts to green issues.’
Bid to identify death-fall man
NATIONAL fingerprint records are being checked in a bid to identify a man who plunged to his death from a bridge.
Detectives in Scarborough said they were no nearer establishing who he is 48 hours after he died.
The body of the man aged between 50 and 60, 6ft tall with grey, receding hair was discovered in the early hours of Monday morning below the Spa bridge.
Police said there were no suspicious circumstances.
Crime stopper:
Crime in Durham is to be tackled by a new city council committee which will liaise with groups like the Durham Agency Against Crime, the Racial Equality Council, Durham County Alcohol Liaison Committee and Neighbourhood Watch.
Death ‘instant’:
A woman whose car collided with an articulated lorry on the A66 near Bowes was killed instantly, a Darlington inquest heard yesterday.
Pathologist Ceri Williams said Alison Margaret Cowley, 34, a mother of two from Allenthorpe, near York, died from multiple injuries.
Historic sale:
A casket presented by Newcastle city fathers to Victorian explorer Sir Henry Morton Stanley remembered for his immortal greeting ‘Dr Livingstone I presume?’ goes under the hammer at Christie's later this year.
Pedestrian dies:
A pedestrian who was knocked down by a taxi earlier this month has died in hospital.
Joseph Hayton, 62, of Geneva Road, Darlington, suffered head injuries in the accident on March 5 in McMullen Road, Darlington.
The taxi was driven by Michael Allenby, 32, from Darlington, who underwent treatment for whiplash injuries.
VIP line-up:
Stan Laurel's nephew will join VIPs at the unveiling of a bronze statue of the comic genius this weekend.
The nine-foot figure stands at a new development in Dockwray Square, North Shields, Stan Laurel's home for 10 years.
His nephew Huntley Jefferson Woods, Tory candidate Neville Trotter, North Tyneside's deputy mayor Muriel Green and deputy mayoress Carol Harrison will attend the ceremony on Sunday afternoon.
Sex charges:
A soldier appeared in court yesterday charged with two sex offences.
Pte Mark Turner, 21, of 24 Airmobile Field Ambulance Brigade, Gaza Barracks, Catterick Garrison, is charged with a serious sex offence against a woman and indecently assaulting her in Scotton, near Catterick Garrison, on Friday.
An application for bail was refused by Richmond magistrates and he was remanded in custody for a further seven days.
Park clampdown:
North York Moors National Park authority is to clamp down on hundreds of illegal signs.
The park officer Derek Statham said in future an attraction will have to have a minimum of 20,000 tourists a year before it can qualify for a sign.
Staff robbed:
Two youths attacked and robbed two members of staff as they went to bank the day's takings from a fruit shop in Raby Street, Byker, Tyneside.
The female staff were unhurt in the robbery of hundreds of pounds.
Compressor stolen:
A compressor worth nearly £9,000 was taken from a compound in Stepney Road, Byker, Tyneside, and bears the name UK Plant Hire.
Shop raid:
Cigarettes worth more than £2,500 were stolen from Bretts newsagents in Westoe Road, South Shields.
The thieves also snatched a television, video recorder and hundreds of pounds in cash.
Scrap plea:
Police have appealed to scrap dealers to look out for brass electrical equipment stolen from Wearmouth Colliery.
Equipment worth over £15,000 was taken in the raid believed to be for its scrap value.
Road closed:
Traffic was delayed and a short stretch of the A66 eastbound closed when a lorry tipped over in Cleveland yesterday.
The HGV toppled near British Steel, between the Grangetown turn-off and Teesport roundabout just before 11am.
A TEENAGE driver who died after crashing into a tree was in a stolen vehicle, a coroner heard yesterday.
The accident which claimed the life of 18-year-old Gary George Still involved a Ford Escort taken from Sunderland and bearing false plates, police said in evidence.
The Darlington inquest heard Mr Still, of Newholme Estate, Station Town, Wingate, died from cardio-respiratory failure and he would have become unconscious soon after impact.
The accident happened on Monday, December 23, on the road between Great Stainton and Sedgefield and left the car severely damaged.
John Wilkinson, a passenger in a car travelling in the opposite direction, said he saw Mr Still lose control of the vehicle and swerve before mounting the verge and hitting the tree.
‘It only came a couple of inches over the white line, he hit the brakes and it shot one way and then the other,’ he said.
‘I looked back and I thought he might get off the verge but it was wet.
Then it hit the tree.’
Another witness told the coroner she was overtaken by a red car and then the Escort and while she did not feel the cars were racing, they were travelling ‘fairly quickly’ and she thought they were together.
PC Dale Cowey said he examined the vehicle which had no defects other than those caused by the collision.
He said investigations showed Mr Still was the holder of a provisional licence, there was no test certificate or insurance and the vehicle had been stolen from the Sunderland area.
Recording a verdict of accidental death deputy coroner Andrew Tweddle said evidence showed Mr Still was travelling too quickly for the road conditions.
‘As a result of the collision he sustained fatal injuries and would probably have been rendered unconsciously almost instantly,’ he said.
THREE Darlington men, appalled at an attack on a blind woman, have launched a bid to raise funds to buy a guide dog.
But the 77-year-old victim, who said she was pushed around by two youngsters aged about ten, has requested a younger blind person benefits from the dog.
The drive has been launched by self-employed builder Jack Pattison, Gary Soakell, manager of Harveys in Darlington, and Dave Morgan, who represents the Morgan Social Club in Barton Street, Darlington.
They decided to help after hearing how the woman, who does not want to be named, was set upon by two boys near the Red Hall estate in Darlington last week.
She said she was on her way home after visiting friends when the incident happened.
Mr Pattison said: ‘They started to push her from behind and she could hear that she was getting nearer and nearer the River Skerne.
‘When she started to cry they offered to help wipe her eyes and used a piece of soiled paper which they had just picked up.
‘They then ran off, laughing at her.
There was no one else around and she was very upset.
‘I'm appalled that a blind person can be treated in this way and want to raise money to buy a guide dog.
But the lady has asked that a younger person benefit so they don't go through what she has endured.’
An entertainment night featuring singer Kate Washington and Dave Hunter has now been planned for April 15 at the Morgan Social Club.
The trio are also planning rhythm and blues nights and rock charity nights.
FEARS over the future of the NorthEast's oldest rugby club have been allayed.
At a general meeting of Darlington Rugby Club some members voiced concern to the committee that the club would not have a ground on which to play home matches next season.
But last night club secretary Andrew Foster said there was no doubt the club would be playing league and cup matches later this year.
Mr Foster said: ‘There has been a long period of uncertainty which always causes problems.
I am confident once the uncertainty is resolved the problems will die down.’
For two years there has been debate over the future of the club's home ground at McMullen Road, Darlington.
An unnamed buyer has agreed to purchase the site for an undisclosed sum.
It is believed the developer wants planning permission to built retail warehouses on the site.
Mr Foster said: ‘It is true that we have not settled our home venue for next season but it will either be still at McMullen Road or another venue.’
He said he was unable to comment about private business within the rugby club.
While the search for a possible new home continues, the normal business of arranging fixtures is going ahead as usual.
CONSERVATIVE plans to allow council tenants to convert rents into mortgages could benefit more than 1,500 people in Darlington.
The claim came from Michael Fallon who is defending the key marginal for the Tories.
Mr Fallon said the Conservatives wanted to allow council tenants to convert their rents into mortgages for half or more of the value of their home.
The scheme would be aimed mainly at sitting tenants and could double the number of people who had bought council houses in Darlington.
He said: ‘Many more tenants would like to buy their own house but cannot quite afford to do so.
‘The rents-to-mortgage scheme would allow tenants to buy at least half their property from day one by paying the existing rent.’
Mr Fallon said a family renting a house valued at £25,000, and entitled to the maximum price discount of 40pc because they had lived there for some years, could have a mortgage of £10,000.
He said: ‘That could be serviced for around £100 a month when the rent would be about £25 a week anyway.’
Mr Fallon added the scheme had already proved successful in Scotland.
Alan Milburn, Darlington Labour candidate, said: ‘The Tories’ record on housing remains as unconvincing as ever, they have given Darlington record council house waiting lists and record levels of home repossessions.
Frankly Mr Fallon is not to be believed.’
INVESTIGATORS hunting the Darlington man alleged to have managed a nationwide counterfeit video business were told he had committed suicide.
Richard Armstrong, an independent investigator, told Darlington magistrates yesterday that he was told Timothy Sturdy had killed himself after being declared bankrupt.
Sturdy, 29, denies eight charges relating to supply of counterfeit and illegal video films to several small shops throughout England.
Shopkeepers who signed deals with Sturdy's company Classic Video, of Victoria Road, Darlington, complained about the poor quality films and the lack of new titles.
The complaints led to an investigation by police, trading standards officers and the Federation Against Copyright Theft (Fact).
Some weeks after Mr Armstrong, of Fact, first spoke to Sturdy he disappeared from his home in Victoria Embankment, Darlington, and Classic Video went bankrupt.
Mr Armstrong said: ‘I visited the house nine times and visited an employee of Mr Sturdy.’
The employee said Sturdy had committed suicide after going bankrupt.
But Mr Armstrong said inquiries through Sturdy's brother, a Darlington policeman, led to a meeting with Sturdy in a Darlington cafe.
The case continues next week.
AN 80-YEAR-OLD German driver who killed a toddler in a freak accident may never go behind a wheel again, an inquest heard yesterday.
The man immediately surrendered his licence after the collision which cost the life of two-year-old Lisa Marie Chates, of Croft Road, Hurworth, near Darlington.
A coroner's court in Darlington heard the accident happened at the end of a pedestrian zone in the German town of Lemgo, last October.
Interpol investigations revealed Lisa was in a buggy being pushed by her mum Elizabeth when the car reversed, catching the pram and crushing it against a pillarbox.
Pathologist's reports established the cause of death as extensive chest injuries.
Deputy coroner Andrew Tweddle said the driver, who was a retired headmaster, had been prosecuted and fined in the German courts.
He read part of the evidence given by a defence solicitor.
‘He was extremely shocked and confused after the accident happened because of the tragic circumstances,’ said Mr Tweddle.
‘He had no convictions prior to this incident and had been driving a car since 1957.’
Mr Tweddle said the driver parked while his wife went into a shop and when he saw her returning he started the car and reversed.
‘It seems that he reversed his car rather quickly and in doing so he inadvertently used too much gas,’ said Mr Tweddle.
He is suffering from the consequences of this accident and reproaches himself for the distress the family of the child is being put through.
As it's not possible to undo what has happened he earnestly hopes the family will find the strength to get over the pain.’
Mr Tweddle said while the police evidence did not provide a complete picture of what happened he was able to record a verdict of accidental death.
TRAINEES from two NorthEast skills training schemes have been told their courses are to be chopped before they have had the chance to gain their qualifications.
Yesterday joinery and construction trainees at the New Careers scheme on Darlington's Faverdale industrial estate were sent home as soon as they arrived at the centre.
And in Billingham, Cleveland, trainees at the Astra Training Centre have launched a last minute attempt to save their courses.
Both organisations have been negotiating with their local Training and Enterprise Councils over their annual funding allocation, due to take effect next week.
Government cuts are forcing the TECs to cut the budgets made available to individual schemes.
Derek Holdsworth, 45, of Grainger Street, Darlington, is one of 32 New Careers trainees to face the chop.
He said: ‘I've been there a month and was hoping to get a City and Guilds qualification in joinery.
We just got told as soon as we turned up that the course was cut with immediate effect.
It looks as though I'm back on the dole.
I feel very bitter about this, it seems as if I've been wasting my time.’
A spokeswoman for New Careers said no comment could be made at present.
Alan Milburn, Darlington's Labour candidate, said: ‘The need for training investment in Darlington has never been greater.
According to Government statistics, unemployment in Darlington is rising, and more than 1,000 people have joined the dole queue since John Major became Prime Minister.
‘Under these circumstances it is madness to cut training.
What we are seeing now is the result of training cuts made by this Government in the funding of their TEC.
Earlier this month Michael Fallon (the Conservative candidate) said claims that training budgets had been cut were simply untrue.
I now challenge him to withdraw his remarks and accept real cuts are taking place in Darlington.’
Last night Mr Fallon said: ‘Alan Milburn is a parasite on rumour.
None of these changes have yet occurred.
‘There is to be a redistribution of training places because the number of unemployed in this constituency has gone down since 1987 while in the south there has been an increase.
‘Every year there are changes, with old courses shutting down and new ones opening.’
Meanwhile Hartlepool Labour candidate Peter Mandelson has been called in by trainees from Billingham's Astra Training Centre.
Welding trainee Paul Marlborough, 21, of Moore Street, Hartlepool, said: ‘The scheme has been told its funding is to be cut to £39,000 for a full year's training, but it needs much more than that to survive.
‘A lot of us have passed the first part of our exam, and are working on the second.
Without both parts we have no chance of getting jobs.’
Teesside TEC chief executive John Howell said Astra had apparently decided to tell the trainees their courses were to be curtailed.
A spokesman for Astra said he did not wish to comment at this stage.
New house:
Bingo player Bob Gladstone is hoping to start his own business after scooping £3,279 at the game.
Bob, 40, of Topcliffe, near Thirsk, won the money at the Regent Bingo Club in Thirsk.
He and his wife, Brenda, have been members of the club for four years and play several times a week.
THREE Darlington men appalled at an attack on a blind woman have launched a bid to raise funds to buy a guide dog.
But the 77-year-old victim, who was pushed around by two youngsters aged about ten, has asked that a younger person benefits from the dog.
The drive has been launched by self-employed builder Jack Pattison, manager of Harveys in Darlington, Gary Soakell, and Dave Morgan, who represents the Morgan Social Club in Barton Street, Darlington.
The three sprang into action after hearing how the woman, who does not want to be named, was set upon by the boys near the Red Hall estate in Darlington last week.
An entertainment night featuring singer Kate Washington and entertainer Dave Hunter has now been planned for April 15 at the Morgan Social Club.
Generator stolen:
Thieves stole a £1,000 generator which was chained to scaffolding at Bondgate, Darlington on Monday afternoon.
Doors theft:
Twelve doors, a sash window and a cast iron fireplace, together worth £1,850, were stolen from Greenbank Road, Darlington.
Model cars:
Two model cars worth £600 were stolen between Sunday and Monday from a shed in a back garden at The Stray, Darlington.
House raid:
Thieves stole two beds and mattresses, a three piece suite, fridge, and other items from a house in Sun Street on Tuesday.
Video taken:
A Hitachi video recorder and Sony colour television worth £700 were stolen from a house in Geneva Road between Thursday and Monday.
SNEAK thieves who raided a Darlington pet store could find themselves shopped by a parrot.
Villains snatched the rare bird when they entered Cockerton Aquatics in Darlington, using a spare key taken from a car two weeks earlier.
But they didn't realise that the bronze-winged Pionuse parrot has just discovered how to talk.
And the bird's loose tongue could lead police straight to their lair.
Shop-owner Bill Cowlam said: ‘At the moment he just says hello in a very quiet voice.
Mind you, these birds are very quick and it might pick up a few words which could be useful.’
The talkative bird, which is worth £300, could let slip the name of one of its captors or even an address which could provide detectives with vital clues.
Police say they are anxious to interview the bird if it is recovered to see if it can help trap the thieves.
Mr Cowlam, who has taken extra security measures following the break-in, also lost a pair of slender billed Conures, worth £250, dog leads, collars and aquatic equipment.
The total haul came to more than £1,000.
He said: ‘After I lost my keys a few weeks ago a locksmith replaced the tumblers but it wasn't enough to stop the door being opened.
Of course, I didn't realise this until it was too late.’
The shopkeeper believes his rare birds could be sold on the thriving black market.
‘It looks as though the thieves knew exactly what they were going to take.
If you know the right people it shouldn't be too hard to get rid of birds like mine.’
A spokesman for Darlington police said: ‘We would certainly be interested in talking to this bird when it is returned to its rightful owner.’
Pack drill
NEIL Kinnock calls the media ravening wolves, his chief press officer knew us as reptiles.
So reveals a piece by a former Kinnock press aide in yesterday's Times.
Nigel Williamson also recalled an afternoon in a Darlington hotel during the 1987 campaign when the Kinnock circus had hit town early and it was the Financial Times man's birthday.
The leader was speech writing upstairs, but Glenys willingly joined in the celebrations below.
‘By 6pm Mrs Kinnock was sitting under the table assisting at least two journalists who were the worse for wear to place calls to London on their mobile phones.’
Funny how that never got in any of the papers, isn't it?
Like Father?
JUST supposing Tory Nick Jopling fails to upturn Tony Blair's 13,000 majority in Sedgefield (‘of course I will’ he says) could his father be keeping a safe seat warm?
‘Absolutely not,’ says Michael Jopling, 61-year-old Westmoreland MP since 1964.
‘I have absolutely no plans to retire at any time.’
Jopling senior, who farms near Northallerton, has half an eye on becoming Father of the House a title likely to pass to Edward Heath (debut 1950) next time.
Only Heath, John Biffen and Paul Channon would have longer service on the Conservative benches.
If old hands are re-elected, the Father of a North-East House would be a close contest between Alen Beith (Berwick) and Giles Radice (Durham North) both first elected in 1973 by-elections.
Radice has longer service by seven and a bit months.
Proof…
THE Scottish Nationalists (Diary, Monday) are attributing much of their surge in popularity to the backing of actor Sean Connery.
Connery (nee Bond) lives in Marbella and has made a commercial for Japanese whisky.
A MAN who fled to Australia to avoid a court appearance eleven years ago has come home only to be locked up.
Robert Dakers, 44, had not counted on the Home Office cancelling his parole licence for previous offences when he returned to face three charges of handling stolen goods.
He now faces seven months in prison serving out the rest of an old jail term, Durham Crown Court was told yesterday.
Dakers, who was born in Newcastle but now lives in Sydney, where he has taken out Australian citizenship, was given a further three months to run concurrently after admitting the three handling charges.
The court was told the offences were committed in August, 1981, four months after Dakers had been released on parole from a four-year prison term imposed for burglary, theft and handling.
Chris Walton, prosecuting, said two women had gone to two branches of Boots in Darlington and using a stolen cheque book, obtained £40 worth of gift vouchers.
They then went to Durham and got £40 worth of gift stamps from Mothercare.
But police were called when staff became suspicious and the two women were arrested, along with Dakers, who had the vouchers and stamps in his possession.
He was bailed to appear at Durham Crown Court in December, 1981, but failed to appear.
Timothy Spain, defending, said Dakers had gone to Australia with his wife and two sons and had got a job there.
He still had relatives in Newcastle, but had been unable to visit them because he believed he would be arrested.
He finally planned that he and his wife should have a six-week holiday in England and arrived last Sunday.
But before doing so, he contacted the solicitors who represented him in 1981 and they arranged for the crown court appearance.
He was shocked to be recalled to prison for the previous offences.
‘He wanted to get the matters cleared up once and for all so he could return to this country in future with a clear conscience,’ said Mr Spain.
Passing sentence, Judge Mary MacMurray said: ‘Owing to the fact that you breached your licence by committing these offences and absconding, I have no alternative but to impose a custodial sentence.’
POLICE are appealing for information about a man who has remained silent since he was arrested for theft.
The man, thought to be about 30, appeared at Darlington Magistrates Court on Monday where he was charged with the theft of jeans from Marks and Spencer.
Now baffled police are anxious to identify the man, who has been remanded in custody.
Yesterday a spokesman said: ‘It's a complete mystery who this man is and where he is from.
‘It's possible he is a manual worker as he has quite strong forearms.
He has a tattoo of the word Kaz on his left arm.’
Anyone with information should contact Darlington police on Darlington .
Repair help:
Richmondshire District Council's recreation committee has agreed to give up to £100 to urgent repairs being carried out at the memorial hall, Middleton Tyas, near Richmond.
The £500 repairs include the renewal of roof gutters and repointing works.
Lift bid:
York Theatre Royal has applied to the city council to install a lift to aid access by the disabled.
The work is part of its major restoration programme.
Drink-driver:
At Northallerton magistrates court, David Robert Smith, 29, of Cobden Street, Darlington, admitted driving a car with excess alcohol in his breath.
He was fined £250 plus £25 costs, had his licence endorsed and was disqualified for one year.
On computer:
A new computer has been donated to the diabetes department at the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton.
The computer, a high performance ultramodern machine, was bought with £2,000 given by Northallerton and district Diabetic Club.
Off loaded:
A Leyland skip loader worth £20,000 has been stolen from a compound on the Faverdale Industrial Estate, Darlington.
The registration number is F424 AWW.
Tubs taken:
Thieves have made off with garden tubs containing shrubs worth £47 from the front garden of a house in Starmer Crescent, Darlington.
TV stolen:
A colour television worth £400 from a house in Locomotive Street, Darlington.
House raided:
A £10 ornament, children's clothes worth £10 and £35 in cash have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Hewitson Road South, Darlington.
Naturally:
Members of the Darlington and Teesdale Naturalists' Field Club have planted a tree in Green Park, Darlington.
The oak tree, which marks the centenary of the club, was presented to the people of Darlington by the Naturalists' president, Margaret Port.
FORMER Tory Party chairman Norman Tebbit last night highlighted the problem of ram-raiding in the North-East.
He made the reference after being asked what the Conservatives would do about law and order during a question and answer session at Hummersknott School, Darlington.
‘Sadly the North-East has become noted for a new and unpleasant form of crime, so-called ram-raiding,’ said Mr Tebbit.
‘I think we have desperate problems of law and order.
‘We have to sentence and the sentence must be a meaningful one, but above all we have to have the long-term support of parents for the biggest range of offenders are appallingly young.
They must work in tandem as partners in instilling the basic concepts of right and wrong to kids as they grow up.’
He listed tax cuts, repaying debts, sorting out the nationalised industries, attracting more business to Britain and education reforms as major Tory achievements over the last 13 years.
‘Our education reforms are only just beginning to bite,’ he said.
‘We spend more in Britain of our national wealth on education than do the Germans and the Japanese.
‘Neil Kinnock believes that management by politicians through the local council is the way to run schools.
We believe in parents and teachers calling the shots.’
And he pointed out the themes of the Tory campaign were opportunity, choice, ownership and responsibility.
‘We want to reduce the power of the government over people.
Ours are policies for less government, for the government to take less not more,’ he said.
A POLICEMAN who chased a burglar despite a serious leg injury has received a bravery award.
Last night, County Durham Chief Constable Frank Taylor, presented the Alderman Harry Robinson Award to PC John Grant Matthews for outstanding work throughout the year.
On one occasion PC Matthews disturbed a burglar who had slammed a door against his leg.
The officer later detained the man after a struggle, but needed ten stitches to the wound.
CID men DC Grahame Chapman and DC Mark Trotter were awarded the Ken England Trophy in memory of a former Divisional Commander.
The detectives linked a burglary in Darlington to an aggravated burglary in Little Newsham, near Barnard Castle, where occupiers were tied up and jewellery was stolen.
Eventually four men were arrested and given prison sentences for the crime.
The Stamford Bewlay Trophy for the most outstanding probationer went to PC Nadin Khaliq for his impressive work over the year.
Mr Taylor told the gathering at Darlington Police station PC Khaliq had made more than 85 arrests during the year.
WPC Tracy Walker, praised for her hard work, courtesy and administration skills, had also been nominated for the award.
FORMER Tory party chairman Norman Tebbit last night highlighted the problem of ramraiding in the North-East.
He made the reference after being asked what the Conservatives would do about law and order during a question and answer session at Hummersknott School, Darlington.
Mr Tebbit said: ‘Sadly the North-East has become noted for a new and unpleasant form of crime, so-called ram-raiding.
I think we have desperate problems of law and order.
‘We have to sentence and the sentence must be a meaningful one, but above all we have to have the long-term support of parents for the biggest range of offenders are appallingly young.
They must work in tandem as partners in instilling the basic concepts of right and wrong to kids as they grow up.’
Mr Tebbit listed tax cuts, repaying debts, sorting out the nationalised industries, attracting more business to Britain and education reforms as major Tory achievements over the last 13 years.
He added: ‘Our education reforms are only just beginning to bite.
We spend more in Britain of our national wealth on education than do the Germans and the Japanese.
‘Neil Kinnock believes that management by politicians through the local council is the way to run schools.
We believe in parents and teachers calling the shots.’
And he pointed out the themes of the Tory campaign were opportunity, choice, ownership and responsibility.
‘We want to reduce the power of the government over people.
Ours are policies for less government, for the government to take less not more,’ he said.
Managers get the blame EDUCATION managers in County Durham were blamed yesterday for keeping money away from the schools which need it most.
Darlington Conservative candidate Michael Fallon said the county is one of the worst in Britain for ‘wasting’ money on administration which should be spent on schools.
Mr Fallon, a junior education minister, puts the figure being lost to Darlington schools at around £700,000 each year.
The county council said £5m spent on administration was a small part of the £190m budget.
DEVOLUTION:
The glossy cover of the Labour manifesto shows the Union Jack and the break-up of its component parts into the separate flags for Scotland, Wales, etc.
That is exactly where they will ultimately lead us by supporting devolved government in Scotland.
Just think.
No more UK, no more Union Jack, no British army, no more British influence abroad, no British passport!
Just England left alone with a permanent Conservative government.
G.L.
Mortimer, 57 Carmel Road South, Darlington.
WITTON Gilbert WMC members have got off to a good start with their appeal to provide two guide dogs for the blind.
Brewers Carlsberg have promised to double the club's donation which is targeted for £2,000 to buy and train two dogs.
The appeal was launched at a charity concern which brought in nearly £600 well on the way to the final amount.
The show featured four clubland favourites.
Linda and Noel Curtis, Paul T Grant, Paul Munroe and Andi Wilde, who gave their services free.
The appeal was also boosted by suppliers and local traders who donated 41 prizes for a draw and by cash gifts from most of the club's sub-sections.
The club is planning more fund raising events later in the year in order to reach their target.
Trimdon Village WMC is putting on a super show with no cover charge on Tuesday March 31 with top comedian Bob Ritchie and award winning duo Inseparable.
There will also be a raffle, proceeds of which will go to the club's senior citizens fund.
RIGHT WINGERS:
The Tories say Labour cannot be trusted to form the next Government.
Quite how the party which has successfully brought us to economic misery and industrial impotence can make such a claim seems to suggest some very muddled thinking.
Imagine the following: John Major (the England manager) is being interviewed on TV after his team's 14–0 thrashing by Upper Volta under 14's.
‘Well John, what do you have to say.’
‘Well Brian, the lads done tremendous, but it is down to circumstances beyond my control.
There is a world football recession.’
‘But John, if it is a world recession, how come other teams are doing so well?’
‘Don't know, Brian.’
‘There have been comments on your tactics John.
Some people think that persevering for 13 years with the policy of playing 11 right wingers could be a mistake.
Have you considered stepping down?’
‘No Brian, I'm still confident that I'm the man for the job.
No one else can be trusted to do it.’
What nonsense.
In the football world this manifestly unsuccessful administration would have been on its bike years ago.
Let us hope that the electorate sack them in April.
R O Long,.
EXPERIENCE:
I urge anyone who may be considering voting Labour to think very deeply about whether Neil Kinnock can really be trusted to run this country.
Not so long ago Mr Kinnock was strongly committed to unilateral disarmament.
Now he claims to have abandoned this principle, apparently for no other reason than the pursuit of electoral palatability.
Just two elections ago Mr Kinnock was pledged to take Britain out of the EEC.
Now he seems to have totally changed his mind.
There are many vital summits regarding Britain's role in the EEC this year.
Can we really trust Mr Kinnock to handle them responsibly when his recent positions have been so erratic?
In John Major we have a Prime Minister who has proved he can handle difficult international situations, in the Gulf and at Maastricht.
It would be folly to replace him with the inexperienced Mr Kinnock.
Mark T.
Hardy, 43, Woodside Gardens, Stanley.
POLICE have urged householders to install alarms after a spate of burglaries in the Darlington area.
PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington Community Liaison department, said residents should then send police a letter with details of their name, address and telephone number and the same details of anyone else who has a key to the house.
The information should be sent to the communications department at Darlington Police Station, where it will be kept on computer file.
The advice came after almost 50 burglaries from homes in and around Darlington in the last week.
Police have asked neighbours to be alert as vehicles must have been used in many of the burglaries committed.
A wardrobe was stolen from a house in Stanhope Road, while a dressing room table was taken from Greenbank Road.
Householders in Sun Street lost a double bed, a three-piece suite, a fridge, a kitchen table, two kitchen chairs and kitchen utensils.
A sun bed, curtains, carpet and electrical goods were taken in another burglary from a house in New Row, Middleton St George.
‘A motor vehicle must have been used to take some of this property.
We would urge people to ask questions if they see things being taken from a neighbour's home, especially if they are away,’ said PC Fishwick.
Although car crime appears to be down this week, PC Fishwick has urged motorists not to become complacent.
There were 26 thefts from vehicles over the last week including the theft of a bag, cash, ring, jewellery and driving licence.
PC Fishwick said: ‘These kind of things should not be left in cars.
Driving licences, in particular, are like giving someone a cheque book.
It can be used as a means of identity.’
Radio cassettes were stolen from cars in Larchfield Street, Eastmount Road and Barnes Road, among other places.
Twenty-four vehicles have been stolen, but one taken from McNay Street was recovered without its roof rack, ladders, tools and wheels.
Others were stolen from North Lodge Terrace, Askrigg Street, Clifton Road, Barton Street and Newton Lane, among other places.
Vehicles have also been stolen from Westwood Avenue, Heighington, Church Lane, Middleton St George and Roundhill Road, Hurworth.
There were 16 cases of damage to vehicles including £300 damage to a vehicle in Larchfield Street, while paint was sprayed over a vehicle in Rydal Road.
TORY Michael Fallon scored a home win in Darlington yesterday as the constituency's three main candidates faced a grilling from sixth formers.
The great majority of the 150-strong audience at the independent Polam Hall School supported Mr Fallon although only a few will be voting for real on April 9.
The debate, the second direct clash of candidates in three days, was broadcast live on Radio Cleveland and chaired by presenter Alan Wright.
Dr Donald Clarke, of the British National Party, was not present and a show of hands suggested he has little support at the independent girls' school.
But, to the amusement of all in the hall, his support increased fourfold over the course of the debate from one vote at the beginning to four at the end.
Labour's Alan Milburn, in response to the first question, pledged to restore benefits for 16 and 17-year-olds unable to find work.
‘Labour will also improve this country's appalling record on training, which is one of the worst in the developed world,’ he said.
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg, who had a solid core of support among the students, attacked the Conservative schools minister for describing some schools in Durham and Cleveland as ‘dismal’.
‘After 13 years in power any ‘dismal’ schools must be your Government's responsibility,’said Mr Bergg.
‘It is a disgrace that the schools minister should describe schools in that way.’
Mr Fallon had blamed the education departments of Cleveland and Durham county councils for withholding money for bureaucracy which should be spent on schools.
Adreeja Chatterjee, an A Level student at Polam Hall, asked what Mr Milburn's message would be to parents with children at private schools.
He said people earning more than £40,000 or £50,000 could afford slightly higher taxes.
But Mr Fallon accused his Labour rival of ducking the question.
‘Some parents make big sacrifices to send their children to independent schools.
Labour's tax increases could cripple them,’ he said.
The chairman asked each candidate to give a one sentence reason why people should vote for them.
Both Labour and Tory chose to list their respective promises and claims, while Mr Bergg said: ‘I think we should try something different.’
A final vote showed Tory support remained solid while the LibDems had picked up a handful of votes at Labour's expense.
— Playground shadows Page 11.
A MYSTERY man who has not spoken for almost a week broke his silence yesterday to Darlington police.
Craig Melia was arrested on Saturday and charged with stealing clothes from a Darlington department store.
Since 29-year-old Melia, from Stretchley, near Sheffield, was taken into custody he has steadfastly refused to say a word to any of the officers who questioned him.
But as he began his sixth day his silent vigil ended.
He is alleged to have stolen jeans from Marks and Spencer, in Northgate.
He was in court on Monday morning but would not give his name, age or address.
Darlington police issued a photograph of the man hoping someone would identify him.
Insp Ken Madison, of Darlington police, said Melia will be back in court on Monday morning.
A PARTY of Darlington schoolchildren escaped injury yesterday when a scaffolding pole smashed through the window of their bus.
The children, from Corporation Road Junior School, were on their way back to school from a swimming session at the Dolphin Centre.
As the bus was waiting in Bondgate a lorry carrying scaffolding reversed into the back of the bus.
Scaffolding poles loaded on the lorry smashed the rear window sprinkling glass through the bus.
Insp Ken Madison, of Darlington police, said officers had been to the scene of the crash but left when they were satisfied no one was hurt in the collision.
The teacher accompanying the children had asked them not to sit along the back seat.
‘It could have been nasty but in the end I think it was just case of exchanging insurance details,’ said Insp Madison.
Margaret Burton, head teacher, said all that mattered was that neither the driver nor any of the children had been hurt.
‘As far as I'm concerned it was a minor incident,’ she said.
BARON Dormand of Easington, long time MP for England's safest Labour seat, has made a remarkable move.
At 72, the former chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party has slipped quietly away from his lifelong East Durham home.
Now Lord and Lady Dormand live in what used to be the shrimp-sized county of Rutland smack in the middle of the most solidly Tory constituency in the land.
‘I can tell you that the transformation from Easington to here is quite dramatic, in fact you can use the word traumatic,’ he says.
‘Every ounce of my body is Co Durham and we miss it very much indeed.
We will not be putting down roots.’
Though his new house has been named Durham Cottage, with fond memories of home, a friend tells us that Lord Dormand still Jack to most people is finding it hard to adjust.
‘It doesn't sound Jack at all,’ he says.
Undeterred, Lord Dormand was addressing a meeting last night in support of Labour candidate Janet Taylor seeking to overturn a 23,022 Conservative majority in Rutland and Melton.
Her father is fellow peer Lord Underhill, formerly the Party's national agent.
‘I've been round the doors since the first day of the campaign,’ says Lord Dormand.
‘She's going to make a very big impression.’
Easington's MP from 1970–1987 and now a ‘full time’ member of the Lords, he moved house solely because of travelling problems.
‘Neither of us wanted to go, but Doris was coming with me to London each week and because of all the road works on the A1 the journey was averaging six hours each way and getting worse.
It was becoming too much.
‘There are so many things we miss just the way we talked and the things we talked about in the NorthEast.’
A miner's son, he was born in Haswell workmen's club, educated at Wellfield Grammar School and Oxford University and in 1963 became Easington area education officer on £2,000 a week.
Recently re-appointed vice-chairman of the Teesside Development Corporation, he still does exercises each day but has stopped bike riding ‘after nearly getting killed a couple of times in London.’
In the 1987 campaign he played a key role at Labour headquarters.
‘This time I told them I was available but, quite frankly, I haven't been asked,’ he says.
Instead he's been door knocking round the lanes of Leicestershire, discovering what it's like ‘immensely enjoyable’ to push the political boulder uphill.
Co Durham's loss may not be permanent, however.
‘Rutland is very pretty, but it's not home,’ says Lord Dormand wistfully.
‘It is possible that one day we will return.’
Second ballot
KEITH Hampson, the Tory MP from socialist Shildon, remains a few miles closer to his browtin's up.
At Westminster for 18 years, he represented Ripon before switching to Leeds North-West in 1979.
His mum still lives in Darlington.
‘In this constituency the other two parties are fighting it out for second place,’ insists the 49-year-old former Bishop Auckland Grammar School head boy.
The seat includes most of Leeds University's halls of residence (‘it's a political blessing the students have gone down for Easter,’ admits Dr Hampson) and the well-heeled town of Otley, where the 200-bed hospital does hip replacement jobs on patients from Cornwall and Kent.
‘It's a benefit of the reforms,’ he says.
‘They need to be seen to compete.
They have a short waiting list and they're relatively cheap.’
His majority last time was a bit over 5,000, with the Liberal Alliance second.
‘If we lose this seat,’ says the Shildon lad, ‘we're in trouble.’
ELECTION fever is gripping Hummersknott School, Darlington, where six candidates are campaigning for votes from their playground peers.
Yesterday Darlington's Liberal Democrat and Conservative candidates visited the school to meet the teenagers who will be representing them in the school election on April 3.
The campaign has been given an extra edge as it is one of the many school ‘constituencies’ throughout Britain to be featured on the BBC's Newsround programme.
Organising the election is teacher Dot Long.
She is a Labour member of Darlington council but promises to keep her own views out of the campaign.
She said: ‘The campaign is being organised to mirror the real thing.
All the candidates had to be nominated with proposers and seconders and they all have election agents.’
Michael Fallon (Con) and Peter Bergg (Lib Dem) yesterday met the young men who will be arguing their policies at the school hustings.
Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn was at the Edinburgh Drive school last week to give his support to Juliet Baker, 15, who is standing for Labour.
Simon Watson, 16, is the Conservative choice, leading in the opinion polls, and 14year-old Dougald Hine represents the Lib Dems.
Also standing are Carrie Hynd for the Green Party while on a lighter note Ben Shotton and Owen Unsworth are campaigning for the Young Church Organist and Macweirdo Spectacular political parties respectively.
CONCERN has been voiced about ambulance cover following the death of a psychiatric patient who fell from an upstairs window.
Sarah Hunt, 74, was left soaked in blood after holding her sister for at least 25 minutes while waiting for an ambulance to arrive after the tragedy in Bishop Auckland.
Neighbours called an ambulance immediately when Joan Whalen, 63, was discovered on the concrete steps in her back yard in Weardale Drive.
But although there is an ambulance station within a mile, a vehicle was sent out from Durham City, about 12 miles away.
Mrs Hunt, who lives next door to Mrs Whalen's home, said: ‘People were all running and phoning because they took that long in coming.
‘Why should they have to come from Durham when there's an ambulance station in Bishop?’
Ambulance officials say the Durham City vehicle was sent because others stationed nearer were already busy.
Mrs Hunt said: ‘I was soaked in my sister's blood.
She was laid on top of me.
I had to pull her on and cuddle her into me to keep her warm.’
The family has already asked for an investigation into her death by officials at Winterton psychiatric hospital, Sedgefield, from which she was discharged for weekend leave a day before she died on Sunday.
Mike Bell, support services divisional officer with Durham Ambulance Service, said that when the call was made at 7.26pm on Sunday, the Bishop Auckland duty ambulance was on an emergency in Newton Aycliffe.
Stations at Darlington, Newton Aycliffe, Fishburn and Chester-le-Street were also operating with a single vehicle and at the time of the call all were out.
The Durham City ambulance was sent within two minutes of the call and arrived at 7.51pm six minutes outside the 19-minute target response time.
The woman was found to be dead once taken into the ambulance.
Under a national agreement, ambulance services should ensure that at least 95pc of vehicles reach their destinations within 19 minutes.
The County Durham rate is around 96 or 97pc.
Mr Bell said the system of having one ambulance on call at each of the county's 11 stations after 7pm every night had been in operation for many years.
He said: ‘It's based on demand.
This was, unfortunately, one occasion when demand outstripped supply.
It is extremely rare when this sort of occasion arises.’
Bob Dockray, chairman of South West Durham Community Health Council, said the incident was rare and the system was working if 97pc of ambulances were getting to destinations within 19 minutes.
But Eleanor Young, chairman of Darlington CHC and vice chairman of the National Association of CHCs, called for a more flexible approach.
‘Unless there are more resources pumped in, this is going to happen,’ she said.
‘It worries me greatly that Darlington has only one ambulance after 7pm at night.’
Man faces trial on death charge
BRADFORD man John Gorst, 48, of Queensbury Square, Queensbury, Bradford, appeared before Northallerton magistrates yesterday charged with the causing death by reckless driving.
He was committed to Teesside Crown Court to stand trial.
In Court The following cases were dealt with by Leyburn magistrates: M Kettlewell (Melmerby) Ltd, of Station Depot, Melmerby, Ripon, admitted using a vehicle with tachograph equipment not complying with council regulations, fined £25, £25 costs.
Stuart Reynolds, 29, of 8 Signal Regt, Vimy Barracks, Catterick Garrison, convicted of driving recklessly and three charges of using car with defective tyre, fined £725, £30 costs.
Marcello Guidici, 28, of Cambrai Barracks, Catterick Garrison, convicted of driving without due care, fined £250, £20 costs.
Sharon Katherine Jackson, 30, of Whitaside, Low Row, Richmond, convicted of driving without due care, fined £250, £20 costs.
Robert Hill, 23, of Mowbray Road, Catterick Garrison, admitted failing to comply with red light, fined £10, £20 costs.
Leonard Anthony Parsons, of Reeth Road, Richmond, convicted of causing obstruction with car, fined £100, £70 costs.
DARLINGTON council is to review its policy banning links with South Africa in the light of moves in the country to end apartheid.
The decision follows a controversial visit by diplomats from the country who met with Darlington Conservative councillors during a tour of the North-East.
At present council policy states there can be no official contact between the authority and the South African government.
After the meeting Tory group leader Tony Richmond and fellow councillor Peter Jones tabled a motion for last night's full council session calling for another South African trade delegation to be invited to Darlington.
But the ruling Labour group proposed an amendment asking the council chief executive to review the authority's policy on apartheid and report back.
The motion also welcomed the result of last week's ‘whites only’ referendum which backed the South African government in starting to dismantle of apartheid.
Coun Richmond then called on the Tory group to support the Labour measure but claimed it would never have been proposed without the prompt of his motion.
Defending his decision to meet with the South African delegation he said the conversation had dwelt on the future and potential business investment in the country.
Labour leader Coun John Williams accused Coun Richmond of hypocrisy and said in the past when Labour had debated South Africa the Tories had said it had no relevance for Darlington.
He also said the Conservatives were electioneering by raising the issue and were attempting to score a cheap political advantage.
‘The Labour group wants to take a reasoned, properly considered approach to the momentous events that are taking place in South Africa,’ he said.
Coun Williams added officers had contacted the African National Congress' London office for guidance and had been told the organisation would not welcome trade with the country while sanctions are still in place.
Liberal Democrat Ken Walker said it was important for the council's policy to be reviewed to take account of changes in South Africa.
STEPHEN SILK meets the Prime Minister and follows his progress through Yarm.
‘Land of limitless possibilities’ turns out in strength for Mr Major The Prime Minister flew in to Teesside Airport on Tuesday and said the possibilities for the North-East were almost limitless.
In an exclusive interview with the D&S he said the gains made in the late 1980s would continue.
‘I have a message for the people of Darlington, the people of Stockton South and Langbaurgh and indeed across the whole North-East,’ he said.
‘We have seen exciting developments here in the last few years.
There has been a dramatic drop in unemployment, tremendous inward investment and people are increasingly aware of the quality of the North-East and the prospects of the North-East.
‘There is not a shadow of a doubt that we are going to win this election and that we are going to win it with the strongest possible representation in this region.
The prospects here are almost limitless and of course you also have the best MPs.’
Mr Major met Mr Michael Fallon, the Darlington candidate, and Mr Nick Jopling, who is fighting the Sedgefield seat, before being swept off in a cavalcade to Yarm.
There he emerged from his battle bus, inscribed with the logo ‘John Major The Best Future for Britain,’ to be met by hundreds of shoppers, schoolchildren and pressmen.
Starting off from the old town hall in the middle of the High Street he made his way slowly down the road as far as the Black Bull pub, accompanied by Mr Tim Devlin, who holds the Stockton South with a slender 774 majority, and his wife Carol.
Mr Devlin said afterwards it had been a great day in Yarm's history.
‘The town has been here since 1210.
We've been through the records and we're pretty sure this is the first time we have had a Prime Minister here.
It's been wonderful, a great day out.
The response that John Major got was very, very positive.
‘He was very impressed by the friendliness of the local people and he did say he hoped he would come back here some day.
The whole thing has surpassed my greatest expectations.’
The only complaints came from residents annoyed at the behaviour of the massed ranks of the national press.
Mrs Di Brown, a former secretary of Yarm Conservatives who now lives in Abbey Road, Darlington, said she felt sorry for people who had waited for an hour or more.
‘There are far too many media people and they are getting in the way of everyone else.
The national press can see him any time.
They should let others have the chance to meet him.’
But hundreds of shoppers and workers did manage to find a vantage point.
Staff hung out of the chemists Strickland and Holt, cheering and waving; men scrambled on to a ledge above the Peter Dominic off-licence; boys climbed on to the top of bus shelters.
Mrs Betty Sawdon, of The Meadowings, Yarm, managed to get through the crush to present the Prime Minister with a bunch of blue irises and carnations.
‘I wanted to give them to his wife but she isn't here so I've given them to him instead,’ she said.
She would be voting Conservative and said Mr Major was a ‘fair down to earth, very nice man’.
Sixteen-year-old Scott Gray, the Green Party candidate in Yarm School's mock election, was less impressed.
‘He hasn't got any policies for the environment.
He's just looking after the present, not the future.
We didn't actually speak to him but we did get an ‘all right boys?’ as he went past.’
Mrs Jessie Swalwell, of Spitalfields, Yarm, was caught with her bicycle in the middle of the crowds.
But she said it had been ‘a delight’.
‘I just came in to buy some flowers and a paper and suddenly I find I'm in the middle of it all.
I think it's quite exciting.
Not much happens in Yarm normally.’
After more than 3O minutes of handshakes and good luck messages Mr Major boarded his battle bus again to cheers and applause from the crowd.
He went on to visit the Nissan car plant in Washington before returning to Teesside Airport and flying on to Edinburgh.
Council house owners would double, says Tory
The number of council house owners in Darlington would double under new Conservative plans, Mr Fallon said this week.
He claimed the manifesto proposals to allow tenants to convert their rents into mortgages could mean 1,500 more houses would be sold.
‘Many more tenants would like to buy their homes but cannot yet afford to do so.
The rents-to-mortgages scheme would allow tenants to buy at least half their property from day one, simply by paying the existing rent.
‘So for the same weekly payments any council tenant can start along the road to ownership.
I estimate that at least 1,500 in Darlington will take up this offer, thus doubling council house ownership.’
For the Liberals Mr Peter Bergg said his party was not against council houses being sold off as long as new ones were built.
And he criticised the Conservatives for not releasing more of the receipts of council house sales to help correct the ‘dire need’ for more houses.
He said his party would abolish mortgage interest relief and replace it with housing cost relief so that tenants as well as house owners could benefit.
Mr Alan Milburn, the Labour candidate, said the Conservatives' pilot schemes had been a failure.
‘In Basildon only 32 out of 8,000 homes were sold and in Scotland where it has been running for two years only 223 out of 6,000 tenants have bought houses.
‘Mr Fallon's government has given Darlington record home repossessions and record council house waiting lists and record homelessness.’
Dolphin Centre repair less than expected
Repairs to Darlington Dolphin Centre would cost less than expected but some improvement work would be left undone, council officials said this week.
Mr John Buxton, director of property services, said a tender of £3.7m.
had been accepted from Darlington based Shepherd Construction for the 22 month project due to start on April 13.
That was about £800,000 less than the original estimate of £4.5m. which officers felt was unacceptable.
Even with fees added on, the final bill would still be £500,000 less than anticipated.
Plans to install new mortar in inside walls and to alter air conditioning equipment had to be abandoned but the move would save taxpayers' money.
But Conservative Coun. Peter Jones said the bill would have only been a fraction of that if the controlling Labour group had taken action when defects in the building were detailed in reports in 1985 and 1986.
‘A stitch in time saves nine,’ he said.
‘The Labour group ignored the reports and instead the community charge payer has to foot the bill.’
Coun. John Williams, Labour leader, chose not to comment on the matter.
Defects in the mortar holding bricks in the outside walls of the ten year-old sports centre were discovered in 1990 after consultants were brought in to examine the building.
Roof panels had also distorted and must be replaced.
PRODESCON opened the doors to its new headquarters in Darlington yesterday.
The design and build group, established in 1988, specialises in healthcare developments and has grown quickly in the past four years.
It recently announced contract wins worth £6.3m for hospital developments at Haywards Heath and Bradford.
The headquarters at Duke Street, were officially opened by Michael Fallon Tory candidate for Darlington.
The company may soon develop a similar property on Duke Street where it has been selected as the preferred developer for vacant properties on the street.
Managing director Gordon Smith said Prodescon planned further expansion as the recovery sets in.
A GROUP of North-East businessmen and women last night indicated that a Tory business vote was not assured yesterday.
Following an open letter from a group of Northern business leaders backing the Tory cause and 13 years of Thatcherism, Tyneside director Ken Bell said: ‘If they vote Tory there are either misled or very stupid.’
Mr Bell chairman of Ken Bell International, the £30m turnover seafood group, said: ‘Some people never learn.
Under the Tories all the family silver was sold off and we have very little left to show for it.’
He was reacting to an open letter to the region which claimed that business had flourished under the Tories.
Signatories to the letter included Sir Tom Cowie, chairman of Sunderland-based car dealers Cowies; former Northern CBI chairman and chairman of Torday & Carlisle; Jermey Ropner chairman of Darlington-based Ropner and Tom O’ Connor managing director of Stockton based Elta Plastics.
The letter stated: ‘We believe that business people and of course others too should support the party which, since 1979, has been so active and successful in promoting the new British spirit of enterprise.’
Mr Bell said: ‘The people who really matter are the businessmen who make wealth, these people just made money.
The only things the Tories did for me as a businessman was to empty a lot of factory space which made it easy to buy up.
‘I certainly won't be voting Tory,’ he said.’
David Goldman, managing director of Newcastle-based computer group Sage said the success of his company was the result of the efforts of its management team, not the Tories.
He said: ‘I am a life-long Labour supporter.
I wasn't always a successful businessman and I remember where I come from.’
He was reacting to the Tory group's comments that the ‘prophets of doom and gloom’ were incapable of recognising how much the region has progressed in the last 13 years.
And Sue Rorstad chairman and managing director of Darlington based Poppies hit out at the six industrialists who praised the Government's message of self reliance.
She said: ‘It's not self reliance the Government has promoted, it's a feeling of alienation in Marxist terms.’
She said: ‘In the boom years things weren't too bad.
It seemed relatively easy to make money, and there was a lot of hype about going into business.
It seemed easy.
‘The Government allowed people to believe it was always going to be good.
I did it myself and spent £90,000 on a house.’
She also condemned the ‘plethora’ of Government-inspired initiatives encouraging small businesses to start up, like the Enterprise Allowance scheme.
‘It distorts the unemployment figures.
Worse, people are allowed to go into business with a business plan I would not even read,’ she said.
Despite her doubts about the Government's policy over the last 13 years Ms Rorstad said she remains a floating voter.
Yesterday Michael Fallon, Tory candidate for Darlington, said: ‘All through the Eighties businesses flourished under a Conservative Government.
‘We are now in a recession and it is very short-sighted of businessmen to start complaining.
The stronger businesses will come back.’
Whingeing:
If the Health Service were to be given all the money they say it needs we should need to double every worker's NHS contribution.
So if a person prefers to go private instead of waiting, surely that person would reduce the waiting list and save the NHS the cost of the operation.
It seems to me that there is some truth in the Australian phrase ‘The land of the wingeing pom’ because we are always grumbling.
Yet one only needs to travel in the town on Saturdays to see well clothed and healthy children and upstanding young men and women, to realise that the people of this country are better off than they have ever been.
J. Lowe, 7 Dene Park Court, Darlington.
FIRST-TIME voter Alison of Fife Road, Darlington, is studying History and Psychology A-levels at Darlington College of Technology.
For her the main election issues include taxation, the NHS and the poll tax which she believes will cost the Conservatives votes because of its unfairness.
Alison says the National Health Service is woefully underfunded and thinks many people would be prepared to pay extra income tax if the money went to health care.
She says local hospitals like Darlington Memorial are short of equipment and more money should be spent on reducing waiting lists and improving nurses' and doctors' pay.
‘The Conservatives want to turn the NHS into an industry, they say that will bring a better service to the consumer, but health shouldn't be an industry.’
Environmental issues are also important to Alison although she believes none of the major parties have a good green record.
Of the town's three main candidates she said she had ‘no idea’ who Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg is while Labour's Alan Milburn ‘seems like a decent bloke’.
Of Tory Michael Fallon she said she didn't like the fact that he didn't vote for dog registration: ‘I can't understand that.’
Alison feels much of the electioneering has concentrated on party leaders' personalities at the expense of issues, creating an American-style presidential campaign.
‘I like Labour policies but Neil Kinnock is a bit of a prat.
Major is a puppet for Mrs Thatcher and very bland, and you can tell Ashdown has been in the army.’
Alison plans to vote Labour but thinks nationally the Conservatives might squeeze a victory on April 9.
She believes some people will vote Labour to shake up the Conservatives and make them reconsider their policies.
TWO women have won awards for pictures of Darlington people and places.
Ann Simmons, of Camera A in Skinnergate, Darlington, and Myra Addison, of Workshop, Darlington, won the awards from the British Institute of Professional Photography and the Master Photographers Association.
Mrs Simmons, a photographer for the last 15 years, also achieved one of two merits from the BIPP for a photograph of the Cornmill centre in Darlington.
The two women run Beautiful Images in Grange Road, Darlington, together.
DARLINGTON'S rising crime rate comes as a direct result of Tory policy, a Labour candidate claims.
Alan Milburn blames the record number of offences committed in the town and falling detection rates on the Conservative failure to draft more officers into County Durham and on general Tory policy.
He believes the police are overstretched and moves are urgently needed to tackle Darlington's crime wave.
Figures show 13,891 crimes committed in Darlington in 1991 a rise of 150pc on the 5,536 in 1979.
Burglary at homes has gone up by 23pc and fraud, shoplifting, and car crime are also rising rapidly.
‘In the same period that crime has risen by 150pc, the number of police in Darlington has risen by only 3.3pc,’ said Mr Milburn.
‘The Tories have refused to fund the policing our town needs the police are more overstretched than ever before.
We will put a duty on local councils to work in partnership with the police and the community to prevent crime.
‘Labour will increase police numbers and put more officers on the beat.
At the moment they are tackling record crime rates with one hand tied behind their back.
‘It's time for a Government that will take action to prevent crime rather than just talk tough about sentencing while starving the police of the resources they need.’
Conservative candidate Michael Fallon said if the Labour party was serious about tackling crime it would not be opposing proposals to toughen up bail.
‘County Durham's constabulary has been increased since 1979 and the Home Office is still looking at the possibility of reallocating some of the 1,000 extra posts to the county,’ he said.
‘One of the most frustrating things for the police is to see someone they have spent weeks tracking down released on bail and subsequently re-offending.
‘I believe my constituents would welcome a generally tougher policy on sentencing, less frequent agreement of bail especially when opposed, and the suspension or revocation of licences for pubs and clubs where there is persistent trouble.’
WHO is responsible for seeing that safety equipment is worn on site?
I refer to seeing paving stones being sawn and the person doing the job neither wearing goggles or a mask while being enveloped in a cloud of dust.
I also encounter men drilling the roads etc without wearing ear protectors.
Surely these workers are provided with Health and Safety equipment and should they not be made to wear them by someone in authority?
K.G. Owen, 7 Middleham Road, Darlington.
Fish farm should be saved
WHAT gives Wear Valley councillors the right to close the fish farm (Echo March 20) at Witton-le-Wear which lots of people enjoy?
The owner has planted trees all around the ponds which will conceal them from the roads so to me that can't be a problem.
As for him having a permanent dwelling, where is he supposed to live?
While he is living there he is stopping glue sniffers and vandals killing the fish and ruining the countryside.
Also the councillors must not want the local fishermen to fish at Witton at a reasonable price compared to other local fishing areas.
My son fishes quite often at the fish farm where I know there is a responsible adult who he can ask for help if needed.
Mrs Freda Hauxwell,.
Voting for fairer way
LABOUR'S E.Murphy (HAS March 16) typically misrepresents my comments on the recent Willington East by-election.
Labour claimed the result ‘smashed’ the Liberal Democrats in Wear Valley despite the fact that we gained further ground and Labour's support fell back.
In fact, if that result were repeated we would hold all our 28 seats and gain four more from Labour.
Of course, things would be different under PR (proportional representation), also known as Fair Votes.
The present unfair, first past the post system favours Labour most of the time, so why do they complain when it goes against them?
As a Liberal I have always supported PR which truly reflects the wishes of the electorate.
I would welcome PR voting for all elections, accepting it might lose us a few seats on Wear Valley.
A senior Labour man told me that if the Tories win the General Election, Labour will go all out for PR, but if Labour win forget it.
That sums up the cynical hypocrisy and political opportunism of Labour.
We believe in PR because it is right.
Coun Chris Foote Wood, Leader, Wear Valley Liberal Democrats, 28 Cockton Hill Road, Bishop Auckland.
Editor's note: Correspondence on the aftermath of the Willington by-election is now closed.
Health group
THE South West Durham Health Authority Consumer Services Liaison Group was formed to consider, evaluate and make recommendations on the nature and delivery of customer services provided by the Community Health Services in South West Durham.
The group consists of both professional and voluntary lay members.
At the recent launch of the Feedback procedure initiated by the group, we expressed the need for more members representing the community.
We have had a good response from some areas, but would like to recruit lay members from Spennymoor, Ferryhill and Trimdon areas.
In order to reflect the whole of the area we need a balanced representation.
Participation would involve attending a meeting once a month and reflecting the views and experiences of their community to the group.
People who are interested should write to me at the address below.
Betty Pickard, chairman, South West Durham Health Authority Consumer Services Liaison Group, The Health Centre, Escomb Road, Bishop Auckland, County Durham DL14 6AB.
Reproach
SHOULD Labour councillors in Eastbourne, whose party has had the area to itself for as long as I can remember, ‘knock on doors’ in this area, I hope residents will raise the question of the state of the Neasham Road approach to Darlington, south of the railway bridge, particularly when at this time of year it is a pleasure to approach the town from any other direction.
My own efforts over a long period of time, plus correspondence and telephone calls to various bodies have met with no success.
After all, we all pay the same Community Charge.
The Neasham Road approach to the town does no credit to Darlington or Durham County Councils.
It is a disgrace.
R. Clement,.
Diabetics
I FEEL that I must take issue with two stories (Echo March 4) in relation to diabetes (a) special foods, and (b) specialist nurses.
It really is appalling to present this outmoded idea about special foods.
What is considered a healthy diet for the general populace is quite good enough for the diabetic; all that is required is the balance of the amounts of carbohydrate in relation to the medication required.
I still feel that the situation brought about by the local BDA group was an unnecessary waste of valuable hospital resources.
The press release by the BDA gave the impression that diet is the single factor in the prevention of the long term complications of the disease, which is patently not so!
Eliot P Joslin in the USA, Karsch in Europe et al stated quite categorically that the triad of medication, diet and exercise were necessary in diabetes care.
Each component is equally important in diabetes treatment.
In relation to the call for a specialist nurse, a campaign to set up a Diabetes Education Unit attached to the clinic, would be more appropriate to the needs of the diabetic population.
C Brian Hunter,.
Too much traffic to handle
I AM concerned about the proposed housing development adjacent to Bellburn Lane, Darlington and the section of new road from Bellburn Lane to serve the development.
Bellburn Lane is a residential cul de sac which already suffers with more traffic than it can safely handle.
Cars speed up and down the twisty road at all hours and residents and visitors frequently park vehicles on the road restricting access.
The road is totally unsuitable to serve a further housing development which would be better accessed by the originally proposed route along the existing footpath east of Bellburn Lane.
Although the argument has been used that the proposed primary school will increase traffic, it will not do so by the same volume.
Furthermore, a proposed BMX track in the area was turned down because the road was deemed unable to cope with increased traffic.
Finally, the site for the development is a former fertiliser plant, totally unsuitable for building houses.
Excavations will pollute the existing Bellburn Lane dwellings and fertiliser residue will create an extremely unhealthy environment for those in the proposed new houses.
I hope other residents in the area will make their feelings known before the planning committee meeting on April 1.
Keith Rickaby,.
ANXIOUS people inundated Darlington police with calls as election canvassing in the town centre almost got out of hand.
At 2pm on Saturday, supporters of the extreme right-wing British National Party were trying to gain support for their election candidate Dr Donald Clarke.
Standing nearby was Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn with a group of his supporters.
People concerned by the chants and comments being made by the BNP contacted the police.
A police spokesman said yesterday some dialled 999 while others rang Darlington police station direct.
When officers arrived at the High Row, a large group of anti-fascist campaigners had arrived and were chanting slogans at the BNP.
‘Our officers separated the two groups and kept a close eye on what was going on,’ said the spokesman.
Yesterday a campaign aide for Mr Milburn said the Labour candidate arrived as the whole situation was being resolved.
The Labour candidate was with actor Hugh Manning, who plays the vicar in Emmerdale Farm.
MICHAEL Fallon yesterday denied accusations he has failed as a Government minister to provide decent schools in his constituency.
Darlington's Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg asked Mr Fallon to clarify what he meant when he said schools in County Durham were a ‘dismal’ choice for parents.
The comments were made during a live radio debate from Polam Hall School, in Darlington.
Mr Bergg immediately turned on him saying: ‘If schools are dismal in Durham and Cleveland it is your Government's responsibility.’
But yesterday Mr Fallon said his comments were aimed at the local education authority and not the schools themselves.
He said it is the choice of schools which is so dismal in the area.
Mr Bergg wrote to Mr Fallon asking him to qualify the remarks he made during the debate.
‘Perhaps it was an unfortunate slip of the tongue,’ said Mr Bergg.
In his written reply Mr Fallon accuses Liberal Democrats of defending a ‘socialist monopoly in education’.
He said in places where choice has been improved for parents the reaction has been favourable.
‘Now schools have their own budgets I hope we shall see growing diversity,’ he said.
A DARLINGTON woman has died leaving a fortune to the American college where she studied more than 50 years ago.
Esther Grace Roberts ended her days at Nora Fenby House, an elderly people's home at Cockerton Green, Darlington.
She had lived there for some time although it is not known where she lived before coming to Darlington.
Her will declares that more than £219,000 should go to Cornell College, Mount Vernon, Iowa, in the U.S., where she had studied English literature.
The money will go to establish a scholarship fund in the memory of Dr Clyde Tull who taught her while she was a student there in the early Twenties.
Staff at Cornell College were astounded by the generosity of the unexpected bequest.
The college registrar said Mrs Roberts had not kept in touch with the college and Dr Tull died in 1968.
Dr Tull taught at the college from 1916 to 1959 and was a legendary figure among the staff at Cornell.
Charles Milhauser, of Cornell College, said he was delighted by the gift but saddened that he had not known Mrs Roberts.
ONE of the final schemes in the Darlington Railside Revival programme will start in May.
And organisers of the project are convinced it will be good news for people living in the Borough Road area of the town who have put up with industrial eyesores for years.
This week the borough council is set to grant permission for demolition work to begin on sheds and outbuildings which were once part of British Rail's Motive Diesel site.
Yesterday Coun David Lyonette (Lab), chairman of the council's development committee, said: ‘This is one of the last jobs left to be done as part of the Railside Revival.
It will be a benefit to local people and it will improve the view of Darlington from the railway.’
A plan is under way to build a new YMCA home on Melland Street, near the landscaping area.
Coun Lyonette said the building will be carefully planned to cut out noise from the railway.
On Wednesday members of the planning applications sub-committee seem certain to approve the work on the 200 yard strip of land which has lain derelict for years.
Darlington council has had to wait while negotiations have been completed with British Rail over the site ownership.
Work is still to be done near the Skerne Park estate to complete the Railside Revival.
THE decision to run road traffic along the unused Newton Cap viaduct is a victory for those who resisted its demolition.
The concept of running a road bridge over a listed, 140-year-old railway viaduct seems simple enough but has never been tried before in this country.
But if the Newton Cap Viaduct Protection Group had not fought so well, the elegant crossing might have been torn down years ago.
If the county council had its way in the Eighties, those now looking forward to the imaginative new scheme would have very little to be happy about.
The county council had wanted to demolish the towering and elegant stone-built landmark and replace it with a more functional concrete and steel structure.
The council was quite happy to erect a new crossing near the fourteenth century Skirlaw Bridge which currently bears the burden of the A689 traffic and links Weardale with the A1(M).
David Newbegin, director of environment at Durham County Council, last week was accepting the credits for the members and his team.
They undoubtedly deserve them for being flexible enough to listen to the people and to bodies like the Royal Fine Arts Commission and for thinking up the innovative scheme itself.
But it is the people of Bishop Auckland who can rightly feel proud that they were the prime movers.
The £6.5m scheme will dovetail nicely with the revamp that Broken Banks, the nearby slumped River Wear river bank, is undergoing.
Work there to stabilise the land near the Skirlaw Bridge is aimed at creating a tree-lined area for recreation.
After the scheduled 1995 opening of the Newton Cap scheme, the picturesque valley around it will become a great local amenity.
It should complement the Bishop's Park which by then, it is hoped, will be kept in a better state than it is at the moment.
Critics might say the charters are merely
PR exercises for pledges which should already be standard requirements of the health service.
But the local charters at least set down these requirements publicly and unequivocally for the patient.
And they do include new assurances.
We have been promised access to our health records and waiting lists which are no longer than 18 months.
Parents have been promised the right to stay in hospital with their sick children at all times.
A public statement of the existence of these rights is a written commitment to providing a public service and should be applauded.
The charter's real test is its ability to deliver its objectives and redress any failures.
There is a right to complain and to have complaints ‘properly investigated’.
But if its promises are broken there is no financial compensation on offer.
In fact, it is not clear what would be the consequences of the authorities failing to meet their own standards of service apart from publication in an annual report.
If the charter is to be worth more than the paper it is printed on we need guarantees that appropriate action will be taken to the satisfaction of the public, and in particular, the complainant.
The first round of reports will be scrutinised with interest.
DARLINGTON'S long awaited pedestrian scheme comes into force today.
Hours of planning and consultation have gone into devising the system, but 10.30am this morning, when cars are barred entry to Skinnergate and High Row, there will still be those who say the Labour-controlled borough council has got it wrong.
The traffic-free scheme bars all vehicles from entering Skinnergate, High Row and the bottom end of Duke Street between 10.30am and 4pm Monday to Saturday.
During the same period access to Blackwellgate will be restricted to buses and entrance to the Abbot's Yard car park will be possible only from Bondgate.
Right turns from Bondgate into Skinnergate will be banned completely.
Some shopkeepers in Skinnergate and High Row have been angered by the decision to stop deliveries during peak time.
Only bullion vehicles or Post Office vans are exempt.
Handicapped drivers and cyclists have also protested at their exclusion from the zone.
But planning officials and Labour councillors insist the scheme will works only if it gives shoppers maximum access to the road.
Labour Coun John Williams, leader of the council, believes the pedestrian plan was a key issue in his party's success in last year's local elections.
Tory councillors disagree and continue to press the case for their alternative plan to make the town's Northgate traffic-free.
Conservative Coun Peter Jones says traffic delays will be created by the new system.
But during consultations between Darlington officials, Durham County Council and the emergency services, it was agreed that the system should work.
Traffic wardens and police patrols have been told to watch for motorists who might attempt to break the rules.
Labour's Jim Skinner, chairman of the council's transport committee, said: ‘This is an eighteen-month trial period.
It will be continually monitored to identify problems.’
He said people who condemned the scheme for being too extreme should remember that rules could be relaxed, while it would be unpopular to introduce more stringent byelaws after the trial.
Darlington Environmental Watch spokeswoman Maggie Bosanquet said: ‘This will help improve Darlington as a whole.
As well as making it much safer for pedestrians it will make the town much more attractive to visitors.’
The group started campaigning for a ban on traffic in October 1990.
DARLINGTON'S long awaited pedestrianisation scheme finally comes into force today.
Hours of planning, argument and consultation have gone into devising a system which Darlington Council hopes will be a real benefit to the town centre.
But at 10.30am this morning, when cars are barred entry to Skinnergate and High Row, there will still be those who say the Labour controlled council has got it wrong.
Briefly the traffic free zone legislation means all vehicles will be barred from entering Skinnergate, High Row and the bottom end of Duke Street between 10.30am and 4pm on Mondays to Saturdays.
During the same period Blackwellgate will be restricted to buses only and access to the Abbot's Yard car park will be from Bondgate only.
Right turns from Bondgate into Skinnergate are banned completely.
Some of the shopkeepers in Skinnergate and High Row have been angered by the decision to stop deliveries during the peak time.
Only bullion vehicles or post vans are exempt.
Handicapped drivers were also alarmed to hear they would be prevented from using the streets like all other drivers.
Darlington's cyclists also complained about being forced to dismount if they want to use those routes.
But planning officials and Labour councillors insist the scheme only works if it gives shoppers maximum access to the road.
Coun John Williams (Lab), leader of the council, believes the pedestrianisation plan was a key issue behind Labour's success at last year's council elections.
He said Darlington voters gave a vote of no confidence to the Conservative plan to make Northgate pedestrians only.
Tory councillors refuse to accept this and still argue the Skinnergate and High Row plans will not work.
The former chairman of the transport committee, Coun Peter Jones (Con), has warned that traffic in Darlington will ‘lock up’ under the new system.
But during consultations between Darlington Council, Durham County Council and the emergency services it was agreed that the system should work.
Traffic wardens and police patrols have been given instructions to keep a careful watch for motorists who may attempt to break the new rules.
To all the critics who have predicted traffic chaos Labour councillor Jim Skinner has the same reply.
As chairman of the council's transport committee he reminds opponents the pedestrianisation plan is not final.
‘This is an eighteen month trial period,’ he told councillors.
‘It will be continually monitored to identify problems.’
Spokeswoman for Darlington Environmental Watch Maggie Bosanquet said: ‘This will help improve Darlington.
‘As a whole as well as making it much safer for pedestrians it will make the town much more attractive to visitors,’ she said.
DEW started campaigning for pedestrianisation in October 1990 and their exhibition called ‘Driving Darlington Crazy’ helped trigger the scheme.
‘It should be very much easier for the elderly, people with pushchairs and those in wheelchairs to get along safely,’ said Mrs Bosanquet.
DARLINGTON Conservatives say they are pleased with election canvassing returns showing they have the support of half the townspeople they contacted.
The Tories now have a third of their canvassing results which they say shows them with 56pc support, Labour 29pc, Liberal Democrats 7pc, and others 8pc.
Tory agent Kathy Lever said: ‘Our vote is holding up well and we will be going flat out over the next ten days to win over the undecided voters.’
Labour candidate Alan Milburn said: ‘I don't know which constituency Mr Fallon has been canvassing but it certainly isn't Darlington.
‘Everywhere I go I meet people from the town saying it's time for a change.’
Mr Bergg said suspicions were aroused when the people asking questions had a vested interest in getting a certain answer.
‘I think 7pc support for me is a drastic understatement and I am certain that is because of the way the Tories questioned people,’ he said.
Long trip for Frankie fans
DEVOTED fans of Frankie Vaughan travelled hundreds of miles to see their idol sing in Darlington.
The group came from the south of England to see Frankie in A Night At the Music Hall at the town's Civic Theatre.
And they presented him with video equipment they bought for a children's charity.
Thinking time:
Some 500 psychologists from all parts of the world meet in Scarborough next month when the British Psychological Society holds its conference there for the first time.
On song:
Darlington choir the Carol Andrews Singers have won the adult section of the BBC Sainsbury Choir of the Year Contest at the Tyne Theatre, in Newcastle and go through to the next stage in Manchester this October.
Meanwhile, the choir will visit LLangollen, in Wales, this July to compete in the chamber section of the International World choir contest.
Death probe:
An inquest will open soon to establish how a 37-year-old man died while in custody at Darlington police station.
The man, who has not been named, collapsed in the cells on March 8.
An investigation is being carried out by the Police Complaints Authority.
The man was being held after being charged with a drink driving offence at Darlington Magistrates Court.
DARLINGTON Labour candidate Alan Milburn paid a mother's day visit to the Metcalfe family yesterday to publicise his party's child benefit plans.
Mum Margaret has twin daughters Hannah, older by minutes, and Amy, who as the second child receives a lower rate of benefit than her sister.
During his visit to the Metcalfes of Marwood Crescent, Cockerton, Mr Milburn said a Labour government would increase child benefit for all children to £9.95 a week.
The present rate is £9.65 for the first child and £7.80 for subsequent children.
Labour's candidate for NorthWest Durham was in London yesterday launching the party's child care plan.
Education spokesman Hilary Armstrong said £50m would to go into a ‘child care partnership’ with parents and employers.
‘Money will go into expanding the non-nursery care, day and after-school care,’ she said.
DARLINGTON police have been criticised for forcing nightclubs to close an hour early on Saturday when British Summer Time began.
Officers gave less than two hours' notice of the decision, angering managers and clubbers alike.
Police say they had to enforce the law after 1am when the clocks went forward an hour.
Steve Stepherd, assistant manager of Bar Rio in the Mardi Gras complex, said he was stunned when club doorstaff told him what had happened.
‘I had never heard of this before, and you can imagine the complaints from customers, we could only tell them once the police had told us.
‘If they want our co-operation why didn't they give us prior notice?
‘It's asking for trouble when people are being turfed out into the street and have paid to come to a club until 2am.
‘They said we would get an extra hour in October when the clocks go back but I'll believe that when I see it.’
Steve estimated around £800 would have been lost in bar takings because of the club's early shutdown.
Tony Yates, manager of Club Lucys, said he first heard he would have to close early when officers called at the club at 11.20pm on Saturday.
He was refused permission to shut the bar at 1am but keep the club open until 2am, and made an announcement to clubbers telling them of the police decision.
‘I told the police they could have warned us in advance.
When they used to change the clocks at 2am that didn't affect us but now they do it at 1am it does.
‘We apologised to people and said it wasn't our fault.
People were hanging about outside until 2am anyway, luckily there wasn't any trouble.’
Mr Yates was told police had not enforced the legislation before because of‘an oversight.’
Sgt Ian Martin of Darlington police said that in previous years when BST started at 2am Greenwich mean time there had been no need to check clubs closed down on time.
‘All we did was to make sure the law was upheld.
‘I know Mr Yates wasn't very happy and I can sympathise, unfortunately the law was there and we couldn't turn a blind eye.
‘At the end of BST they will get an hour back so at the end of the day it will all even out,’ he said.
Police warn about con-trick builders
POLICE are warning people to beware of unscrupulous workmen after a pensioner was swindled.
Sgt John Grainger, community relations officer at Bishop Auckland police, said three builders using a blue van called at the home of an elderly person in the town, telling her she needed work on the roof and quoting £300.
Sgt Grainger said they eventually accepted £50 but it appears no repairs have been completed.
Police are also asking people to be on the lookout for bogus officials following several incidents in the area.
Boy recovers:
An eight-year-old boy spent the weekend recovering after being knocked over by a car on Hollyhurst Road, Darlington.
A police spokesman said it is thought the boy ran out in front of a Ford Fiesta car driven by Jacqueline Springett, 21, of Coniston Street, Darlington.
Vote winner:
Shop assistants at Boots in Spennymoor have voted their colleague Sylvia Bulmer through to the next round of the Boots Assistant of the Year contest.
House fire:
Firemen fought a small fire in a first floor room of a house in Gerard Street, Spennymoor, just after 7pm last night.
ONE of the final schemes in the Darlington Railside Revival programme is set to get underway in May.
And organisers of the project are convinced it will be good news for people living in the Borough Road area of the town who have put up with industrial eyesores for years.
Railside Revival was developed to improve the old industrial sites bordering the railway through Darlington.
This week the borough council is set to grant permission for demolition work to begin on sheds and outbuildings which were once part of British Rail's Motive Diesel site.
Yesterday Coun David Lyonette (Lab), chairman of the council's development committee, said: ‘This is one of the last jobs left to be done as part of the Railside Revival.
It will be a benefit to local people and it will improve the view of Darlington from the railway,’ he said.
A plan is underway to build a new YMCA home on Melland Street close to where the landscaping work is to be done.
Coun Lyonette said the building will be carefully planned to reduce noise from the railway tracks.
On Wednesday members of the planning applications subcommittee seem certain to approve the work on the 200 yard strip of land which has lain derelict for years.
Work still remains to be done near the Skerne Park estate to complete the Railside Revival.
Darlington Council's next plan is to set to work improving the derelict land sites bordering the River Skerne.
TORY councillors caused uproar after breaking council policy by meeting a South African delegation which visited Darlington.
Conservative group leader Coun Tony Richmond contacted the diplomats independently after Labour councillors refused to see them, and invited them to a meeting in Darlington Town Hall.
The Conservatives saw the meeting as a chance to improve relations with a foreign power and have claimed that the talks may have paved the way for a future visit to Darlington by a South African trade delegation.
Labour's John Williams, leader of the council, has dismissed the Tory claims that apartheid is finished.
However, the council decided last week to review its policy.
Now the Whites of South Africa have given their President an overwhelming referendum mandate to reform, we asked the people of Darlington for their opinions.
Sydney Johnson, 62, of Belgrave Terrace, Darlington, is a retired scaffolder.
Let them get on with it.
They have got to let the Black people in South Africa have better conditions, but some of the Dutch people in the country are very determined.
It's going to take a long time yet.
As for the meeting, it won't make a blind bit of difference and the people of Darlington don't care anyway.
Joanne Pipe, 18, of Neville Road, Darlington, is a sixth form student.
There should be closer links, but only if there are equal rights for all people in South Africa.
I think that if those talks were negotiations towards this, that was good.
If we don't discuss these problems we won't get anywhere and nothing will be done.
At the end of the day I don't think it affects everyday life in Darlington.
Philomena Lupton, 77, of Lucknow Street, Darlington, is a housewife.
It's wrong that everybody is not treated the same way.
I think the way things are going now the Black people in South Africa are treated much better than they were before, but they used to be treated terribly, and after all it was their country.
The colour of their skin makes no difference, we are all the same.
Colin White, 29, of Newton Aycliffe, is a postman.
It doesn't bother me.
It's wrong the Blacks can't do as they please in South Africa, it's as much their country as the Whites.
If you don't talk about it nothing will happen, and this problem isn't going to go away, it needs to be solved.
I think more of that sort of thing should happen.
Talks of that kind should be encouraged.
Melanie Pitchford, 28, of Salutation Road, Darlington, is a housewife.
I haven't really thought about it.
I'm glad the referendum makes it look like things are going to be solved, but it's still too early.
They shouldn't have had those talks because things are far from settled.
What is most important is not the talks but what they do after that's what matters.
Politicians should still be careful about South Africa.
Richard Shotton, 17, is a sixth form student, of Fenby Avenue, Darlington.
I don't have any distinct views, but my local church is doing a petition about South Africa.
I think it's right they talked to the delegates, and they should talk more about it.
Building links is important.
We don't hear enough about South Africa and the people In Darlington don't care enough about the situation.
It doesn't affect their lives.
DRIVERS have their last chance to use two of Darlington's busiest streets at peak traffic times this weekend.
Skinnergate and High Row are closed to almost all cars and cycles from Sunday at midnight in an experimental scheme to cut traffic congestion.
Durham County Council engineers will be in Darlington at the weekend to put in moveable bollards which will be taken down after 4pm every day.
The work marks the end of a long battle at Darlington council over the best pedestrianisation plan for Darlington.
When Labour took control of the council last year they promised the scheme would be in place by Easter 1992.
But Tories have continued to attack, saying the scheme is a poor excuse for real pedestrianisation.
Signs have gone up in Bondgate and at other points in the town centre warning motorists of the changes.
Coun Ray Flowers (Lab), chairman of the county council's transport committee, said the streets have been dominated by cars for far too long.
The scheme is designed to give shoppers better access to shops without being confined to the narrow pavements.
During the next 18 months the no traffic zones will be carefully monitored to establish whether they should be permanently enforced.
Both Darlington and Durham councils claim the consultation process showed broad support for the plan.
ONE of the biggest stores in a job-starved town is to close leaving 110 staff redundant, it was announced yesterday.
Binns in Hartlepool's Victoria Road will shut on June 27 after more than 50 years in the town.
House of Fraser deputy finance director, Richard Scott, broke the news in person to shocked staff and managers.
However, the company has pledged to try to find alternative jobs for as many workers as possible.
A spokesman said: ‘They will all be individually counselled and we are setting up a job shop within the store and a hot-line in conjunction with the Department of Employment.
‘We have not been trading profitably there for quite some and there comes a point when one has to say enough is enough.’
The company feels that the 84,000 sq ft store is not big enough to develop further and is concentrating its investment in premises of more than 120,000 sq ft.
It has recently opened two new stores, each employing 300 people, at Leicester and Thurrock, in Essex.
The spokesman stressed: ‘This decision was taken after a great deal of thought and heart-searching.
It wasn't an easy thing to do.
‘But if you are a responsible company you have to bear in mind the overall health of the company for the good of all staff and hard decisions have to be taken.’
A PARLIAMENTARY candidate has called for an investigation into why there was a delay in an ambulance reaching a woman who died after plunging from a window.
The incident last weekend happened just a few hundred yards from Bishop Auckland ambulance station, but it took 25 minutes for a vehicle to arrive from Durham City 12 miles away.
Liberal Democrat candidate for Bishop Auckland, Bill Wade, said he was not satisfied with explanations given by Durham Ambulance Service for the delay.
Sarah Hunt, 74, of Weardale Drive, Woodhouse Close, Bishop Auckland, clung hold of her sister Joan Whalen for 25 minutes after neighbours alerted the ambulance service that Mrs Whalen had plunged from the window of her house.
Mr Wade, who is also a district councillor for the Woodhouse Close estate, said he was deeply worried about the incident.
Mrs Hunt has said she cannot understand why there was such a delay when an ambulance station is situated less than a mile from her home.
Durham Ambulance Service chiefs have said the single ambulance on duty at the town's station was on an emergency call in Newton Aycliffe at the time.
Stations at Darlington, Newton Aycliffe, Fishburn and Chester-le Street were also operating with one vehicle and each were on call some in each other 's areas.
A Durham City vehicle was despatched but could not get there within the 19-minute national guideline time for ambulance call-outs.
Mr Wade said: ‘Quite clearly, the ambulance service needs to carry out a full investigation.’
He said the 19-minute guideline was more understandable for emergencies in isolated areas.
But he said: ‘We would not expect this to be the case when the ambulance station is within a few hundred yards of the person who made the call.’
Derek Foster, defending Bishop Auckland for Labour, said the incident was ‘extremely rare’.
He said: ‘If there is any evidence that this case is not an isolated occurrence we will have to examine that.’
Mr Foster said he thought that the Durham Service's rate of 97 per cent of call-outs having an arrival time of less than 19 minutes was ‘creditable’.
Conservative candidate David Williamson was unavailable.
A CONSULTANT doctor yesterday said health service problems are worse in the North of England.
Dr Abdul Jaleel, who practises in Darlington, attended the British Medical Association's conference at which health reforms were again unanimously condemned by the 400 delegates.
He said the NHS is under threat from overspending on administration while ignoring clinical costs.
The BMA also opposes the decision to keep doctors and nurses out of the management process and cutting choices for the patient.
He added that a survey of morale among health staff revealed 70pc to be unhappy.
The highest levels of low morale were in the Northern region.
Dr Jaleel argued that in the country's more economically deprived areas, the pressure on the health service is far worse.
AN election candidate was last night accused of abusing democracy after some of the people who signed his nomination papers said they were not told he was standing for the far-Right British National Party.
Dr Donald Clarke is the BNP General Election candidate for Darlington.
As with all other candidates, his nomination papers need the signatures of ten electors in the constituency.
Six of those who signed Dr Clarke's papers live in Vine Street, Darlington.
Yesterday, two of them told The Northern Dr Clarke had not mentioned he was standing for the BNP, and that they would not have signed had he said so.
William Dixon, 62, said: ‘I have no time for that party or their policies.
He came to the door, said he was standing as a candidate, but didn't say he was from the BNP.
I feel as if I have been hoodwinked.
William Langley said: ‘He certainly didn't say he was from the British National Party and there is no way I would have signed the form if I had known.’
Darlington's Labour candidate Alan Milburn said: ‘This appears to be the very worst sort of abuse of democracy.’
And Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg said: ‘My reaction is that this is absolutely diabolical.
The fact that he can do this makes me believe the system needs changing.
Last night Dr Clarke's election agent Kevin Scott said: ‘One of our supporters lives in Vine Street and Donald and I went knocking on a few doors.
Some of the people who signed are not our supporters, but Donald said who he was.’
Family flees house blaze
A MOTHER and her two children escaped from their blazing house in The Bank, Barnard Castle, yesterday.
Two firemen wearing breathing apparatus managed to confine the fire to the living room, which was extensively damaged.
The rest of the house was severely smoke damaged.
Art show: Yorkshire Itinerants, artists for charity, are holding an exhibition in York's Guildhall in aid of St Leonard's Hospice between March 30 and April 12.
The public is invited to a preview on March 31 at 7pm.
Easter dates: Libraries in York and Tang Hall will host Easter crafts sessions for children on April 21 and 22.
THE future of Darlington's colleges would come under threat if Labour wins the general election, it was claimed yesterday.
The town's Conservative candidate Michael Fallon said a Labour government would undermine the budgeting of the technical college and Queen Elizabeth's sixth form college which are set to become self-governing from April 1993.
He has challenged Labour counterpart Alan Milburn to tell the electorate if he would defy a whip reversing the move.
Mr Fallon said they would no longer be subject to the constraints of poll tax capping and there would be an end to ‘haggling’ with Durham County Council.
‘Labour would reverse this independence and are committed to taking both colleges back into county council control,’ he said.
Mr Milburn told The Northern Echo Labour would not support the nationalisation of education.
‘We believe that local colleges should have a local input,’ he said.
‘Darlington's colleges should be run from Darlington and not from Whitehall.’
A PLANNED housing development could spell disaster for a top nature reserve, environmentalists have warned.
The proposal to build houses near Brinkburn Pond, in Darlington, has triggered an outcry from Darlington Wildlife Trust and Darlington Environmental Watch.
They fear drainage work for the 10 acre development could dry out Brinkburn Pond, destroying the thriving community of Greater Crested Newts, a protected species.
Brinkburn Pond is a recognised Site of Particular Ecological Interest, and managed by Durham Wildlife Trust.
Cliff Evans, founder of the new Darlington branch of Durham Wildlife Trust, said: ‘It is extremely valuable for animal life.
I have seen a kingfisher here and a survey of the pond has shown it to be very important for invertebrates as well as amphibians.
‘We have lost a lot of ponds all over the country, so the ones we do have are even more important as wildlife habitats.’
DEW spokeswoman Maggie Bosanquet added: ‘It is far too early to let this go ahead it could destroy the pond.
If drainage is needed, it's very likely the water level would drop and the pond dry out.’
Both groups are calling for a halt to the planning application until a full hydrological survey has been carried out to check the pond would be safe.
And hundreds of local residents are joining the protest, saying the proposed site access, north of Honeypot Lane, is too dangerous.
Residents of nearby Bellburn Lane Joan Lowes and Lionel Whitfield started a petition to bar the development and have raised over 300 signatures.
Mrs Lowes said: ‘The plan shows Bellburn Lane as the proposed access but this is a quiet cul-de-sac and far too narrow for more traffic.
‘Our children play out on the street and there's a plan to build a school on land nearby surely we couldn't have a busy road where children are going to school?’
Darlington Council planning committee is expected to consider the plan on April 29.
A DRUNKEN man was found lying outside a shop door after he had stolen two shirts from inside, a court was told yesterday.
Robin Blythe had used a piece of wood and some barbed wire to remove the ladies' shirts from the shop in Skinnergate, Darlington.
But police officers found him lying drunk outside the door.
Yesterday Blythe, 30, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted theft.
Judge Angus Stroyan ordered him to pay £21.98 compensation for the shirts, which were bloodstained, and gave him a community service order for 60 hours.
Euan Duff, defending, said Blythe, of Vane Terrace, Darlington, had no memory of the theft but accepted he must have done it.
Mr Duff said: ‘His life all went wrong in 1986 but since then he has been putting it back together again.’
AN ELDERLY driver who stalled half way across the main road escaped injury when her car was hit broadside by another vehicle.
The 70-year-old woman, who has not been named, was coming out on to the A67 from Piercebridge when her car stalled.
While she was trying to restart her Mini Metro car another came round the bend from Darlington.
The other driver was unable to stop in time and crashed into the side of the elderly lady's car.
The younger woman suffered shock and whiplash injuries but was otherwise unhurt.
A spokesman for Darlington police said both women had been fortunate not to have been more severely injured in the crash.
Mum and children escape house fire
A MOTHER and her two children escaped from their blazing house in Barnard Castle yesterday.
A fire brigade spokesman said the fire broke out at a house in The Bank at 9.30am.
Two firemen wearing breathing apparatus managed to confine the fire to the living room, which was extensively damaged.
The rest of the house was severely smoke damaged, he added.
The mother and her children, who have not been named, managed to get out of the house before the flames spread.
The blaze is believed to have started in an armchair.
Locked in: An elderly woman was stuck in the Superloo in Crook for half an hour, a local trader has claimed.
Church service: The Bishop of Durham, Dr David Jenkins will attend the rededication service at St Andrew's Church, South Church, Bishop Auckland tomorrow to mark the end of a 12-year, £500,000 refurbishment programme.
ANYONE familiar with York cannot fail to be impressed by the pedestrianisation scheme which has enhanced the city in recent years.
In York it was particularly hideous to have lorries and cars vying for space with bicycles and people in the narrow streets.
Since vehicles have been banned for most of the waking day local shoppers and visitors can enjoy a pleasant lead-free atmosphere without fear of being pinned to a wall.
Yet when pedestrianisation was first announced the city's shopkeepers, taxi drivers and disabled groups kicked up a fuss.
Their fears have proved largely unfounded.
Taxi drivers still complain a bit, as they do, but parking facilities were made available for the disabled.
The net effect on trade has been coloured by the recession though some businesses have moved to take account of the change in access.
However, few suffered in the way they feared.
One moved out of the city centre and has seen business increase at its new premises.
There's a lesson here for Darlington as it embarks on its own pedestrianisation scheme.
Similar complaints have been heard from similar complainants.
It is as if pedestrianisation has just been invented.
Some towns and cities have had it for 20 years or more.
Coventry since the war.
Far from hitting business, it is particularly important for Skinnergate and High Row to be rid of traffic if they are to survive the opening of the Cornmill development.
Skinnergate faces two choices: it either declines into a traffic-filled street of second-rate shops or it cleans itself up, providing an open air alternative to the Cornmill's enclosed space.
Skinnergate doesn't need cars, it needs attractive, quality shops.
The council should offer help, if it can, to help upgrade those shops in the streets affected by changes of access.
A smarter Darlington would benefit all those living, working and shopping in the town.
STEPHEN SMAILES, local politician and cricket buff, though not necessarily in that order, has gone into the business of sports sponsorship.
This is an expanding market of course and potential sponsors are constantly searching for an appropriate product on which they can lavish their money.
Lucky Smailes did not have to look far.
He decided to dispense with the goodlooking, personable high-achiever destined to succeed and instead back the incumbent of this space.
The result, agreed in a hard-hitting threeminute session involving no agents, or even contracts, is that my performances in the coming cricket season have a price on them.
This will be alarming for team mates who worry desperately about my abilities even when there is not the pressure of big money involved.
Before the league authorities get in touch, however, with a reminder about the rules of professionalism they should know that the Smailes fortune is destined for charity.
For each catch or stumping I make for Barnard Castle the Yorkshire exile, a long time proponent of overseas players, will pay 50p.
On the evidence of recent season this could cost him about £30.
But with ageing, lack of fitness, and the pressures of playing for money now being added to the customary problem (some unkind people suggest this is a congenital inability to catch) he could be spared digging so deep.
The shrewd Smailes has already agreed to buy the beers all night in the event of a half century being scored from this direction this summer, in one innings that is.
‘I don't think I'll be buying much beer, if any,’ he said by way of a confidence booster.
‘But I want to give you a little help with your wicket keeping.
I was at a jumble sale the other day and managed to buy a bucket and a coat.
You can stop balls with the coat and catch them in the bucket.’
The cash, if not the equipment, was an offer impossible to refuse.
To earn it one's sponsor suggested that fitness training should start now.
He did not want to be backing anything other than the North Yorkshire and South Durham League B Division's number one wicketkeeper.
On that score, he might have done better.
But to show the pressure means nothing the Smailes money will be matched by an equal amount from here.
If anybody would else would like to come in the sponsorship is not exclusive.
Most of all, if opposition batsman would like to get out (the dollier the catch the better) they can start the long walk to the pavilion in the knowledge that it was in a good cause, and not just that of Barney cricket.
ONE of County Durham's longest-serving police officers is to retire in a few days.
Chief Supt Bill Hills, head of the force's uniform operations department, will have completed more than 35 years' service when he leaves the job.
He joined the Durham force in 1956 and started on the beat in Darlington before being promoted through the ranks to reach his present status in 1989.
Mr Hills led the force's first community relations department and supervised the county's first Neighbourhood Watch scheme in Annfield Plain.
As commander of uniform operations department he had responsibility for areas such as traffic, dogs, crime prevention and public relations.
Mr Hills, 55 on Thursday, was awarded a commendation in 1973 for showing initiative and bravery when dealing with a dangerous psychiatric patient, and in 1979 he won the police long service and good conduct medal.
He has also served as deputy sub-divisional commander in Newton Aycliffe, and deputy divisional commander in Bishop Auckland.
The father-of-two lives in Darlington with his wife Pat, a retired school teacher.
The new commander of uniform operations will be Chief Supt Tom Whitton.
A MAN who refused to speak for several days after being arrested was yesterday given a 12-month conditional discharge.
Craig Melia, 30, from Stretchley, near Sheffield, admitted stealing a pair of £22.50 jeans from Marks and Spencer in Darlington on March 21.
Ian Walker, prosecuting, said a store detective spotted Melia going into a cubicle to try the jeans on.
He left the store without paying for them.
‘Throughout the time he was in custody, he remained silent,’ Mr Walker told Darlington magistrates.
Graham Hunsley, defending, told the court Melia had been roaming round the country for about a month and stole the jeans after becoming concerned about his scruffy appearance.
A MAN who hurled an ashtray at a barmaid was yesterday barred from the pub for a year by magistrates.
Philip Raper, 48, was ordered to pay barmaid Christine Charlton compensation of £75 after she was left with bruising and swelling to her head.
Raper, 48, of the Honeypot Lane caravan site, Darlington, admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm at the Archdeacon pub in Darlington in January.
Ian Walker, prosecuting, told Darlington magistrates Mrs Charlton had refused to serve Raper who was drinking in the pub after being barred.
Paul Pacitto, for Raper, said a group of men had been barred from the pub because of a smashed window.
Raper was not involved and threw the ashtray in annoyance at not being able to explain this to the landlord, said Mr Pacitto.
Magistrates gave him a 12month conditional discharge and ordered him to pay £35 costs.
A LONG-AWAITED scheme to banish traffic from Darlington town centre was introduced yesterday.
But it ran into early criticism from disabled shoppers who claim it discriminates against them, and from traders who fear it will hit business.
Vehicles are now banned from Skinnergate and High Row between 10.30am and 4pm everyday except Sundays as part of the borough council's pedestrianisation project.
The measures were introduced following consultation with the public and disabled groups and will be monitored during an 18 month pilot scheme.
Disabled drivers can park for up to three hours in 44 parking spaces within the traffic-free area for up to three hours provided they arrive before 10.30am.
Council leader John Williams said he was delighted the Labour controlled authority had finished the scheme by Easter as it promised in its manifesto.
‘This is the first step in sorting out Darlington town centre, we want to go on and sort out the bus chaos, the market square and look at pedestrianising other areas.’
Coun Williams added local disabled groups were consulted during the planning stage of the scheme and would benefit from it along with the elderly and parents with pushchairs.
But wheelchair-bound Betty Richardson of Oakfield, Newton Aycliffe, and her husband Jim say they will go elsewhere to shop.
Arthritis sufferer Betty, 63, said the special parking spaces were of no use, while Jim, 63, said his hip replacement meant the extra 200 yards he would have to push his wife would be hard work.
EUROPEAN Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan lent his weight to the Tory campaign yesterday to boost party hopes in their most marginal seat.
As the election campaign entered its third week, the main parties once again sent some of their big names North.
The former Home Secretary and Richmond MP joined local candidate Conal Gregory in York yesterday.
The pair toured a sheltered housing development at Lincoln Court in Ascot Way, Acomb, to chat with local residents.
And Sir Leon expressed confidence in the Conservative campaign, although he admitted it wasn't over yet.
‘We have still got ten days to go and I'm quite sure that in that time our efforts will mean Mr Gregory will be all right.’
One-time Labour health minister Lord Ennals joined candidate John Healey on the quest for votes in the sprawling Ryedale constituency.
At a public meeting in New Earswick, near York, attended by some 50 people, Mr Healey set out Labour's plans to safeguard the health service.
Lord Ennals said: ‘It took a Labour government to create the NHS and it will now take a Labour government to save the NHS.’
Mr Healey claimed the Tories were putting paperwork before patients and cash before care.
Trade union chiefs in the region yesterday claimed Government policies were a direct cause of the problems facing the economy of Yorkshire and Humberside.
The regional TUC in their quarterly review claimed the recent budget did nothing to tackle the problems facing the region.
And they suggested many employers are holding back bad economic news until after the general election.
The TUC cites the strong pound, the uniform business rate and lack of infrastructural investment as contributory factors in the regions problems.
‘The public sector is being squeezed particularly hard,’ said regional TUC secretary Paul Jagger yesterday.
He said redundancies had been reported in all sectors of industry, from textiles to manufacturing, from the media to transport.
He added that they were now calling for a fundamental review of taxation and a broadly-based training and employment programme.
Meanwhile, Home secretary Kenneth Baker, on a visit to the region, pledged to tackle juvenile crime.
In Newcastle he said joyriders and bail bandits would be targeted, and spoke of the need to catch criminals when they are young.
‘It usually starts with truancy and bunking off then they get into shoplifting and drug taking and on to burglary eventually becoming habitual criminals.’
In a whirlwind tour of the region he met Tory candidates in Hexham, Wansbeck, Blyth, four from the Newcastle constituencies, Wallsend, Tynemouth, Darlington, Stockton South and Langbaurgh.
Labour's shadow defence minister Martin O'Neill visited Swan Hunter's yard in Newcastle.
Health minister Virginia Bottomley and Baroness Blatch were visiting the North-East today.
GOLDEN couple Bill and Freda Jefferson celebrate 50 years of marriage today and put their happiness down to working together.
The couple, who were introduced to each other by one of Mr Jefferson's relatives in 1940, were married two years later at the Holy Trinity Church in Darlington.
Now the 71-year-olds, of The Birches, Strait Lane, Hurworth, have a son David, a daughter Carol and six grandchildren.
‘It was her beauty which attracted me at first,’ said Mr Jefferson, who was a produce buyer for NAFFI for more than 37 years.
‘She had lovely fair hair.
Mind you, I still find her attractive.
I don't think I've come down to earth since the day I met her.’
Mr Jefferson retired in 1976 and went on to help a friend with office work.
His wife worked on the railways during the war and had her own fruit and general goods shop for 14 years.
Now the couple enjoy a less hectic lifestyle and for Mr Jefferson the highlight of the day is receiving The Northern Echo.
‘I've had a 50-year addiction to The Northern Echo,’ he said.
‘In all those years the Echo has been a necessary part of a busy daily life and even more so in retirement.
‘When I've been away my wife has posted it to me.
Consequently I've had the pleasure of reading the Echo whilst working in the south of England, Scotland and Belfast.
‘On one occasion I woke up from an operation in hospital and asked her if she had brought my Echo.’
 Ashok to the system
SCHOOLS minister Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Conservatives, has taken an early lead as the favourite subject of our election limerick competition.
Two entries, in fact, rhyme Fallon with gallon (as in ten gallon, as in hat, as in talking through.)
Since it scans perfectly and rhymes almost, try this one from the ubiquitous Basil Noble on Labour's defendant in East Cleveland: A would-be MP called Kumar, Went calling in very good humour, As he smiled through Langbaurgh, Both at home and afar, He never committed a bloomer.
Entries to Election Diary, Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
£25 for the best, £10 to runners-up.
A SENIOR police officer has admitted a town's nightclubs should have been warned they would have to close early when the clocks went forward on Saturday.
But Darlington Chief Inspector Matt Longstaff also believes club managers could have contacted the force if they were in doubt over their legal position.
Yesterday The Northern Echo revealed Darlington clubs had to close an hour early on Saturday when British Summer Time started at 1am.
In most previous years clocks have changed at 2am, when clubs in the town would normally close anyway.
But on Saturday officers gave less than two hours' notice of the decision angering managers and clubbers alike.
Chf Insp Longstaff said club managers had a responsibility to make sure they knew what the law required of them.
But he agreed the police could have given them a few day's notice of the situation.
‘Probably we didn't realise it would be a problem until a few days before, but why didn't the managers come to us and ask about it?
‘I would have had no objection to telling them the position, in all honesty we could have done that and I may give them advance warning next year.’
Club managers are now hoping they will be entitled to an extra hour's opening when the clocks go back in October.
A spokeswoman for Durham police said the only other place in the county where clubs are licensed until 2am was Durham City itself.
There clubs closed at 1am and it is understood local police liaised with managers before Saturday.
Video snatched:
A video recorder worth £200 was stolen from the Grammar School in Northallerton.
Pride stolen:
Thieves made off with a stone lion worth £28 from a garden at Lovesome Hill, Northallerton.
Car taken:
A Ford Orion was taken from the Community Centre car park in Northallerton.
Motor theft:
A Vauxhall Astra was stolen from Great Ayton.
Factory blaze:
Children set fire to rubbish at the Alverton factory in Northallerton.
In court
The following cases were dealt with by Northallerton magistrates: Alan Robert Lazenby, 22, of Knotto Bottom Road, Northallerton, was convicted of entering building and stealing property valued at £824, entering a storage container and stealing property valued at £350, dishonestly attempting to obtain £989.46 worth of goods by deception, dishonestly obtaining goods valued at £77 by deception, driving a van while disqualified and using a van without insurance, without a test certificate, driving while disqualified, failing to provide specimen of blood for analysis, driving car recklessly, using car with a defective tyre, with a defective braking system, failing to report an accident, failing to stop after an accident, failing to stop when required by PC, using a car without insurance; 15 months imprisonment, licence endorsed, six points, disqualified for three years.
William Francis Wilson, 21, of Springwell Lane, Northallerton, was convicted of three charges of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, jointly taking fish from private waters and fishing in private waters without a licence, fined £300 plus £155 costs, £740 compensation and bound over in the sum of £100.
Paul Malcolm Wilkinson, 23, of High Street, Northallerton, admitted driving car with excess alcohol in breath, fined £250 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for one year.
The following cases were dealt with by Thirsk magistrates: David Philip Robson, 25, of Topcliffe Road, Thirsk, admitted damaging a flashing amber traffic warning beacon, fined £50 plus £25 costs and £21 compensation.
Stephen Edgar Thompson, 30, of Hambleton View, Thirsk, admitted damaging a plant compressor, fined £150 plus £25 costs and £200 compensation.
The following cases were heard at Bedale Hannah Jane Brown, 26, of The Old Vicarage, Masham, Ripon, admitted driving a pick-up with excess alcohol in breath, fined £250 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for one year.
Elizabeth Ann Pritchard, 22, of Bullamoor Road, Northallerton, admitted using a car without insurance, fined £100 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
Michael James Ward, 24, of Embledown, Norton-le-Clay, Helperby, York, admitted driving a car exceeding 60mph, fined £100 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, three points.
The following case was dealt with by Ripon Liberty magistrates: Peter Michael Hearsum, 28, of Grove House, Harrogate Road, Ripon, was convicted of riding a motorcycle without a licence, fined £10 plus £20 costs.
DARLINGTON Labour candidate Alan Milburn yesterday said his party would allow £8bn to be spent on council housing if it formed the next government.
The figure is the amount said to be raised from the sale of council homes under the Conservative's right-to-buy legislation but which local authorities are not allowed to spend.
In Darlington Mr Milburn said the council's surplus from sales was £1m, which could build 30 new homes outright or up to 120 properties if used to attract investment from housing associations.
He said under Labour the money would be used to give a boost to the local construction trade and help many of the town's homeless families.
It could also be spent on buying private properties which would in turn get the private housing market moving, and in the long run would save money on keeping families in bed and breakfast accommodation.
Mr Milburn said Darlington had suffered badly under the Conservatives and praised a development at Mellen Street where the Labour council is in partnership with the YMCA to build 30 new homes for young adults.
‘Under the Conservatives more homeowners have lost their homes than at any time since the war.
In Darlington last year there were 238 repossession orders in the County Court, a rise of 136pc, the highest in the North-East.
‘And homelessness has risen to record levels.
In Darlington there are in excess of 3,000 people on the council's housing waiting list and it is growing longer by the day.’
Darlington Tory candidate Michael Fallon said Labour could spend a quarter of the £1m in borough council coffers on housing, but also had outstanding debts for constructing council properties.
He said the Government had ploughed £22.4m into housing authority (see corr notes) grants for work in Darlington since 1979.
A MAN was injured in an accident between two lorries on the notorious A66 trans-Pennine route yesterday afternoon.
Yesterday's accident came on the day The Northern Echo featured the growing dangers on the road which links County Durham and Cumbria.
The A66 has become a cause for deep concern among local residents following a spate of accidents in recent months.
Three people have been killed in accidents on the A66 in the last month within a short distance of yesterday's accident, which happened a mile west of Bowes, near Barnard Castle.
A police spokesman said the man, who has not been identified, suffered leg and abdominal injuries in the collision at about 4.45pm.
The man, who was trapped after the crash at temporary traffic lights, had to be released by the fire brigade.
The spokesman said the man was taken to the Darlington Memorial Hospital, where his condition was not believed to be serious.
No parking:
David Holmes, of Cedar Grove, Shildon, was yesterday given an absolute discharge by Darlington magistrates after admitting parking a vehicle in a no waiting zone in Woodland Road, Darlington.
Theft charges:
Ian Leslie Young, 40, of Walworth Crescent, Darlington, was yesterday committed for trial at Teesside Crown Court by Darlington magistrates.
He faces three charges of theft to the value £3,000, £2,184 and £445 from Skippers of Darlington.
In custody:
Francis Lyster, 34, of no fixed abode, was yesterday remanded in custody until April 13 by Darlington magistrates on two charges of obtaining services by deception, one of obtaining property by deception and one of attempting to obtain services by deception.
He is also charged with theft.
Husband fined:
John Taylor, 31, of Headingley Crescent, Darlington, was yesterday fined a total of £300 and ordered to pay £50 costs after pleading guilty by letter to three charges of making false representation to obtain benefit.
Darlington magistrates were told how Taylor had continued to claim benefit while his wife Sharon was working as a barmaid.
Computer raid:
Burglars have stolen a Sega mega-drive games computer, three computer games and a video tape worth £240 from a house in Kielder Drive, Darlington.
House burgled:
A video recorder, a hi-fi, a computer and equipment worth £1,779 have been stolen in a burglary at a house in West Auckland Road, Darlington.
In Court The following appeared before Thirsk magistrates and were convicted of trespass in daytime in pursuit of game, namely hares: Robert Paul Hanson, 32, of Thomas Street, Shildon, fined £150 plus £40 costs; John Houlahan, 32, of North End Gardens, Bishop Auckland, fined £100 plus £40 costs; Malcolm Dugdale, 29, of Busty Terrace, Shildon, fined £100 plus £40 costs; James Guy, 27, of Morpeth Close, Spennymoor, fined £150 plus £40 costs and Mark Quinn, 21, of Eden Close, Coundon, fined £100 plus £40 costs.
HOME Secretary Kenneth Baker has claimed the Conservatives are ‘the only party of law and order’ and repeated his party's message that Labour is soft on crime.
Speaking in Skelton, in the marginal Langbaurgh constituency, he said the Government had taken tough measures against the scourge of car crime.
Legislation to tackle joyriding drawn up in the wake of last summer's Tyneside riots comes into effect tomorrow.
Offenders will be liable to serve up to five years in prison and could face unlimited fines and driving bans.
‘We want to deter these gangs who think it is fun to put others lives at risk,’ said Mr Baker.
‘People are fed up of the mayhem and death wreaked by young criminals.
‘We have now given the police and the courts powers, it is up to them to use them.’
Mr Baker also claimed the Government had done all it could to make cars safe.
He also pledged further action against ‘bail bandits’ and further investment in a prison building programme.
Mr Baker claimed Labour would give into the criminals.
‘Labour says too many people go to prison at a time when the public believes more people should be put in custody,’ he said.
‘For Labour, it's always society to blame, not the criminal.
Conservatives combat criminals, they don't compromise with them.
Our concern is to protect the innocent, not to mollycoddle the guilty.’
Earlier, while in Newcastle, Mr Baker spoke of the need to catch criminals when they are young.
‘It usually starts with truancy and bunking off then they get into shoplifting and drug taking and on to burglary eventually becoming habitual criminals,’ he said.
As the election campaign entered its third week, the main parties once again sent some of their big names North.
In a whirlwind tour of the region Mr Baker met Tory candidates in Hexham, Wansbeck, Blyth, four from the Newcastle constituencies, Wallsend, Tynemouth, Darlington, Stockton South and Langbaurgh.
Darlington Conservative candidate Michael Fallon said yesterday Labour's policies on crime were soft and would undermine the police.
Mr Fallon said officers he had canvassed wanted to see stiffer sentences for offenders and the return of the death penalty both of which he supported.
Darlington's Labour candidate Alan Milburn said Conservative claims were undermined by the fact that no new police officers were awarded to County Durham when the Government was asked to provide 180.
Labour's shadow defence minister Martin O'Neill also visited Newcastle.
He met management and workers at Swan Hunter's and Vickers, two firms who depend on the defence industry for work.
Mr O'Neill said defence contractors would have to diversify more in future.
In York, European Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan lent his weight to the Tory campaign yesterday to boost party hopes in their most marginal seat.
The former Home Secretary and Richmond MP joined local candidate Conal Gregory in York.
Health minister Virginia Bottomley and Baroness Blatch were due in the North-East today.
A PETROL station owner was attacked by two masked youths outside his home in Darlington last night.
Police said 65-year-old James McQuaker left his house in Wellbeck Avenue at about 9pm to close and lock up the Haughton Road service station before returning home twenty minutes later with cash and credit vouchers.
After getting out of his car he was attacked by the youths, who were in their late teens and wore dark clothing.
They tried to grab the cash from him and knocked him to the ground.
The petrol station owner, who sustained scrapes to his knee and hand in the struggle, held onto the cash and the youths ran off.
One is described as 5ft 8ins tall and the other slightly smaller.
Darlington police are appealing for witnesses.
A MAN who died in police custody in Darlington was yesterday named as 37-year-old John Gannon.
Mr Gannon, of Selby Crescent, Darlington, died in cells at Darlington police station on March 8 after he was arrested for alleged drinking and driving.
Yesterday an inquest into his death was opened by South-West Durham coroner Colin Penna.
The hearing was told that Mr Gannon, a self-employed window cleaner, died of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Home Office pathologist Dr Harichandra Ranasinghe said a post mortem revealed extensive bruising to the body.
Cuts to Mr Gannon's forehead were estimated to have been caused before his arrest.
Dr Ranasinghe said they were consistent with him falling on a hard tarmac surface.
The doctor said: ‘A specimen of blood showed he had drunk the equivalent of nine or ten pints of lager or half a bottle of spirits.’
He was unable to tell Mr Gannon's family how long the infection had been present but he believed the infection had spread through Mr Gannon's blood rather than through any internal rupture.
His father, John William Gannon, said his son had been living with him since he split up with his wife in January.
An investigation into the death is being carried out by the Police Complaints Commission.
Yesterday Det Supt Keith Readman said inquiries were still being conducted and the inquest was adjourned pending further investigations.
A PETROL station owner told last night how he fought off two masked youths who tried to snatch his takings.
The pair jumped on 65-year-old James McQuaker outside his bungalow in Welbeck Avenue, Darlington, on Monday night.
Mr McQuaker said he had just left work at the Haughton Road service station at 9pm as he had done for the last 25 years when the youths pounced.
‘I was determined they were not going to get the money.
There was a considerable amount in the bag,’ said Mr McQuaker, who injured his shoulder in the scuffle with the youths.
‘One kept shouting to the other to get the money, but it was all over in a flash.
They ran towards Whinfield Road.’
His wife Ina, 64, said she heard a scuffle going on outside, but when she got to the door the two youths had already fled.
One youth is described as 5ft 8ins tall and the other slightly smaller.
A CRASH victim had his head held above icy water by rescuers after his car plunged into a marsh.
Firefighters cut the man free as ambulance workers saved him from drowning after the accident in Teesdale.
Leading fireman Derek Jones told how the ‘Jaws of Life’ special cutting equipment were used to rescue the man from his overturned car on the B6278 near Barnard Castle at about 3.30pm yesterday.
The man, who has not been named, was slightly injured and treated at Darlington Memorial Hospital before being discharged last night.
Mr Jones, of the Barnard Castle fire station, said he arrived at the scene of the accident near Windy Hill Quarry to find ambulance staff holding the victim's head above the water.
He said: ‘The car had crashed through a wall and had overturned in a marshy field.
It was lying under about two feet of water.
‘The roof was smashed in and one door was open, but we could not get him out.
We used the Jaws of Life to cut the other door.’
Mr Jones, who was accompanied sub-officer James Gibson, said it took ten minutes to complete the rescue operation.
Fire engines from Darlington and Middleton-in-Teesdale also attended the scene.
HARRIET Harman yesterday staked a claim for Labour as the party for women whose needs she said had been ignored under 13 years of Conservative rule.
Speaking to a Labour party rally in Darlington the shadow health secretary accused the Government of letting women down with inadequate child care, pay discrepancies between the sexes and an all-male Cabinet.
The 300-strong crowd of party supporters warmly applauded her when she argued Labour's policies would give a fair deal to women.
Ms Harman said the gap between men and women's wages is wider in Britain than elsewhere in Europe because of the lack of a minimum wage.
And lack of adequate child care facilities was one of the main reasons why 15,000 nurses leave the NHS every year, taking their experience with them.
‘In the first two years we will establish 6,000 nursery and after school places and offer staff the chance to choose the hours they work,’ she said.
‘Under John Smith's Budget £600m has been earmarked for education.
Part of that money will go into nursery and after school care so we can create an extra 25,000 places.’
Ms Harman also claimed the Conservatives had ‘ruthlessly fiddled the NHS waiting list figures with the same ruthlessness as they fiddled the unemployment figures,’ and had created a two-tier health service.
She told the audience how she had seen a new state-of-the-art ambulance which was only for use by private patients but staffed and paid for by the NHS.
‘We will bring all hospitals that have opted out back into the NHS because we want hospitals that are accountable to local people and provide services that local people want, not run like businesses.’
Also addressing the Dolphin Centre rally was Darlington-born Tom Sawyer, deputy secretary of NUPE, who won a roar from the crowd when he announced new opinion poll findings giving Labour a six point lead.
He accused the Conservatives of attempting to duck responsibility for the recession they had created.
And he condemned the Liberal Democrats for refusing to accept the need for minimum wages.
Ms Harman urged the electorate to draw from their own experiences when they vote.
‘It has become clear that people know there is a very real choice between the Tories who would privatise the National Health Service and starve it of funds and Labour who would invest in it and modernise it,’ she said.
‘The government keeps putting out figures on waiting lists, but people will judge from their own experience.
They know they have had to pay to have their eyes examined.
They know if an elderly relative needs long-term nursing care there is nowhere for them in the NHS any more.’
During a visit to Darlington Memorial Hospital, where she visited the children's ward, Ms Harman said the Government was starving the NHS of resources while building up the private sector.
A consultant paediatrician yesterday joined Labour candidate Alan Milburn to oppose a merger between two district health authorities.
Dr Elizabeth Elliott, who works at Darlington Memorial Hospital, said it was important health services in Darlington and Bishop Auckland remained within their own areas.
Proposals for a buying consortia linking together districts in the Northern Region sparked fears of a merger between Darlington and South-West Durham health authorities.
But the Northern Regional Health Authority has already denied there are any plans for such a link-up.
‘I think the people of Darlington and Bishop Auckland are two separate communities.
They do want their own services.
They have a right to it,’ said Dr Elliott.
‘We're supposed to be a caring society.
Health is part of that caring.
Is it caring for sick children to have to travel miles to Bishop Auckland to be treated,’ she asked.
Labour candidate Alan Milburn said: ‘I think these changes are the thin end of the wedge and we will oppose them.’
Opposition chief whip Derek Foster added: ‘Weardale people travel 40 miles to go to Bishop Auckland General Hospital.
How will they feel if they have to then travel even further to Darlington for services?’
But yesterday Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, said no such merger had been proposed.
‘Mr Milburn is simply spreading fear and alarm and lowering morale in hospitals,’ said Mr Fallon.
POST Office bosses have apologised after Liberal Democrat election leaflets were delivered with a newsletter produced by the British National Party.
Householders in Darlington were shocked to receive a leaflet about forced repatriation of immigrants and quarantining of AIDS victims together with an election address from Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg.
The controversial policies were contained in an election leaflet produced by the BNP for the party's Darlington candidate Dr Donald Clarke.
Dr Clarke, a retired headmaster who once stood as the Liberal candidate for Edinburgh Pentlands, is a prominent member of the far right.
Liberal Democrats say they are appalled the Post Office could deliver its moderate leaflets with BNP documents.
They have called for an immediate apology and say the muddle may have cost crucial votes in the battle for Darlington.
Mr Bergg said: ‘I would hate to think anyone would identify me or my party with the BNP.
Personally I and everyone in the Liberal Democrats, abhor everything they stand for.’
Mr Bergg said he had received a number of complaints from people who received both leaflets, adding: ‘I am sure there are many more who were equally shocked but didn't bother to reply.’
Kevin Harland, the Post Office's acting processing manager, said national guidelines laid down before an election decreed no leaflets would be delivered folded together.
Mr Harland added: ‘Unfortunately in this case a few of our postmen failed to interpret those rules correctly.
These problems have now been rectified and we will be writing to Mr Bergg offering our profound apologies in the near future.’
Both BNP and Liberal Democrat candidates are entitled to have almost 39,000 election leaflets delivered to homes in Darlington free of charge.
A MAN told police that a block of cannabis found in his mother's freezer was his and that he intended to supply it to others, Darlington magistrates heard yesterday.
But Darren Whitehouse faced a charge of possessing the drug rather than a supplying charge because police believed he was lying to protect his mother.
Whitehouse, 21, of Wales Street, admitted possessing a cannabis roach end when he appeared before Teesside Crown Court.
He was given a conditional discharge for 12 months.
Robin Denny, prosecuting, said the police had raided Whitehouse's mother's home twice before.
He said: ‘The defendant's mother was the subject of interest to the police on this occasion as well.
‘The police thought he was lying to protect his mother.’
LABOUR'S Northern Ireland spokesman yesterday saw first hand the cramped conditions in a Darlington Catholic school.
Kevin McMamara toured St Bede's School in Kings Way where he saw 19 youngsters crammed into a tiny room.
‘I think the teachers are doing a marvellous job under enormous difficulties,’ said Mr McNamara.
‘There can't be any excuse for overcrowding when money is available.
‘Facilities should be made available if Catholic parents want to send their children to Catholic schools.
That would go for any other religion.
We believe in parental choice.’
Labour candidate Alan Milburn added: ‘St Bede's is a first class school that is hampered by the lack of resources and lack of government commitment.
‘Labour supports church schools and will ensure that St Bede's and other overcrowded Catholic schools are given additional classroom space.’
Teacher Bride Eglington told how conditions are so cramped for the five and six-year-olds in her class one youngster trapped his hand between chairs when the class was asked to stand up.
‘These are not the conditions infants should have,’ said Mrs Eglington.
Headteacher Terry Anderson said staff had been struggling in the cramped conditions since the school was opened in 1985.
Schools minister Michael Fallon said permission had been given to expand St Bede's from the beginning of the next financial year, which starts today.
He said he was fully aware of the problems at the school, which is one of 700 built throughout the country by the Conservative Government since 1980.
OFFICERS at Darlington Council have been congratulated on their efforts to carry out service quality initiatives agreed last year.
Labour leader of the council John Williams said they had used resources well despite the constraints on local authority spending imposed by central government.
The borough council's new administration agreed 12 new objectives last summer designed to improve the quality of services and ensure they were in line with what residents wanted.
These included setting and monitoring performance standards, reacting to consumer needs, improving staff training so employees could communicate better with the public and developing a simple complaints procedure.
Officers say progress has been made with many of the objectives, and initiatives on surveying public opinion and other upgrading will be researched and developed this year.
Coun Williams said: ‘I am delighted our officers have been so successful in finding the resources to take the initiatives despite being starved of cash by the Government.
‘We are anxious to proceed with performance review it is vitally important that services provided by the council are subject to close scrutiny to ensure they are of sufficient quality and right for the customer.’
But Conservative councillor Tony Richmond said Labour had increased committee spending by twice the rate of inflation in this year's budget by using balances and he disputed the claim Government restrictions were hampering service improvements.
‘If they are not able to improve services at that level of spending they are not using the money efficiently and to the real benefit of the people in the town,’ he said.
Coun Williams retorted: ‘The fact that they are looking around for someone to blame is proof they really don't want to do it.’
g Attack on homes record d PETER Bergg, the Liberal Democrat candidate for Darlington, has attacked the Government's record on homelessness.
Mr Bergg said the number of people expected to apply for emergency housing aid in Darlington this year was 629.
But the Borough Council will only be able to help a couple of hundred and Mr Bergg said: ‘Only the most needy will find somewhere to live.’
The Liberal Democrats plan to kick-start the house building programme by increasing the Government borrowing.
‘That will make things easier and should help people in Darlington find somewhere decent to live,’ said Mr Bergg.
DARLINGTON:
Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat candidates will answer questions from the public at St Cuthberts Church Centre at 8pm on Sunday.
Homelessness, overseas aid, prison overcrowding, electoral reform and the maintenance of peace are all on the agenda.
Tickets are available from Rev John Pilkington on Darlington .
SEDGEFIELD:
Liberal Democrats say their polls are showing strong support for candidate Garry Huntington.
Spokesman Ben Ord said doorstep canvassing had registered strong support for the Liberal Democrats.
Mr Huntington, a member of Sedgefield District Council, is attempting to overturn the 13,058 majority of Labour's Tony Blair.
CRITICS of proposed supermarket on the outskirts of Darlington last night rallied to renew their opposition to the scheme.
The public meeting was held to discuss proposals from Safeway to build a £15m superstore at Blands Corner.
The company's application was refused by Darlington Borough Council and is due to go to appeal in May.
But last night 60 opponents again argued that the store would be an eyesore on an attractive route into Darlington and would increase traffic in the area.
Conservative councillor Heather Scott, who organised the meeting with fellow Park West Tory councillor Charles Smith, said people had expressed strong opposition to the scheme.
‘This is not just a ward issue, people are worried about it across the town.
‘The residents are all going to oppose this, and a lot of them are planning to go along on the day of the appeal,’ she said.
Coun Scott said a better site for a supermarket would be the one under consideration by Sainsbury's and currently occupied by Caldaire in the town centre.
Conservative Parliamentary candidate Michael Fallon also condemned the proposals, describing them as ‘very damaging.’
‘The store would increase traffic along Carmel Road, destroy the important rural Tees conservation area and take business away from the town centre,’ he told the meeting at All Saints' Church Hall in Ravensdale Road.
‘If Safeway succeed they could completely undermine the new Cornmill shopping centre due to open this August.
‘A supermarket at Blands Corner will change the character of the West End for good.’
Driving charge:
Steven Welsh, 21, of Newholme Crescent, Evenwood, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with careless driving and driving without proper insurance.
He was bailed until May 18.
Abusive man:
Anthony Masters, 26, of Eastmount Road, Darlington, was fined £50 yesterday after he admitted causing harassment, alarm or distress to people living in the Wimbledon Close area of the town.
Masters said he was angry because vandals had smashed his door.
Poll tax payers face final bill
THE majority of Darlington's poll tax payers receive their last bills this morning.
Darlington Borough Council staff have sent out more than 70,000 bills which are expected to arrive today and tomorrow.
The bill is just over £300 and is the last poll tax bill which will have to be paid, no matter who wins the General Election.
Man fined:
Anthony Paul Masters, 26, of East Mount Road, Darlington, was ordered to pay £50 after he admitted causing harassment, alarm or distress to people living in the Wimbledon Close area of the town.
Burglary haul:
Burglars have stolen a Panasonic microwave, a Commodore computer, two televisions, two video recorders, a Pioneer hi-fi, a Kenwood CD player, a carriage clock, Lladro figure and two Chinese plates worth £1,180 from a house in Burnside Road, Darlington.
House raided:
A graphic equaliser, a CD player, an integrated amplifier and a cassette tape deck, all made by Kenwood and worth £800, have been stolen from a house in Victoria Embankment, Darlington.
A 26-inch Matsui colour television worth £500 was also taken.
PETER FOSTER, Duty officer at Teesside International Airport in Darlington.
My job as duty officer involves keeping Teesside Airport running smoothly at all times.
Throughout the day and night, we have to be ready to accept all kinds of aircraft.
The duty officer has to be on hand, not only to greet the pilots and passengers, but to make sure the plane gets refuelled and baggage is taken off into the airport.
I also have to make sure when the passengers come into the airport terminal they are entering a clean, well-presented environment.
Most importantly, the airport has to keep the runways open at all time.
Whether it's snowing or blocked by another plane, we have to be able to accept planes again as soon as possible.
In any one day, we can usually expect around 200 aircraft movements at the airport.
An aircraft movement involves a landing and a take-off.
We've also got our non-stop London shuttle, which runs from 6.45am until 10pm and is well used by people from the area.
As well as the regular chartered and cargo flights to various foreign and domestic airports, we also take a number of executive fights during the day.
For example, Sir John Hall, The Cowie Group and ICI all run executive planes from the airport.
Also based at the airport are Northern Electric, who use two helicopters to check electricity lines, and the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, who oversee the British fishing areas.
The airport is also one of the main bases which holds chemicals to deal with large oil spillages in Scotland and the North.
Oil workers who live in the area use Teesside to get to the Middle East via London and the North Sea rigs via Aberdeen.
Teesside also manages to support two flying clubs based at the complex.
They are very popular with oil workers who return during their holidays and are looking for something to spend all their money on.
We also get a number of aircraft and airlines who like to practice on our runway.
Our airfield was used by the military during World War Two and aircraft from RAF Leeming still pay us a visit occasionally.
The Leeming airfield can get busy at times, so anything up to a dozen Tornados a day can visit us for refuelling.
We're also used as a ‘motorway cafe’ by light planes, usually from France, who fly to Scotland, stopping at Southend and Teesside for re-fuelling.
While they're waiting they have something to eat.
During the night we also get a number of organ transplant flights coming in, so it is vital that the airport remains open all the time.
In the 27 years I have worked at the airport, sixteen of those in the fire service, I have seen a huge increase in the number of flights.
We are securing more travel destinations each year, with more airlines using the airport.
In my spare time, I'm chairman of Hurworth Parish Council, and I'm also on Darlington Borough Council.
CALLS for action following a serious accident may mean the introduction of speed restrictions on a County Durham road.
Durham County Council has announced it will investigate the feasibility of a 40mph or 50mph limit on the A167 through Ferryhill after residents organised a petition in favour of measures.
A woman was seriously hurt in a car accident there last month and the issue was taken up by Sedgefield's Labour parliamentary candidate Tony Blair.
Previous requests have been turned down as the Transport Department felt the road did not meet criteria for imposing speed restrictions.
Mr Blair welcomed the investigation and claimed action to curb speed was essential.
He said: ‘The change of mind on the part of the council is good news for the residents of Ferryhill.
‘The county council are taking seriously their request for a speed restriction on a stretch of road which has proven dangerous in the past and will continue to be so if action is not taken.’
A county council spokesman said speed checks would be carried out but a final decision on imposing a speed limit was with the Department of Transport.
She said pedestrian refuges had helped to cut the number of accidents at the southern end of Ferryhill near the Darlington road junction which as seen several fatal incidents.
‘We will have to hold discussions with the transport department but investigations are getting under way,’ she added.
LABOUR candidate Alan Milburn yesterday presented residents in a Darlington street with a cheque for £7,619.44 which he claims they will save if his party is elected.
Labour plans to replace the poll tax, which now costs the 81 Major Street residents a total £24,319.44, exclusive of any rebates, for the financial year which started on Wednesday.
Yesterday Mr Milburn said under Labour's proposed Fair Rates the cost would be £334 per household a total of £16,700 for the street's 50 houses.
He said each household would be £114 better off under Labour.
‘The poll tax has been a disaster for Darlington,’ said Mr Milburn.
But Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, said: ‘The people of Major Street will pay less under Major.’
He said houses like those in Major Street would pay £310 per household because they will be on the bottom band.
A NEW hospice support group is appealing for volunteers.
The Richmondshire support group for Darlington and District Hospice Movement needs people to help with home care and support, hospice care and support and fund-raising.
The hospice movement started six years ago to help terminally ill people.
It covers Richmondshire and Teesdale, as well as the Darlington area.
The support group wants to take part in a sitting service to give carers a break.
Various voluntary tasks need to be undertaken, including fund raising for the conversion of Harewood House, Darlington, into a day hospice.
Drivers are needed to transport people to the centre and volunteers are wanted to staff it.
More information is available from Mary Lovell on Richmond .
LABOUR RHETORIC:
The Labour Party like to indulge in political rhetoric concerning training and enterprise.
I am writing as Chairman of Darlington Business Venture and Darlington Enterprise Association Ltd to ensure people are not taken in.
Over the last few years, thousands of people have received a variety of training through the Business Venture, which is made up of senior local businessmen and two council officials one Conservative and one Labour.
Since joining the Board some years ago, the Labour representative has attended only one Board Meeting and rarely apologises.
Clearly our valuable training input to the local area has not featured as a priority on the local Labour Party agenda.
We have, however, received considerable support and encouragement from Michael Fallon, who visits us regularly and takes up issues on our behalf with Government Ministers, seemingly with considerable success following the recent announcement with regard to European Grant Aid.
I would be surprised if our Labour candidate even knew where the Business Venture could be found.
After the election I am sure any enthusiasm he shows for this issue will disappear as quickly as he will.
David W. France,.
COINCIDENCE?:
Can it be all together coincidence those names, places and events that made the headlines during the First World War have done so again in recent years?
Who would have thought today Sarajevo, where the first shot of that war was fired, would be in the news?
Or in 1982 the Navy would fight the Falklands, the very spot where in 1914 it won a spectacular victory and uncannily on both occasions the flagship was called Invincible.
The year 1917 saw the Russian Revolution and they have just had another one.
In the same year the battleship Vanguard blew up in Scapa Flow.
This name has lately been given to a Trident submarine.
But the interesting bit here for the Tories was that in 1916 a Welshman became Prime Minister.
J. Conlon, 39 St John's Gardens, Sunnybrow, Willington.
Shock decision
YESTERDAY'S piece on Ashok Kumar (Labour, Langbaurgh) is a reminder that the Diary isn't alone in dealing in bad puns.
Local party officials tell us that in last November's by-election they pushed hard for the campaign slogan ‘Ashok to the Tories.’
It was overruled from London on the grounds later justified that victory wouldn't be a shock in the least.
Policy statement A
CALL yesterday from Peter Freitag, the Lib Dem man in Easington and previously almost everywhere else.
‘If the Liberals are the third party,’ he asks, ‘who is fire and theft?’
DUBIOUS goings-on marred an otherwise textbook election campaign at a Darlington School yesterday.
As tension at the count at Hummersknott School mounted, a worried gaggle of counters informed the Returning Officer the number of ballot papers did not tally with the number who had cast votes.
‘There seems to have been some personation going on here.
I hope none of the candidates mind,’ said teacher Dot Long, who in her role as a Darlington councillor has probably encountered many different forms of political intrigue.
Personation was one word for it, although cheating seemed more appropriate.
The finger of suspicion pointed to supporters of Owen Unsworth and Ben Shotton of the McWeirdo and Young Church Organist parties respectively.
Despite a community policeman guarding the head teacher's office, where the votes were cast, some still managed to get round twice.
Messrs Shotton and Unsworth didn't turn up for the count.
A shame since their combined votes would have toppled the eventual winner, Conservative Simon Watson.
His was a campaign to warm the heart of the town's Tory candidate Michael Fallon.
Simon, 16, comes from Laurel Street, Darlington, where Vote Labour Alan Milburn posters are almost de rigeur.
‘Because of Tory party policy I'm able to come to Hummersknott rather than be forced to go to my local school,’ he said.
His manifesto aimed at issues his voters would identify with.
The introduction of a public payphone in school, a crackdown on crime with tougher litter collection sentences for wrong-doers and a minimum wage for tuck shop workers.
Fighting the rearguard action with Ms Hynd were Juliet Baker, 16, for Labour and Dougald Hine, 14, for the Lib Dems.
Dougald said his was the only party firmly committed to improving schools throughout Britain.
‘I'll be disappointed if I get less than 30 votes,’ said Dougald.
He breathed a sigh or relief when Mrs Long announced he had polled 31.
Labour got 123 of the 869 votes cast.
Ms Baker had not expected to win.
‘I think quite a few people will vote the same as their parents and this is Hummersknott,’ she said.
Many of the younger voters will probably still be sticking loyally to the Ninja Mutant Turtles.
CHURCH leaders have withdrawn an invitation for the British National Party's candidate to take part in a debate with his political rivals.
Dr Donald Clarke, the BNP's candidate for Darlington, was originally set to take part in the debate which takes place at St Cuthbert's Church on Sunday.
But he has received a letter withdrawing the invite to take part in the discussion, which will feature Tory Michael Fallon, Labour's Alan Milburn and Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg.
Although church leaders refuse to discuss their decision a letter sent to Dr Clarke from organiser Rev John Pilkington says: ‘It is within the discretion of the churches to decide who should be invited to take part.
‘Having read your manifesto I feel bound to add that your racist policies, your opposition to aid for third world countries, and your proposals for the quarantining of those carry the AIDS virus are deeply repugnant to the Christian consciousness.’
Dr Clarke's three main political rivals have also signed a statement condemning the BNP.
The statement adds: ‘Racism and anti-semitism severely affects the quality of life of those who endure it and we therefore wish to support the right for all members of our community to conduct their affairs in Darlington free from the risk of verbal or physical attack.’
Kevin Scott, Dr Clarke's agent, said: ‘Just what are these people afraid of?
All we want to do is go along and put forward our policies to discuss them in a well-mannered reasoned way.
‘But it seems as though we have been barred by left-wingers yet again.
We are a political party with a bona fide candidate and have a right to speak.’
POLICE are looking for an antiques dealer who mysteriously vanished from his Barnard Castle home last month.
Chief Insp Malcolm Fordy confirmed that Alan Jackson, of The Bank, had been accused of a firearms offence, but police had been unable to serve a summons on him.
Mr Jackson, a well-established trader, left without trace.
James Bradshaw, of Abbey Road, Darlington, has accused Mr Jackson of failing to honour his debt after a cheque for £1,600 bounced.
Yesterday, Chief Insp Fordy said Mr Jackson was accused of not having a firearms certificate for a shotgun and a rifle.
The case before Barnard Castle magistrates has been adjourned until May 6.
If anyone has any information about the whereabouts of Mr Jackson they are asked to contact Teesdale .
A FOREIGN medical company has drawn up plans for a private hospital development in Darlington, it was revealed last night.
The continental company, which is not named, is negotiating with Darlington Borough Council through a local construction company which would build the hospital at Lingfield Way, on the Yarm Road industrial estate.
A letter to the council from Bowhill Construction, of Middleton St George, claims the hospital would employ at least 80 people and could be open by September, 1993.
The developers hope it will link with the existing Magnetic Imaging Centre, which already operates a sophisticated body scanner.
The proposals follow a decision by a Government inspector to prevent private health company Bioplan from building a clinic in the grounds of Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The latest developer claims to have carried out extensive research into the feasibility of providing medical treatment in Darlington.
It promises a state of the art hospital which would serve the local community and draw patients from around Britain and abroad.
Specialised surgical facilities at the hospital would include:
A bodyscanner.
a 30 to 35-bed hospital with two operating theatres.
full X-ray facilities.
a health centre for GP services.
physiotherapy and hydrotherapy unit.
The director of Bowhill Construction has written to Darlington council's chief planning officer, Stephen Tapper, giving details of the scheme.
He says the developer estimates 80 jobs being created, with more employers being attracted to Darlington because of the standard of healthcare available.
Last night, the town hall's planning department confirmed the letter has been received merely asking for advice.
No formal planning application has yet been made.
Neither Mr Tapper nor anyone from Bowhill were available last night.
Council leader, Coun John Williams (Lab), when told of the plans by The Northern Echo said: ‘I will need to find out much more about this before we can decide we can support it or not.’
He said he would seek a meeting with senior planning officers to establish if anything more is known about the company behind the proposal.
The letter outlining plans for the clinic stresses that it would be carefully screened and would not create dangerous traffic levels in the area.
Depot burglary:
Intruders broke into British Fuel's Romanby Road depot at Northallerton and stole the keys to four lorries and £25 cash.
Garden thieves:
Police in the Wear Valley are looking for thieves who have struck in a number of gardens and stolen ornamental garden furniture.
House raided:
Burglars have stolen electrical equipment and jewellery worth £1,500 from a house in Cedar Road, Darlington.
Video taken:
A Granada video recorder worth £250, a £100 radio cassette player, 30 CDs worth £360, two suitcases worth £100 and £5 worth of beer have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Orchard Road, Darlington.
TV stolen:
A television, video recorder and remote controls worth £700 have been stolen from a house in Anfield Court, Darlington.
Bankers cards and £27 in cash were also taken.
Stone me:
Two stone urns worth £500 have been stolen from a house in Coniscliffe Road, Darlington.
Break in:
Burglars have stolen electrical equipment and jewellery worth £1,500 from a house in Cedar Road, Darlington.
Video theft:
A Grenada video recorder worth £250, a £100 radio cassette player, 30 CDs worth £360, two suitcases worth £100 and £5 worth of beer have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Orchard Road, Darlington.
Jewellery was also taken in the raid.
Car hit:
Pioneer CD player and ten CDs worth £700 have been stolen from a vehicle parked in Blackwell, Darlington.
CD target:
Thieves have stolen a Goodman CD player, 40 CDs and a camera in a burglary at a house in Claremont Road, Darlington.
Diesel site:
Darlington council yesterday agreed to demolish sheds at the motive diesel works east of Melland Street and landscape the site as part of the Railside Revival scheme.
MICHAEL Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, has repeated his warning of job losses at Rothmans despite claims of caremongering.
He believes Labour's commitment to banning tobacco advertising and sponsorship could lead to a reduction of Rothmans employees in the North.
‘Multi-nationals like Rothmans do not have to stay in the North-East.
Any family with somebody working at Rothmans should think very carefully before voting in Darlington.
Jobs are at stake.’
Alan Milburn said: ‘Rothmans’ workers are sick of hearing Mr Fallon's old scare stories.
They know that most of the cigarettes produced in Darlington go for export outside Europe and will not be affected by any advertising bans.’
A letter condemning ‘scaremongering’ has been signed by 122 Rothmans workers and sent to Mr Fallon.
NO VOTE:
I find myself effectively disenfranchised by the Post Office.
As I have to be in London for the entire week of the General Election, I applied to Darlington Town Hall for a postal vote.
My application form went off to the town hall first class, posted in Darlington on the morning of Friday March 20.
Ample time, so I thought, to beat the deadline for applications of noon on Monday March 23.
Not so.
The Post Office managed to take until 11.30am on Tuesday March 24 to deliver it.
A very nice lady at the town hall explained that there's no appeal and consequently I have no vote.
It appears that John Major's classless society now extends to the Post Office.
Sue Campbell,.
A PIG farmer took his animals out of a quarantine zone designed to contain a highly contagious disease, a court heard yesterday.
The Government last year declared parts of North Yorkshire infected zones after an outbreak of blue ear disease which threatened the industry.
The virus preyed on sows and piglets, in particular killing the young stock and causing pregnant animals to abort.
But despite being inside an infected zone, Montgomery Taylor twice took his pigs to Darlington auction mart.
Assistant county trading standards officer Ed Chicken yesterday told Bedale magistrates that animal health inspectors spotted Taylor's animals being weighed at the mart.
Checks revealed they were from the infected zone.
On the second occasion an inspector recognised his van and refused to let him unload the stock.
Mr Chicken said: ‘It is a relatively new disease and very contagious.
It increases the mortality of pigs and causes an awful lot of problems for anyone in the pig industry.’
He said anyone in the infected zone was severely restricted on the movement of pigs regardless of whether their animals had the disease.
They could only leave the zone if they were going directly to the slaughter house.
Taylor, 47, of Potlands, Leeming Bar, failed to attend court and was convicted in his absence of two charges of moving pigs out of the declared area.
Bedale magistrates fined him a total of £200 with £127 costs.
Mr Chicken said that during interview Taylor claimed that mart officials had told him it would be all right to bring the pigs in.
He said he had not been told it would be an offence and had not received any advice or information on the disease.
MORE than 50 teenagers from County Durham will take up a sporting challenge from France next week.
Youngsters from Tanfield Comprehensive in Stanley, Eastbourne School in Darlington, Sunnydale Comprehensive in Shildon and Seaham Comprehensive will compete at swimming, athletics, basketball and soccer.
They will be staying with families in Amiens during their four-day visit which follows a challenge from the president of the Department of the Somme, one of the county's twinned areas.
As well as the sporting events the County Durham pupils will take part in a programme of activities, including a visit to a water theme park and a disco party.
INDUSTRY Secretary Peter Lilley was challenged yesterday to apologise to the people of Hartlepool.
Labour candidate Peter Mandelson urged him to admit that it was his party's policies which had created mass unemployment in the town.
‘The government's high interest rate policy, strongly promoted by Mr Lilley, crippled businesses in Hartlepool and caused mortgage misery for thousands of townspeople.
‘Mr Lilley is an arch-Thatcherite who personally designed many of the Tories’ most extreme policies,’claimed Mr Mandelson.
He added: ‘He vehemently opposes active regional policies, he has wound up a lot of the government's aid to the North and during his term as Industry Secretary he has done nothing to create new technology and skills or back new firms and enterprise in Hartlepool.’
But Mr Lilley dismissed Mr Mandelson's comments as he toured the head office of local house builders Yuills.
‘In this constituency unemployment is 27 per cent below what it was in 1987.
We believe we have the policies in place to ensure we maintain that progress in the future.
‘We have helped to create a new training culture in this country but that can only be done by businesses focusing on that in partnership with the government.’
Mr Lilley said the message he had received from local businessmen was that the economic recovery was well underway.
He added: ‘It is clear the North-East is well set to lead the country out of recession and the UK, I believe, will be one of the countries that leads the world out of the recession.’
Hartlepool's Conservative candidate Graham Robb said: ‘I am proud to show Yuills.
It is the cutting edge of Hartlepool's economy increasing profits, turnover, employees and training.
This company is the way forward for Hartlepool.’
Mr Lilley expressed concern about Britain losing in any Euro recycling plan when he visited Visqueen, Stockton.
The company, which makes polythene bags and which also has a recycling programme, believes a plan by Germany will not help the rest of the EC or the environment at large.
John Sale, external relations director responsible for environmental issues, said that the targets set by Germany needed a rethink.
After touring the factory Mr Lilley said talks were going on with his department, the EC and industries and he admitted that the EC should have a common policy on the issue.
Mother of all battles
MICHAEL Fallon today expects two ministerial big guns to join the fight for marginal Darlington and another two on Monday.
His most formidable (and we mean formidable) ally hit town last night, however his mum.
‘It's now a tradition that she comes for the last week of the campaign,’ he says.
‘She's the supergun.’
Hard to swallow
NEVER mind Proportional Representation, this is the election where PR means Public Relations.
Yesterday's post carried opinion poll results on behalf of car salesmen (‘car fleet bosses predict a hung Parliament’), an indigestion tablet (37pc say Neil Kinnock most likely to spoil their meal, 16pc say Major) and Thornton's the sweetie shop folk.
Thornton's sold jelly heads of Major, Kinnock, Ashdown and Sutch.
In the North-East Kinnock sold 34pc, Major 33, Ashdown 23 and the Loony ten.
Nationally Major was 1pc ahead.
Altogether they sold over 170,000 jelly politicians.
Just to bite their heads off.
Hersh money
IN Tory headquarters at Stockton South they're going nuts over the Hershey bar America's favourite chocolate, apparently.
‘One of our researchers is American and he brought some over and it's simply fantastic,’ says Party worker John Reece.
‘We'll buy up anyone who has any.’
A VIDEO dealer was yesterday found guilty of supplying counterfeit films throughout England.
Timothy Albert Sturdy, 29, had denied supplying counterfeit copies of popular titles like Nuns On The Run, Dark Angel and AWOL to corner shops.
He did not deny that inspectors from the Federation Against Copyright Theft (FACT) found counterfeit tapes in shops supplied by his company, Classic Video, of Victoria Road, Darlington.
Sturdy, who lives in Stanhope Road, Darlington, said: ‘I do not know whether I supplied them.
I certainly did not know they were counterfeits.’
Earlier, Darlington magistrates listened to evidence from a former employee of Sturdy who contacted The Northern Echo with new information half way through the trial.
Dale Weller, of Whitcliffe Grange, Richmond, said Sturdy had explained to him how to spot counterfeit video tapes.
David Singleton, prosecuting for FACT, said Sturdy had worked in the video business long enough to learn about counterfeits.
He said: ‘Your business was in desperate financial straits so you bought cheap counterfeit tapes to stave off the evil day.’
In April last year the company went out of business and Sturdy was declared bankrupt.
Yesterday he was fined £500 for supplying a film which was not for distribution and ordered to pay overall costs of £1,000.
He was given six concurrent three-month jail sentences, suspended for a year, for supplying counterfeit tapes.
He was found not guilty of supplying a copy of an unclassified and uncut version of the sexually explicit film Caligula.
Sturdy may appeal against the conviction.
DARLINGTON police have warned gardeners not to leave tools out at night in case they are used for crime.
PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington Police community liaison department, said in the last week thieves have stolen a spade, ladders, fork, lawnmower and mountain cycle from a car port in Westbrook Villas, Darlington.
Those with garden sheds are urged to check their security and consult a DIY expert if necessary.
Tools have been stolen from sheds in Dundee Street, West Auckland Road, Clifton Road and Kensington Gardens.
Thieves stole alloy wheels from vehicles in Redmire Close, Alwyn Road and Loraine Crescent.
‘My advice would be to have locking wheel nuts fitted.
They are fairly inexpensive when you compare the cost with that of replacing a set of alloy wheels,’ said PC Fishwick.
There were 48 thefts from vehicles in the last week, including a sports bag and clothing from a car in West Powlett Street, a wallet, portable telephone, pens and cards from a vehicle at Blackwell Scar, and power tools and attachments from a car in Green Street.
Two stolen radio cassette players have the serial numbers 90048172 and 196060.
There were 38 burglaries, as well as several attempts, in Darlington.
Thieves struck at Northgate, where they took a video recorder, a pearl necklace, cash and a gold ring, and at Bowman Street, where a hi-fi, television, video recorder, microwave, telephone and clock radio were taken.
Other burglaries took place in Lewes Road, Hirst Grove, Burnside Road and Victoria Embankment.
There were 18 thefts of vehicles, from places such as Coniscliffe Road, Walkworth Way, Estoril Road South and Wolsingham Terrace.
Eight thefts of cycles have taken place with a £500 mountain cycle stolen from Barnard Street, two cycles worth £400 from Hewitson Road and a Shogun Trailblazer worth £400 from Polam Road, for example.
Other items stolen throughout the town include three parrots worth £500 from Cockerton Aquatics, an aluminium greenhouse from Auckland Oval and a Flymo grasscutter and spades with the serial number 8845/2 from Shearwater Avenue.
Outstanding vehicles are 
A PIG farmer took his animals out of a quarantine zone de signed to contain a highly contagious disease, a court heard yesterday.
The Government last year declared parts of North Yorkshire infected zones after an outbreak of blue ear disease which threatened the industry.
The virus preyed on sows and piglets, in particular, causing pregnant animals to abort and killing the young stock.
But, despite being inside an infected zone, Montgomery Taylor twice took his pigs to Darlington Auction Mart.
Assistant county trading standards officer Ed Chicken yesterday told Bedale magistrates that animal health inspectors spotted Taylor's animals being weighed at the mart.
Checks revealed they were from the infected zone.
On the second occasion an inspector recognised his van and re fused to let him unload the stock.
Mr Chicken said: ‘It is a relatively new disease and very contagious.
It increases the mortality of pigs and causes an awful lot of problems for anyone in the pig industry.’
He said anyone in the infected zone was severely restricted on the movement of pigs regardless of whether their animals had the disease.
They could only leave the zone if they were going directly to the slaughter house.
Taylor, 47, of Potlands, Leeming Bar, failed to attend court and was convicted in his absence of two charges of moving pigs out of the declared area.
Magistrates fined him a total of £200 with £127 costs.
Mr Chicken said that during interview Taylor claimed that mart officials had told him it would be all right to bring the pigs in.
He said he had not been told it would be an offence and had not received any advice or information on the disease.
ELECTION candidates in Darlington will tonight air their views on local, national and international Green issues.
At a meeting chaired by Peter Sands, editor of The Northern Echo, Michael Fallon, Alan Milburn and Peter Bergg will face questions from environmental groups and charities in the town.
The meeting at the Dolphin Centre has been organised by Darlington Environmental Watch Group and campaign organiser Maggie Bosenquet said local topics would include whether Darlington should have a Green Belt, the crosstown route and other Green priorities.
‘Members of several environmental groups, including Darlington Wildlife Trust, Oxfam and our own group have put things forward,’ she said.
‘Anyone who is concerned that environmental issues are not getting sufficient hearing in the campaign and wants to know where the main candidates stand is welcome to attend.’
Unknown haul:
A Panasonic AG 450 camcorder and two red cash boxes have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Gladstone Street, Darlington.
The value of the haul is not yet known.
Dig deep:
A red £10,000 Chieftain mini excavator with 12G printed on the side has been stolen from a compound in Haughton Road, Darlington.
A grey fourwheel trailer worth £200 was also taken.
On your bike:
A green gents Raleigh Lizard cycle worth £250 and a red Trappeur mountain cycle worth £155 have been stolen from garages in Shearwater Avenue, Darlington.
The thefts were discovered yesterday morning.
Sales rep punched nightclub barmaid
A SALES representative who punched a young barmaid in a Harrogate nightclub wept yesterday as a judge threatened him with prison.
Terry Hodges struck Trisha Campbell in the face for no reason after drinking 12 pints of beer, York Crown Court heard.
Hodges, 32, of Oakdale Glen, Harrogate, admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm and was ordered to complete 200 hours community service and to pay £200 compensation to Miss Campbell.
Recorder Louis Lawton told him: ‘You ought to be bitterly ashamed of yourself.
Your stupid behaviour would normally result in me sending you to prison but I feel I can take a different course.’
Roadshow visits:
The Dalesmade Roadshow visits the King's Head Hotel, Richmond, tomorrow to explain the Dalesmade scheme to local businesses.
The roadshow will be open from 12noon-4.30pm and includes a presentation at 2.30pm by Peter Goulden, director of the Dales Enterprise Agency, and Lynne Ridgway, director of the Watershed Mill.
Church repairs:
Richmondshire District Council development services committee has agreed to give £1,700 towards the £13,046 cost of repairs to St Oswald's Church, a Grade 2 listed building in Thornton Steward, near Leyburn.
Appeals refused:
Appeals against the refusal of planning permission and listed building consent to convert unused buildings into three holiday units at Brownberry Blades, near Gunnerside, Swaledale, have been dismissed.
Civic service:
Civic leaders from all parts of North Yorkshire including the High Sheriff, Sir Richard Storey, will be attending the county council's civic service at Melsonby, near Richmond, tomorrow.
Found dead:
Retired farm worker Ronald Stamphas been found dead at his home at Tom Cat Lane, Birdsall, near Malton.
Police broke in after neighbours had not seen him for several days.
It is believed Mr Stamp died from natural causes.
Fish poisoned:
Vandals have poisoned a tank of 20 ornamental fish at David Perkins' dental surgery at North Marine Road, Scarborough.
Mr Perkins said they had walked into the surgery and poured bleach into the tank.
Dogs die:
Two dogs perished in a fire at a caravan at Amtree Park, Filey.
The caravan, owned by a workman on the site, was gutted.
Car stolen:
A VW Golf GTi worth nearly £14,000 has been stolen from North Street, Scalby.
Hall repairs:
Urgent repair work is being carried out at Pickering's 19th century memorial hall after heavy rain brought down part of the ceiling.
Bottle study:
Eight pupils from East Whitby School have thrown bottles into the sea from the West Pier as part of a scientific study on prevailing currents off the Whitby coastline.
Arts festival:
Artists and performers from all parts of Britain will be taking part in the Moorland Arts and Sacred festival at Grosmont in the Esk Valley near Whitby next month.
The festival opens on May 10 and runs until the end of the month.
Cars collide:
A driver was slightly hurt after two cars collided near Ripon.
The accident happened on the road to Kirkby Malzeard just outside the city.
Garden party:
Thirsk Lions are hoping to raise £5,400 at a garden party at Thirsk Hall on May 17 for a blood matching machine for Northallerton's Friarage Hospital.
Hedge heist:
Green-fingered thieves lifted 1,000 seedlings from a hedgerow in Stokesley.
The 2ft 6in trees had just been planted along Thirsk Road when raiders struck.
They were worth £250.
Today
HARROGATE:
Gibson Craft Fair, Parliament Room, Royal Baths Assembly Rooms, Crescent Rd, 9.30am-5pm.
Quilt Exhibition, Mercer Art Gallery, Swan Road, Harrogate, Tues-Sat 10am-5pm, Sun 2–5pm.
Until 21st April.
Final night of Carousel presented by Ripon Amateur Operatic Society, Harrogate Theatre, 2.30pm, 7.30pm.
Tickets, tel .
RIPON:
Harrogate Choral Society, Cathedral, 7.30pm.
Details, tel .
A woman's place
A REFLECTION of the region's kitchen sink past, perhaps, the 42 North-East seats muster just 17 women candidates between the lot of them.
Labour and the Lib-Dems field five apiece, Conservatives four, and the Greens and Natural Law party (in York) one.
Nationally the Liberals have 143 women, Labour 138 and the Conservatives a distaff side of just 63.
Maidstone's the place to be for the first time ever, all four candidates are female.
Banks note
SARAH Banks is the first woman candidate ever to fight Durham City.
Less surprisingly, she is also the first Green.
Since this is an equal opportunities column, we must also report (on Diary Day 17) that this is the first time we've mentioned the Durham constituency.
Brought up in White Horse country near Thirsk, Sarah Banks is a 36-year-old adult education tutor in Durham.
We caught up with her on Thursday evening at a ‘Democracy Day’ debate, an articulate platform shared by two of the three other candidates and chaired, admirably, by the Rev Ben de la Mare who's a descendant of Walter's.
Nigel Martin, the LibDem, lectures in maths; Martin Woodroofe, Tory, is a former chairman of the Young Conservatives.
Young Mr Woodroofe, you read it here first, will eventually go a very long way indeed.
Unfortunately Gerry Steinberg, the defending Labour candidate, was unable to attend.
Organisers were told he was ‘a very busy man.’
Mr Steinberg had also been a very busy man when the other candidates debated the health service but, as a former headmaster, had found time to attend the education debate.
Dr Banks was splendid.
The Party wanted ‘root and branch’ electoral reform, she said as well a Green might and (among many other things) more power for parish councils.
Afterwards we had a couple of gills in the Half Moon.
Success, she said, would be saving her £500 deposit, raised among her supporters.
‘Really we just want people to take notice.’
Left standing
MAYBE the region's first certainly the best known women's activist was Joan Maynard, born in Thirsk and, aged 71, happily returned to her roots.
Left wing Labour MP for Sheffield Brightside from 1974–87, she had been a senior officer in the agricultural workers union and was chair for eight years of the Campaign Group of Labour Mps.
Now she's on Sowerby parish council.
‘I enjoy it greatly,’ says Miss Maynard.
‘You can often do more good at grass roots level than as a Backbench opposition MP.’
So how far has the campaign for women's equality advanced in her long struggle?
‘Not so fast as I'd like,’ she says.
‘Change has been very, very slow.
Men are in a very privileged position.
If you have a privilege you don't easily give it up.’
Blair necessities
SINCE this is Ladies' Day on the Diary, here's a limerick from Arlene Willetts now in Silksworth but until recently one of Tony Blair's flock.
An erudite MP named Blair Sported gleaming white teeth and thick hair The perfect example An NHS ‘sample’?
So privatisation beware!
Though deluged with entries who says people don't read about the election? we welcome more before next Thursday to Election Diary, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Unisex prizes.
Congratulations: Mrs Dalton at the winning post, 1929
A Dalton double take THE North-East's first women MP was Ruth Dalton, elected in Bishop Auckland in 1929 but only to keep the seat warm for her old feller.
Described on the ballot paper as ‘Mrs Hugh Dalton’, she became the ninth female in the Commons.
More than 60 emancipated years later the regiment of women MPs had advanced to a mere 43 in the last Parliament.
Dr Hugh Dalton, MP for Peckham and later to become Attlee's first Chancellor, had already been chosen to succeed Ben Spoor said to be an alcoholic in the Co Durham constituency.
When Spoor died somewhat inconveniently months before the 1929 general election Hugh Dalton decided against an early train from Peckham.
Enter his wife, and Oswald Moseley still a Labour man who laid into the Tory government before 1,500 people in Shildon Hippodrome.
Mrs Hugh Dalton doubled the Labour majority to 7,072, remarking at the declaration on the ‘ever deepening distress’ of the South Durham people.
Charlton Curry, the second placed Liberal, said that Conservatism had ‘departed once and for all’ from Co Durham and (with a nod to Mr Fallon and one or two of his predecessors) was just about right.
The Daltons became the second husband and wife team in the Commons, but three months later he came North to bag the seat for himself.
Perhaps Dr Dalton considered it his conjugal right.
HEALTH Minister Stephen Dorrell, on a campaigning visit to the town, claimed Darlington had progressed under the Tories.
But the local Labour party yesterday paraded a cardboard cutout of chancellor Norman Lamont to illustrate what they called the Tories'’ hidden costs’.
Mr Dorrell, visiting Darlington Memorial Hospital, claimed during the 1980s the number of patients treated in the town rose by an average of 5pc a year.
‘The Conservative government is committed to ensuring the NHS should be a good employer,’ he said.
‘Where Labour cut nurses’ pay by 3pc and doctors' pay by 17pc, the Conservatives have increased pay levels of nurses by 50pc and doctors by 46pc in real terms.
Darlington's Conservative candidate Michael Fallon said Labour's commitments to reverse the Government's NHS reforms would damage patient care in Darlington and the Memorial Hospital stood to lose £249,000 with the abolition of competitive tendering.
But Labour Parliamentary hopeful Alan Milburn said the NHS had to be improved and the Conservatives could never deliver that.
‘If they can't get the NHS right after 13 years they never will,’ he said.
‘All Mr Fallon's splutterings will not make up for those people who are on record waiting lists in Darlington.
Earlier, Labour used the cut-out of Chancellor Lamont to hit out at the introduction of charges for eye and dental checks, increased bills from privatised companies, the cost of administrating the Poll Tax and VAT.
They also slammed increases in prescription charges and said under a Labour Government eight out of ten Darlington families would be better off.
But Mr Dorrell said the majority of people could afford to pay for eye checks and those on low incomes received assistance.
He said the Government believed NHS resources should be used to enhance patient care and the number of eye tests being done was higher than before the charges were introduced.
AN ARSENAL of guns and live ammunition was found in the home of a man being evicted, a court heard yesterday.
Two men had gone to Anthony Bland's home in Vine Street, Darlington, to execute a warrant for eviction and when they searched the house they discovered sub-machine guns, a pump action shotgun and pistols.
They also found uniforms and a case of German daggers.
Yesterday Bland, 35, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted possessing a prohibited weapon and two offences of possessing a firearm without a certificate.
The case was adjourned until Monday for the condition of a submachine gun to be checked to see if it was capable of being fired.
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, said many of the guns were modified in order to disable them but not sufficiently in the view of scientists who examined them.
She said Robert Fisk and Raymond Parkin had gone to the house with the eviction warrant and gained access with the help of a joiner.
They then searched the house to find out whether Bland, of Prior Dene, Darlington, was inside.
They discovered the guns in the two bedrooms of the house.
Miss Sherwin said: ‘In the front bedroom they found a quantity of uniforms, two empty gun cases and a bag full of ammunition.
‘The second bedroom was secured by a lock to the top of the door and the joiner was required to remove that to gain entry.
‘Inside was a locked metal cabinet and leaning against one of them was a pump action shot gun.’
They also discovered the display case of German daggers, a heavy machine gun on a tripod with a belt of ammunition attached, two smaller machine guns and a Russian submachine gun.
John Aitken, defending, said he would be trying to persuade the court not to confiscate some of the weapons which were not on the charge.
He said: ‘They are valuable to others and Mr Bland is in great financial straits.’
A TEENAGER has been locked up for burgling the home of a mother-to-be.
Christopher Appleton, 18, of Highmoor Road, Darlington, admitted burglary and asked for two offences to be considered.
Judge David Bryant sentenced him to nine months in a young offenders' institution.
Christine Foster's home was broken into while she was in hospital, Teesside Crown Court was told.
Thieves made off with a cot mattress, pram and potty she had bought for the baby.
John Aitken, prosecuting, said two youths, one of them Appleton, were seen going in and out of Mrs Foster's home by neighbours in the early hours.
A NEW brochure aimed at boosting Darlington's tourist trade was launched in Birmingham this week.
The booklet Essentials for the Travel Trade was unveiled at the British Travel Trade Fair.
Council officers say it is targeted at tour operators and coach companies, giving details of top attractions, accommodation, transport facilities and interpreters.
There are also sections on entertainment, events and ideas for themed short breaks.
Darlington Borough Council spent six months preparing the brochure which Coun David Lyonette, development and planning applications subcommittee chairman, hopes will increase the number of visitors by 25pc over the next 18 months.
He said: ‘We think we've got a great potential that we haven't tapped in the past.
We're close to North Yorkshire, North-West Durham and the Cleveland Hills, and we think we can exploit the fact that Darlington can be the base to various avenues of interest in the North.’
The council has produced two other brochures in the past, on bed-and-breakfast accommodation and restaurants.
MOTORCYCLIST Douglas Audaer died in an accident on the Yarm Industrial Estate in Darlington yesterday.
Mr Audaer, 38, of St Luke's Court, Franklin Square, Kings Road, Harrogate, was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital but was certified dead on arrival.
His Yamaha RD 350cc motorcycle was in collision with a Volvo heavy goods vehicle, owned by Tuffnels Parcels Express of Shepcourt, Sheffield.
Police have issued an appeal for witnesses to the accident, which happened at 11.55am at the junction of Allington Way and Lingfield Way.
A TERRIFIED youngster was chased and run down by teenagers on a motorcycle as he played with friends in a park.
Keith Lodge, nine, suffered cuts and bruises to his leg after his ordeal in Darlington's Eastbourne park.
Last night police appealed for help to catch the hit-and-run riders.
Keith, who lives on The Fairway, was playing with a friend when they heard the motorcycle coming towards them.
The youngster said: ‘I turned around and it was coming straight for me.
Two teenage boys were riding on a scrambler without any crash helmets.’
The boys leapt out of the motorbike's path but the rider simply turned around and charged on.
‘I just couldn't get out of the way in time and the bike clipped my leg.
I feel down and thought they were going to come back again to finish me off.’
The boy's father, Gavin Lodge, said: If I could get hold of these idiots they wouldn't sit down for a week.’
A spokesman at Darlington police station said: This was a despicable act and someone could have easily been hurt or even killed.
We would appeal to anyone who thinks they might know these bikers to come forward.’
Anyone with information can contact Darlington police on .
A LABOUR candidate said yesterday her membership of CND does not contradict the party's current policy.
Marjorie Mowlam, Labour candidate for Redcar, has admitted she is still a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
She was asked to make her position clear by Robert Goodwill, fighting the seat for the Conservatives.
Mr Goodwill said Dr Mowlam's election leaflet in 1987 said Labour would rid Britain of nuclear weapons.
Dr Mowlam Redcar MP since 1987 said in her written reply: ‘I am still a member of CND and I still want the country rid of nuclear weapons.
‘The principle has not changed however, the real world has changed.’
She quoted the Labour policy to reduce the world's stocks of nuclear weapons in partnership with other countries.
Her letter adds: ‘Until elimination of those stocks is achieved, Labour will retain Britain's nuclear capability, with the number of warheads no greater than the present total.’
‘I see no contradiction between my CND membership and our current policy.’
Meanwhile, Armed Forces minister Archie Hamilton, on a visit to the North-East, claimed yesterday that North-East companies could win orders worth millions from the Government's defence procurement policy.
In Darlington, Mr Hamilton insisted Government plans would result in a leaner, fitter and better equipped service.
Defence, he said, was only safe in Tory hands.
Although the Tories plan to reduce manpower by an average of 20pc across the three services they remain committed to several important new orders.
And North-East companies could benefit from the buying bonanza, according to Mr Hamilton.
Darlington company Darchem has provided special insulation for Britain's nuclear submarine fleet and Cleveland Bridge built a ship lift at the Faslane naval dockyard.
A Conservative government would press ahead with plans for a fourth Trident submarine and a helicopter carrier.
Wallsend-based shipbuilder Swan Hunter is bidding for the carrier contract which will be one of the Royal Navy's biggest surface ships since the war.
Mr Hamilton also reaffirmed the Government's commitment to the Challenger II main battletank, built by Newcastle-based company, Vickers, and gave an assurance over the future of Otterburn camp, in Northumberland.
Ministers believe reduced commitments in Europe and Hong Kong will allow them to axe 14 battalions.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon, who toured the town with Mr Hamilton, said North-East companies had prospered as a result of defence contracts.
He added: ‘We also have a proud tradition of recruiting for the armed forces.
It would be a terrible shame to see that go to waste.’
Away from the defence debate Dr Mowlam also yesterday spoke of her despair at the growing homeless problem in her constituency.
Dr Mowlam, whose office is in the heart of Redcar's bedsitland, said home-buyers were being dragged down into the morass.
She claimed mortgage repossessions had added to the homeless spiral and contributed to a 40pc increase in Langbaurgh borough in the last 12 months.
This compares with a national rise of four per cent.
‘Those who have had their homes repossessed expect to be able to get a council house easily,’ she added.
‘They have never been in that position before some of them are classic cases of Thatcher's children.
Dr Mowlam said one woman was so desperate to get a house that she and her children lay on a bed in a furniture shop below her Redcar office.
‘The shop-owner rang me and said she wouldn't move until I had found her a house,’ she explained.
ANGRY scenes erupted at a meeting in Darlington last night as the British National Party tried to gatecrash an environmental debate.
BNP candidate Dr Donald Clarke turned up at the Dolphin Centre to join the town's three other candidates in a meeting organised by Darlington Environmental Watch.
But he was booed and heckled out of the room by angry protestors who said he had no place in the debate.
Dr Clarke and his two supporters were asked to leave the room by DEW member Maggie Bosanquet and others.
Before he left Dr Clarke protested that he was an official candidate and should be allowed to speak.
‘Under the rules of democracy I would have expected to be allowed to speak,’ he said.
‘I have made very clear my anti-Fascist convictions.
But I can sense that my departure will be most welcome.’
He said he had environmental credentials as he was a life member of the British Butterfly Conservation Society and was also a member of the Kent branch of the Council for the Preservation of Rural England.
But Mrs Bosanquet said Dr Clarke was not an invited guest.
‘We are in regular contact with the other three candidates on environmental issues,’ she said.
‘But I have never had any approach from Dr Clarke.
I asked him about his party's environmental charter but he seemed to have no answer.’
Eventually, the debate, chaired by Peter Sands, editor of The Northern Echo, continued in front of a 200-strong audience with candidates Michael Fallon, who is defending Darlington for the Tories, Labour's Alan Milburn and Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg.
Issues ranged from the Cross Town Route in Darlington to worldwide energy conservation.
All candidates said they were concerned that Darlington should preserve its green belt.
And that out of town developments like the proposed superstore at Blands Corner should be restricted.
They were also all concerned about traffic congestion in the town and said the Cross Town Route should take traffic out of the town centre and not generate more.
Mr Fallon said the Conservatives aimed to reduce the emission of gases and would set up an environment agency.
Each Government department would also have its own member with special responsibility for the environment.
As Schools Minister he said he wanted to ensure that children learnt about green issues in schools.
Mr Milburn said the Labour party would create the post of an Environment Minister.
They were keen to combat acid rain, freeze carbon dioxide emissions and improve public transport.
He was concerned that Britain was becoming the dustbin of Europe and wanted to see stricter controls on the dumping of toxic waste.
Mr Bergg said the Liberal Democrates would discourage the use of cars as much as possible.
People would be charged for using highly congested roads and cleanliness and efficiency requirements would be introduced in MOTS.
All candidates said they were against testing on animals for cosmetic purposes.
On a somewhat more controversial issue, Mr Milburn and Mr Bergg said they would support a ban on fox hunting.
But Mr Fallon said he would not support it as foxes needed to be controlled.
New bid to boost bloom chances
COUNCIL officers in Darlington hope a new environmental award scheme will improve the town's chances in the Britain in Bloom competition.
A local contest is set to be introduced covering pubs, restaurants, hotels, shops and offices, schools, individual gardens and allotments, in a bid to boost the limited participation of the last few years.
Officers say while the awards scheme will be ambitious, they hope to attract sponsorship to help fund trophies, certificates and a presentation night.
House blaze: Fire crews were called out to tackle a blaze at a house in The Greenway, Middleton St George yesterday.
The front room was severely damaged and no one was injured in the incident.
Hospice appeal:
The Richmondshire support group for Darlington and District Hospice Movement needs people to help with home care and support, hospice care and support and fund raising.
More information from Mary Lovell on Richmond .
Talent night:
Route 66 in Darlington is arranging a Stars in Their Eyes Talent Night.
Top prize is a day at a recording studio.
Details are available from Mike Evers on Darlington .
Thieves strike:
Two video recorders, a television set, cash and jewellery were stolen from a house on Cleveland Terrace, Darlington, on Thursday afternoon.
Missing clothes:
Thieves who broke into a car parked on Skinnergate in Darlington on Thursday night stole clothes worth more than £200 and a radio-cassette player valued at £130.
Research cash:
Route 66 in Darlington has made £150 for multiple sclerosis research with a raffle drawn at a special soul promotions night.
Tickets are now on sale for another raffle with a first prize of more than £60 worth of CDs.
Radio talks:
The next meeting of Darlington Community Radio takes place in the Dolphin Centre, Darlington, on April 15 at 7.45pm.
Video haul:
A Panasonic AG 450 camcorder and two red cash boxes have been stolen in a burglary at a house in Gladstone Street, Darlington.
Compound raid:
A red £10,000 Chieftain mini excavator with 12G printed on the side has been stolen from a compound in Haughton Road, Darlington.
A grey four-wheel trailer worth £200 was also taken.
Bikes taken:
A green gents Raleigh Lizard cycle worth £250 and a red Trappeur mountain cycle worth £155 have been stolen from garages in Shearwater Avenue, Darlington.
Meaty amount:
Butcher John Allison, of Ferryhill, raised £700 in a horse-racing evening at the Wild Boar in Metal Bridge in aid of Muscular Dystrophy of Great Britain.
Mr Allison lost his son Martin to the condition.
Euro challenge:
Youngsters from Tanfield Comprehensive in Stanley, Eastbourne school in Darlington, Sunnydale Comprehensive in Shildon and Seaham Comprehensive travel to France next week to take on their French counterparts at swimming, athletics, basketball and soccer.
Charity cash:
Darlington Meningitis Support Group's charity night at the East End Club raised £1,397.
The total raised since August 1991 now stands at £3,502.
Volunteer call:
Darlington Dial a Ride has appealed for volunteers to help the elderly with door to door transport.
The organisation needs escorts and drivers and can be reached on .
All aboard the merry-go-round
IF ON April 9 Neil Kinnock is returned as PM it will not be quite the disaster that other Socialist governments of the past have proved to be.
Facing the Tories in what is a most boring and infantile election campaign is an emasculated and barely recognisable Labour party.
Almost all principles and the corner stone of socialism ie: nationalisation, have been thrown overboard in the scramble to be elected.
Mr Major and his cabinet are in disarray and have evidently run out of ideas and of steam.
Labour supporters must be in despair at not being able to race away from the Tories in the run up to the election.
What we have is the mediocre trying to replace the ordinary.
But if Labour do win they will make the usual hash of things and then the whole merry-go-round will begin again.
A.E.
Eaton,.
Decisive vote
AT LAST the electors have an opportunity to put in power a government that will look after the needy instead of the greedy.
We are now being told by this arrogant and incompetent lot that having given us record unemployment, bankruptcies, house repossession, liquidations, factory closures etc, that they are the only ones fit to govern when surely that record should make them hang their heads in shame.
They are now indulging in distortion and scaremongering, but they are unable to hide the record of the last 13 years that has caused so much misery to so many people.
The Liberal Democrats are promising what they would do, but people should not be fooled into voting for them.
The only way to remove this Government is to give a decisive vote for the Labour Party to ensure they form the next government and undo as soon as possible the damage caused in the past years.
E. Smith,.
World slump:
Mr Kinnock and Mr Smith insist that the Government alone caused the recession.
Should we believe them?
A female Canadian relative of mine says they are suffering in the same way.
Businesses are closing and making people redundant.
Will she believe the British Government caused the recession?
Jean Bramhald,.
SISTERS:
Labour and Conservative are the Two Ugly Sisters.
The Liberal Democrats might be Cinderella, but they are not responsible for the 40 years of failure of the Two Ugly Sisters.
Which Ugly Sister are you voting for?
Or perhaps this time Cinderella will go to the ball.
Go on, give her the chance.
Joe Corrie, 45 Barnes Road, Darlington.
EDUCATION COSTS:
It is difficult nay, impossible to understand the rationale of Tory objections to Liberal Democrat proposals to add one penny on income tax, to improve education for every child.
The richest man in Britain, the Duke of Westminster, has opted for State education for his son.
I know, and I can prove it, that teachers are spending their own money to buy essential aids to learning.
In one case, over £10 last week, plus many hours of unpaid time, in preparing projects.
Many Conservatives enter into schemes, as soon as their children are born, to provide for the cost of future private schooling.
Why then do they think it is so bad for parents and only those who can afford it paying a little extra to ensure their children get a well-funded education?
The Tories are all for investment.
The Liberal Democrats happen to believe that investing in our children's future will provide the highest dividends of all; and the better quality of life which a good education brings.
Horace Wilson,.
PENSION PLIGHT:
From April 9 those who receive the basic pension will get an extra £110/£120 for the year 1992/3.
Outgoings will vary but in my own case I already know that for gas, water and the poll tax I shall need an extra £132.
The dilemma is where does the money come from for the other essential things, especially food.
When one hears of the hardships which could be caused to the high salaried, then surely in this country which claims to be Christian, we face not a political problem, but a moral one.
Should we not ask whether it is right for people with high salaries to give up some of their income to give to pensioners the means to live with dignity?
In 1981 my weekly pension was £31.53.
In April 1992 it will be £57.69, an average over 11 years of less than £2.40 per week per year.
In less than one year certain people have received an increase more than has come to me in 11 years.
Percy Fox,.
RED HERRING:
The red herring of who did what to whom on the NHS has dominated the media when important issues like devolution, the reform of the House of Lords and our contribution (political and monetary) to the EC are ignored.
Let me make it clear, I believe in the Union of Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland as the only sensible and acceptable way of being a member of the European Community.
Fragmentation would reduce our influence to virtual nonexistence.
And I also believe that an elected Second Chamber to replace the Lords would feature people of much lesser ability and stature, who would be unable to speak their minds freely because they would be beholden to the same electorate as the Commons.
Margaret Bland, Burn Brae, Barton, Richmond.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Liberal Democrat Candidate Suzanne Fletcher has received a good luck card from Essex, from a direct descendant of the area's Liberal MP between 1918 and 1920.
SWEEPING changes to Darlington's town centre came into force at the end of last month.
The council's decision to ban traffic from Skinnergate and High Row between 10.30am and 4pm, Mondays to Saturdays, is aimed at making shopping safer and more enjoyable.
But it has upset some shopkeepers whose deliveries have been disrupted, and disabled drivers who say they can't get into town.
Labour believes that its original plans for the scheme were a vote-winner at last year's council elections.
Darlington council Leader Coun John Williams has called it ‘the first step in sorting out Darlington town centre.
We want to go on and sort out the bus chaos, the market square and look at pedestrianising other areas’.
Tory councillors think the present plans are unworkable and would pedestrianise Northgate instead.
The former chairman of the transport committee, Coun Peter Jones, has warned that traffic in Darlington will ‘lock up’ under the new system.
Pat Thoirs, a newspaper seller from Minors Crescent, Darlington.
It's nice to be able to walk across the road but I find that people are complaining because they're not able to park.
Disabled people are finding it very difficult.
People coming from outside town don't know what's going on so they're just getting booked.
It's also taking me an hour longer to sell the papers.
Caroline Bailey, a student from Kensington Gardens, Darlington.
It's a good idea, but why block it off for certain limited hours?
With the distress and disturbance it's going to cause, they might as well close it off altogether.
Raymond Horn, a pensioner from Salutation Road, Darlington.
As I understand it, disabled people were using the Friends Meeting House for their meetings, but with the pedestrianisation they can't very well get their vehicles along during the day.
Apart from that, if you're able to get about then clearly it's helpful if there's no traffic.
Dorothy Longstaff from Strawgate Lane, Stapleton, visiting Darlington with her husband.
We think it's going to make Darlington a ghost town.
We find it's simpler to go to Stockton and get parked.
There's no hassle at all.
Mary Lowther, a fruiterer who runs a shop in Skinnergate.
We've been really quiet since it started.
I don't know if it's pedestrianisation or the bad weather.
It could be a bit of both.
We've had no trouble with deliveries because my husband brings the stuff in at five o'clock in the morning.
Bob Cowper of Dickinson Street, Darlington, secretary of the Darlington Taxi Owners Association.
It's long overdue because that area of the town has been far too congested.
The thing that I object to is that many old people and the disabled relied on taxis to get them into that area, and I would say that Hackney Carriage vehicles should be allowed in.
POLICE in County Durham are stepping up the fight against crime after a wide ranging shake-up in senior personnel.
Senior officers have targeted car thefts and house burglaries as the two biggest problem areas and a new team has been put in place to spearhead the campaign.
Supt Tom Whitton, currently deputy divisional commander for the North Division, has been promoted to Chief Superintendent.
He replaces Bill Hills, who has retired, in charge of uniform operations at police headquarters in Durham.
Supt Alan Saddler, currently sub-divisional commander for Darlington, moves to headquarters to become force careers development officer.
His place will be taken by Supt Ken Lavery, who moves from Sedgefield to his old patch at Darlington.
In Newton Aycliffe, Insp Clive Brooker becomes a Chief Inspector and moves from the force training department.
Chief Insp Paul West becomes superintendent in charge of the Sedgefield sub division while Supt John Tyrrell moves from Newton Aycliffe to be deputy divisional commander for the north.
Road statements corrected
WITH reference to the traffic scheme on Skerne Park Estate, I refer to the letter of R. Howe (HAS March 24).
My letter (HAS March 17) sought to correct the misleading statements made by the residents of Lakeside to The Northern (March 5 and 6).
Mr Howe states that Ms Robinson was correct in saying that Loraine Crescent was once a full crescent without access to Hammond Drive, but had failed to mention that Lakeside was a cul-de-sac also without access to Hammond Drive.
One fails to see what relevance this has to the present issue at hand which is to deal with the present-day traffic using the estate.
After his meeting with the residents of Lakeside, I spoke to Michael Fallon MP, in the presence of Bethany Megan Robinson and Mr Howe.
He told me that he could understand the objections to the scheme by the residents, due to the fact that the width of the road was four feet less than the width of the road in Loraine Crescent.
I informed Mr Fallon that this was incorrect.
The actual difference in width of the two roads is approximately six inches.
I am aware that residents have complained on several occasions about the parking of cars in Lakeside, particularly on the west side of the road, which Mr Howe has pointed out is common land.
The implementation of the scheme would solve this.
I still cannot understand how the residents maintain that the proposed scheme will cause an increase in danger to people using the area.
G.J.
O'Neill, Loraine Crescent, Darlington.
NHS debate
AT a public election meeting held in St Luke's Church Hall, Ferryhill, on Sunday, March 29, I asked the following of the three candidates.
The debate on the National Health Service has brought to the forefront very different values with each of the two major parties seeking to capture the high moral ground.
Seeking to translate this question of morality to local issues, I asked the question, did the candidates agree that it was morally wrong and perhaps a misuse of public funds for local councillors to claim that there was no money available to install gas central heating in the homes of elderly disabled people when they always found money for hospitality allowances and trips abroad for themselves.
District councillor S. Carmedy immediately sprang to his feet and proclaimed that what I had said was untrue.
As Coun Carmedy has now stated in front of a large number of people that what I said was untrue, I offer him this challenge.
Are you prepared to debate this one issue with me in public?
Telephone or write to me.
I am ready at any time, any place to take part in such a debate.
B. Gibson, Putting People First,.
Office moan
LABOUR leader Coun John Williams says (HAS March 30) Darlington council is prepared to accept a small loss of under-used parking space at Russell Street to secure ‘employment opportunities.’
What opportunities?
There are numerous offices to let and for sale already within Darlington do we really need another one?
Significantly, your photograph alongside Coun Williams' letter, illustrates this point more eloquently than words.
Darlington is poorly served for car parking.
More spaces are needed at less cost not another white elephant office block.
Audrey Oxley, 4 Milbank Road, Darlington.
AN ambulance chief has defended the record of his service after claims that an ambulance took more than half an hour to answer an emergency call in Teesdale.
Ken Threlfall, general manager of the County Durham ambulance service, responding to concerns voiced by Teesdale district councillor Phil Hughes, said response times in the dale bettered the national requirement.
Coun Hughes said an ambulance had taken about 36 minutes to arrive in Barnard Castle after a man collapsed with chest pains outside his office on Thursday the man was treated by a doctor before the ambulance arrived.
Mr Threlfall said that according to the service's records the response time to the incident had been 24 minutes.
He added that the delay was the unfortunate result of three emergency calls arriving within an hour.
An ambulance had to travel 15 miles from Darlington to attend the man because the two units based in Barnard Castle had to take patients to Darlington Memorial Hospital, he said.
Mr Threlfall said: ‘There is a physical limit to what we can do; this was one of those unfortunate occasions.’
He said between December 1 last year and March 3 this year the Barnard Castle and Middleton-in-Teesdale ambulance stations had attended 145 jobs, of which only three exceeded the national response time requirement of 19 minutes.
Of those calls, 16 were to road traffic accidents and of that 16 the longest response time was 18 minutes.
The average was four to eight minutes, which ‘wasn't bad considering the area covered’, he said.
Mr Threlfall added that the service was not complacent and was always trying to improve.
MICHAEL Fallon, the Tory candidate for Darlington, met one of the town's newest voters at his campaign headquarters yesterday.
Jonquil Gilbert, who lives in Wharfdale Close, Darlington, will be 18 years old on polling day, Thursday, April 9.
And yesterday she told Mr Fallon: ‘You can depend on my vote.’
Mr Fallon met Jonquil and other young voters including youngsters who took part in a mock-election at Hummersknot School at his Grange Road headquarters.
LABOUR'S transport spokesman John Prescott could step in over British Rail's plans to sell off a Darlington sports ground.
Mr Prescott has pledged to review the move in the early days of a Labour government if his party wins the General Election.
His promise came after Labour's Darlington candidate Alan Milburn met representatives of the town's Railway Athletic sports club.
BR has threatened to sell off the valuable ground, in Brinkburn Road, to ease a burgeoning cash crisis.
But during a meeting with RA players at Darlington's Dolphin Centre yesterday, Mr Milburn said the policy would be immediately reviewed.
He said: ‘It's our plan to allow British Rail to use private investment to ease its financial problems.
That means the BR property board will not be forced to sell off its assets.’
‘We will ask BR to reconsider its sell-off plans.
The RA club is an asset to Darlington, providing topclass leisure facilities for thousands of local people.’
Mr Milburn plans to hold further meetings with club officials to explore other ways of preserving the ground's future.
He added: ‘Darlington has lost seven sports grounds over the last 13 years.
It's vital we start protecting open space so that the town's sporting talent can thrive.’
A PAIR of quick thinking ambulancemen had to park by the side of a busy road and deliver a baby.
Mark Pollitt and Phil Baxter delivered little Simone Turner in the back of their ambulance.
They sprang into action when mum Angela Turner said she would not make it to Bishop Auckland hospital in time.
Mark, 26, is a former Army medic who was called up to man a field hospital during the Gulf War.
Mark, who lives in Reid Street, Darlington, needed all his military training to keep cool during the tricky operation.
He said: ‘The only other time I had to deliver a baby was during my time in the Army.
Mind you, I didn't have time for a refresher course, we just had to get on with it.
‘Luckily everything was pretty straightforward, both mother and baby were perfectly all right.’
Angela and Simone were allowed home to Kirkstone Place, Newton Aycliffe, last week.
But before they left hospital, Angela made sure she sent a thank you card to the dynamic duo.
Simone's gran, Gwen Turner, said: ‘If it hadn't been for the prompt action of these two ambulancemen I don't know what would have happened.
We owe both them a big debt of gratitude.’
Motorcyclist killed in crash with lorry
MOTORCYCLIST Douglas Audaer, from Harrogate, has died in an accident in Darlington.
Mr Audaer, 38, of St Luke's Court, Franklin Square, Kings Road, Harrogate, was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital where he was certified dead on Friday.
His Yamaha RD 350cc motorcycle was in collision with a Volvo goods vehicle, owned by Tuffnels Parcels Express of Shepcourt, Sheffield.
Lorry driver Kenneth Scott, 31, of Tudor Walk, Kingston Park, Newcastle, suffered whiplash injuries in the accident.
He was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital and released after treatment.
Police have issued an appeal for witnesses to the accident, which happened at 11.55am at the junction of Allington Way and Lingfield Way.
Jobs threat:
Five teachers at York's Lowfield School could face redundancy unless the opted-out school can balance its books.
It says it faces problems because it receives money for average rather than actual salaries.
Prints sale:
Prints showing life backstage during last year's York Theatre Royal pantomime are to be sold to raise money for its restoration appeal.
Artist Margaret Clarkson will sign prints at the theatre next week.
Deaf aid:
A new resource centre for people with hearing problems has opened at Bootham House, Bootham, York.
It will be open on Thursday from 10am-4pm and aims to break down the family, work and leisure isolation problems of people with hearing difficulties.
Road crash:
Motorist Alan Rowbotham of Blakey Close, Redcar and lorry driver Ian Sleightholme of Captain Cook's Close, Staithes, both escaped unhurt when their vehicles collided at Pond Hill on the Scarborough to Whitby road.
Mr Rowbotham's Ford Escort car was extensively damaged.
Takeaway plans:
A Vietnamese couple who had to leave their country and fled to the North Yorkshire market town of Kirkbymoorside 14 years ago, are returning to it to open a Chinese takeaway.
Cong Poc and his wife Hin lived in Kirkbymoorside with their three children after being forced to flee Vietnam when it was at war with China 14 years ago.
They ran a restaurant at Barnard Castle until recently.
Grant aid:
Two historic sites in Whitby are to get grant aid from Scarborough Council.
A £10,000 grant has been given towards the restoration of the Donkey Road alongside the town's famous 199 Church Stairs, and £6,000 to protect archaeological remains on the plain alongside the Abbey.
Shops open:
New shops set to open in Scarborough's £30m Brunswick Pavilion shopping mall by Mothercare, Microbite Computers and outfitters Maze, will take the number of new jobs created in the centre to more than 200.
Fares hike:
The cost of travelling by bus in North Yorkshire go up this month.
The rise, the first for a year by United, is 4pc in line with inflation.
Land chief:
David Brewster has been appointed head of land management for the North York Moors National Park.
The 41-year-old comes from the Broads Authority in Norfolk and replaces Bob Cartwright.
Bagged it:
An anti-litter campaign has won praise from the Tidy Britain Group.
The North York Moors National Parks campaign Bag It, in which eyecatching biodegradable bags were made available for rubbish, was said to be an imaginative solution to the litter problem.
A PROPOSED new speed limit on a major tourist route as it approaches a town was yesterday welcomed by a district councillor.
Wear Valley councillor Betty Harker said she was ‘very pleased’ that the council was offering no objections to a Durham County Council plan to impose a ‘buffer’40 mph speed limit along a stretch of Darlington Road, south of West Auckland.
Coun Harker said: ‘I think anything to reduce the speed limit coming into West Auckland is bound to be a good idea.
‘The cars come down the bank there very quickly.
It is a very fast road and people do not realise how fast they are going.’
The new restricted zone would run between the UK Corrugated site and Glenton Hall Farm on the A68.
It will mean traffic will have to slow down much earlier to keep within the 30mph limit in the town.
The plan by Durham County Council highways authority is likely to be agreed this week by Wear Valley District Council.
Coun Mrs Harker said: ‘I would very much like to see more speed limits on all the roads coming into West Auckland.
‘I think that's what most people in West Auckland want.’
Council considers home grants boost
GRANTS to tenants who need to redecorate after major repairs are set to be boosted by Wear Valley District Council.
The council's policy and finance subcommittee meets on Wednesday to consider a 10pc increase the firs t review for three years.
The rise would mean tenants in one bedroomed flats or bungalows getting £120 and those in a two bedroomed flat or bungalow £150.
Occupants in two, three, four and five-bedroomed houses would receive £235, £265 and £295 respectively.
Food poisoning:
Two cases of food poisoning caused by campylobacter organisms were notified in the Wear Valley during February, a report to district councillors revealed.
Crime fight:
A steady stream of visitors attended the second Crime Prevention Day organised by Sedgefield Village Crime Prevention Panel in conjunction with the police in Sedgefield Parish Hall on Saturday.
The exhibition included various crime prevention systems both for the home and the car and details of neighbourhood watch.
Mein host:
A German schoolboy who plans to improve his English in Darlington this summer is looking for a host family.
Dennis Brauer, 15, from Darlington's twin town of Mulheim, would like to spend three weeks with a family who have a teenage son.
Details are available from town twinning officer Michelle Le-Neveu on Darlington .
BLIZZARD conditions and torrential rainstorms wreaked havoc on the North-East yesterday.
Arctic weather blasted through the region, leaving behind it snow drifts several feet deep and severe flooding — the worst for 20 years.
Electricity supplies were disrupted and scores of cars slithered off the roads.
Such a shocking change in weather condition came as a rude awakening to people who thought the North-East had escaped the clutches of winter for another year.
And last night the Met Office flashed a weather warning across the region saying a hard frost could make things even worse this morning.
A spokesman said: ‘We had a substantial fall of snow which has been compacted by cars.
If that freezes it will be like a skating rink.’
Further scattered wintry showers are expected today but no further substantial snow fall is forecast.
Durham County Council used several tonnes of grit — and its new snow-blower — in a bid to keep main roads open.
Despite their efforts several villages, including Alston, Langdon Beck in Teesdale and St John's Chapel in Weardale were cut off by the blizzards.
More than 18,000 consumers were left without electricity when snow brought down live cables.
Conditions were so bad that emergency crews were told it was too dangerous to try and restore power before daybreak.
Worst affected areas were parts of Bishop Auckland, Stanley, and other villages in Weardale.
A Northern Electric spokesman urged people not to approach downed lines: ‘Although they are designed to fail safe people must not get to close.
In some conditions they might still be live.’
Ordinary power cables carry around 11,000 volts.
The normal mains supply of 240v is more than sufficient to kill a man.
Travellers faced delays caused by the appalling conditions.
British Rail said work to clear a landslide on the Newcastle-Sunderland line was hampered by driving rain.
Most commuters managed to get through but line speeds were reduced to single figures.
Inter-City's new 225 express trains were slowed to a crawl on the East Coast main line when a river burst its banks.
Travellers were up to half-an-hour late.
Flights were not disrupted by the bad visibility.
Rain caused a landslide, resulting in the A1 bypass at Newcastle being closed for 12 hours.
Two people were taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital following an accident on the Barnard Castle to MIddleton-in-Teesdale road.
Firemen had to cut one of the victims free from the wreckage.
Police reported a number of minor incidents but no further serious accidents.
Breakdown organisations were working flat out to cope with stranded motorists.
The AA had to call in extra patrols from North Yorkshire and Cumbria to cope with the demand in County Durham.
Car parks were flooded and shops threatened as the River Ouse, in York, began to rise.
A spokesman for the National Rivers Authority said the city could face further problems if the snow on higher ground begins to melt quickly.
The NRA said Weardale had been saved from immediate flooding because rain turned to snow.
Snowblower proves a no-goer in the Teesdale drifts
A snow plough costing £170,000 made a disastrous debut when it became stuck in fivefoot drifts in Teesdale on Thursday.
Durham county council's state-of-the-art snowblower, which was developed in Switzerland, slipped off the B6277 road above Middleton-in-Teesdale.
County workers travelled in less technological gritters, snow ploughs and snow buckets and spent two hours dragging the expensive machine back on to the road.
It had slipped off the road, despite the manufacturer's claims that it can clear 20ft drifts and 2,500 tonnes of snow an hour.
Mr John Morgan, the driver, said the machine had sheared its mounting bolts but the problems were teething troubles.
A spokesman for the county council said: ‘Before that unfortunate incident it had been working very successfully for several hours.
‘Once repairs were completed things were back to normal again.’
Despite the county council efforts, several towns and villages, including Tow Law, Alston, Langdon Beck in Teesdale and St John's Chapel in Weardale, were cut off by the blizzards.
More than 18,000 people were left without electricity when snow brought down live cables in parts of Weardale, Bishop Auckland and Stanley.
Two people were taken to Darlington Memorial hospital following an accident on the Middleton-in-Teesdale to Barnard Castle road.
Firemen had to cut one of the victims free from the wreckage.
AMBULANCE QUERY AFTER DELAY
The level of ambulance coverage in Teesdale has been questioned after a 7-hour delay following the collapse of an elderly man.
Coun. Phil Hughes, manager of Teesdale Citizen's Advice Bureau in Galgate, Barnard Castle, waited 36 minutes after his emergency call when a man collapsed with chest pains outside the office.
He was treated by a local doctor before the ambulance, which had travelled from Darlington, arrived.
Coun. Hughes said he called the emergency services and nearby health centre at 2pm on Wednesday, and further requests were made at 2.10pm and 2.15pm.
The ambulance arrived at 2.36pm, by which time it was not needed.
A spokesman for the ambulance service said 95pc of all emergency calls in rural areas were responded to within 19 minutes, the government guideline, and that this ambulance had taken 24 minutes to arrive.
In a letter to Mr Ken Threlfall, general manager of Durham Ambulance Service, Coun. Hughes said the deployment of a rapid response unit would prove invaluable for road accidents on the A66 trans-Pennine route.
‘While I appreciate that in some 5pc of cases the response time is outside this target, I do feel that a 36-minute or more response time is unacceptable in Barnard Castle town centre on market day.’
Mr Threlfall, who has promised an investigation, said it was inevitable that in some cases response times were longer.
MICHAEL Fallon, Darlington's man from the law and order party, has been burgled.
The defending Tory became a statistic in what Labour opponent Alan Milburn claims is the town's 150pc crime increase during 13 Conservative years.
Since the story has a happy ending, Fallon points up the effectiveness of extra police manpower and resources funded by the government.
Among the items taken from his Darlington home were electric blankets, souvenirs and a treasured portrait of Winston Churchill given by a grateful constituent.
(This simply illustrates the inconsistency of the criminal classes.
Our very first Diary revealed that when someone half inched Mrs Thatcher's picture from Horden Conservative Club, they left old Winnie behind.)
The burglary, kept quiet until now, was a year ago.
The happy ending came last week.
Though the apolitical villain was fairly quickly apprehended, Churchill's portrait has just been discovered in a police raid on a suspected handler.
‘A young detective remembered that I'd had something like that stolen,’ he says.
‘I haven't got it back yet because it's being tested for fingerprints, but it was a smart piece of work.
‘So far as I'm concerned, our policemen are wonderful.’
Final thought A
DETACHMENT of Darlington's wonderful policemen/thin blue line (delete as applicable) was on duty outside St Cuthbert's church on Sunday evening.
In the church hall the town's three main candidates Fallon, Milburn and Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg were debating what's what.
Outside, flag-carrying supporters of British National Party candidate Dr David Clark denied a platform were protesting peaceably.
‘I expect there's no bother tonight, mind,’ said an inspector to a youth in a leather jacket.
‘How man I'm from Sunderland,’ said the man in the cow hide.
‘Sunderland's just got to Wembley.
There'll be nee bother the neet.’
Extreme unction
THE church debate, alas, was an example of what happens when civilised becomes sanitized.
Questions had been submitted in advance; candidates addressing one another by Christian names were so anxious to avoid extremes they almost fell over themselves in the middle.
Heads nodded; anodyne was the unction of the day.
Alan Milburn, it transpires, spent the first 11 years of his existence in Tow Law, though his vowels belong North Tyneside now.
Afterwards we fell to talking of the cold December Wednesday in 1967 when he and the rest of Tow Law's bairns took the afternoon off school to watch the local Northern League side beat Mansfield Town 5–1 in the FA Cup.
It was by far the most memorable part of the evening.
Too many Cooks?
AFTER lunching with Tory candidate Simon Fowler attacking Frank Cook's 881 Labour majority in Stockton North last Tuesday's Diary suggested that the sandwiches at the Centenary in Norton might have seen better days.
Mike Hutchinson, the pub's manager, has now called to protest that the bread was fresh that morning.
He concedes, however, that the whole thing could have been a ‘cleverly laid’ trap.
‘The sandwiches were made by our young commis chef.
He's a nephew of Frank Cook's.’
GREEN POINTS:
Martin Shipton's interesting article Keeping the green light burning (Echo April 1) quoted the views of Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat spokes-people on the environment but did not include an interview with a Green Party representative.
I find this rather extraordinary, not only because the Green Party is regarded as the party of the environment, but also because in the General Election the Greens are fielding 254 candidates nationally, at least a dozen of which are in the North-East.
Mr Shipton ends his article on a slightly sceptical note, asking whether the three parties whose views he has canvassed will actually translate their environmental concerns into reality after April 9.
If he had consulted a Green candidate, he would have been told that even the other parties' policies are not tough enough in theory let alone practice.
If we take just two examples of major environmental crises facing the world ozone depletion and carbon dixode emissions we see that no party except the Green Party is prepared to act quickly enough.
Sarah Banks, Green Party Candidate for Durham City,.
HOPE NEEDED:
As a committed Labour Party member I cannot condone nor understand why, with the country suffering from Tory fatigue, the Labour Party does not thrust home its policies rather than become embroiled in this negative smear and counter-smear campaign.
People need hope not insult-trading, especially in these difficult times.
If this were not enough we are in serious danger of election overkill.
Opinion polls, which as the 1970 election proved, are often wrong.
Self-styled experts, verbosity, repetition and an extended 9 O'Clock News cannot fail to turn people off.
This election is important, but at 10pm last Thursday I was grateful to Ronnie Barker and a rerun of Porridge.
Peter A. Gledhill,.
REAL VALUES:
As the election campaign threatens to engulf us, think through the trivia and above the bickering to the real values of the Conservatives compared to the phoney, intrusive dictums of the leaners to the Left.
Unless we want to wake up on April 10 to Neil Kinnock's punitive Britain, every vote on April 9 should go to the candidates supporting John Major to uphold freedom of the individual (embracing rights with responsibilities) and importantly, the British character abroad.
Mrs S.E.
Scrope, Danby on Yore, Leyburn.
MORAL GROUNDS:
It amazes me that there are still some people who equate morality with Christianity.
W.M. Wood (HAS Election Post March 30) seems to show concern for the nation's moral welfare if we have an agnostic elected to prime minister.
No matter whether a person is a Muslim, a Jew, a Hindu or an agnostic/atheist, they can be moral.
After all, morality is social in origin.
R.A. Wood, Secretary, Tyneside Humanist Group, 58 Garmondsway Road, West Cornforth.
DEFENDING Tory Michael Fallon hit back at the poll results last night saying there was ‘no way at all that Labour are 12 points ahead in Darlington’.
Pointing to the Conservative Party's own canvassing returns which show that they have a 20pc lead over Labour he added: ‘Our own returns based on a sample twenty times the size of The Northern Echo survey show a quite different picture.
The Northern Echo poll is ludicrously out of line with national opinion polls and out of line with our own survey figures.’
Referring to our doorstep survey, Mr Fallon said: ‘I am suspicious of the circumstances in which the poll was taken, knocking on every fifth house in certain streets is unsatisfactory.
‘My own wife was included in the sample but disregarded because of her known political views.’
Labour's Alan Milburn meanwhile was predictably pleased with the survey results, saying they were roughly in line with Labour's own canvass returns.
He said: ‘The poll results are very encouraging and in line with the response we have been getting on the doorsteps of Darlington.
It shows that the people of the town believe it is time for change and that it's time for Labour.’
The Labour team, he added, would not be relaxing their efforts: ‘Everything is still to play for but we are confident that we can win.’
Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg said he was disappointed with the party's failure to rise above 10pc but added: ‘I think the fact that there are so many people still undecided shows they are disillusioned with both Labour and Conservatives.
‘I would hope that between now and polling day those people would make up their mind to actually vote, not out of habit, but for us.
I am confident we will capture quite a share of that still undecided vote.’
BEHIND their closed doors and curtained windows, the sizeable minority of undecided Darlington voters still hold the key to the result of this vital marginal seat.
And they could hold the key to much more than that.
For these voters and others like them throughout the country hold the key to Number 10.
The Darlington result has always been one keenly watched by national political pundits it is traditionally a barometer of the way in which the nation generally is set to swing.
Hence the keen interest in this result and the fierceness of the battle which has been fought here over the last few weeks.
The battle was still raging last night.
Predictably Labour's Alan Milburn was pleased with The Northern ‘s poll result although he stressed no one was taking anything for granted and the relentless effort would not ease between now and polling on Thursday.
For his part Michael Fallon dismissed the 11.3 point gap between himself and Milburn as ‘ludicrously out of line’ with national polls and that of Conservatives.
But last night the Press Association published the biggest poll yet undertaken and that gave Labour an overall 7pc swing from Conservatives to Labour, a swing that in some areas reached as high as 10.5pc.
The poll showed the biggest collapse in Tory support to be in the South East, West Midlands and the North-East.
If the views of ‘undecided’ voters are removed from The Northern Echo poll equation as happens with many national polls by organisations like Mori and Gallup then our poll figures would translate into: Labour 51; Conservatives 36; Lib Dems 13 and the BNP just one per cent.
That 15pc lead and it must be remembered in this equation we have removed the ‘don't knows’ would represent a swing of ten per cent from Conservative to Labour.
If indeed Darlington is a barometer of national trends then that would be more than enough to give Neil Kinnock the keys to Downing Street.
Looking in more detail at our poll it is clear that of those who expressed their voting intentions some ten per cent who voted Conservative in 1987 will now vote for Labour, and eight per cent of them will vote LibDem.
Labour voters have not changed their minds in such high numbers 83pc of them will still vote Labour and only six per cent have switched to the Tories or to the Liberal Democrats.
The Liberal Democrats will be depressed to see that only 40pc of Alliance voters in 1987 are now ready to vote for Peter Bergg.
Some 30pc of them have switched to Labour and around 8pc to the Tories.
However, again, it should be remembered that there is a high percentage of undecided votes in our survey.
It is likely that a large proportion of those undecided and non-declared votes in our survey will go the Tories particularly when some of the other aspects of our poll are considered.
For instance a large chunk of those voters who did declare firmly their intention to vote Labour were still prepared to recognise that Michael Fallon has done a good job as a constituency MP for the town since his election victory in 1983.
Asked to agree or disagree with the statement: ‘As Darlington's MP Michael Fallon has served very well’, some 47pc either agreed or agreed strongly.
And of those who firmly intended to vote Conservative more than half of them said the major reason for giving the Tories support was that ‘they like the local candidate’.
Whether Michael Fallon's personal popularity among voters is enough to sway what is becoming a national swing away from the Tories remains to be seen.
He will argue that there are still a lot of undecided voters to make up their minds.
And that theoretical poll equations do not represent hard votes until the count is declared.
LABOUR'S Darlington candidate Alan Milburn claimed yesterday some schools had to use lotteries to help pay for basics like books and pencils.
‘Parents are contributing £55m a year for the basics of their children's education,’ he said.
‘And I know of one Darlington school which is running a lottery to make ends meet.
They sell tickets for 10p each to help buy pencils and books.’
He said Labour would invest £600m in education, reduce class sizes to below 30 pupils, modernise old schools, and restore student grants, housing benefit allowances and hardship allowances.
But Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, said parents only had to pay up to £8 on education per pupil each year.
‘And even this is paid on an entirely voluntary basis.
No parent needs to pay for the essential items.
‘Labour's £600m would not help primary or secondary schools as most of it is going on nursery education or restoring student grants.’
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg said £600m was not enough.
He said they would spend £2bn on education in their first year and a further £2.6bn in the second.
The Lib Dems would also reintroduce student grants.
LABOUR could not sustain its commitment to increase benefits, social security minister Tony Newton said yesterday.
Mr Newton, visiting the NorthEast, claimed Labour's tax plans would hit the ‘wealth creators’.
But Alan Milburn, Labour candidate for Darlington, hit back saying they could meet their promises.
Mr Newton, on a visit to support Tory candidates in the North-East including Michael Fallon (Darlington), David Williamson (Bishop Auckland), Nick Jopling (Sedgefield), and Tim Devlin (Stockton South), also dismissed claims his party did not help the poor.
‘Our extension of Family Credit has been very successful helping over 350,000 people,’ he said.
Pensioners and the disabled had also benefitted from the Tories, he continued, claiming Labour's proposals would cost over £10bn.
But Mr Milburn said: ‘Mr Newton should read John Smith's alternative budget.
‘With anyone earning over £40,000 paying their fair share of the tax burden, it means we can raise pensions by £5 per week for a single person and £8 a week for a married couple.’
And he claimed eight out of ten families would be better off under Labour.
A Conservative Government would unveil an inner city action force, Tim Devlin claimed yesterday.
He said: ‘This is not simply another initiative to beautify the environment but a serious effort to unlock potential in areas such as Stockton High Street, where the Labour Council have so obviously failed the people of Stockton.’
Working outside the areas covered by the existing Teesside Development Corporation, the proposed new Urban Regeneration Agency would reclaim derelict land and earmark suitable sites for redevelopment, he said.
But Labour opponent John Scott said: ‘I think we would see a Labour ministry of development and environment as being perfectly able to deal with inner city regeneration throughout the country.’
Liberal Democrat candidate Kay Kirkham said: ‘I am not in favour of extending the undemocratic policy of the TDC.
I think all these regeneration schemes should be under democratic control.
Our system of democracy would make sure all the authorities were represented.’
A MAN who went on a violent rampage, breaking bottles and glasses in a pub and attacking a woman and a police officer, claimed his drinks had been spiked with drugs.
Martin Colling, 24, began with racist remarks to an Asian shopkeeper and ended by attacking a police officer with a coal shovel when he tried to arrest him, Durham Crown Court heard.
Colling, of Striding Edge, Blackfell, Washington, had gone into a store in Lambton village last May and made abusive, racist remarks to the Asian shopkeeper.
He became violent and a customer, Olive Appleby, went to call the police from the Highwayman pub next door.
But Colling followed her, said Christopher Dorman O'Gowan, prosecuting.
He attacked her and threw her to the ground before turned his attention to the pub, picking up pool balls and throwing them at bottles of spirits behind the bar.
He also broke glasses and ornaments.
He then left the pub, but police went to the house where he was staying and tried to persuade him to come out.
Eventually, PC Michael Hepworth forced the door open.
Colling was standing behind the door with a coal shovel and hit the officer on the head, causing a cut which needed two stitches.
He was arrested, but said nothing when questioned.
While on bail, Colling also took part in a shopping trip with three others when they used a stolen credit card to buy petrol and goods from two supermarkets in Darlington.
James Harper, defending, said Colling believed his drinks had been spiked with a narcotic substance which caused his violent behaviour.
He claimed when he was arrested he received ‘the working-over of all time’ from police.
In the second incident, involving the credit card, he had only gone along for the ride, and had not used the card himself, said Mr Harper.
Colling, who admitted causing criminal damage, common assault, unlawful wounding, and three charges of obtaining property by deception, was sentenced to eight months imprisonment, to run consecutively with an 18 month sentence he received at Durham Crown Court in February after being convicted of other deception charges.
A JOYRIDER was captured on video as he fled from the scene of a hit-and-run accident.
A 19-year-old girl was injured by the stolen car which hurtled up an alley and rebounded off a wall before hitting her and another wall.
Northern Echo reporter Gavin Engelbrecht was filming his children at his home in Darlington when he heard a smash outside.
With his video recorder still running, he dashed outside to see a youth sprinting down Kingston Street in the Corporation Road area.
The runaway had abandoned a stolen Vauxhall Nova.
Scores of people were on the scene within seconds of the collision the engine of the badly damaged car still running.
Tracy West, who was knocked down, was picked up by bystanders and taken to a nearby shop, where she was treated for shock before being taken to the Memorial Hospital.
According to witnesses, the car drove up an alley between Corporation Road and Kingston Street and smashed into a wall near Frank and Chris' Shop as it turned left.
Tracy, of Derwent Street, Darlington, yesterday recovering from her ordeal, said she was walking by herself to the video shop when she heard the car racing up the alley.
She said: ‘He sped out and hit the wall.
The car bounced off the wall and came toward me.
I tried to move out of the way but the car kept following me.
‘I was knocked to my knees and landed behind the car.
I'm lucky to be alive.’
Tracy, who suffered bad bruising to her arm and leg in the Sunday night incident, was treated and discharged.
Meanwhile, corner shop keeper Frank Allan has repeated a call for traffic calming measures in the surrounding alleyways.
He said: ‘We have been onto the borough council to have sleeping policemen installed, because drivers are using the alleyway as a short cut.’
The youth who fled the scene was wearing a blue checked shirt.
Police are investigating.
ANDREW John Crowther, 23, of Coniscliffe Road in Darlington, was yesterday fined £250 and banned from driving for a year after admitting driving with excess alcohol.
Crowther told Darlington magistrates he had been drinking before a football match several hours before he was stopped by police.
He had gone out later that evening not intending to drive but took the wheel when his friend refused to drive because he was over the limit.
A test at Darlington police station revealed Crowther, an assistant manager at the Hurworth VG shop, was one and a half times the legal limit for driving.
He was ordered to pay £35 costs.
THE RSPCA has launched an investigation after the grisly discovery of a dead pit bull terrier dumped near a Darlington golf course.
An amateur photographer found the dog's corpse during a photo shoot near Stressholme golf course.
It was at the bottom of a 5ft deep pit and no attempt had been made to disguise the body.
Police say the dog could have been used in a fight or dumped by an uncaring owner who could not afford to have the animal registered under dangerous dog legislation.
RSPCA officials say they are disgusted by the grim find and have vowed to prosecute the dog's owner.
RSPCA Chief Insp George Farrow said: ‘There is absolutely no excuse for something like this.
Even if someone wanted to have their dog put down they could have applied for financial help.’
Animal welfare officers plan to examine the body in a bid to find out how the dog died.
It was worth £400.
They are praying the post mortem examination does not reveal evidence of a fight, but Chief Insp Farrow said: ‘We know dog fighting is happening.
It has become big business with a huge amount of money riding on the outcome.’
A spokesman for Durham police said anyone convicted of dog fighting faced a maximum fine of £2,000 or six months in jail.
He added: ‘We are viewing this find with great concern.
If it has died as a result of dog fighting then immediate action will be taken to stamp this odious business out straight away.’
A LORRY driver who felt sorry for an unwanted calf stole animal feed to keep it alive.
Alistair Michael Twohig, 55, of Trevor Walk, Newton Aycliffe, a driver for Varley Animal Feeds, made extra deliveries to a farm in Husthwaite, magistrates in Darlington were told.
Graham Hunsley, mitigating, said Twohig dropped off food to save a calf which would otherwise have been slaughtered.
He admitted theft of 320 kgs of feed on February 10 and theft of 1.79 tonnes of feed before his arrest.
He also admitted forging entries in his diesel record book.
Sentence was adjourned until May 11 for a probation report.
A CHILD could be killed outside a village school because of traffic hazards caused by bad parking, a committee heard yesterday.
Trevor Drury, head of Hurworth junior and infant school, has asked for waiting restrictions to be introduced opposite the school entrance.
He says the crossing patrol has poor visibility because of parked cars and the lollipop lady has to weave in between stationary vehicles.
Darlington transport committee heard yesterday Mr Drury has to write frequently to parents asking them not to park near the entrance.
Conservative Peter Foster, ward councillor for Hurworth, told the meeting it should not fall to Mr Drury to chase after parents for parking.
He also wants yellow lines outside the school.
‘Someone's going to run a little child over because the lollipop lady is busy asking drivers to move on but children are coming out all the time.
She shouldn't have to do that.’
The matter will be referred back to the borough council's officers' traffic group.
A GUN collector has been ordered by a court to give up the arsenal of weapons he had gathered since he was 16.
Anthony Bland's obsession with weapons led to him filling his Darlington home with machine guns and pistols, Teesside Crown Court was told yesterday.
The guns will now be de-activated and used in training and as teaching aids by Durham Police.
The arsenal of weapons and live ammunition were discovered by bailiffs as they served an eviction warrant on Mr Bland's home in Vine Street, Darlington.
When the bailiffs broke into the second bedroom which was locked they discovered a pump action shotgun, sub-machine guns, pistols, German daggers and uniforms.
One of the machine guns had live ammunition attached to it.
Bland, 35, now of Prior Dene, Darlington, admitted possessing a prohibited weapon and two offences of possessing a firearm without a certificate.
Judge David Bryant sentenced him to nine months imprisonment suspended for two years and ordered him to pay £200 costs.
He said: ‘All these weapons in the wrong hands could cause grave damage.
Even the de-activated pistols in the hands of the wrong person in a bank or something of that sort could cause terror.’
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, said: ‘Although there were two lockable proper gun cabinets not all the guns and ammunition were stored as they should have been.’
John Aitken, defending, said Bland did have certificates for some of the weapons.
He added: ‘There is nothing to suggest he in any way misused the weapons.
He has taken his obsession just a little bit too far.’
A DRUNKEN night out among friends ended with a nightmare journey for the taxi driver hired to take the group home.
Yesterday, Darlington magistrates heard how 19-year-old Daniel Howe was so drunk after a football club night out he had no memory of his violent attack on taxi driver John Leyland.
Howe, of Glebe Road, Great Stainton, near Sedgefield, admitted criminal damage to the taxi he had tried to smash the windscreen and break the meter with his fist.
He also admitted beating Mr Leyland, although the injuries would have been worse if his friends had not intervened.
He pleaded guilty to stealing a money bag containing Mr Leyland's takings after the driver ran off in fright.
Chris Morrison, prosecuting, said Howe and three others hired the taxi to take them from Sedgefield to Great Stainton.
They were all larking about but when Mr Leyland asked them to calm down Howe turned violent.
Howe, an apprentice plasterer, was fined a total of £100 for the theft and the assault.
He was also ordered to pay £666 compensation to Mr Leyland and £35 legal costs.
Mitigating, Howe's solicitor said he had suffered domestic problems and the incident had brought shame on his family.
A DARLINGTON man who was glassed by four skinheads is appealing for his rescuer to come forward.
David Leonard, 37, needed six stitches to his head and two days of hospital treatment after the vicious attack outside Darlington Arts Centre 11 days ago.
But Mr Leonard's injuries could have been much worse if a mystery middle-aged man had not risked his own safety and stopped the thugs' attack.
Police inquiries have so far failed to track down the culprits and now the victim has appealed for his heroic rescuer to come forward and help the investigation.
Mr Leonard was leaving the Arts Centre after a rhythm and blues concert on Friday March 27, when the four youths wearing jackets, jeans and Dr Marten boots set upon him.
His two elderly companions had to watch helplessly as the skinheads attacked Mr Leonard on Vane Terrace.
Mr Leonard, who lives in central Darlington, said: ‘I was cut on the head and pushed to the floor several times.
I don't remember what the man looked like but he was coming out of the Arts Centre with his wife, took off his glasses and stepped in between the thugs and me.
‘I would like him to contact the police incase he can help but also because I would like to shake him by the hand.
‘He was very brave and I am very grateful for what he did.
My wife and family and I were very shocked by what happened and I would just like to say thank you to that man.’
Sgt Steve Raw said: ‘We would like to hear from this man but also from anyone who knows anything about the incident and ask them to contact us on .’
DARLINGTON Council is to join a region-wide group lobbying for better rail services to the NorthEast.
Yesterday's transport committee heard Stockton Borough Council is setting up a steering group to consider all aspects of rail travel in the North-East.
Representatives of interested local authorities have already met with transport under-secretary Patrick McLaughlin, who has given the scheme his backing.
A report to the meeting said services to the region had been deteriorating for several years, with fewer trains running at less flexible times.
Labour committee chairman Jim Skinner said he would be concerned by any further erosion of rail services.
A UNION leader warned yesterday that free rail tickets for British Rail pensioners could vanish if railways are privatised.
Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the rail union RMT, said new private railway owners would almost certainly scrap the privileges presently available to the country's 131,000 BR pensioners.
Mr Knapp, chairman of the Better Rail Campaign, said it would hit thousands of BR pensioners who live in the Darlington area.
But Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories said the concessionary rail travel would be safeguarded.
PLANS TO divert a public footpath crossing farmland will be the subject of a public inquiry tomorrow.
The hearing into the application by Maj William Trotter of the Deanery, Staindrop, to divert the path through his land near Cleatlam, will be held at the Staindrop village hall at 10am.
The inquiry was prompted by objections from Teesside District Council and the Ramblers Association to a decision by Durham County Council's special rights of way subcommittee to allow the diversion.
Darlington Ramblers spokesman Alan Hutchinson, who has accused the committee of favouring landowners in contentious rights of way issues, said the suggested change at Cleatlam skirting the fields rather than crossing them would offer inferior views and be longer.
Maj Trotter has said he knew most of the walkers using his land, adding most preferred the more circuitous route alongside a beck.
Ray Flowers, chairman of the subcommittee has denied that farmers are favoured in pathway matters.
Gulf inquest:
A jury inquest into the deaths of nine British soldiers including three from the North-East killed by ‘friendly fire’ during the Gulf War will be held at Oxford county hall on May 7 and 8.
Van crash:
A woman suffered minor injuries when the car she was in collided with a van in Victoria Road, Consett, last night.
She was treated at Shotley Bridge hospital after the incident.
Winners all:
The winners of our Lilliput Lane cottage competition in the Inside Out supplement of March 25 were: David Whyman, Ravensdale Road, Darlington, and Mrs J.M. Russell, Durham Road, Framwellgate Moor.
Their correct answers of Nottingham, 1840 and Dorset were the first drawn.
The prizes will be despatched shortly.
A SUBSTANTIAL silent minority still holds the key to who wins the marginal seat of Darlington, according to a new poll.
The opinion poll, carried out by The Northern shows that 15.3pc of the town's electorate are still unsure how they will vote on Thursday enough to swing the result to either Conservative or Labour.
A further 9.9pc would not say how they would vote.
The Northern spoke to 1,051 people last Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday morning, visiting households in all the polling districts of Darlington.
Our survey showed that Labour had a 38pc share of the vote, the Conservatives 26.7pc, the Liberal Democrats 9.5pc, the British National Party 0.6pc.
That gives Labour candidate Alan Milburn an 11.3pc lead over schools minister Michael Fallon.
But the key lies with the 15.3pc who have not yet made up their mind and the 9.9pc who declined to say.
If the undecided voters chose to vote Conservative, Michael Fallon would keep the seat with a 4pc lead.
Analysts also believe that the majority of the those people who would not disclose how they were going to vote were more likely to be Conservative than Labour.
The survey, which has a margin of error of 2.5pc, showed that more than 13pc of those who voted Tory in 1987 were unsure about which way to vote this time, whereas only ten per cent of those who voted Labour were still undecided.
In addition 2.9pc of Conservative voters in 1987 refused to say how they would vote this time around.
The poll also showed that almost half of those intending to vote believed Michael Fallon was a good MP for the town.
More than a quarter of those who said they intended to vote Labour said they either agreed or strongly agreed with the statement that he has served the town well.
Those questioned believed that the main issue which Darlington voters thought the next Government should tackle was the health service, followed by education and jobs.
Last night Mr Fallon questioned the validity of the poll which he said was ‘ludicrously out of line with national opinion polls.’
Labour candidate Alan Milburn said the poll was in line with his party's own canvassing returns.
Peter Bergg, the Liberal Democrat candidate, said he was disappointed that his party should fail to rise above 10pc in the survey but was confident he could win a share of the undecided vote.
LABOUR stand 2 7 points ahead of the Tories in the Press Association 10,000 poll published last night.
The biggest and most comprehensive opinion poll taken during the entire general election campaign almost certainly provides the most accurate snapshot of voting intentions.
The ICM survey shows a 7pc swing from the Conservatives to Labour overall, and in some areas the swing is as high as 10.5pc.
It represents a major setback for the Tories and raises the prospect of a hung Parliament with Labour the biggest party.
These findings are in line with those of smaller polls which have shown Labour opening up a small lead on the Conservatives.
The poll has Labour on 38.7pc, the Conservatives on 36.2pc, and the Liberal Democrats on 20.4pc, with Others on 4.7pc.
This compares with the 1987 General Election result of 43pc for the Conservatives, 32pc for Labour, and 23pc for Liberal/SDP Alliance candidates.
The poll shows a dramatic fall in Tory support in many areas, especially in the South-East (11pc), West Midlands (10pc), the North-East (9pc), and the East Midlands (8pc).
In a breakdown of the North's voting intentions, Labour get 54pc, Conservative 29pc, Liberal Democrats 16pc.
The findings show that Labour would win 76 seats from the Conservatives, giving them 305 seats overall, six or seven more than the Tories, but 21 short of an overall majority, with the Liberal Democrats holding the balance of power.
The Tory-held seats at the last election which Labour would expect to win in the North-East are Darlington, Tynemouth, and Langbaurgh.
Prominent figures who would lose their seats to Labour include former junior health minister Edwina Currie, minister for overseas development Lynda Chalker, roads minister Christopher Chope, energy minister Colin Moynihan, and Anthony Beaumont-Dark, an outspoken Tory critic of the Government.
Meanwhile, Chris Patten, the Tory chairman who master-minded the campaign, would be left vulnerable to the Liberal Democrats, given the 7pc fall in Tory support in the South-West region.
Of the issues being considered by voters as being most serious, top was unemployment with 80pc, closely followed by the National Health Service with 77pc.
Education was rated a serious issue by 65pc, the cost of living by 54pc, and order 51pc.
Britain and Europe rated just 25pc and defence was rated as a serious issue by only 23pc.
ICM interviewed 10,460 adults nationwide in 330 constituencies half of the total between March 31 and April 3.
The margin of error is plus or minus 1pc. — A Daily Express Harris poll puts Labour (38pc) one point ahead of the Tories and a poll of Tory-held marginal seats by ICM for Today newspaper showed an 8.5pc swing to Labour since the 1987 election.
Man on premium bonds theft charge
OVER £10,000 worth of premium bonds and savings certificates were stolen from an elderly man, a court heard yesterday.
Kevin James Mason, of Swan Street, Evenwood, Bishop Auckland, is charged with stealing the certificates between January 1 and February 13 this year from the pensioner who lives alone in Ferryhill Station.
The case was adjourned by Sedgefield Magistrates until April 23 and Mason was released on conditional bail.
Two jailed:
Two Darlington men were jailed for four months by magistrates yesterday for their part in an attempted burglary of a terraced house in the town.
Stephen Liddle, 31, of Lansdowne Street and Ian Thain, 25, of Arnold Road, both Darlington, admitted the charges.
Men charged:
Colin Hunter, 17, of Hammond Drive, and Peter Llewelyn Jones, 18, of Tyne Crescent, both Darlington, and a juvenile appeared before magistrates yesterday charged with offences relating to alleged burglary of a house in Grange Road.
Petrol offence:
Two men caught syphoning petrol from a car in Darlington were fined yesterday.
Sean Barrie Turner, 22, of Greenbank Road, and Stephen Thomas Walls, 19, of Aviemore Court, both Darlington, pleaded guilty at Darlington Magistrates Court to stealing petrol and were fined £100 each.
They were ordered to pay £35 costs.
DARLINGTON:
British National Party supporters protested outside St Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, at the weekend after an invitation to their election candidate to speak there was withdrawn.
Candidate Dr Donald Clarke had been invited to a debate at the church with the town's three other candidates but the invitation was later withdrawn.
DARLINGTON:
Election candidates in Darlington have failed to meet the Green challenge, according to the man who was to have stood against them.
Dr Robert Upshall said copies of the Green Party's charter were sent to the three candidates but none of them agreed to sign it.
DEFENDING Tory Michael Fallon hit back at the results of The Northern Echo poll of Darlington last night saying there was ‘no way at all that Labour are 12 points ahead in Darlington’.
Pointing to the Conservative Party's own canvassing returns which show that they have a 20pc lead over Labour he added: ‘Our own returns based on a sample twenty times the size of The Northern Echo survey show a quite different picture.
The Northern Echo poll is ludicrously out of line with national opinion polls and out of line with our own survey figures.’
Referring to our doorstep survey, Mr Fallon said: ‘I am suspicious of the circumstances in which the poll was taken, knocking on every fifth house in certain streets is unsatisfactory.
‘My own wife was included in the sample but disregarded because of her known political views.’
Labour's Alan Milburn meanwhile was predictably pleased with the survey results, saying they were roughly in line with Labour's own canvass returns.
He said: ‘The poll results are very encouraging and in line with the response we have been getting on the doorsteps of Darlington.
It shows that the people of the town believe it is time for change and that it's time for Labour.’
The Labour team, he added, would not be relaxing their efforts: ‘Everything is still to play for but we are confident that we can win.’
Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg said he was disappointed with the party's failure to rise above 10pc but added: ‘I think the fact that there are so many people still undecided shows they are disillusioned with both Labour and Conservatives.
‘I would hope that between now and polling day those people would make up their mind to actually vote, not out of habit, but for us.
I am confident we will capture quite a share of that still undecided vote.’
Growing voice for better rail services
DARLINGTON council is to join a regionwide group lobbying for better rail services to the North-East.
Yesterday's transport committee heard that a group is being set up to consider all aspects of rail travel in the North-East.
Representatives of interested local authorities have met transport undersecretary Patrick McLaughlin, who has backed the scheme.
A report to the meeting said services to the region had been deteriorating for several years, with fewer trains at less flexible times.
Abattoir conversion:
A former slaughter house at Valley Street North, Darlington, may be used as a showroom for heating equipment if proposals are agreed by Darlington council.
Thefts alert:
Police are warning householders to beware of sneak thieves after a series of burglaries in Newton Aycliffe.
Sgt Steve Atkinson said thieves walk in through unlocked back doors and snatch whatever they can.
Loop delight:
Julie Peeke, 33, of Minors Crescent, Darlington, looped the loop on her first ever aeroplane flight.
She took to the skies with Sqn Ldr Dick Coles from RAF Dishforth and raised £200 for meningitis research.
Doctor's travels:
Darlington GP John Apps has left for a three-month trip to the Arctic Circle with a research team investigating wildlife and fauna.
Electrical raid:
Police in Newton Aycliffe are investigating a theft of electrical equipment from an electricity substation at Jubilee Road, Shildon.
House burgled:
More than £500 worth of television and hi-fi equipment was stolen from a house in Whinlatter Place, Newton Aycliffe, at the weekend.
HOT AIR:
In an election circular delivered last Sunday Darlington's Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg says his party will phase out nuclear power.
He also proclaims that the Liberal Democrats will keep four Trident submarines.
Is he going to power them on his party's hot air?
Basil Noble, 19 Pine Grove, Darlington.
ANTHONY Bourne-Arton MBE, Tory MP for Darlington from 1959–64, was somewhat surprised to find himself mentioned in Monday's Hear All Sides.
Reader J J Stephens reproduced his 1966 letter to the editor, accusing Major Bourne-Arton of ‘trying to make capital’ out of the closure two years earlier of North Road railway workshops.
Surprised the old soldier may have been, retreating he's not.
‘The shops were rather a home from home, not the most efficient of places,’ says Major Bourne-Arton.
‘People who got in there could make a job for their sons, nephews, friends and relations.
‘They were down as craftsmen, but it was a bit phoney and they knew it.
Often they didn't have the skills they were supposed to have.’
Union attitudes were ‘understandable and to some extent commendable’ he says, but having 22 different unions made life difficult.
Bourne-Arton argued that the loss of the town's biggest employer had already been compensated by the arrival of new industry.
‘The industrial face of the town proves that I was right.’
Coupled with his backing for the Beeching report, however, it cost him his seat.
He unsuccessfully fought the next three elections.
He well recalls a couplet about him in The Times: ‘He was right, dead right, as he walked along; but he was just as dead as if he'd been wrong.’
Aged 79, Major Bourne-Arton lives now as then in the former rectory at West Tanfield, near Ripon.
There are 11 grandchildren, three great grandchildren and another on the way ‘posted but not yet joined,’ he observes.
‘I'm rather lame people in the village say you've caught arthritis, and I caught it a year or two ago but my brain hasn't entirely given out.
‘I haven't lost my interest in politics by any manner of means.’
Experience, he says, teaches him to disbelieve opinion polls.
‘Because of boundary changes Darlington is far less marginal than it used to be.
‘I'm quite sure Mr Fallon will win.
He's a damn sight better MP than I ever was.’
Lucky Jim
JIM Boyden, another well remembered North-East MP, has particular cause to be grateful to the NHS.
The time spent in waiting rooms can be frustrating, he says, and the treatment sometimes isn't all it should be.
But it was while in hospital in 1990 that the long-time Labour member for Bishop Auckland met a nurse called Sue Hay.
He was 79; she he says coyly was ‘quite a lot younger.’
Now they're Mr and Mrs Boyden.
His first wife christened Emily, affectionately and universally known as Pem died on Christmas Day 1988 after 53 years happy marriage.
By then the admirable Jim was also chronically ill ‘duffy kidneys,’ he says.
A dialysis machine has now been installed at their new home in Oxford, supervised by his New Zealand born wife.
‘She copes splendidly, it's marvellous being nursed at home,’ says Jim.
‘I'm very much up and down but the past few days I've amazed myself.
‘I think it's the scent of victory on Thursday.’
A multi-talented chap, he had been barrister, wartime squadron leader, Admiralty chief training officer and director of extra-mural studies at Durham University (among much else) before succeeding Hugh Dalton at Bishop Auckland in 1959.
MP for 20 years, when he successfully fought against the closure of Shildon wagon works.
‘I don't suppose I'd have done so well if Maggie had been in charge’ he was a Minister in the Wilson government.
His last public appearance was in 1988 when, against doctor's orders, he opened a block of flats named in his honour in Newton Aycliffe.
‘People talk about Newton Aycliffe but it's not so bad,’ he says.
‘I was quite ill at the time.
The doc told me I could go but I wouldn't come back, but I managed to persuade her.
‘It was the first speech I'd made for ages.
We had a spanking time.’
Now he spends his days writing his memoirs 60,000 words so far gardening and reading the Daily Telegraph to see what the enemy says’.
I'd love to be back in Bishop Auckland just now, if only for the gossip, but I can't do a day's canvassing and sometimes feel a bit of a passenger.
I get the impression that the Tories have already conceded defeat.
My analysis of the situation would be very favourable to them, but they'd need to offer me a 50,000-acre country estate and the Chancellorship.’
Briefly in Oxford Labour party (‘awful people’) he's now a life member in Bishop Auckland and retains his membership of a bevy of South Durham workmen's clubs.
On Friday, he says, he will join in their celebrations from afar.
‘We have worked hard for this one and victory will be sweet.
‘My life now is really very happy.
I think by the weekend I may be happier still.’
A VIDEOTAPE showing a car thief fleeing the scene of an accident could hold vital clues to the criminal's identity.
Detectives in Darlington have taken colour prints from the home video, shot moments after a stolen Vauxhall Nova crashed near Corporation Road.
Police plan to have the pictures enlarged in an attempt to identify the thief, who abandoned the smashed car and ran away.
The video was shot by Northern Echo reporter Gavin Engelbrecht.
Nineteen-year-old Tracy West, of Derwent Street, Darlington, who was knocked down by the car and suffered cuts and bruises.
She was treated at Darlington's Memorial Hospital for shock.
Witnesses said the powerful Nova GSi raced up an alleyway between Corporation Road and Kingston Street, but the driver lost control as he attempted to turn left and ploughed into a brick wall.
Det Chief Insp Harvey Harris said his men were examining the video.
The film was taken seconds after the crash and shows the thief running away.
He said: ‘We have taken some colour photographs from the video and are planning to have them enlarged.
‘The video is pretty powerful stuff and we were very lucky someone had the commonsense to film what happened.’
The crash has prompted calls for a clampdown on speeding motorists using the alleyways in the Corporation Road area.
Residents say the lanes are a ‘rat-run’ for ‘boy racers’.
LATE-NIGHT revellers who may have seen a vicious assault have ignored police appeals to come forward.
Detectives say they are bitterly disappointed by the apathetic response following the assault which left 20-year old Michael Gibson, of Moffat Close, Darlington, fighting for his life.
Despite widespread appeals not one person has come forward to say they were in the town centre when Michael was beaten up on Friday evening.
The youth was approached by another man as he walked along High Row and then beaten to the ground.
Michael's father Ian arrived in Darlington yesterday after flying from Oman.
The family are maintaining a bedside vigil for their son who suffered serious head injuries in the attack.
Neurosurgeons have already operated on Michael, who worked for a local builders' merchant, and a team of specialists are keeping a round-the-clock watch on his condition.
Yesterday Chief Insp Harvey Harris, who is leading the inquiry, renewed his appeals for help.
Police have managed to track down 30 people who were in the town centre when the attack occurred, but admit witnesses are proving difficult to find.
They want to trace anyone who might have seen the incident.
David Clark, 21, of Station Road, Darlington, has been remanded in custody until Monday charged with grievous bodily harm.
DEPRESSED James McMeekin turned to crime after three strokes of bad luck within days.
His father died, he lost his job and he split up with his girlfriend, Darlington magistrates heard.
McMeekin went on a drinking spree in Darlington and ended in Presto, where he was seen hiding a bottle of Southern Comfort under his jacket.
Lorraine Gabriel, prosecuting, said McMeekin walked through the checkout without paying and left the bottle in the gents.
McMeekin, 27, of Kingston Street, Darlington, admitted theft and was given a 12-month conditional discharge.
He was also ordered to pay £25 costs.
In mitigation Michael Rayner said his client had been deeply depressed in the days leading up to the incident.
His actions were ‘brought on by all three incidents running together,’ he said.
A MAN accused of stealing nearly £4,000 from a Christmas fund has been committed for trial at crown court.
Peter Leonard Bishton, 34, is charged with stealing £3,934.82 from Richmond Comrades Club Christmas savings fund.
Bishton, of Corporation Road, Darlington, was committed by Richmond magistrates yesterday to Teesside Crown Court.
Legal aid and conditional bail were extended.
TOP Smokebuster Karen MacGregor has won a first class trip on an Intercity 225 for helping her mother quit smoking.
The 11-year-old member of Wensleydale Smokebusters from Redmire will travel in style from Darlington to York and back on the new smoke-free train on Friday.
She used treats and kindness rather than nagging to persuade her mum to kick the habit for at least two weeks.
There are now plans to run the Kiss it Goodbye Buddy competition, organised by Northallerton Health Promotion Services, every year.
More than 400 Wensleydale Smokebusters have pledged to help support someone wanting to give up cigarettes.
COUNCIL officials in Darlington are anxious to create a major tourist attraction in the town.
Yesterday members of the authority's development committee heard the North Road railway museum could be seen as a possible area for expansion.
Economic development officer Alan Wallis said he wanted to bring thriving industry to the town, adding: ‘Whether that is manufacturing, office based or tourism does not matter.’
A circular from the Department of Environment has encouraged councils to think of initiatives to make their area more attractive to visitors.
And Mr Wallis believes the town should be thinking in terms of an attraction of equal size and prestige as the Beamish Museum.
Development director Stephen Tapper added: ‘We have good communications and can relieve tourist pressure on the North York Moors and the Dales.’
PARKED cars are putting children's lives at risk on a busy village road, a lollipop lady said yesterday.
Eileen Plant, who patrols outside Hurworth junior and infant school, fears there could be accidents along Roundhill Road unless some sort of parking restrictions are introduced.
Every day she has to dodge between parked cars and buses when she guides children across the road.
And the vehicles often block her view.
‘It's ridiculous,’ said Eileen, 51.
‘Some days I can hardly see down the road at all and with all these people parking I just can't get through.
‘It's so chaotic at times and I really don't like to have to dodge between cars with the children.’
Eileen said the traffic along Roundhill Road had got worse since she started as a lollipop lady ten years ago, adding: ‘I don't know what will happen when the cattle market comes here.’
The Darlington Farmers Auction Mart plan to resite the Clifton Road market at Roundhill Road.
But residents are concerned it will intrude into the countryside and cause more traffic along the already congested stretch.
Eileen said she could understand parents wanted to park outside the school to pick up their children.
‘But they are even parking on the zig-zags now.
Even if they did put down some yellow lines I don't think it would stop some people.’
Headmaster Trevor Drury said: ‘Something has got to be done about the situation as it can be very dangerous.
I have often gone out to ask parents to remove their cars.
Every day Eileen takes her life into her own hands.’
Mr Drury said he had written to parents several times to be more considerate and not park directly outside the school.
The borough council's officers' traffic group have visited the site and a report was discussed at Monday's transport committee.
Hurworth councillor Peter Foster said: ‘Someone's going to run a little child over soon because the lollipop lady is busy asking drivers to move on.
She shouldn't have to do that and she has narrowly avoided being knocked down several times herself.’
Councillors referred the matter back to the traffic group for further consideration.
Parish councillors are also due to discuss the issue next Tuesday.
ONE OF Darlington's busiest streets could come to a standstill this morning as taxi drivers pay respect to a young colleague who died suddenly.
At 11am taxi drivers from throughout the town will form a cavalcade to escort Kim Theaker's coffin to a memorial service at St Mark's Church in North Road.
Kim, 29, died of a heart attack and yesterday her ex-husband Peter explained that there was no warning that she was ill.
‘She complained of feeling ill and then the next thing she blacked out and we called an ambulance,’ said Peter, who works for Darlington Council.
Paramedics came to the house in Thompson Street, Darlington, and struggled to revive her but it was too late.
Kim had worked as a taxi driver for about five years.
She leaves four children aged between 18 months and seven years.
LENGTHY planning rows like the one which led to Albert Dryden murdering a council official, could be resolved by new legislation, a Tory councillor claimed yesterday.
Members of Darlington Council's development committee yesterday heard details of legislation to simplify and shorten planning procedures.
Conservative Coun Peter Jones said the Dryden affair could have been avoided if both sides had known where they stood from the outset.
The Planning and Compensation Act outlines a system where appeals are more likely to be dealt with by courts than planning authorities.
Although district councils will have more scope to refuse applications, Labour councillors fear some policy controls could shift to central Government.
A ROW over health provision in Darlington erupted last night as Conservatives and Labour battled over NHS reforms.
Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, said health service reforms were working and were backed by doctors.
But Labour's Alan Milburn said the NHS was suffering because of Tory cutbacks and essential services were missing in the town.
Mr Fallon said: ‘It's time Labour stopped knocking the Memorial Hospital.
Enormous improvements have been made there and £1m was provided in 1989 for new maternity and ante natal facilities.
Our reforms are working and are backed by senior doctors.’
Dr John MacDonald, a consultant in obstetrics and gynaecology at the Memorial, said it was ‘simplistic and misleading’ to claim funding was the only cause of NHS problems.
‘Inefficient use of resources, ineffective management, restrictive practices and conflicts of interest have undermined attempts at improving the services provided at the Memorial,’ he said.
Mr Milburn said: ‘There is no fat left to cut in the NHS.
Further financial savings would be fatal to services at the Memorial.
It's time to save the NHS.
‘Managers at Darlington Memorial Hospital are currently wrestling with how to make up to £1.5m in cuts.
Over the last four years ‘cost improvement programmes’ have cut almost £4m from its budget.’
Mr Milburn, whose comments have been supported by consultant Sheila Shearson, said Darlington had been without a fulltime accident and emergency consultant even though money was allocated for the post two years ago.
‘I will be seeking that Labour's £1bn for the NHS provides extra money for this new consultant post,’ he said.
Mr Milburn added that specialist skin treatments were not available in Darlington.
DARLINGTON should have control over its affairs, Labour candidate Alan Milburn said yesterday.
Labour council leader John Williams and Mr Milburn yesterday produced a declaration arguing for Darlington to become one of the first unitary authorities under local government reform.
Coun Williams said he wanted unitary status as soon as possible so Darlington could control areas now under the county council such as education and social services.
But Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, said: ‘It is completely misleading to describe Labour's plans as unitary.
There would be a second tier assembly a regional organisation based in Newcastle.’
Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg said yesterday: ‘We want a regional assembly although we haven't said where it will be yet.
Mr Fallon's claims that it will be in Newcastle are unfounded.
It could even be based in Darlington.
LABOUR are firm favourites to win the marginal Darlington seat according to North-East bookmakers Gus Carter.
Candidate Alan Milburn is 4/11 to capture the seat from Tory Michael Fallon who is 2/1.
Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg is 33/1.
The Conservatives have a majority of just over 2,000.
THE body of the pilot of a light aircraft missing over the North Pennine moors for six hours was found among wreckage last night.
The man's name is being withheld until relatives have been informed.
He is known to be a member of the Teesside Aero Club based at Teesside Airport, near Darlington.
His body and the wreckage of his PA 28 Cherokee single engine plane were found at Horseshoe Hill on the southern edge of Stanhope Moor at about 10.50pm.
The grim discovery was made by members of the fell rescue team from RAF Leeming in North Yorkshire.
They were keeping a watch on the scene last night.
He had been reported missing shortly after 5.30pm on a flight from Teesside to Carlisle.
He was flying about 20 minutes behind the Aero Club's chief instructor when he radioed to Newcastle Airport air traffic control that he was descending to below 1,000 feet because of thick fog.
Emergency services, fell search and rescue teams and RAF and Royal Navy helicopters were called in after a driver reported seeing a light aircraft flying just feet above his vehicle in the area between Consett and the Derwent Reservoir.
Police from Consett searched the Waskerley area but found nothing.
The search was extended west to Rookhope, near Stanhope, and the RAF Rescue Co-ordination Centre sent a Sea King helicopter from RAF Boulmer in Northumberland.
A Royal Navy Sea King from an RAF base near Prestwick, Scotland, also joined the search.
The pilots were able to search some areas below the fog, but said visibility was almost nil at higher levels.
Fell rescue teams from RAF Leuchars in Scotland also raced to the scene.
A spokesman explained: ‘They are being called in because visibility is so bad.’
The Northumbria police helicopter was also sent and firemen and ambulance crews were standing by.
The pilot took off at about 4.30pm and last contacted the control at about 5pm after encountering fog and snow.
Floating voters target
FLOATING voters were yesterday targeted by Conservative candidate Michael Fallon in a bid to win the ‘don't know’ vote.
Mr Fallon said about 3,000 of 26,000 people he had canvassed were still unsure how they would vote tomorrow.
He disputed figures in The Northern Echo poll which said 15pc were undecided and gave Labour an 11pc lead.
‘Our figures show things differently.
We want to catch the floating voters and show that a vote for the Liberal Democrats is a vote wasted as it would help put Mr Kinnock in at No 10.’
Labour's Alan Milburn said: ‘People are going to vote for change in Darlington.
They recognise it is time to end the recession, to save the NHS and abolish the poll tax.
People realise it is time for Labour.’
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg said he was encouraged by support when out canvassing.
The Lib Dems polled 9.5pc in The Northern Echo poll but Mr Bergg felt the vote could be higher.
‘I want people to realise that a vote for us is not wasted.’
’ Free speech' protest
BRITISH National Party supporters protested outside St Cuthbert's Church in Darlington, for free speech for their candidate Dr Donald Clarke.
He had been invited to a debate at the church with the town's three other candidates but the invitation was later withdrawn.
Kevin Scott, Dr Clarke's agent, said: ‘We want free speech for the BNP and equal rights for all candidates.’
Rev John Pilkington, who chaired the meeting for Darlington Churches Together, said the debate was lively.
Almost 200 people, including members of Darlington Hebrew Congregation, attended.
DARLINGTON:
Labour are firm favourites to win Darlington according to North-East bookmakers Gus Carter.
Alan Milburn is 4/11 to take the seat from Tory Michael Fallon who is 2/1.
Lib Dem Peter Bergg is 33/1.
DARLINGTON:
Election candidates in Darlington have failed to meet the Green challenge, according to Dr Robert Upshall, who said copies of the Green Party's charter were sent to the three main candidates but none of them agreed to sign it.
Record number of crime victims helped
A DARLINGTON agency founded to help victims of crime has dealt with a record number of people in the first three months of this year.
Darlington Victim Support had 1,139 referrals between January and March compared with 654 in the same period last year.
Group chairman Tom Peacock said if crime in Darlington stays at its present level Victim Support will have dealt with more than 4,600 incidents by the end of the year, compared to last year's total of 2,789.
Higher plane:
Trainee joiner Steven Hart, 22, of Harrowgate Hill, Darlington, who works for conservatory company Amdega, has reached a higher plane by winning the Carpentry and Foundation award.
Case adjourned:
Kenneth Webster, 42, of Haughton Road, Darlington, has pleaded not guilty at the town's magistrates court to two charges of selling alcohol to under-18s.
The case was adjourned for seven days.
Cycles stolen:
Two mountain cycles worth £150 and £190 were stolen from Clark's Yard, Darlington, yesterday.
Boxed off:
Boxing gloves, a head guard, boxing boots, a protective box and a radio were stolen from a car on Hurworth Green yesterday.
Homelessness record under Tories, says Labour candidate
Requests to Darlington council for help with housing have tripled in the last three years, according to Labour.
Mr Alan Milburn, the party's candidate in the town, said there were 160 homelessness investigations in 1988–89 and an estimated 629 this year.
‘Under the Conservatives, homelessness has risen to record levels.
In Darlington, there are in excess of 3,000 people on the council's housing waiting list and it is growing longer by the day.
‘Labour will build new homes in Darlington.
The new Labour government will begin the phased release of receipts from council house sales so that houses can begin to be built again.’
He said this would mean £1m. available in Darlington.
‘Were the Conservatives to remain in office, that money would remain buried in the bank vaults, unable to benefit the people of our town.’
But Mr Michael Fallon, the Conservative candidate, said it was right that a quarter of the receipts should go on housing while threequarters went towards repayment of debt.
‘Darlington council's debt is £50m.
And it is the poll tax payers who have to pay for that debt to be serviced.’
He said £22.4m. of government money had been spent in the town through housing associations since 1979, creating 1,194 units of accommodation.
Mr Peter Bergg, the Liberal Democrat candidate, said Labour's plans would not provide enough money quickly enough to sort out the country's homelessness problems.
‘We will put £1.35bn. into housing.
We would increase the public sector borrowing requirement for the first two years before reducing it sharply for the rest of our term of office to balance the books over five years.
‘Labour's policy is that they are going to provide the money at some point when the country can afford it, but everyone knows they will never be able to afford it.’
POST OFFICE IN LEAFLETS BLUNDER
The Post Office has apologised to the Liberal Democrat candidate in Darlington after leaflets from the British National Party were delivered folded together with his own party's literature.
Mr Ian Heaviside, the Royal Mail election coordinator for Darlington district, said every postmen had now been instructed not to fold the leaflets.
‘This was an isolated incident and we have spoken to the postman involved,’ he said.
Mr Peter Bergg, the Liberal candidate, said he knew of at least four houses where it had happened including the party's own offices in Coniscliffe Road.
‘I am extremely annoyed about it and I want to make it clear that I find the policies of the British National Party abhorrent.
‘Of course I could be in danger of losing out in terms of votes because of this.
But I am much more concerned with the reputation of the Liberal Democrats.
My election chances are not as important as the good name of the party.
‘I want to make it clear that the party has no links whatsoever with the British National Party.’
Election rules allow each candidate to send one leaflet to every house or every person on the electoral role in the constituency.
Leaflets from different parties can be delivered at the same time as long as they are not folded together.
Labour council blamed as poll tax surcharge rises
The Labour-run Darlington council has been soft on poll tax dodgers, the town's Conservative candidate said this week.
Mr Michael Fallon said he thought it was wrong that the surcharge for non-payment had increased from £16.16 last year to £19.65 this year.
‘They have had two years now to take people to court.
This figure should be going down by now, not increasing.
‘I think the Labour council has been stalling because of the General Election.’
Mr Malcolm Watson, head of revenue and computer services, said the council had taken every measure it could to recover the money.
‘We have issued 13,000 liability orders in the 1991–92 financial year.
I think that demonstrates our commitment to enforcing collection of the poll tax.’
For Labour, Mr Alan Milburn said the poll tax had been a disaster costing the country £19bn. and Darlington £25m.
Seven out of ten families in Darlington would be better off under Labour's fair rent proposals.
Mr Peter Bergg, the Liberal Democrat candidate, said both Conservatives and Labour plans for financing local government were expensive and inefficient.
The Liberal's local income tax proposals, in contrast, would cost virtually nothing to implement or collect.
‘The whole set up is there and yet the other parties want to carry on with their wasteful plans.’
Head to head in Darlington
Two head-to-head contests take place between three of the four Darlington election candidates this week.
Mr Peter Bergg for the Liberal Democrats, Mr Michael Fallon for the Conservatives and Mr Alan Milburn for Labour meet at St. Cuthbert's Church Centre tomorrow at 8pm to discuss homelessness, overseas aid, prison overcrowding, the maintenance of peace and electoral reform.
Tickets will be available tomorrow from churches in the town.
On Monday the three move on to the Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College for unscripted questions from students in the main hall in their lunch hour.
The debate is not open to the public.
Hospital unveils new listening machine
A new computer listening machine will treat up to 200 children with hearing problems in its first year of use.
Doctors unveiled the £16,000 Electric Response Audiometer at Darlington Memorial Hospital this week after a four-year campaign to buy the equipment.
Charities throughout County Durham and North Yorkshire helped buy the machine which will test the hearing of babies and mentally handicapped people.
It can also indicate the presence of other illnesses such as multiple sclerosis.
‘Up until now people have had to travel to Middlesborough or Newcastle for this diagnostic treatment,’ says chief technician, Mr Peter Barton.
‘But now we can take children and adults from as far away as Stanhope and Richmond.’
There is already a waiting list of 50 people for the new machine.
It works by scanning electric pulses in the brain which form five types of waves each representing a different sound.
This gives doctors a detailed diagnosis of the way sounds make their way from the ear drum to the brain.
‘It is like moving from a one dimensional to a three dimensional picture of someone's hearing,’ says Mr Barton.
Concern for the disabled but reviews are promised as pedestrian scheme gets underway
Pedestrian-only areas were officially introduced into Darlington town centre with the locking-in of a traffic bollard this week.
But disabled shoppers protested just yards away that the scheme barred them from using some shops.
Borough and county councillors and officers gathered at the junction of Duke Street and Raby Terrace on Monday to officially launch the 18month trial project.
Coun. Ray Flowers, chairman of the county highways committee, and Coun.
John Williams, leader of Darlington council, helped put the last bollard in place.
A safe place Both said they were delighted the scheme had begun two weeks ahead of schedule and promised residents and visitors a safer and more pleasant place to shop.
‘Members and officers of the county and borough councils have worked closely together to bring this scheme to fruition,’ said Coun. Flowers.
‘The public has also played its part in developing the proposals, particularly by way of a comprehensive consultation exercise during which they gave a high level of support for the principles.’
Coun. Williams said the scheme, which bans traffic from High Row, Skinnergate, Bondgate and Blackwellgate between 10.30 and 4pm, was just the first step in a review of the whole town centre.
Although buses could still use Bondgate and Blackwellgate, both councils would look into the problem of bus congestion in the town centre, he said.
‘We want to sort out the bus chaos plaguing the town centre and look at the market square and pedestrianising other areas,’ he added.
Coun. Alan Robinson (Lab) said towns all over Europe had introduced pedestrian-only shopping for at least part of the day and it had been hailed as a great success.
‘Darlington must be one of the last towns of its size to be bringing in pedestrianisation,’ he said.
He stressed the scheme was experimental and said the council would review it as necessary if problems or complaints came to light.
‘We have modified it a little already by putting back the starting time from 10 to 10.30,’ he said.
But disabled people gathered in Duke Street during the ceremony to protest at the scheme.
Supported by Mr Michael Fallon, Conservative candidate for Darlington, and Tory borough councillors, they feared the traffic ban would create no-go areas for the severely physically handicapped.
Wheelchair-bound Mrs Betty Richardson and her husband, Jim, of Newton Aycliffe, claimed they must give up shopping in Darlington after 20 years.
‘I am Betty's pusher but because I have had a hip replacement I am limited in the amount I can walk,’ said Mr Richardson.
Although the council provided more than 50 disabled car parking spaces in the shopping centre, the couple claimed this was not enough.
Mr Don Macro, chairman of Dial-a-Ride, which provides minibus transport for the elderly and disabled, said the scheme created problems for the charity's clients.
‘We wholeheartedly support pedestrianisation but I am concerned that our buses could get bottled up on the ringroad,’ he said.
Coun. Tony Richmond, leader of the Conservative group on Darlington council, also supported the idea of traffic-free zones but said the areas chosen for the scheme were unsuitable.
Shop owners had made numerous complaints that delivery lorries could not get to their premises, he said.
During the official opening ceremony one van driver who arrived at 10.35am was turned away by police and vowed angrily he would return to his warehouse for instructions.
Mr Fallon said many disabled people wrote to him concerned that they would not be able to shop at convenient times.
‘Nobody is against pedestrianisation in principle but it has been too harshly applied,’ he said.
‘I would hope at the very least the council will review it after three months and consult the disabled, town centre traders and shopkeepers, otherwise we will end up with ghost streets closed off to those least able to move about town.’
Places reserved ‘But supporters of the scheme said provision had been made for disabled shoppers.
About 50 parking spaces were reserved for the disabled in Abbot's Yard car park, Houndgate, Horsemarket and Raby Terrace, said Coun. Robinson.
Disabled people parking before 10.30 would also be allowed to stay for three hours.
A mixed blessing for traders but welcomed by shoppers
Although teething troubles dogged the first week of pedestrianisation in Darlington traders and shoppers generally welcomed the scheme.
While shopkeepers in Skinnergate admitted deliveries had been difficult with drivers turning back, most supported the idea of traffic-free streets.
Mr Brian Harvey, owner of Skinnergate Cycles, said lorry congestion had been caused most mornings as delivery men jostled to complete their business before the 10.30 deadline.
‘I think pedestrianisation is great but the shops need to be serviced,’ he said.
‘I had to pick up two bikes from Stockton and, because I couldn't park outside my shop, I got soaked in heavy rain wheeling them in.’
Customers taking bikes to the shop for repair or picking up new cycles found they could not park near the shop.
However, Mr Harvey welcomed the ban on cars which had caused endless problems for shoppers in the past.
He stressed the scheme was in its infancy and hoped that, with the council's help, it would be a success.
The feeling was echoed by staff at Taylor's butcher's at the other end of Skinnergate.
‘We have had a few of our delivery men have missed the time by just two or three minutes but as people get used to it things should improve,’ said a spokesman.
Trade had suffered a little in the early morning because entry to Skinnergate from Bondgate was not permitted.
Workmen who normally called at Taylor's on their way to work had not been in because of this.
‘But the street is much quieter because there is not the through traffic and that is much more pleasant,’ said the spokesman.
However, Binn's department store on the corner of High Row and Blackwellgate could suffer greatly because of pedestrianisation, said Mr Neil Setterfield, assistant manager.
While the company was not against improving the town centre for shoppers, the new scheme would cause serious problems for delivery vehicles.
‘We have not had any great problems yet but we are traditionally not very busy during March and April,’ he said.
‘But we are not happy with the situation.
We need to be able to take deliveries at all times of the day and it is very difficult to dictate to carriers, especially when they come from the other end of the country, what time they can deliver.
‘Unless something is done and we are given some special dispensation we will never be happy with this.’
He said the 10.30 deadline caused congestion on High Row and this would increase as the year progressed to more busy shopping times.
Traffic problems on the ringroad, particularly around Bondgate roundabout, have vexed motorists at peak times and this was one area the council intended looking at quite soon, said Mr Alan Docherty, of Darlington planning department.
The change of traffic direction at the Bondgate end of Skinnergate, the one-way system introduced in Salt Yard and the traffic lights at the bottom of Woodland Road combined to worsen the problem.
‘It is very early days and a lot of people are not yet used to the new system,’ said Mr Docherty.
‘We need more time to see how things develop.
It has been very poor weather this week and that influences traffic and pedestrians.’
General feedback to the town hall from shoppers had been good, he said, with most people welcoming the lack of traffic at peak times, particularly on High Row.
Mr Bill Jefferson and his wife, Freda, of The Birches, Strait Lane, Hurworth, who celebrated their golden wedding anniversary on Tuesday.
The couple, both aged 71, met in 1940 when relatives introduced them.
Two years later they were married at Darlington Holy Trinity Church and now they have a son, David, a daughter, Carol, and six grandchildren.
Mr Jefferson retired from his post as Naafi produce buyer in 1976; his wife worked for the railways during the war.
TOWN GETS IT OWN EATING OUT GUIDE
An eating-out guide to Darlington featuring 58 restaurants, cafés and pubs in the district has been published by the borough council.
The booklet gives a brief description of each place with symbols to show the price range, whether vegetarians and children are catered for, opening times and transport details.
Venues awarded a Heartbeat logo in the council's healthy eating campaign are also identified.
Eating places in the 14 page brochure include the Bishop's House, Sardi's, Eastern Bamboo, Victor's and Capri restaurants as well as the Talk of the Town Social Club and Pizza Hut.
The cafés section includes those at the Arts Centre and Dolphin Centre, Brambles Tea Shop, the Elim Christian Centre Coffee Shop and the Cockerton Coffee Pot.
Pubs featured include The Institute, Perry's Brasserie, the Baydale Beck and two Hurworth pubs The Comet and The Otter and Fish.
Copies of the guide are available free from Darlington Tourist Information Centre, West Row, tel..
LABOUR VISION
Ms Harriet Harman, the shadow health spokesman, visited Darlington this week and laid out a vision of life under Labour.
Speaking to 300 people at a national Labour Party rally at the Dolphin Centre, she vowed that a Labour government would set up 6,000 nursery and after school places in its first two years.
Staff would be offered the chance to choose the hours they worked.
She said the Labour Party's national minimum wage proposals would be of particular benefit to women and promised to bring all opted-out hospitals back into the mainstream.
‘We want hospitals that are accountable to local people and provide services that local people want, not hospitals run like businesses.’
Other speakers included Mr Tom Sawyer, the deputy secretary of NUPE, who was born in Darlington, and Mr Alan Milburn, the Labour candidate for the town.
Keilder earns its keep
County Durham and Cleveland could have faced serious water shortages had Keilder reservoir not been built, a water environment group heard.
The National Council of Women in Darlington, which met at the Coachman Hotel this week, were told the tenyear-old reservoir had staved off drought in the North-East.
They were being addressed by the National Rivers Authority environmental quality manager, Mr Malcolm Colley.
He said water and beach quality had improved over the last five years.
However, the Tees Estuary, in particular, still posed environmental problems.
‘There are 33 stretches of EC bathing water from Berwick to Saltburn,’ said Mr Colley.
‘About half of them fail to comply with European standards.’
Long sea out-falls and more sewage treatment works will help improve beach quality, he said.
Mrs Elizabeth Crabb, chairman of the Tees Valley branch, asked Mr Colley: ‘Whether excessive lead in the water has something to do with the violence which is rife in our cities?’
Mr Colley said he had read papers which suggested there was a link between them but was not able to confirm there was anything in the theory.
About 60 women attended the Water, Waste and Want study day.
Dr Allan Clements, of ICI sponsors of the event addressed the meeting later in the day.
Cigarettes warning
Mr Michael Fallon, the Darlington Conservative candidate, has written to Rothman's employees about Labour plans to ban tobacco advertising.
‘The chairman of Rothman's, Lord Swaythling, recently wrote to me, spelling out the particular risk to Rothman's workforce in the North-East.’
he wrote.
He said the Conservative government had always opposed a ban on tobacco advertising and he promised to ‘continue to defend the interests of Rothman's workers in my constituency.’
Mr Alan Milburn, for Labour said: ‘Michael Fallon can dredge up all the negative scare stories he likes, but the workers at Rothman's will not be intimidated by them.
‘They know as he does that 75pc of the cigarettes manufactured in Darlington go abroad.
So the British ban on advertising will not affect them.
‘Mr Fallon should stop playing politics with employment in this town.’
Home Secretary promises action to fight crime
Mr Kenneth Baker, the Home Secretary, visited Darlington this week and promised tougher measures against so-called joyriding, car crime and bail bandits.
At a press conference held before a walkabout in the town centre he said the insurance industry had increased the premiums on ‘hot’ hatchbacks often the target for joyriders.
‘I have also talked to manufacturers about the need for stronger locks and devices which immobilize the car.’
He said a new Act which came into force on Wednesday would mean magistrates could impose five-year sentences on joyriders and treat passengers in the car equally severely.
People charged with taking a car could also be punished for the damage done to it.
And under a procedure known as ‘reversal of the burden of proof’ the defendant would have to prove he did not commit the damage rather than the other way round.
On bail bandits people who offended while on bail he promised to bring in legislation to increase the penalties and set up bail hostels.
‘All this is symbolic of our tough policy on law and order.
Labour in contrast is soft on crime.’
He said security cameras in town centres an idea recently proposed in Darlington were being used increasingly in Britain, and the success seen after their introduction at football grounds was being repeated in high streets.
‘Young thugs don't like to know they are being watched and these cameras have been especially good at cutting down on incidents in the street,’ he said.
Mr Peter Bergg, for the Liberal Democrats, said the measures showed a typical Conservative obsession with sentencing.
‘They just try and make the criminal more fearful of crime but more laws do not mean less crime we have seen that with all their previous measures.
‘In contrast the Liberal Democrats concentrate on crime prevention.
We would shift resources from detection to prevention.’
For Labour, Mr Alan Milburn said the Conservatives had previously reduced the penalty for car crime.
‘While we welcome their joyriding legislation it doesn't even go back to the situation we had previously.
It's too little too late.
‘The Conservatives have had 13 years to get law and order right.
If they cannot do it in that time they never will.
‘Labour supports action to prevent crime and would set up a partnership between the police, the council and the local people.
‘Tory Party smoke screens a week before the General Election cannot obscure the fact that crime has increased while the Conservatives have been in power.’
Superstore plans and cross-town route get a thorough airing
Controversial plans for a superstore on the outskirts of Darlington could undermine the new Cornmill shopping centre.
This was the claim made by the town's Conservative candidate, Mr Michael Fallon, when he spoke to critics of the Safeway scheme this week.
Residents packed All Saints' Church hall for a public meeting which organisers hoped would rally opposition to the proposed £15m. superstore at Blands Corner.
‘Any further development there,’ said Mr Fallon, ‘will completely undermine the Cornmill shopping centre due to open this August.
‘We should be encouraging more shoppers into the town not luring them to the edges.’
He warned that the project would change the character of the West End for ever and lead to a ribbon of development between Darlington and Croft.
Mr Fallon declared that he would fight the proposal at the public inquiry which opens on May 18.
The Park West ward councillor, Mrs Heather Scott (Con), told the meeting the original application was turned down partly because of Ministry of Transport objections about traffic access.
She added: ‘We have discovered today that Safeway have put in an amended access plan which Durham county council is likely to accept.
We are very unhappy about that.’
Several householders were very concerned about road congestion in the area, which they said, would only worsen if the building went ahead at Blands Corner.
Mr Fallon said plans to improve the A1(M) could ease traffic problems.
He confirmed that Department of Transport consulting engineers would examine the A1(M) and the A66 interchange to consider whether a northbound spur could be built.
And news of the DoT decision to look at the interchange this week raised the hopes of green campaigners opposed to the cross-town route.
They have argued that the junction could be altered to remove the need for the new road.
The cross-town route proposed by Durham county council would link the A66 from Teesside with the A1(M), via a new road through Darlington on to the A68 past Faverdale on the edge of town.
Protesters argue that traffic from Teesside could use the existing southern A66 by-pass round Darlington to Blands Corner and then head for the A1(M).
Darlington Environmental Watch spokesman Mrs Maggie Bosanquet said she was delighted by the news from the DoT.
However, Mr John Braithwaite, assistant director of highways and bridges design at Durham county council, said the possible northbound junction would not remove the need for the new route.
‘I have never considered that these would be alternatives, they serve different purposes,’ he said.
If the A66(M) junction were redesigned it would cost several million pounds and take several years to complete, he said.
Darlington tipped for airport deal
The world's biggest civil engineering project could soon be coming to Darlington, a cabinet minister said this week.
Mr Peter Lilley, Trade and Industry Secretary, was visiting Cleveland Structural Engineering with Darlington's Conservative candidate, Mr Michael Fallon.
The firm is part of a consortium trying to beat off global competition for the Hong Kong airport deal which is worth three times as much as the channel tunnel.
‘Nothing is certain until the final signature but the outlook is extremely good,’ he said after touring the plant.
‘The government is giving this project every conceivable support because of the enormous amount of work it would provide not just for Cleveland but for many other British companies.
He said they were facing particularly strong competition from a Korean consortium, but he was confident Cleveland's reputation for reliability would prove the decisive factor.