

Religious education encrusted in myths and fantasies
Professional religious education teachers like Marjorie B Clark (Points of View, today) are doing valuable work in many secondary schools in trying to separate the facts about religion from the myths and fantasies with which they have become encrusted.
Good RE teaching is about the historical facts and the literature of the main world religions and it allows the young to study the beliefs and attitudes held by the adherents of these religions and also by humanists.
Unfortunately there are many secondary schools, especially in the denominational sector, where this strictly educational approach is not followed.
In primary schools, class teachers are expected to be polymaths and to devote 10 per cent of their time (if they obey the official guidelines) to teaching a detailed programme of religious and moral education.
This is drawn up by the curriculum committee, which argues that since God, death, suffering and the purpose of life are all at the heart of religion, and since children sometimes ask questions about them, the class teacher should not only teach about these matters, but be subject both to assessment procedures and to official inspection.
But we all have our own ideas about the answers to these big questions and it ought to be left to the discretion of class teachers to allow their pupils to learn about life's problems in their own time and at their own pace.
This attempt to codify religious and moral education in the primary school is a mistake; it will unnecessarily tie the hands both of teachers and of education departments.
As for worship, or religious observance as the legislation calls it, I agree entirely with Marjorie B Clark that ‘compulsory acts of worship can never be educationally justified’.
The trouble is that the Scottish Education Department disagrees with both of us and insists that religious observance must not only be reinstated but also reinforced.
The department is now laying itself open to serious educational criticism on several grounds:
1
It is undemocratically imposing its will on reluctant schools;
2
It has failed to understand the vital distinction between education and indoctrination;
3
It is failing to make it clear to parents that the law gives them full rights to withdraw their children from religious instruction and religious observance.
Holy Bat-poo
TROUBLED times for the Church of England.
Hard on the heels of the furore about women priests it now has to contend with something equally knotty — the fatal British tendency to be kind to animals.
Any animal.
In this case the appalling British bat which is fouling up churches.
It's probably best to declare an interest.
We're not all bat lovers.
Put to the test, we suspect the anti-bat vote would be a close second to the anti-rat faction.
In fact, take out David Attenborough, still fondly remembered in his early television days standing knee-deep in the bat-droppings of centuries, and a few hundred assorted enthusiasts, and this country, given the chance, would go solidly anti-bat.
But a few hundred enthusiasts were all that was needed to make these dirty little flying mice a protected species, free to flit and, well, leave droppings, wherever it takes their fancy under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act.
Cottage and village hall ceilings come high on their list of favourite dropping places.
Anyone who has had such a ceiling sag under the strain will sympathise with this week's debate in the Church of England synod.
Distracted vicars want action against the furry little pests, and quite right too.
Whether they will be allowed to evict their unwelcome, unsavoury, tenants, from belfries and elsewhere, is another matter.
But it is encouraging that Bats in Churches, sponsored by, Lord help us, the Bat Conservation Trust, is countered by the Movement Against Bats in Churches.
That is genuine progress.
It's time we took a stronger line with wild-eyed enthusiasts who don't think through the full consequences of their soft-hearted feelings.
When are we going to get a Society for the Prevention of Birds or, failing that, at least a society for the prevention of seagulls and starlings?
Only be thankful they don't live in lofts and churches.
Voting religiously
BOB Kernohan, mentioned last week as a possible lay candidate for Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, has had a life outside the Kirk, we learn.
In 1964 he stood for the pretty safe (at the time) Conservative seat of Glasgow Pollok.
Apparently his chances were not helped by his photograph, where his dark and dashing looks were taken by some for Jewish.
Bigots decided to vote against him.
Then it was thought his Irish-sounding name suggested Catholicism, and other bigots decided to take action.
Finally, the word went around that far from being either Jewish or Catholic, Mr Kernohan was a high official of the Orange Order.
The Catholic Tory voters took the appropriate electoral steps.
Funnily enough, then, but for 296 or so bigoted votes, the Rt Hon RD Kernohan MP might now have been Secretary of State.
Keeping the faith but losing a way of life
Frank Farragher reports from Galway on the impact of the Digital job losses
THE PEOPLE in the west of Ireland city of Galway are no more religious than the next.
In the past year they have lost a bishop in a love-child affair but over the past few days they had more faith in prayer than in their politicians when it came to saving the Digital computer plant.
Galway, a tourist and university city with a population of 55,000, regarded the Digital plant as part of the landscape.
Securing a job in Digital, opened in the recession-free days of the early 70s, was thought to be akin to getting a position in the civil service: once in, there forever.
The word on the streets of Galway last week was that hardware manufacturing with its 800 jobs had gone by the wayside.
Last-minute trips to Boston by the employment minister, Ruari Quinn, and local mayor, Padric McCormack, were regarded as a face-saving exercise — something to be seen to be done.
At last Friday's meeting of Galway County Council, independent councillor Joe Brennan, a public representative noted more for his faith in God than in liberal man, proposed a prayer to save Digital.
‘We should look to the Holy Spirit to guide us for good news.
Ireland should go back to the past and pray and concentrate on God.
The number of unemployed is increasing and human beings have failed us,’ he said.
This morning the 780 employees of Digital in Galway will wake up with a hangover after a night's mourning and stare into an uncertain future, wishing that some divine intervention could be called upon to extract them from their present straits.
The Digital workforce in Galway was a loyal and dedicated one which placed its faith in the company ethos of trust and co-operation.
People's lives were Digital oriented: many had been there since finishing second level school or university…life outside Digital was unthinkable.
The Digital thinking permeated through all walks of life in the Galway region.
Digital workers were always good for a car loan or a mortgage, perceived as being in secure, well-paid jobs.
Good workers, with high self-esteem…not the type to renege on a £60,000 mortgage or a £10,000 car loan.
The term ‘Digital mortgage’ in Galway was synonymous with the middle to upper end of the housing market.
With an average three-bedroomed semi-detached fetching in the region of £55,000, the typical Digital purchaser often dipped into the £70,000-£80,000 market.
A frightening thought now for former workers looking at interest rates of close on 14 per cent.
Even in the days when every dog on the street knew about the impending Digital closure, employees of the company were reluctant to talk publicly about their plight.
The whole company ethos of keeping everything within the plant and of not talking to television or papers survived even when all seemed lost.
The workers' faith has not been repaid this week — in a region which had escaped many of the severe job cuts which had hit other cities.
Now just 350 software jobs have survived the multinational hatchet.
Other multinational companies like Thermo-King, Baird, Northern Telecom and Crown Control still survive in a city which has other major employers in third level education, hospitals and the tourist industry.
Digital was always regarded in Galway with the same respect and awe as Cinderella had for her fairy godmother.
The model plant, model workers who didn't need a union, jobs for life…but this fairy godmother forgot all about the happy ending.
The 450,000sq ft factory on the edge of the world famous Ballybrit racecourse — Digital sponsored the richest race in the summer festival — had an influence which permeated into every corner of life in the city.
In human terms the loss adds up to 800 jobs in Digital and 2,000 more depending directly on orders, supplies and service.
In financial terms, the loss is estimated at £100 million per annum to the Irish economy.
Not far from Digital a firm set up by the Rehabilitation Institute employing 60 people, some of them handicapped, supply packaging to Digital.
‘We have large sales to Digital and there aren't too many Digitals out there,’ said Rehab company chief Hugh McNally.
A small company in Galway called Standard Printers has a £2.5 million annual contract with Digital.
Its boss, Michael Cunningham, now fears that some of his 71 staff will have to be let go.
The car hire company Johnson Perrott at any one time has several hundred cars at Digital…the list goes on and on.
Earlier this week, workers at the Galway plant flashed an electronic message to the Digital HQ in Maynard, Boston, USA.
It was desperation stakes, a last throw of the dice, but workers in Ballybrit agreed to take a 10 per cent cut in wages, all to no avail.
There is no bitterness towards Ayr in Galway.
Everyone knows that in the contracting world of producing computer hardware it would always be a case of dog eat dog.
Unfortunately for Galway, the perception is that Michael Heseltine had an Alsatian teamed up against an Irish poodle.
Until about three weeks ago there had been a belief among Digital employees in Galway and the Industrial Development Authority in Ireland that Digital's plant in Ayr would lose out.
But in the words of the former Irish minister Bobby Molloy, who represents Galway City in the Irish Parliament: ‘A major change occurred’.
Last night in the ‘Digital pubs’ it didn't really matter any more whether Heseltine had offered a major defence contract inducement to the company.
They saw little point in diagnosis after the patient had been placed in the coffin.
Yesterday a dream died in Galway…a dream which had been born in the heady, optimistic days of the early 1970s when bright-eyed youngsters leaving school walked in the doors of the Digital plant and more often than not were given a job.
By 10am on the morning of 25 February, 1993, tears had taken the place of hope.
Winners and losers: The sign outside the Digital factory at Ayr yesterday
A love at odds with its faith
Joan McAlpine talks to an angry priest about the Catholic Church's attitude to homosexuals among its ranks ‘
I believe that homosexuality is a gift from God.
To deny that gift is to deny God's will, saying His way isn't good enough.
It's a type of blasphemy, if you like’— Bernard Lynch
THE Roman Catholic Church has never been the most liberal institution in its views on homosexuality.
It condemns gays as sinful and evil.
So it would seem safe to assume that life as a gay priest might be something of a tortured path — if not a contradiction in terms.
But some homosexuals in the church — especially in America — have exchanged guilty, fervid prayers for support groups and gay pride marches.
They are now asking that Rome recognises — or at least does not condemn — the love that dare not speak its name.
Angry priests and nuns argue that the hardline stance on chastity hampers the church in educating young people about AIDS, as well as caring for those who have the disease.
But those who raise their heads above the vestibule are seldom treated with Christian charity.
The story of Father Bernard Lynch demonstrates how the wrath of the bishops can strike those who bare their souls to homophobic scrutiny.
In May 1988, Lynch, a high profile campaigner for gay rights, was indicted on five charges of child abuse in New York City.
He was accused of molesting a 14-year-old boy whom he had been counselling while working as a school chaplain.
But the prosecution case collapsed.
Questions were raised over the fabrication of evidence.
It was strongly suspected that the softly spoken Irishman had been framed.
He was acquitted on all counts after the court heard the boy in question, by then a young man, had been put under pressure to testify by the FBI and the district attorney.
In his book A Priest On Trial, published this week by Bloomsbury, Lynch sets out the transcript of the trial and accuses the church of colluding in his personal crucifixion.
By the time of his trial, Father Lynch, a former missionary in Africa, had been working with gay Catholics in the city for nearly ten years.
He had been openly critical of his own archbishop's defence of discrimination against homosexuals in church employment.
A trained counsellor, he has ministered to 600 people with the disease to date.
Only six remain alive.
In 1986 he founded an AIDS Ministry with Dignity, a group of lesbian and gay Catholics, and became a member of the mayor of New York's taskforce on AIDS.
The city introduced legislation that year forbidding discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
This was in marked contrast to the Vatican's letter of the same time saying gays were: ‘disordered in their nature and evil in their love’.
Lynch remembers: ‘The reaction in the city and throughout the gay world — and, indeed, among many reasonable, intelligent people — was incredulity.
How could the church, a church supposedly based on the love of humankind, issue such a horrendously offensive document?
We were devastated.’
After he spoke out against the letter, Lynch was ordered to take a year's sabbatical in Rome — even though by this time his ministry was receiving worldwide media coverage.
The Society of African Missionaries made him sign a document promising to be ‘Faithful to church teaching in matters of faith and morals.’
It was at this time he was indicted on child abuse charges.
‘Of all the charges brought against the gay community there is none more common than the assumption that gay and paedophile are one and the same.
‘People can hardly be blamed for this misconception when one considers how often the media, particularly the tabloid press, come out with it.
Some gay people molest children, just as some heterosexual people do, but this is because they are emotionally and psychosexually damaged, whatever their sexual orientation.’
After his acquittal, he says he was less concerned at the action of the authorities, than by the failure of his church to help him.
The church's attitude to Lynch stands in marked contrast to its harbouring of some Catholic priests who have in fact been guilty of child abuse.
‘It transpired that the Archdiocese of New York had allowed the state to defame, prosecute and condemn me, not only without offering me any aid, but also keeping from my attorney any information which might have helped me.’
Yet Lynch remains a member of the church.
He is on leave from his order, and currently works in London as a counsellor for people with AIDS.
Up until the time of his trial, he felt obliged to deny his own homosexuality.
Now he freely admits to being gay and to having had a stable, loving relationship with another man.
He continues to campaign for the right of Catholics to be openly gay.
But how can this be a realistic demand in an institution which condemns any physical pleasure outwith marriage — for heterosexuals as well as homosexuals?
And how can gay priests reasonably expect acceptance when celibacy is demanded of heterosexuals?
The desire for marriage and a family results in thousands of men leaving the priesthood.
‘I believe that homosexuality is a gift from God.
To deny that gift is to deny God's will, saying His way isn't good enough.
It's a type of blasphemy, if you like.‘
He does not believe celibacy should be demanded of priests — whether gay or straight.
Radical views like this seem unlikely ever to be accepted by the cardinals who dictate the dominant conservative teaching.
The Roman Catholic Church is distinguished by its hierarchical nature and its insistence that tradition, and the papal interpretation of God's will, is as important as scripture.
But Lynch believes his church is like a large boat which should be able to take his views on board.
‘The Catholic church is universal, like the United Nations.
It can take in all sorts of people.
In Latin America and Africa, as well as this country, there are bodies of faithful Catholics who don't adhere to church doctrine.’
He insists the Vatican's teaching is at odds with its congregations.
‘In the US, 78 per cent of Catholics believe in the ordination of women while 48 per cent approve of blessing the union of two people of the same sex.
The church's teaching on contraception is widely ignored by Catholics.’
Lynch says the church's attitude to sexuality should be reviewed in the light of HIV and AIDS.
‘The church ought to take its courage in both hands with this disease.
It should say ‘If you cannot adhere to the moral dictum, then at least only engage in safe sex.
It's not enough to say don't have sex.
The church has enormous power when it comes to education.
There is no room for soft pedalling.
This is a life and death issue.’
He believes the church must go further and examine its whole attitude to the ‘rich mosaic of sexuality’.
‘Minorities have an important role to play here.
Gays in the church, for example, are like the canaries in the Welsh mines, leading the way for others.’
Given his views, one might be surprised that Lynch remains a priest.
The popular expectation would be the humiliation of ‘defrocking’.
In fact, this is a very rare event.
Only an attack on the nuts and bolts of belief — such as denying the existence of Christ — merits this punishment.
Lapsed priests remain priests, but tend to be unemployable in their clerical functions.
Lynch is on leave from his order.
But he does say Mass when invited, often by people with AIDS who are not Catholic, but would like spiritual support from a like-minded person.
Given the radical nature of his views, one must ask why he remains a priest.
His experience of Catholicism from his earliest years up until his trial, seems to have been bound in oppression, self-denial and guilt.
As a child in the west of Ireland, he was a member of two Jansenistic religious groups.
He recalls that the Dominic Savio club, designed to safeguard bodily purity, forbade its members from even watching a screen kiss at the Saturday matinee.
In his book's conclusion, he writes: ‘It has been my sad experience, again and again, especially in my Aids ministry, to witness the damning effects of my church's institutionalised God on young people's souls.
The church has in effect, poisoned their lifeline to God.’
Why does Lynch remain in an institution which seems to deny everything he holds dear?
Why not just leave — set up home in a more tolerant spiritual pew?
After all, there are many trendy Anglicans who hold similar views.
‘I could not leave.
Once you are a Catholic you remain a Catholic, whether you become a Buddhist or an atheist.
You still think in the way you have been educated as a child.
‘Anyway, should you move out of your country because you disagree with the politics of the government?
No, you stay and try to change it.’
DONALD MACLEOD
Holy alliance
An item in your Diary (16 February) is objectionable to myself and Bob Kernohan only in the lack of style that is employed in tittle-tattle and irony nowadays.
We both come from an older school of journalism.
Some of the facts were right.
I am a Christian-Marxist, totally unreconstructed.
Bob Kernohan would not object to being called a very conservative Conservative.
I am not proposing him for Moderator, but I am pressing his case.
Unless the Church of Scotland has redefined the meaning of ordination, I remain a minister in function although I chose to demit status.
So why the holy alliance between left and right?
I doubt if Bob Kernohan and I have ever agreed on anything except personal integrity.
He is a man with something to say and an immense intellect with which to say it.
He could start a debate about a church that in order to survive will be radically different from the one we know.
He might even get media coverage beyond the protected, precious and self-indulgent ‘God slots’.
Virgin territory for miracles
MYSTICAL manifestations seem to be in the news at the moment, what with the imminent publication of a book about recent sightings of the Virgin Mary in a London tower block.
Sister Marie — or Sofia Segatis Paprocki Orvid Puciato to her friends — claims the Madonna appeared at her sixth-floor flat in Queen's Park and delivered dire warnings about coming cosmic events.
Details are sparse, but the events seem to involve the ‘three kings of Arabia’, Sir David Frost and the Queen's press secretary.
You may laugh, but already deposits worth £30,000 have been put down for the book and at least 5,000 people have telephoned bookshops to express an interest.
Indeed, mystical manifestations are not unknown even in our own hard-headed Scottish capital.
Ian Lang's visit last week to address the Edinburgh University Politics Society was marked by a phenomenon which, a few years ago, might have attracted the interest of Arthur C Clarke.
Just as Lang was rising from his chair, claims a letter in Midweek, a burst of sunlight filled the stained glass window behind him.
After the audience had accustomed their eyes to the flash, they beheld a subtle and beautiful sight.
All around the head of the minister-with-the-film-star looks was a nimbus, or brightly-shining halo.
Of course, it is premature to propose Mr Lang to the Pope for canonisation.
But, when the times comes, his proposers look as if they will have an incontestable piece of evidence.
After all, ‘Blessed Lang of Galloway’ may be the only Secretary of State to have walked all over water.
Something funny about this poster protesting against Mr Lang's visit to the Edinburgh University Union?
Perhaps it's the editor of Living Marxism who should think about going back to an educational establishment?