

Relief for Lamont as inflation tumbles
By Ewen MacAskill and Clifford German
INFLATION tumbled to 1.7 per cent yesterday, its lowest level for 25 years, and temporarily eased the pressure on the Chancellor.
However, the pound had another troubled day, falling to a record low before recovering slightly.
Meanwhile, the Government was heading for more conflict after its confirmation of a 1.5 per cent public-sector pay rise led to protests from teachers and health workers.
Mr Lamont and the Prime Minister betrayed their nervousness about the pound by ruling out further interest rate cuts in the near future in an attempt to reassure foreign markets.
Currency traders around the world remain fearful that the Government will be tempted to cut interest rates and go for growth, risking a fresh fall in sterling and another bout of inflation.
Conservative back-benchers publicly welcomed the fall in inflation, but it is unlikely to be enough to save Mr Lamont's job.
Privately, Conservative MPs predict that he will be moved in the first reshuffle after the Budget and bets are already being placed on his successor.
Kenneth Clarke, John MacGregor, Michael Portillo and Michael Howard are the front-runners.
Opposition MPs were unimpressed by the inflation fall, pointing to a much deeper economic malaise that they claimed the Chancellor was failing to address.
The inflation figure confounded economic analysts, most of whom had been predicting a much smaller reduction.
Cheaper home loans, food and the post-Christmas reductions on a host of household goods pushed the headline rate of price increases for January down from 2.6 per cent in December.
There was even better news on underlying inflation, which excludes mortgages.
It fell from 3.7 per cent to 3.2 per cent, the biggest monthly fall since records began in 1956.
Price rises in the UK are now the second lowest in Europe, behind Denmark with 1.5 per cent inflation, according to the Central Statistical Office.
Mr Lamont said: ‘This is the best possible news for everyone who wants to see a modern and competitive British economy succeeding in world markets in the 1990s.’
Explaining why he did not foresee a cut in interest rates in the near future, he said: ‘I have to take into account the needs of savers, many of whom have been writing to me recently, the exchange rate which causes concern to some people — and I believe what people above all want is stability.’
This is the second time in a fortnight the Chancellor has broken with the convention that he does not comment on interest-rate movements.
While mortgage holders will be disappointed at the lack of further cuts, it will be welcomed by savers.
Mr Major said: ‘I think people have now begun to recognise that the inflation psychology is on the retreat in the United Kingdom and that is a very valuable gain.’
The shadow Chancellor, Gordon Brown, warned that inflation was set to rise again later this year and identified the central problem as ‘the low level of activity in the economy’.
The 1.5 per cent pay rise for the public sector was announced by Mr Lamont in his autumn statement, but the details only came from the pay review bodies yesterday.
There was anger among teachers — some of whom receive only 0.55 per cent initially — as well as nurses and other hospital workers, but the message from the military, who have done relatively well in previous pay reviews compared to other public sector workers, was that there was little point in grumbling.
Doug McAvoy, general secretary of Britain's biggest teachers' union, the NUT, branded the award a ‘disgraceful insult’.
Health union negotiators rejected a 1.5 per cent pay award for 600,000 nurses, midwives and health visitors as totally unacceptable, refusing to accept the below-inflation increase recommended by the professions' pay review body.
They will now consult their members to see whether they wish to accept the rise or consider taking industrial action.
£1.5m land deal to bring more jobs for Bathgate
By Keith Aitken Economics Editor
A £1.5 million deal clinched this week in Lothian could bring more jobs to Bathgate to serve the Motorola personal telephones plant.
Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Ltd has bought a 75-acre site next to the Motorola plant at Easter Inch Farm, ready to accommodate a number of international components suppliers keen to serve the £100 million factory.
Discussions are understood to be under way with several companies which have expressed an interest in setting up alongside the plant to supply components to Motorola, which operates on a just-in-time principle of bringing in materials just as they are required for the production process.
It comes only days after Motorola lodged West Lothian's biggest planning application, designed to accelerate its five-year timetable for bringing the plant up to full production levels and to pave the way for possible further expansion in the future.
When the development was first announced in 1990, senior Motorola managers spoke of the company's policy of encouraging its global suppliers to establish local operations alongside its manufacturing plants, and said they hoped that some suppliers might be persuaded to set up in Scotland.
That prospect now seems to have moved significantly closer, and it is understood that both LEEL and Locate in Scotland are involved in discussions with several suppliers about the Bathgate site.
The signs are that the talks are progressing well.
The Motorola plant, Scotland's most significant inward investment of recent years, is expected to reach its target employment level of 1,500-2,000 jobs next year, two years ahead of schedule, but senior managers have indicated that the eventual total could be nearer 4,000 if markets continue to perform as robustly as currently projected.
Agency to fold after housing slump
By Alan Forbes
THE slump in house sales has been blamed for the failure of a West of Scotland estate agents which owes creditors £70,765.
The Dunbartonshire (Solicitors) Estate Agency was set up in 1984 by law firms in the area.
According to the former directors, the company increased its network of offices but in 1991 it was hit by ‘the ravages’ of the recession.
There was reduced income because few houses were sold and there were high overheads and staff outlays to manage an increasing stock of unsold houses.
The company, known as DEAL, was liquidated after its premises in Dumbarton and company title was sold to the manager, David Muir.
The law firms involved in DEAL were Adair's; Brunton, Miller; Blair & Bryden; Paterson Robertson & Graham and MacIntosh, Humble & Co.
Yesterday creditors agreed to appoint John Readman, of chartered accountants Ernst & Young, as liquidator.
Assets at 4 November were £11,197.
Of the £70,765 due then to creditors, the preferential creditors, the Inland Revenue and HM Customs & Excise, were owed £22,926 and £2,414 respectively.
Of the ordinary creditors, the Solicitor to the Scottish Secretary was owed £14,962, Strathclyde Regional Council's rates department was owed £3,918, and T B Dunn & Co, chartered accountants of Albert Drive, Glasgow, were owed £4,016.
Scottish financial sector worthless, claims Clarke
By Graeme Stewart
THE SHADOW Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, yesterday criticised the country's financial sector, claiming it did nothing to help the economy.
In a speech to the Scottish Trade Unions for Labour in Glasgow, Mr Clarke said the financial sector was extremely strong and dominant in the Scottish economy but asked: ‘What does it put back into Scotland?’
He said it was worthless having a respected financial sector that did nothing to help the economy and added that the vested interests of the sector needed to be tackled so that the benefits could be accrued by everyone in Scotland and not just a selected minority.
His comments brought an angry response from the executive director of Scottish Financial Enterprise, James Scott, who described them as confused nonsense.
‘Is Mr Clarke suggesting that 220,000 jobs do nothing to help the economy?
That Scotland does not benefit from the 15 per cent of GDP earned by the financial sector?’ he asked.
In a robust defence of the sector, Mr Scott said it performed outstandingly for its clients in Scotland and throughout the world.
Those clients included millions of account holders, policy holders and ordinary investors in Scotland and the rest of the UK.
He asked: ‘Are these the people Mr Clarke regards as a select minority?’
Mr Clarke also had harsh words for the Government and the Scottish National Party.
He accused Prime Minister John Major of a disgraceful betrayal of the Scottish workforce by claiming credit for Hoover jobs staying in Scotland.
After criticising Government policy since 1979, when the Conservatives came to power, Mr Clarke said: ‘For John Major to claim credit for Hoover jobs staying Scotland — thanks to him opting out of the Social Chapter and keeping wages down — is a disgraceful betrayal of the Scottish workforce.
‘It would be interesting to see how he equates his claim in the case of the jobs Nestle decided to take to France.
He'd probably say that their wages should have been lower!’
Mr Clarke told TUFL there were many voices in Scotland claiming that the Scottish economy had managed to avoid the recession and that was to the credit of the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, and his fellow ministers.
However, he said, even a cursory look at the figures showed that what really happened was not so much that Scotland had gained but the rest of the country was now becoming stuck in the kind of economic mess that Scotland had endured since 1979.
What seemed to have happened was that Scotland's economic cycle had gradually moved out of synchronisation with the national one.
Scotland's unemployment reached a 1980s peak in the first quarter of 1987, the national peak was nine months later.
He claimed that another political party which would have Scotland in the Second Division of Europe was the SNP.
He said that if the Tories had policies that were not working for the Scottish economy then the silence of the SNP since last year's general election told the real story of what independence for Scotland would really mean.
‘Action is needed and action is needed now.
The Tories have failed Scotland and the SNP has given up.
Only the Labour Party has the energy and ideas for the way forward,’ said Mr Clarke.
Alex Salmond, leader of the SNP, defended his party saying: ‘The economic prospects for an independent Scotland are outstanding, and in sharp contrast with bankrupt Britain which is sinking under Tory policies and would still be sinking under a Labour government pursuing Tory policies.’
Tom Clarke: ‘What does it put back into Scotland?’
Confusion over water sell-off
By Gary Duncan and Eric McKenzie
THE man heading the fight by Scottish councils against any water sell-off yesterday seized on comments by the shadow Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, in which he acknowledged Labour might be unable to remove private water companies after the next election.
Councillor John Connolly, convener of the water and sewerage committee of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, said he was ‘flabbergasted’ by reports of Mr Clarke's comments.
He said he was seeking a meeting with him ‘to ensure there are no further misunderstandings’.
Mr Connolly said he had written to Mr Clarke saying he very much hoped Labour's commitment to the retention of water services under local government control extended to returning those services to councils ‘in the unhappy event of any form of privatisation or transfer to some hybrid organisation’.
His letter continues: ‘I know that all in local government would support this being stated unequivocally.’
Mr Connolly was speaking after a meeting of his committee at which he and members reaffirmed their opposition to any form of water privatisation — including the introduction of a franchise system.
He said that the future shape of the water industry in Scotland should be freely determined by the nation's democratically elected local authorities.
Scottish Militant Labour also rounded on the Scottish Labour Party yesterday over the issue of water privatisation.
Councillor Tommy Sheridan, SML group leader in Glasgow District Council, said the Labour Party was likely to split over the question.
Speaking at a news conference in Glasgow, he said: ‘There are some members of the Labour Party who cannot stomach the idea of allowing Scottish water to be privatised while waving the white flag over ownership.’
He accused Labour leaders of being totally out of touch with ordinary people, and predicted that the party leader, John Smith, the shadow Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, and Donald Dewar, Labour's social security spokesman, would soon be deserted by some of the left wing of the party in Scotland.
He appealed to genuine socialists still in the Labour Party to join Scottish Militant to build a mass force for real social change.
Meanwhile, the need to separate the supply of water services from their regulation and the enforcement of health and safety standards is highlighted in a response by Scottish Natural Heritage to the Government's consultation paper on water services.
In its response SNH says it is less interested in institutional arrangements for the delivery of water services than in the need for key principles to be followed.
These are:
The need for river catchments to be planned and managed as a whole.
The need to ensure that water use by by people is not to the disadvantage of the natural beauty of the countryside or animal habitats.
The need to maintain or enhance public enjoyment of lochs, rivers and reservoirs.
SNH says any new providers of water services should be subject to a statutory duty to conserve natural heritage and that the recreational use of any land whose ownership is transferred should be safeguarded.
‘This would involve, for example, preserving existing access opportunities even when an area of land was being sold off as surplus to the supplier's requirement,’ the response states.
Back to the pack
INVESTING heavily in 1992 calendars or Cowdenbeath to win the cup might seem a better bet.
But those who can, do, and those who can't, carp.
So good luck to the firm determined to revive the Pakamac raincoat and if they do we'll eat our grey plastic button-down hood.
Some things were not meant to be revived.
Winklepicker shoes, knitted ties and Bri-nylon shirts spring to mind.
String vests and flares.
School-issue gaberdines.
Suede-fronted waistcoats.
Gannex coats.
But way up yonder, ahead of them all, is the Pakamac.
True, the grey monstrosity was an astonishing success in its time, selling 60,000 a week at the height of its popularity.
That was an amazing number of drips.
But how many people actually wore them?
When it came to the crunch, wear it and look stupid or get wet and keep your dignity, how many thousands stayed tightly rolled in school bag, shopping bag and haversack?
True, we are promised a new-look, Pakamac in name only.
No longer plastic, but high-tech nylon.
No longer grey or black, but a range of bright and pastel colours.
No longer a few shillings, but £15.
Will the few surviving traditionalists who wore Pakamacs first time round, dripping and steaming simultaneously on forlorn summer holidays or jeered unmercifully at school, take to bright colours?
And where is the new market?
The manager has been quoted as saying that the parents who wore Pakamacs in the fifties and sixties will buy them for their children.
Obviously an optimistic bachelor, unaware that, one, a Pakamac of any colour will clash with jeans, baggy jackets and Doc Martens, two, youngsters refuse to wear any kind of protective clothing on the grounds of street cred, expense and pig-headedness and, three, the clincher, they would rather emigrate than wear something bought by a parent.
Apart from that, good idea.
Next, galoshes.
Time for help
IT IS no surprise that workers at the main Leyland plant voted by four to one not to strike.
If the receiver succeeds in his plans to sell the company as a going concern then most of them might be able to hang on to their positions.
Faced with his threat that a dispute could force a total close down, the workers were not ready to risk their jobs.
The vote by their colleagues in Glasgow, two thirds of whom were in favour of a strike, is equally understandable: the small band of 550 suspect that their factory is doomed no matter if some part of the firm is rescued.
In those circumstances, voting to strike may be a final gesture of defiance.
But it is likely to prove empty in the end, even if the workers are right in thinking that, at this stage, they have nothing to lose and that a threat to withdraw their labour might help their union representatives wring a few more concessions from those in whose hands the firm's fate now rests.
In particular need of such aid are those who were made redundant yesterday.
This process seems to have been handled badly, even if it is not one that lends itself to sensitive treatment.
The terms offered to the 1,600 who are now without work are pitiful, especially when compared to those available to their fellows in Holland.
There, Daf workers who are made redundant will receive 70 per cent of their wages for the next four years.
By contrast, even those who have spent all of their working lives with Leyland in the UK are being given no more than the minimum provided by the state.
The receiver may explain this harsh treatment by claiming that to go beyond meeting the minimum legal position would jeopardise his whole strategy.
No such excuse is available to the Government.
While ministers in Holland and Belgium are intervening ‘before breakfast, lunch, tea and dinner’ in order to rescue something of the Daf structure, their counterpart in the UK holds to the view that the market alone should decide Leyland Daf's future.
The company's predicament and that of its 5,500 employees in the UK are of a kind that would respond to sympathetic treatment intelligently applied by the Government — the kind of assistance, in short, given by a previous Tory administration which nationalised Rolls Royce to save it.
Michael Heseltine, the self-styled interventionist, was, at one stage, responsible for that company when it was owned by the state.
Perhaps he ought to remember those days and get around to living up to the promise he made to the last Tory conference.
Swaps that deal brokers out of small share sales
Share exchanges are an increasingly popular alternative for investors to selling small holdings.
LIZ WALKINGTON reports
IF YOU bought into privatisation issues with limited allocations, or have inherited small parcels of shares, you may find selling them a problem.
Most stockbrokers charge a minimum commission which makes small deals very uneconomical.
An alternative is a share exchange scheme, whereby you can swap shares for a holding in a unit or investment trust.
These are less risky than individual shares and are easier and cheaper to cash in.
Another advantage is that your new investment can be put into a personal equity plan, which means income and capital gains will then be tax-free.
Share exchange is growing in popularity.
Foreign & Colonial launched its first scheme last month in response to public demand, while Alastair Herbert, of Invesco, says business in the last two years amounted to more than £40 million.
Acceptable shares are usually those listed on the UK stock exchange or the Unlisted Securities Market.
Fidelity, Gartmore and Invesco will also accept unit trusts from other management groups.
This is largely a convenience, as you could just as readily sell trust holdings yourself, but Gartmore offers a 2 per cent discount on the reinvestment into its own trusts, while Fidelity offers 0.5 per cent for sums over £5,000 and 1 per cent on £10,000 plus.
In addition, Invesco will take on European shares, while Gartmore accepts foreign shares, UK gilts and holdings in offshore funds.
In some cases there is a minimum value that will be accepted, either for individual shareholdings or collectively if you sell shares in more than one company.
Alternatively, the commission charged for the sale may make a scheme impractical for very small amounts although Fleming, for instance, will allow family holdings to be lumped together in one transaction.
Even if there is no minimum on the selling side, there will be one for reinvestment into a trust.
With Dunedin the figure is just £30 if you are an existing investor with the company, otherwise £250, but for most unit trusts the minimum is £1,000.
If the share proceeds are less than that, the difference can be made up in cash.
Herbert says, for example, that Invesco once did an exchange of shares worth just £2.
Generally, the shares will be sold on the market and the customer will be credited with the bid price less any charges.
But occasionally a company may absorb the shares into one of its own funds.
M&G has a list of shares it will accept, most of which are those it actively holds itself.
If the shares are retained, the investor is offered a mid-market rather than a bid price.
Save & Prosper is more generous, giving the equivalent of the offer price if the shares are kept.
Otherwise the investor will get the bid price less charges, although the sale commission will be waived on larger amounts.
The charges for buying into a trust are usually at the standard rate.
Dunedin, however, has no front-end fee for its share plan other than stamp duty.
The marketing manager, Robin Pollok, comments: ‘Schemes that offer to sell shares free of charge usually have a fee for the trust purchase, so the transaction is not really ‘free’.’
Dunedin charges £15 per holding for the sale, but for larger sums this can work out at less than a front-end trust fee.
Another point to watch for is how long the whole transaction will take.
Dunedin, for example, deals through a broker, usually on Tuesdays, so if the paperwork is received on a Monday, the proceeds will be reinvested on the Friday.
In other cases the companies deal on the market themselves, so the transaction has to await the next stock exchange settlement day.
If the new investment is only made after the sale proceeds are realised, the total delay could be up to three weeks.
For PEPs this is unavoidable, as the rules stipulate that the investment is made in cash.
For non-PEPs, Gartmore will credit the trust purchase as soon as the share price is known, while M&G and Save & Prosper will normally put it through on the same or the next business day.
In most cases the full range of unit or investment trusts is available through a share exchange scheme.
Mercury is one exception, offering only its managed portfolio, which operates in the style of a private client service.
Foreign & Colonial does not yet offer its PEP trust, though this may be included in future.
Fleming has regular discount offers on specific shares, usually for a month at a time.
This month, for example, the deal applies to BAA and British Airways.
But it is not worth waiting several months for the right special offer to come up.
Marketing manager David Smith says: ‘The investment decision and timing are more important — after all, the cost saving is only £5.’
MICHAEL STEPHENS/PA ‘Schemes that offer to sell shares free of charge usually have a fee for the trust purchase, so the transaction is not really ‘free’.’
Diminishing returns: Stockbrokers' minimum commission charges can make small deals uneconomical for shareholders
Schwab caters to US interest
INVESTORS looking to invest in US-quoted companies can now use the services of the largest US discount execution-only stockbroking service, Charles Schwab.
This week, the company opened its first European office in London to serve US expatriates and UK investors with an eye on the US market — locking horns in the process with its main American rival, Fidelity Brokerage, which set up shop in the UK four years ago.
The main service on offer is the Schwab One International account which has been designed especially for international investors.
This requires would-be clients to make an initial minimum deposit of $10,000 — £7,150 — pay an annual account maintenance charge of $100, plus an additional $5 a month if the account falls below $5,000 (which can be avoided by placing two commissionable trades a year).
But, in return, clients get easy-to-read statements, daily income of their uninvested cash, margin loans (used to buy additional securities) at low interest rates and a Visa debit card, together with dollar cheques, with the first 50 cheques free of charge.
The banking service allows funds to be deposited in numerous foreign currencies as well as the dollar, and the conversion rates charged to customers are lower than those of commercial bank or exchange centres.
In addition, Schwab is offering two other  services .
The first is the established Schwab One account, which can be opened with an initial minimum deposit of $5,000 and has no annual fee.
This provides access to funds through dollar cheques, provides interest on uninvested cash and also offers low interest loans to buy additional stocks to add to any marginal holdings.
The other is the Brokerage account, which has no minimum deposit or annual fee and allows investors to buy and sell US securities subject to a minimum trade value of $39.
The commission charged on all three services ranges from $30 plus 1.7 per cent of the investment on sums up to $2,000, to $255 plus 0.09 per cent of the investment for sums above $500,000.
Further details on 071-495 7444.
Personal Finance is edited by Ian Harper
Asda proves to be top seller
SHARES in the supermarket group, Asda, were among the most popular buys by small investors last month, according to the UK's largest execution only sharedealing service, Sharelink.
The buying came prior to the group announcing a £347 million rights issue and took Asda ahead of BT which was last month's favourite.
The fastest climbing shares during the month were the troubled Brent Walker Group and Guinness which a year ago were not even in the top 30 small shareholder purchases.
Other fast climbers include Glaxo, Queens Moat Houses, Forte and Hanson.
However, companies which have ceased to be private client favourites include Tarmac, British Petroleum, Lonrho, Trafalgar House and Fisons.
Sharelink has about 300,000 clients and handles an estimated 10 per cent of all the deals or the London Stock Exchange and one in four of all execution only deals.
Lessons on paying for school fees
WHEN our grandson reaches 11, we wish to pay for him to go to public school.
The overall cost will be between £45,000 and £50,000.
Are there any tax allowances on school fees?
And are death duties or capital transfer tax relevant?
MR, Penicuik There is no tax relief on school fees.
Inheritance tax (the modern name for both death duties and capital transfer tax) could be due if you make a substantial gift or settlement and then die within the following seven years.
Whether tax is due depends on the size of your overall estate.
The classic way to provide for school fees is to invest with one of the major life companies, which will pay out money each term when fees are due.
Equitable Life, Royal Life and Save & Prosper are just three of the major companies with school fee plans.
Ask an insurance broker to obtain some illustrations for you to compare.
I pay income tax at the basic 25 per cent rate.
If I sell my British Telecom shares, will I be taxed on any profits I make?
JC, Alloa Income tax is not due on profits from the sale of investments, but the quite separate capital gains tax could be due.
However, the starting point for this tax is quite high, so most people escape the net.
You are allowed relief for inflation (your local tax office can supply the figure, which is updated every month), and you also deduct all expenses such as stamp duty and stockbrokers' charges.
If, after all these deductions, your net gains during the full financial year total more than £5,800, capital gains tax is due on the surplus at the same rate as your income tax payments.
I DECIDED to hand over a half share in my bungalow to my daughter now, and leave the other half share in my will to my grandchildren.
I asked for this to be arranged twelve months ago, but it is still in the hands of the solicitor, who does not answer letters.
How long should this take?
DP, Stirling Assuming there are no complications you have not mentioned — for example, that the property is still in the name of someone else who left it to you in the first place — then the changes you requested should take weeks rather than months.
Whatever the cause of the delay, the solicitor should answer your perfectly reasonable request for an explanation.
Write to him once more and keep a copy of the letter.
Tell him that if he does not reply within seven days, the copy letter will be sent to the Law Society (26 Drumsheugh Gardens, Edinburgh EH3 7YR) to form the basis of a complaint.
I AM currently paying £3 per month income tax.
Is this correct?
I am 76 and married.
My state pension is £57.60 per week and I have a pension of £360.95 per month from my former employers.
I have no savings interest and claim tax relief on £5 a week paid to my ex-wife.
SC, Dunfermline Your total income is £7,326 a year, less £260 paid to your ex-wife, which leaves you with £7,066.
As a married man over 75 and on a modest income, you are allowed the first £6,875 free of tax.
This means your taxable income is just £191 a year.
Tax at the reduced rate of 20 per cent is due, which amounts to £38 a year, or a few pence over £3 a month.
Each week Alexander Taylor answers questions on personal finance.
Write, concisely please, to: Cash Clinic, The Business Scotsman, 20 North Bridge, Edinburgh EH1 1YT.
Names and addresses will not be published.
We believe the advice given is accurate and pertinent, but do not accept legal responsibility for it
National Savings adds £219m
NATIONAL Savings products contributed a further £219 million to Government funding in January, bringing the total contribution for the financial year to date to nearly £4 billion.
This compares to a grand total of £3.1 billion for the whole of last year.
Total gross sales in January were £522 million compared to £385 million in December, which after taking into account repayments, gave net receipts of £103 million.
In December, there were net outgoings of £65 million.
The highest contribution to January's inflow came from Index-linked Savings Certificates which brought in £74 million.
The total amount invested in National Savings at the end of January was £43.8 billion.
Pound puts damper on inflation cheer
THE continuing slump in the pound robbed the Government of a much needed propaganda triumph yesterday.
The sudden fall in the ‘headline’ inflation rate from 2.6 per cent in December to 1.7 per cent in January was only partly due to the fall in mortgage interest payments.
The cost of household goods and services, clothing and footwear all fell as retailers cut prices to the bone in the January sales.
Even the cost of motoring fell, and the parallel drop in the underlying rate, excluding mortgage interest payments from 3.7 per cent to 3.2 per cent, was both welcome and unexpected.
Unfortunately the markets were already more concerned with the fear that the Government will sacrifice sterling and the fight against inflation to the continuing pressure to cut base rates and sustain a desperate ‘dash for growth.’
It took the combined efforts of the Bank of England intervening to buy unwanted sterling, the lowest inflation rate since 1967 (and the lowest underlying rate since July 1958), and a firm promise by the Chancellor not to play fast and loose with interest rates to reassure the markets.
One of the problems is that the army of inflation forecasters in the City of London simply do not believe that the corner on inflation has been turned so easily.
They can calculate all too clearly that the average value of sterling has fallen 17.5 per cent,(and over 25 per cent against the dollar) since September, and the price of fuel and raw materials for industry has so far risen by just over 10 per cent , while retail prices have actually fallen.
Overseas suppliers will hold their prices to try and keep as much of their UK market as possible, manufacturers, distributors and retailers will be pressed to contain their price rises as far as possible, and to pass the belt tightening on to their employees.
But it would be straining credulity too far to expect that everything will be absorbed.
The analysts have now downgraded their inflation forecasts for the rest of this year, but many are still expecting the underlying rate to creep back up to the top of the Chancellor's target range of 4 per cent and above this summer.
Any further weakening of sterling, any further cut in base rates not sanctioned and sanitised by a cut in German interest rates, and any move to raise VAT in the Budget would all make higher inflation more likely.
Profits at Lloyds Bank top £800m
By Magnus Grimond
LLOYDS Bank yesterday looked certain to retain its position as Britain's most profitable bank as it unveiled a soaring 28 per cent rise in profits for the year to December.
Despite recession, the pre-tax total of £801 million was just £151 million short of the record profits struck in 1989 and the new chairman, Sir Robin Ibbs, said: ‘One has to be a super pessimist to think the current year will be worse than the last one,’ though he warned that ‘it is too soon for me to predict the extent or timing of the recovery’.
Lloyds' figures were at the top end of market expectations and, combined with an inflation-beating 11 per cent rise in the final dividend to 12.5p, helped the shares firm 6p to 534p yesterday.
Nick Collier, of the broker, Morgan Stanley, said operating profits — which edged ahead 2 per cent to £1.53 billion — and the bad-debt provision — down £182 million to £736 million — were better than expected.
He has lifted his profits forecast for this year slightly to £950 million and expects a 15 per cent rise in the dividend.
Last year's figures were boosted by strong foreign-exchange earnings and a £122 million write-back from third world debt provisions.
Sir Robin said foreign-exchange gains were helped by sterling's departure from the exchange rate mechanism.
Meanwhile, the domestic market continues to be Lloyds' Achilles heel, with profits of £11 million in the first half becoming a loss in the second, slashing overall profits from £105 million in 1991 to only £5 million.
Bad debts remained ‘stubbornly high’, particularly among small and medium-sized businesses.
The specific provision edged up from £551 million to £563 million.
Lloyds was also badly hit by the fall in interest rates, which slashed the so-called ‘endowment effect’ from non-interest bearing accounts.
But Brian Pitman, the chief executive, hinted yesterday that, despite low domestic profitability, he might not follow other banks if they decide to reintroduce charges for customers who remain in credit.
Oil firms urged to win work in CIS
By Frank Frazer
FIRMS on the export trail to former Soviet republics should pick up oil and gas work worth £43 million this year, according to Scottish Enterprise.
The estimate was given yesterday by Allan Stewart, the Scottish industry minister, when he urged companies to give increasing priority to markets in the Commonwealth of Independent States to win work which could help to offset the gradual decline in North Sea oil opportunities.
Speaking at SE's headquarters in Glasgow, he said the new estimate compared with about £28 million earned in 1992 by Scots companies which had made initial ventures into the emerging markets, helped by SE's energy group and Scottish Trade International.
Mr Stewart said government-funded bodies could assist with advice, contacts and market information.
Urging firms to take up the challenge of the new markets to safeguard their future, he added: ‘It is the innovative and proactive oil and gas service companies of Scotland with the vision and drive to explore and capitalise on international markets who will succeed and grow in the next century.’
Crawford Beveridge, SE's chief executive, said the foundations for business had been laid by trade missions organised since the attempted coup in 1991 which led to the break up of the former Soviet Union.
He said important contacts had been made in Russia, Western Siberia, Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan.
Estimating the potential market for oil and gas technology at £2 billion a year, Mr Beveridge urged offshore supply companies to waste no time investigating opportunities.
The next trade mission, arranged for July, will focus on opportunities in Western Siberia, one of the main oil and gas producing regions in former Soviet territory.
SE will also organise an inward mission of oil industry representatives from the CIS.
First step in £1.5bn gas venture
PLANNING clearance was given yesterday for the shore-based part of a £1.5 billion gas project which will create spin-off contracts for firms in the offshore supply business, writes Frank Frazer.
But the final go-ahead for the scheme — involving the piping of gas from a discovery in Liverpool Bay to a power plant in North Wales — will hinge on the outcome of the Government's present review of energy policy.
The project, operated by Hamilton Oil on behalf of a consortium which includes LASMO and Monument Oil & Gas, could create 3,000 construction jobs on contracts which include building the pipeline terminal at Point of Ayr, cleared yesterday by the Welsh Office, and the conversion of the Connah's Quay power station to gas burning.
Ed Blair, Hamilton's president, said yesterday that he hoped the go-ahead for the next phase would follow quickly to enable PowerGen to buy the gas.
Unigate pays £48.8m to swallow Clifford
By Magnus Grimond
UNIGATE, the foods and distribution combine, yesterday moved to gobble up its rival, Clifford Foods, in a £48.8 million agreed offer.
The news saw Clifford's voting shares leap 50p to 573p, matching the all-cash offer, and ended speculation which began on 5 February after the company admitted receiving a bid approach.
Unigate, one of the UK's leading milk-distribution firms, said the acquisition of Clifford's dairy operations was a logical extension of Unigate's activities.’
Unigate could now replace its existing fruit-juice operation, while the other speciality foods operations held out the prospect of future developments.
Ross Buckland, Unigate's chief executive, said: ‘The nature of Clifford's operations makes it an exceptional fit: strengthening Unigate's existing operations and offering benefits of integration and the prospect of further expansion of our food interests.’
As well as the ordinary share terms, Unigate is offering 251p in cash for each ‘A’ non-voting share.
There is a conditional loan note alternative for both offers.
The bid comes nearly 13 years after Unigate made its first, unsuccessful, attempt to buy Clifford and follows the latter's announcement in October of a 60 per cent drop in first-half profits to £1.03 million.
A profits estimate for the whole of 1992 is promised when the bid documents are published.
Activity in the milk distribution sector has been increasing recently in advance of the abolition of the Milk Marketing Board's statutory milk-buying monopoly in 1994.
Falling returns force Widows to cut with-profits bonuses
By Ian Harper
SCOTTISH Widows has cut with-profits bonuses.
For maturing policies, terminal bonuses have been cut at all premium levels.
On a 25-year traditional with-profits endowment policy taken out by a man aged 29 with monthly premiums of £30, the maturity pay-out has fallen from £61,505 a year ago to £58,754 now.
But this still represents an annualised yield of 12.9 per cent— 4.3 per cent above the average rise in the RPI over this period.
This puts the Widows in tenth spot for 25-year endowments, behind its Scottish mutual rivals, Standard Life and Scottish Life, but ahead of Scottish Provident.
On ten-year policies, the pay-out on a similar policy drops from £7,295 to £6,619 — an annualised yield of 11.7 per cent, or 6.3 per cent above the retail price index.
For reversionary, or annual, bonuses paid on with-profits policies, the interim rate has been cut from 3.8 to 3 per cent on the basic sum assured, but is held at 6 per cent on bonuses already declared.
On the new-style unitised with-profits policies, bonuses are maintained at 6 per cent.
Mike Ross, Widows' managing director, said: ‘Despite a good 1992, nominal investment returns during the 1990s continue to be considerably lower than for the 1980s.
For example, the average rate of growth in the FT All-Share Index during the 1980s was 18 per cent per annum , compared to only 4.2 per cent per annum for the period 1 January, 1990 to 31 December, 1992.’
Lamont and Bank spring to defence of sterling
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE Chancellor and the Bank of England were forced to step in to halt a further dangerous slide by the pound yesterday morning which overshadowed the later, dramatically better news on inflation.
Sterling fell heavily in Tokyo overnight and slumped to a record low of Dm2.3235 soon after UK trading began, compelling the Bank to intervene to buy pounds on the currency markets and the Chancellor to make a statement echoing the overnight comments by Eddie George, and ruling out another cut in UK interest rates soon.
Sterling then rebounded and closed half a pfennig higher at Dm2.3550, and a quarter cent better at $1.4207.
Shares, for once, see-sawed in rhythm with sterling.
The FT-SE 100-Share Index was down 20 points after half an hour, then rebounded to show a 20-point gain shortly after midday, before slipping back in line with Wall Street to close 8.7 better on balance at 2,843.0 in heavy trading.
Gilts, meanwhile, surged by £2 on the inflation figures.
The City remains worried about the impact of the falling pound on inflation once higher costs work through to the shops later this year.
But last month, the annual rate of inflation fell dramatically to only 1.7 per cent, its lowest level since September 1967.
Average prices fell by 0.9 per cent in January, the biggest drop in a single month since July 1958 and the third month in a row of lower prices.
Housing costs fell by 3 per cent, thanks to a further cut in average mortgage rates from 9.4 per cent to 8.5 per cent , and the cost of clothing and footwear eased by 4.6 per cent more in the January sales.
Household goods, mainly electrical items, furniture and furnishings, were 2.3 per cent cheaper on average.
Motoring costs went down by 1.3 per cent, thanks to a further fall in the average cost of second-hand cars and an average drop of 7p a gallon in petrol prices which, together, more than made up for a rise in car insurance premiums.
Prices of leisure goods eased by a modest 0.2 per cent, as did the average cost of fuel and light, helped by the last round of the recent phased cuts in gas prices.
Food prices rose, but by only 0.3 per cent, well below the expected seasonal trend.
The only big increases came in travel costs, which jumped 2 per cent, thanks to the annual fare rises on British Rail and the London Underground, a 1.4 per cent increase in household services, mainly household insurance and telephone rental charges, and a 0.7 per cent rise in drink prices as Christmas special offers came to an end.
The drop in inflation took every City commentator by surprise.
Even now, many analysts think the improvement too good to be true, and expect inflation to rebound when the effects of devalued sterling work right through to the shops.
When tax does not fit the bill
A survey has found that £86m was paid to, or collected by, the taxman in error this year.
IAN HARPER investigates
UP TO £8 billion will be paid in the UK this year in unnecessary taxation, it has been estimated.
A survey by IFA Promotion, the financial services industry-sponsored organisation which promotes independent financial advice, claims that in Scotland alone:
£86 million of tax is paid to, or collected by the Inland Revenue in error.
This can result from underclaiming of tax reliefs against taxable income, but it is more likely to be due to tax being stopped on some income but not reclaimed.
However, the error may be the fault of the taxpayer because an interest penalty is incurred for late payment of tax;
£221 million in tax could be easily saved by the simple use of the tax-efficient financial products which have been introduced by the Government over the last ten years;
A further £312 million could be avoided with a little effort by either changing behaviour or by choosing more tax-efficient products which involve more detailed financial planning.
In many instances, such arrangements would only be within the means of high earners.
The accompanying table breaks down into 11 the areas where tax is wasted by Scots.
The main problem over income tax allowances derives from the failure of married couples, where only one person is working, to take advantage of the flexibility available since the advent of separate taxation in the 1990/91 tax year.
However, by far the largest area of waste relates to the failure to make best use of pensions, in particular by working people aged over 45 and by working women.
For example, very few people make the maximum allowable contributions, which can be done through additional voluntary contributions into a company scheme or into personal pensions where such a plan exists.
In addition, contributions can be made to take up any unused part of the total earnings of the past six years.
Pension contributions attract no tax and can be made up to 30 per cent of earnings at the age of 55 and 40 per cent over the age of 60 for personal pensions, subject to the current earnings cap of £75,000.
With banks and building society savings, a large number of people have not registered to receive their interest gross.
Taxpayers with allowances not already fully used and those whose tax rate is 20 per cent not 25 per cent, must take positive action to reclaim overpaid tax.
Only a small proportion of those entitled are doing so.
For taxpayers, there are the building society TESSAs which allow interest to be credited gross, so long as the original capital remains untouched for five years and no more than the net interest is withdrawn.
It is estimated that less than 10 per cent of existing savers entitled to hold a TESSA have taken one out.
With stocks and shares (including investment trust shares) and unit trusts, tax at 25 per cent is stopped at source when companies pay dividends and unit trusts distribute their income.
Higher rate taxpayers must top up the tax to 40 per cent.
The main source of waste is the failure of non-taxpayers and 20 per cent taxpayers as well as those who have not used all their allowances to reclaim the tax.
There is currently no mechanism to register for dividends to be paid gross, although PEPs are an entirely tax-free way of holding shares and unit trusts.
With friendly societies and life assurance, there are two main methods of saving tax.
Friendly societies allow individuals to open tax-exempt accounts and save up to £200 a year per person, including children.
While there is no longer any premium relief on new life policies, higher rate taxpayers or people expecting to become so in the future, qualifying policies allow them to obtain a ‘tax-free’ lump sum when the policy matures although tax is paid at the basic rate on the fund by the life assurer.
With partnerships and small businesses, the main avoidable tax loss is due to the failure to keep proper track of small cash expenditures, or losing records of minor expenses.
As for capital gains tax, the main waste is due to the failure of married couples to make full use of their allowances.
For example, a husband paying CGT should give some of his assets to his wife.
And if anyone is paying CGT on share dividends, they should shelter their holdings within a PEP.
One of the biggest problems with insurance policies and pensions in particular is that many are not written in trust.
If this is the case, then the proceeds will fall within the estate of the deceased and so become subject to inheritance tax.
By far the largest area of waste relates to the failure to make best use of pensions
Trust goes for slice of the American pie
THE GIANT Foreign & Colonial group is to launch a new investment trust specialising in smaller US quoted companies.
The trust will follow a similar investment strategy to the Hypo Foreign & Colonial US Smaller Companies unit trust, the top performing authorised fund for the five years to the end of December, with £1,000 invested five years ago now worth £4,348.
The aim of the new trust — which will have an initial ten-year life — will be long-term capital growth.
Investments will be in 60 to 100 companies with a market value ranging from $100 million to $1 billion — giving a choice of more than 1,500 companies.
It's structure will comprise ordinary shares, with warrants attached on a one-for-five basis at an issue price of £1 a share.
The warrants will have an exercise price of £1 at the end of their nine-year life.
Launch costs are capped at 3.5 per cent, giving a net asset value after launch of 96.5 per cent of gross proceeds.
The annual management fee is 0.8 per cent.
But there is also be a performance-related fee of 5 per cent, plus VAT, of any annual out-performance by the trust's NAV of ‘target performance’— which is defined as a 2 per cent margin over the Frank Russell 2000 Index, the standard index of US small company performance.
However, the total annual fee is capped at 1.5 per cent As a guideline to how this fee is calculated, to give a total annual trust fee of 1 per cent(that is , a 0.2 per cent fee for outperformance) then the trust must outperform the 2000 Index by 6 per cent .
For the maximum annual fee of 1.5 per cent to be charged, the trust must outperform the 2000 Index by 16 per cent.
The minimum launch subscription is £500 lump sum but there is a minimum £25 a month regular savings option through F&C's monthly savings scheme.
A maximum of £1,500 worth of the trust's shares can be put into F&C's PEP in the current tax year.
The launch period lasts from 12 February to 5 March, with separate dealings in the ordinary shares and warrants opens on 11 March.
Building on Capital success
SCOTTISH Amicable is to launch a second Capital Guarantee Bond, following the success of the first one which took in £22.5 million following its launch last October.
The five-year bond, with a £5,000 minimum investment and £250,000 maximum, tracks the FT-SE 100-Share Index, with all dividends being reinvested in the funds.
There is a guarantee the return after five years will be at least the amount of the original investment.
Flexible approach
PRUDENTIAL has launched a new range of flexible pensions products which can be converted to a free-standing additional voluntary contribution and vice versa, and allow contribution levels to be reduced or even suspended altogether for up to five years.
Initial charge on PEP waived
FLEMING Investment Trust Management has waived until 29 March the 1.5 per cent initial charge on lump-sum investments into its Mercantile PEP and is also offering a free share-exchange facility until 11 March.
The Mercantile invests for long-term capital growth with emphasis on emerging companies worldwide.
Details on 071-638 5858.
Bond with rising income
CHASE de Vere Investments has launched a Five-year Guaranteed Income Bond designed to provide to provide an income rising from 5.5 per cent for a basic rate taxpayer and 4.68 per cent for a higher rate taxpayer, to 7.5 per cent and 6.38 per cent in year five for basic rate and higher rate respectively.
The minimum investment is £10,000.
Details on 0225-469371.
Guide to tax and benefits
LAURENTIAN Financial group has produced a free guide to help readers plan their personal finances ahead of the end of the 1992/93 tax year.
Titled Tax and Social Security Benefits, it is available on Freephone 0800 444818.
Free financial check-up on offer
READERS planning to visit the London Money Show, to be held at Olympia from 4-7 March, are being offered a free financial health check by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales.
The institute is also offering a free Guide to Financial Planning.
On look-out for investment chances
CAPEL-Cure Myers has launched a service which monitors the opportunities to invest in Business Expansion Scheme companies before the end of the current tax year.
The minimum investment through the service is £5,000 and until invested, the money is held in the company's Corporation Loan Account which is currently paying interest of 5.25 per cent gross.
Money will be invested within 24 hours of the launch of suitable schemes.
Details on 071-488 4000.
Comprehensive cover
ALLIED Dunbar has launched what it claims is the UK's most comprehensive critical illness cover, Lifestyle Plus.
Full details on 0793-514514.
BRISTOL & West Building Society, in conjunction with the stockbroker Close Brothers, has launched BESSA Bristol & West, the first BES ‘arranged exit’ scheme involving a building society.
The aim of each BESSA B&W company is to acquire leasehold interests in repossessed residential properties which will then be let under assured tenancy leases.
The minimum investment is £3,000 and the maximum £34,000.
Details on 071-638 5500.
Managers at a loss over profit-earner
A building societies survey has found many managers feel under-trained to sell insurance products.
IAN HARPER reports
ABOUT half of the building society branch managers taking part in a survey of the top 30 societies said that they are insufficiently trained to sell insurance products and services — although the commission earned on the sale of such products is becoming an increasingly large component of society profits.
The survey added that because of the move towards leaner operations, no less than 80 per cent of the managers feel stress as a result of their work and that 12 per cent of these ‘to some degree’ resort to drink.
The survey, which covered 225 branch managers and 857 account holding customers, also found that two thirds of the managers believed their customers were confused by the range of products and services on offer.
On the question of training, when asked whether they or their staff had been adequately trained, while 9 per cent of managers said ‘no’ on savings and investments, nearly a fifth said ‘no’on mortgages and loans.
But when it came to such ‘non-core’ products such as pensions and insurance, these numbers rose dramatically — with 44 per cent saying ‘no’over life assurance and pensions and 34 per cent saying ‘no’over general insurance.
Unfortunately, the survey did not ask them if they sold the products about which they said they had received insufficient training.
The survey also found that two-thirds of the customers surveyed did not understand the Financial Services Act distinction between a tied agent and an independent financial adviser.
However, although 80 per cent of the managers surveyed belonged to tied societies, 45 per cent said they believed their customers would have preferred independent advice.
Nevertheless, when asked about the way the societies sold insurance, 49 per cent of customers said they trusted their society to sell them only those products and services which were in the customers' best interests.
On marketing, while branch managers said they believed interest rates were the biggest attraction to new customers, for the customers the key was close proximity to a branch.
Homing in on fixed rate offers
A FURTHER tranche of fixed-rate mortgages came on to the market this week following last month's cut in official base rates from 7 to 6 per cent.
Cheltenham & Gloucester has launched a no-strings-attached, fully portable five-year deal fixed at 7.75 per cent, available on an interest-only or repayment basis on mortgages and remortgages up to 90 per cent of property value.
There is a £250 arrangement fee and an early redemption penalty of six months' interest.
The C&G still has a 7.5 per cent two-year fixed rate deal on offer.
The Nationwide has announced a five-year deal but at the higher fixed rate of 8.29 per cent, available on a repayment or endowment, but not interest-only basis.
The society also requires clients to take out its mortgage protection insurance.
The maximum loan to property value is 85 per cent, the arrangement fee is £295 and the early redemption penalty is nine months' interest in years one to three, six months' in year four and four months' in the final year.
Alliance & Leicester has launched three deals — a one-year, fixed rate of 5.95 per cent on loans up to 80 per cent of valuation; a two-year rate of 6.35 per cent on loans up to 90 per cent of valuation; and a five-year rate of 7.99 per cent on loans up to 80 per cent.
The arrangement fees are 0.5 per cent up to a maximum of £300.
The early redemption penalties are six months' interest on the one-year deal; four months on the two-year one; and on the five-year loan, four months interest in years 2, 3 and 4 and three months in year 5.
The loans are fully portable, but must be backed by a pension or endowment.
Laurentian Financial Group has reduced the variable rate on its 100 per cent mortgage to 7.99 per cent on the first 75 per cent of the loan and 13.99 per cent on the final 25 per cent.
For readers who would like to fix until the next  millennium , Birmingham Midshires has is offering a fixed rate of 8.49 per cent until 31 January, 2000.
The arrangement fee is £300.
But for those who wish to focus more on the current century, there are three other deals — a five-year fixed rate of 7.99 per cent(arrangement fee £245), a two-year fixed rate of 6.79 per cent (arrangement fee) £225; and a one-year deal of 5.79 per cent (arrangement fee £175).
All four deals are fully portable, are available on an endowment, pension or PEP basis and have no strings attached.
The maximum loan is 90 per cent of property value on mortgages or 75 per cent on remortgages up to a maximum of £150,000.
The early redemption penalties are — six months interest on the seven and five-year deals and three and one month's interest respectively on the two and one-year offers.
Saatchi chief poised to seal Adidas deal
ARRANGEMENTS have been completed for the sale of the Adidas sporting goods company to Robert Louis-Dreyfus, the chief executive of Saatchi & Saatchi, and allied French investors, a French business paper reported yesterday.
The French financier, Bernard Tapie, via his Bernard Tapie Finance, owns 78 per cent of Adidas GmbH, a holding company that in turn owns 95 per cent of Adidas.
According to the article in Les Echos, Mr Tapie has agreed to sell 15 per cent of Adidas GmbH to Mr Louis-Dreyfus.
Adidas declined to comment yesterday.
Mr Louis-Dreyfus would join three French state-controlled institutional investors who already own small stakes of Adidas.
Assurances Generales de France will boost its share to 18 per cent from 5 per cent, while Credit Lyonnais will rise to 18 per cent from 10 per cent .
Banque Worms, a wholly owned unit of Union des Assurances de Paris, will increase to 5 per cent from 2 per cent.
Gilberte Beaux, the current executive board chairman of Adidas, reportedly will up her 5 per cent stake to 8 per cent.
The remainder of the 78 per cent will be taken up by other allied investors.
Mr Tapie had wanted to charge Ffr2.08 billion (£26 million) for his share of the sporting goods group, and according to Les Echos, he was successful on that count.
A previous sale to Pentland Group fell through after London-based Pentland accused Mr Tapie of failure to reveal key financial details about Adidas.
Mr Tapie denied the charge.
— AP
Wiseman development
THE EAST Kilbride-based Robert Wiseman Dairies will be packaging English milk from a greenfield site in Manchester early next year, the firm's managing director told farmers at Dumfries.
Speaking at the latest in a series of milk producer meetings, Alan Wiseman said that the firm had just exchanged contracts on a nine-acre site.
‘We will shortly move our milk distribution depot to the site and plan to be packaging locally sourced milk in about a year's time,’ he said.
‘We currently transport in the region of 225,000 litres of milk to Manchester every week for distribution as far south as Birmingham and Coventry and to Hull and Grimsby in the east.
With transport costing us 2.5p per litre at the moment, the new plant is a logical move.’
Mr Wiseman said that the milk would be sourced from local farms, probably through Milk Marque.
‘Unlike son of Scottish Milk Board, Milk Marque is not our competitor and we would not have any problem with buying our milk through them.’
Asked about the mechanics of milk collection when the milk boards go, Mr Wiseman, said ideally he would like the present system to remain in place.
‘I have asked the SMMB several times if we can keep the present grid system and central testing laboratory in place so that one tanker would continue to collect all the milk on one road,’ he said.
‘But they will not even discuss the possibility.
‘In time, possibly five or six years from now, I believe that all milk collection will be done by an organisation jointly owned by all the co-operatives buying Scottish milk.
It would work in the same way as the gas and electricity national grids.
‘At Motherwell Food Park, we can buy our gas from an Aberdeen-based company and our electricity from London-based Southern Electric.
Milk distribution would work in the same way in that as long as the milk is put into the system at one point, it does not matter where it is taken out.’
Mr Wiseman also hinted he had found a prominent milk producer to lead his attempt to recruit dairy farmers to supply milk directly to his dairies.
‘We have spent months looking for someone to lead our efforts,’ he said.
‘Northern Foods have announced that former MMB board member Richard Smith will lead their recruitment drive and we have now found a leader for our producer's partnership.’
Mr Wiseman said he expected to announce the name shortly.
Lockout alleged at Timex
INDUSTRIAL stalemate continued at Timex in Dundee yesterday when management refused to accept a back-to-work offer from the striking workforce.
Union officials claimed their members were locked out after the 400 strong workforce, which has been on strike for just over two weeks, met yesterday to consider a management proposal.
The workers agreed to management plans to resolve the dispute over lay-offs.
These included a return to work for those who had not been laid off, the re-employment of the sacked strikers next week and a final, binding decision by the arbitration body ACAS.
But management also wanted a wage freeze for 1993 and cuts in staff benefits which the workers claim represent a 10 per cent cut in wages.
They agreed to return to work but under protest at the wage freeze and  benefits cuts.
By doing so individuals could have challenged the changes in the courts.
Timex management decided the offer of a return to work was unacceptable.
No-one from management was available for comment.
The Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union's Scottish organiser, Harry McLevy, said: ‘Our people are now locked out.
We want to get back to work but the attacks on the conditions of the Timex workers make the Hoover negotiations look like a love-in.
And we are not accepting them.’
Chunnel pact plea
CROSS-CHANNEL ferry operators P&O and Sealink Stena yesterday asked the Government to allow them to cooperate on services in order to meet the challenge of the Channel Tunnel.
The companies fear the tunnel opening, either later this year or early next year, could force them out of business on the Dover to Calais route unless they are allowed to pool their services.
Cooperation could mean the companies putting together joint timetables for their ferries and pooling their ships.
P&O currently has five ships on the route and Stena four.
The operators could also launch joint marketing initiatives or cooperate on ticket sales.
— PA
They have written to Director General of Fair Trading Sir Bryan Carsberg asking him to advise the Government to lift a ban on the two companies discussing the integration of their Dover-Calais services.
Stena Sealink chairman Rudolph Agnew said: ‘The tunnel is being supported directly and indirectly by government, British and French, in both road and rail investment.
‘Simple justice and commercial logic suggest that now is the time to remove the handcuffs from the ferry companies.’
Lord Sterling, P&O chairman, said: ‘In management terms time is extremely short if we are to effect the changes necessary for the task of providing a viable alternative to the tunnel.’
The two companies would keep separate identities and would only cooperate on the one service.
Sealink and P&O last asked the Government to allow them to cooperate in November 1991, but the then trade and industry secretary Peter Lilley refused to lift the ban on advice from the OFT, which was then headed by Sir Gordon Borrie.
‘No plans’ for Direct Line flotation
THE ROYAL Bank of Scotland last night dismissed the renewed speculation that it plans a stock market flotation for its highly profitable insurance subsidiary, Direct Line, writes Richard Shackleton.
The latest straws in the wind have been blown in by the bank's disposal of its merchant banking arm, Charterhouse, last week for £235 million.
In addition, Peter Wood, who founded Direct Line and is a director of Royal Bank, is believed to be keen to see the company floated on the stock market.
But a bank spokesman said yesterday: ‘We have no plans for flotation of Direct Line, although nothing is for ever.
There may well come a time when it is a good idea to float Direct Line.’
Some City analysts believe a flotation is on the cards but not just yet.
They say that Direct Line's 1992 profits of £15 million could grow to as much as £100 million by 1996 when the company becomes one of the biggest players in insurance industry.
The management is currently dominated by Mr Wood, who was the UK's highest-paid employee last year when he took home £6.2 million in salary and bonuses.
He earns a bonus of 1 per cent of the rise in the company's value and Direct Line has grown from virtually nothing in 1985 to be worth around £800 million.
The company has succeeded by selling insurance over the phone and cutting out brokers and their commissions.
It specialises in motor insurance and has doubled the number of policies it sells each year as well as moving into household insurance.
The Royal Bank has suffered a slide in profits to £20.9 million from £57.7 million and has seen bad debts soar.
Direct Line, by contrast, made profits of £15.1 million and is predicted to be heading for profits of about £40 million this year.
Peter Wood: founder of Direct Line
Pay rises still slowing
PAY increases continued to slow in the three months to January but still kept ahead of inflation, a report shows today.
The average rise recorded in the quarter was 3.6 per cent, compared with 4 per cent in the three months to last October, said a Labour Research survey.
Wage settlements were almost 6 per cent in the autumn of 1991.
The Government imposed a ceiling of 1.5 per cent in the public sector is showing little sign of filtering through to private companies, said the report.
One in ten of all agreements with a settlement date on or after August 1992 are now being hit by a pay freeze, said Labour Research.
— PA
The public sector pay round is predicted to be ‘turbulent’ with many unions representing health and local government workers submitting claims above the 1.5% pay curb.
Move to aid cross-border deals in EC
AN ATTEMPT to provide more information for firms trying to launch cross-border deals is to be carried out by accountants KPMG Peat Marwick, it emerged today.
KPMG has been appointed by the European Commission to carry out a survey of venture capitalists in the European Community.
The survey will try to identify the type of information companies need when launching cross-border deals and whether they have difficulties in obtaining it.
Information on different legal, accountancy and financing standards will be particularly looked at.
KPMG's head of venture capital, John Hustler, said: ‘This will attempt to ascertain the current obstacles regarding access to information which venture capitalists throughout Europe face when attempting to fund transnational deals.’
The survey is expected to take two months to complete and will be carried out through questionnaires sent to venture capitalists and advisers throughout the EC.
June census results released
THE RESULTS of the June agricultural census for 1992, which were published last week by the Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department, show substantial increases in the areas of wheat, oilseed rape, and fallow land.
In the livestock sector, the dairy breeding herd continued to fall while the beef breeding herd continued to increase.
The number of sheep fell slightly, the first fall for many years.
Both the pig herd and the poultry flock increased.
The agricultural labour force continued its long term decline to just under 27,000, nearly two per cent fewer than in 1991.
The total area of cereals fell by more than one per cent to 461,000 hectares, the wheat area rose 11 per cent to almost 122,000 hectares, while barley fell by more than five per cent to 312,000 hectares.
The oilseed rape area continued to increase, by 14 per cent in 1992.
In spite of the decline in autumn sown varieties, the large increase in the spring sown crop reflects the change in the oilseed support scheme in 1992.
Fallow land rose by nearly 30 per cent to 37,000 hectares, of which just over 24,000 hectares was set-aside under the fallow option.
Although the total number of cattle (2.1 million) was unchanged from the previous year, the dairy breeding herd declined while the beef breeding herd increased, the former to 233,000 and the latter to 496,000.
Sheep numbers fell but the decline was small.
The pig herd increased by more than three per cent to 509,000 and the poultry flock rose eight per cent to just under 15 million.
Farming is deeply indebted to Government, claims minister
THE MESSAGE from the Scottish Office is that farmers are not so hard hit, hard up or hard done by as they frequently claim.
So stop moaning and plan ahead with some confidence.
Sir Hector Monro, Scottish Agriculture Minister, did not put it quite like that at a weekend meeting with Scotland's agricultural editors.
Himself a farmer, almost for 30 years an MP, now with almost a year as minister under his belt, Sir Hector was his usual affable self, seldom referring to his backing group of Scottish Office specialists.
But his message was uncompromising.
Under the new-look European farm policy agreed last year farmers are much better off than they thought they would be.
In spite of the recent spat about Government taking a slice off the hill and upland ewe subsidies, farming is an industry deeply indebted to Government.
Total income for Scottish farmers rose 42 per cent last year, to £240 million.
Direct subsidies to Scottish farmers during the year were £190 million, with indirect subsidies worth about the same again.
Direct subsidies are expected to increase by a further £100 million this year.
Trying to claim that, in spite of those subsidies, average net farm income is lower than the average Scottish wage of £14,100 a year won't wash according to Scottish Office reckoning, because that comparison is not valid.
Taking a more aggressive line than usual the Scottish Office specialists say that farmers' cash income is a better comparison.
That is the difference between total receipt and total trading costs.
The average for that for all Scottish farm types is £26,800.
Or there's cash flow, the difference between cash income minus net investment, which averages £15,700.
There is room for argument about precise figures, none about the general thrust of Sir Hector's briefing.
He remains  unrepentant about his comments last December that Scottish farmers had every reason to be confident.
They simply had not realised how well they had done out of changes in Europe's common agricultural policy.
They should have realised by now.
Farming was heavily subsidised, particularly the hills and uplands, but it had to be to survive.
He was pleased the Government was putting money where it was needed: ‘The average farmer gets a poor return on capital invested.
He deserves the support we given from the Treasury and from Europe.’
And it was right for John Gummer, Minister for Agriculture, to be regularly, some might say infuriatingly, optimistic: ‘It would be quite wrong for him to go round wringing his hands.’
Sir Hector was also confident that settlement will be reached on the General Agreement on  Tariffs and Trade ‘within a month or two when the Clinton administration has settled down.’
There were some concerns for farmers.
For example the future of marketing boards and the avalanche of paperwork linked to policy changes.
But Government put more than £2 billion a year into UK farming now and would put an extra £2.4 billion in over the next three years.
His only admission of worry was the debate over marketing boards.
It is known, without doubt, that the Scottish Office and Scottish MPs would like to keep the Potato Marketing Board which Mr Gummer wants to scrap.
But Sir Hector would only say that discussions on the board's future were continuing.
He was hardly more forthcoming on the Scottish Milk Marketing Board, where an  impasse has been reached.
The board's proposals for its future as a voluntary co-operative have been criticised not only by the Scottish dairy trade, but by a recent Monopolies and Mergers Commission report.
The board must, according to almost everyone, separate its milk buying from its commercial selling company, Scottish Pride.
But the milk board refuses to consider that.
Sir Hector said: ‘It's absolutely crucial to dairy farmers and the industry that we have a scheme up and running by April 1994 which is acceptable.’
He, and the Secretary of State Ian Lang, are unlikely to accept the present proposals.
He had advised Andrew Howie, board chairman, to look at the proposals again and the sooner the better.
‘We've had some interesting discussions and we may have to have more,’ he said.
JD managing director named
ALEC MCKEE has succeeded Doug Walker as managing director of John Deere in the UK.
Mr Walker, a graduate of Edinburgh School of Agriculture, became JD managing director in 1968, the same year Mr McKee completed a National Diploma in Agricultural Engineering at Writtle College after a two-year course at Harper Adams college.
Mr McKee worked with John Deere in Zambia for four years, returning to the UK and becoming commercial manager by 1979.
He became general sales manger in 1991.
1,000 stalkers in deer cull
A THOUSAND stalkers on the Scottish hills this winter have been shooting deer to keep their record numbers under control.
And environmental groups have welcomed the cull — the biggest this century — aimed at thinning the largest herds seen since the Middle Ages.
A series of mild winters has meant leaps in the populations of deer in the Highlands.
Old stags and hinds and young calves numbers have not been cut as in the past by the cold climate.
Landowners reluctant to cull a sporting resource have also caused the numbers to increase.
It has been estimated that more than 30 per cent of the herds will have to be killed just to keep numbers static.
Now the shootings at more than 600 estates and on moorlands will continue until the middle of this month to try and break last year's record of 24,000 hinds killed.
Red Deer Commission stalkers have been helping estate staff in the Angus glens pick off marauding deer destroying farmlands.
Skilled stalkers are shooting up to a dozen hinds a day.
Andy Rinning, secretary of the Red Deer Commission, commented: ‘There have been no protests from  environmental groups.
In fact, some of them think the cull is too low.
Deer cause habitat degradation, attacking forestry and agriculture and have an adverse effect on wildlife generally.
‘We are constantly reviewing the situation to ensure numbers are kept under control.’
A  spokesman for the Worldwide Fund for Nature commented: ‘We don't take any satisfaction from the killing but the deer need to be culled to protect the important wildlife in this part of the country.’
Naish re-elected
DAVID NAISH was re-elected as president of the National Farmers Union of England and Wales for a third year at the union's annual meeting last week.
Ben Gill was re-elected for a second year as deputy, and Tony Pexton for a second year as vice-president.
Magazine changes hands
THE Peebles Publishing Group, Scotland's largest business publishers, has bought the monthly farming magazine Agribusiness Scotland from Eddie Gillanders.
Mr Gillanders started Agribusiness in 1985.
He will stay as editor and Lorna Cassie as advertising manager.
Oliver Peebles, the new owner's managing director, said: ‘We've tracked the success of Scotland's farming publications for several years.
Farming is one of Scotland's major industries, so there's huge potential for Agribusiness.’
Call for study tour of EC
A NORTH-east farmer wants a few wise men from Scotland to take a behind-the-scenes look at farming in EC member states to see how counterparts are faring with the rules and regulations.
Accusing the National Farmers Unions of both Scotland and England of being too parochial and not au fait with what was happening on the agricultural scene in the rest of Europe, Gerald Biffen, Mains of Arnage, Ellon, said Scottish farmers should take the initiative and send a party of working members to undertake a study tour in selected areas.
Six or eight well-briefed farmers from different areas and different disciplines throughout Scotland should aim to find out how European farmers ae implementing the rules and regulations and how individual governments support their farmers.
Urging the appointment of party leaders with knowledge of each country and their languages Mr Biffen said that in the longer term visits could develop into  reciprocal exchange schemes which would be to  everyone's benefit.
Mr Biffen's plea at the monthly meeting of Aberdeen and Kincardine NFU area executive followed on from an Ellon branch resolution urging the NFU to detail on a regular basis.
Details of EC support received by overseas farmers and information regarding the prices paid and received for their various commodities.
The Ellon farmers wanted to know just how ‘single’ the European market really was and Mr Biffen said the information would provide ammunition to fight politicians.
Support for the Scottish farming industry assurance scheme, FASL, however, showed clear signs of dwindling fast with many former strong supporters in the Aberdeen and Kincardine ranks deploring the recent resignation from the beef committee and the apparent lack of progress in attracting members.
Eric Stephen said he thought that a of method getting people into the scheme was ‘off the rails’ and he called for a large input of help and direction while Andrew Macfarlane said that unless the end user guaranteed a premium farming leaders could ‘forget FASL’.
In spite of the area president, Rosemary Sorrie, stating that there were developments afoot — and there is expected to be a major statement on FASL at the NFU's annual meeting in Dundee next month — members said any changes to the scheme would be required to be made public more urgently.
‘This latest resignation does not do any good at all and we must send a letter to headquarters to get details sent out as soon as possible,’ said Ian Fraser, Dunecht.
‘The industry wants to know what the hell is going on.’
The Buchan Meat chairman, Peter McKilligin, argued against change and urged the FASL board to concentrate on the scheme in existence.
‘Once you open a furrow you've got to fill it in’ he said.
‘Get what's on the stocks already in a better form; anything else will just totally confuse and alienate the farmer.’
NIGG Counsellors to aid redundant workers
A TEAM of three specialist advisers is being set up to counsel redundant Ross and Cromarty workers on job opportunities after the rundown at Highlands Fabricators' oil rig construction yard at Nigg.
The scheme is part of the East Ross Initiative, a project funded by the local and regional councils, Ross and Cromarty Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
The advisers will concentrate on how people can make the most of their skills and abilities, and how retraining or travel could provide them with employment.
Unions to step up campaign to save Leyland
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
NATIONAL union leaders and shop stewards representing Leyland-DAF workers met in Birmingham yesterday and resolved to step up the campaign to keep all five British plants open.
The union representatives were speaking after production workers at the crisis-torn company's van plant in Birmingham narrowly voted against a strike.
Workers at the Washwood Heath factory voted not to stage industrial action by 761 to 615 in a secret ballot.
The decision followed Friday's lead from colleagues at Leyland, Lancashire, who also voted against a walkout.
Only workers at Leyland-DAF's Albion works in Glasgow, which lost 67 jobs from a total of 550 in Friday's jobs-cuts announcement, have voted to take industrial action, but it is highly unlikely they will strike.
The Albion workforce will meet this morning to discuss yesterday's outcome in Birmingham.
The acting convener, Tommy Gorman, said the factory's union representatives want another meeting with the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, whom they met in Glasgow last Friday.
‘We want to talk to Mr Stewart about the way the 67 men who were made redundant were treated by the company.
Some of these men had been loyal workers at Albion for decades yet they were shown the door within a matter of minutes.
That is outrageous behaviour,’ he said.
At Friday's meeting, Mr Stewart told the union representatives and the Labour MPs Donald Dewar and George Galloway that while he would be working strenuously to help ease the plight of the Albion workers, he could offer little hope of any Government money to support the stricken plant.
In Birmingham, the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union's chief negotiator, John Allen, said of the vote: ‘It is not surprising.
We have now to get on with the job of saving the plant.’
Managers were yesterday working on plans for a buyout to save up to 1,400 jobs at the Birmingham factory and a management team at the Washwood Heath van plant confirmed it was developing a take-over plan.
The managing director, Allan Amey, said: ‘We now have a team to put together a management buyout.
We have expressed our interest to the receivers and we believe we have got a sensible business plan that can be developed.’
It is understood the financial backing for the plan has yet to be finalised.
Mr Allen said the union leaders would leave no stone unturned in their efforts to save the Leyland-DAF plants at Glasgow, Birmingham, Leyland, Chorley and Thame.
‘We are giving our full support to a management buyout or any other plan to save jobs,’ he said.
NATIONAL union leaders and shop stewards representing Leyland-DAF workers met in Birmingham yesterday and resolved to step up the campaign to keep all five British plants open.
The union representatives were speaking after production workers at the crisis-torn company's van plant in Birmingham narrowly voted against a strike.
Workers at the Washwood Heath factory voted not to stage industrial action by 761 to 615 in a secret ballot.
The decision followed Friday's lead from colleagues at Leyland, Lancashire, who also voted against a walkout.
Only workers at Leyland-DAF's Albion works in Glasgow, which lost 67 jobs from a total of 550 in Friday's jobs-cuts announcement, have voted to take industrial action, but it is highly unlikely they will strike.
The Albion workforce will meet this morning to discuss yesterday's outcome in Birmingham.
The acting convener, Tommy Gorman, said the factory's union representatives want another meeting with the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, whom they met in Glasgow last Friday.
‘We want to talk to Mr Stewart about the way the 67 men who were made redundant were treated by the company.
Some of these men had been loyal workers at Albion for decades yet they were shown the door within a matter of minutes.
That is outrageous behaviour,’ he said.
At Friday's meeting, Mr Stewart told the union representatives and the Labour MPs, Donald Dewar and George Galloway, that while he would be working strenuously to help ease the plight of the Albion workers, he could offer little hope of any Government money to support the stricken plant.
In Birmingham, the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union's chief negotiator, John Allen, said of the vote: ‘It is not surprising.
We have now to get on with the job of saving the plant.’
Managers were yesterday working on plans for a buyout to save up to 1,400 jobs at the Birmingham factory and a management team at the Washwood Heath van plant confirmed it was developing a take-over plan.
The managing director, Allan Amey, said: ‘We now have a team to put together a management buyout.
We have expressed our interest to the receivers and we believe we have got a sensible business plan that can be developed.’
It is understood the financial backing for the plan has yet to be finalised.
Mr Allen said the union leaders would leave no stone unturned in their efforts to save the Leyland-DAF plants at Glasgow, Birmingham, Leyland, Chorley and Thame.
‘We are giving our full support to a management buyout or any other plan to save jobs,’ he said.
Grampian suffers highest rise in unemployment
By Frank Urquhart
UNEMPLOYMENT in oil-rich Grampian is rising three times faster than in the rest of Scotland, a report by regional economists revealed yesterday.
The unemployment rate increased by 31 per cent last year, compared to an overall Scottish rise of 10 per cent.
The report, by Grampian's economic development and planning department, also reveals that the out-of-work totals increased in all five districts in the region, with a dramatic 41 per cent increase in Kincardine and Deeside.
The unemployment rate rose by 36 per cent in Gordon, by 35 per cent in Banff and Buchan, by 33 per cent in Aberdeen, and by 21 per cent in Moray.
In spite of the increases, unemployment in Grampian is still relatively low in comparison with the rest of Scotland.
It stands at 5.2 per cent, compared with 10 per cent for Scotland as a whole.
The rising unemployment in the area was also highlighted by the GMB union at a press conference in Aberdeen to publicise the union's campaign to protect jobs in the public services.
Robert Thomson, the union's Scottish secretary, said the three north-east parliamentary constituencies — Kincardine and Deeside, Gordon and Banff and Buchan — were among the top five throughout the whole of Britain with the fastest rising levels of unemployment.
‘Only one other Scottish constituency features in the top 50 and that is Aberdeen North which is placed at number 37.
No other region in the whole of Britain has such an alarming growth rate in unemployment,’ he said.
Fraser Adam, GMB's Grampian regional organiser, claimed the increases reflected jobs losses in a variety of traditional industries, including fishing, construction and paper manufacturing, and a downturn in North Sea drilling activity.
He said: ‘These figures are a warning to all of us here not to be complacent.
If our jobless levels keep rising at the rate they have since the general election, then the north-east of Scotland may start to feel like the north-east of England.
‘If public sector jobs in the north-east start to go then we are into serious unemployment sums.
We will move out of the danger area and into the disaster area.’
Textile firms' skills shortage
By William Chisholm
TEXTILE companies in the Borders are facing an unexpected staff shortage in the week when national unemployment figures are expected to top three million.
A rapid turnaround in fortunes has meant that at least 100 jobs are on offer from a dozen Hawick companies facing a skills shortage.
Management and unions are looking at ways of overcoming the problem.
There is already evidence to show knitwear firms are failing to attract sufficient numbers of young people.
According to figures from the Scottish Textile Association, only 20 school-leavers were recruited in the current year against the normal total of between 70 and 100.
The association's executive director of training, Ray Chlopas, said yesterday: ‘The skills shortage in the Borders is getting worse by the week.
There have not been as many jobs lying unfilled for at least three years, and companies simply cannot find the people they need.’
Mr Chlopas said his inquiries among the Hawick-based knitters showed job opportunities for at least 50 skilled workers, with a further 50 needed for training.
‘It is very sad to see up to three million people on the dole while we cannot get applicants for good jobs in our industry,’ he added.
Some companies, with branch factories outwith the Borders, may be forced to solve their problems by expanding those satellite operations.
Recruitment drives will also be mounted in the Borders during the spring.
A special promotion will be staged at Hawick High School.
‘This will be yet another attempt to rid the industry of its Victorian mill image, demonstrating our place in the international market place’, Mr Chlopas said.
A local trade union secretary, John Farries, of the GMB union, claims the solution lies in providing nursery facilities which would allow young married women to return to work.
‘There was a time when all of the major companies had creches, but these have been closed down,’ said Mr Farries.
The Scottish Borders Enterprise chief executive, David Douglas, said: ‘There were an estimated 1,000 redundancies in Hawick during 1991 and 1992 and we certainly have not had 1,000 new jobs to replace them.
Yet the people who were paid off seem to have disappeared from the jobs market.’
Judge asked to ban football showdown
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A BOARDROOM battle for control of the Premier Division club Falkirk FC went to court yesterday when a judge was asked to ban an extraordinary general meeting on Thursday.
The seven-man board was divided 5-2 against father and son Hamish and George Deans, the club's majority shareholders, the Court of Session heard.
However, they had called the egm and were putting forward a resolution which would remove four of their opponents from office.
If that happened, it was claimed, the controversial Deans would be able to run the club as they wished and to the prejudice of minority shareholders.
Lord Cullen heard an allegation that while chairman of Falkirk before being removed from the post last May, Hamish Deans had behaved in an overbearing and dictatorial manner.
Fifteen shareholders, including three directors, Wilson Young, James Johnston and Alastair McKenzie, petitioned the court for an interim interdict to stop the egm.
They said that Hamish Deans had unilaterally and for no good reason prevented the signing of the former Celtic striker Andy Walker, now with Bolton, after the player had agreed terms with Falkirk.
It was also claimed that Mr Deans had been responsible for the non-payment of police bills which had led to a threat of police cover being withdrawn for home matches.
He was also accused of having committed Falkirk to a contract for the sale of its ground at Brockville Park and the purchase of a site for a new ground without the board's knowledge.
Neil Davidson, counsel for the Deans, said they denied allegations levelled at them by the shareholders, many of which cannot be reported because of restrictions imposed by Lord Cullen.
The removal of four directors would not give the father and son unfettered control of the club, Mr Davidson added.
They would remain subject to general company law and there would still be a third member of the board, the club secretary, who could in no way be called a cat's paw.
The hearing was adjourned until tomorrow.
Hamish Deans: wants to oust four boardroom opponents
Lang talks up Scottish economic prospects
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
THE Scottish economy is moving out of the shadow of public sector clouds into a brighter private sector-led future, the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, claimed yesterday.
He asserted that the spread of home and shares ownership was causing an enterprise culture to take root in which more indigenous companies will spring up, creating the opportunity for Scotland to become a headquarters rather than a branch economy.
It was a remarkably optimistic speech to Edinburgh University politics society, in a week when the Government's economic policies will come under severe criticism if, as expected, the number of unemployed rises above 3 million.
But Mr Lang said that such a level was not an admission of government failure, but an admission that the recession had not ended, pointing out that Scottish unemployment rates were lower than the UK average.
He argued that Scotland has ‘psychologically’ moved over a watershed from belief in the public sector to belief in the private sector, although there were still too many public institutions, mainly local authorities, who thought in public ownership terms.
His speech brought scathing opposition responses.
The Scottish National Party leader, Alex Salmond, argued that it was under Tory rule that takeovers and closures had caused the loss of most companies, leaving Scotland with only 4 per cent of company headquarters in the UK.
Alistair Darling, the Labour MP for Edinburgh Central, said that the Leyland DAF crisis was the latest damage done to Scotland's manufacturing base, adding: ‘Even the financial services sector, crucial to Scotland's economy and an area in which we are world leaders, is predicting job losses.’
He contended that 250,000 Scots locked into an unwanted dependency ‘look to government to free them’ and called for the Government to invest in research and development, transport infrastructure and environmental measures, and training a skilled workforce.
Mr Lang argued that politicians ‘should resist the temptation to second-guess the industrialists, business people and the entrepreneurs who are the wealth-creating engine of this country.
‘Scotland suffered in the past from too much misguided, if well-meaning, interference in its economic life.
We have tossed the discredited interventionist philosophy aside.
And Scotland has prospered as a result.’
He said that post-war coal and steel nationalisation had ‘drained Scotland of its industrial lifeblood’, but privatisation had created big Scottish-headquartered companies like ScottishPower.
To meet the challenges of the European single market, he said, the Scottish economy had to be international in outlook, diverse and efficient.
The Government's role was to remove obstacles that prevented the operation of a market economy, to enable the economy to work on a level playing field, to support the private sector but not to supplant it.
Support, he said, meant investment in transport links like the conversion of the A74 to motorway standard, but such schemes could be financed jointly by public and private sectors.
Giving the examples of the Skye bridge and the proposed second Forth road bridge as ‘exciting new opportunities’, he said that the partnership concept could be taken further in the future.
Acknowledging that far fewer companies were being formed in Scotland than in England, he said that the root cause — too few Scots having any economic power — was changing.
‘The fact that no fewer than half the funds invested in small firms in Scotland comes from personal equity shows that Scots do have a flair for enterprise and a willingness to back their own judgment that is essential in every entrepreneur.’
‘Yes’ sought from AEEU
By Denny Macgee
TRADE UNION leaders started a campaign yesterday for a ‘yes’ vote among members of the recently formed Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union on whether it should belong to the Trades Union Congress.
The ballot of the AEEU's one million members, which will take place from 1 March, will be the first referendum on TUC membership.
The AEEU was formed last May after the Amalgamated Engineering Union merged with the Electrical, Electronic, Telecommunication and Plumbing Union.
The electricians were expelled from the TUC in 1988 and a positive vote from the new union would lead to a reunification of the British trade union movement.
The general secretary of the TUC, Norman Willis, and AEEU leaders, Bill Jordan, Gavin Laird and Paul Gallagher, opened the campaign for a ‘yes’ vote in London.
Mr Willis said: ‘Trade unionism is based on the belief that we all work better when we work together.
Engineers and electricians recognised that clearly when they voted earlier this year to join together in one union.
‘I am confident they will now show their support for working together with other unions through the TUC.
‘At a time when we face crucial challenges such as those posed by bitter recession, massive unemployment and opportunities like those offered by the new Europe, we need each other more than ever.
Membership of the TUC will bring many benefits to AEEU members.
‘The strength which this union brings to the TUC will benefit all trade unions.’
I urge all AEEU members most strongly to vote yes.’
Union leaders in Scotland said they were confident of a large vote in favour of the move.
A member of the AEEU executive council, Jimmy Airlie, said in Glasgow: ‘We will carry the vote massively in Scotland.’
The union has around 80,000 members — 50,000 engineering workers and the rest electricians — north of the Border.
Mr Airlie conceded that there might be some residual animosity towards the electricians but he did not envisage any problems in taking the union into the TUC.
‘My view is that if a union like the AEEU, with a million members, was outwith the TUC, for the first time in the history of the trade union movement there could be a rival centre to the TUC.
‘The Tories would love it.
It would weaken the movement if we were not in.’
The union has remained a member of the Scottish TUC.
Jobs losses in Scotland ‘running at 1,000 a week’
By Graeme Stewart, Industry Correspondent
JOB losses in Scotland are running at 1,000 a week, according to the Labour Party.
In all 4,221 people lost their job in January and unemployment will rise, Henry McLeish, the shadow Scottish affairs spokesman, said.
Mr McLeish said the figures showed that not only had the constant bleeding-away of Scottish jobs continued unabated, it was accelerating at an even more alarming rate.
The recession was having an impact on all sectors of an already battered economy.
‘The key question is not about how bad things are going to get but about what action the Government is going to take.
Ian Lang cannot remain complacently sitting on his hands in the face of an economic crisis which is damaging all our communities and condemning more than 80,000 Scots to long-term unemployment,’ he said.
Labour had called repeatedly for an emergency employment package aimed at providing work, training, assistance with job search and paying the proper rate for the job, he said.
‘A Government with any heart and sense would already be pursuing that strategy.’
The Government has had a Cabinet committee looking at ways of reducing unemployment but its recommended package is not due to be announced for a couple of weeks.
The committee, chaired by the Leader of the Lords, Lord Wakeham, has decided on a package that includes relaxation of rules that prevent benefit claimants from taking further education courses which occupy more than 21 hours a week.
In addition, there are plans to increase the number of places available in job clubs and job plan workshops from April.
There is growing concern in the Government about unemployment in the south-east of England and what is seen as discrimination in favour of Scotland and other areas through regional aid.
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, is expected to put job creation high on his list of priorities when he announces the Budget on 16 March.
New GOC Scotland is named
THE MINISTRY of Defence officially announced yesterday that the next General Officer Commanding Scotland will be Brigadier Michael Scott, CBE, DSO.
On 6 April, he will succeed Lieutenant General Sir Peter Graham, KCB, CBE, who is retiring.
Brigadier Scott, 52 next month, is depute military secretary at the MoD and also Regimental Lieutenant Colonel of the Scots Guards.
It was as commander of the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards that he won the DSO at the Battle of Tumbledown during the Falklands campaign.
In his new post, Brigadier Scott will be a ‘two-star’ Major General.
Because of the recent reorganisation of the management of the infantry, which saw the headquarters of the Scottish infantry division remaining at Edinburgh Castle, Brigadier Scott will become a ‘two star’ Major General rather than a ‘three star’Lt Gen, as has been customary in the past with the GOC Scotland.
BM to cut business fares
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
BRITISH Midland is to slash the cost of business travel from next month, undercutting rival business class fares by up to 40 per cent.
Diamond EuroClass is being introduced from 28 March on all its European services from Heathrow and also from East Midlands and Birmingham airports.
Diamond Service will continue on domestic flights.
Sir Michael Bishop, chairman of British Midland, said the new fares represented a ‘unilateral declaration of independence from the current business travel competition sham’.
Diamond EuroClass tickets will be offered at three levels of fare, as well as tickets issued on its self-write Timesaver Plus ticket scheme.
The difference in fares relates to restrictions on booking and travel times, but all business class travellers will receive the same standard of service whatever price ticket they buy.
On the London-Paris route for instance the EuroClass tickets will vary between £180 and £270, compared with the £318 currently charged by its competitors on the route.
The biggest saving will be on the Heathrow-Palma route where a EuroClass Eurobudget return will cost £290 against the current business return ticket which costs £484.
Sir Michael said the move was an integral part of the airline's long-term strategy of expansion.
‘Europe's ‘open skies’ have not yet become a reality.
If New Year's Day was the dawn of a new era, clearly someone forgot to tell Europe's flag-carrier airlines.
Perhaps this will remind them.’
Improvements in the service include 24-hour reservations and seat-selection service, separate check-in desks, a new EuroClass lounge and priority boarding.
Caution as CBI sees first signs of retail pick-up
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
A TENTATIVE economic recovery began in the shops last month, when retail sales showed their first year-on-year rise since last September and their strongest increase since May 1992, the month after the last general election, the Confederation of British Industry claimed yesterday.
A further, if more modest, improvement is expected in February.
Over the coming months, the cuts in interest rates since last September will be filtering through to homeowners' pockets, and this should help to lift consumer confidence, Nigel Whittaker, chairman of the CBI's distributive trades panel, said yesterday.
But the survey also sounds a note of caution.
‘Given the levels of consumer debt and the continuing rise in unemployment, it is too early to be sure we are seeing a sustainable recovery in consumer spending.
The survey indicates that sales volumes are up, but they still remain below what retailers would consider to be normal for the time of year.’
The recovery is also limited to certain trades.
Chemists, grocers, clothing, footwear and leather shops say that sales improved significantly compared with a year ago.
Conversely, off-licences, furniture and carpet retailers, confectionery, tobacco and newspaper retailers, and booksellers and stationers reported lower sales.
Wholesalers reported an increase in sales compared with last year, reversing the previous trend, and they also expect strong growth in sales in February.
But the improvement is shallow and uncertain.
They placed fewer orders with suppliers than a year ago and ran down their stocks in January.
Motor traders reported their strongest increase in sales volumes for two years.
The improvement in January was better than had been expected in December, sales of both vehicles and parts and accessories increased and the trade is looking forward to a further improvement in February.
The outlook is measured not by actual volumes and values, but by a changing balance of CBI members reporting improvements over those reporting a worsening trend.
In January, those reporting an annual increase outweighed the pessimists by 11 per cent of the sample, compared with plus 4 per cent in September, 14 per cent last May and 24 per cent last February.
But the figures can fluctuate sharply, with a negative balance of 5 per cent reporting an improvement in March last year and a positive balance of 20 per cent again in April.
Looking ahead, a balance of only 5 per cent expects to see an annual increase in February 1993, compared with figures of plus 23 per cent last May and plus 26 per cent in June, figures which proved to be wildly over-optimistic in the event.
Euro-research information centre unveiled
By Gary Duncan
A CENTRE aiming to promote the European Community's research and technological development programme across Scotland and the north of England was launched in Edinburgh yesterday by the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, seen here taking a well-deserved break during proceedings.
Based in Glasgow, the EC Relay Centre is one of a network of 27 such offices across Europe created to ensure the dissemination and use of the results of Community-funded research.
The network is designed to enhance Europe's international competitiveness by encouraging the transfer of new ideas and technology to industry.
The EC's decision to establish a Relay Centre in Glasgow follows a successful bid by a consortium of four companies: the Glasgow-based EuroInfo Centre and Technology Transfer Centre, Business Information Source of Inverness, and RTC North of Sunderland.
The EuroInfo Centre will gather all the information, while Technology Transfer, Business Information Source and RTC North will make the one-to-one contacts with individual businesses.
The centre will help business and organisations across Scotland and the north of England to gain access to the £4.5 billion of funding available for research and development through the EC up to 1994.
Mr Stewart said he was sure the centre would not only allow more organisations to win EC backing but, more importantly, would lead to the implementation of research and development in the form of new products and new processes in UK companies.
Emphasising the need for European co-operation, Mr Stewart said: ‘By bringing together the resources of various countries, we can take advantage of the complementary know-how and abilities available throughout Europe.
‘As the clearest expression and most powerful instrument of European integration, the EC plays a pivotal role in this.’
Bringing the single market to the door of Scottish business
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
TODAY The Scotsman, together with EuroInfo Centre, is launching a new information service Doing Business in Europe for business readers to help them to exploit the single market.
With companies being urged to look to the EC for the chance to expand now that the single market has come into force, this new service is intended to make it easier, particularly for smaller and medium-sized businesses, to take advantage of possibilities they might not otherwise get to hear about.
Every week, we shall publish a list of business opportunities that have been made publicly available through the Official Journal of the European Community, or through the network of a total of 211 EuroInfo Centres which are based throughout Europe.
This will alternate between contracts put out to tender and listing companies looking for joint ventures, partners, distributors, agents and so on.
This week we are starting the service with a selection of contracts in the energy and civil engineering sectors.
These will be carried once a month and will alternate with contracts in the food and electronics sectors.
Ian Traill, director of the Glasgow-based EuroInfo centre, said last night: ‘We are delighted to have collaborated with The Scotsman in promoting this service and bringing the single market to the doorstep of Scottish business.’
The information provided was gathered electronically from right across the European Community.
‘This will make it quite comprehensive and right up to date, more up to date than the published version of the Official Journal,’ he said.
Readers wanting more details should contact EuroInfo Centre, which is based at Atrium Court, 50 Waterloo Street, Glasgow G2 6HQ.
Doing Business in Europe, Page 27
Unigate buying Glass Glover
By Magnus Grimond
UNIGATE, the food and distribution group, yesterday announced the £54 million acquisition of Glass Glover, a contract distribution business.
Unigate also said it was ‘actively considering’ making a public offering in the US of shares in its US restaurant chains.
The purchase of Glass Glover comes just weeks before it was due to float on the stock market.
Unigate's chief executive, Ross Buckland, said yesterday: ‘By buying the company before flotation, we reckon we have got a very fair deal, compared with what it would have been after flotation.’
Glass Glover will bring turnover of nearly £85 million to Wincanton's sales of £210 million and operating profits which reached £5.5 million in the year to 3 October.
The company first went public in 1963 after a merger between Harry Glass and Young Glover & Co, selling fresh produce from Leith, Edinburgh and Glasgow.
Mr Buckland said Unigate was also evaluating the possible flotation in the US of the 235-strong Taco Bueno and Black-eyed Pea chains of restaurants, which last year made profits of £13.3 million.
Julian Lakin, Smith New Court, suggested the offering could value the restaurants at more than £150 million.
Unigate's shares rose 15p to 357p after the news yesterday.
Mr Buckland stressed there was ‘no necessity’ for the share sale and there was no intention of holding a rights issue.
This was in spite of the fact that the Glass Glover acquisition and last week's £48.8 million purchase of Clifford Foods would help push gearing to over 60 per cent by the year end in March.
Parliament in dispute on working conditions
THE European parliament is at odds with the Commission and member states over the draft directive covering working conditions for employees sent to another EC country under contract to provide a specific service.
The MEPs want to do away with the Commission's proposals for a three month contracting-out period during which the provisions in the directive would not be applied.
The Commission's draft Directive proposes that laws on the minimum wage and paid holidays in the country where a worker is being contracted out should apply solely to workers whose assignments last for more than three months.
In other words, if a Portuguese or indeed even a Polish business is the official employer of workers seconded for three months to a worksite in Germany, these workers would have to make do with the minimum wage provided for by Portuguese or Polish legislation.
When converted into German marks, the workers would not be earning a great deal.
After three months they would be entitled to the statutory minimum wage in Germany, but this would still be less than the wages taken home by Germans working on the same site.
The member states most concerned by the proposal — Greece, Spain, Ireland, Italy and Portugal — favour the three-month period proposed by the Commission.
Germany, France and the Netherlands, in contrast, seem to be against it, while the United Kingdom would like to considerably lengthen the period during which workers are not eligible for the minimum wage and national paid holidays, and to extend it to daily, weekly, Sunday, and night working hours.
Maastricht's out…
Eindhoven's out…
Dijon's out…
Dalgety defies tough trading conditions
By Richard Shackleton
DALGETY, the Spillers to Golden Wonder food combine yesterday revealed a near 5 per cent increase in taxable profits despite the ‘generally tough’ trading conditions.
The group, that only last week was forced to replace its sick chairman, John West with the chief executive Maurice Warren, pushed pre-tax profits up 4.5 per cent to £56 million for the six months to end-December compared to £54 million in the equivalent period in 1991.
Dalgety also increased its interim dividend payout by 5 per cent to 7.85p from 7.5p.
Earnings per share were 2.7 per cent up at 18.5p.
Mr West's early retirement means that Richard Clothier will to take over as chief executive in April rather than June as previously announced.
Mr Warren said new product development helped build market share and establish ‘a competitive edge’.
But he warned that recessionary trading conditions meant the company would not be able to pass on all the added costs arising from sterling's devaluation last September.
Flour has already risen by 15 per cent since then whilst animal feed has already risen by a similar amount and is expected to increase further.
Dalgety reported turnover up 8 per cent to £2.1 billion from £1.9 billion and trading profit up 7 per cent to £61 million from £58 million.
A good performance from Pot Snack meals helped profits from consumer foods rise from £27.8 million to £30.8 million.
Spillers pet foods had a resilient first half despite the continuing pressure on pet food margins.
Agribusiness profits jumped 23 per cent to £14.6 million helped by the strong growth in the agricultural supplies business and a good performance from the group's Pig Improvement Company where volumes have been impressive.
The only division to show a fall-off in profits has been the foods ingredients where profits fell from £10.8 million to £9.1 million because of difficulties in the bread market and the temporary impact of the closure of the Gainsborough plant.
Profits from food distribution rose from £6.8 million to £7.0 million with the US business, Martin-Bowers, gaining from new accounts won during the year.
The shares added 3p to 470p.
Market members back in the black
MEMBER firms of the London Stock Exchange were thought to be back in profit in the last quarter of 1992 after a third-quarter deficit caused by heavy dealing losses and falling revenues.
In the first six months of 1992, member firms' pre-tax aggregate profits totalled £131 million.
But this slumped to a third quarter loss of £126 million.
Current estimates suggest fourth quarter profits of around £24 million.
The London exchange, reporting the figures in its latest quarterly publication, said that 900 people left the industry during the first nine months of the year, cutting total staff numbers to 22,100.
On the overseas equity market, total annual turnover was £329 billion — a 16 per cent rise on the 1991 figure and a record year for non-domestic equity trading in London.
On the domestic market, total annual turnover of £433 billion was the highest since 1987.
The losses run up in the third quarter will seriously hit the aggregate figure for the whole of 1992, with pre-tax profits for the year expected to be about 95 per cent down on the £528 million recorded in 1991.
Problems in the third quarter are reckoned by observers to be mainly due to falling confidence throughout the securities industry in the run-up to Black Wednesday.
A spokesman for the exchange said that, assuming the recent wave of rights issues continued, this year should see a return to better levels of profitability.
The exchange, headed by Peter Rawlins, said uncertainty over the general election and worries about the economy kept investors on the sidelines last year.
— PA
Big leap for Mid Wynd
MID WYND International Investment Trust achieved accelerated growth in the first half-year, as net asset value per share leapt by 16.3 per cent, from 280.9p at the previous year-end to 326.8p in the six months to 31 December, 1992.
The capital growth and income trust, which is run from Edinburgh by Baillie Gifford, invests internationally in smaller companies and saw its pre-tax revenue drop from £313,946 six months before to £288,562, while earnings per share fell from 4.14p to 4p.
The interim dividend is being held at 4p, and the board says it expects to keep the final dividend, and therefore the total, unchanged at 6p.
The trust's European bond portfolio was sold in the period at ‘a useful profit’, the board reveals, while reductions in European and Japanese investments have financed a big rise in the percentage of assets held in south-east Asia — from 20.7 per cent to 26.5 per cent.
A strong start to the second half has seen NAV jump 5.2 per cent to 343.8p, and the shares firmed 3p to 294p.
Actuaries award gold medal for science work
PROFESSOR David Wilkie last night became only the fourth person to receive a gold medal from the Faculty of Actuaries in its 137-year existence for his contribution to the development of actuarial science.
Prof Wilkie, who trained with Scottish Widows and who has also worked for Standard Life, is a partner of R Watson & Partners, the firm of  consulting actuaries, and is an honorary visiting professor at Heriot-Watt University.
Professor John McCutcheon, president of the Faculty of Activities, paid tribute to the volume and quality of Prof Wilkie's work, and pointed out that he had now written more than 100 publications.
Prof Wilkie has been involved in constructing several widely-used indices and tables, and was personally responsible for constructing the series of fixed interest indices for British government stocks, index-linked stocks and company debentures.
He has also been a member of the actuarial profession's working party on AIDS and developed a model suitable for forecasting the number of  AIDS cases in the UK.
In the past 25 years he has also been responsible for the construction of the mortality tables produced by the Continuous Mortality Investigation Bureau for use by the life offices and has also taken an active part in the development of a new method of analysing sickness insurance statistics.
In addition to all this, his most important work has been in relation to investments and his ‘stochastic investment model’ is widely used by actuaries in the UK and abroad.
Prof David Wilkie: medal awarded for only fourth time
MB-Caradon signals French sale
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
MB-CARADON, the UK conglomerate yesterday signalled its intention to sell its 25.3 per cent stake in Carnaud-Metalbox, the French-based can-maker which contains the old Metal Box company.
MB-Caradon's chairman, Antony Hichens, and chief executive, Peter Jansen, denied yesterday that there is an immediate buyer in sight for the stake, which is currently valued at about £515 million on the Paris Bourse, but they have called an egm for 4 March to ask shareholders to approve a sale whenever an attractive opportunity arises.
The jump in the value of the franc against sterling since last September has increased the value of stake by almost 20 per cent, but the terms of the original merger give its main French partner CGIP which also has 25.3 per cent of Carnaud-Metalbox, the right of first refusal.
The old Metal Box company merged its can-making business with Carnaud in 1989.
Since then, the UK holding company merged with Caradon and brought in new management, and now operates in building products, plastics, central heating equipment and security printing.
In 1991 the stake in Carnaud-Metalbox contributed about a quarter of total trading profits of £125 million.
But the dividend income is relatively modest, and coming from abroad they are not a tax-efficient source of income.
A £150 million rights issue in October 1991 enabled MB-Caradon to pay off the bulk of its borrowings and selling its stake in Carnaud-Metalbox would almost certainly be followed by an acquisition in the building materials sector.
Carnaud Metalbox shares were suspended in Paris yesterday, and MB-Caradon shares rose 11p on the news before settling back to end unchanged at 310p.
Fine start at Second Alliance
SECOND Alliance Trust has again outperformed the FT Actuaries All-Share Index in its first six months, lifting its net asset value per share by 22.7 per cent, from £13.62p a year ago to £15.7p, compared with the index's 19.3 per cent rise over the same period, writes George Duthie.
There was a handsome rise, too, in pre-tax revenue, from £4.78  million before to £5.15 million, and earnings per share improved from 17.83p to 19.49p for the Dundee-based trust, the UK's second-biggest general investment fund.
The board is lifting the interim dividend from 12p last time to 12.5p after what it calls ‘a larger increase in pre-tax revenue than seemed likely six months ago’.
This was achieved partly because of the beneficial effect of devaluation on overseas income for three months, it explains, but also because the directors have been largely successful in avoiding companies which have been forced to cut their dividends in the recession.
While ‘it is too soon to be sanguine’, the board says, it believes the worst is over for its portfolio, and that with the benefit of devaluation for the whole of the second half, earnings for the full year should allow the trust's record of dividend progress to be maintained.
Some US holdings have been sold in the six months and more stakes in UK companies capable of dividend growth in a difficult climate have been bought.
Second Alliance's shares gained 6p to 1,480p on the figures.
MFI firm's closure cuts 259 jobs
THE furniture group, MFI, is to cut about 259 jobs with the closure of its home-delivery distribution centre at Runcorn, Cheshire, in May, workers were told yesterday.
The closure, which will save MFI up to £2.5 million a year, follows the introduction of new technology.
The centre was used for delivery of Schreiber kitchens and upholstery to customers, but changes in stock-control procedures mean that MFI shops can now handle deliveries themselves.
Schreiber's Runcorn factory is unaffected by the closure.
MFI's shares firmed 1p to 126p on the news yesterday.
— PA
Water companies keep diversifying
ANGLIAN Water yesterday splashed out £36 million on a Swedish water engineering company as part of its attempts to diversify out of water supply.
Nordic Water, an offshoot of the building and real estate group, NCC, makes water-treatment products and does design and contracting work for water companies, industry and local authorities.
It has customers in the UK, as well as in Scandinavia, eastern Germany, Poland, Spain and the US.
Nordic's president, Goran Wijkmark, is to join Anglian as managing director of its new process engineering group.
Also yesterday, North West Water bought a US firm, Consolidated Electric Company, which makes equipment for water and waste-water plants and pumping stations, as part of its efforts to diversify.
No price was disclosed.
— PA
Banks study final Heron rescue plan
MORE than 80 banks are thought to be studying final proposals for the £1.4 billion debt refinancing plan to rescue the property and trading group, Heron.
The proposals, supported by the lead banks, are reported to have been sent to all 82 financial institutions for detailed consideration.
The banks have until the end of February to make a decision if Heron is to continue to meet its obligations.
Final proposals were sent out after the refinance steering committee, led by Barclays, agreed the documentation in a process which was originally started last March.
The banks approved the first outline of the proposals in October, but detailed work on the final draft has been going on since then.
— PA
BET nets £38m from disposals
BET's sell-off programme gathered pace yesterday with three disposals which will generate a total of £38.5 million in cash for the business services company.
The largest sale was of the joinery group, Boulton & Paul, for £14.5 million.
The business had been put on the market in early 1990, but remained unsold because of the housing slump.
Two other businesses, Leada Acrow and Initial Ireland, brought in a total of £12 million.
BET's chief executive, John Clark, said the sell-offs would improve profitability and were an important step in turning round the company.
The shares rose 5.5p to 103p.
In the 12 months to the end of March last year, BET's pre-tax profits slumped to £18.5 million, from £217 million the previous year.
— PA
McCarthy still cautious on outlook
THE retirement homes specialist, McCarthy & Stone, is remaining cautious about prospects, despite a surge in reservations and inquiries.
Shareholders were told at the Bournemouth-based group's annual meeting yesterday that January reservations were 9.4 per cent up on last year's and that this month, a 41-unit development was sold to a housing association.
But the chairman, John McCarthy, said: ‘Whilst these are encouraging and welcome signs, the timing of sustained recovery in the housing market remains unclear.’
He said that in the five months to the end of January, the group had sold 223 houses — only two more than at that stage in the previous 12 months.
Consumer confidence and house prices had been hit by the events of Black Wednesday, he added.
— PA
Japan's bankruptcies still rising
CORPORATE bankruptcies in Japan rose only 2.7 per cent in January and their resulting debt fell more than 40 per cent from a year ago, but analysts said that it was too soon to say the worst was over.
The private Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research said in Tokyo yesterday that 974 corporations went bankrupt in January, leaving behind debt worth 261.53 billion yen (about £1.53 billion).
January was the 28th consecutive month in which bankruptcy cases involving debts equivalent to £58,400 or more rose above year-ago levels.
‘This is an understatement, considering the actual state of the economy,’ said Shigeru Ogata, a Tokyo Commerce and Industry analyst.
‘I'm scared of what huge numbers may come out starting February.’
January's figures reflected the fact that the month had fewer business days, so some bankruptcies might have been postponed until the next month, the analysts said.
— Reuter
David Lloyd's firm to float
THE sports and leisure company founded in 1980 by the former tennis international, David Lloyd, is planning a March flotation expected to capitalise it at more than £50 million.
David Lloyd Leisure owns seven clubs in the south-east of England and is planning to expand elsewhere.
— PA
Scapa pays £11m to expand
THE industrial materials group, Scapa, has acquired for £11 million the business of Oberdorfer, a manufacturer of fabrics for the paper industry, which has plants in Germany, Austria and America.
— PA 
Banana prices ‘unlikely to rise'
THE European Commission sought to play down fears yesterday that new European Community rules limiting imports of cheaper bananas from Latin America would force up prices for consumers.
‘The Commission does not think that we should expect an increase of prices…
Such a situation should not happen,’ an official at the EC executive dealing with banana trade told reporters.
EC farm ministers agreed the new rules on Saturday to protect high-cost Community producers in areas such as Madeira and Martinique and former colonies in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific.
Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands were outvoted by their EC partners when they tried to increase Latin America's share of the Community banana market.
The regime will allow the annual import of two million tonnes of cheaper bananas from Latin America at a tariff of 100 European currency units (Ecus) per tonne.
Shipments over the limit will be charged at a rate of 850 Ecus per tonne.
But the official said the quota had been determined on the basis of current banana consumption.
If this consumption grew the Commission would be able to increase the quota accordingly.
‘If consumption increase…we have the means in the Community to react quickly,’ he said.
The EC regime will replace national systems under which bananas cost less in Germany and the Netherlands than in Spain, France or Britain whose overseas territories or former colonies grow more expensive bananas than large-scale Latin American plantations.
Warning on effect of travel merger
TOUR operators, travel agents and holidaymakers will all suffer if the proposed merger between Owners Abroad and Airtours is allowed, it was claimed yesterday.
The claim came from the travel company Thomas Cook, which is battling to ensure its own link-up with Owners Abroad gets the go-ahead rather than the £220 million hostile bid from Airtours.
‘The proposed merger (between Airtours and Owners) would be to the material detriment of existing and potential small tour operators and retailers,’ said Thomas Cook in a submission to the Office of Fair Trading.
‘This would reduce both consumers’ choices and, eventually, the price-competitive nature of the current market.’
Thomas Cook said the merger would create an effective duopoly and tour operators would find themselves ‘subject to debilitating price wars funded by the dominant position of the duopoly and designed to drive them out of the industry’.
The company said the proposed merger should be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
The OFT is set to advise the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, about any possible MMC referral.
In its submission, Thomas Cook said the proposed merger would result in Owners and Airtours taking 41 per cent of the Canary Islands market, 42 per cent of Turkey, 33 per cent of Corfu, 26 per cent of Malta and 22 per cent of Cyprus.
— PA
Saatchi chief leaves to join newly-sold Adidas
THE man who pulled the Conservatives' favourite advertising agency, Saatchi & Saatchi, back from the brink, yesterday confirmed his departure.
Robert Louis-Dreyfus, the chief executive, will leave the group on 31 March to become president of the management board of the sports goods firm, Adidas.
He will remain on the board of Saatchi as a non-executive director and will be replaced as chief executive by Charles Scott, who he brought with him into the company as finance director in January 1990.
He was due to go in June but brought forward the date to join Adidas, which was finally sold off yesterday by the controversial French tycoon Bernard Tapie to a group of international investors for $371 million.
Mr Louis-Dreyfus, who has taken a 15 per cent stake in the new company, has been joined by the UK-based investment company, Coatbridge Holdings with 15 per cent whilst an unnamed investment fund, which is advised by the US money-center bank Citibank, has taken 19.9 per cent.
Mr Louis-Dreyfuss will take over from Gilberte Beaux as chairman of the company's management board.
Beaux, Mr Tapie's longtime lieutenant, who will become head of the adidas supervisory board, has raised her stake to eight per cent from five per cent.
Adidas, founded by Adi Dassler in 1920, posted a net profit of just $30 million on sales of $2.0 billion in 1991.
The sale ends an important chapter in the career of Bernard Tapie, the flamboyant French businessman and politician.
Mr Tapie, who made his fortune in the 1970s and 80s rescuing troubled companies, once called his dramatic entry into adidas three years ago the best deal he had ever struck.
But he has been trying to unload the firm since last year to help his debt-laden holding company, BTF, and clear the way for him to pursue his political career.
The sportswear firm's announcement that BTF had sold its 78 per cent stake in Adidas International Holding — which holds 95 per cent of Adidas — came as no surprise.
But France's centre-right opposition has cried foul over the reinforcement of the stakes held by state firms in a company controlled by the Socialist government's urban affairs minister.
The Credit Lyonnais bank and insurers Assurances Generales de France and Unions des Assurances de Paris increased their joint stake to 42.1 per cent from 17 per cent.
Francois d'Aubert, a centre-right UDF deputy, and Alain Juppe, general secretary of the Gaullist RPR party, demanded a public enquiry into what d'Aubert termed ‘banana republic ethics’.
‘This enquiry should determine under what conditions…a state bank — Credit Lyonnais — and two nationalised insurance firms helped a serving minister offload Adidas at a nice price,’ Mr d'Aubert said.
He has long criticised the bank's practices, dubbing it ‘Crazy Lyonnais’ for rash lending.
In a book published last week entitled Dirty Money, he attacked the bank's role in the 1990 takeover of the Hollywood film studio MGM.
Oil prices drift as talks continue on production levels
By Frank Frazer
OIL PRICES drifted down yesterday as leading oil producers struggled to find a compromise on production levels after three days of talks in Vienna.
Though there was no trading in the US because of a public holiday, North Sea Brent blend of crude oil lost 35 cents in early trading in London before ending 23 cents lower at $17.97 a barrel.
Traders said there had been an initial bout of panic at the prospect of the meeting of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries finishing without a deal on output levels.
But selling was thin as most buyers stayed out of the market while the talks continued.
In spite of claims by some delegates that a settlement was imminent, prices suffered a setback after a report that Nigeria would not accept a cut in its output of more than 50,000 barrels per day (bpd), compared with the 75,000 bpd which it was reported previously to have offered.
But sources close to the Vienna talks said that the most difficult issue remained opposition by Kuwait to an OPEC quota which would limit its build up in production in the aftermath of the Gulf war.
For most of the day, Alirio Parra, Venezuela's oil minister who is OPEC president, met individual delegations in hotel suites in an attempt to resolve the differences.
Though he gave no details of the proposals, he claimed last night that ‘considerable progress’ had been made.
But analysts recalled that Mr Parra had spent the two weeks before the talks touring member states in an attempt to secure a deal that would remove at least 1 million bpd from the oil market as demand falls with the onset of warmer One analyst said that the delay in reaching agreement had unsettled the market.
Some delegates were said to be angry at Kuwait's intransigence, including officials from Nigeria who said their country needed oil revenues as much as any other because of difficult economic problems.
But a senior Kuwait delegate claimed his country had offered the other ministers a compromise on the tough quota demands it made when the meeting started but said the proposal were rejected.
‘I do not know what they are cooking,’ he added as the talks continued.
Saudi Arabia and Iran, the two largest OPEC exporters, were reported to be among countries demanding that Kuwait make sacrifices to achieve higher oil prices.
Still no sign of escape route for Chancellor
CONFIDENCE is a fickle thing.
Our own straw poll of leading businessmen bears little resemblance to some of the bullish comments that have appeared in various surveys recently.
It is clear that whatever the CBI, economists or analysts might be saying, several of Scotland's most experienced businessmen are downright sceptical about any claims that recovery, albeit a very gentle one, is under way.
Far from it, what they say for public consumption appears to be at odds with what they are saying privately.
On the other hand, most of the optimistic comments such as there were came from the heads of two companies involved in housebuilding.
Folklore has it that any economic revival starts in the housing market as homeowners and would-be homeowners decide they can put off moving or buying no longer.
By this theory manufacturers in whatever sector will eventually follow on behind, although the devaluation of sterling already seems to have led to increase in export volumes, if not values.
Once the consumer decides to start spending again, the theory goes, recession will turn to growth.
The latest CBI distributive trades survey, published today, underlined what is expected to be confirmed in tomorrow's retail sales figures for January, namely that there was quite a good bounce-back from the unexpected fall in December.
Nevertheless the continued growth in unemployment is bad news for retailers in the longer term.
Fear of unemployment is probably doing more than anything to hold back consumers from increasing their spending, and that is compounded by their desire to pay down debt after getting their fingers burned in the late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s.
The other problem is that as companies shed more labour to remain competitive, the fewer people there are who have real spending power and that in itself will be a major inhibiting factor on recovery.
All that helps to explain why businessmen are keen to talk up prospects in official surveys and why they don't really believe all that they say.
What it doesn't do is offer an escape route to a Chancellor who can see public borrowing spiralling out of control yet cannot afford to increase taxes substantially to keep the public spending deficit under some sort of control.
Nor can he afford to cut interest rates to American or Japanese levels to stimulate recovery, as that would just provide a one-way bet against sterling with all the attendant risks for inflation.
Either way Norman Lamont is hemmed in with little scope for escape.
Murphy's fast track from Highland News to PR magnate
‘At the end of the day PR is a lot about commonsense, but it is quite a complex business’
THE world of public relations has plenty of detractors but Michael Murphy, the founder and chairman of PR Consultants Scotland, has managed both to make himself wealthy and to run what is widely regarded as Scotland's most professional home-grown consultancy, as well as its largest.
Murphy, who was 39 last week, recently announced that he was making his original partner, Helen Cree, managing director, although he is staying as executive chairman to concentrate on growing the business, particularly in the financial sector, and improving quality.
The announcement only fuelled speculation that he is earmarked for greater things in the Shandwick organisation, of which PRCS is now a part, or even that he was preparing the way for something completely different when his five-year golden handcuffs are released next year.
Either way he has come a long way in a very short time, especially for someone who left journalism for PR at the age of 22 after failing to break into daily newspapers.
His short-lived journalistic career encompassed the Highland News and then the Cumbernauld News, but after making no headway he swapped it for being a press officer with the Greater Glasgow Passenger Transport Executive.
‘I chose that because I thought I would still be able to keep my hand in by writing the staff newspaper.’
In fact he enjoyed the commercial side of PR, especially after joining Alloa Brewery, and in 1979 he joined Grant Forrest, the advertising agency, as an account manager on its fledgling PR wing with just two clients, Barratt Scotland and Schlumberger (Barratt is still with him).
Within four weeks his boss resigned and Murphy was put in charge.
‘I told the managing director ‘you must be mad’,’ he laughs.
But both sides survived.
Six years later Murphy had turned it into the biggest agency in Scotland, overtaking Barkers, traditionally the market leader, and bought it out (the  implicit threat being that he would start up on his own) for £100,000.
Murphy had 55 per cent, Cree 20 per cent , and 3i had the rest.
One of his early moves on joining Grant Forrest was to change the name to its current one to emphasise that it was a pan-Scottish agency and in 1983 Cree joined to open the office in Edinburgh, a move he considers a vital part of PRCS's success.
‘That was one of the watersheds along with winning business from British Airways.’
At that stage he was as keen on growth as profits.
‘In the very early days I looked at the market and decided one of the things I wanted to do was to build a big PR company because the market suffered from too many small companies.
There is room for plenty of small companies but over-fragmentation is not a good thing.’
The profits that were generated were ploughed back in investment in staff and technology, a philosophy that has been maintained and which has allowed PRCS to become twice as big as any of its competitors, an achievement which speaks for itself.
‘As far as being good at PR, we were also good at running a business.
We took finance, marketing, human resources and technology very seriously.
‘Probably the most important thing was being able to bring together and keep together a strong collection of people at all levels.
At the end of the day PR is a people business and you are only as successful as the number of good people you have.’
Murphy is insistent that one of the best people he has available to him isn't even on the payroll — his wife Lynne, who used to be in the PR industry herself.
He recently gave her some free advice when she launched her own business.
‘But I have had by far the better of the deal because the consultancy advice I have had from her has outweighed that ten times over.
It is important to have that sort of relationship where someone can look in from the outside.’
That ability to build and keep a good team explains why, when he sold to Shandwick in 1989, the performance-related deal valued PRCS at £5 million plus and Murphy at more than £2.5 million.
The recession has put paid to PRCS achieving that value, although, until last year, it had a 13-year unbroken record of increasing profits.
Nevertheless Murphy should end up comfortably a millionaire once the earn-out is complete next year.
The fact that Murphy considers himself first and foremost a businessman who happens to be in PR helps to explain the care with which the decision to sell PRCS was taken.
The decision to sell was taken a year before the deal was done and the company looked at 11 different suitors before picking Shandwick.
‘We needed an international group because more and more of our clients were wanting international services, while it was important to be part of someone strong in financial PR in the City.’
Shandwick's was by no means the highest offer.
Indeed one firm — which has since gone bust — offered £1.5 million more, while other better offers would have entailed loss of control and loss of identity.
‘Shandwick offered the opportunity to retain our own name and develop autonomously with no interference and they have been totally true to their word.
The ability to run our own business was very important.’
Before the sale, Murphy and Cree deliberately gave some of their stake to their fellow directors and to an employee trust as a means of motivation.
Although it already had a number of blue chip clients, such as Wm Low and the Scottish Development Agency (and now Scottish Enterprise), perhaps what made the firm's reputation was the way it handled Scottish electricity privatisation for the Government, an appointment made before the Shandwick deal.
Others among its 70-strong client base include BP, Coors, Digital and Ernst & Young.
One side effect of being Scotland's largest PR firm — with a turnover of £3.75 million and fee income of £1.8 million last year — is that, rightly or wrongly, it can give potential clients the impression of being both expensive and impersonal.
To counteract that Murphy has set up the Edinburgh-based PR Centre.
It helps to avoid potential conflicts of interest, but equally it has pitched for business against its parent — and won.
The fact that PRCS has such a large client base might suggest that it has discovered some magic formula, but Murphy insists the principles of good PR are quite simple.
‘You have to ensure not only is the chairman of the client happy, but you have to pay just as much attention to helping the weekly newspaper journalist.
It is both sides of the equation.
If you don't service one then the other won't be happy.
You have to be able to deal with people at all levels.
‘At the end of the day PR is a lot about commonsense, but it is quite a complex business.
You have got to ensure the client, journalists, analysts and other opinion formers trust you.
You have got to be up front and open, although that doesn't always mean telling everyone everything.’
By common consent Murphy comes over as easy-going, but behind that there is a sharpness that even he admits doesn't always make him the easiest person to work for.
‘I am a strange mixture of appearing to be a pleasant guy but behind it all I am pretty hard and often grumpy.
I don't like seeing things going wrong and I don't tend to say ‘well done’ to people when things have gone well.’
Despite that he has managed to keep a group of people around him who have a loyalty both to him and to the company.’
What that group wants to know, of course, is what he will do when the golden handcuffs come off at the end of next year.
Murphy is playing his cards close to his chest.
‘I am enjoying my job more than ever and there is still a lot to be done with PRCS, so all the speculation is a bit silly.’
But Murphy knows he can run a successful business — PRCS has been voted consultancy of the year by its peers — and the odds must be on him wanting to play on a bigger stage once he is free to do so.
Recession becomes architect of gloom
Almost half of Britain's architects are unemployed or under-employed, finds GORDON MILNE, who also reports on brighter prospects abroad
‘I get to see a fair number of architects, and some firms are just barely hanging on’
IF AN unemployed actor is ‘resting’ and an unemployed journalist is ‘freelance’, what do we call an unemployed architect?
It is a difficult question.
If the unemployment register held by the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland is to be believed, there are fewer than 100 out of work.
Nobody — including the RIAS — believes this.
Consider the facts: there are about 3,000 architects in Scotland; workloads have declined by as much as 60 per cent; and some firms report that they are only half the size they were just two years ago.
‘There's  still something of a stigma in being an unemployed professional,’ said Kate Comfort, director of public affairs at RIAS.
‘That's a great shame, because unemployment is so universal nowadays that I would have hoped the stigma would disappear.’
Instead, when the large practices make cutbacks, the favourite route for those who are axed is into self employment.
They won't show up as unemployed in the statistics.
‘But they might be under-employed.
You might find architects who a few years ago were working on major projects, but are now making a living from loft extensions.’
Chris Palmer, spokesman for the Royal Institute of British Architects, said a survey conducted last year showed that 58 per cent of architects were either unemployed or underemployed.
Ian Gracie, Wimpey Construction's director for Scotland, quotes a figure of 45 per cent architectural unemployment.
‘That's a serious situation, because architects provide the tools of our trade — drawings and information.’
He foresees more redundancies.
‘I get to see a fair number of architects, and some firms are just barely hanging on.
I have heard of one firm where not one architect is earning more than £17,000 — and that's after all their years of training.’
The latest RIBA quarterly survey, published last month, paints a grim picture.
New commissions for housing and offices show a marked decline over previous quarters.
Pessimism is the order of the day in every one of RIBA's eight offices — most markedly in Ulster and in south-east England, but with no real grounds for optimism in Scotland.
North of the Border, a balance between those architects expecting a rise and those expecting a fall in workloads in the next six months stands at a dismal minus 19 per cent.
Normally, one would expect the spokespeople for industry bodies to ‘talk up’ their respective industries.
Not so with Chris Palmer of RIBA.
‘To be honest, I don't see any prospect of improvement in the near future,’ he said.
‘The one positive sign I've seen recently is that public sector spending was up in the third quarter of 1993.’
But he points out that recent government pronouncements suggest the squeeze is to be put on public spending once more.
Traditionally, the profession has relied heavily on public works; 25 years ago, more than half of all new commissions were funded by the public purse.
Now the proportion is down to less than a quarter, and falling.
John Spencely, chairman of Edinburgh firm Reiach & Hall, describes this recession as one of the worst he has experienced.
‘Two years ago this practice employed 70-odd people.
That's now down to about 35, and our turnover's about half what it was.’
He adds that this is fairly typical for Scottish practices.
‘We've lived through other recessions.
The most recent was in the early 1980s, during the first couple of years of the Thatcher government but that only lasted for 18 months.
This one has gone on for so much longer — two years so far with no sign of it coming to an end.’
Mr Spencely says a primary reason is the upheaval caused by various public sector reorganisations.
The changes in the health service, in education, in local authorities, mean that everything is put on hold, he said.
‘That is understandable.
If you present professional politicians with a proposal, and they don't know whether their organisation will even be in existence in two years’ time, they're not going to go ahead — because they won't get the credit.
The same thing happened when the Scottish Development Agency changed over to Scottish Enterprise.’
Mr Spencely sees no early respite.
‘This government's policies are not conducive to bringing about the end of the recession,’ he said bluntly.
Professor Charles Robertson of Strathclyde University's department of  architecture confirmed the gloomy prognosis.
In Scotland, an architect starts his training with a four year BSc.
That will earn him his RIBA Part I. But then, he has to get a year's relevant experience in practice before coming back for the final year of his course.
‘Students are finding it increasingly difficult to get that experience.
Jobs with the bigger practices have practically dried up, so we're finding that we have to be much more flexible in the type of experience we'll accept — a year working on a site for Wimpey, for example.’
It is hard for universities to gauge how successful their graduates are in finding work.
‘The trouble is, our records aren't very accurate.
Often, we don't know what has happened to our students and there is no real need for them to tell us — we can lose track.
‘For example, out of 28 graduates last year, I know that 15 are working and I know that three don't have jobs.
But I don't know what's happened to the other ten.’
Prof Robertson believes some will have gone abroad, probably to Europe or Hong Kong.
Others will be unemployed.
Notwithstanding the bleak prospects, there is no shortage of applicants for Strathclyde's degree course.
‘It's certainly not discouraged potential students.’
‘We used to take in 35 students a year and now we're taking in 75, more than twice as many.
But even then, we can choose from over 400 applicants.’
Reporting requirements may push up compliance costs
This week STUART BRUCE concludes his series on value added tax and the single market by looking at the new reporting requirements for UK businesses.
WITH the abolition of border controls, no customs paperwork is generally necessary when goods move between member states.
A document has, however, been introduced to accompany excise goods moving between registered businesses.
Companies should now be experiencing shorter delivery times with the absence of physical checks at the frontier but compliance costs will almost certainly have risen, in the short term at least, due to the introduction of new reporting requirements devised for collation of EC trade statistics and to combat fraud.
Intra-EC customs clearance work, hitherto carried out mainly by agents, is no longer appropriate but both governments and industry still require statistics to be kept, particularly in the early years of the single market.
Responsibility for accurate submission rests with businesses themselves and, as an indication of how important the data is viewed by Customs, criminal penalties are in place for non-compliance.
The prime document for EC statistics is now the VAT return.
All who are engaged in intra-EC trade must now show thereon the total value of all goods dispatched to other EC customers and received from other EC suppliers in the special boxes provided on the return form.
Where either category has exceeded £135,000 during 1992 further, more detailed information has to be submitted within the very strict time limit of ten working days after each month end.
Known as the Intrastat system, the data can be submitted by a computerised medium but only if it meets Customs specification requirements and has prior approval.
Specific details relating to each consignment are required but values and quantities may be aggregated where all other details are identical.
Up to ten items of coded information are required comprising such details as the commodity reference of the goods, delivery terms, weight, method of transport and, for arrivals, the country of origin.
The zero rating of goods moving to other member states without Customs documentation clearly invites fraud.
To help control this, all except the very smallest of businesses are required to submit on a calendar quarterly basis the aggregate value of sales to individual customers in other EC countries by reference to their foreign VAT registration number.
Monetary penalties apply if these EC sales listings are submitted late or contain material inaccuracies.
Much closer liaison now exists with the other fiscal authorities within the community and a system of audit based controls will enable the sales values provided on these listings to be compared with declared purchases in other member states and vice versa.
New anti-fraud teams have been set up to investigate any discrepancies.
Timing differences in the recording of transactions may mean that VAT return statistics and the more detailed Intrastats do not agree.
Customs expects companies to be able to satisfactorily explain why — and has incorporated into the Intrastat system an optional means of so doing.
Companies now need to ensure much greater co-operation between their operating departments and their accounting function if they are to make accurate reports properly to Customs.
Many companies have already found that to maintain commercial confidentiality they have had to register for VAT and appoint agents in other member states just to comply with the new reporting regime.
All companies need to take their reporting  responsibilities seriously.
Army earns its stripes with good promotion
With judging under way for the Scottish Marketing Awards, KAY BLAIR picks out some entries worthy of a mention in dispatches
OVER the past few weeks I have been attempting to assess the relative marketing merits of companies as diverse as theatre companies, electrical retailers and peat producers.
This is the annual judging season, the exercise in question the Scottish Marketing Awards, which are organised by Scottish Industrial & Trade Exhibitions.
Judging the awards is a fascinating experience which has a refreshing tendency to challenge preconceived notions.
You find enthralling tales of small businesses without a jot of formal marketing training who have, unknowingly, applied effective marketing techniques for years — but have done so under the banner of plain, common sense.
There are demonstrable cases of innovation, clear thinking and a willingness to be brave.
But you also find disappointing examples of companies which still perceive marketing to be all to do with promotion and little to do with profits.
A credible advertising campaign does not maketh a marketing strategy.
You become excited when you discover an entry from a brand leader but descend into despondency when you find that large, marketing-led organisations can be incredibly sloppy when it comes to presenting written reports.
Despite substantial resources, the task of preparing the awards' entry is delegated to the most inexperienced member of the marketing team — and it shows.
There are the carefully packaged documents prepared by marketing, PR and advertising companies on behalf of their clients.
Some of them are excellent, the work of true professionals who know well how to present a logical and inspiring case study.
Some of them, sadly, are glib, glossy reports which do the client companies few favours.
What was encouraging this year was that the overall calibre of entries far-outstripped last year's submissions.
That organisations as diverse as shipbuilding, meat processors, training agencies and hotels saw fit to participate must be encouraging and some degree of recognition that marketing as a business philosophy is making some impact on the Scottish psyche.
The results of the judges' deliberations will be made public at an awards dinner arranged by SITE on 16 March.
Then those companies which impressed the judges will be justifiably lauded for their efforts.
But let me tell you now about just a few of those entries which did not make it to the final but which, nevertheless, had several redeeming features.
One submission from the army, an organisation not normally noted for its marketing ability, held a key sentence.
‘Good resettlement adds up to good recruitment.’
In other words, if you look after your ex-employees and leave them feeling positive towards your organisation, it can make attracting new staff easier.
It is a simple enough message but one which has a nasty habit of being forgotten when companies decide to shed staff.
Far too many still favour the shock tactics of getting those who are no longer deemed useful out of the door as fast as possible — and good riddance.
Yet, embittered pigeons have a great tendency to come home to roost at a later date, wreaking merry havoc as they zoom in on perceived injustices and ensure that all and sundry realise the iniquities of their previous employer.
Despite churning out reams of PR gobbledygook to a receptive media, a business can find that a few choice words uttered by vitriolic ex-employees can change public perceptions radically.
Treating redundant employees as people with positive strengths who deserve to be marketed well was an unusual entry.
It recognised that the plan to reduce the size of the armed forces between 1992 and 1995 would inflate the normal 1,000 leavers in Scotland in 1993 by a further 500 compulsory redundancies.
The challenge was to plan and implement a strategy which would help give them jobs, to ensure that potential employers were aware of this trained workforce and knew how to gain access to it.
By looking after its past employees, the army sought to position itself as a caring organisation which would encourage new recruits.
Far removed from the practicalities of army life was the entry from the Traverse Theatre in Edinburgh.
With a move to new premises which would double its audience capacity in a city not noted for enthusiastic theatre-going, the company needed to retain its existing audience while attracting new theatre go-ers to fill additional seats.
It had to identify new target markets.
It sought to attract both moral and financial support from the business community and to establish a regular bar/cafe clientele which would provide much-needed income.
Its submission asserted that its marketing objectives had been met.
In a sector beset with intellectual arrogance which has a disturbing tendency to under-rate the value of the customer and blame poor audiences on the weaknesses of marketing rather than, as is more likely, on the weaknesses of the artistic offering, it was refreshing to find a company which had used marketing techniques successfully — and which claimed it would continue to do so.
On 16 March details of those companies which the judges considered had even better marketing stories to be told will be revealed.
It is worth tuning in.
Hitting the target: The army's emphasis on a caring attitude struck a chord
Penetrating approach to printing
Three Englishmen ventured north, bought into, and are now building up the 200-year-old Scottish printer Pillans & Wilson.
JOHN HATFIELD presents an account of their success
‘There is definitely a need for trust and security has to be taken seriously.
This general culture of understanding confidentiality is our livelihood — the market is very unforgiving’
ANY Scot who has ever sat in a drafty hall, feeling a mounting sense of doom while staring blankly at an exam paper has probably cursed Edinburgh-based Pillans & Wilson for collaborating in their misery by printing the question papers.
But since it was established in 1775 to serve as a printer to Edinburgh's legal, banking and ecclesiastical communities P&W has developed a strong position in financial printing, providing it with a coverage that goes much wider than ‘Sketch and describe an electronic circuit.’
It was this exposure to the financial sector that attracted the attentions of the three-man management buy-in team which took control of P&W in 1990.
Graham Bowstead, Bob Hodgson and Ray Cargill, all Englishmen, had been working for William Lee in London but were on the look out for opportunities to branch out on their own.
That chance arose in 1988 when Colorgraphic acquired P&W as a vehicle for building its direct mail printing business north of the border.
Since the annual report printing business was surplus to requirements at Colorgraphic, Bowstead and his partners moved in and took over in 1990 with backing from County NatWest and Murray Johnstone.
As Graham Bowstead points out: ‘When we took over P&W was printing 130 report and accounts a year, the second-highest number produced by any company, yet it was hardly known south of the border.
‘We saw the potential for growth and are aiming to become the UK's chief financial printer managed from Scotland.’
Despite the effects of recession and significant overcapacity in the industry down south, the team has managed to build up the business considerably over the past two years.
This is evident not just in the personalised PWL number plates on the directors' cars but in the results.
Perhaps the best example of the company's penetration of both the Scottish and English markets is the fact that it was entrusted with printing the prospectuses for the Scottish Rugby Union's debenture and the English Rugby Union's Rose debenture.
Turnover has surged from £6 million to £10 million and the firm is working 24 hours a day, six days a week throughout the year to meet demand.
This applies even to the lean season in January and February.
Sales are split roughly 60:40 between financial printing and what is known as quality commercial.
This can be anything from postcards to calendars to specialist books and provides a steady flow of business to offset the seasonality of the financial division.
But P&W is determined to expand its business south of the border and, perhaps even more ambitiously, into the west of Scotland.
To do so, Graham Bowstead says the company has several strong selling points, not least of which is its office and factory in London.
‘In March 1991 we acquired FPC International which concentrates exclusively on corporate finance documents.
This gave us the chance to offer a comprehensive service and also to develop FPC in its own market.’
Having set up a presence in the south east with representative offices in Japan, P&W felt confident enough to establish a bridgehead in Glasgow and it opened an office in the city last January.
The sortie into the English market has proved a success with the London office already having generated nearly £1.5  million of new business.
Several companies have now taken the printing of their annual reports to P&W as a result of its expansion in London.
Its notable wins include Wimpey, Foreign & Colonial, Powell Duffryn, Throgmorton, Inchcape, 3i, Charterhouse Bank and Associated British Foods.
But other ingredients are necessary to become a major player in the financial printing world apart from mere physical presence.
Rapid turnaround times, value-added service, reliable distribution and guaranteed security and confidentiality are all prerequisites when it comes to handling time-sensitive and price-sensitive information.
As Graham Bowstead says, when dealing with a defence document for a company threatened with takeover, the whole process from receiving the raw information to issuing the proofs has to be condensed into less than one day.
‘For example, last summer the Royal Bank did a deal which involved issuing depositary shares in the US.
We did the typesetting and then delivered the proofs simultaneously to locations in Scotland, London, Paris and New York.’
Precautions are also taken to prevent any attempts at industrial espionage while the confidential documents are on the premises.
‘There is definitely a need for trust and security procedures have to be taken seriously.
All visitors to the company have to report to reception and are issued with security passes; all the proofs are sent out in securities; all stacks of printed brochures are protected with security covers.
‘We have to nurture this general culture of understanding confidentiality because it is our livelihood — the market is very unforgiving.’
P&W is confident that it can continue to grow the business further and is contemplating acquiring a company in the North of England to gain exposure to that lucrative market.
There are also plans to expand into Europe using the services of the Scotland Europa office in Brussels.
In another direction, P&W plans to enter the facilities management market, believing that it sits well with the company's annual report and corporate finance activities.
‘A lot of companies have in-house reprographics or printing facilities and we aim to get involved in advising them how to use these facilities better through a consultancy service.’
What is certain, however, is that whatever areas P&W pursues the headquarters will remain in Scotland.
Mr Bowstead says that location is quite far down the list of priorities for companies  choosing a printer and that P&W is well to the fore in providing services such as pass-the-press which allows clients to check the product during the printing process.
It may be run by Englishmen, but P&W seems set to remain a Scottish success story.
Typeset, printed and sent world-wide in a day
PILLANS & Wilson provides full printing services — comprising composition, printing, bindery and distribution — covering the annual report, corporate finance and quality commercial fields.
At its headquarters printing department off Edinburgh's Leith Walk, P&W has six-colour, five-colour, two-colour and single colour Heidelberg presses which can handle any size of document from A3 to B1.
Operating 24 hours a day the company specialises in annual reports and documentation for major financial events such as privatisations, takeovers mergers and share issues.
Using a linking network P&W can typeset a prospectus in Edinburgh, have it approved in New York, print it in London and have it distributed in Europe with the whole process taking less than 24 hours.
Investment in technology can reduce production lead times by several hours.
For example, there is no need to reset hard copy since the typesetting department can download text straight from a clients' word-processing or desk top publishing discs.
Recent contracts have included the Forth Port privatisation; the Scottish Television and Grampian TV franchises; the Kenwood and Country Casuals offers for sale; and the Evode and RHM defence documents.
By Gavin McCrone
AS the Chancellor prepares for his budget next month and contemplates the unenviable situation in which he finds himself, he might be excused for thinking that it might have been better to move last September.
The six months since Britain left the ERM have seen a more complete U turn in British economic policy than at any time in recent memory; and over the last two years the deterioration in the nation's finances has also been spectacular.
The decisions involved in a budget are never easy, but this year the Chancellor has to be concerned about the high and rising level of unemployment, the danger of renewed inflation as a result of the sharp depreciation of the pound, the large and rapidly growing budget deficit and the deficit on the balance of payments.
These problems require very different sorts of action; together their requirements conflict in a way that gives him little room for manoeuvre.
The Government's main underlying aim is now to get growth back into the economy so as to reverse the rising trend in unemployment.
This is in marked contrast to the position before last September when the priority was to kill off inflation so as to preserve Britain's competitive position within the ERM in the expectation that growth would recover as a consequence.
Because of the high German interest rates this latter aim necessitated a very tight monetary policy and fiscal policy was in consequence fairly relaxed.
The situation now requires this policy to be rebalanced.
With the drop in interest rates and the depreciation of the pound, monetary policy has now been substantially relaxed; but the twin deficits, of the budget and the balance of payments, indicate that a substantial tightening of fiscal policy is required.
A major balance of payments deficit when the economy is in deep recession has not occurred before in this country.
It is no doubt a consequence of sterling having been overvalued within the ERM and the relatively weak position of manufacturing industry.
The danger is that it will get worse as recovery brings increased domestic demand.
It is therefore more than ever necessary that the recovery should be export led rather than led by domestic consumption.
The depreciation of sterling should help to bring this about and, although there might in time be scope for some further slight fall in interest rates, it is doubtful if there is much more that the Chancellor can do.
The main danger now is that the gain in competitiveness will be eroded by inflation partly triggered by the rise in import costs.
This is what has so often happened in the past; and although the Chancellor has made it clear that low inflation remains his goal, now that the country is out of the ERM there is not a great deal that he can do to prevent it.
The best hope is that the effect of the recession on pay bargaining coupled with prudent fiscal management can preserve the competitive advantage for a considerable time.
In last year's budget the Chancellor estimated for a deficit, or public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), of £28 billion in the current year.
In fact, according to the Institute of Fiscal Studies, the out-turn is likely to be £38 billion with £54 billion estimated for next year.
And, although this huge deficit is in large measure a consequence of the fall in tax revenue and the cost of unemployment in the recession, the IFS expect it to remain at this level for some years even if a gradual recovery does take place.
Clearly a PSBR of this order, which is more than 8 per cent of GDP, is not tenable except for a short period.
Public debt as a proportion of GDP is already rising steeply; and if this is allowed to go unchecked, Britain would quickly change from being a low debt to a high debt country with a burden of interest payments which would have serious implications for future levels of taxation.
This is the situation which the Irish faced in the 1980s and from which they are only just escaping.
It is the trap into which Italy has fallen and it is not an example to be copied.
No doubt this is why Mr Portillo is starting a radical review of public expenditure.
But it is doubtful if the problem can or should be solved with spending cuts alone.
Many would argue that important public services are already underfunded and there is a constant demand for improvements to infrastructure on which the performance of the economy depends.
Either in March or in the second budget which is due in December this year tax increases of some kind therefore seem inevitable.
Even if all goes well and recovery gets underway this year, unemployment is likely to go on rising for another year at least.
It is not going to be an easy time for the Government; but if it fails to face up to the fiscal deficit it will risk a crisis of confidence developing later which would require more drastic remedies and put both the recovery and the reduction in unemployment at risk.
Selling their expertise abroad
‘You need contacts, and you need to find out the way things are done’
IF the scene is so unremittingly gloomy in Scotland for architects, are the prospects brighter elsewhere in the world?
Like the Curate's Egg, the answer is ‘good in parts’.
Scotland has a long tradition of exporting its talents.
Obvious examples include inventors, medics and military men.
Architecture is less obvious, but it still happens.
In the past, Scotland's architects might find commissions close to home — such as England.
A fairly recent example of this might include Law and Dunbar-Naysmith, the Edinburgh New Town partnership which designed Sunninghill Park.
If the name sounds only vaguely familiar, it might be more familiar as ‘SouthYork’— the marital home of the Duke and Duchess of York.
Large commissions such as these are few and far between nowadays.
No more Buckingham Palaces or Balmoral Castles, one suspects.
But overseas royal families are far more ready to put hand in pocket.
Rulers of the oil-rich Trucial States in the Middle East have access to almost unbelievable wealth, and some are in the process of transforming patches of desert into architectural playgrounds.
Thankfully, some Scottish firms are muscling in on the act.
Leith-based J&F Johnston are one such firm.
Just last week, the firm opened a permanent office in Abu Dhabi, under the name J&F Johnston (Emirates).
John McLaren, a partner in the long-established firm, will be permanently based in Abu Dhabi.
Projects in the pipeline include office buildings, leisure facilities and a chain of hamburger bars.
That J&F Johnston find themselves in the Middle East at all is a testament to the good works of Scottish Trade International, the joint Scottish Enterprise/Scottish Office agency.
Its initiative, SCEME — Scottish Companies Exporting to the Middle East — is helping 22 companies, including J&F Johnston, to gain a toehold in the Gulf.
However, the Abu Dhabi office is not the first overseas-based venture for J&F Johnston.
For some years, it has had an associate office in Accra, Ghana's capital city.
‘That came about after we had a Ghanaian girl working in the Edinburgh office,’ Mr McLaren said.
‘We do a lot of restoration work, and when she went back home on a visit she took a brochure which showed the sort of stuff we do.
Somehow it found its way into the hands of a government minister, and he got in touch with us.’
Initially, a team of architects and engineers from J&F Johnston Overseas were commissioned to restore two medieval colonial castles on the Gold Coast.
The castles, dating back to 1482, were bulwarks of the slave trade.
The Ghanaian government hopes the castles, plus a slavery museum, will be the linch-pins of a newly created tourist industry.
The irony of the invitation is not lost on McLaren.
‘It's turned full circle, hasn't it?
We were the ones who exported the slaves in the first place, and now the white man is being asked back to restore the castles.’
In addition to the restoration work, J&F Johnston Overseas has been involved in the construction of office buildings and hotels in Accra.
Recently, it won the commission to design the new Ghanaian parliament building — the country only having recently returned to democracy.
Is architecture an easy skill to export?
‘Not really,’ says McLaren.
‘In fact, I think it's one of the most difficult.
You need contacts, and you need to find out the way things are done — local customs and regulations.’
Ghana's potential excites McLaren.
‘It's a tremendous country, with friendly people and little of the hassle you get elsewhere in Africa.
As yet, though, it  doesn't have enough in the way of top-class tourist hotels, so we have high hopes in that direction.’
Other firms have lengthy track records in the Middle East.
One such is Robert Matthew Johnson-Marshall & Partners — one of the great and successful commercial practices that grew out of the post-war explosion in public sector development.
As far back as 1984, the firm was awarded a Queen's Award for Export Achievement.
Recently the Scottish arm of the partnership, known in the industry as ‘Rumjums’, was commissioned to design the new Scottish Office building, to be sited at Victoria Quay in Edinburgh's Leith Docks.
But further afield, golfers who watched Nick Faldo's triumph in the Desert Classic in Dubai at the start of the month might also have noticed the course's futuristic clubhouse.
This also was designed by Rumjums, after an approach by a member of the ruling Maktoum family.
Prof Charles Robertson of Strathclyde University says the Scottish profession has a good reputation elsewhere in Europe.
‘Nowadays, all graduates are computer-literate, and we're alive to the continuing changes in technology and design.
Added to that, almost all our graduates nowadays have a second language.’
Some in the profession believe that with unemployment or underemployment among Scottish architects, overseas work could become more of a necessity than an option as time goes on.
The demand is there — particularly in countries whose indigenous profession is not so well-versed in technological advances as our own — but more pertinently, there appears to be no respite from our own recession.
Every chief exec should learn to project himself
Projects are too important to be left to the juniors, says NEIL FITZGERALD
MORE than the site of an old battle or the grave of a family pet, perhaps the saddest sight is the remains of a company premises.
You see archive photographs, usually punted out in a TV documentary on the demise of industry, or in actuality when some building is being demolished: lockers with the owners' names (and some unintelligible  graffiti ) still on them, a filing cabinet with some abandoned document (‘4 April, 1962.
Dear Sir, With reference to your order 026/3822/B, I am pleased to…‘) drooping in a half-opened drawer, a board with a half-finished calendar and a postcard (‘Viva Calla Millor!’) still hanging on.
Even in going concerns, the ghosts come back to haunt you through the flotsam of old files and folders, especially those emanating from some long-forgotten ‘project’.
Of course, in the 1960s or 1970s they were less likely to be called projects: they were ‘schemes’, or ‘plans’, all very redolent of the ‘planning’ of the public sector, indeed of all economic life in those Wilsonian days.
But people were healthily sceptical then, ‘Oh God, don't tell me it's another mad scheme from accounts’.
Yet they went through the motions: bold summaries, joint papers, graphs, maps and a special binder with the scheme title typed on it.
All, mostly, for nothing.
There is a lot more urgency apparent in more recent projects.
Embrace change or be — the ultimate curse — a loser.
Feel the pages, read the crisp, hard text.
Much enthusiasm, a sense of adventure, evidence of weekend meetings and power breakfasts even in Lighting Products Division (Purchasing).
All that energy, the hope of tangible improvements in the way daily work is carried out.
Which makes the documentation all the more poignant when you know the project did not get anywhere.
Oh yes, they are still going down the pan, to the tune of £1 billion a year in the UK, according to the Management Consultancies Association.
That is the figure it has come up with, based on a survey of chief executives.
Apparently this level of failure in major projects to achieve expectations extends across all sectors of the economy and is especially prevalent in ‘soft’ projects such as the development of new IT (ah! that's where DP went!) systems and organisational change.
The solution, it seems, is for chief executives and senior managers to take a much stronger personal interest in the projects going on in their organisations.
‘Too often chief executives fail to recognise that they have embarked on a major project until they are well into it and it had run into difficulties.’
Perhaps strangely to those who never associate it with efficiency and effectiveness, the public sector seems more successful in handling projects in certain areas than their counterparts in the private sector.
Part of the reason suggested being that money is tighter in the public sector so there is more pre-planning and costing before organisational changes are allowed to proceed.
Yes, well it has also been a point that for all their substantially lower salaries there are far more bright sparks in the higher echelons of public sector management than is credited.
On the other hand, this skates over the achievement or otherwise in such minor public projects as health service acute ward budgeting and the Scottish secondary school syllabus and primary testing.
It also seems that, if this survey covers both private and public sector projects, a billion quid isn't that big a figure at all.
How many brown beer tokens go into something like planning the split of ICI?
Think how many management consultants (agents of organisational change) there are — 1,763 firms at the last official count — and while you could say the internal cost in terms of management person hours and midnight oil bills dwarves the external consultant fee that goes with it, it doesn't leave an awful lot for the average consultancy of Runnit Downe Foryewe & Howe, even if every firm blew an assignment each.
Meanwhile, who is actually running these major projects?
The more junior executives, if the cause of the disease is said to be a lack of involvement by the senior bosses.
In which case it also seems a small price to pay for the next generation of senior managers to be blooded.
And what is the alternative?
The idea of the Big Chief Exec himself crashing in on the detail seems a poor use of resources itself and no more a guarantee of success when he should be looking after the whole business (you have heard the litany: ‘At first he came to every meeting, then occasionally he was called away, then he sent some deputy or other, and in the end we thought, what's the point, if he doesn't care, why should we?’).
Too often the reason that a project fails is that the team leader enters a department to be met by its manager who sees someone only equal, if not subordinate, in status and, fearing an incursion on his empire, makes it nigh impossible to achieve progress.
In an age when much more business is project-oriented when it is increasingly a case of throw it at the wall and see what sticks (perhaps in the public sector they really wish they didn't have to be so careful with the dosh and could similarly try things out more just to see what might work), the role of the chief exec is to empower the team and keep informed of progress (half a side of A4 and no hyperbole please).
And afterwards to assure those running the project that, if it wasn't their fault, there is no recrimination when it doesn't work out.
Failure to do that would mean a much greater cost in terms of lost hopes and demoralisation.
At least, he's consistent
IN his chairman's statement, Angus Grossart, of the merchant bank that bears his name, spoke of the need for consistency in financial matters.
It is a good thing he practises what he preaches.
The annual report is always sent out within a week of the bank's year end.
The other mark of consistency is that the report's cover has never changed, at least not during the Diary's existence.
Well, it saves on design costs.
A little behind the times
FEBRUARY comes after January.
Well, the Diary has always thought so, but the Edinburgh branch of the Chartered Institute of Marketing seems to think differently.
Last week it despatched entry forms for the Scottish Marketing Awards to its members, encouraging them to show how they had got to the top of the class.
The fact that closing date for entries was 28 January seems to have escaped its notice.
Put on the hat and stand in the corner.
IT can sometimes be useful to get an updated list of a PR company's clients.
On the other hand, the Diary was less than impressed to get such a list from one of Scotland's newer agencies detailing containing one horrendous spelling error.
The misspelled client might be forgiven for wondering whether his interests are really being looked after.
Refined accounting method shows BP's continuing strength
The areas of exploration and production are becoming more and more important to BP's profits and its Scots workforce, says FRANK FRAZER
ANALYSTS have tended to be muted in their response to the 1992 figures from British Petroleum which is the most up-to-date yardstick available to measure the state of health, if not wealth, of the oil sector.
Perhaps the teenage scribblers — not to mention the longer-in-the-tooth City commentators who helped to orchestrate last year's departure of Robert Horton as BP's chairman and chief executive — are still coming to terms with Financial Reporting Standard No 3, the new format recommended by the Stock Exchange for presenting details of financial performance.
BP is among the first major companies to adopt the standard which requires asset disposals and fundamental restructuring costs to be stripped from other components of the profit and loss account, implementing the new  procedure for last year's results ahead of the June 1993 deadline set for  compliance .
But the bottom line for most of BP's 8,000 Scottish employees are the indicators which the results give about the state of the company's ‘core’ exploration and production business based on operations in the North Sea and other areas where it has concentrated its upstream operating resources.
Replacement cost operating profit from E&P activities remained almost unchanged last year at £1.7 billion, contributing all but about £100 million of total profits.
Though there were marginal gains from refining and nutrition, most of the surplus from those operations were offset by losses in chemicals and other activities vulnerable to recession.
In spite of being the main source of generating profit, E&P operations have not been immune from the cost-cutting drive aimed at reducing capital debt.
It resulted in last year's decision to close the European exploration headquarters in Glasgow with the transfer of key personnel to work from the main North Sea operational base in Aberdeen, a process which should be completed by the end of this year.
Other measures, such as the new partnership deals with contractors, have still to make an impact on performance.
But the strength of the operations are reflected in the quarterly breakdown of income from E&P which rose from £414 million at the start of 1992 to £515 million in the final quarter.
Particularly encouraging to the E&P management has been a gain over the last year in net income to the equivalent of about $3.50 per barrel of oil produced, putting BP well ahead of the performance of most other oil majors judged by the same yardstick and only marginally behind Exxon, the largest US oil company.
Royal Dutch/Shell, which is not due to issue its 1992 figures for another ten days, is excluded from the comparisons.
But the measure of performance in dollar terms helps to confirm that BP is making progress towards its overall aim of adding value to its assets at a time when analysts generally consider the international oil industry as a whole to be under continuing pressure through uncertain trends in oil price.
BP's operating improvement was achieved in spite of a drop from $20.24 to $19.40 per barrel in the average price realised in 1992 for its North Sea oil.
Though the devaluation of the pound during the later part of the year helped to offset weaker oil prices, the sterling equivalent also dropped from £11.43 to £10.96 a barrel.
There was a more dramatic drop in refining margins over the past two years — from $5 to $2.88 a barrel in Europe and $2.71 to $1.75 in the US — reflecting competitive conditions in product marketing during the recession.
But the £117 million operating profit in this sector in the last quarter of 1992 was 27 per cent higher than in the same period of the previous year.
In spite of City concern about the level of company debt built up to acquire Britoil and North American assets, BP has been a major capital spender in Scotland as part of its positioning to improve its long-term competitive position.
Its complex at Grangemouth is at the centre of a £1 billion investment programme to handle North Sea oil and petrochemical feedstock while work on the Bruce gasfield, in which BP has a 37 per cent stake, is nearing completion for production this year.
Other new production is expected this year from the Draugen field in Norwegian waters, the Pagerungan gas find in Indonesia and Point McIntyre in Alaska.
The stronger dollar, which helped to improve sterling returns from oil production, backfired on BP late last year by inflating the value of funds borrowed in the US.
As a result, the book value of the company's debt rose from £8.2 billion at the end of 1991 to £10.2 billion a year later, though the dollar equivalent remained virtually unchanged at $15.3 billion.
The company remains committed to worldwide annual spending of about $5 billion in 1993 and 1994 on projects which it expects to yield good returns in future, even if present lacklustre oil market conditions persist.
Apart from North Sea projects on the drawing board, progress is expected during 1993 towards the  development of the huge Mars discovery it shares with Shell in the Gulf of Mexico and the oil reserves it has established by pioneering exploration work in Colombia.
It is working in partnership with Norway's Statoil on other opportunities, including possible projects in the former Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, as part of the process of taking a longer look ahead at business prospects than the average City scribbler cares to take into account.
930216 
Processing plant: BP's complex at Grangemouth is at the centre of a £1 billion investment programme to handle North Sea oil
Guinness judge urges fraud trial changes
A SENIOR English judge called for a review of the conduct of serious fraud cases yesterday after ordering that an American lawyer's defence costs should be paid by the British taxpayer.
Thomas Ward, 53, was cleared on Monday of stealing £5.2 million from Guinness after the brewery giant's successful takeover bid for Distillers.
The lawyer had always maintained that the money he received was a legitimate success fee for the vital role he played in the bitterly fought takeover battle.
Ward was a Guinness director at the time.
His defence counsel, Andrew Trollope, QC, had described the prosecution case against Ward as a travesty during the five-week trial.
Yesterday he applied to Mr Justice Turner for his client's defence costs — both here and in the United States — until Ward was given legal aid in November 1991.
The judge made an order for the costs to be paid, though the total amount cannot yet be estimated.
He then made a series of suggestions about possible reforms in dealing with alleged fraud cases.
‘I make it quite clear anything I say I would have said regardless of the result of this present case,’ he told the court.
He called for both prosecution and defence to declare their hands fully to each other before the start of a serious fraud case in an attempt to speed up proceedings.
At present, the prosecution in criminal trials had to ‘lay bare its store of knowledge to the defence’ whereas defence need not reciprocate.
‘As a consequence, any proper issue of fact which the court and the jury may ultimately have to resolve may lie buried until a late stage of the trial.
As a result, time may be wasted.’
He said that under the present system, witnesses might give evidence on issues which turned out not to be in dispute — wasting court time.
Such time was expensive —‘not just in costs to the parties themselves’ but in the provision of a court and the expense and inconvenience to 12 jurors.
It all involved a huge expenditure of public money, said the judge.
He suggested there should be a form of common pleading by both parties as in civil law — with appropriate sanctions.
‘I would envisage a process of discovery, so each party would list documents in their possession and make them available to the other parties.’
The simplification of areas of evidence in dispute would shorten trials, he argued.
He proposed that a prosecution should not be started or continued unless a prosecutor was satisfied there was reliable evidence and kept evidence under review.
The Crown Prosecution Service did not just consider whether a bare prima facie case was enough, but whether there was a proper chance of conviction on reliable evidence.
He did not know whether the Serious Fraud Office had a similar code of conduct — but suggested if not, it should adopt one.
An increased flow of information during proceedings, as he suggested, should help prosecutors keep cases constantly under review, he said.
Mr Justice Turner also said that a regulatory body — existing alongside the law — could be considered in dealing with some wrongdoers in the commercial field.
Mr Ward returned to court in the morning to hear the judge award him his costs.
He said afterwards that he had always been confident ‘because I was not guilty’.
— PA
Dismissal threat to strikers
By James Rougvie
STRIKING workers involved in the Timex dispute in Dundee may be compelled to return to work soon, after the threat of dismissal notices from management.
More than 300 workers have been on strike since 29 January over a dispute about enforced lay-offs.
Until yesterday the unions and management were deadlocked and hours of negotiation had produced no solution.
A company proposal to agree a rotating shift pattern for laid-off workers, coupled with a wages freeze and cuts in fringe benefits had been accepted under protest by the workforce but that qualified agreement was unacceptable to management.
Yesterday, the management threatened to issue dismissal notices to the 300 out of the 400 workforce, and about 200 demonstrated at the locked factory gates in an attempt to return to work.
The main union involved, the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, asked for a delay in the issue of the notices until a meeting of the workforce today, when it is understood the company plan will again be put to the workforce.
Last night, a local official, John Kydd, said the union would have to reconsider its position fairly swiftly.
After its opening match, the courtroom theatre degenerated from high drama to farce
Draining the last drops from the Guinness plot
No cliff-hanger ending for the long saga of the Guinness fraud trials.
Instead the scandal this week fizzled out, writes John Hatfield
GUINNESS IV, the final instalment of the Guinness fraud trial series which closed on Monday, was a virtual B-movie cult production compared to the original blockbuster and the first sequel.
It certainly generated neither the furore nor the hype that surrounded the original big budget epic ‘The Guinness Trial’, which boasted an all-star cast, an intricate cloak and dagger plot, and ran for more than three years.
One Bank of England official described it as the biggest scandal since the South Sea Bubble.
In fact the script, which saw American lawyer Thomas Ward cleared of the charge of stealing £5.2 million from Guinness while he was working on the brewing giant's takeover of Distillers Group, did little more than tie up the loose ends of the storyline.
The events described had already formed the backdrop to Guinness I, and two unfinished sequels.
Each episode had a broadly similar scenario: the good guys from the Serious Fraud Office were pitted in courtroom confrontations against the bad guys from Guinness and their allies.
In each trial the defendants were accused of committing a vast range of crimes in order to ensure that Guinness was successful in its contested £2.6 billion bid for Distillers against James Gulliver's Argyll Group.
In the case of Ernest Saunders, then executive chairman of Guinness and chief defendant in both Guinness I and Guinness II, there were 42 charges in all stretching from dishonestly procuring documents to theft and false accounting.
However, at base, the trial centred on the illegal conspiracy to support the Guinness share price during the takeover battle in order to make the Guinness cash and shares offer more attractive to Distillers' shareholders.
The whole business has lasted nearly seven years and cost an estimated £25 million for the trial alone; not to mention the cost of the DTI inquiry, the takeover panel investigation and the cost of extraditing certain defendants from the US.
It was an arduous process which became tangled in its own complexity leaving juries baffled and the legal and financial regulatory systems exposed.
Such enormous cost in terms of taxpayers' money, defendants' and jurors' time and livelihoods, and, in some cases, plaintiffs' sanity, prompted Mr Justice Turner, the presiding judge in the Ward case, to criticise the current system of fraud trials and to suggest ways in which it could be improved.
After ordering that Ward's court costs were to be paid by the British taxpayer he called for both prosecution and defence in fraud trials to declare their hands to each other before the start of a serious fraud case in an attempt to speed up the proceedings.
He also criticised the fact that under the present system witnesses might give evidence on issues which turned out not to be in dispute, thus wasting further time.
He proposed that a prosecution should not be embarked upon or continued unless the prosecutors were satisfied there was reliable evidence.
In his view the SFO should adopt a code of conduct enshrining these ideas if it did not already have one.
The Guinness affair has also raised the question of abolishing trial by jury in the case of serious fraud cases in favour of investigation and prosecution by the self-regulatory bodies.
As a result of the Guinness trial the Securities and Investments Board, the watch dog body with overall responsibility for policing the financial community, is abandoning its complicated rule books for a more broad-brush approach.
So if it achieved anything of lasting value, the sheer slog of the marathon Guinness trial clearly underlined the shortcomings of the present system and showed why reform was necessary.
Guinness I did represent a Pyrrhic victory for the SFO: after six months of evidence and five days of deliberations the jury found all four defendants guilty.
Saunders was sentenced to five years' imprisonment but in the event he served only ten months having been released on the grounds that he was suffering from a dementia condition akin to Alzheimer's disease.
This condition has now cleared allowing him to work as a lecturer on City ethics and a consultant.
He is also taking up his case with the European Court of Human Rights.
Other participants in the share support scam, Gerald Ronson of Heron Group and stockbroker Anthony Parnes, received prison sentences, while Sir Jack Lyons, last of the ‘Guinness Four’, was stripped of his knighthood and fined £3 million.
After its hard-fought opening match, the SFO never managed to complete another trial as the courtroom theatre degenerated from high drama to farce.
Guinness II, the trial of Guinness's merchant bankers Roger Seelig and Lord Spens on charges of fraud, collapsed when the judge ruled that Seelig was mentally ill and it would be unfair to proceed against Lord Spens alone.
At the time there were widespread rumours of an Establishment plot and stories circulated that the trial had been stopped because the protracted Guinness saga was becoming an embarrassment to the authorities.
Lord Spens said he wished to continue with the trial as he was confident of undermining the prosecution and exposing Argyll's tactics in the battle.
According to Lord Spens, Seelig's illness was used as an excuse for dropping the case before too many unpleasant facts came to the surface.
Roger Seelig, however, appears to have recovered having joined the board of engineering firm Norman Hay on Monday.
Guinness III, against Cazenove stockbroker David Mayhew, never even made it to the courtroom after the prosecution announced that new evidence made hopes of a conviction unrealistic.
THAT left Guinness IV in which US lawyer Thomas Ward, self-confessed right-hand man of Ernest Saunders and a Guinness director from 1984 until 1987, was cleared on a charge of stealing £5.2 million from Guinness.
In contrast to Guinness I, Ward's trial lasted just six weeks and was based on one charge.
It appeared that lessons were already being learned.
Property valuers' motion refused
17 FEBRUARY, 1993 Melrose v Davidson and Robertson First Division Lord President Hope, Lords Mayfield and Cullen 5 February, 1993
A MORTGAGE application form completed and delivered to the lenders constitutes a contract between lender and prospective purchaser if it obliges the purchaser to pay for any valuation to be obtained and the lender does in fact obtain a valuation on that basis.
The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 accordingly applies to a disclaimer in such a form purporting to exclude the valuer's liability in negligence to the purchaser.
The First Division of the Court of Session so held in refusing a reclaiming motion by property valuers against the Lord Ordinary's decision that a mortgage application form containing a disclaimer in respect of their liability to Derek and Margaret Melrose constituted a contract.
The Opinion
LORD President Hope, with whom Lords Mayfield and Cullen concurred, said that the pursuers had sought to buy a house with the assistance of a mortgage from the Alliance Building Society.
They completed a standard application form, which included a declaration that the society would obtain a valuation of the property, a copy of which would be sent to the pursuers, and that no responsibility for the information therein would lie with either the society or the valuer.
The building society obtained a mortgage valuation survey from the reclaimers valuing the property at £38,000 and making a nil estimate of essential repairs to be carried out.
The pursuers then concluded a contract for the purchase of the house but subsequently raised an action of damages against the defenders, based on negligence, in which they averred that there were many patent defects in the house which should have been apparent to surveyors of ordinary competence exercising reasonable care.
Counsel for the defenders submitted essentially that the Lord Ordinary had erred in law in concluding that the declaration in the application form was part of a contract between the pursuers and the Alliance Building Society to which the provisions of the act applied, rather than concluding that the declaration was non-contractual in character and accordingly not caught by the provisions of the act so far as applicable to Scotland.
Section 16(1) in the unamended form applicable at the relevant time stated: ‘Where a term of a contract purports to exclude or restrict liability for breach of duty arising in the course of any business or from the occupation of any premises used for business premises of the occupier that term…(b) shall…have no effect if it was not fair and reasonable to incorporate the term in the contract.’
It was accordingly necessary for the pursuers to establish that there was a contract and that s16 applied to it.
It was agreed that if it did, the disclaimer would have no effect because the defenders were not able to show that it was fair and reasonable to incorporate it in the contract.
Lord Hope did not accept the first  submission on behalf of the pursuers, which was to the effect that when the completed application form was sent to the building society the pursuers had accepted an offer made by the society to consider the application, as, unlike in Hunter v General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Co, 19O9SC (HL) 3O, the building society in the present case had not given any undertaking to consider the application and were under no obligation to do so.
However, his Lordship considered the second submission, that a contract had been created in respect of the provision of and payment for the valuation report, to be well-founded, because the declaration in question consisted of an offer by the society to provide a copy of the report to the pursuers in exchange for payment, which they accepted by signing and returning the form.
The resulting contract was contingent upon the society's decision to proceed with obtaining a valuation, and by doing so they purified the contract.
The remaining question was whether s16 of the act applied to the contract.
This depended on its being one which, by s15(2) (c), ‘relates to services of whatever kind’.
Lord Hope considered that the contract related to the services to be provided by the valuer in preparation of the report, so s16 was applicable.
Whisky sales fall by 10%
THE Scotch Whisky Association yesterday revealed that the industry suffered a 10 per cent collapse in UK sales last year — the worst performance since 1977.
Its chairman, James Bruxner, blamed the ‘punitive and unfair’ level of excise duty on Scotch for the near 1 million case reduction in the UK, traditionally the second strongest market after the US.
Although domestic sales fell, exports climbed 7 per cent to £1.96 billion with Venezuela, France and Spain showing the strongest growth.
The strong overseas growth left overall volumes flat but Mr Bruxner warned that further increases in duty from next month's budget would leave the industry in ‘very serious trouble.’
Thomson to sell off some freesheets
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
THE Thomson Corporation, owner of The Scotsman, is to sell or close a number of its free weekly newspapers in the United Kingdom as part of a restructuring of its worldwide newspaper interests.
The shake-up will result in a $170 million (£114 million) charge on its results for the final quarter of 1992, Michael Brown, president of TTC, said yesterday.
No decisions have yet been taken on which newspapers will be sold or closed down in the UK.
Thomson Free Newspapers has 75 titles in the UK, while the paid-for centres around the country, including Edinburgh and Aberdeen, also publish a number of free weekly papers, bringing the total nearer 100.
None of Thomson's paid-for titles in the UK will be affected by the move.
In a statement Mr Brown the recessions in North America and the United Kingdom had adversely affected Thomson's businesses over the past three years, particularly newspaper publishing.
‘We have reviewed in depth our newspaper operations and have decided to sell or close a number of newspapers in North America and the United Kingdom.
‘This will allow us to concentrate more on developing the growth potential of our remaining newspapers operations.’
Joe Logan, managing director of The Scotsman Publications Ltd, said none of the ten titles produced in Edinburgh, including the Evening News, Scotland on Sunday and five free newspapers, was threatened by the announcement.
Wall Street market tremor shakes City
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
UK SHARE prices fell sharply yesterday afternoon, taking their cue from Wall Street, where stocks also slumped heavily as US investors took fright at President Clinton's threatened tax increases and spending cuts.
At one point, the Dow Jones was down 70 points.
Over here, the FT-SE 100-Share Index fell 33.7 points to 2,812.2 by the close of business, of which 24 points were lost in the last 90 minutes of trading.
Dollar-earning stocks fell heavily, with Glaxo shedding 33p to 667p and ICI down 25p at 1,134p.
Sterling, however, rallied as the dollar weakened in response to Mr Clinton's early U-turn and gained almost three cents to $1.4472, as well as a pfennig and a half to Dm2.3669.
The public sector repaid £3,834 million last month, almost £3 billion more than the City had expected and, after crediting privatisation proceeds of £6.3 billion, the shortfall in government revenue for the first ten months of the current financial year actually fell back to £21.6 billion at the end of January.
With just two months of the year to go, the chances of coming in below the Government's current target of £37 billion must now be good, though City experts pointed out last night that changes in VAT regulation may have brought payments forward from February and March to December and January.
February, and especially March, are traditionally very heavy spending months, and few analysts were willing to revise their forecasts downwards immediately.
January is traditionally the peak of the tax-gathering season, but both income and corporation tax were lower last month than in January 1992, and total government revenues are continuing to run below last year's levels.
Much of the improvement in January came from a sharp and largely unexplained fall in spending by government departments.
Net repayments of £1 billion by local authorities and public corporations, which may, in turn, be the result of recycling some of the £5 billion special payment from central to local government last October.
Central government's total cash receipts were £23 billion in January and £170 billion for the year to date, compared with £23.3 billion in January 1992, and £170 billion for the last financial year at this point.
Expenditure was £20.1 billion in January and £199.5 billion in the year to date, compared with £19.5 billion and £176.4 billion at this stage a year ago.
Industrial output, however, proved disappointing in December.
The index of manufacturing output rose fractionally, from 111.0 in November to 111.1 in December.
A sharp fall in output of steel and smaller falls in mechanical engineering goods, commercial vehicles, beer, tobacco and consumer durables offset continuing increases in chemicals and pharmaceuticals, which have responded fast and positively to devaluation.
Output of oil, gas and coal fell fractionally, however, and the index of all industrial production edged down from 106.5 to 106.4.
Scottish economy set to outperform UK
By John Hatfield
THE Scottish economy is expected to have outperformed the UK economy in 1992 and will continue to do so in 1993, according to the latest edition of the Scottish Office's Scottish Economic Bulletin.
Three out of four independent economic forecasting bodies expected the Scottish economy to perform better than the UK economy both last year and this year.
However, in the medium-term between 1994 and 1997, GDP growth in the UK was expected to exceed that in Scotland by up to 0.2 per cent.
Basing its findings largely on other surveys already published, the bulletin concludes that the short-term prospects for the Scottish economy are critically dependent on the export sector which has benefited from sterling's devaluation since leaving the exchange rate mechanism.
With sterling now at a considerably lower rate against the Deutschmark, French franc, the currencies of the Benelux countries and the dollar, which together account for more than 50 per cent of Scotland's export trade, the impact will be significant.
Given IMF projections that the world economy will grow by nearly 3 per cent in 1993, lower interest rates, and the potential for a GATT talks deal, the bulletin believes Scottish exports should experience a surge this year.
However, it points out that Scotland's better performance during the recession is the result of several special factors: a relatively buoyant North Sea oil and gas sector; higher proportion of manufacturing output being exported; lower household indebtedness; and continued rises in Scottish house prices.
Commenting on the review, the Scottish Office industry minister, Allan Stewart, said: ‘This bulletin demonstrates the significance of a competitive export sector for the Scottish economy and highlights the important role that exporters will play in contributing to a sustainable economic recovery when demand in overseas markets picks up.’
Henry McLeish, shadow Scottish industry spokesman, said that while Scottish exporters were doing well, there was a need for an industrial strategy to support them involving partnership between government and industry.
‘We need our government in Scotland to reproduce the help for industry that occurs in most of our competitor countries.
There can be no recovery as long as there is a widespread fear of unemployment.
industrial strategy
Henry McLeish: Call for
Plea over debts
SMALL companies were yesterday urged to be more vigorous in pursuing debts as figures showed yet another rise in the number of liquidations.
A total of 23,594 companies in England and Wales went into compulsory or voluntary liquidation in 1992 — a rise of 8.2 per cent— according to figures from the  accountancy firm KPMG Peat Marwick.
Tim Hayward, head of corporate recovery at KPMG, said: ‘Liquidation is the form of insolvency particularly common to smaller companies and many have simply not had the cash reserves to enable them to survive difficult  trading conditions.
‘When bad debts can mean the difference between survival and failure, companies, regardless, of their size, need to employ strict credit management procedures to assist in the timely collection of outstanding debts.’
Mr Hayward detected a glimmer of hope in the fact that the rate of increase in liquidations had slowed down, with only a 3.5 per cent rise in the last three months of 1992.
Personal bankruptcies may also slow down because of the recent interest rate cuts but are expected to continue at a high level for some time, he said.
The south east of England accounted for 58 per cent of all voluntary liquidations with 8,115 up from 7,715 in 1991.
In the fourth quarter the number rose from 1,972 to 2,087.
In Bristol the number of voluntary liquidations fell from 368 to 301, while in the south west they rose to 189 from 168.
In South Wales voluntary liquidations dropped from 311 to 284 but in the Midlands they rose from 1,756 to 1,773.
In the north west the increase was from 1,875 to 1,898 and in the north east from 1,249 to 1,301. — PA
Bank dampens rate hopes
THE Bank of England remains concerned that underlying inflation is still running at least 2 to 3 per cent higher than it should at this stage of the economic cycle, and repeats its belief that there is no real room for further cuts in interest rates while the pound remains so sensitive, writes Clifford German.
Inflation has fallen over the last three months and the cone of possible future inflation is now pointing slightly downwards, the bank reports in the first of its quarterly reviews of inflation produced in response to the Chancellor's invitation in his speech at the Mansion House last year.
But the upside inflation risks are greater than the downside opportunities.
The increased cost of imports has not yet started to appear in the rate of inflation.
On past experience, a 15 per cent fall in the value of the pound could add 3 per cent to inflationary pressures for five years unless it is contained and offset by cost controls, and increases in output and productivity.
Recent events have not changed the picture, with the welcome fall in the headline rate of inflation last month balanced by a further slight fall in sterling.
It is also important to get the rate of inflation in the service sector of the economy down towards the rate of inflation in manufacturing.
The bank has dropped its usual review of the prospects for the real economy from the latest quarterly bulletin, but it remains convinced that real economic growth will come when exports start rising and the country's creditors decide that assets are cheap and start spending.
Informally, the bank admits that if sterling was still in the ERM, the underlying rate of inflation could be down almost to zero now, but base rates would still be at 10 per cent, and the prospects for the economic growth and unemployment scarcely bear thinking about.
OPEC reaches deal on oil output cut
By Frank Frazer
AFTER four days of tough bargaining, leading oil exporting countries settled a deal last night to trim production in an attempt to prevent a collapse in prices later this year.
Delegates emerging from eight hours of talks by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries in Vienna said that the proposals could remove up to 1.4 million barrels from the present combined production of about 25 million barrels per day (bpd) by cartel members.
Earlier, prices for North Sea oil closed 19 cents higher at $18.15 a barrel in expectation that the delegates would overcome opposition by Kuwait to accepting OPEC quotas which would curb its build-up of production after the Gulf war.
After a break to allow Kuwait delegates to consult their government, Philip Asiodu, Nigeria's oil minister, announced: ‘We have finished, yes, with Kuwait, with everybody.’
Though there was consensus among most delegates that production cuts were needed to avoid an oil glut which would weaken prices as demand dipped in the spring, the discussions became bogged down with claims by Kuwait for special treatment.
At one stage, it seemed the Kuwaitis would accept no compromise by insisting that they were allowed to go on rebuilding their production to 2 million bpd.
But they seemed later to moderate their stance by seeking an agreement which would let production start to rise again later in the summer.
Sources close to the talks said this idea had at first been opposed by Iran and Nigeria.
But the settlement is believed to have given Kuwait assurances that its production could go up in the summer if the market is strong enough.
Analysts said last night that oil prices could stabilise at present levels of around $18 a barrel if OPEC could prevent ‘leakage’ which would cause total cartel supply to rise above 24 million bpd until the end of June.
The deal was settled after oil trading closed early in London last night to allow dealers to attend a series of oil industry social functions.
Trading was light for most of the day but brisker buying may be resumed when the market opens today if dealers want to ensure they are not left short of supplies by the proposed cuts due to go into force on 1 March.
According to some observers, the Vienna talks ended in confrontation between Kuwait and neighbouring Saudi Arabia, the largest OPEC exporter.
‘Kuwait was trying to reassert its pre-Gulf war position and Saudi Arabia was expecting some sort of show of compromise,’ one analyst said.
So far OPEC has put aside the even more complex task of making market adjustments to accommodate a return of output from Iraq, thought to have twice the production capacity of Kuwait, which is still banned from international oil sales under a United Nations embargo.
‘If OPEC is having so much trouble coming up with this agreement, it's a bad sign for how they will be able to deal with the start-up of Iraq,’ the analyst added.
Warning on moves to personal pensions
By Ian Harper
MEMBERS of company pension schemes are to be given special guidance notes in the face of mounting concerns that they are being badly advised to transfer into private personal pension plans.
In a recent letter to the 1,200 member schemes of the National Association of Pension Funds, the NAPF's director-general, Michael Elton, warned that despite the issue in July of a guidance note by the independent advisers' watchdog Fimbra to its members ‘there still remains much evidence of scheme members being badly advised on transfers’.
Mr Elton advised the NAPF members to circulate copies of the Fimbra guidance note to their scheme members who were considering a transfer out of the company scheme and added that Fimbra had requested them ‘to refer any instances of misleading scare advertising, or any  evidence of bad advice that results in loss to scheme members, to its Complaints Department’.
According to one source, NAPF acted following a complaint from the British Aerospace pension fund about the possible impact of ‘scurillous advertising’ in local newspapers.
The Fimbra guidance note, which was first published in July, warns advisers that: ‘It should be clearly demonstrated that the beneficiaries’ rights in the (company) scheme are fully taken into account,’and that anyone contemplating a transfer must be advised that there are four options open to them, including remaining in the scheme as a deferred member.
One Fimbra member has been fined £50,000 for giving a client bad advice on a pension transfer.
Prior to the issue of the Fimbra notice, the life assurance watchdog, Lautro, warned that ‘in view of the limited understanding of the complex subject of pensions amongst members of the general public, the level of complaints received on this score may well understate the scale of the potential problem’.
According to recent new business figures from life assurance companies, one of the main sources of new business is transfers from occupational schemes.
Pittencrieff plans $50m
US telecoms offer
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
PITTENCRIEFF, the oil and gas and mobile telecommunications group, is to raise $50 million by issuing new equity in its American telecommunications subsidiary, Pittencrieff Communications Inc.
The news, which will allow Pittencrieff to concentrate on growing its oil and gas interests, excited the City which marked up the shares 28p higher at 351p.
The share issue is expected to take place, subject to market conditions, in late spring or early summer following publication of Pittencrieff's 1992 annual results in April.
The move is designed to enhance shareholder value, as the Pittencrieff board believes the mix of the business means it has been undervalued by investors.
Demand from investors will determine how many new shares are issued, although Pittencrieff said yesterday it will retain a majority stake.
If the effect of the new issue was to value PCI at $150 million, which would be very modest by American valuations of telecommunications companies, given that it has 12 to 13 million potential subscribers, it would mean Pittencrieff's oil and gas interests would effectively be valued at nothing at the company's current market capitalisation of just under £100 million.
Pittencrieff also announced yesterday it was buying Francis Communications Corporation in El Paso, Texas, for $6.65 million, and some oil and gas reserves in Texas from Exxon for $3.75 million.
It raised the money through the placing of two million ordinary shares at just over £3 per share.
Terry Heneaghan, Pittencrieff's chief executive, said the two acquisitions were in line with its investment philosophy that any acquisition should pay back within four years and should improve cashflow and earnings per share.
The board also announced that, in the absence of unforeseen circumstances, it would recommend a final dividend of not less than 4p, making a total of 7p, representing an increase of not less than 16.7 per cent.
Mr Heneaghan said one of the reasons behind the move to raise new capital was because the board could see PCI, which now has monthly billings of $2 million against $30,000 two and a half years ago, doubling in size this year.
Despite good cash flow, this would leave no money at all for growing the oil and gas business.
He refused to comment on Pittencrieff's intentions for its recently-acquired 16.6 per cent stake in Aberdeen Petroleum, but said Pittencrieff had made it clear it wanted to see rationalisation among the smaller oil companies.
JACK CROMBIE Right line: Terry Heneaghan, Pittencrieff's chief executive, who says recent acquisitions are in line with the investment philosophy that any acquisition should pay back within four years
Bowater in £295m call
By Richard Shackleton
BOWATER'S expansion programme moved into top gear yesterday with the $434 million (nearly £300 million) acquisition of the US-based Speciality Coatings International.
The deal will be financed by a £295 million, one-for-six rights issue at 400p a share.
It is the second time in under a year that the packaging and printing giant has issued new equity for big acquisitions.
Last March, it raised £333 million to buy Cope Allman and DRG Packaging.
The group also predicted that total pre-tax profits for last year would jump from £99 million in 1991 to £147 million.
Earnings per share before exceptional items should climb 12.1 per cent to 25.1p, while a final dividend of 6.65p will lift the total by 11.1 per cent to 11.5p.
Norman Ireland, chairman, said trading in the last quarter of 1992 had exceeded forecasts, and the improvement was continuing.
The shares jumped 8p to 493p as investors gave the thumbs up a growth strategy which should result in another earnings-enhancing year.
SCI, with operations in the UK, US and Ireland, is the product of a leveraged buy-out from AEA Investors in 1991.
Its latest annual operating profits were $48.6 million.
The acquisition will boost Bowater's annual sales of coated films and papers to the printing and office equipment industry from the £200 million generated by its existing Rexham subsidiary to £500 million.
The enlarged business could produce about 25 per cent of group turnover.
The need to secure approval under US competition law encouraged the company to issue the new shares in two stages.
A first instalment of 132p will be payable on 11 March, with the 268p balance due later, after completion.
But, should this prove impossible, the second instalment will be cancelled, with the initial £95 million going towards reducing borrowings.
Accounts shake-up blurs Hanson result
By Richard Shackleton
NEW accounting standards introduced by Hanson effectively muddied first-quarter results revealed yesterday, pushing shares in the trans-Atlantic conglomerate 4p lower to 250p.
Pre-tax profits in the three months to end-December rose just 4.4 per cent to £236 million from £226 million in the same period last year.
However, a £20 million gain from the sale of Weber Aircraft in the US was included in profits allowing Hanson to report an increase — had they been excluded profits would have amounted to £216 million, the bottom of a range of City estimates.
Further distortions arise from Beazer Homes, Hanson's last big UK acquisition, which did not contribute fully in the results for the three months to end-December 1991.
Last night Lord Hanson played down talk of economic recovery in the UK, though he was hopeful that lower UK interest rates ‘should certainly spark increasing economic activity over time’.
He added that the results were as expected by the company and that cost-cutting had allowed the group to reduce its operating margins.
‘Meanwhile, our strong balance sheet and the  fundamental strengths of our businesses, keep us in good shape for future worldwide recovery.’
A quarterly dividend of 2.85p will be paid to shareholders and subsequent quarterly pay-outs will be not less than 2.85p.
Turnover rose to £2.3 billion from £2.09 billion but earnings per share slipped to 3.5p from 3.9p.
The three months to December 1991 included £105 million of sales and £11 million of profits from companies that have since been sold, while the 1992 results include just £11 million of sales and no profits from disposals.
Test boosts plans for Fife oil development
By Frank Frazer
PLANS to develop the small Fife oil discovery in the North Sea are being studied after a successful test on the first well drilled to establish the field's potential.
Amerada Hess, working in partnership with Premier Consolidated Oilfields, said yesterday it had recorded a flow of up to 12,340 barrels per day from the well which was drilled to 9,280ft.
The output was constrained by limits imposed by safety equipment on the rig but the company plans to start a second well next month to provide further information on prospects for development.
Tim Kieft, Amerada's project manager, said the results had confirmed the company's interpretation of three-dimensional seismic soundings.
‘Possible development solutions for the field are already under consideration,’ he added.
The most likely option at present suggests that a floating production system, similar to the vessel at the company's nearby Angus field, will be used.
In a separate deal yesterday, Texaco and Union Jack Oil decided to swap interests in two North Sea fields on terms which include a £6.7 million cash payment to Union Jack.
Its 7.5 per cent stake in the Franklin gas find will be taken over by Texaco which is drawing up development plans for the area.
In exchange, Union Jack will acquire a 3.5 per cent interest in the Claymore field from Texaco.
This will give Union Jack a share of production on which liability for petroleum revenue tax can be offset against drilling costs in other areas.
Lionel Sackville, the Union Jack's chairman, said the deal would transform it ‘into a better balanced company, well placed to continue its active exploration programme in a tax-efficient manner’.
Ibstock to axe brick plants
THE building materials group Ibstock Johnsen is to shut some manufacturing plants in a move which will cost a total of £28 million.
The closures are part of an effort to match output to demand and will include redundancies costing £8 million and asset write-offs costing £20 million.
After the charges, Ibstock says 1992 profits will fall to £1 million from £9.6 million.
The company said the major impact was on the UK brick company ‘where a number of less effective manufacturing facilities are to to be closed and production concentrated on the low-cost, high-quality plants’.
Also affected is the forest products business.
— PA
Global warming plea to oil firms
By Frank Frazer
OIL COMPANIES were urged yesterday to join forces with environmental groups and governments to find scientific solutions to global warming problems.
The plea was made at an Institute of Petroleum conference in London by Alfred DeCrane, chairman of Texaco, who warned of the danger of rushing through measures that would lead to a new set of problems.
Speaking on the eve of an expected announcement on energy taxes by the Clinton administration, Mr DeCrane said that global climatic change was a complicated issue in which stringent environmental policies were being proposed with little regard to cost.
‘Before we rush forward with plans that could lay a heavy burden on societies around the globe, we must have a basic understanding of how much environmental benefit that money is buying — and whether there is a less-expensive, possibly more effective alternative available,’ he said.
Measures he suggested included oil companies working with other responsible parties to develop a comprehensive and impartial body of scientific research and expertise to advise on policies.
He also believed there was a need from credible studies of the economic and social impact of reduced energy consumption, carbon taxes and command and control initiatives.
$7bn AT&T health cover
AMERICAN Telephone & Telegraph said in New York yesterday it will charge $7 billion against earnings in the current quarter to cover its liabilities for current and future retiree health care and other benefits.
The company previously estimated the charge would amount to between $5.5 billion and $7.5 billion to comply with new accounting rules.
AT&T said it expected the change on future earnings to be negligible and added that there would be no effect on cash flow.
The company estimated its 1993 profits would increase by about $500 million under another new accounting change governing income taxes.
Meanwhile, AT&T said it has introduced a flexible benefits programme to help control health-care costs.
— AP
Stricken pound puts BA in spin
By Magnus Grimond
BRITISH Airways yesterday became the latest casualty of Black Wednesday as it revealed the slumping pound had helped cause profits to crash 80 per cent in the third quarter.
The pre-tax total nose-dived from £100 million to just £20 million in the three months to December.
The news comes as BA is still licking its wounds from having to apologise for the dirty tricks campaign conducted against its smaller rival, Virgin Atlantic, and the early retiral of its former chairman, Lord King.
Sir Colin Marshall, who replaced Lord King as chairman earlier this month, said around 60 per cent of the profits fall related to the decline of sterling, which fell 15 per cent against the dollar during the period.
There was an immediate impact on costs, half of which are measured in overseas currencies, whereas there was relatively little effect on revenue, much of which is booked in advance.
Although passengers are returning to the air — numbers carried by BA rose 7.3 per cent to 6.18 million in the quarter — the increase is not matching the rise in BA's capacity, which jumped 11 per cent over the same period.
Meanwhile cut-throat competition is keeping ticket prices low, particularly in the US.
Sir Colin said trading conditions remain ‘difficult’ and warned that the current quarter is ‘invariably the weakest of the year’.
Turnover dipped 4.5 per cent to £1.37 billion in the quarter, with operating profits slumping from £111 million to £70 million.
For the nine months to December, pre-tax profits slipped 13 per cent to £247 million.
The shares fell 3p to 276p yesterday, in line with the market, and Ian Wild, of brokers Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said there had been no great surprises in the figures.
Nonetheless, he has cut his full-year profits forecast from £235 million to £220 million.
EC business confidence hits low
BUSINESS confidence in the European Community fell to its lowest level for a decade last year, according to a survey published yesterday in Brussels by the European Commission.
The Community's leading economic indicator, combining calculations for both output and outlook, dropped to 96.1 in December, from 96.3 in November, to equal the previous lowest level registered in October 1982.
The sentiment indicator would have fallen even further in December, the survey showed, had it not been for the glimmer of recovery in Britain.
But it was the only one of the 12 Community members to show an improvement.
— Reuter
Chelsfield in £128m property deal
THE prize asset of the crashed Mountleigh property group has been sold in a deal worth more than £128 million, the receivers said yesterday.
Merry Hill Shopping Centre, in Dudley, West Midlands, went into receivership when Mountleigh collapsed last May with debts of about £500 million.
The centre, one of the largest in Europe, has now been sold to the privately-owned property company Chelsfield.
Failure to sell it was one reason why Mountleigh went into receivership — because of concern that the centre was built on contaminated land.
— PA
Banks swap Anglo debt for shares
ANGLO United, the Coalite smokeless-fuel distributor, yesterday confirmed a financial restructuring which leaves banks holding half its shares.
The proposals, agreed with the main lenders, Barclays and Midland, involve reducing core loans from £250 million to £130 million as the banks convert debt into equity for 10p a share.
David McErlain, Anglo's chairman, is to be replaced by Harold Cottam, head of Haden MacLellan.
Anglo's purchase of Coalite in 1989 left it with total debts of £467 million.
— PA
Pentland takes over Berghaus
PENTLAND Group has bought the specialist outdoor clothing and equipment maker, Berghaus, for £4 million.
Pentland, the sporting-goods group, said Berghaus, which had sales last year of about £20 million, would continue to operate from its two main sites in Washington, near Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Last November, Pentland pulled out of talks to buy Adidas. — PA
Bank cuts card interest rates
THE Bank of Scotland has announced that it is to cut the monthly rate of interest on its Classic Visa Card and Bank Mastercard from 1.8 per cent to 1.63 per cent.
The annual fee remains at £10, giving an annual percentage rate of 22.6 per cent for purchases and 24.5 per cent for cash advances.
Interest will be calculated at the new rate from 4 March and will appear on statements from 6 April.
Order delays hurting AH Ball
CANCELLED and delayed orders have hit the pipeline-laying specialist, AH Ball.
Optimism over trading at the interim stage had proved unfounded, the group said yesterday.
‘Trading conditions for the coming year remain uncertain as clients’ spending plans still have to be made known,’said Ball.
Results for the current year were likely to show little or no improvement over those for the first six months.
The shares plunged 30p to 75p. — PA
Japan's trade surplus soars
JAPAN'S high-profile, customs-cleared trade surplus jumped to $5.29 billion in January, from a revised $3.79 billion a year earlier, with its surplus with the US rising to $2.95 billion, from $2.45 billion, the Finance Ministry said yesterday in Tokyo.
— Reuter
Skipton switch to GA Life
By Ian Harper
SKIPTON building society, the UK's fifteenth-largest, has terminated its five-year old tied-agency agreement with the life assurer, Legal & General, in favour of a link with GA Life, the York-based offshoot of General Accident.
The new arrangement, which will mean that GA Life's investment products are sold through the Skipton's 60 branches, takes effect on 31 March.
According to David Charlton, assistant general manager (marketing) at the Skipton — which has 70,000 mortgages outstanding, with a value of £2.5 billion — the decision to switch to GA Life hinged on several factors, including its administration and financial strength.
He said: ‘A key point was the fact that other people are saying that GA Life is good at administration, rather than just GA saying it.’
But Mr Charlton declined to say whether the Skipton would receive higher commissions on the sale of investment products, or whether commissions were a factor in the severing of the L&G link.
The move brings the number of building societies tied to GA Life to five.
This spring, it is also expected to win the third-party policy administration contract for Leeds Life, should Leeds Permanent Building Society decide to set up its own life assurance operation.
Need for Budget tax increases may be less than urgent
THE good news yesterday was that the public sector borrowing requirement may not be growing as fast as the pessimists feared, and the need for tax increases in the Budget may not be as insistent as some analysts believe.
But it is far too soon to shout hurrah! and the economy still faces a tough road ahead.
Manufacturing industry was still in recession right up to the end of 1992, and both manufacturing and total industrial output fell last year for the third year in a row, according to the Central Statistical Office's figures yesterday.
Only the chemicals and pharmaceutical industry have so far shown any signs of responding to the competitive advantage created by the devaluation of sterling last September.
The recession has been only half as deep as the slump of 1979-81, but it has now lasted ten quarters, against eight quarters then.
The only green shoots seen so far have been the slightly faster growth of notes and coin in circulation, which is partly the result of the fall in interest rates which can be earned on money in the bank.
Bank lending and consumer credit remain depressed and the analysts are still hopefully waiting for today's figures on retail sales in January to provide some conclusive evidence that demand is poised to recover.
The Bank of England, in its latest quarterly bulletin yesterday, blames the length of the current recession squarely on debt deflation, the buzz-word for borrowers determined to repay debt before they even think of spending and borrowing more.
Recovery will come when the country's creditors decide that the return on money in the bank has fallen so low that the price of assets has become cheap.
It will also come when manufacturers respond to the competitive advantages conferred by devaluation, and last longer if manufacturers can contain the inevitable increases in costs of imported goods and materials.
Much also depends on how much spare capacity there actually is in manufacturing industry.
The Bank concludes that, despite the remarkable fall in the headline rate last month, the underlying level of inflation is still close to the top end of the target range of 1 per cent to 4 per cent, though at this stage of the cycle it should be below 2 per cent , and the cost pressures created by devaluation have still to feed fully into the economy.
On past experience, a 15 per cent devaluation could be expected to feed through at roughly 3 per cent a year for five years, and if this is repeated, it is still far too soon to say that inflationary expectations have been beaten out of the economy.
Abattoirs make a killing abroad
SOARING beef cattle prices are confirming the advantages of Scotland's export oriented abattoir industry — and may even undermine the buying power of the big five supermarkets.
Abattoirs which concentrate on supplying beef to the domestic market have hit problems because retailers are unable to pass back their high procurement costs.
Exporters, who have been aided by a combination of favourable currency exchange rates and the harmonisation of the open European Community market, are able to trade profitably — in spite of record cattle values.
As a result, abattoir owners are beginning to speculate that the operating framework of the beef sector could swing overwhelmingly towards exports — as it is already doing with lamb.
Another forecast is that companies which have committed themselves to supplying multiple retailers — which is still being publicly advanced as the correct structural direction for the beef industry to take — could find themselves at a permanent disadvantage.
Scottish auctioneers confirm that bullocks are averaging 125p but stress that it is heifers and young bulls — each of which is demanded by a specific section of the Continental market — which have enjoyed the sharpest price rises.
Heifers are averaging 120p and bulls, which just 12 months ago were condemned as being outside the specification of the domestic supermarkets, have  recovered all their lost ground to level at 122p.
Even though the beef industry is taken aback by the sudden jump in prices, the general opinion is that they will stick until at least July — and could harden in the long term if CAP reform and a further round of milk quotas push down breeding numbers.
Some abattoir operators think they have already spotted a significant shift in beef trading patterns.
They believe that the booming export market is not just a temporary product of the recent devaluation but a development that could stick.
They acknowledge that it has been sparked by the slide in the pound, but say that the financial markets do not think sterling will ever recover all of its value against the deutschmark or the franc.
And they interpret that as meaning that whatever happens in the money market exporters should still retain some of their current advantage.
Evidence of two-tier trading already exists in Scotland, where companies with supermarket contracts are finding it impossible to cover overheads because the multiples themselves are locked in price competition.
Others which have recently opened profitable outlets in Italy, Spain and France because their beef can undercut German and Dutch competitors, are eager to expand those markets.
The short-term view within the meat industry is that there is no chance of prices falling until cattle are freely available off grass, which will not be until August-September.
That means the domestic sector faces the prospect of a prolonged period of persistent losses.
As a result, some traders are already pondering the wisdom of reducing their domestic commitments and developing outlets in southern Europe instead.
It has been pointed out that the location of those markets is itself a telling advantage to Scottish traders because they all have weak currencies (the lira and peseta) while former German and Dutch suppliers are forced to trade with the strongest (the deutschmark and the guilder).
There is also a chance that Mediterranean customers could recognise the calibre of the Scottish product and favour it above the competition on quality grounds.
That could encourage more Scottish operators to analyse the wisdom of supplying supermarkets in Naples instead of Newcastle or Bilbao instead of Bristol.
Guide to sheep premium quota
THE Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department has issued an explanatory guide on the introduction of Sheep Annual Premium (SAP) quota.
The guide gives detailed information on how quota allocations have been made and explains the arrangements for supplementary allocations, and for allocations from the National Reserve.
It also sets out the rules governing quota transfer and leasing together with the treatment of quota which is not used.
A copy has been sent to each producer who claimed for SAP in the 1991 scheme year.
Additional supplies of the guide are being made available from local area offices.
Pigperson award
THE Scottish Pig Industry Initiative, which is behind Scottish Quality pork, is looking for pigperson of the year.
Judging will be based on organisation and management, husbandry skills and commitment.
Nomination forms are available from the SPII, Rural Centre, West Mains, Ingliston, Newbridge, Midlothian EH28 8NZ.
99,000 hectares of trees to be planted
THE Forestry Commission expects about 99,000 hectares of trees to be planted in Britain in the next three years.
That includes about 43,000 hectares of replanting and 56,000 hectares of new planting by both private foresters and Forest Enterprise.
More than £75 million will be made available over the three years from the commission's woodland grant scheme to help private planting.
Broadleaved trees now account for about 46 per cent of all planting, encouraged by higher grant rates.
Average grant payment for all planting is expected to rise from £972 per hectare in 1992/93 to £1,152 by 1995/96.
Timex sacks 300 workers in pay strike
By James Rougvie
MORE than 300 Timex workers in Dundee will today receive letters of dismissal after overwhelmingly rejecting a deal drawn up by management, but union leaders said staff would not be terrorised into ending their strike.
At a meeting yesterday, the workers, who have been in dispute with the company since 29 January, voted against accepting the proposals, which would have frozen wage rises and cut fringe benefits.
Later, the company responded by advertising for staff.
The workers walked out last month after a failure to agree all the terms for 110 lay-offs.
The Scottish regional organiser of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, Harry McLevy, said after yesterday's meeting that the workers clearly understood what was at stake.
‘This is another multi-national using anti-union legislation to try to terrorise the workers into  accepting cuts.
We are available for work and our people will be going to work every day.
If they let them in, so be it.
If they do not, so be it,’ he said.
On Tuesday night, the company held back from issuing dismissal notices until after yesterday's meeting, but Mr McLevy said there had been an overwhelming vote, with only four against, to reject the Timex proposals.
Mr McLevy said the workers had been locked out because they would not accept a cut of 10 per cent in their fringe benefits and a wages freeze.
‘The dispute will continue until they withdraw the cuts,’ he said.
Although there were minor scuffles at the factory gates on Tuesday morning, Mr McLevy said the workers would continue to picket peacefully and legally.
Early editions of the Dundee Evening Telegraph newspaper last night carried an advertisement for semi-skilled and skilled personnel.
It said previous experience was not necessary.
The vacancies were in watch distribution, customer service and electronic production assembly areas.
Timex's president, Peter Hall, said: ‘We deeply regret that almost two months of constant negotiation has resulted in this action.’
TWO union officials at Timex were yesterday given a week to counter a claim that they have breached an interim interdict granted at the Court of Session earlier this month.
The interdict prohibited four officials from organising or taking part in pickets of more than six people.
Timex claims the shop stewards' convener, John Kydd, jun, and deputy convener, William Lesslie, have breached the interdict.
The two men deny that.
100 GRE jobs to leave Edinburgh
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
GUARDIAN Royal Exchange is to transfer 100 jobs from Edinburgh to Lytham St Anne's over the next two years, the insurance giant announced yesterday.
The staff affected handle the administration for GRE's personal pensions business.
A GRE spokesman said all the staff were being offered a transfer to Lytham and added that the firm would do its best to accommodate their wishes if they didn't want to move to Lytham.
Work handled in London and Ipswich is also being switched to Lytham as part of a reorganisation that will see all the administrative and servicing work for life and pensions handled in Lancashire.
However, the administration of corporate pensions will remain in Edinburgh, where 200 people are currently employed.
GRE also announced that its Lytham and Edinburgh offices are to be the subject of a six-month operating review to improve efficiency.
The review is expected to start in April or May.
It will not cover the employees whose jobs are being transferred.
David Meldrum, general manager, financial services, said the last couple of years had been very difficult for everyone in the industry.
‘We  need to increase our efficiency and reduce our operating costs.’
A GRE spokesman said the changes were not in reaction to the losses incurred over the past three years, as the life business had remained profitable.
Cray plans jobs boost
CRAY Systems Scotland, one of Britain's largest information technology companies, plans to create up to 25 high-skilled jobs this year at its offices in the Scottish Software Partner Centre (SSPC), within Hewlett Packard's Scottish facility at South Queensferry.
The new operation will develop and research new products, design software systems and provide consultancy services for Scottish firms, particularly in the financial services sector.
The  decision to site the new facility in Scotland was influenced by the provision of an assistance package from Locate in Scotland, the inward investment service, the large pool of software graduates, a growing number of potential clients and a perceived gap in the market for Cray's services.
Welcoming Cray's decision, the Scottish Office industry minister, Allan Stewart, said: ‘Cray Systems is a welcome addition whose presence should aid the efforts of my Locate in Scotland team to secure further investment in that field.’
Sterling sinks as shares dither
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE jump in retail sales last month of 1.6 per cent was roughly twice what the City had expected and more than made good the disappointing fall of 1 per cent in December.
It was also the biggest single monthly rise since March 1991, when shoppers rushed to beat the rise in VAT.
The Chancellor was quick to welcome the signs of recovery and repeat his view that he has cut interest rates far enough already to ensure a recovery.
But the City was not wholly convinced.
The retail sales figures sent the FT-SE 100-Share Index five points higher, helping it recover an initial fall in line with Wall Street overnight.
But the prospect of another cut in interest led sterling to weaken.
It closed almost two pfennigs lower at Dm2.3486 and almost half-a-cent down at $1.4440, while the FT-SE 100-Share Index also failed to make a decisive move and closed only 1.8 higher at 2,814.0 on cash-call fears, with nearly 619 million shares changing hands.
Utilities had a good day, with electricity generators to the fore, but aerospace was the worst-performing sector of the day, led down by Smiths Industries on Eurofighter worries.
Abbey National rose 14p to 365p as brokers made it their favourite for a bid from Lloyds Bank.
Bill Morrison to quit
ONE of Scottish accountancy's best-known names is to leave his firm at the end of September.
Bill Morrison, deputy senior partner at KPMG Peat Marwick and chairman of the Auditing Practices Board, plans to pursue an alternative career.
As managing partner of KMG Thomson McLintock, he played a leading role in the pre-merger discussions that led to the formation of KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock.
Mr Morrison was senior partner of the firm's Scottish region until September 1992, when Archie Hunter took over.
He served as president of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland from 1984 to 1985.
Separate assets of pension fund safe
AN investigation has been launched into whether the pension fund of the collapsed Lilley group has enough funds to meet all its commitments, writes Peter Woodifield.
But the remaining Lilley employees, former employees and pensioners have been assured that the pension fund itself is intact.
In a letter to members of the Lilley Group Retirement Benefits Plan, Allan Martin, a director of Hymans Robertson Trustees, which was recently appointed by the receiver as an independent trustee of the plan, said its assets were totally separate from the assets of Lilley plc.
‘The trustees can also advise you that the assets of the scheme are safe and are not invested in or loaned to any of the employer companies,’ he said.
Mr Martin added that the trustees have instructed Godwins Scotland, which will continue to act as administrators and actuaries of the scheme, to investigate whether the assets were enough to meet all benefits.
Members of the plan with any queries about their pensions should contact Godwins Scotland at 125 West Regent Street, Glasgow G2 2SG, Mr Martin said.
He added that the trustees would continue to keep members of the plan informed of any developments.
University makes £16m from orders
By John Hatfield
GLASGOW University cannot be accused of isolation in academic ivory towers after today's announcement that it has generated nearly £16 million in income from commercial and industrial sources in the last academic year.
Such business acumen has made Glasgow the third-biggest earner of contract income among all UK seats of higher learning, beaten only by London and Oxford.
In the year to July 1992, Glasgow generated £38 million of income through research grants and business contracts, including 25 new patent applications and six new licensing agreements.
Altogether, a staggering 277 research contracts and consultancies were awarded to various university departments, with 22 of the contracts worth more than £100,000 each.
Despite the predominance of the medical faculty in attracting research grants, the unit with the largest contract turnover was the archaeology department.
Glasgow University Archaeology Research Division (GUARD) secured 39 contracts worth over £377,000.
GUARD has become a leading player in carrying out environmental impact assessments for industrial and commercial developments, all of which are now legally obliged to use the services of archaeologists.
At present, GUARD is working on projects such as the upgrading of the A74 to motorway status and the Glasgow Cathedral renovation.
According to Alan Leslie, assistant director of GUARD, business has not been affected by the recession: ‘We are working on contracts from Shetland to Galloway and the Borders and although business from the construction sector has eased off, we are still successfully tendering for a lot of work in the maintenance and upgrading of sewerage, gas, water and roads facilities.’
The largest order received in the year was the £261,000 contract awarded to the Department of Veterinary Medicine from the Overseas Development Agency to investigate the interaction between nutrition and genetic resistance to parasitic disease.
Commenting on the total value of contract work received, Fergus Neil, director of the university's Industrial and Commercial Development Service (ICD), said: ‘Our work in supporting members of staff in the pricing and negotiation of research contracts and consultancies continues to show considerable growth in difficult times.
‘Despite the long shadow cast by the recession, the level of activity on all fronts has continued to be encouragingly high.’
Thomson nets £21m in sale of magazines
EMAP has bought 14 business magazines and three directories from the Thomson group for £21 million, writes Peter Woodifield.
The acquisition brings EMAP's portfolio of business magazines to 65, confirming its status as one of the UK's top three business publishers.
The Thomson magazines were published by Thomson Information Services, part of the Thomson Corporation and a sister company of Thomson Regional Newspapers, owners of The Scotsman.
They include seven market leaders and had a turnover of almost £19 million last year, though they suffered a loss.
But EMAP said yesterday that by cutting overheads, it expected them to be profitable this year.
Robert Kiernan, managing director of TISL, said the EMAP offer had prompted a strategic review.
‘While recognising that these were a strong portfolio of major brands, we acknowledged that the business had moved away from TISL's core development area.’
Crane company doubles its size with Lilley buy
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
WELDEX International Offshore, Scotland's leading crawler-crane hire company, has more than doubled in size after buying Piper Plant (Scotland), a subsidiary of the collapsed Lilley group.
Weldex paid Price Waterhouse, the receiver, nearly £1 million for the business, which had a turnover of £5 million last year.
Doug McGilvray, Weldex's managing director, said that at a stroke, the move had removed its biggest competitor in Scotland and doubled its own crane-hire fleet.
‘In terms of general plant, Piper was bigger than us, while we were larger than them as crane operators,’ he said.
‘Now we're the undisputed Scottish leader in crawler-cranes and we plan to use this platform to build our role in the UK and into Europe.
Weldex has already been in contact with Sunley Turriff, AMEC and Keir Construction, which have all acquired Lilley companies, and it will take on the hire contracts previously carried out by Piper Plant (Scotland).’
Mr McGilvray said he would be opening a depot in Cambuslang in the next fortnight where he would be employing as many as 18 former Lilley personnel.
The group would also be using a base in Perth as a central point for sending cranes all over the country.
Weldex, which was set up in 1979 and now has a turnover of £4 million, will this week take delivery of Glasgow-based cranes that were stranded in England after Lilley's collapse.
Mr McGilvray said the Inverness-based firm had not found the recession a significant problem because of its ability to widen its work base from its oil-related beginnings.
As a result its turnover had increased for 14 successive years.
Iain Bennet, of Price Waterhouse, said yesterday that he hoped to conclude negotiations on the sale of the assets at Piper Plant's Rugby depot soon.
The sale of the last Lilley contracting subsidiary, Robison & Davidson, may be completed late today, he said.
Robison & Davidson was the only Lilley subsidiary not in receivership and is the subject of an institution-backed management buy-out.
Completion had been delayed by the legal details, he said.
Mr Bennet warned that although good prices had been obtained for the contracting subsidiaries, it was not clear whether the banks and the secured bondholders would get all of their money back, and he was very cautious about whether there would be any dividend for the ordinary creditors, let alone the shareholders.
Welcome for display phone
By Frank Urquhart
AN experimental telephone scheme in the North-east of Scotland, aimed at countering hoax, malicious and obscene phone calls, has been voted a success by 500 BT customers.
The revolutionary new Caller Display system, introduced on a trial basis two months ago, allows customers to see the number of the person calling them before they answer the phone.
Subscribers have the chance to ignore unwanted calls but can also use the system to record the numbers of recent callers when they are away from their homes.
A similar scheme in parts of North America has already dramatically and permanently reduced malicious and hoax calls.
The British trials have involved subscribers in the areas served by the Aberlour, Dufftown, Elgin, Findhorn, Forres, Keith, Lhanbryde and Lossiemouth  exchanges .
Carole Rue, BT's network services development manager, said: ‘Although the trial has only been running for a few weeks we're most encouraged by the initial response from our customers.
They see Caller Display as a service which gives them a window on the world, through which they can stop unwanted calls and increase their sense of security.’
‘Caller Display puts control of the telephone back into customers’ hands, restoring the balance of power between the caller and the called person.’
One of the subscribers taking part in the trials said: ‘I wouldn't have had the problems I had with malicious calls a few years ago if I'd had Caller Display then.’
The Elgin area trials are due to continue until 31 March.
A BT spokesman said further trials would be held later in the year before a final decision is made on making the system available nationally.
EWEN WEATHERSPOON
Mrs Joan Jamieson, of Springfield Road, of Elgin with the new BT caller display unit
Inaugural winner moves on into Swiss market
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
EDWARD Macbean, the inaugural winner of the Eureka European Business Award, sponsored by Grant Thornton in association with British Airways and The Scotsman, is setting up a company in Switzerland.
Macbean Switzerland will sell the Cumbernauld-based company's waterproof protective clothing to industries and utilities in Switzerland and Austria.
It is the second partner company Macbean has established on the continent with the first, in Holland, covering the Benelux companies.
Macbean's move comes as the deadline for the second of the quarterly awards draws near.
The Eureka European Business Award aims to encourage small and medium-sized businesses to show enterprise and initiative in Europe now that the single market is in place.
The winner receives two return BA tickets to the European city of his or her choice and up to £1,000 of accommodations costs paid for by Grant Thornton, which will also provide local contacts where necessary.
Tom O'Connell, the marketing partner of Grant Thornton Scotland, said yesterday: ‘We had some excellent entries for the first award, and we are looking forward to receiving entries of a similar calibre.
Companies wishing to enter should send details, covering no more a single sheet of paper, of why they should be considered, along with a copy of the latest set of accounts to Marion Green at Grant Thornton, 1-4 Atholl Crescent, Edinburgh EH3 8LQ to arrive by 22 February.
High hopes for subsea laser welder
By Frank Urquhart
A MAJOR research programme, which could revolutionise vital welding work in the North Sea, has been launched in Aberdeen.
The aim of the project is to prove that high-powered laser technology can be harnessed by the oil and gas industry to save millions of pounds in manpower and equipment costs and lead to safety improvements.
The research will focus on the adaptation of carbon dioxide lasers for topside and subsea welding work in both a wet and hyperbaric environment and the eventual development of a remotely operated welding system.
Six separate organisations and companies, including Aberdeen University and the National Hyperbaric Centre, are collaborating in the study, which is part of the Eureka programme, a European Community project to investigate various industrial applications of laser technology.
Dr John Watson, of the university's department of engineering, said:’ Carbon dioxide lasers are already used for welding and cutting, primarily in the aerospace and motor industries.
The offshore industry don't seem to be exploiting laser processing technology at all.’
He said the feasibility study would seek to prove that laser welding was not only possible in a subsea environment, but would also lead to substantial improvements and cost savings.
‘Laser welding could be of major benefit,’ said Dr Watson.
‘The major advantage is that the heat is focussed on a very narrow area.
Conventional welding gives you a very large heat affected zone and that can distort the material or alter its properties in some way and potentially damage or weaken a structure.
‘There is also the potential for fully automated techniques being used and we are aiming to develop a diverless laser welding system.’
DEREK IRONSIDE
Hot stuff: Dr John Watson with the laser which he believes could revolutionise welding work in the North Sea
New move in campaign over dubious accounting
By Gordon Milne
THE campaign by the Accounting Standards Board to wipe out dubious accounting practices moves into its fourth phase today, with the publication of a draft standard on off-balance sheet financing.
The Exposure Draft (FRED 4 — Reporting the Substance of Transactions) contains two key proposals designed to stamp out abuses.
Off-balance sheet financing is a term used to describe techniques designed to obscure a company's true financial obligations.
Examples might include sale and leaseback agreements, where an asset is sold and immediately leased back from the purchasers.
In this way return on assets, gearing and interest cover can all be massaged, giving a misleading picture of the company's financial health.
FRED 4 seeks to ensure that financial statements report the substance of transactions and not merely their legal form.
General principles covering four main areas are set out.
These are:
How to determine the substance of a transaction — its effect on the assets and liabilities of the company;
Whether any resulting assets and liabilities should be included in the balance sheet;
What disclosures are necessary; and
Whether any ‘vehicle’ companies — non-subsidiaries which house certain assets and liabilities — should be consolidated.
David Tweedie, chairman of the ASB, said yesterday: ‘There is general agreement that the accounting treatment of off-balance sheet financing needs to be put on a footing that is both sound and informative to users of accounts.’
Mr Tweedie said that, at present, it was all too easy for users to be left unaware of the total assets employed in a business, and its overall funding.
‘Disclosure, all too often opaque, is no substitute for inclusion in the accounts.
I believe that the board's proposals will cast much needed light into a murky corner.’
Irresponsible blow to the national spirit
CALLS from the Scotch Whisky Association for the fairer tax treatment of our national spirit have, in the past, tended to fall on deaf ears.
Increasing excise duties on alcohol and tobacco have traditionally allowed Chancellors of the Exchequer to raise revenues with a matronly wag of the finger that suggests they are trying to do us a favour.
In the days when increased duty meant an increased tax take, this attitude might just be forgiven, never mind the long-term damage it did to the industry.
But when diminishing marginal returns set in in 1983-4, further increases in duty deterred consumption leading to falling sales and eventually lower tax revenue for the Treasury.
The then Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, was quick to recognise the implications not only for the industry but also the public purse when he froze duty on whisky.
But first John Major's, and now Norman Lamont's, tenure at the Treasury has seen a resumption of a policy that is  inimical to both the industry's and the  Government's long-term interests.
Last year's revenues of £729 million from whisky, although 2.3 per cent ahead in money terms, were in fact down 2.5 per cent in real terms.
For a Chancellor looking to fill a £12 billion hole in the national accounts next year — further increases in duty on whisky now look plain irresponsible.
A contributory factor to the muddled thinking on excise duty on whisky has been the discrimination in favour of imported wine, where increased consumption has been shown to cut away at the base of whisky consumption.
A study by the Edinburgh-based economic consultancy, Pieda, has shown that if the duty rate per degree of alcohol was raised on wine and lowered on whisky (and other spirits), the standard rate for all alcoholic drinks that would maintain the total tax take would be nearer the wine rate than the spirits rate as wine (and beer) account for 76 per cent of all consumer expenditure on alcoholic drinks.
If, as Pieda and the SWA are suggesting, there is a community of interest between the industry and the Treasury, why have ministers so far refused to take any action despite the lobbying campaign that has been mounted?
For without prior reform of the UK excise duty structure it will always be an uphill struggle to maintain exports at their current level.
Inevitably the question reverts to how far the UK government is prepared to go in persuading its EC partners to harmonise duty rates between beer, wine and spirits.
In the past harmonisation has been interpreted to mean an institutionalised discrimination against spirits by having very different tax regimes for competing alcoholic products in different countries.
This position would be impossible to tolerate if the UK government made serious attempts to put its own excise duty house in order.
It hasn't so far.
Lamont warned not to raise tax
By Magnus Grimond
THE National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a leading economic think-tank, has added its voice to those urging the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, not to raise taxes in his March Budget.
In its latest review of the UK economy, the National Institute calls for a neutral Budget, rather than further interest rate reductions, to maintain the momentum of the nascent economic recovery.
The advice follows a similar demand from the CBI, which warned Mr Lamont against ‘snuffing out’ recovery by raising taxes.
However, the NIESR says there may still be a need to cut borrowing costs if the change of policy after Black Wednesday in September fails to stimulate the economy.
‘If the indicators for the first quarter remain flat or suggest a further fall in output, then the time will have come for a further cut in interest rates, by another 1 per cent or more.’
The institute has stuck to its November forecast that the economy will pull out of recession this year, with growth set to reach 2 per cent, although it could fall below 1 per cent or top 3 per cent , given the margin of error involved.
The forecast for inflation is also unchanged, with the underlying rate expected to top 4 per cent by the fourth quarter of this year, according to the review.
The NIESR warns that this means the Government's target of keeping inflation between 1 and 4 per cent‘is clearly at risk’.
Meanwhile, the institute has increased its prediction for unemployment, which it now thinks will peak at 3.2 million in the first quarter of 1994.
It believes more should have been done to ease the severity of the jobless situation.
‘Central and local government, and public corporations, should be delaying any measures which involve laying off workers until the recovery is well established, while bringing forward measures which involve taking on extra staff’, it says.
Jobless forecast to top three million
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
UNEMPLOYMENT is poised to top three million for the second time because the quality of jobs created in the late 1980s was poor, according to a report by the Employment Policy Institute.
Two-thirds of the new jobs created in the 1980s went to women, but more than half of them were part-time, and the Government's Restart pushed many unemployed people into less productive, poorly paid, low-skilled jobs they would not otherwise have taken.
The subsequent recession has reduced the population in work by 1.9 million, of whom 1.5 million were employees and more than 300,000 were self-employed.
The workforce has fallen by 700,000 as people have retired or given up looking for jobs, but unemployment has risen by roughly 1.3 million, the EPI reports.
The drop in the number of people working has actually been greater in the latest recession than between 1979 and 1983, a period when industry was supposed to be shaking out overmanned jobs.
Total employment is now almost half a million less than the numbers Mrs Thatcher inherited in 1979, and more than half the jobs lost have been among the self-employed.
In 1992 there were 1.3 million fewer employees than in 1973, and although there were 950,000 more people self-employed and 325,000 people on various training schemes which kept them off the unemployment register, there were 77,000 fewer in the forces and 122,000 fewer people in work.
The workforce meanwhile had risen by 2.17 million and the numbers out of work has risen by 2.3 million.
Unemployment now is set to go on rising to 3.3 million.
In the next six years the workforce is due to rise only slowly, by 600,000 overall.
Allowing for retirements, that still implies the need for 2 million new jobs if unemployment is to be reduced significantly.
US provides energy tax lead
MOVES by the US to introduce an energy tax could clear the way for a similar measure by the European Community, according to Sir Leon Brittan, the external trade commissioner, writes Frank Frazer.
He told the Institute of Petroleum dinner in London last night that the commission would only impose the levy — applied to fuels on a tapering scale based on emissions of carbon dioxide — if major trading partners did likewise.
Efforts by the EC to introduce a tax last year were frustrated by the Bush administration's opposition to the concept which European industrialists claimed would put them at an unfair disadvantage in world markets.
The commission had proposed a tax starting at a level equivalent to $3 per barrel of oil this year, rising to $10 per barrel by the end of the century.
But Sir Leon said that the plan would only be implemented if trading partners followed suit to ensure that the measure was ‘fiscally neutral’ for companies operating in Europe.
He also said that the EC hoped by the summer to complete negotiations on an energy charter involving 50 countries which would serve as a blueprint for co-operation in developing oil and as resources in Eastern and Central Europe.
Discussion of the details has been delayed by the breakup of the Soviet Union which increased the number of potential signatories and created differences over the role of private investment in energy industries.
But Sir Leon believed an early agreement was needed to boost economic growth in eastern Europe and secure energy supplies for the West.
‘The opportunities for investment in the oil and gas sector of the former soviet Union are colossal.’
It is estimated by the Russian government that Russia alone will require $30 billion over the next five years simply to stabilise its oil production,’ he added.
Oil prices lost 45c to close at $17.70 a barrel in London yesterday after doubts about the effectiveness of the quotas agreed on Tuesday by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
The fall stemmed from remarks by Ali al-Baghli, Kuwait's oil minister, that his country would exceed its quota if others did so.
Much of discussion at the talks centred on Kuwait's attempts to continue building up production as Gulf war damage to its oilfields was repaired.
Last night Hacene Mefti, Algeria's oil minister, said his country was also unhappy at the outcome, claiming that other members which had  benefited from Kuwait's absence from the quota system for two years should do more to help smaller producers.
Owners Abroad mounts bid defence
OWNERS Abroad yesterday unleashed the latest offensive against Airtours' £215 million takeover bid.
In a document sent to shareholders yesterday, Owners claims Airtours' profits could have been inflated by more than £2 million last year by pushing flight costs into the current year.
It also questions its rival's treatment of airline maintenance costs, implying that Airtours may not be providing enough against profits for future charges, and rebuts certain ‘misleading’ statements made by Airtours.
But last night, David Crossland, Airtours' chairman, claimed that the document ‘smacks of desperation and fails to address the issues raised by us’.
BT gives way on private circuits
BT has accepted proposals by the telephone watchdog, Oftel, to limit price rises on private circuits — lines rented mainly by businesses and commercial organisations for private data and voice traffic.
The agreement affects prices for the next four years on three types of circuit — national analogue, national digital and international — which will be pegged to inflation.
Oftel's director general, Bill Wigglesworth, said he wanted to see ‘an end to the uncertainty’ about prices, and BT's shares later dipped 5p to 398p. — PA
EC go-ahead for Dan-Air takeover
THE European Commission gave the green light yesterday in Brussels for British Airways' takeover of Dan-Air, dismissing objections by rival carriers and the Belgian government.
It said that a month-long inquiry had shown BA would not dominate the market for flights between London and Brussels, so it had no reason to object to the takeover.
— Reuter
Argyll move calms rights fears
ARGYLL group, which runs the Safeway supermarkets, yesterday headed off market fears of another big cash call by launching a £150 million fixed-rate Eurobond issue, replacing expensive short-term debt with a cheaper long term loan.
A leading City analyst described the move as ‘very sensible — just the thing to kill off all the rumours about a convertible issue we were hearing six weeks ago’.
Argyll's shares held firm on the news, up 1.5p at 364p.
Green light for Boots drug in US
BOOTS is to launch its heart drug, Manoplax, on the US market — worth £500 million a year — next month.
It got the go-ahead for the congestive heart-failure treatment by US authorities earlier this year.
It was launched in Britain last September.
Boots' shares firmed 6p to 491p. — PA
Heathrow seeks fifth terminal
BAA, owner of Heathrow, London, the world's busiest international airport, said yesterday it was seeking planning permission to build a fifth passenger terminal which would cost up to £900 million.
Expected to be ready in 2002, it will nearly double Heathrow's capacity.
Expanding Vardon trebles profits
VARDON, the expanding leisure group which runs the London Dungeon and last October bought nine Sea Life centres, including those at Oban and St Andrews, yesterday reported nearly trebled pre-tax profits of £2.43 million for 1992.
It also yesterday announced the acquisition of the Seal Sanctuary, in Cornwall, for £1.8 million.
Cargoes booming at Mersey Docks
A LEAP of nearly three million-tonnes in cargo handled at the Port of Liverpool helped the Mersey Docks & Harbour Company lift pre-tax profits last year by 24 per cent to £16.4 million.
The total dividend jumps from 6p to 7.5p and the shares climbed 10p to 309p. — PA
Oil companies ‘must change N Sea notions'
By Frank Frazer
COMPANIES in the offshore oil business were urged yesterday to change their thinking on ways of operating so that the North Sea could compete with other areas seeking shares of limited investment funds.
The call was made by Norman Chambers, Aberdeen-based managing director of Brown & Root, the leading offshore contracting group, who was the keynote speaker at a conference in London organised by the Institute of Marine Engineers and the Royal Institution of Naval Architects.
He told delegates that the UK offshore area was under serious and immediate threat of a drastic reduction in investment as exploration opportunities arise in other areas, some with lower costs in complying with environmental requirements.
Among the areas he mentioned  was China, which yesterday announced long-awaited plans that will allow Western oil companies to start drilling in 12 onshore areas.
Other areas which Mr Chambers believed could drain funds from the UK included the former Soviet republics, Iran and Venezuela.
Stressing the need for dialogue involving oil companies, contractors and government to improve the cost-effectiveness of North Sea operations, Mr Chambers said: ‘Creating new solutions that improve the economic attractiveness of our region requires a shift in our thinking.’
Mr Chambers said that innovative technology would have to be combined with a transfer of responsibility to the best people and organisations able to develop and produce oil and gas reserves.
‘With this vision, small uneconomic fields today will provide excellent returns in the future, due largely from an evolution to a life cycle approach to total cost reduction,’ he claimed.
Tim Eggar, the Energy Minister, told the conference that he expected recommendations by the end of the month from a working group on offshore costs chaired by John d'Ancona, the head of the Glasgow-based Offshore Supplies Office.
He said that in spite of gloom and doom in some quarters about falling markets for offshore structures, a healthy number of projects were being proposed for approval and exploration success rates in the North Sea remained high.
But Mr Eggar admitted: ‘There are changes occurring which are unavoidable.’
‘The natural progression is from larger to smaller fields and, inevitably, from young to old, with consequent implications for development and operating costs.’
Details of China's plans for onshore exploration were given yesterday by Wang Tao, the president of the country's state oil company, who said the 12 areas being opened would include part of the Tarim Basin in the north-west Xinjiang region which is though to hold some of the world's largest untapped oil reserves.
For more than a decade, OSO and oil companies, including British Petroleum, have built up contacts in China in spite of drilling being restricted previously to some offshore areas with little commercial potential.
Oil company officials said that they were excited at the new possibilities which opens up territory equivalent in size to the oil-producing state of Texas.
‘It is a significant first step.
We have been looking forward to it for a long time,’ said one oilman.
Bellway announces £33.6m rights issue
THE housebuilder Bellway yesterday joined the lengthening queue of UK companies that have returned to their shareholders for fresh equity with a £33.6 million rights issue, writes Richard Shackleton.
The Newcastle-upon-Tyne-based group also issued an upbeat forecast of demand for this year.
It is convinced that recent falls in interest rates have created conditions for a long-awaited recovery in the housing market.
‘This is already being reflected in the strong advance in sales and reservations we have experienced in recent weeks,’ said Bellway's chairman, Kenneth Bell.
Shareholders are being offered two new shares for every seven already held at 320p a share.
Bellway shares fell back 2p to 394p.
The company, which does a large amount of business with housing associations and urban renewal programmes in Scotland, has forecast that sales should reach 2,200 this financial year compared with 1,800 in 1991/92.
Evidence of a recovery is provided by the 50 per cent jump in reservations during 1993 which has also seen a ‘strong advance in sales’.
Margins improved from 7.8 per cent to 8.4 per cent in 1991 and are expected to reach 10 per cent in the current year.
Bellway is forecasting a pre-tax profit of around £16 million for the year to end-July.
The previous 12 months saw taxable profits of £13 million.
A previous rights issue in 1991 raised some £25 million and helped the company buy up development land at bargain prices.
It now has planning permission for 7,000 plots and aims to increase annual spending on land to as much as £75 million.
Sale correction
Our report of the Highland Cattle Society's sale at Oban in yesterday's paper contained some incorrect information.
The passage should have read: The best of the bulls were clearly in demand, with a top price of 8,000gns.
That was for Cailean-A Rithist of Achnacloich, from Mrs Jane Nelson, Achnacloich, Connel, Argyll, and sold to Stewart Brown, Ringour, Castle Douglas.
Next best, at 6,000gns, was Victor 6th of Earn, from H Corrigal, Culnahna, Nigg, Ross-shire, taken by Connie Laurie, Lairg, Sutherland.
At 5,800gns another from Mrs Nelson, Conall of Achnacloich, sold to the Dutchman, Leon van Tongeren, Dungarthill, Dunkeld, while at 3,500gns Balach Beag, of Pennygown, from Donald MacGillivray, Mull, sold to Mrs Tosh, Kinrossie, Perthshire.
Sour notes over milk board's future
By Fordyce Maxwell Agricultural Editor
TETCHY.
That's the word to describe how everyone now feels about the future of the Scottish Milk Marketing Board.
Last Friday night Sir Hector Monro, Scottish minister of agriculture, let it be known he was not happy about board proposals to transfer its every nut, bolt, fixture and fitting from statutory monopoly to voluntary co-op from April 1994.
Given the 98 to 100 per cent support from dairy farmers it is looking for, that would mean it still bought virtually all the milk in its area while processing and selling much of it through its commercial company Scottish Pride.
The Scottish Dairy Trade Federation has said for some time it is not happy with that.
Its members would effectively have to buy milk supplies from their main competitor.
The dairy trade complaint was given a boost last autumn when the Monopolies and Mergers Commission said the SMMB could not buy the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society's milk business and, in passing, criticised the board's plans to be, in the jargon, a vertically integrated co-op.
Undaunted, the SMMB made it clear it would not alter its proposals.
On Friday night Sir Hector made it clear it must separate its milk selling from its milk buying.
He said that the proposals had to be approved by him and Ian Lang, Secretary of State for Scotland.
They would not approve them as they were.
Sir Hector said he expected ‘interesting discussions,’ Scottish Office-speak for ‘we might have to bang heads together.’
Milk board directors have indicated that Sir Hector's ‘get on with it’ warning, given at a briefing for agricultural editors, was their first indication that the Scottish Office was not happy.
That might be taken with a pinch of salt.
But however the warning was given, the board, huff and puff as it might, will have to pay attention.
Re-thought proposals have to meet criteria set by the Office of Fair Trading that the board will not have such monopoly powers as to distort trade.
Sir Hector wants revised proposals by August this year at the latest.
Yesterday the National Farmers' Union of Scotland put its pennyworth in when Alex Brown, the milk committee convener, said the union expected a reasoned decision from the secretary of state.
‘Ministers should not prejudice the outcome of proposals yet to to be made, or be influenced by a half-baked Monopolies and Mergers Commission report about a tiny acquisition.’
He added: ‘We'll take our case to Parliament and we're examining the legality of imposing market conditions which don't apply elsewhere in the European Community.
We'll also be discussing these matters further with the milk boards.’
Government defeats attack on HLCA cuts plan
THE Government early yesterday defeated an Opposition attack on its plans to cut compensation payments to hill farmers, with a majority of 38 in the Commons.
After a stormy debate in which the proposals came under fire from both sides of the House, MPs voted by 283 to 245 against a Labour call for the Hill Livestock (Compensatory Allowances)(Amendment) Regulations to be annulled.
Responding to MPs' complaints, the agriculture minister of state, David Curry, denied the move would leave the farmers worse off.
Although the HLCA was being cut, he insisted increases in other grants meant farmers would be better off than they had thought.
Nicholas Winterton (C Macclesfield) asked: if the deal was so good why were there protests.
He said: ‘The figures are disputed by the National Farmers’ Union and the Country Landowners' Association and the Council for the Defence of Rural England — none of them really anti-Tory organisations.’
Dr Gavin Strang, for Labour, said the Government had no idea of the poverty and misery which was occurring among hill farmers.
‘The cut in the compensation arrangements is unprecedented.
It is true that hill farmers’ incomes have begun to rise again, but this is after a fall of 50 per cent.
‘It would need an increase of 100 per cent in the ewe premiums for the  farmers to get back to their previous levels of income at the beginning of the 1980s.’
For the Liberal Democrats, Paul Tyler said farmers' incomes fell by 75 per cent between 1982 and 1992.
‘The long-term viability of very vulnerable rural communities is at stake,’ he warned.
Mr Curry earlier stressed the compensation rates would be reviewed each year, taking all factors into account.
He gave figures for four farmers who took part in an NFU lobby on the issue, showing that each would be getting at least £3,000 a year more.
Mr Curry declared: ‘£0.5 billion a year goes to hill farmers in public support.
We support hill farmers and we are proud to do so.’
He said the first new batch of HLCA cheques would go out yesterday.
Towards the end of the debate, Mr Curry was prevented from speaking again after protests by Labour MPs.
George Foulkes (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) told the Deputy Speaker, Michael Morris that for a minister to speak twice in a debate he needed the permission of the Commons.
Mr Morris asked if Mr Curry had ‘the leave of the House to reply’ and was greeted by cries of ‘No!’
Earlier the Agriculture Minister John Gummer came under fire from angry MPs over his absence from the debate.
The row followed hard on the heels of Tuesday's criticism by the Members' Interests Select Committee that Mr Gummer should have declared work paid for by a giant food company to restore a pond at his Suffolk home.
He left the chamber minutes before the start of the debate.
Labour MPs complained he had deliberately snubbed the House by arranging for David Curry to put the Government's case.
Bob Cryer (Lab Bradford South) said: ‘Mr Gummer signed the Order.
He should be here.’
To laughter, he joked: ‘He is probably looking after his pond.’
There were cries of ‘Where is he?’ as Mr Curry tried to speak.
Dr Gavin Strang, for Labour, demanded: ‘He was seen in the chamber in the previous division, why is he not here for the debate?’
But Mr Curry told them he had specifically asked to take the debate as there were many sheep farmers in his Skipton and Ripon constituency.
Call to cut potato planting
POTATO growers must reduce plantings this year by at least 6 per cent to avoid a repeat of the glut and low prices of the 1992 harvest.
Bob Doig, president of the Scottish Potato Trade Association, made that claim yesterday; an appeal he made several weeks ago in conjunction with the National Farmers' Union of Scotland.
Since then yet another Potato Marketing Board buying  programme has begun, at £10 a tonne, simply to try and clear a major surplus of potatoes off the market.
Mr Doig said yesterday: ‘No grower in his right mind can be happy with an income of £10 a tonne.
Unless we begin to operate as a united industry and impose a voluntary reduction on crop planting it is difficult to see anything other than another year of disastrous returns.’
Trying to support growers has reduced the PMB's support fund from £20 million to under £6 million.
Belt, braces and every other support had disappeared in one season, he said.
A 6 per cent voluntary cut in the 155,500 hectare quota for the UK would be about 10,000 hectares, which would take an estimated 400,000 tonnes of potatoes off the 1993/94 market.
Action urged on quotas
GOVERNMENT must act on quotas for suckler cows and breeding ewes which threaten the future of the landlord tenant system, the Scottish Landowners' Federation claimed yesterday.
Graeme Gordon, vice-convener of the federation, said that rents and capital values of tenanted farms were threatened by allocating quotas to the owner of the livestock, not the land.
He said that if landlords' interests were threatened, no landowner should consider creating any new leases.
Government had an obligation to react to the threat, and the certain erosion of the amount of land available to tenants.
Mr Gordon added: ‘Quotas were never intended to benefit some at the expense of others.
We look to Government for a public commitment to maintain this principle.’
The Scottish Crofters' Union, still smarting from the £2.25 cut in Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowance per ewe, has recommended that more priority be given to new or recent entrants to crofting when sheep and cattle quotas are allocated from the national reserve.
It also points out that creating this reserve by deducting 1 per cent quota from existing producers will be difficult, not to say impossible, for crofters with small numbers of cattle or sheep.
The union suggests that crofters get an automatic entitlement for up to ten cows and that sheep quota might be converted to cattle quota within the Highlands and Islands area.
New chairman
STUART Renton, MBE, DA, ARSA, FRIBA, FRIAS, has been elected chairman of the board of governors of Edinburgh College of Art, He succeeds Martin Huggins, chairman since January 1991.
Mr Renton has been a board member since 1985.
He retired in 1991 as senior partner of Reiach and Hall, architects, Edinburgh, but is still involved with the practice, currently consulting on matters of design policy and participating in project design reviews.
He is currently a visiting professor at the University of Strathclyde's Department of Architecture and Building Science.
Earl's plea for stately tax relief
By William Chisholm
NEXT month's Budget should provide tax concessions for owners of historic houses to help them meet crippling maintenance costs, according to Earl Haig.
The earl is currently struggling to secure the future of his stately home, Bemersyde, near St Boswells.
So far, his efforts to set up a  maintenance fund for Bemersyde have met with limited success.
He is trying to sell off four building plots on his estate for up to £40,000 each to raise cash for an endowment fund.
One of the plots has been sold, and there are prospects that a second transaction will be completed.
But that will not be sufficient to guarantee the long-term future of Bemersyde, which was presented to Earl Haig's father, Field Marshal Lord Haig, after the First World War.
‘We have not achieved our goal yet, but the sale of the first plot allowed me to put in services for the proposed houses,’ said Earl Haig.
‘There has been some interest, but it is a difficult time to be selling housing sites.
However, I remain patiently optimistic.’
The earl, who says he has experienced one financial crisis after another since inheriting Bemersyde and its grounds in 1928, is pinning some of his hopes on Chancellor Norman Lamont.
‘I hope he will remove income tax from endowment funds tied to large properties like mine because that would ease the burden.
‘My own ‘trade union’, the Historic Houses Association, realise that without this kind of relief some properties could be lost.’
Terence Empson, director general of the Historic Houses Association, said he would be ‘fairly astonished’ if Mr Lamont took action on the issue this year.
There might be a better chance of securing assistance for members like Earl Haig in 1994 if the economy showed stronger signs of recovery.
‘We believe the case is overwhelmingly strong and extremely important for the heritage of the country’, Mr Empson said.
‘The association will continue to press the arguments because if the terms for maintenance funds could be improved more people would take advantage of them.
There is very little incentive at the moment because you are constrained with what you can do with the money.’
Under present legislation dedicated funds attracted 35-40 per cent income tax, and that did not make sense.
Mr Empson said the association was also campaigning to reduce the burden of VAT on its 1,400 members, 300 of them in Scotland.
Koreans take on Lothian operation
By Gordon Milne
A KOREAN company is to salvage a former Ferranti International operation in the Lothians.
The move will create 45 jobs in the next two years.
International Metrology Systems (Scotland) is to invest £750,000 in a new research-based engineering plant at Livingston which designs and makes high precision measuring machines for the automotive, aerospace, defence and general engineering sectors.
The move follows the closure of Ferranti International's metrology systems division at Dalkeith in January last year.
In October, Advance Automation Systems — Ferranti's metrology distributor in Korea — decided to re-establish the operation under the IMS name.
The new plant will shortly be moving from Dalkeith to a 20,000 sq ft facility at Livingston.
IMS has already started to recruit engineers for the Livingston operation, many of whom are former Ferranti employees.
The company also plans to buy about 70 per cent of its materials from Scottish suppliers.
Woosup Koh, managing director of IMS (Scotland), paid tribute to the involvement of Locate in Scotland both in bringing the company to Scotland and in helping it to complete the deal in less than two months.
IMS intends to place a heavy emphasis on research and innovation.
‘We are currently re-designing our machines with assistance from the design council and we are working with Napier University in Edinburgh to develop a new range of software control systems with assistance from Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise.’
Robert Crawford, director of Locate in Scotland, said he was particularly impressed by IMS's link with Napier University.
He added that the company's research and development emphasis reflected a long-term commitment to the Scottish manufacturing operation.
World may take cue from US energy tax
By Frank Frazer
REACTION was mixed yesterday to President Clinton's confirmation that the US will introduce a tax on energy in a double-edged attack on global warming and the cost of oil imports.
European Community officials in Brussels said the move had removed a barrier to their plans for a similar levy, which were frustrated by opposition from the Bush administration to the idea.
The European proposals, which could add $10 a barrel to the price of oil by the end of the century, were also opposed by large-scale energy users claiming that their businesses would be hampered if other trading partners did not introduce similar measures.
But yesterday a spokesman for Yannis Paleokrassas, the EC environment commissioner, predicted that other countries would be prepared to follow the Clinton policy reversal.
‘If the US takes part, Canada is sure to do so and Japan could follow, too.’
Oil markets, preoccupied by the output cuts deal proposed by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, were largely unaffected by the US proposals.
The price for the main North Sea Brent blend of crude oil firmed slightly to $17.81 a barrel as traders awaited signs that the cartel would implement proposals for a cut of one million barrels per day (bpd) to set its production ceiling at about 23.6 million bpd from 1 March.
But the Clinton proposals were reported to be causing concern to Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil exporter, which may seek a dialogue with Western nations on issues of petroleum supply and taxation.
Oil industry representatives in the US expressed doubts last night about the effectiveness of the measures which, administration officials claim, will add about seven cents to the cost of a US gallon of petrol, which is about five-sixths the volume of the UK gallon.
Charles DiBona, president of the American Petroleum Institute, claimed the tax would raise US prices for petrol and jet fuel by ten to 15 cents a gallon because of the uneven way in which the higher crude cost would be passed through the refinery product stream.
‘A tax of this magnitude will disproportionately hurt the poor,’ he said.
Kingfisher agrees £1bn bid for French retailer
By Magnus Grimond
KINGFISHER, the Woolies to B&Q stores group, yesterday looked set to become Europe's biggest electrical retailer after it announced a £1.04 billion agreed bid for Darty, France's leading electrical goods chain.
Kingfisher is calling on shareholders for as much as £313 million in a two-part rights issue to part finance the deal.
News of the final terms caused the shares to bounce 31p to 558p yesterday as it became clear that they were much more favourable to Kingfisher than the market feared when negotiations between the two sides came to light earlier this month.
At that time there was speculation that the UK group might have to pay as much as £1.5 billion and launch a £900 million rights issue to pay for Darty.
Describing the deal as ‘a highly significant step in European retailing’, the chairman of Kingfisher, Sir Geoffrey Mulcahy said: ‘Our merger will create a business with the muscle to compete on a European basis as well as enhancing growth opportunities in our domestic markets.’
However, his finance director, James Kerr-Muir, revealed that it will lead to a £900 million goodwill write-off for Kingfisher and push gearing above 60 per cent.
Given the cash generating capacity of Darty and Kingfisher, he said: ‘I am confident that gearing will reduce significantly in a short period of time.’
The deal values Darty's equity at 4.45 billion francs (£560 million), while another 3.8 billion francs (£480 million) is being paid for the group's debt.
The consideration will comprise 68 million Kingfisher shares — giving Darty shareholders 10 to 12 per cent of the enlarged group — with the balance paid in cash.
Kingfisher is raising £155 million from the first call of 225p a share on a one-for-seven rights issue, with another 225p payable at the company's discretion.
Catherine Wynn, the stores analyst at Kleinwort Benson Securities, described the price paid by Kingfisher as ‘excellent’.
The only question mark was over why Darty's management had sold out so cheaply, she said.
The price compares with the 7 billion francs paid by management and employees, supported by institutions and the Darty family, to buy out the company in 1988.
Since then, sales have jumped from 6.86 billion francs to 8.56 billion in 1992, while pre-tax profits have soared to 443 million francs from 130 million in 1988.
However, the French electrical market is forecast to contract by more than 2 per cent this year, after slipping 4 per cent in 1992, and brokers are expecting Darty's profits to fall in 1993.
Kingfisher has estimated that its own pre-tax profits fell from £228 million to £210 million in the year to the end of January, hit by a £26 million property write-down.
Retailing profits edged up from £205 million to £214 million, within which the Comet electrical chain performed ‘especially well’ and only the B&Q DIY business reported a fall.
A final dividend of 9.5p, up from 9.0p last time, will be recommended, to raise the annual total from 13.0p to 13.7p.
The quiet man behind a dazzling success story
SIR Geoffrey Mulcahy yesterday took his most ambitious step yet since his Kingfisher retailing group failed in its £570 million bid for Dixons, Britain's biggest electrical retailer, in 1990, writes MAGNUS GRIMOND.
The £1.04 billion agreed offer for the French group, Darty, will in one leap make Kingfisher not just Britain's, but Europe's, No 1 seller of electrical goods and add about £1 billion to sales estimated at £3.5 billion last year.
It is the culmination of a lengthy deliberation process which has been the hallmark of Sir Geoffrey's rise to the position he now occupies as one of Britain's most successful businessmen.
A workaholic who rises early and plays hard, he has eschewed the cult of personality which accompanied the rise and fall of so many high-flying retailers of the 1980s.
His slowness to take decisions can frustrate colleagues, but the strategy he has followed since the £310 million management buy-in of Woolworth in 1982 has turned the renamed Kingfisher group into a British success story on a par with that of British Airways.
The idea of a move into Europe has been under consideration since at least 1989, the year when Darty was first approached by Kingfisher.
The need for such a strategy was reinforced the following year when, in blocking the Dixons bid, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission effectively ruled out any further sizeable acquisitions by the group in the UK.
In a speech in Brussels in November 1991, Sir Geoffrey laid out his stall as a British retailer looking for partners in Europe.
‘The real question for the bigger players is not whether to exploit the single market, but how,’ he was quoted as saying.
As one of the reasons for European expansion, Sir Geoffrey cited the need to maintain buying-power in the face of global manufacturers.
That need was highlighted again yesterday as one of the reasons for the Darty takeover.
But that same caution which has distinguished Sir Geoffrey's ten-year career at Kingfisher is likely to restrain further expansion in Europe — another key reason for yesterday's bid — until the opportunities have been exhaustively examined and the markets thoroughly tested, and that could take another four years.
GARETH WATKINS/REUTER
It's a deal: Sir Geoffrey Mulcahy (left), and Philippe Frances, chairman of the French retailer Darty, shake hands at a press conference yesterday
Lending figures hint at recovery
By Richard Shackleton
FURTHER evidence that the economy may be edging out of recession came with yesterday's publication of statistics that showed a bigger than expected pick-up in credit lending and a smaller than expected rise in the jobless total.
The £4.1 billion jump in bank-lending was month was twice the average monthly increase in 1992, but economists warned that it reflected a rebound rather than new hope that consumers are taking on significantly bigger borrowings to fuel recovery.
Analysts said that corporate borrowing was a major factor in the rise as companies sought funds to pay their tax bills.
The three-month trend shows sterling lending to the private sector averaging only about £1 billion a month.
But the broad measure of money in the economy, M4, fell last month to an annual rate of 3.2 per cent from 3.7 per cent in December — below the 4-8 per cent target range set by the Chancellor, Norman Lamont.
M0, the narrow measure, rose 1 per cent in January, slightly ahead of market forecasts.
Year-on-year it increased by 4.1 per cent.
‘The lending figures show that people are still not prepared to take on new credit and this will restrain any turnaround in the economy,’ said Ian Amstad, of US-based Bankers Trust.
‘The building society figures show how cautious consumers still are.’
Building societies said the fall in net new commitments was not unexpected despite increased activity reported around the country in the past two months.
Gross lending fell 18 per cent to £1.8 billion.
Despite the January sales net deposits from savers totalled £363 million, the highest since October 1991.
The fall in the growth of average earnings continued, with the December year on year figure of 4.75 per cent, down from 5 per cent , in line with expectations and still well ahead of inflation.
The statistics underpinned an optimistic market after a flood of major company news had sent shares flying in early dealing.
A positive performance on Wall Street and in Tokyo added to the air of good cheer.
By the close the FT-SE 100 Share Index had marched ahead to 2837.7, up 23.7.
The big corporate news came from stores group Kingfisher, and drugs giant Glaxo.
Kingfisher was left in no doubt of the City's approval of its £1 billion tie-up with French electrical stores group Darty.
The Comet to Woolworth group added 31p to 558p.
Glaxo's impressive profits jump and an improved dividend payout sent its shares 25p higher to 684p.
Other pharmaceuticals reacted positively.
Wellcome added 9p to 907p, SmithKline Beecham added 5p to 444p while Fisons was a penny firmer to 239p.
Quiet trading on currency markets saw sterling gain more than three quarters of a pfennig to 2.3565 deutschmarks but lose 25 points against the dollar to close at 1.4410.
RTZ to pay £330m for loss-making Nerco
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
RTZ is paying almost £330 million for the loss-making American minerals group Nerco in an agreed deal.
However, the UK mining group plans to sell off Nerco's oil and gas interests and may get rid of its gold and silver operations as well.
Robert Wilson, RTZ's chief executive, said Nerco's coal business was large and profitable and was the main target of the acquisition.
‘We have been considering a move into the US coal industry for some time and the acquisition of these mines is the first step in establishing the foundations of a new high quality business for RTZ in the USA,’ he said.
The mines were large and had a long life and fitted in with RTZ's strategic objectives, he added.
RTZ had exited from the oil and gas business and no intention of re-entering it.
The company had a good idea of  the saleability and value of Nerco's oil and gas interests, he said.
Mr Wilson said Nerco had already started disposing of the gold and silver operations.
Although they might seem a natural fit for RTZ, the sale might still go ahead after a review.
In view of the plan to get rid of a large chunk of the assets, it was not possible to say what the net cost of the investment would be, he added.
But he predicted that the deal would enhance earnings from this year.
Gearing is expected to rise to about 60 per cent before any disposals are taken into account.
Nerco yesterday announced net losses of $551 million for 1992 following writedowns on oil and gas assets and loses on discontinued minerals businesses, totalling $714 million.
The shares fell 5p to 646p.
Call for cut in beer duty
THE Brewer's Society yesterday urged the Chancellor to cut duty on beer in the Budget to counteract the flood of imports from France.
Research showed that nearly one in ten pints drunk at home last month was imported for personal use, resulting in a loss of revenue of almost £100 million, the society told the Paymaster-General, Sir John Cope.
‘How serious does the position have to get before action is taken?
The Chancellor must act in the March Budget,’ said Roger Simpson, director of the Brewers' Society.
What was happening was not a temporary phenomenon, with increasing evidence of low-cost drinks being hawked around and reports of the first off-licence closure attributed to duty-free imports.
‘It is wishful thinking to see this as unlikely to persist.
All the indications are that it will increase,’ he said.
Kvaerner tips small gain at Govan yard
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
GOVAN shipyard should make a small profit this year after coming close to breaking even in 1992, according to its owners Kvaerner, the Norwegian-based shipbuilding, shipping and oil and gas equipment-makers.
Labour costs per head are still 50 per cent above Scandinavian levels but are falling steadily and with work for the next two years all Govan now needs is a substantial new order before the middle of 1994 to ensure its future.
Kvaerner's group turnover rose 7 per cent to £2 billion in 1992, but operating profits fell 9 per cent and, after offsetting net financial costs of £1.4 million in 1992 compared with net financial income of £6.8 million in 1991, group profits fell 16 per cent to £93.2 million.
The downturn in financial revenues included a net realised financial profit of £34 million on foreign exchange earnings and an unrealised loss of £25 million on the cost of long-term finance for the shipping fleet.
Profits from shipbuilding rose almost 40 per cent to £73.5 million, with the Norwegian and Finnish yards which make specialised cargo ships reporting good order books in spite of the recession.
The oil and gas equipment contributed almost 50 per cent more at £30.6 million, but paper-pulp equipment making fell by a quarter to £20.4 million.
Shipping lost £11 million after taking unrealised losses on the value of dollar loans which finance the shipping fleet, and losses in mechanical engineering widened to £23.2 million, mainly due to the depressed market for ship fittings and equipment.
The continuing strength of the dollar has been good for the group, as many shipbuilding and most shipping contracts are priced in dollars, and both Finland and Norway have gained a competitive edge against both the US and Germany.
In 1993 Kvaerner hopes to make a profit equal to 1992 plus the unrealised loss.
For 1992 the dividend has been increased from three kroner to five (50p) to sweeten shareholders, including many in Scotland who subscribed for the rights issue last year at 175 kroner.
The London-listed shares rose 2.5 kroner to 160.5 kroner.
Businesses in appeal for late payments law
By Gordon Milne
TWO-THIRDS of businessmen and women want the Chancellor to introduce legislation to counter the late payment of debts, according to a new report by Touche Ross, the chartered accountants.
A survey conducted between 25 January and 8 February also showed 40 per cent believed bad debts were a big factor in their cash flows.
The survey shows, too, that while many businessmen believe the Chancellor should increase taxes to tackle rising public borrowing, there is no agreement on where the burden should fall.
No method of raising tax was popular with the 222 respondents.
While only 10 per cent thought the Government should raise the National Insurance contributions rate, 64 per cent were against this.
A quarter of businesses felt corporation tax rates should rise, while 59 per cent said no.
Twenty-eight per cent were in favour of increasing the rate of VAT, with 56 per cent against, and 32 per cent thought income tax rates should be lifted, with 54 per cent against this option.
The most popular route with businesses would be for the Chancellor to extend the scope of VAT.
A full 40 per cent believed he should introduce such a measure in his Budget speech, with 44 per cent disagreeing.
More than half of respondents — 54 per cent— felt there should be no increase in taxes at all .
David Williamson, the partner in charge of Touche Ross's Business Service Group in Edinburgh, said yesterday: ‘It is clear that if the Chancellor wants to raise the tax burden on businesses, then no moves are going to be popular — even though many businessmen believe he should raise extra revenue to reduce public borrowing.’
The survey also shows, however, that the Chancellor could sweeten the pill by extending the time limit on capital allowances to help counter the late payment of debts.
New store for Inverness
MORNING Noon & Night, the Dundee-based convenience store company, has opened its 15th store.
The store, at Balloan Park in Inverness, will open on 4 March.
MN&N, which was formed after a number of senior managers left Watson & Philip in 1991, now employs 215 people throughout Scotland.
Its stores are concentrated primarily in the north and east of Scotland.
Low & Bonar sells African interests
By Gordon Milne
LOW & Bonar has sold its last remaining African interests.
The Dundee-based packaging and materials multinational has been looking to sell off its interests in South Africa, Zimbabwe and Zambia for a number of years.
The sale will hit Bonar's bottom line profits figure to the tune of £1.2 million, to be provided for as an exceptional item in the group's results to 30 November.
The African disposal closes a chapter in the company's history which goes back to 1925, and cuts Bonar's last links with the traditional clothing textile market.
As recently as 1982 Africa contributed more than 90 per cent of Low & Bonar's earnings.
But when Roland Jarvis — Jim Leng's predecessor as chief executive — took over in 1984, he instituted a programme of rationalisations and disposals to focus Bonar's diverse interests down to packaging and specialist materials.
Since then, Bonar's African operations — hit hard by political upheavals and devaluation — have largely had to survive on local earnings, with little or no investment from their Scottish parent.
The sale was for £1.5 million to Cavmont, a London holding company with widespread African interests.
A total of £1.1 million was payable on completion in cash, with the balance payable over the next three years.
Mr Leng said: ‘The ability to receive dividends has been largely exhausted and the cash generated from the sale will be re-directed into our mainstream activities.’
£51.2m losses for Control Securities
By Richard Shackleton
CONTROL Securities, the debt-laden mini-conglomerate that owns the Belhaven Brewery, yesterday revealed taxable losses of £51.2 million for the six months to end-September after making massive property write-offs.
In the same period last year, the company made interim profits of £17.2 million.
The company, whose shares have been suspended at 16.5p since September 1991, has still to reveal details of its refinancing negotiations with banks and creditors to an extraordinary meeting of shareholders.
At last month's agm, the chairman, Sydney Robin, said he hoped to have an agreement ‘within weeks’.
Meanwhile the group continues to trade with the support of the banks.
Last October, Swiss bondholders agreed that interest on the bonds should be deferred with the bonds not being declared to be in default until 1 March.
It is widely expected that bondholders will then be asked to convert some of their holdings into a new convertible preference share.
Mr Robin said exceptional losses of £68.4 million had been incurred from property writedowns, the loss on a Swiss bond deal and restructuring costs.
These overwhelmed trading profits of £17.2 million from the group's property and leisure businesses.
The profits contribution from Spanish hotels fell from £5.3 million to £4.6 million as a result of the recession in the package tourist business.
Mr Robin said the hotels were now up for sale.
Profits from English hotels fell back slightly to £1.1 million.
GGT offering £14.7m rights
THE advertising and marketing services group, Gold Greenlees Trott, is calling on shareholders for £14.7 million in a one-for-three rights issue aimed at providing elbow-room for more acquisitions.
GGT said its board was ‘examining opportunities’ to develop the group further.
‘Their priority will be to make acquisitions which build upon the existing core businesses in the UK and US.’
The company said that, though its American operation was turning in a strong performance, the UK situation remained difficult.
But the current strength of the US dollar, if maintained, would have a positive impact on sterling profits and the long-term outlook was encouraging.
The board says it expects to hold the total dividend for the year to April at 8.3p, and the shares fell 12p to 288p on the cash-call news.
— PA
Kleinwort Benson continues recovery
By Magnus Grimond
KLEINWORT Benson, the London merchant bank, continued its profits recovery last year, aided by a big reduction in bad debts.
Pre-tax profits soared from £27.9 million to £46.3 million in the year to December, following a loss of £68.0 million in 1990.
Outgoing chairman David Peake described the results as ‘really quite reasonable’ given the circumstances.
Net provisions dived from £38.7 million to just £6.8 million, reflecting Kleinwort's decision to get to grips with doubtful loans.
Most of the fall came as a result of the release of provisions in the merchant banking and securities division.
In private banking, net provisions jumped from £1.6 million to £4.8 million, said to be due principally to unpaid mortgages.
The jump follows a big increase in bad debts reported last week by the private banking operations of Lloyds Bank.
The increased bad debt charge depressed profits from investment management and private banking to £22.1 million from £24.4 million last time.
However, there was strong growth in merchant banking and securities dealing, where profits surged from £24.7 million to £38.0 million in the year.
A final dividend of 10.7p leaves an unchanged total of 16.0p for the year, payable from earnings per share which picked up from 14.3p to 16.2p.
Glaxo moving in on OTC drugs
By Richard Shackleton
SHARES in Glaxo, the UK's second-largest company, closed 22p higher at 684p yesterday after the drugs group clarified recent statements about its possible involvement in the over-the-counter (OTC) drugs market.
At one stage, their price nudged 700p.
Analysts say the company's recent stock market underperformance has been caused partly by fears that its near-£1.5 billion cash pile would be used to make a big acquisition in this market.
But Glaxo is planning to downgrade some of its products from prescription status.
It has set up a unit to develop OTC drugs because it believes the Government's health experts want to reduce reliance on prescription drugs as part of cost-cutting measures.
Ernest Mario, chief executive, apologised if previous policy statements had been confusing.
‘That does not mean that we will purchase OTC products from another company, and it does not mean that we will purchase another company purely for its OTC products,’ he said.
But he added that Glaxo is looking at possible investments.
He outlined the new thinking as Glaxo revealed a 16 per cent surge in pre-tax profits for the six months to 31 December to £819 million, better than City forecasts.
Turnover rose 16 per cent to £2.3 billion, while sales of the best-selling ulcer drug, Zantac, also grew 16 per cent to £1.03 billion.
The group's stable of established drugs increased sales by 13 per cent to £2.05 billion, with the asthma drug, Becotite, contributing £165 million and the anti-biotic, Zinnat, turning in £160 million.
New-product sales, which include the anti-emetic, Zofran, and Imigran, the migraine treatment, generated sales of £245 million, which represent 11 per cent of turnover and 29 per cent of turnover growth.
Dr Mario pointed out that the group's ‘pipeline’ included preparations to combat schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
Glaxo plans to increase research and development spending this year to £735 million, from £595 million.
He also admitted that threats to cut the prices of prescription drugs in the US had hurt the stock market view of Glaxo.
But he would not comment ahead of firm proposals from the administration.
Cutting oil costs by onshore testing
By Frank Frazer
NORTH Sea oil costs could be reduced by a novel plan to build and test subsea production equipment at onshore sites rather than hooking it up on the seabed.
Details of the plans were outlined yesterday at a conference in London on offshore installation work organised by the Institute of Marine Engineers and the Royal Institution of Naval Architects.
The technology has evolved from operations already carried out at coastal sites in Scotland in which lengths of oil and gas pipelines are made into bundles which are towed offshore at control depths for installation at oil and gasfields.
Iain Grainger, an executive with the Aberdeen-based subsea contractor, Rockwater, which is among pioneers of the technique, said it would be a natural step to integrate subsea production equipment for towing out with the pipeline bundles.
Using coastal sites to link arrays of production valves and other components with the pipelines would reduce the amount of work required by divers and specialist vessels.
‘Onshore fabrication offers further benefits such as working in a climate-controlled environment, rigorous inspection and full onshore testing and commissioning which avoids expensive offshore delays,’ Mr Grainger said.
Cost comparisons showed that a subsea project to handle 50,000 barrels of oil a day might cost £21 million to develop by conventional means but could be built onshore and towed to the location for £17 million.
The cost of a larger scheme might be reduced from £58 million to £48 million by the same technique.
‘Practical experience and study efforts have proven the technical and economic feasibility in the North Sea, and in the developing deep-water oil and gas regions, of well-established pipeline towing techniques in combination with the known advantage of onshore fabrication and commissioning of offshore structures,’ Mr Grainger said.
Though sites around the Scottish coast could be used for any plans by oil companies to adopt the technique for UK waters, he predicted that the first deep-water application of the method would be in the Norwegian sector and Brazilian waters.
Cupid aims for £1.9m cash call
CUPID has its sights trained on shareholders' bank accounts in an attempt to raise £1.9 million via a rights issue and a share subscription, the wedding dress maker said yesterday.
The cash call was accompanied by a forecast loss of up to £1.5 million for the year ending 31 March.
The statement comes just two months after the group predicted it would make pre-tax profits of £867,000, slightly less than the previous year.
Cupid, which is moving its head office from Accrington to Blackburn, Lancashire, said it needed the cash to reduce borrowings which had increased since it took over the Youngs formal wear business last year.
Financial problems have been compounded by lower sales in the Pronuptia-Youngs division.
It also announced that Richard Shaw, a non-executive director, will become chairman and chief executive following Michael Murray's resignation as a director and chief executive in December.
— PA
McLeod bids for Wheway
THE paint group McLeod Russel yesterday launched a £14.3 million takeover bid for the struggling environmental engineer Wheway.
The bid follows protracted negotiations between the two groups about a possible merger.
McLeod, based in Winchester, owns 2.99 per cent of Birmingham-based Wheway.
It is offering one of its shares for every ten Wheway shares, valuing it at 10.5p a share.
McLeod's chairman, Nigel Openshaw, said: ‘I believe our offer fairly values Wheway and is in the best interests of its shareholders and employees.
Our offer secures Wheway's future and I urge Wheway's board to recommend it.’
The merger talks started in September last year.
The two companies broke off negotiations in December only to restart them two weeks ago.
McLeod put an offer to the Wheway board and has now made it public in order to get a quick resolution.
McLeod, in its offer document, quotes Wheway's chairman, Hugh Ashton, as saying that the development of his company ‘would be best served by a merger with a financially robust partner’.
If the bid proceeds the companies will have combined businesses in paint, wood coatings, air filtration and environmental engineering.
McLeod made pre-tax profits of £5.18 million in the year to 30 September while in the year to 3 October, Wheway suffered a loss of £3.5 million.
Wheway said it was considering its position and advised shareholders not to sell.
— PA
Wheway's shares have slumped from a high of 140p in 1989 to just 7.5p at present.
Yesterday, they?— PA
Drastic action from Lamont becomes advisable
THE last thing Norman Lamont and John Major wanted on a day when the unadjusted unemployment total topped 3 million again in spite of all the Government's (indirect) efforts to set the scene for recovery was for the IMF to meddle in UK economic policy issues.
But there seems little doubt that the IMF, which monitors the economies of all member countries behind the scenes, has suggested the Chancellor's Budget next month should cut the public sector's borrowing requirements in the next financial year, either by increasing taxes or by cutting public spending.
Britain is not in debt to the IMF, so the advice is entirely optional, but there are unpleasant echoes of the mid-1970s when Denis Healey had to borrow from the IMF to support the pound and was publicly forced to accept its advice to control the money supply and raise interest rates.
The IMF is a quasi-academic and apolitical organisation and its advice is based on its assessment of a few key economic ratios.
The size of the public sector deficit is one of them, the unemployment rate is not.
The IMF has therefore taken fright at the thought that with the economy still in recession, the Government's tax revenues are at best static, while spending on unemployment benefit and income supplements are rising in line with the unemployment figures, and the deficit on the Chancellor's own admission is set to reach £37 billion this financial year and £44 billion next.
The Chancellor has several options, none of them painless or free from risk.
He can raise taxes in the Budget, possibly by pegging tax-free allowances so that all pay rises are fully taxed, by raising national insurance contributions or by increasing indirect taxation.
Motoring is already braced for taxes to recoup the cost of abolishing last November of the special tax on new cars.
Drink and tobacco, however, are already taxed to the point where consumption and, therefore, revenues fall.
The most effective and therefore the most likely would be an increase in VAT or widening the scope of the tax to cover books and newspapers or even food and children's clothing.
That would cause an outcry and add several percentage points to inflation, and could easily check spending and strangle the recovery in its cradle.
Cutting public expenditure could equally check the recovery and postpone the already distant point when unemployment should start to recede again.
The alternative is to defy the IMF and live with a massive deficit, at least until the second budget next December.
That would protect the recovery (and even enhance it by encouraging spending in advance of tax increases).
But it would increase the risk of undermining the pound and forcing a protective rise in interest rates.
Boeing ‘plans to cut 23,000 jobs’
BOEING, the world's leading aircraft builder, yesterday joined the list of big US companies slashing workforces with plans to eliminate 23,000 jobs nationwide this year.
A company source said in Seattle that the cuts would come through resignations, retirements, attrition and lay-offs.
Late last month, Boeing hinted at deep cuts in staff because of big cutbacks by its most important customers — the big US and foreign airlines wounded by the weak global economy.
— AP
World airlines ‘may lose $7bn'
THE world's airlines could report losses last year totalling as much as $7 billion, the head of the Dutch flag carrier said in Amsterdam yesterday.
‘Virtually all the profits earned since the very first flight of the Wright Brothers in 1903 have faded away in the last three years,’ Pieter Bouw, chairman of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, told a meeting of airline caterers.
His estimate was nearly three times the $2.5 billion loss forecast for the world's carriers in 1992 by an International Air Transport Association director last October.
— Reuter
Pointers to property recovery
THE long-awaited upturn in the devastated property market could be on the way, the developer, Countryside Properties, predicted yesterday.
Alan Cherry, chairman, said at the annual meeting that inquiries and reservations were, respectively, 70 per cent and 40 per cent ahead of last year's for his company.
The Kent-based house-builder, Ward Holdings, yesterday provided some backing for Countryside's optimism when it announced much-reduced annual losses of £5.3 million, against a £14 million deficit in 1991. — PA
Punters hungry for pizza the action
SMALL investors rushed for a slice of the stock market newcomer, Pizza Express, boosting the share price to more than twice the 40p institutions paid last month.
The shares opened at 76p and quickly soared to 96p before settling back to 81p.
New North Sea find by Amoco
AMOCO, the US oil company, announced last night that it had found a new gasfield 125 miles east of Aberdeen while drilling on a prospect it has named Appleton.
The discovery well produced a prolific flow of 19.4 million cubic feet of gas from depths of almost 300 feet.
LASMO pulls out of Australia
LASMO, the London-based oil group, is quitting Australia after a deal yesterday to sell its remaining exploration and production interests there to SAGASCO Resources for £4.8 million.
Milk board looks to options
THE Scottish Milk Marketing Board appeared to acknowledge yesterday that its proposals for change are unacceptable to Government, writes Fordyce Maxwell.
In a letter to the board's 2,300 dairy farmers, the chairman, Andrew Howie, wrote that it now looked highly unlikely that the Government would accept the proposal for a voluntary co-op which retained its commercial company, Scottish Pride.
That confirms what Sir Hector Monro, Scottish minister of agriculture, said a week ago.
He stated that the board would have to produce alternative proposals, and fairly soon.
The board had hoped that, when it lost statutory monopoly power to buy all milk in its area some time next year, it would retain 100 per cent loyalty from its dairy farmers.
It also intended to keep Scottish Pride, which processes and sells much of the milk.
A Monopolies and Mergers Commission report criticised those proposals severely, particularly trying to retain Scottish Pride.
Government seems to have accepted that criticism.
Mr Howie does not, but seems to have accepted that the criticism has ruined his board's plans.
He wrote: ‘This outcome is very disappointing, as the board has made considerable efforts on your behalf to get the proposals accepted.
We have been in close contact with the Scottish Office and the competition authorities to this end for more than 18 months.’
He expects a ruling from Ian Lang, Secretary of State for Scotland, on the proposals by the end of this month.
If, as he now seems to acknowledge, present board proposals are unacceptable, it has several other options prepared.
Which one it puts forward cannot be decided until Government gives further clues about what it would like: ‘Once this has happened, the board will move rapidly to implement its preferred option, recognising as we do that the timetable set for us by Government is relatively tight.’
Whatever the option for which it goes, it will, it claims, be ‘in the best interests of the Scottish producer in a changing market.’
Europeans developing a taste for Scottish lamb
By Robert Forster
THE lamb market is being swept up in a revolution that by happy chance will undermine attempts by supermarkets to wrap it in their boa constrictor grip.
While that is good news for farmers, who are undoubtedly being given an opportunity to earn more money than the multiples would ever be happy to pass back — it does mean that consumers will have to get used to paying a little more.
Scottish sheep farmers have their eyes on Europe.
They have noted that demand for lamb is growing throughout the European Community and they want a slice of that market.
It is, as they say, all before them.
In the majority of EC countries lamb is regarded as a minority meat — something like veal, which in overall terms actually outsells it.
Until now France has been the principal export outlet.
It already takes more than 20 per cent of British production at prices that are comfortably higher than those offered at home.
Others are moving into the frame and within five years it is possible that more than half of all lamb will be sold overseas.
The biggest boost has come with the opening up of the Mediterranean.
Four years ago, those markets were just a rumour — places where scraps of lambs the size of rabbits were bought for unbelievable prices and then spitted like kebabs.
Now they are beginning to soak up thousands of unwanted male lambs off Scottish hill farms and in five years are expected to be soaking up even more.
The strength of demand could even change the way in which Scottish shepherds manage their flocks.
It demands a carcase that in British terms is almost unsaleable.
In Spanish eyes a quality lamb is a British reject.
It must be half size — and it doesn't matter if it's half finished either.
The Portuguese, Greek and Italians are in on the same thing too.
By a stroke of luck, an article that is an embarrassment on the home market is like gold on another.
Hill farmers can't wait to offer more.
The message they are getting is that Italy is the real target.
Unlike Spain, which likes its imports from June to December, the Italians want theirs all year round and the men in Perthshire and Argyll will be happy to oblige.
It may mean fundamental alterations to the way in which they manage their farms.
They have the lambs and the people in Southern Europe, who traditionally did without when their own supplies dried up, can afford them.
That sounds like a pretty fair exchange.
New ground is being broken in Northern Europe too.
Unlike France, where lamb is still, in spite of its easy availability, regarded as a prince's dish, the Germans think of it as something else.
In fact, national memories of wartime boiled mutton are still so strong that most Germans can't look at sheepmeat, even prime lamb, without searching for a dog's bowl to put it in.
The marketeers are out to persuade them otherwise.
Encouraged by the fact that the Germans, and the Scandinavians, have more money to spend than anyone else bar the Japanese, there are moves afoot to show them just how good lamb really is.
Sales are already beginning to kindle.
They are more than a spark but less than a small fire and exporters have high hopes.
All of that suggests that the sheep industry is poised to make the most of the structural accident that has made it the biggest producer of lamb in the Northern Hemisphere.
It has only two EC competitors.
France, where the national flock is already melting under the heat of imports and Ireland, which is packed to the limit and where a fall in numbers is inevitable.
That brings us back to the domestic market and the attempts just 18 months ago by supermarket buyers to force lamb prices down to new depths and twist sheep farmers' tails till their eyes popped.
That temporary phenomenon was possible only because of an EC support control mechanism which passed away last January and brought smiles to thousands of faces.
It can already be said with virtual certainty that lamb will never be as cheap again.
In fact, if the EC export market continues to open up, it can only get dearer.
Even without pressure through exports, it would become more expensive because sheep quotas (a new EC budget control mechanism) have capped European production at the same time as demand has soared.
Sheep farmers have learned their lesson.
After having their noses rubbed in the mud in autumn 1991, they are now looking at higher priced overseas outlets.
Supermarkets may be as surprised as anyone to find themselves selling no more than 25 per cent of national production by 1997.
It's a fair bet that more than half will be sold abroad and half of the half that remains will be distributed by independent butchers.
Sometimes it doesn't pay to be greedy.
Permission to grow cannabis
FARMERS are to be allowed to grow cannabis — but not the variety normally associated with illicit drug parties.
The Home Office yesterday lifted restrictions on growing hemp, a member of the Cannabis Sativa family, and a source of fibre for the manufacture of rope, paper, linen, lace and twine.
They will even be able to claim a European Community grant of about £250 an acre.
A Home Office minister, Michael Jack, said the crop would be subject to strict licensing controls to ensure only approved varieties with no potential for drugs misuse were planted.
Mr Jack said strains which met EC requirements — those bred to contain low narcotic levels — had been grown on the Continent for more than 20 years without any  problems .
‘Trials have been conducted in the UK which have proved successful and it is now proposed that commercial cultivation should be permitted in appropriate circumstances,’ he added.
‘Hemp has been grown for many years on the Continent and this decision will allow UK farmers to gain a share of the market currently occupied by our EC partners.’
The Ministry of Agriculture said it believed hemp, which can grow as high as 15ft, would be a minority crop and would not become a common feature of Britain's rural landscape.
The Home Office said one company had so far applied for a licence.
Galloway bull sells for 5,200gns
TWENTY bulls topping the l, 000gn mark and a 5,200gn top price brought smiles to the faces of Galloway breeders at Castle Douglas yesterday.
For earlier in the day they saw in-calf heifer averages drop by over £200 and bulling heifers drop by £88 on the year at the spring event.
The bulls, showing a healthy average rise of £73 on last February, were topped at 5,200gns in a joint purchase by R&M Fergusson of Barlaes, Dalry and JA Fergusson of Nether Rusko, Gatehouse of Fleet.
They bought the third prizewinning September l991 bull Zebedee of Meiklewood from GB Robertson of Meiklewood Farm, Ringford, Castle Douglas — the only entry from the relatively new breeder.
There were four bids of 4,000gns and over with the two-year-old Zhaab from TJ Harding of Hardhurst, Walton, Brampton, making the second top figure of the day at 4,400gns when he was snapped up by J Tully of Bowenhill, Teviothead, Hawick.
Minutes earlier MH&JR Weir of Falbae, Creetown, went to 4,200gns for the October l991 bull Zingaro from J McConchie and Sons, Mains of Penninghame, Newton Stewart.
That bull was sired by Globe Titan, the Canadian imported bull which also sired the bull champion, withdrawn at l, 400gns by Messrs McConchie, and the female champion, also from Mains of Penninghame.
The two 4,000gn bids were for Runrig, the two-year-old first prizewinner from WJ&CSR Christie of Lochdochart, Crianlarich, and the reserve supreme champion Grange Zermatt from Messrs James Biggar, Grange, Castle Douglas.
The buyers were F&J Hunter-Blair of Marbrack, Carsphairn, and F&J Young, Congeith, Kirkgunzeon.
M&J Ross and Son of Romesbeoch, Shawhead, Dumfries, received a 3,400gn bid for their Zora of Romesbeoch from J&JW Ions of Thorneyburn, Hexham and RT Lawson and Son, Airlies Farm, Wigtown, went to 2,800gns for the second prizewinner Zulu, the September l991 bull brought out by Ian Henderson of Langholm.
George Wilson of Reddings, Moffat, and Neil Manning of Tweedshaws, Tweedsmuir, Biggar also spent 2,800gns for Barlaes Teviot, a two-year-old from R&M Fergusson, Barlaes, Dalry, and this was followed at 2,200gns by a bid from FA Waugh of Kilnstown, Carlisle, for the first prizewinning Huntly Yarrow shown by R&M McIntosh of Outer Huntly, Ashkirk, Selkirk.
Two others — Zeus from Brian Allan of Glenturk, Newton Stewart, and Zodiac from R&H Finlay of Blackcraig, Corsock — went under the hammer at 2,000gns to Messrs McConchie and Alistair Sinclair, Carnavel, Dalry.
In the heifer classes the top bid was 2,000gns for the champion from Messrs McConchie which was purchased by JJ Patterson of Kirktonhill and Glengelt Farms, Oxton, Lauder, while the reserve champion Jenny l86th from J&W Wilson of Kirkmabreck, Creetown was bought at 900gns by R&K Drysdale, Old Cambus Quarry, Cockburnspath, Berwick.
The 81 in-calf heifers sold by Wallets Marts PLC levelled out at £673.03 compared with £888.86 a year ago and the 60 bulling heifers dropped by £85.50 to £567.18.
The 38 bulls sold averaged £1,738.57 compared with £1,665.24 last year and four steers were sold for an average of £475.13.
City Site sells prime property for £26.5m
CITY Site Estates, the Glasgow-based property investment and development group, yesterday sold one of its prime London properties for £26.55 million.
writes John Hatfield.
The sale of Stockley House, in the Victoria district, to an undisclosed overseas buyer will provide a much-needed cash injection for the fragile balance sheet.
Purchased in 1989 at the height of the property boom the 70,000 feet air-conditioned office building, which houses the headquarters of BAA, brought in an annual rental income of £2.6 million.
While the original purchase price was £28.8 million, the property had already been written down in the balance sheet to take account of the general fall in values.
It was sold at current book value.
A spokesman for City Sites said that it did not envisage that the sale would lead to a reduction in rental income over the year.
He added that rental income was sufficient to cover interest payments.
Leisurewear firm to create 150 jobs
By Gordon Milne
AN AGGRESSIVE marketing drive into Europe by a US leisurewear company is to mean 150 new jobs for central Scotland by the end of the year, it was revealed yesterday.
The Russell Corporation of Alabama, maker of the popular ‘Russell United’ brand of sweatshirts and sports clothing, plans to invest a further £4.8 million in its factories in Livingston and Bo'ness.
The new jobs will bring total Scottish employment up to 616 at the company's knitting, dyeing, cutting, sewing and distribution facilities.
Mike Coggin, chief executive of the Scottish operation, said yesterday: ‘Europe has become a significant potential market for leisurewear and sportswear.
We now have sales offices throughout Europe targeting a market of 350 million people.
‘We are delighted with the quality of workforce we have recruited in Scotland, and with the European marketplace showing excellent sales potential, we are looking to expand all manufacturing facilities in Livingston and Bo'ness.’
Russell Corporation describes itself as one of the world's largest manufacturers of ‘teamwear’, supplying outfits for most of the professional baseball teams and American Football teams in the United States.
However, its main ‘bread and butter’ market is in knit products sold through stores and discount houses.
In Europe, its most popular ranges are Jerzees for basic sports and leisurewear and Russell Athletic for followers of ‘classic’ American sportswear.
Russell established its European manufacturing operations in Scotland following the June 1989 purchase of Cloathbond of Livingston.
At the time, Cloathbond employed 225 staff, and Russell Corporation announced its intention to create 350 new jobs in a £7.3 million expansion plan.
The plans unveiled yesterday means that Russell has more than exceeded its original plans both for capital investment and job creation.
The company has lodged an application with Livingston Development Corporation for planning permission for a 60,000 sq ft extension to its facilities in Houston Industrial Estate to accommodate 91 of the new jobs.
The remaining 63 are to be created at the Bo'ness sewing centre.
Allan Stewart, MP, the Scottish Office Industry Minister, said: ‘Russell Corporation was one of a number of inward investors eager for a European foothold by 1992.
The company fully recognised the potential for growth within the European Community and was persuaded that Scotland was the ideal location from which to serve that market.’
Russell Corporation, which employs almost 16,000 people in the US, invests heavily in research and development, with robotics playing a large part in the manufacturing process.
Mr Coggin said this meant training had a high priority.
‘It takes up to 18 months to properly train our staff and I must say I am particularly impressed by the capability, skills and attitude of the Scots workforce.’
Bob Watt, chairman of Livingston Development Corporation, said: ‘We are conscious of the potential of Russell Corporation's expansion within Europe and have worked closely with the company as it has developed.
This latest news on the job front adds to what has already been a good year for the town.’
Move to stem statistics leaks
By Richard Shackleton
THE Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, yesterday announced moves to speed the public release of key statistics on production and prices under the aim of promoting ‘openness’ in economic decision-making.
The improved practices at the Central Statistical Office will also limit the number of ministers and officials with access to the figures prior to their official publication.
The CSO's new director, Bill McLennan, said the changes were not only part of general tidying up operation to standardise distribution but also to prevent leaks.
‘I have been concerned by some leaks.
Some quite recently,’ he said, but would not give details.
He added that the penalties against leaking confidential information were severe.
In addition, there has also been press criticism that ministers have been using advance knowledge to influence market and media opinion.
In the current issue of New Scientist, a former chief statistician has alleged prior disclosure of some key indicators:
‘There have been a number of occasions in the past when stories have appeared in the press saying what the figures are going to be in one or two days’ time…but when someone quotes exactly the figure which is going to come out the next day it is hard to believe they just made an inspired guess.
It is news management by ministers which is suspected and it is very difficult to prove.’
From 1 April, only the Prime Minister, Chancellor, Governor of the Bank of England and seven other senior ministers and officials will have two days' advance notice of key data.
The new arrangements standardise old ministerial practices pre-dating the creation of the CSO, when individual ministries had differing procedures for distributing any statistics for which they were responsible.
At present the Chancellor has nine days' prior warning of the crucial retail price figures.
This will be cut back over a period of time.
The new measures will bring the UK more into line with other western governments' statistical bureaux that limit both the number of ministers with access to figures and the amount of time they have to consider them.
Host of opinions for Lamont to ponder on
IF THE Chancellor expected consistent advice backed by irresistible logic from the first submission from his seven wise men, he will have been disappointed by their 80-page text plus statistical appendix yesterday.
If, however, the Chancellor was hoping for a variety of opinions to give him maximum freedom of manoeuvre in next month's Budget, he will be only too happy with the report.
It may be early days to expect a  consensus to emerge less than two weeks after the group was established, and it is now too late to forge a common front to influence the Budget.
To adapt the old joke, there appear to be at least eight separate opinions detectable in the summary and seven individual assessments occupy all but 38 paragraphs.
The opinions are highly predictable.
Wynne Godley has been consistently the gloomiest economist operating in Britain, believing that the UK economy is suffering from severe structural weaknesses, and it will remain locked in a low growth and high unemployment pattern for years.
At the other extreme, Prof Patrick Minford believes that most of the UK's problems are cyclical and will disappear as a spontaneous recovery takes root, filling the Chancellor's coffers with tax revenues and creating new jobs, so long as the Chancellor has continued to keep inflation under control.
But Minford and Godley are the least optimistic about an early upturn in the economy this year.
The two most monetarist in inclination, Profs Minford and Congdon, both believe a buoyant increase in money supply is a necessary precursor of a recovery.
Gavyn Davies at Goldman Sachs is the most inclined to reflate.
But no-one expects a quick rally, and forecasts for 1993 growth range from 0.2 per cent to 2.0, with underlying inflation ranging from 3.1 per cent to 4.8 per cent, base rates between 4.5 per cent and 6 per cent , and the PSBR anywhere from £40 billion to £55 billion.
All seven expect unemployment to go on rising throughout the year.
Further out the forecasts spread rapidly, with growth predictions next year ranging from a pessimistic 1.4 per cent to an optimistic 3.4 per cent, inflation from 1.0 per cent to 4.9 per cent , the PSBR from £32.5 billion to £60 billion, unemployment from a low of 2.7 million to a gloomy 3.6 million in the fourth quarter of 1994, and the current account deficit from a high of £22 billion to a best-case scenario of only £6 billion for the year.
Only Prof Congdon thinks the Chancellor should raise taxes next month to balance a loose monetary policy, and the other six advise against a rise, though all agree the Chancellor needs to explain his strategy clearly and three more expect tax increases in 1994.
Airtours' offer extended
THE Airtours holiday company has extended its £210 million takeover offer for its rival, Owners Abroad, until 4 March, after receiving only 0.4 per cent acceptances from holders of the ordinary shares, it revealed yesterday.
Acceptances for the preference share offer totalled only 1.23 per cent.
Under Stock Exchange rules, Airtours has until 15 March to gain control of its target, or the bid must lapse.
Owners' chairman, Howard Klein, was jubilant at the response.
Later yesterday, he said: ‘Shareholders have once again resoundingly rejected the Airtours offers.
Since the first closing date, only 0.03 per cent further acceptances have been received.’
He added: ‘It is clear that our shareholders agree that the Airtours offers grossly undervalue Owners Abroad.
We continue to urge shareholders to reject them.’
Airtours' shares rose 9p to 304p on the news yesterday, while Owners' were unchanged at 118p.
Lopex in cash call
THE advertising and marketing group Lopex is asking shareholders to stump up £3.5 million to cut borrowings.
‘Receipt of the net proceeds of the rights issue will restore the balance sheet to a position which should be acceptable to a wider range of both suppliers and clients,’ Lopex said.
The cash call was accompanied by a statement that taxable profits for last year would not be less than £200,000.
In 1991 Lopex made a pre-tax loss of £400,000. — PA
Guthrie expands in pizzas
THE Bank of Scotland is behind the latest deal marking Michael Guthrie's comeback into fast food catering, writes Richard Shackleton.
It is arranging part of the debt finance for his Brightreason company's £20.25 million acquisition of 43 Prima Pasta and Pizza Piazza restaurants from Rank Organisation, the Odeon, Hard Rock and Butlins leisure combine.
In 1990, Mr Guthrie was forced by a combination of ill health and heavy borrowings to concede defeat during the £600 million bid for his Mecca restaurant and disco group by Rank.
But two years ago, he bought 122 Pizzaland restaurants from Grand Metropolitan with the help of Mercury Development Capital.
This group has been joined for yesterday's deal by Montagu Private Equity and Samuel Montagu, as well as the Bank of Scotland on the debt side.
The purchase has been structured around an immediate £19 million cash payment, with the balance deferred until October 1993.
Brightreason will now have 20 per cent of the booming pizza market, which has doubled over the last eight years.
‘We created Prima Pasts at Mecca,’ Mr Guthrie said.
‘The purchase is part of a clear strategy.
I have always believed in the middle-market spending the restaurants represent.’
Mr Guthrie's Pizzaland restaurants already had a turnover of £50 million and the additions from Rank will immediately increase that to £70 million.
Mr Guthrie reckons that he and his former Mecca team will be able to bring the new company to the stock market in about two years.
Fifteen months ago, his other company, Pavilion Services Group, was formed to buy 11 motorway service stations, also from Rank, at a cost of £86 million.
For Rank, the latest disposal is a continuation of its debt-reduction strategy.
Last year, it managed to raise £150 million, while the sale of its hotels this year should raise a further £100 million.
Gearing currently stands at about 75 per cent.
Rank's shares firmed 3p to 696p.
US red tape ‘will hurt UK firms'
BRITISH firms may face increased red tape in the wake of President Clinton's new economic programme, according to an expert at one of the world's biggest tax practices.
Bruce Lassman, head of the US desk in London of the international business advisers, Ernst & Young, said yesterday that any increase in taxes levied on foreign firms doing business within the US would come through tighter enforcement of the rules relating to prices charged to each other by related companies, and imposition of stiffer penalties for failure to comply.
To avoid penalties, firms doing business within the US may be required to provide pre-prepared documents supporting inter-company, or so-called ‘transfer pricing’ policies.
This increased administrative burden might cost foreign multinationals ‘significant amounts of time, effort and money’.
— PA
Lloyd's to brief staff over cuts
EXECUTIVES of the Corporation of Lloyd's, which regulates and manages the insurance market, are to brief staff at ‘business forums’ next week on the background to the organisation's latest cost-cutting strategy.
About 600 jobs are to go at the corporation — about 30 per cent of the workforce — affecting staff at all levels.
Peter Middleton, chief executive, said in a letter to staff that there was a ‘vital need’ for Lloyd's market's competitive edge to be restored.’
The staff cuts are part of plans to reduce the corporation's 1993 budget by £30 million to £115 million.
Executives will brief staff at meetings in London and Chatham on Wednesday and Friday next week.
Proposals are expected to be be published in April.
— PA
Trencherwood looks to recovery
THE house-builder, Trencherwood, expects to see a gradual return to profitability during 1994, its chairman, John Norgate, said yesterday.
Reporting yesterday a pre-tax loss for last year which has been cut to £21.4 million, from £37.7 million in 1991, he forecast a steady increase in sales this year, spurred by a recovery in the market.
The Berkshire-based company said it had operated at a ‘much reduced loss’ in the second half of last year, compared with the first.
But 1992 had seen only about 165 houses were sold, against 306 in 1991.
Losses per share were cut from 137.01p to 83.1p, but there is again no dividend and the shares dipped 0.5p to 7p. — PA
Hogg joins board of SmithKline
SIR Christopher Hogg, 56, chairman of Courtaulds and Reuters, has joined the pharmaceuticals giant, SmithKline Beecham, as a director.
One of its non-executive directors, Alain Gomez, 54, chairman of the French electronics group, Thomson, is leaving to pursue other interests.
— PA
UB's Terry's tempts a bidder
UNITED Biscuits, the Edinburgh-based group which is Britain's biggest biscuits and snacks manufacturer, yesterday confirmed that it had received a serious approach for its Terry's chocolate company.
The news followed a Financial Times report that discussions were believed to have been under way for several weeks with a number of prospective buyers, but were most advanced with the US foods and tobacco giant, Philip Morris.
Morris owns Jacob Suchard, the Swiss chocolate and  coffee company, where Terry's would fit in well.
According to the FT, analysts reckon that Terry's, which made operating profits of £3.2 million on sales of £69 million in the first half of last year, could fetch more than £200 million.
The company has about 3 per cent of the UK chocolate market, as well as subsidiaries in France and Italy.
UB has made acquisitions in Europe, Australia and the US in the last two years in an attempt to strengthen its international presence in the biscuits and savoury snacks markets.
The Terry's cash would be very useful to UB, which is chaired by Bob Clarke, who is known to be keen to cut the group's high gearing — debt amounted to about £540 million at the last count — and pave the way for even more expansion.
— PA
Pound makes good gains as shares drift
By Richard Shackleton
STERLING was a major beneficiary yesterday of the report from the ‘seven wise men’ after dealers took the view that further interest rate cuts were unlikely.
Though opinions among the seven are divided, only two are calling for immediate additional cuts.
At one stage, the pound was trading nearly three pfennigs higher against the Deutschmark before settling back to close 2.14 pfennigs up at Dm2.3779.
Its rise against the dollar was more limited, because of the recent strength of the US currency.
It closed 145 points up at $1.4555.
Gilts traded about £&3/8; higher on the pound's firmness.
In the absence of any leading company or firm economic news, shares had a quiet day, with the FT-SE 100-Share Index moving in a narrow range.
In a featureless market, even news that United Biscuits had received a serious approach for its Terry's chocolate company failed to excite investors.
UB's shares only nudged up 3p to 352p.
The Footsie closed just 2.3 points higher at 2,840.0.
Glaxo reversed most of yesterday's gains with a 19p fall to 666p after rumours surfaced that the pharmaceutical giant was considering a big joint-venture with the US group, Warner-Lambert.
On Thursday, Glaxo's chief executive, Ernest Mario, appeared to rule out any blockbuster move into the over-the-counter market, preferring to downgrade some of the group's existing drugs into that market.
The textile company, Ingham, confirmed it was having talks on a possible acquisition, but stressed that, if they were successful, it might have to launch a share issue.
The shares fell 1p to 108p.
Aberdeen Petroleum, courted as a merger partner by Bellwether, dipped 1p to 14p after news that the proposed tie-up was off.
And the house-builder, Trencherwood, lost 0.5p to 7p after cutting heavy losses but again failing to pay a dividend to shareholders.
Mirror Group fell 3p to 106p because of the current turmoil affecting the newspaper over the political direction it might adopt.
But the stores group, Kingfisher shone out like a beacon in the dull market.
The shares rose 19p to 576p as investors digested and approved the news of its £1 billion link-up with the French electrical stores chain, Darty.
The paper-maker, Bowater, still basking in an optimistic profits forecast for the full year, firmed 7p to 507p.
Focus of interest when rates fall
MARTIN HARRISON looks at a way of protecting savings income
WHEN interest rates fall, bank and building society deposits become much less attractive as a home for long term savings than when rates were high.
Not only is the real value of the capital slowly being eroded by inflation, but the income paid to investors falls too and has done, dramatically, in recent months.
So what should those who rely on the interest earned by their savings do to protect their income?
One option which they should very seriously consider is to invest in a bond fund.
Bonds are investments  issued by governments or companies who wish to borrow money.
They pay a fixed rate of interest and carry a promise that the capital will be paid back at full face value at a pre-determined date in the future.
Falling interest rates are bad for bank and building society investors but they are actually beneficial for investors in bonds because when interest rates fall, bond prices actually rise.
In fact, a capital gain of more than 20 per cent is achieved when the income yield on a 20-year bond (with a 10 per cent interest coupon) drops from 8 per cent to 6 per cent.
There is an even larger turnover in bonds worldwide than there is in shares.
They still feature less prominently in the portfolios of private investors in the UK than, for instance, on the continent or in the US, but they are becoming increasingly popular here too.
The best way to invest in a portfolio of international bonds is through a managed fund, such as a unit trust.
By doing so the investor achieves a broad spread of investments, international diversification, active portfolio management by experts and the potential for currency gains.
Investing in many different bond markets around the world increases the investment potential because when one market is going down another may be on the way up.
For instance, interest rates are beginning to fall in Germany, they have already fallen substantially in the UK and are very low in the US.
The fund manager can, therefore, select the mix of bonds which offers the most attractive yield and capital growth potential.
International investment involves the added dimension of dealing in foreign currencies, providing the opportunity for  additional profits.
The fund manager can make currency gains by holding strong currencies and protect the fund from weak currencies through a process known as ‘hedging’.
Investors should pick a fund with a good track record over ten years or more and to receive income gross look for one managed from an overseas centre such as Dublin or Luxembourg.
But don't be greedy: a fund with a 7 per cent to 8 per cent yield is likely to produce a much better capital gain over time than one with a higher yield.
As interest rates continue to fall around the world, bonds could well prove to be the investment opportunity of the 1990s.
Professionals take their pick of bunch
Which unit trusts would you choose if you had £10,000 to invest?
We asked two leading advisers to offer their recommendations
Alan Steel, of Alan Steel Asset Management, Linlithgow:
‘For capital growth, I'd invest mainly in smaller companies funds, with a bit in US smaller companies where there is still some scope, possibly through the Perpetual US Smaller Companies trust.
Then I would add a good UK trust such as the Foster Braithwaite UK Smaller Companies.
But it must also be a good time to invest in Europe, possibly through the Morgan Grenfell European Growth fund.
In Japan, we must be getting to a time when equities are worth buying, so, on a five-year basis, I would choose the Schroder Japan Smaller Companies which has a good reputation, or possibly the Schroder Tokyo fund.
Finally, I'd choose the Templeton World Growth fund.
‘For income I'd again select a combination of funds.
Firstly, the Perpetual High Income which has been a consistently good performer from a good fund management group; then Mercury's European Income Fund on the basis that it is probably a very good time to invest in Europe, with interest rates about to fall there.
Next, I'd pick the Exeter High Income, a very high income fund…because it has got good recovery prospects.
‘Another fund would be the M&G Extra Yield.
This yields 5.15 per cent, at the moment, but we are getting to a situation in the market which will probably be good news for the fund manager's philosophy.
Finally, I'd choose the Schroder Global Bond.
This is yielding 6.3 per cent but with falling interest rates likely to continue, especially in Europe, this is probably a good low-risk addition to a portfolio.’
Robert Burdett, of Berrie Asset Management in London:
‘For the investor with a £10,000 lump sum looking for capital growth, I'd be tempted to split it into more than one investment.
I'd be keen to have a UK smaller companies fund, possibly a quarter of the cash going into the Buckmaster Smaller Companies.
It is lagging at the moment but we may be about to see some real performance.
‘Probably another £2,500 I'd put into a larger stock fund such as the Fidelity Stabiliser.
(This uses futures and options to place some limit on the downside while offering a potentially very good upside).
A quarter of the cash I'd put outside the UK, largely into Far East emerging markets, possibly through the Abbey Asian Pacific Fund which has a very consistent record.
Of the final quarter, I'd put about 10 per cent into a straight emerging markets fund…and the rest into US smaller companies through the Hypo Foreign & Colonial fund.
‘With a £10,000 lump sum being invested for income, I'd recommend half to be invested into three Guinness Flight bond funds which invest in UK government debt, supra-national bonds such as issued by the World Bank, and AA and AAA-rated corporate bonds.
To counterbalance that, we would use high yielding equity funds, so the other £5,000 would probably be split between the Newton Income fund, which has a good record of capital and income growth, the Perpetual High Income and possibly, the Buckmaster Income.’
Going green without going into the red
Investments that don't cost the earth are increasing and doing well.
IAN HARPER reports on ethical and environmental funds
CYNICS might argue that ‘green’ or environmental funds and their ethical counterparts were developed as a marketing tool to attract the conscientious investor.
But such is the demand for them that there are now about 25 funds with more than £350 million invested, according to the Ethical Investment Research Service (EIRIS).
And as our table shows, some of them have turned out to be very good performers indeed.
Over five years, an investment of £10 a month into a hypothetical fund based on the average performances of all the ethical/green funds listed would now be worth £822.32 which as the table on average sector performance shows, is the best performance of any sector bar Far East Excluding Japan and North America.
Over one year, a £10 a month investment would be worth a respectable £143.26 now, if it could have been placed in the same hypothetical fund.
However, looking at individual funds, only a few have delivered above average performance over one and five years.
Had the investor paid £10 a month over the past five years into the best performing fund ethical/green fund — Framlington Health — the investment would now be worth £1,312.88.
But this is exceptional, as only one other fund has managed to beat the five-year average for the sector — the Friends Provident Stewardship North American fund, which is now worth £951.47.
But at the other end of the scale, a £10-a-month investment over five years in the Friends Provident Stewardship Income fund (now worth £683.88) and the Buckmaster Fellowship fund (worth £667.98) would have been better off investing in a building society investment account (worth £686.76).
Over one year, while seven funds beat the sector on the basis of £10 a month invested, with the best performing fund — Friends Provident Stewardship North American — now worth £168.89, the rest fall below the average, although in no cases would the building society have been a better bet.
But what is the investor buying with these funds?
According to Peter Webster, the director of EIRIS, not only do investors have different requirements when it comes to investment, but so do fund managers when choosing stocks for their portfolios.
For example, said Mr Webster, while many investors shun nuclear weapons at all costs, they may not care if the portfolio includes alcohol.
‘There is no obvious hierarchy, from dark to light ethical,’ he said.
Similarly, some investors put environmental concerns uppermost on their list while others are only just waking up to green concerns.
The situation is equally blurred when it comes to the fund managers.
At one end of the portfolio selection process is the use of so-called ‘negative criteria’.
If a company fails to meet one of these it is excluded from the portfolio.
Scottish Equitable, which has more than £7 million in its Ethical Unit Trust, is considered to be one of the best examples of such a process.
At the other end is the ‘positive’ approach pioneered by Jupiter Tarbutt Merlin.
The aim is to identify companies which can show that they are taking positive steps to improve their ways towards the environment, as well as to raise the level of debate about green issues.
Somewhere in the middle is the approach — typified by the TSB Environmental Investor Fund, best known for its association with television personality Dr David Bellamy — which avoids investing in companies if they are substantially involved in, or have a material interest in polluting (or military) activities, but may invest in those which are, trying to avoid pollution.
Lee Coates, the proprietor of Fimbra-member, the Ethical Investors Group (0242 522872), which claims to be the only UK investment adviser dealing exclusively in green and ethical funds, says that only seven are likely to match all the ethical or green criteria investors may have.
These, he says are the Friends Provident Stewardship, Scottish Equitable Ethical, National provident Institution Global Care Fund, Clerical Medical Evergreen Fund, Merlin Ecology Fund, Henderson Green PEP and the Skandia Ethical Selection Fund.
Mushrooming funds: ‘Green’ funds cater to the issues concerning conscientious investors
Caution can prove a key factor in secret of success
IAN SAMPSON offers some timely advice on some of the ways to reduce the risk factors in investment
PITFALLS?
There are really only two — timing and luck.
Neither can be eliminated, but their effect can be substantially reduced.
A possible third — over-exposure to specialised and/or volatile funds, can be eliminated simply by being cautious.
Most shares change in price most days — usually by very little and only infrequently by quite a lot, and then very rarely by a huge amount, say 50 per cent or more.
By investing in a unit trust you have already neutralised the real horrors because it will be holding 50, 100 or more separate shares.
But if you invest when share prices are high and you can't know that until later, you will if you then sell, incur a loss, probably not very great but nonetheless annoying.
Equally, you might be showing an agreeable profit.
That is where luck comes in.
The solution is to invest money which you won't need for some years, say five or more.
The longer you leave it the more likely you are to profit from the upward trend in equities established now for nearly a century.
Most of us were taught the wisdom of saving regularly, which brings us to one of the most sensible ways of investing — the unit trust monthly saving scheme, and best of all through a personal equity plan.
By saving regularly, you are ‘pound cost averaging’, that is buying more units when prices are low and less when they are high.
The best effect is achieved over a period of years, but at worst you really can't come to much harm.
For what it is worth, I have been saving in this way for years myself.
A word of warning — if somebody tries to sell you ‘a long-term savings plan’ read the literature carefully.
It could be an insurance plan so described to divert attention from the front-end and other charges which will absorb much, maybe all, of the first year's ‘savings,’ and it could be five years or more, on any reasonable projection of performance, before you are likely to see even your original money back.
There are about 1,400 unit trusts, so how do you choose?
Of course virtually all share one of three objectives — maximum capital growth with little immediate income, a high immediate income with capital growth secondary, or a balance between the two.
What else is there?
Most funds used to be of a general nature investing mainly in the UK.
Now there are many specialised funds as well— by country, by industry, by size of company, and so on , but ask yourself what you mean by ‘specialised’.
The US and Japanese markets each represent about 30 per cent of world capitalisation compared with about 8 per cent for the UK, so are general US or Japanese funds really specialised?
I suggest not, and that most long-term core portfolios should contain them, remembering that in the short-term extra volatility can arise from currency fluctuations.
There are also funds investing in much smaller economies representing 1 per cent or less of world capitalisation.
They are much more risky, tending to be highly volatile — rising quickly but often falling faster, indeed sometimes trading is suspended for a few days so you are locked in until trading resumes usually at a much lower level.
Of course with luck you do very well.
More recently we have bond (that is, fixed-interest funds) designed to maximise and maintain income levels, and cash funds which are in some ways an alternative to bank or building society deposits, though they may produce a slightly higher return.
Futures and options funds are emerging, offering at last the chance to lose all of your investment or maybe to make a lot.
Back to luck again.
Another recent arrival has been the index fund, invested so as to replicate, say, the performance of the FT-SE 100-Share index.
So to sum up, I suggest that if you are investing a sizeable sum for the first time, put most into two or three UK- based funds called, probably, UK Equity, UK General or UK Equity Income.
Then if growth rather than income is your main aim add America and Japan.
Put smaller amounts into any specialist funds which appeal to you but not too much in total and plot their performances.
Finally, how do you choose a fund manager?
Small groups are regulated in the same way as larger groups and as such, the key to selection should performance.
For those very much interested in cashing in
IAN HARPER checks out trusts that invest in high interest cash accounts rather than equities
HOW, the unit trust companies asked, can investors be persuaded to keep at least some of their capital in their funds rather than the traditional haven of the building society?
The answer they came up with was the cash unit trust — where instead of investing in equities, they invest in high interest cash deposit accounts or into a variety of fixed interest securities such as gilts or local authority bonds.
While such accounts may lack the flexibility of traditional savings accounts and are not intended to be a substitute, they do, nevertheless, offer better rates of interest on smaller investments as well as a cheque book facility for transferring funds.
However, because they are unit trusts they are unable to pay interest gross.
Interest is paid net of basic rate tax and non-taxpayers and investors with unused allowances must reclaim tax.
Higher rate taxpayers will be liable to a further tax charge.
Of the three major players in this field — Fidelity, M&G and the Prudential — the Fidelity Cash Fund is perhaps the most flexible.
The fund is operated in conjunction with a cheque book and gold card from the Bank of Scotland and although the fund has a minimum investment of £1,000, to enjoy both of these facilities the investor must maintain a minimum balance of £5,000.
The minimum cheque size is £250 and cheques can be made payable to anyone.
While this may be suitable for certain types of business customer and private individuals transferring money into other bank accounts or investments, it is clearly unsuited to small purchases.
However, when the account is used in conjunction with a credit card — which has an annual fee of £25 — the investor can use the card for purchases and the cheque facility to pay off the card account at the end of each month.
The Cashfund invests in the high interest accounts of UK banks and top foreign banks with UK branches.
The yield on these accounts fluctuates daily and the current rate of interest is about 6.1 per cent gross.
There is no initial charge on the fund but there is an annual management fee of 0.5 per cent.
The cheques carry no charge.
The M&G Treasury Fund requires a minimum investment of £5,000 and offers a cheque book facility.
However, the cheques — which must be for a minimum of £200 — can only be paid into an account in the investor's name.
There is no initial charge but there is a 0.6 per cent annual management fee.
The fund is invested in a range of fixed interest securities, primarily short dated Treasury bills and the rate paid is currently about 5.27 per cent gross.
The Prudential's Cash Haven requires a minimum investment of £1,000 but there is also a regular savings scheme with a minimum deposit of £25 a month.
The cheque book facility allows for a minimum withdrawal of £200, but there is no credit card add on.
Again there is no initial charge and the annual management fee is 0.5 per cent and the fund invests in a combination of high interest building society and bank deposits, gilts and local authority bonds.
The current gross yield is about 5.46 per cent gross.
Lukewarm response to brave new world
GAVIN GRANT explores the new frontiers which have opened up
SINCE 1991, unit trust managers have been able to move from their traditional equity gilt and money market funds into the worlds of property and the mysteriously named warrants, futures and options.
Most managers have not viewed these new areas of investment with great enthusiasm.
Indeed, few funds have been launched.
The managers concerns were that property might prove to be an illiquid investment, particularly in a falling market.
This would contradict the open-ended accessibility that is the hallmark of unit trusts.
While there was scepticism about property funds, there was general initial hostility to the other new categories.
City professionals are very familiar with the different responsibilities, opportunities and costs associated with futures and options and warrants.
These devices are widely used by professional fund managers to gain highly cost-effective exposure to stock markets without having to buy the underlying shares.
These derivatives, as they are known, can be very effective in limiting potential losses in falling markets, while producing spectacular gains when they rise.
Some of these new style funds are very suitable for ordinary savers while others are only appropriate for the sophisticated and professional investor.
As in all matters of financial planning perhaps the best advice is to consult an independent financial adviser unless you are truly confident that you understand the nature of these funds.
Funds charged with complexity
Front-end or performance-related?
LIZ WALKINGTON weighs the pros and cons of charging structures
‘Investors often take too short-term a view of unit trusts’
UNIT trust managers are fond of claiming that their charges are ‘transparent’.
The information is, indeed, available but it would take a very canny investor to calculate all the possible effects on his return.
Annual management charges are relatively simple, being a fixed percentage levied on the total value of the trust.
But while they look broadly similar across the industry, being between 1 and 2 per cent, even this small difference can start to have a significant effect on returns over longer periods.
Take an investment of £1,000 achieving a gross investment return of 7 per cent a year.
With a charge of 2 per cent, the net return would be 5 per cent a year and the value after ten years would be £1,629.
With a charge of only 1 per cent, the value would rise to £1,791.
But it is front-end charges that have the most impact and are most complex.
For a start unit trusts, like shares, have an offer price at which you buy and a bid price at which you sell.
Under the regulations, a trust must have a creation price and a cancellation price.
These are calculated on the value of the investments held in the trust (measured on their own offer and bid prices), the brokerage costs and stamp duty.
The maximum possible offer price for the trust is equal to the creation price plus the manager's initial charge, typically between 5 and 6 per cent.
The minimum possible bid price is equal to the cancellation price.
The difference between these two — the full spread — can be as much as 10 or 11 per cent.
In practice, managers usually quote prices somewhere in that band, with a dealing spread of about 6 or 7 per cent.
When the trust is in demand, prices are likely to be at the upper end of the range and the trust is said to be on an ‘offer’ basis.
When there are more sellers than buyers, the prices move to the lower end and the trust will be on a ‘bid’ basis.
So if you buy when the trust is on an offer basis and sell when it is on a bid basis, you will suffer an effective charge of the full spread.
This could be up to 4 per cent more than the dealing spread shown in newspaper price listings.
Richard Eliott Lockhart, of Murray Johnstone, calls this a ‘hidden cost’.
‘A large sale order can force the manager to move to a bid basis, but sellers won't know this in advance, so the effective spread becomes much wider than they expected,’ he explained.
The complexity stems from the aim of being fair to everyone, particularly existing investors.
If sellers were given too generous a price, it would reduce the value of the trust for those still holding units.
This need for fairness has overshadowed the search for a simpler pricing system.
The current plan is for single pricing, in place of offer and bid prices, with the initial charge added on for buyers.
But the problem of settling the mechanics means it is not likely to be brought in before at least this autumn.
Meanwhile, Murray Johnstone has taken the approach of cutting its initial charge to 1 per cent and always dealing on the full spread.
This means the pricing basis will remain the same no matter what size deals are being done.
Other innovations being considered are performance-related fees, which are common in the US, and exit charges in place of initial fees.
Examples of the latter have already been introduced on PEPs by Fidelity and Gartmore.
Fidelity has a 2 per cent front-end fee and exit charges on a sliding scale — 3 per cent in the first year, 2 per cent in the second, 1 per cent in the third and zero thereafter.
Judy Delaforce says: ‘It is very cost-effective over longer periods and our experience suggests PEPs are bought for the medium to long term.’
Alan Steel, an independent adviser based in Linlithgow, believes exit charges could be beneficial.
He says: ‘Investors often take too short-term a view of unit trusts, so if exit charges encourage longer term holdings it would be in the consumer's interest.’
Aside from fairness, a major factor in the design of charges is the commission paid to independent advisers, usually 3 per cent which is paid from the manager's initial charge.
Independents represent the main distribution route for unit trusts — although the commission element is still charged even if you buy direct or through off-the-page advertising.
Martin Harrison, of GT, believes that for regular savings schemes exit charges would allow greater flexibility to pay attractive rates of commission while still offering a fair deal to investors.
Murray Johnstone, on the other hand, has moved away from the up-front commission structure, believing that it is more efficient for advisers to charge fees for their services.
Not all investors would be prepared to pay fees.
As Harrison comments: ‘Smaller investors get a good deal on commission, as it will be cheaper than an hourly fee.’
But commission can produce a conflict of interests.
David Wallace, a fee-based independent adviser in Glasgow, says: ‘You can't produce the best value product which also pass the best commission.’
In the long run, moving to fees might provide the simplest solution to the problem of charging structures, and still offer good value for investors.
Cash Clinic
Chinese puzzle on yield prospects
WHAT is your opinion of the new China Dragon Fund?
Would this be a safe investment for, say, £3,000?
What sort of yield should I expect?
MD, Edinburgh
THE China Dragon Fund is managed by Save & Prosper, the huge unit trust company, so it has a wealth of experience behind it.
The aim is to invest in Chinese stocks and shares which stand to benefit from the upsurge in economic growth which China is experiencing.
The joker in the pack is, of course, the political situation.
China has just freed the last of the students jailed after the pro-democracy demonstrations four years ago, and this is seen as a sign of wanting improved relations with the west.
Nevertheless, Save & Prosper officials, themselves, say you should put no more than 5 per cent of your savings into this fund.
I would perhaps risk a little more, but this is definitely a long-term growth prospect, so do not invest if you need income.
I HAVE some electricity shares, and I include the dividend tax vouchers with my tax return to obtain a refund from the Inland Revenue.
Can my wife claim on her share?
She is a 61-year-old housewife and does not receive a tax return.
UNTIL a couple of years ago, your wife's investment income would have been taxed in your name, so any entitlement to a refund would have depended on your income and tax allowances.
Now, though, a wife has her own tax allowances and can make refund claims in her own name.
Your wife should contact your tax office, or call at the nearest local office, and ask them to arrange to open a set of records for her.
She will then be sent a tax return on which to enter details of her income.
If it does not exceed the basic personal allowance of £3,445 a year, all tax deducted from the dividends will be refunded.
I AM trying to obtain a loan of £5,000 but loan companies appear to want interest of about £500 for each £1,000 borrowed.
This seems excessive.
Could you advise on the best way of obtaining a loan for three to five years at a reasonable rate?
I own my own home, and I am in work, so repayment would be no problem.
I THINK you must have been going to small moneylenders to be quoted interest rates of this sort.
Where to borrow depends a little on what you need the loan for, but broadly speaking you should go straight to a bank or building society and explain that you want a personal loan.
Emphasise that you have property to lodge as security, if necessary.
You should be able to obtain a loan for well under half the cost you mention.
THE Fidelity savings group is advertising a unit trust which pays interest of 6 per cent, tax free.
Is this safe, and how can interest be tax free?
I thought only National Savings was allowed to offer interest without income tax.
YOUR investment is safe in the sense that Fidelity is a very large investment business and extremely unlikely to go broke.
However, your money is invested in a mixture of high yielding shares and fixed interest stocks, so the value of your units could fall or rise, depending on the skill of Fidelity's managers, and on stock market performance generally.
The income is tax-free because your units are held in a personal equity plan.
The government made PEPs tax-free to encourage people to invest in shares.
A PEP should be regarded as a long-term investment though, so do not tie your money up if you think you may need it quickly.
COULD you please advise on my income tax for 1991-92?
I am 78 years old, and my pension was £53.33 a week.
Monthly interest from National Savings totalled £1,305 for the year, and my building society interest was £1,307, after tax of £435 was deducted.
I completed a tax return but heard nothing more.
YOUR income for 1991-92 amounted to £5,820 before tax.
As you were over 75 and on a modest income, you were allowed the first £4,180 tax free.
Tax on the remaining £1,640 should have been charged at the basic rate of 25 per cent, which would make your tax bill £410.
This means you can reclaim £25 of the £435 deducted from your building society interest.
Contact your tax office and press your claim.
Each week Alexander Taylor answers questions on personal finance.
Write, concisely please, to: Cash Clinic, The Business Scotsman, 20 North Bridge, Edinburgh EH1 1YT.
Names and addresses will not be published.
Shape of future
SCOTTISH Amicable, the Glasgow-based life office, has revamped its corporate identity.
A new logo, which replaces the one introduced nearly 20 years ago, is said to have followed two years of research among consumers, independent financial advisers, appointed representatives and staff.
The chosen logo was one of four developed by Minale Tattersfield, the design shop, at a cost of £50,000.
Altogether — including the logo design, new stationery (and, in some cases, new shop fronts) the cost of the new identity is expected to come to about £600,000.
Brendan Llewellyn, head of strategic marketing at Scottish Amicable, said: ‘We looked at four different concepts in qualitative groups, and emerged with a logo which we think reflects the attributes of the company.’
Mr Llewellyn said the flag was a strong and distinctive visual idea with a dynamic and free flowing look which, he said, suggested progressiveness and a customer led approach.
‘At no point was there any attempt to graft on an image purely to improve our standing.
We wanted an image that would reflect our current standing within the industry; one that we fully intend to maintain and build upon.’
Independent adjudicator to hear tax complaints
New codes of practice set out the standards of service to expect.
GORDON MILNE reports
THE INLAND Revenue is to appoint an independent adjudicator to examine complaints from clients.
The announcement, made during this week, coincided with the publication of three codes of practice.
Both measures are a direct result of the Prime Minister's Citizen's Charter initiative.
The adjudicator will consider complaints about the way in which the Revenue has handled someone's tax affairs.
Examples might include complaints about excessive delay, errors, discourtesy or the way in which the Revenue has exercised discretion.
He or she will not be responsible for hearing appeals on matters of law relating to a person's tax liabilities, or for property valuation appeals; those will continue to be the responsibility of the independent general and special commissioners for tax and the relevant tribunals for valuation matters.
The adjudicator, whose job will be publicly advertised, will start work on 5 April.
The three codes of practice — the first stage in a planned series of codes intended to support the Taxpayer's Charter — aim to set out the standards of service people can expect.
The first, Mistakes by the Inland Revenue, explains the procedure if a Revenue error results in any of the following things happening:
You are charged interest because your tax has been paid late;
you have to wait longer than you should to get money back from the Revenue;
you incur additional costs;
or you get an unexpected late assessment from the Revenue and your income is £40,000 or less.
The second code of practice is simply entitled Investigations.
The leaflet explains how the Revenue would carry out an investigation in its local tax offices, detailing provisions regarding such matters as confidentiality and professional representation.
The third, Inspections of Employers' and Contractors' Records, is targeted at businessmen.
Matters like compliance costs, assessments and appeal hearings are also dealt with here.
Norman Lamont welcomed the plans, which he described as an important step forward.
‘No one likes paying tax,’ he said.
‘But I believe the great majority of people get a high quality service from the staff of the Inland Revenue.
Where things sometimes go wrong, as they do in every large organisation, the new adjudicator will be there to review complaints and offer an impartial view.’
Sir Anthony Battishill, chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, added: ‘The new arrangements will provide taxpayers with the assurance of an impartial review and Inland Revenue staff, with greater protection against complaints that prove to be unfair.’
Leaflets explaining all three codes of practice will be available from local tax offices from the end of this month.
Meantime, copies can be obtained from the Inland Revenue Public Enquiry Room, West Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB.
Unease with EASE leads to County Auctions quitting
By Fordyce Maxwell, Agricultural Editor
COUNTY Auctions, Wooler, is to start its own electronic auction business when its contract to EASE ends in August.
The company, which sold a record 508 cattle through its Electronic Auctions Systems Europe franchise on Thursday, has given the necessary six months notice to the franchise-holding ANM Group, Aberdeen.
It is understood that Lawrie and Symington, Lanark, the first company to sign a franchise with ANM three years ago for what was then a revolutionary way to sell livestock, will stay with EASE.
United Auctions, Perth, has six weeks to decide.
No decision has been made on whether to renegotiate with EASE, sign up with one of the several other electronic systems now operating, or, like County Auctions, develop its own system.
The Wooler decision must be a blow to EASE, which sold 60,372 cattle, up six per cent, through eight auction companies, three in Scotland, five in England, last year.
Lamb numbers more than doubled, to 391,442.
Pigs, grain, potatoes and some breeding sheep were also sold through the system, which involves potential buyers bidding from computer terminals in their own offices for livestock, grain, etc. which have been described in detail to them.
But County Auctions, a big operation with centres at Wooler and Newcastle, was always likely to go it alone.
A significant factor was that much of the stock it sells comes from the Scottish side of the border.
But Colin Young, then managing director of Lawrie and Symington, had negotiated a tough deal as the first company to sign an EASE franchise in early 1990.
That deal included any company selling livestock through EASE from what was designated Lawrie and Symington's ‘area’ had to pay 0.2 per cent commission to L&S, on top of the franchise fee paid to EASE.
That was a small percentage which mounted up as Wooler became one of the most successful EASE centres.
The company has now developed its own electronic auction system and is ready to go alone from August.
It could be another sign that EASE is in for a tough few months, ironic when its annual report due to be published soon, will show that it made its first modest profit in 1992.
Apart from County Auctions decision, there will be  renegotiations with the four other English marts using EASE.
Legal action has also been taken, alleging breach of contract, against Frank Yeo, West Country Livestock, who moved from EASE to one of the new electronic auction companies, APEX.
APEX, headed by former ANM top man, John Lind, is based at Montrose.
There is also LEAN, which is essential Thompson, Roddick and Laurie; Beacon, based at York, selling mainly sheep through its Carlisle franchise; and CLASS, the variation on a theme of bidding for cattle shown on video by satellite relay.
EASE is the biggest operation by a long way, although electronic selling has not developed as quickly as the ANM Group hoped when it introduced the idea from Canada.
But other players are making for a congested goalmouth and more, like County Auctions, might decide to strike out alone.
Colin Young: negotiated a tough deal
Campaign to promote lamb
IN SPITE of their success with chilled lamb in some Scottish stores last year, New Zealand suppliers seem to have accepted this is little more than a coals to Newcastle exercise.
Instead Wales and, for the first time in many years, Ulster will feature alongside their more traditional targets in the South, the Midlands and Lancashire in a heavyweight television campaign starting on Monday.
Total promotional spending in the first half of the year will be about £1 million.
John Mabb, UK director of the NZ Meat Producers Board, made only the briefest of references to last year's imports of chilled lamb into Scotland which led to recriminations from farmers.
‘The UK lamb market experienced some uncertainty caused by the phasing out of the variable premium for domestic lambs,’ was his only comment.
Later in the year British exports to the EC rose and left a gap for the NZ product ‘and this is where our strategy over the past few years paid off.’
He played down the adverse conditions that had led to low lambing rates by pointing to the limit of 205,000 tonnes that could be sent to Europe under the voluntary restraint agreement.
The UK would continue to be the main market for this supply in Europe, accounting for 29 per cent of NZ world sheep meat earnings and 27 per cent by volume.
Within Europe Germany was the next most important market counting for about 9 per cent while outside Europe Iran took 13 per cent of export volume.
‘The UK is the No 1 volume market for New Zealand by a large margin and sets the scene for the other markets.’
£3,450 record average at Limousin bull sale
PEDIGREE Limousin bulls met an unprecedented demand at the annual spring show and sale at Carlisle yesterday, selling to a top of 14,000gn and producing a record average for the sale of £3,450, £900 up on the year.
A combination of absentees and rejections left only 99 of the 162 entries catalogued on offer and all but a handful sold as the packed ringside of buyers competed for the animals remaining in the sale.
The breed secretary, Peter Reynolds, was delighted with the result, which topped this month's breed leader at Perth by 7500gn and added £150 to that centre's average.
‘It was a reflection of the fact that Carlisle is the main centre for the breed, with something for everyone,’ he said.
‘The bulls going to Perth are selected for the suckler men and tend to fit into a tight price band.
At Carlisle we sell to breeders, beef men and even dairy farmers looking for a crossing bull and tend to get a much wider price range.’
Dominating the trade, which saw 12 lots take 5,000gn or more, was the Dumfries-based breeder Jim Goldie, who had four of the top five lots, including the top bid of 14,000gn for the intermediate and overall champion bull, the 17-month-old Epatant son Goldie's Glenfiddich.
Signing the cheque, which matched Jim's top price at the autumn sale at Carlisle, was David Baillie of Calla, Carnwath.
Mr Goldie also took the reserve intermediate title with another Epatant son, the similarly aged Goldie's Goldfinger.
Breaking the five-figure mark again, he sold for 10,800gn to the judge, Roger Hazard, Grantham, Lincolnshire.
Broadmeadows Gurkha, a 15-month-old Broadmeadows Cannon son from Broadmeadows Pedigree Livestock of Garvald, East Lothian, sold for the next highest bid of 8000gn.
The buyer was MJ Hodgson, Ambleside, Cumbria.
Malcolm Smith, who runs the noted Jencra herd at Stoke on Trent, paid 7,500gn for Jim Goldie's 17-month-old Epatant son, Goldie's Globetrotter, while the suitably named Goldie's Goldmine, another by the same sire, made the same amount when it sold in a private deal to David Dick of Mains of Throsk, Stirling, and Archie McGregor, Allanfauld, Kilsyth, after being turned out of the ring unsold at 7,200gn.
John Logan, Humebyres, Kelso, made a 6500gn sale when his 18-month-old Ronick Dumby son Homebyres Gainsi was taken by Castlemilk Farms of Lockerbie, while JW Neale, Launceston, Cornwall, paid 100gn less to secure Normande Giant, a 22-month-old Rake Terence son from Norman Cruickshank, Cowford, Lanark.
Averages: 27 senior bulls, 3173.33 (+£946.85 on the year); 29 intermediate bulls, £4261.55 (+£1455.72); 39 junior bulls, £3042.31 (+£482.93); overall 95 bulls, £3451.74 (+£900.63); 17 females, £1763.38 (+£214.63).
Auctioneers — Harrison and Hetherington
Coulton looks a good bet
COULTON, the favourite for next month's Cheltenham Smurfit Champion Hurdle, has his final workout in today's Nottingham Tote City Trial Hurdle, writes Isobel Cunningham.
This is no more than a sparring round, however, for the defection of Thursday's Sandown winner, Satin Lover, realistically leaves only Duke of Monmouth to take on Mick Easterby's pretender to the hurdling crown.
But Duke of Monmouth, winner of last year's Cheltenham Triumph Hurdle, has failed to recapture anything like that form this season.
Nottingham also stages today's only other truly significant contest (not on TV, of course), the Grade II Nottinghamshire Novices' Chase, where Sybillin and Wonder Man, this season's exciting new steeplechasing debutants, clash for the first time.
Newcastle's Tote Eider Chase is always a recognised Grand National trial, but with Bonanza Boy, Mr Boston and Mr Ed the most notable of several Liverpool aspirants who pulled out at yesterday's declaration stage, it offers fewer clues than usual.
JACK CROMBIE Up and over: Chief Mole clears the last in the 2:15 at Edinburgh yesterday, but finished third
THE WEEK'S WORK
IF YOU fancy an early bite of calabrese, seeds should be sown now — preferably in module trays, placing two or three seeds in each ‘cell’ in case any fail to germinate and, if they all grow, the sturdiest seedlings will be retained and the weaker snipped off with a pair of scissors.
The compost supplied especially for use in modules is best, as it can be compacted firmly; this makes for blocks which remain in one piece when pressed out of their cells for transplanting.
To make sure of early germination, the trays will have to be placed in a slightly heated propagating case — but taken out as soon as the seedlings are about an inch high and kept in warmth and good light.
Before planting outside, they will  require a short hardening-off period in a cold frame or cool greenhouse.
Some form of wood-pigeon scarer is usually called for after planting out, as they are particularly partial to all brassicas at their young stage.
F1 hybrid ‘Mercedes’ is easy to grow and matures early, and F1 ‘Green Duke’is also popular.
While genuinely pot-grown fruit trees and bushes allow considerable latitude in planting times, bare-root specimens should really be got in before the end of March.
When buying young blackcurrant bushes, each should have at least four or five stems arising from ground level.
They require fairly rich soil, and, after planting, all the branches will be cut back to within a few inches of ground level to encourage them to produce more branches for berry production next year.
If further bushes are required, they are easily home-grown by cutting the pruned-off young stems into lengths of about 10-12 inches and inserting these fairly close together with only two or three inches above soil level.
Of the modern varieties, I have found ‘Ben Lomond’ to be best with ‘Ben Nevis’second.
Gordon Wallace
Inner beauty of a spring delight
Foodies will know saffron's subtle flavour comes from the crocus, a vast genus with almost countless species, writes David Stuart
AMUSING how fast flowers can take advantage of the weather at this time of year…
A cool foggy morning and a bunch of crocus culled from the tangle are tightly closed, with no hint of the excitements within.
As you might expect from relatives of the iris, the two sets of petals, concentric whorls of three, can be remarkably different.
Closed at first, the flowers of Crocus biflorus ‘Parkinsonii’ are smoky purple, C tomasinianus are a chilly white, and our form of C angustifolius (sometimes still called C susianus), gives just a gleam of intense ochre gold, but the petal backs are mostly covered by deep purplish brown stripes.
Ten minutes indoors in the small jug, and they all begin to open, sometimes so fast that they make us laugh.
The most substantial flower, with broad cupped petals, and the least cautious of bad weather, is C biflorus.
In the form here, the inner surfaces of the outer petals are the most perfect white, the whole of the three inner petals the same colour.
At the centre of each flower, the styles are a vivid orange, held well above the three golden yellow anthers.
With the warmth of the room (and of a sunny day outdoors), the flowers open almost flat.
C tomasinianus follows on almost immediately.
In this species, the petals are much narrower, both sets of three much more similar, pale at the base, and shading to soft purple at the tips.
Anthers and styles are at the same level, and less spectacularly coloured.
The flowers open so much that the petals swing back.
Then, C angustifolius opens, the petals sometimes jerking open like springs, and so much so that at least the outer set of three curl backwards like the petals of a martagon lily, leaving three widespread and brilliantly golden petals to bask in the light (easy, then, to see why it is called the ‘Cloth of Gold’ crocus).
Crocus is a vast genus, with endless numbers of charming flowers, with equally endless confusion about how many species there really are, and what their names should be.
The most ancient of all the cultivated crocuses is the saffron, C sativus, so ancient, indeed, that it seems to have no connection with any wild species at all.
It's now quite sterile yet still manages to be immensely variable — to such a degree that even in the 18th century, gardeners thought all crocuses might simply be variants of it.
That's not true, but even so it is still rather unclear quite what species the older garden crocuses do belong to — probably they are complicated hybrids between C vernus and Middle Eastern species.
All flower several weeks after the species in the jug, are much larger, get their flowers eaten by the birds, and aren't half so much fun.
Even if you have a tiny garden, these early species are worth looking at.
All naturalise perfectly well, though if you don't like accidentally digging up bulbs, and are really keen about weeding, you might find their presence a nuisance.
In that case, you'll find they do excellently in pots.
They'll give lots of pleasure indoors for a week or two, and can then be left to their own devices outdoors for the rest of the year; getting dried out in summer is a positive help.
Repot each autumn.
You'll soon have more potsful of delight that you can possibly use.
Crocus biflorus provides not only our foggy purple sort, as well as the so-called ‘Scotch Crocus’(nothing to do with Scotland, but the patterned outer petals were thought to look tartan), but also the brilliant yellow ones normally assigned to C chrysanthus.
The species grows wild in Europe and the near East, but gardeners have been selecting nice forms for so long that even by the 17th century, flowers could be had in white, purple, pale and deep yellow, large and small, and with the colours striped, feathered or flamed.
Even though Crocus angustifolius, originally from the Crimea and Caucasus, has been in our gardens at least since the late 16th century, it seems to be much less variable.
As well as the form in the jug, we once had another.
A lovely flower, early, strongly scented of honey, and a yellow golden interior, but plain greyish purple, with darker stripes on the outside.
Both naturalise well, and in a sheltered corner of the garden, the perfume can be quite strong.
The various forms seem to increase by division of the bulbs — and clumps can get both dense and reluctant to flower — so divide up every second season or so.
C tomasinianus grows wild in Hungary and Bulgaria, but only reached British gardens in the late 19th century.
It naturalises itself so easily that it almost becomes a weed.
However, none, whether deep bluish amethyst flowers, or pure white, will ever be treated like one.
IF YOU like the work of Gertrude Jekyll, the great Edwardian garden designer and plantswoman, there are plenty of books about her gardens.
If you like her plants, you might be interested in the new spring catalogues from Kelways Nurseries Ltd, Barrymore Farm, Langport, Somerset TA10 9EZ.
One is concerned with summer flowering bulbs, and though perhaps some of its contents come from Dutch wholesalers, there are some interesting things, from several fine pineapples lilies (types of Eucomis), a really wonderful variety of Amaryllis  belladonna , a gorgeous looking relative of the lilies (and far more expensive), called Bessera elegans, with coral red flowers, and much more.
The half-hardy things, solanums, daturas and so on are described as ‘Terrace Plants’.
The other list is of hardy border plants, ferns, grasses and alpines.
There are lots of nice, large, and not overcoloured, photographs of both gardens and flowers.
Weather or not: Crocus biflorus ‘Parkinsonii’ is shy of cold, damp and mist but opens up quickly in warmth
Murray joins rush for records
YVONNE Murray has Mary Decker's eight-year-old record of 5min 34.8sec in her sights as she tackles the rarely-run 2,000 metres at the star-studded TSB International in Birmingham today.
The Scot is just one of several athletes aiming at world records, with Algeria's Noureddine Morceli set to top the bill by running the fastest indoor mile in history.
Promoter Andy Norman is hailing the line-up at the National Indoor Arena as the finest he has assembled in 20 years — and the best anywhere in the world this winter.
Morceli says he is ‘80 per cent’ confident of providing himself with the perfect 23rd birthday present by eclipsing Eamonn Coghlan's ten-year-old mile mark of 3min 49.78sec but Norman believes other records will also tumble, with Colin Jackson in the 60m hurdles and Murray providing the British challenge.
Welshman Jackson, who finished just one-hundredth of a second outside his European record with a 7.42sec run in Sindelfingen last weekend, will have his Cardiff lodger, Canadian Olympic champion Mark McKoy, and America's former double Olympic gold medallist Roger Kingdom to push him towards Greg Foster's 7.36sec mark.
Opt-out of ERM saves £4bn, says economist
By John Hatfield
UK industry has saved some £4 billion in annual interest payments since sterling opted out of the exchange rate mechanism and devalued last September.
These savings amount to roughly £1 billion for every 1 per cent cut in the base rate.
According to Lloyds Bank's chief economic adviser, Patrick Foley, the industrial and commercial company sector will this year revert to financial balance for the first time 1987.
The process will be helped by recovery in profits and the interest rate cuts.
Writing in the February issue of the Lloyds Bank Economic Bulletin, he says: ‘The restoration of financial balance will mean that, far from there being a credit crunch, banks are likely to continue to find very little net demand for loans from companies.’
In Mr Foley's view the idea that high corporate gearing is  responsible for holding back economic recovery is misleading, since companies on average were not particularly heavily indebted when the recession began and have subsequently reduced their borrowing levels.
He noted that most progress had been made by firms which were the most highly geared at the onset of recession.
Mr Foley identified uncertainty as the greatest obstacle to company expansion, noting that for many firms continued rationalisation may be the best policy.
Heathrow lounge for Branson
RICHARD Branson's Virgin Atlantic Airways will today take another step towards competing with the aviation giants by opening a new lounge at Heathrow Airport.
Fresh from his High Court victory over British Airways in the ‘dirty tricks’ affair, Mr Branson will be joined by the transport secretary, John MacGregor, for the opening.
The new lounge, for Virgin's first-class passengers, is a further example of its growing presence at Heathrow since the airport was opened to all airlines two years ago.
Although Mr Branson will be pleased with the new lounge, what he really wants at Heathrow is more take-off and landing slots.
This matter has dominated the talks Virgin has been having with BA following the High Court settlement which saw BA pay Virgin and Mr Branson a total of £610,000 in damages.
— PA
New lease of life for shipyard
A FORMER shipyard site which used to support hundreds of jobs will soon provide employment again as a result of a major redevelopment scheme by a Government agency.
The first firm to move on to the revamped Southwich Yard, now part of a 110-acre enterprise park, at Sunderland will be the tunnelling equipment manufacturer Herrenknecht International, the Tyne and Wear Development Corporation said.
Its move from its existing site at nearby Seaham, Co Durham, will only bring 25 new jobs, but TWDC's chief, Alastair Balls, said other firms were showing interest and he was ‘very optimistic’ about prospects for further developments.
The Taiwanese government has approved a £240 million joint venture between British Aerospace and Taiwan Aerospace to make regional passenger jets, newspapers said in Taipei yesterday.
The cabinet's economic and financial screening committee gave the go-ahead to the project at a meeting on Saturday, the papers said.
The companies signed a contract for the venture last month, subject to regulatory approvals.
The 50-50 venture will focus on making passenger jets seating between 70 and 115 people, with assembly work performed in both Taiwan and Britain.
Taiwan Aerospace's vice-president, George Liu, said last month the venture aimed to sell 130 planes over the next five years.
— Reuter.
Krupp may quit steel industry
EUROPE'S worst post-war steel industry crisis may force Germany's No 2 steel firm to quit the industry, its chairman said in an interview released in Bonn at the weekend.
But Gerhard Cromme, management board chairman of Fried Krupp AG Hoesch-Krupp, told Der Spiegel magazine he hoped to avoid such a move.
Asked if Krupp, which is also involved in engineering, might stop steel production, Mr Cromme said: ‘That is a thoroughly realistic idea.
I hope, however, that we can avoid such a step through decisive measures.’
German firms say their only hope of staying competitive is to cut production, and are seeking co-operation among themselves to do this in the the most effective way.
Mr Cromme said co-operation would give Germany's big three steelmakers — Thyssen AG, Krupp, and Preussag AG — the best hopes of surviving.
‘This trio only has long-term chances of survival if it uses all chances to work together to get the best results,’ he said.
The steel crisis, caused by over-production and cheap east European imports, is expected to slash 50,000 jobs in western Europe in the next few years, about 40,000 of them in Germany.
Thyssen, Krupp and Saarstahl AG are in talks that could lead to a merger of their troubled structural steel divisions.
Krupp said last week it would close one of its steelworks if the tricky co-operation talks fail.
Thousands of steelworkers marched in protest at the news and other plans for mill closures.
— Reuter
More firms try to take sting out of redundancy
By John Hatfield
EMPLOYERS are taking a more compassionate attitude towards redundant workers in the face of soaring unemployment, according to a survey published today by the Institute of Directors and Pauline Hyde & Associates.
It shows that positive policies to ease the pain of job-loss are now the norm rather than the exception.
More than 85 per cent of 614 companies and organisations surveyed said they had a formal policy for counselling and retraining to help employees to survive the trauma of redundancy.
Some 65 per cent of respondents provided career counselling services irrespective of any redundancy situation.
The survey also found an increased awareness among employers of the need to tackle the effect of redundancies on remaining staff with 42 per cent reporting increased communication with employees.
Outplacement services are increasing their role, with three-quarters of firms now incorporating outplacement services in severance packages.
Of those organisations which are using outplacement services, 94 per cent said they are having a major impact on helping the career of those made redundant.
Commenting on the findings of the survey, John Harper, head of the Institute of Directors' Centre for Director Development, said:
‘The IOD welcomes the evidence in this survey of the degree of  responsibility companies are now accepting for the effective management of redundancy situations and the high level of concern and care which they evidently feel for employees.’
‘They have taken on board that with redundancy now a prominent part of corporate life severance pay is no longer enough and employees need practical help,’ he said.
Big dairy companies vie for cream of the milk profits
The free market philosophy set in train by Mrs Thatcher when she became Prime Minister in 1979 has at last caught up with milk, writes MAGNUS GRIMOND
THE DELIVERY of milk in the UK is about to undergo its biggest shake-up since the war — and this has nothing to do with any possible attack on the traditional British pinta by Brussels Eurocrats.
The free market philosophy set in train by Mrs Thatcher when she became Prime Minister in 1979 has resulted in the Government deciding to end the life of the venerable Milk Marketing Board, set up in 1933 to buy all the milk produced in England and Wales, paving the way for what it is claimed will be a totally free market in milk.
A bill is at this moment passing through Parliament which will enable the Milk Marketing Board to change from a statutory monopoly into a milk-buying co-operative, similar to those that already exist on the Continent, to be called Milk Marque.
The proposals have set off a heated debate within the milk industry, whose outcome is likely to have important ramifications north of the Border, where the Scottish milk boards are facing a similar fate to that of their English and Welsh counterpart.
The big English processors and distributors are not waiting for a conclusion to position themselves to compete more effectively in the new free market, expected to be in place by 1994.
Unigate, the St Ivel yoghurts to Wincanton distribution group, is the latest to move.
Earlier this month it announced the £48.8 million acquisition of Clifford Foods, which delivers milk across five counties in the south of England from Kent to Cornwall.
That purchase added around 3 percentage points to its share of the liquid milk market, taking it to 16 per cent, where it is now snapping at the heels of the second-largest operator, Dairy Crest, the marketing subsidiary of the MMB, which claims a market share of around 17 per cent .
Unigate's attitude to the liquid milk market has changed markedly since it sold close to half its business to Dairy Crest four years ago.
Last year, it acquired the small Abbots and Sussex dairies, also based in the south, and in January picked up part of the Co-operative Wholesale Society's milk distribution business.
Referring to the Dairy Crest sale, Ross Buckland, the Australian who took charge at Unigate in 1990, says: ‘I have not attempted to go back into past history and judge the merits of that decision.’
He appears unworried by fears expressed then and more recently that milk consumption is in long-term decline.
‘There is a huge volume of milk sold and consumed in the UK and that is not going to change.
Indeed, the trend towards low fat milks, I believe, will mean the decline of around 1 per cent a year in volume will be reversed.’
But there has been an even greater spur to Unigate's renewed interest in the milk market in the shape of Northern Foods' aggressive push for market leadership over the past 18 months or so.
Known as a high-quality supplier of food to major food retailers like Marks & Spencer and Sainsbury, Northern surprised the stock market in November 1991 by announcing a £326 million deal to buy Express Dairies from Grand Metropolitan.
In one leap, that acquisition made Northern Britain's biggest milkman, with approaching a quarter of the market.
And Christopher Haskins, Northern's chairman, has moved quickly to tie up milk supplies after the demise of the MMB.
Three weeks ago, he helped launch the Northern Milk Partnership, a non-profit-making body dedicated to supplying milk to Northern Foods.
NMP aims to sign up more than 5,000 of the 29,000-30,000-odd dairy farmers in England and Wales and is wooing potential customers with a promise to pay better prices than Milk Marque.
But Unigate and Northern will not have the liberalised milk market all to themselves.
Under its new chief executive, John Houliston, big changes have been taking place at Dairy Crest as it prepares for a stock market flotation next year.
More than 2,500 employees have been axed as part of an extensive rationalisation programme and there is plenty of scope for further improvement.
Operating profits of £59.1 million on turnover of more than £1.1 billion last year suggest that margins at Dairy Crest are still around half the level achieved by Northern, the best in the business.
A stock market listing will maintain the pressure to squeeze more out of the business, so a privatised Dairy Crest is certain to be a more potent competitor in a milk market freed of statutory controls.
Despite that, the Dairy Crest sell-off is just about the only part of the MMB proposals to have been met with enthusiasm by the rest of the industry.
Mr Haskins has been one of the most outspoken critics of the MMB plan to turn its other functions over to the new Milk Marque co-op.
‘We don't think it is a very good idea, because a voluntary monopoly is worse than a statutory monopoly because there is no control over it.
It frightens us, frankly.’
He would like to see safeguards built into the bill to limit the size of the new co-op and he is also critical of plans by Milk Marque to retain control of key activities like milk testing and the artificial insemination service.
This means a producer joining a rival co-op will lose his share of those assets, he claims.
Naturally the MMB does not share these views.
Andrew Dare, its chief executive, says Milk Marque, as a farmer-owned organisation, will not suffer from the conflicts of interest inherent in NMP.
‘It will be free to sell to any business, and will earn higher prices and offer greater security since it won't be linked to the fortunes of any one company, however successful that company may appear.’
But Mr Dare is plainly taking the threat of increased competition seriously and has been touring England and Wales to sell his ideas to farmers.
Whatever the exact shape of the industry after 1994, all the big players appear certain that liquid milk will remain a lucrative commodity to be involved in.
The pound's decline since its unceremonious departure from the European exchange rate mechanism has seen the disappearance of the traditional premium paid for milk for liquid delivery, as the price of imported processed dairy products has been forced up.
Thus cheese is now around 18 per cent more expensive than it was before Black Monday.
But Mr Haskins, for one, sees the old differential returning, assisted by the reduction in subsidies inherent in proposed changes to the EC's common agricultural policy and the GATT world trade regime.
‘I think by and large, because of the impact of quotas and the continuing reduction of milk supply through quotas — and that will certainly happen after the CAP and GATT reforms — we will become more dependent on imports.
The price should therefore be pretty strong,’ he says.
But as unsubsidised European supplies of processed milk products increasingly find it difficult to compete on world markets, they are likely to be redirected towards the European internal market.
That, Mr Haskins believes, will depress prices of these products, while liquid milk should be relatively unaffected, given the difficulties of importing milk in this form.
So dairy farmers look likely to be gainers under the new regime, particularly as several new groups will be competing for their milk.
Whether there is any great benefit to the housewife remains to be seen.
Lang lobbied on milk board plans
MORE THAN 60 farmers from the west of Scotland, unhappy with the Government's apparent U-turn in support for the Scottish Milk Marketing Board's plans for reform, lobbied the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, at his constituency surgery in Stranraer on Saturday.
The farmers, including the president of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland, John Ross, and the union's milk convener, Alex Brown, called on the Scottish Secretary to back Scotland's milk producers, who were overwhelmingly in favour of the SMMB's proposals, and help overturn the Office of Fair Trading's findings that the plan would distort trade for milk.
Mr Lang said: ‘If the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and the Office of Fair Trading change their views on the proposals, no one will be happier than me.
But if they do not change their view there is nothing I can do to change it.
It will be up to the SMMB to come up with a scheme that is acceptable to them.’
Accused by Alex Brown of using the OFT as a smokescreen to hide behind, Mr Lang said: ‘Absolutely not.
You may think that I want to destroy the milk boards, but if you believe that you will believe anything.’
Mr Lang urged the National Farmers' Union of Scotland and the SMMB to put together a submission showing how the OFT's findings were flawed and said he would pass it on to the OFT and the president of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine.
‘I am the last person in the world who would want to inhibit the movement of the SMMB to its new form,’ Mr Lang said, ‘but there is little I or Michael Heseltine can do to influence the OFT.
‘I will act as a conduit to pass on information to the OFT, but only the OFT has the power to amend its report.’
Alex Brown thanked Mr Lang for taking the time to talk to the milk producers present but said: ‘We know the final decision rests on your shoulders because it will be for the Secretary of State for Scotland to decide on whether proposals for vertically integrated milk co-operatives distort competition after the milk boards are deregulated.’
A tragedy of vaudeville politics Nairn on Monday
A YOUNG child is killed in Liverpool and an entire state of more than 50 million souls is plunged headlong into tormented self-flagellation, morose prophecies and flabby tirades about restoring a sense of right and wrong.
Why?
Had Britain plunged merely into mourning I suppose it might have been creditable, but also surprising.
Since the dreadful happens in some form each day, a country which regularly responded like that would have time for little but grief.
But everyone knows such conjecture is idle.
Of course this was a one-off: a meaningful spasm, as it were— a directional seizure of humours or sick pressures already present in society.
Spasms like it have happened before.
But there is also something new and odd here.
Nor is it flippant liberalism to point this out — though there may be significance in the fact that anyone who does so has immediately to excuse himself, as I find myself doing.
During such seizures, Great Britain feels like a queer sort of Empire again.
It reverts to being a dense moral imperium, so to speak, where to make themselves heard dissenters are called on to exhibit certain credentials.
Labour voices have been stammering to oblige.
They have to show they are not in league with the Beast.
During past Crisis-of-Britain episodes He hovered in the wings.
Now He casually materialises at the centre of the stage, hissed by an openly hysterical public.
What used to be like the Old Vic has become the vaudeville of Thatcherism Undone.
Reviled by every theatre critic in the world, the show must still go on (and the company's lease may well be permanent).
When poor James Bulger was found, the assumption (uncomfortably like a dark hope) was that some other-world fiend had done away with him.
When it became possible that the assailants might be other children, the fiend could only be collectivised: an anti-society of the dispossessed, those beneath Christian morality whose drugged souls are already forfeit.
Crime and evil must be to blame — not the drunk stage manager, the amnesiac hams or the brain-damaged libretto of their current production Black Wednesday.
The fact that evil has a history as long as homo sapiens should itself warn one against moralising convulsions.
This is what pagans of the 1st century Roman Empire thought about Christians (somewhat later it would be how Christians viewed those in league with Satan):
‘I am told that…the novice stabs the child to death with invisible blows.
Then — it's horrible — they hungrily drink the child's blood, and compete with one another as they divide his limbs…
Through this victim they are bound together (and) pledged to silence.’
As Norman Cohn shows in his classic Europe's Inner Demons, infanticide — slaughter of the incontrovertibly innocent — was always crucial to the psychodrama and it soon got pinned on the Jews.
This is the depth of the nerve brought into play last week.
Fortunately, no such handy scapegoat was available in Bootle.
It was as if a sick national organism had been waiting for the right, suitably appalling, symptom to erupt into general protest at its fate.
But when the protest welled up, it turned out to be aimed at…well, practically everything.
That may be just as well, but it may not last.
Also, it is far too convenient for the regime.
‘Evil’ has become the last refuge of the latter's apologists and scoundrels, like the education minister, John Patten.
Last week BBC2's Newsnight happened to have a reporter travelling down the AI, the ‘backbone of Britain’, and what he laid bare was a chain of slipped discs and abscesses.
The journey culminated in a Friday night debate where Patten gave a lecture on proper posture.
Conservatism had been nobly employed dissolving the state into the people, he explained in his warm, dreamy way.
Unfortunately, some of the latter were evil.
The state's one remaining task is therefore to deal with them most severely.
At the same time one should look for points of light in the darkness.
Anthony Sampson objected — rather too moderately, I felt — that this might all have something to do with politics.
Not as parties intend it (we have already endured the required bipartisan bleatings about youth and moral crusades) but with the deeper meaning of structural renovation.
All general projects of redressement —‘putting right’ or straightening out, but the French is somehow more apt — are political in that sense, and run immediately into the difficulty that Britain possesses neither a constitution nor a state machine adapted to them.
Every now and then it half-wishes it had and deploys psychic explosions as a substitute: vision-thing weeks (as it were) during which a rotary storm of collective fulmination conjures up generally-agreed ‘solutions’ for the British Fall.
After them, things can go on in the normal hopeless way.
But (as medieval quacks knew) more easily for a time, with the patient bled of his humours.
The novelty of the Bootle tempest was the ominous depth of its motifs, its intensity, and its timing — six months on from Black Wednesday, after a true winter of discontent and many-sided collapse.
It seemed clear then that there would be delayed shock-effects — unpredictable, perhaps quite irrational — at deeper levels of the body politic.
This has surely been one of these: a much clearer seismic warning than any given previously of plate-movements underneath an increasingly despised and anachronistic system.
Such tensions can't help searching both for scapegoats and for leaders.
If the system doesn't come up with them much more convincingly than it is doing at present, then they will probably be found outside.
England clashes can light up Scotland's rugby future
By Graham Law
ENGLAND, who stand between Scotland and a Triple Crown triumph, are in line to pay a surprise visit to Murrayfield.
In the run-up to next month's Twickenham showdown, discussions are understood to be taking place on the staging of a floodlit fixture to officially hansel the completed Murrayfield super-stadium in the autumn of 1994.
By that stage, the stadium will have a capacity of 67,500 and there is already a match against South Africa scheduled for November 1994.
However, having spent a total of £41million on the redevelopment by then, the union would obviously seek to have as many sell-out rugby events as it could reasonably muster in a season.
Such a compelling clash would also put the gloss on the remarkable atmosphere which was generated during Saturday's Royal Bank international with Wales, Scotland's 20-0 victory setting up the tantalising finale to the season.
Rugby at Murrayfield has become Scotland's best chance to express its nationhood — more so than Hampden in recent years.
The record at the ground dubbed ‘Fortress Murrayfield,’ by Scotland captain Gavin Hastings is formidable: since 1985 only Australia (in 1988) and England (1988, 1991 and 1992) have put a spanner in the works.
Yet last month that out-pouring of patriotism was muted during the Irish match.
Players spoke of the stadium being ‘much quieter’ than in the days of the terracing.
The crowd took the hint and the spontaneous renditions of Flower of Scotland 15 minutes before no-side on Saturday were unprecedented.
Not even the Grand Slams of 1984 or 1990 offered anything comparable.
Duncan Paterson, Scotland's manager, spoke of the players' appreciation of such backing.
Scott Hastings put it slightly more graphically.
‘I remember as a child getting tingles up my spine when I watched television and heard Land of my Fathers when Wales played in Cardiff.
You have no idea what a surge of adrenalin it caused when our crowd burst into voice like that, then gave such a huge cheer when a great Craig Chalmers diagonal found touch ten metres out.
It was really special.’
The undoubted quality of the Scottish performance was, in some respects, difficult to quantify, a point touched upon by former coach Jim Telfer.
‘Yes,’ he nodded, ‘the forwards did go well, but you have to wonder just how good the Welsh side were.’
It would seem reasonable that, as a consequence of the game, as many as ten Scots ought to have featured prominently when the British Lions selectors held a preliminary meeting in Edinburgh yesterday.
A groundswell of media opinion is pushing for Gavin Hastings as captain and his off-the-field credentials — particularly the manner in which he has created a happy spirit in the Scottish camp — give him a head start over England's Will Carling.
It also should not be forgotten that Hastings has toured New Zealand three times in recent years — for the World Cup in 1987, with Scotland in 1990 and the World XV last year — an experience which Carling cannot match.
The other Scots who must be high in the current pecking order are Gary Armstrong, Kenny Milne, Scott Hastings, Damian Cronin, Doddie Weir, Tony Stanger, Paul Burnell and Craig Chalmers, with Andrew Reed a good fringe candidate.
Should victory be achieved over England next month, others could come into contention too, though for all the Scottish aspirants, there will be an agonising wait until the final round of championship matches is completed on 20 March, the Scottish campaign finishing a fortnight earlier.
‘The forwards did go well, but you have to wonder just how good the Welsh side were’ Jim Telfer
Top Fiat directors held in crackdown on corruption
TWO SENIOR executives of the Italian motor manufacturer Fiat were arrested yesterday in the latest development of a huge bribery investigation wreaking havoc on Italy's political classes.
The Fiat Group's financial director, Francesco Paolo Mattioli, and Antonio Mosconi, head of Fiat's Toro Assurance subsidiary, were detained at their homes on suspicion of corruption.
A spokesman for Fiat, Italy's largest private-sector industrial group, confirmed reports of the arrests but would not say on what charges.
Court sources in Milan, where the so-called Mani Pulite (Clean Hands) investigation began a year ago, indicated that the two executives are suspected of having violated laws on political party financing.
Later, Fiat issued a statement saying it had learned of the arrests ‘with great astonishment’ but it is the second time the company has been involved in the ongoing scandal.
Judicial sources said the arrests were made in connection with Fiat's Cogefar-Impresit construction arm, which is suspected of illegal dealings in the building of Milan's metro railway.
Mattioli is also chairman of Cogefar-Impresit.
Its managing director, Enzo Papi, is awaiting trial on corruption charges.
The news sent a shiver through Italy's skittish markets.
Traders were plunged into another whirl of selling, taking the lira back down to five-month lows of around 964 to the German mark.
Fiat group shares, which rose as much as 20 per cent last week on market rumours of outside concerns taking a stake, fell some three per cent on the day on the Milan stock exchange.
Political analysts saw further turbulence ahead for Prime Minister Giulio Amato after Friday's shock resignations of his finance and health ministers, just nine days after his justice minister was forced out.
All were victims of a year-long bribery scandal in which dozens of politicians stand accused of demanding contributions to party funds in return for lucrative public works contracts.
— Reuter 
Editorial, Page 8
Bad winter could mean disastrous lambing
FOR this main lambing season, Scotland's leading animal welfare organisation, the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, is forecasting a potentially disastrous outcome.
Speaking from the society's headquarters in Edinburgh, superintendent Ron Grant — a former shepherd — summed the situation up: ‘It's been one of the worst winters in the west Highlands for many years and for once it's not been snow but rather rain which has caused the problems.
‘Many hill sheep are in very poor condition and unless there is a dramatic upturn in the weather, hill farmers are looking disaster straight in the face.’
Already there are indications from the Oban area of extraordinarily high losses in hill flocks, with many sheep having been drowned in the floods of late January and early February, but that may be nothing compared with what is in store, according to Mr Grant.
‘The increasing trend towards extensive farming on the hills has placed farmers in a very difficult situation.
Many of them are farming for little more than the subsidies.
In a sense one cannot blame them for that, but we in the SSPCA feel that it would be much better if some of those payments from the Government came in the form of food tokens which could be redeemed when farmers purchased feeding stocks.’
The SSPCA freely admits that feeding livestock on the hills runs contrary to the accepted practice in many hill farming areas but it is of the opinion that the time has come when a stand has to be made.
In the islands — particularly the Outer Hebrides — the standard of management is, according to SSPCA inspectors, dire.
The chief executive of the SSPCA, Richard Morris, added: ‘It hardly matters what kind of lamb crop some farmers get, they will get the subsidies regardless.’
Mr Morris added: ‘We have pressed the Government for a long time to have a look at the hill farming situation.
We would not like to get into the New Zealand situation of ranching, but it seems in many senses we are already there.
‘The economic pressures are such that farmers cannot afford to employ an adequate number of shepherds and that is leading to neglect and a potential welfare time bomb in the eyes of the general public.’
A leading Loch Lomondside farmer, John Maxwell of Cashel Farm, said: ‘It's been a dreadful winter — one of the worst I can ever remember — with rain day after day and it just proves how wrong the Government were to cut back the HLCAs for hill use.’
The SSPCA's annual report, due to be published next month, will also confirm the growing concern over animal welfare in an increasingly depopulated countryside.
The number of farmer related prosecutions during the past year is up by 64 per cent to 51 cases.
According to Ron Grant, some of these cases were appalling, but he is keen to point out that the vast majority of farmers enjoy a trusting relationship with his organisation and increasingly bring their concerns to his inspectors before problems arise.
Mr Morris welcomed the principle of the Farm Assured Scotch Livestock initiative but added: ‘The scheme guarantees consumers that stock have been produced according to welfare friendly standards but we would welcome steps to take it a stage further, particularly to embrace quality.
‘Any farmer worth his salt knows that quality can only be achieved by pursuing the higher standards of welfare.’
One particular aspect of concern to the SSPCA relates to the North-east, where large numbers of incomers from the south of England — the so called white settlers — have bought many small farms.
Mr Morris said: ‘We have had several problems with these sort of people and have pressed the case for a basic form of licence before anyone can start keeping animals.
‘It seems absolutely wrong to me that people with no experience and understanding can be allowed to keep livestock just because they have the money to buy the land.’
Ron Grant: ‘hill farmers are looking disaster in the face’
Interest in outdoor pig systems
DANISH farmers are taking a keen interest in outdoor pig production.
That has been spurred on by the successful growth of that sector in Britain.
It now accounts for at least 15 per cent of total supplies and offers the potential of a green premium.
Worries about pollution levels from intensive indoor units and growing concern about animal welfare are also motivating factors.
However, Andreas Toft Fensvig, managing director of Danske Slagterier, the Danish co-operative of producers and slaughterhouses, suggested that welfare considerations had been overstated.
Consumer research had shown that that concern was allegedly highest in relation to poultry yet sales of that product had continued to boom.
‘We know that as an issue animal welfare is being widely discussed in the UK,’ he said at a Danish Bacon and Meat Council (DBMC) trade event.
‘Our own research suggests that in these recessionary times animal welfare is not a major factor influencing consumers’ purchases.
‘However, as consumers become more interested in how food is produced, the issue will undoubtedly become more important.’
Animal welfare had been the subject of discussions with several leading UK retailers and the Danish industry had offered assurances about the way in which animals are produced and reared there.
Animal welfare and health had always been important to the Danes, he said.
‘The research and development which has helped achieve supreme meat quality has always had significant health benefits for our industry.’
The Danish industry was intent on developing existing production systems but was also looking at new systems such as group housing.
‘Danish farmers are also keen to try their hand at outdoor systems, which we have seen emerging in the UK over the past five years, and trials have already begun.’
The DBMC, which began a meat safety assurance scheme last November to ensure compliance with United Kingdom food safety law, is to spend some £2 million this year promoting Danish bacon in Britain on both radio and television, reviving the slogan ‘Good bacon has Danish written all over it.’
£250,000 to beef up turkey image
BRITISH turkey producers are intent on breaking out of their Christmas and Easter straitjacket and aim to spend about £250,000 this year to make the product less boring.
That is being helped by the change in the turkey processing market in the past 15 years or so which has led to two-thirds of the national output, worth a total of £300 million a year, being eaten in portion and added value form.
The major problems facing the industry are that the product is still seen as difficult to cook and boring by non-buyers, said Keith Simpson, head of the British Turkey Information Service (BTIS), at the annual turkey industry conference in Norwich yesterday.
‘There is a very wide divergence between buyers and non-buyers,’ he said.
‘Thirty-four per cent of buyers think turkey is interesting — which is higher than lamb or pork — but only 9 per cent of non-buyers agree, which is considerably less than any other meat in the market.’
More worryingly, many consumers said they did not like the taste, but much of that could be put down to the fact that many housewives had a narrow cooking repertoire with an average of only two turkey variations.
After extensive market research, the BTIS is to embark on a programme of promotion aiming to convert more non-buyers away from the red meat and chicken camps to turkey.
That will involve targeting existing shoppers, rather than schools and colleges, and close co-operation with retailers.
It will use women's magazines and a booklet called The Beginners' Guide to highlight the ease and variety of preparations.
At the same time the programme will underline the low fat/health benefits including the claim that lean turkey meat has only 50 per cent of the fat of chicken.
To catch on to the developing barbecue market, the BTIS is also to spotlight June as its first Quality British Turkey Month; arrange sampling tests for up to 150,000 consumers; and set up a turkey charity ball — or turkey trot — in conjunction with a major charity.
Fiona Gately, marketing manager with Food from Britain, urged producers not to ignore the catering market, which is worth £7 billion a year in food purchases.
The fast food sector offered a £1 billion a year market in sandwiches alone.
She said there were seasonal opportunities at the top end of the restaurant trade and predicted real volume opportunities in frozen, value-added products.
Turkey trot: anything but boring down on the farm
US seeks legal use of growth promoters
THE US government is playing down claims that the Clinton administration is keen to raise the European Community's import ban on hormone-aided beef as a stalling issue in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks.
It is clear that it is still campaigning to have licensed growth promotions reinstated for beef cattle.
American beef industry lobbyists have described the eight-year-ban as a trade barrier — not a policy issue.
They estimate it has lost traders $145 million of business with the EC and have asked President Clinton to challenge it.
However, US officials have claimed that their government has already taken all the necessary counter action to the 1985 ban by enforcing a $90 million retaliation on Italian tomatoes and restricting the access of Irish beef.
‘As a trade issue, the beef ban has long since been wiped out,’ The Scotsman was told.
Later this year, the European Commission's technical committee is expected to be asked to review the use of licensed steroids in EC beef production.
‘We recognise that there are forces in the EC who also say that the ban is unenforceable,’ a US spokesman said.
Although their public language is guarded, the Americans have pointed up the Belgian and Irish beef industries as examples of general hormone abuse.
‘But we are not getting into this game.
We will let it stew in Europe for a while.
There are people [in Europe]who want to bring back regulation and we will encourage them.’
However the US administration appears resigned to long discussions before its target of the  reinstatement of a scientifically backed sanitary code for the legal use of growth promoters is achieved.
Its representatives have been advised by EC ministers that although the ban is scientifically unsustainable it is politically impossible to remove.
‘So there is no way that the US will lob a test delivery of beef at the EC administration.
We recognise that the issue is caught up with consumer perceptions.
Nothing official will be done through GATT,’ a spokesman for the US department of agriculture added.
Industry is to be consulted on tagging of lambs for live export
LAMBS for live export could pose the biggest problem for the Scottish sheep industry as it sets out to establish a European Community approved national identification scheme before the July 1994 deadline.
Individual identification is out, sheep farmers will be relieved to hear.
Ministry of Agriculture specialists confirm that it is not required under EC law.
But sheep which cross national barriers, such as slaughter lambs for France, must carry a flock mark and for practical reasons that almost certainly means ear tags.
The entire industry is to be consulted.
And at this stage it is expected that tagging will be confined to specified types and not involve the routine identification of all sheep — including hill ewes — as many farmers feared.
But ministry specialists believe that ear tags will be compulsory for all lambs exported for slaughter.
Voluntary tagging may also be adopted for sheep which could benefit from the positive identification of their flock of origin, such as pedigree animals or breeding females from farms operating under specific health schemes.
‘We want to be practical.
Tattoos are an alternative but they are useless in sheep with black ears,’ MAFF explained.
‘We have to submit our plans for a national scheme to the EC Commission by July 1994 and it must be operational by January 1995.
‘However, we would like to have ours up and running much sooner so that we can iron out the teething problems before it becomes law.’
This year at least 1.5 million head of prime lambs are expected to be transported live to France and other EC countries — and the majority are selected at auction markets which last year handled 72.5 per cent of all lambs offered for slaughter.
‘Their flock of origin will have to be identified.
It will be up to the exporter to make sure that lambs have the correct certification and presumably they will make this a condition of purchase,’ a ministry specialist said.
It is accepted that that would be difficult in markets because a relatively small percentage of the lambs presented are shipped overseas.
It may mean that all lambs expected to be put before live exporters will have to carry a flock identification mark.
‘Our overall task is considerably simplified now we know there is no requirement for individual identification.
We also acknowledge that it may be unrealistic to flock mark ewes in extensive hill areas,’ MAFF added.
‘In general terms we want to work with the industry and do our best to build a scheme based on existing systems.
However if the EC directive is to be satisfied lambs exported live for slaughter will have to carry a flock mark in their ears.’
Ngugi faces four-year ban after refusing test
KENYA's five-times world cross country champion, John Ngugi, could be banned from athletics for four years after refusing a random dope test, a senior International Amateur Athletic Federation official said yesterday.
Ngugi, winner of the 1988 Olympics 5,000 metres, said he had declined the test because the IAAF team of doctors who visited his rural home in Nyahururu, 190 miles north of Nairobi, failed to identify themselves.
‘I could not entrust my life to strangers,’ he said.
‘I have always been tested before or after competition and I am prepared to be tested any time by the IAAF.’
John Weston, leader of the IAAF team of doctors, said the Kenyan star had declined a random test and he was forwarding his report to the IAAF for action.
The Kenyan Amateur Athletic Association barred Ngugi from competing in the national cross-country championships, which are used to select the team for the world championships in Spain on 28 March, at the weekend.
Ngugi said he had never taken drugs and did not know how serious the refusal was until he was barred from the meeting.
KAAA secretary-general, David Okeyo, said he thought Ngugi had acted out of ignorance but would issue a statement after meetings with Ngugi and the IAAF team.
Meanwhile, Butch Reynolds qualified for his first major international competition since serving a two-year suspension for steroid use at the US world indoor trials in Boston.
Reynolds, the 400 metres outdoor world record holder, won the 400m in 45.91 seconds, 0.2sec ahead of Jason Rouser who earned the other berth in the US team for the World Indoor Championships in Toronto next month.
‘I'm glad it's over,’ said Reynolds, who set the world record of 43.29sec at Zurich in 1988.
‘I'm elated at the result and I'm looking forward to running fast in Toronto.’
Reynolds was suspended in August 1990 by the IAAF for steroid use but, after claiming testing improprieties, successfully sued the IAAF for £18 million in a US court last year.
Canadian athletics officials will announce today whether injured sprinter Ben Johnson can compete in the 60m event at Toronto.
Johnson withdrew from the Canadian track and field championship, advising meet organisers that a hamstring injury suffered on 10 February in Belgium had not healed.
Athletics Canada, the governing body for track and field, used the weekend meet as the qualifier for the world tournament.
Normally the top two finishers in each event would be named in the team provided they met the qualifying time set by the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Bruny Surin won Saturday's 60m event in 6.59sec with Derrick Sutherland second in 6.67.
Johnson has met the IAAF 60m standard of 6.8sec three times in the past two months.
On Saturday, Athletics Canada chairman, Brian Langley, said it was unlikely officials would drop two healthy sprinters who had met the 60m standard in favour of an athlete unable to run at the qualifying meet due to injury.
Johnson, stripped of his 100m Olympic gold medal in 1988 as well as world indoor and outdoor world records, came back from a two-year steroid suspension in 1991. — Reuter.
Westminster plans £100m float
ONE of the UK's largest nursing-homes operators is planning to join the stock market via a share offering before 31 May to the public valuing it at more than £100 million.
Westminster Health Care is currently a subsidiary of California-based National Medical Enterprises, one of the biggest healthcare services groups in the US.
At the end of last month Westminster, owned and operated 39 nursing homes in England, Scotland and Wales, providing 2,620 beds.
In addition, it had nine nursing homes, representing 737 beds, under construction.
Proceeds from the offering will be used to repay debt guaranteed by NME, and to continue Westminster's expansion programme.
NME will retain a ‘significant’ minority share stake after the flotation.
— PA
Ex-Leeds chief to lead Halifax
MICHAEL Blackburn was yesterday named the next chief executive of the Halifax, Britain's biggest building society.
He has been chief executive of the rival Leeds Permanent society, which ranks fifth in size, since 1987.
Before that, he was chief executive of the Joint Credit Card Company (Access), after a career with Lloyds Bank.
Mr Blackburn, 51, will succeed Jim Birrell, who retires in mid-August.
Roger Boyes, who for the past three years has been the Leeds finance director, will become acting chief executive from next Monday.
— PA
Welsh Water in £21m expansion
WELSH Water yesterday paid £21 million for an engineering consultancy, Acer Group.
The deal, under which the company also takes on Acer's debts of £27 million, is another step in its strategy of diversifying from its core water business.
It wants to make profits from activities unhindered by water price regulation.
Acer employs about 2,700 people and made profits of £7 million in the year to last April.
In the UK, much of its work comes from motorway and road contracts and water and sewerage engineering.
Overseas, it is involved in work on the Bosphorus bridges and road tunnels at Sydney harbour.
Welsh Water, based in Brecon, Powys, could pay up to £8.1 million extra for Acer, depending on future profitability.
— PA
Queens Moat-Holiday Inn link-up
QUEENS Moat Houses and Holiday Inn Worldwide, the Bass hotels subsidiary, have agreed to convert an initial eight QMH hotels to the Holiday Inn brand — four in the UK and four on the continent, they announced yesterday.
In addition, QMH is renewing its existing franchise licences with Holiday Inn Worldwide, covering 19 continental hotels, on a ten-year basis.
The UK hotels involved are in Aberdeen, Bristol, Newcastle and Reading.
QMH's shares dipped 1.5p to 52.5p, while Bass's lost 13p to 590p. — PA
Morgan in Chinese joint venture
THE industrial materials group, Morgan Crucible, has signed a joint venture agreement in China with the Shanghai Electrical Machinery Corporation to make mechanical carbon parts used in car starter motors and industrial machinery.
Morgan will take a 51 per cent share and invest about £3.7 million in technology and equipment for the Shanghai Morgan Carbon Company.
Shanghai Electrical will contribute its factory's business.
— PA
Chairman of Amberley quits
THE building-preservation group, Amberley, yesterday announced that its chairman, Dennis Buckley, is to resign, after having agreed to sell 15 per cent of the company for about £260,658.
Mr Buckley's move to sell 965,400 shares at 27p cuts his stake to about 3 per cent.
Two new directors, Brian Meddings and Robert Healey, are joining the board to pursue a strategy of growth by acquisition.
— PA
Aberdeen business taken over
EASTMAN Ross, the Aberdeen-based oil industry supplier, has been taken over by Kingswood Fluid Power Group.
Eastman Ross is now part of a group with an annual turnover of nearly £6 million, a headquarters and 16 sites, including those in in Glasgow and Edinburgh.
P-E wins Standard Life contract
THE Surrey-based management consultancy and computer services group, P-E International, has won a contract worth about £500,000 annually to develop and maintain software for the big Edinburg-based life assurance company, Standard Life.
— PA
Changes in tax benefit Norsk
By Frank Frazer
NORSK HYDRO, Norway's largest industrial concern, which draws 90 per cent of its operating income from North Sea oil and gas, was helped into profit last year by a change in tax accounting methods.
Results reported from Oslo yesterday showed the company, 51 per cent-owned by the Norwegian state, made a net profit of 1.76 billion Norwegian kroner, about £160 million, compared with a loss of 498 million kroner in 1991.
Hydro said it would have lost an estimated 195 million kroner in 1992 if accounting changes had not freed about two billion kroner of reserves put aside for future tax obligations under the old accounting system.
Egil Myklebust, president of the company, which also has interests in agriculture, petrochemicals and light metals, said that a weak world economy had caused a sharp drop in prices for its main products since 1991.
‘This has been offset by improvements in areas over which we ourselves have control — partly by improving our cost base, and partly by increasing oil production,’ he added.
In spite of a 16 per cent rise in Hydro's oil production to a record high, selling prices slipped over the year from $20 to $19 a barrel.
It was also hit by a fall in European sales of fertilisers and competition from imports.
The company's turnover for 1992 fell to 58 billion kroner, from nearly 61 billion kroner the previous year.
A dividend of 3 kroner per share is proposed, compared with 3.5  kroner in 1991.
UK Peugeot sees profits plunge
PEUGEOT Talbot, the UK subsidiary of the big French car-marker, yesterday warned shareholders that trading would remain difficult this year as it revealed a slump in annual profits.
The company said last week that 3,300 production workers at its Ryton plant, at Coventry, would be laid off for four days from today because of a drop in demand from continental Europe.
Yesterday, the deputy chairman and managing director, Geoffrey Whalen, said: ‘Trading conditions will remain difficult and profit margins will continue to be depressed during 1993.’
His comments came as the company unveiled a slump in pre-tax profits for 1992 to £10.2 million, from £50.8 million in 1991 and as much as £109 million in 1990.
Peugeot's annual turnover, however, edged ahead from £1.4 billion to £1.5 billion.
But Ryton, which makes the Peugeot 405, saw its output remain virtually unchanged at about 88,000 vehicles.
Around 65 per cent of its production is exported, mainly to France.
Just three years ago, Ryton was producing 116,500 cars.
UK sales last year of both UK and French-made Peugeot cars increased, but export sales fell from 61,400 to 53,000 because of lower demand in some European markets.
Deal over M74 contract
BEDFORD-BASED Kier Group has acquired the rights to the M74 contract in Strathclyde following the receivership of Lilley Construction.
The receiver, Price Waterhouse, reached agreement with Strathclyde Region for Kier to complete work on the £17 million Scottish Office-funded contract of which approximately £9.7 million is outstanding.
The contract comprises a 4.5 kilometre extension of the M74 in Glasgow.
Kier has now started work on site and will control the project from its Scottish office at Stepps in Glasgow.
Plan for 100 new Welsh jobs
UP TO 100 electronic industry jobs are being created in Wales with the construction of a factory by the microwave circuit board maker, Labtech.
Labtech, based in Presteigne, Powys, plans to complete the 20,000-sq ft factory by the end of the year.
Set up ten years ago to serve the telecoms, avionics and space research markets, Labtech currently employs 38 staff.
It is an offshoot of Aerospace Engineering, of Swindon.
Labtech's founder and managing director, David Latham, said: ‘The new factory will triple existing capacity, making us the world's largest supplier of microwave circuit boards.’
He added that he hoped the ‘red tape’ procedures of planning and administration would be dealt with quickly so building could go ahead.
Glyn Davies, chairman of the Development Board for Rural Wales, said: ‘We will be making every effort to put a grant package together and build a factory on time to meet the company's requirements.’
— PA
Fife innovation scheme unveiled
By Frank Frazer
FIFE is hitting the high-tech trail with the launch of a business initiate intended to help innovative firms get new products to the market.
The venture is supported by £800,000 in funding from bodies including Fife Enterprise, Fife Regional Council and Dunfermline District Council which will be matched by a similar contribution from the European Community.
It will offer up to £100,000 in support to Fife companies with ideas that are considered to have a good chance of success but lack resources needed to develop their products.
The immediate aim is to launch at least five such products on the market within two years.
Directors of the venture, which was launched yesterday as Fife Product Innovation, include Douglas Anderson, managing director of the Fife-based strategic design firm, Crombie Anderson.
He said that the scheme would aim to help Fife companies develop businesses that would assist in the diversification of the defence-dependent economy.
‘Investment in new product development is an essential ingredient of corporate success — the means to secure profit today, growth for tomorrow and value for the future,’ he said.
Assistance available to companies will include practical help in identifying market opportunities and creating new product concepts to suit.
There will also be assistance in planning and implementing new product development programmes as well as positioning and launching products in international markets.
Ian Renilson, operations manager for Fife Product Innovation, said he believed product innovation was the most fundamental method of wealth creation which could be harnessed more effectively to generate real economic growth.
‘In this country we tend to neglect our manufacturing industries in favour of service industries such as banking and insurance.
‘These service industries can provide a better short-term financial return but real sustainable growth must be founded on manufacturing industries which add real value to raw materials by combining them together to form a product for which people are prepared to pay a premium,’ he added.
EC support from the scheme is provided through the PERIFRA programme set up in 1991.
Fife's application for assistance was based on the need to reduce dependence on the defence sector and increase the level of product development within the manufacturing sector.
Wired up: Fife Product Innovation's team of (left to right) Douglas Anderson, director, Jim Johnston, director, and Ian Renilson, operations manager
EIB set to approve post-summit loans
THE European Investment Bank is set to approve its first loans under a package to boost economic growth agreed at last December's European Community summit, monetary sources said in Brussels yesterday.
They said the bank's board was likely to agree today to loans totalling nearly one billion European currency units (about £816 million) for about 17 different infrastructure projects in nine EC states.
The loans will be drawn from the so-called Edinburgh facility, under which the EIB will lend a total of five billion Ecu (about £408 billion) to projects such as road, rail, energy and telecommunications networks over the next two years.
But because of the short time since the Edinburgh summit, few of the projects to be offered money are new.
Most are existing schemes eligible for extra EIB money under the Edinburgh facility, which allows the bank, the European Commission's investment arm, to lend more than its usual 50 per cent ceiling to suitable, growth-promoting projects.
The Edinburgh facility and the related European Investment Fund (EIF) are the EC's contribution to a far broader growth package outlined at the December summit, including action by individual member states.
Monetary sources said work on setting up the EIF, which will have capital of two billion Ecu (£1.4 billion) and be funded by the EIB, the commission and private banks, was progressing well — although it is not expected to be operational before early next year.
EC finance ministers are expected to produce an outline of national growth measures at their meeting next month.
But a definitive package is unlikely before their meeting in April, which member states of the European Free Trade Association have been invited to attend as prospective participants in the European Economic Area.
— Reuter
Asda and Burton have rights stuff
SHAREHOLDERS in the retail giants, Asda and Burton Group, have responded enthusiastically to cash calls for a total of £510 million.
Burton announced a 90 per cent take-up for its £163 million rights issue, while Asda did even better, with 94 per cent of its £347 million issue taken up.
The Asda cash will be used to cut debts to about £100 million and allow the revamping and relocation of some stores.
Two years ago, Asda faced a debt mountain of nearly £1 billion.
Burton, which recently said that 2,000 of its full-time jobs were to go and 3,000 part-time staff to be hired instead, will use some of the cash to cut borrowings to about £160 million.
John Hoerner, who became Burton's chief executive 12 months ago, plans to upgrade the group's 1,700 high street stores and 88 Debenhams branches in an attempt to win back customers.
Wessex Water has received acceptances for 93 per cent of its one-for-six rights issue at 480p per new share.
— PA
Need for balance sheet parachute for DAF
IF EVER there was a case for passing a law that forbade the British government from interfering in industry, the current difficulties in the coal and car-making sectors are probably the best examples available.
Gut political reaction from the handful of Conservative MPs capable of defeating the Government now threatens to make a mockery for its long-term market-led plans for the electricity market.
Its original plan was to unload the problem onto the electricity generators.
However, the managements of the new privatised companies not surprisingly vetoed this option as being against shareholder interests.
Now Mr Heseltine's plan promises to boost their earnings by getting them to burn an extra 8 million tonnes of subsidised coal by not running down stocks rapidly and by displacing imported coal.
However, that still leaves ministers well short of the 13 million tonnes they need to guarantee the future of enough pits.
The difference is enough to ensure success or failure in the vital Commons vote that must accompany the Government's review.
The difficulty arises from ministerial unwillingness to curb the dash for gas or to cut-off the cross-Channel interconnector.
The first option would practically wreck further liberalisation of the energy market while the latter would almost certainly dump the UK into the dock of the European Court.
Even taking a harder line with the generators is fraught with difficulty while the Government retains a 40 per cent stake in both National Power and PowerGen.
Their long-term viability cannot be allowed to be compromised.
In the case of DAF and, specifically the van-making plant at Birmingham, it must be increasingly apparent that this is an area where the company can no longer compete effectively in the short-run.
Clearly, it must also be apparent that any subsidy would have to be long-running to be effective.
The DAF workers are less likely to attract the same sort of gritty sympathy that the miners have done.
If the NUM is the Light Brigade of trade union movement, then the van-makers must be its NAAFI.
Instead, if Birmingham is to saved, then some sort of balance sheet parachute should be concocted on the lines of a long-term equity injection such as preference shares or even a convertible bond.
In either case, subsidy will create more long-term problems than it can solve.
Exporters' bad debts soaring, says survey
By Gordon Milne
BAD debts incurred by exporters have soared in the past five years, a survey has revealed.
The study, conducted by a leading provider of export insurance, reveals that the value of losses reported by UK companies exporting to the EC over the last five years rose by 248 per cent.
Some countries proved less safe than others, according to NCM Credit Insurance.
In percentage terms, the value of losses reported by companies exporting to Portugal rose by 2,620 per cent over the five years.
In Spain, the increase was 805 per cent.
Even in Germany — which, hitherto, has been generally thought of as one of the safest markets — export losses through bad debt has risen by 300 per cent.
NCM protected exports from Scotland worth nearly £600 million last year.
The company, which until its privatisation in 1991 was the Short-term Export Credit Division of the Export Credits Guarantees Department, also revealed that the value of overdue accounts in the EC rose by 36 per cent in the past year.
The increase was most dramatic in Germany, at 125 per cent.
Other countries where UK exporters experienced an above-average rise in overdue accounts included Belgium (60 per cent up) and France (55 per cent up).
Harry Groen, chairman of NCM Holding NV, said yesterday: ‘In the Netherlands 20 per cent of domestic GDP is credit insured, in France 10 per cent.
But here in the UK it is still only 7 per cent.
‘It is strange that most companies insure property, plant and equipment against damage or theft as a matter of routine.
Yet debt owed by customers, which could be up to 40 per cent of their assets, is so often left unprotected.’
Motherwell Bridge raises £6.5m
By Gordon Milne
MOTHERWELL Bridge has raised £6.5 million through the private placement of shares with a number of financial institutions.
The new funding represents nearly 15 per cent of the enlarged share capital of the Lanarkshire-based private engineering group, which employs 3,000 people and whose 1991 accounts showed pre-tax profits of £6.05 million on a turnover of £137 million.
John Crawford, Motherwell Bridge's chairman, yesterday described the fund raising as ‘a natural step in our group's development.
The new money will assist us in continuing this successful growth policy’.
The institutions involved were Eagle Star Investment Managers, Foreign & Colonial Ventures, Ivory & Sime Development Capital, NatWest Ventures and Rothschild Ventures.
The company's advisors were Hill Samuel Bank, NatWest Wood Mackenzie and Maclay Murray & Spens.
Conference centre work starts next month
BUILDING work on Edinburgh's new international conference centre will begin next month following the signing of a £38 million contract yesterday.
The Edinburgh International Conference Centre, being built between Morrison Street, Lothian Road and the Western Approach Road, is due to open in spring 1995.
Funding for the four-storey 12,000-seater building comes from EICC, a joint company formed by Edinburgh District Council and Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise.
Councillor Mark Lazarowicz, leader of the district council's Labour group and chairman of EICC, said yesterday at the signing of the contract between EICC and the main contractor, GA Management, that he hoped the venture would attract business all year round to the city.
‘Other cities’ experience show conferences are an excellent way of bringing in visitors who will spend a great deal of money in the city.
It will be the most modern in Britain and one of the best equipped centres of its size in the world.’
Already, six major international conferences have signed up for the the centre.
Our picture shows Mark Lazarowicz (left) and Jack Lickrish, managing director of GA Management, signing the contract on-site in Edinburgh  yesterday .
New lease of life for BTU
IN framing controversial proposals for a US energy tax, President Clinton gave a new lease of life to the British thermal unit, which the UK has abandoned in favour the joule based on the metric standards adopted in Europe.
Rigid US adherence to the old imperial measures may evoke nostalgia among engineers of yesteryear.
But it is hoped that the heat generated by the US tax will not sour the special relationship by giving the British a bad name.
Panic in the oil industry
TIM EGGAR, the Energy Minister, may have caused mild panic among oil industry investors at a London conference last week when he spoke about the UK sector of the North Sea during the last two years having a ‘strike’ rate higher than ever before.
It was an unfortunate choice of phrase when memories are still fresh of the summer of discontent when workers staged sit-downs on some platforms in an attempt to secure better conditions.
What Mr Eggar really meant to say was that there has recently been a high level of success in finding new oil and gas fields in UK waters during a worldwide downturn in exploration.
The other face of life company
SCOTTISH Amicable has just spent two years coming up with a new logo based on its Amicable Man image.
Half-flag, half-face, the new image cost the Glasgow life company £50,000 and another £550,000 changing the notepaper etc.
The more unkind observers have already wondered whether it looks rather two-faced or even like a pair of out of shape knickers.
At least(or is it at most ?) it looks more lively than Standard Life's recently unveiled corporate logo.
But perhaps more importantly, do any companies get real value from the large sums they spend trying to persuade a gullible or not so gullible public that they are modern and go-ahead — or, even more to the point, how many logos that do not contain the company name (like BP or ICI) are recognised unprompted by the average person?
The Diary, for one, has its doubts.
Chancellor faces Budget decisions of more than the usual complexity
GAVIN MCCRONE reflects on how things have changed over the last six months
AS the Chancellor prepares for his budget next month and contemplates the unenviable situation in which he finds himself, he might be excused for thinking that it might have been better to move last September.
The six months since Britain left the ERM have seen a more complete U-turn in British economic policy than at any time in recent memory; and over the past two years the deterioration in the nation's finances has also been spectacular.
The decisions involved in a budget are never easy, but this year the Chancellor has to be concerned about the high and rising level of unemployment, the danger of renewed inflation as a result of the sharp depreciation of the pound, the large and rapidly growing budget deficit and the deficit on the balance of payments.
These problems require very different sorts of action; together their requirements conflict in a way that gives him little room for manoeuvre.
The Government's underlying aim is now to get growth back into the economy so as to reverse the rising trend in unemployment.
This is in marked contrast to the position before last September when the priority was to kill off inflation so as to preserve Britain's competitive position within the ERM in the expectation that growth would recover as a consequence.
Because of the high German interest rates this latter aim necessitated a very tight monetary policy and fiscal policy was in consequence fairly relaxed.
The situation now requires this policy to be rebalanced.
With the drop in interest rates and the depreciation of the pound, monetary policy has now been substantially relaxed; but the twin deficits, of the budget and the balance of payments, indicate that a substantial tightening of fiscal policy is required.
A major balance of payments deficit when the economy is in deep recession has not occurred before in this country.
It is no doubt a consequence of sterling having been overvalued in the ERM and the relatively weak position of manufacturing industry.
The danger is that it will get worse as recovery brings increased domestic demand.
It is therefore more than ever necessary that the recovery should be export-led rather than led by domestic consumption.
The depreciation of sterling should help to bring this about and, although there might in time be scope for some further slight fall in interest rates, it is doubtful if there is much more that the Chancellor can do.
The main danger now is that the gain in competitiveness will be eroded by inflation partly triggered by the rise in import costs.
This is what has so often happened in the past; and though the Chancellor has made it clear that low inflation remains his goal, now that the country is out of the ERM there is not a great deal that he can do to prevent it.
The best hope is that the effect of the recession on pay bargaining coupled with prudent fiscal management can preserve the competitive advantage for a considerable time.
In last year's budget the Chancellor estimated for a deficit, or public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), of £28 billion in the current year.
In fact, according to the Institute of Fiscal Studies, the out-turn is likely to be £38 billion with £54 billion estimated for next year.
And, although this huge deficit is in large measure a consequence of the fall in tax revenue and the cost of unemployment in the recession, the IFS expect it to stay at this level for some years even if a gradual recovery does take place.
Clearly a PSBR of this order, which is more than 8 per cent of GDP, is not tenable except for a short period.
Public debt as a proportion of GDP is already rising steeply; and if this is allowed to go unchecked, Britain would quickly change from being a low debt to a high debt country with a burden of interest payments which would have serious implications for future levels of taxation.
This is the situation which the Irish faced in the 1980s and from which they are only just escaping.
It is the trap into which Italy has fallen and it is not an example to be copied.
No doubt this is why Mr Portillo is starting a radical review of public expenditure.
But it is doubtful if the problem can or should be solved with spending cuts alone.
Many would argue that important public services are already underfunded and there is a constant demand for improvements to infrastructure on which the performance of the economy depends.
Either in March or in the second budget, which is due in December, tax increases of some kind therefore seem inevitable.
Even if all goes well and recovery gets underway this year, unemployment is likely to go on rising for another year at least.
It is not going to be an easy time for the Government; but if it fails to face up to the fiscal deficit it will risk a crisis of confidence developing later which would require more drastic remedies and put both the recovery and the reduction in unemployment at risk.
Toujours la politesse, but within reason…
Some business formalities are somewhat outdated, says NEIL FITZGERALD
Of , we were brought up to be polite.Observe the niceties.
Please don't pick your nose at the table.
Or scratch your crutch with the salad fork.
In business life, it sometimes seems how you say something, and to whom, is everything.
The stress being on sometimes.
It's astonishing how some formalities have stayed on, even through the mean and hungry 1980s, for no apparent reason than that they were always done, while in other areas of activity important people are treated with the utmost disdain — or worse, with complete new-fangled insincerity.
All this came to mind on sight of a communication from, of all places, Customs & Excise Debt Management Division Branch 4 (Insolvency Branch).
These are the people to whom, for example, you write if you've just been appointed liquidator of a company and want to get its VAT payments sorted out.
Now VAT men have earned an unfortunate reputation for not exactly being the sort who might have graduated from the Lucy Clayton school for charm and social deportment.
Perhaps it's something to do with being the only civil department still with the power to send in a gunboat.
But these chaps down at Bootle on Merseyside — in fact the correspondent is a woman — are, one assumes, ordinary, helpful (they are communicating some helpful information) and hardworking people.
Particularly hard-working at the moment, one expects, as the insolvencies mount up.
Which is their problem.
Apparently this particular branch is receiving more than 11,000 pieces of post every week and a high proportion of it is non-essential correspondence ‘such as simple acknowledgments of previous transaction’.
Please, the branch's Mrs Elizabeth Allen says, pass on the message that acknowledgments of mail are not required and indeed delay responses to more important correspondence.
You can picture it, can't you, as the daily dumper truck tips out hundreds more envelopes, each of which has to be laboriously slit open, the contents unfolded, date-stamped, sent to the right person to be read.
And all it says, after the usual letterhead, abbreviated reference and date, is: ‘We are pleased to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 14 inst.’
Someone recently recalling an analysis of the amount of effort, in people-cost terms, that what went into producing the average letter.
It has since become the dreaded archetype of business bureaucracy: the £10 letter.
(You can do a similar exercise with similarly startling results on the customer service side by, as they put it, ‘stapling yourself to a purchase order’ and watching how many hands it passes through).
Now this would be all right if the damned thing served a purpose.
Of course, quite a lot of them do — putting down on paper what was agreed over the phone to be produced in evidence if the other side claims they never did, for example .
But as the Customs people are finding, many of them don't.
Meanwhile, there are other niceties that have simply gone by the board in certain aspects of management life.
Please or thank you, or complimenting someone on their effort, doesn't seem to come naturally to many managers or supervisors.
Of course people are paid to perform a particular task.
But that is not a valid excuse.
This isn't a defence for hollow formalities.
They should, unlike those acknowledgement letters, have a purpose, and they do.
The first is, yes, to show appreciation and respect — which various people require in varying degrees.
The second, and by no means less important, purpose, is that they open up a transmission channel for information from the recipient.
How often do you dump a file on someone's desk with a Post-it note on it saying ‘do this’ and get it back — okay — competently done but with no knowledge how it might have disrupted that person's other work or even if they liked doing it enough to want to do more?
Looking someone in the eye while saying: ‘Please would you do this’ extends the transaction enough for you to gauge the person's reaction and therefore mood.
Uh-oh, message received, time your request better next time.
Similarly, ‘thank you’ requires a response from them which can range from the cheerful to the stony silence.
More information.
An American once said to me that British Midland's habit of giving out boiled sweets before take off was a ‘quaint gesture’.
That set me watching the next time I was on a flight and to realising what a useful transaction it was.
First, you've frantically found your seat, strapped yourself in with a metallic click of the belt and are sitting bolt upright and trying to remember the air crash fatality statistics when — ooh, thank you, sweeties in a basket from a nice person — there's a touch of human contact in a high-tech, high-octane toothpaste tube.
Second, it gives extra time for the nice person proffering the basket to size you up — belt fastened, seat upright, bag not blocking exit — without being intrusive.
Sneaky, insincere?
Depends how it's done.
Which brings us onto those Americans.
‘Have a nice day.’
How exaggerated, how American, we Brits recoil.
Forgetting, of course, that our goodbye is a contraction of God be with you which, if uttered in full today, would earn us a rightly deserved raspberry for insincere piety.
In fact, ‘have a nice day’ was originally coined as a deliberately longer and more personal message to have ringing in customers' ears just as they walked off the premises, instead of the terminal ‘bye’or ‘see yah’, so they'd come back.
Of course, it can sound overused, these things all do, and needs constant polishing up.
But, from personal experience, done properly it's a hell of a lot better than walking out ignored and hard not to respond honestly to.
Yours sincerely.
Now there's another element of business correspondence that could do with some attention and purpose behind it.
Please or thank you, or complimenting someone on their effort, doesn't seem to come naturally to many managers or supervisors
Book-keeper can be replaced by software
Stuart Bruce — based in the firm's Glasgow Office — is BDO Binder Hamlyn's senior VAT manager.
A former member of HM Customs and Excise he answers questions on small business VAT problems, on the second Tuesday of every month
I HAVE been in business for many years operating a small company in the construction industry.
We employ an elderly book-keeper who is due to retire soon and I am concerned about getting someone to replace her as the books that she is keeping appear quite complicated.
What would be the best course of action in replacing the book-keeper?
Your predicament is not uncommon.
Our advise would be to first speak to your accountants who would be able to talk you through the various options which are:
1.
Employ a new book-keeper to continue operating the manual book-keeping system.
2.
To install a computerised accounting system and employ someone with experience of setting up and operating such a system.
3.
Employ your accountants to do the accounting work for you.
Many accounting firms provide this service, but this option may be the more expensive one.
It may be sensible to use your accountants to interview the individuals if you are going for option 1.
Our inclination would be to recommend that you do go for option 2, as there are some excellent off the shelf accounting packages available for the construction industry which would probably give you a lot more information than you have now.
Grants are also available for the selection and implementation of your computerised system if you use outside consultants to advise you.
Once again, your accountants will probably be able to provide this service assuming they are recognised by the grant funding organisations.
The costs covered by these grants vary depending on which type of grant applied for and this would, in the main, depend on the size of your company.
In the case of a fairly simple system Better Business Service grants would  probably be available through Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise and up to 35 per cent of the costs will be paid up to a maximum grant of £525 can be paid under this scheme.
Larger systems would probably be covered by the initiative where gain one-third of the cost will be covered up to a maximum level of grant of £5,000.
If you are going this route is would help if you employed an accountant with some experience in operating computerised accounting systems and your own  accountants would again give you lack of expertise in this area be better to get involved in the recruitment process to ensure that you end up with a suitable individual to run your system.
The costs of computer software is not prohibitively expensive in addition, hardware costs have also fallen substantially.
The benefits which you would derive from a properly set up and run computerised accounting system should more than out-weigh the additional costs involved.
I HAVE just set up in business as a limited company.
I need to acquire various items of equipment and a car.
What is the best way to fund this?
There are four main methods of funding: cash purchase, bank overdraft, hire purchase and leasing.
Cash purchase is the cheapest, if you have the funds available.
The funds could be provided by you as a shareholder either as a loan or as further share capital.
Tax capital allowances would be available.
At present there is a 40 per cent first year allowance, with 25 per cent reducing balance each year thereafter.
There is a restriction on the allowance for the car if it costs more than £12,000, and only 25 per cent writing down allowance is given in the first year.
Using a bank overdraft, would incur an interest cost, with tax capital allowances being available as above.
The interest charge would be fully tax deductible.
Hire purchase would also incur a tax deductible interest cost, and again tax capital  allowances would be available for the capital cost.
Leasing is treated differently.
The asset belongs to the lessor, and so capital allowances are not available to the company.
The assets would be shown in the balance sheet, and tax relief given for the depreciation and interest charge shown in the accounts.
If the car costs more than £12,000 there would be a tax restriction on the relief available for the payments.
You should concentrate on the cost of finance, so the decision depends on the following:
1.
Are you as a shareholder in a position to finance the purchase?
If so, buy them outright.
2.
If not, which will be the cheapest option from the three remaining methods?
This will require quotes from the bank, HP companies and leasing companies.
With the car, this will be a benefit in kind for you.
The benefit is based on the engine size of the car, providing it costs less than £19,250, and on the business mileage.
If all petrol costs are to be met by the company, the fuel scale charge will also apply, and an adjustment will be required to the company's VAT returns for VAT on private fuel.
Alternatively only the cost of petrol for business mileage could be reimbursed.
The company would have a national insurance charge to pay based on the car scale charge (and fuel scale charge if applicable).
This is paid after the end of the tax year, and is currently 10.4% of the tax scale charges.
If you provide your own car, business mileage costs could be reimbursed using the Fixed Profit Car Scheme.
This scheme specifies the maximum rate per mile which may be paid with no benefit-in-kind implications for the employee.
The rate depends on the engine size, and gives two figures: one for the first 4,000 miles, with the second rate for all business mileage over 4,000 miles.
There is no national insurance cost to the company.
JAPAN Nagasaki to aid Korean A-victims
THE TOWN of Nagasaki said yesterday it would earmark two million yen (£12,000) in its 1993 budget towards aiding Korean survivors of the 1945 US atomic bombing of the city, but the Koreans, who were working in Nagasaki as imported labourers, must come to Japan to receive the free medical treatment.
UNITED STATES Too many pennies spent on shuttle
THE US space agency was criticised yesterday over costs of a new toilet for the space shuttle which soared from $8.2 million (£5.6 million) to $23.4 million (£16 million).
National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials conceded to a congressional committee looking into the costs that the agency had made a mistake by letting the contract ‘run over cost, over time.’
THE gamble taken by Michel Rocard, former premier and leading Socialist, seems to be paying off.
By calling on his fellow party members to perform the equivalent of a collective hara-kiri, he paradoxically appears to have given them back hope of a new life at the moment of their deepest despair.
For months the polls have been predicting an unprecedented landslide victory for the Right in next month's general election.
The Socialists looked set to lose 200 or more of their 270 parliamentary seats.
A mood of total defeatism had set in.
Many of the party leaders appeared to have given up.
Rocked by an interminable succession of scandals, shamed by its inability to stop the inexorable rise of unemployment to a record three million, and increasingly alienated from ordinary people after more than a decade in power, the Socialist Party was no longer simply ailing; it was moribund.
The latest scandal, this time involving the Prime Minister himself, Pierre Beregovoy, hitherto regarded as the very model of honesty and integrity, seemed like the last straw.
Mr Beregovoy may claim he has nothing to reproach himself for, but his acceptance of an interest-free one million franc (£125,000) loan from a shady businessman looks suspicious to say the least.
Mr Beregovoy says he accepted the money from his ‘friend’, Roger-Patrice Pelat, in September 1986 in order to help to buy a modest, 100 square yard flat for himself in the fashionable 16th Arrondissement of Paris, costing 2.5 million francs.
He insists no political favours were promised in return and claims that he has since repaid the debt, half of it in the form of old books and furniture.
No itemised list of the valuables has been produced, however.
Mr Pelat, an old friend of President Franois Mitterrand from his days as a Resistance fighter, was charged with insider trading in 1988 after making a profit of more than £800,000 during the acquisition of the American Triangle Industries by Pechiney, the French state-owned aluminium and packaging company.
M Beregovoy is supposed to be joint leader of the socialists' election campaign.
The other supposed leader, Laurent Fabius, first secretary of the Socialist Party, is also severely incapacitated on account of his involvement in a scandal concerning the treatment of haemophiliacs with HIV-contaminated blood, for which he is facing manslaughter.
Into this seemingly catastrophic situation suddenly rode Mr Rocard, prime minister from 1988 to 1991 and the man officially designated as the Socialist candidate for the 1995 presidential election.
Since being ‘sacked’(his own expression) by President Mitterrand nearly two years' ago, Michel Rocard had virtually disappeared from the national political scene.
Last Thursday, however, he made a spectacular return with a speech to party militants in Montlouis, on the outskirts of Tours, in which he called for a political ‘big bang’ in order to bring about the emergence of a new centre-left party as part of a recomposition of the whole of the French political scene.
It was time for the Socialists to make a complete break with their past in order to bring about a new renaissance, he argued.
What was now needed was a ‘vast, open, modern, outward-looking movement,’ comprising progressive-minded communists, ecologists, centrists, and human rights activists, as well as what remained of the socialists.
Mr Rocard's ‘big bang’ proposal has received a positive response from most socialist leaders, left-wing voters (73 per cent approved of the idea), and ecologist supporters (62 per cent approved), while several leading communist dissidents have expressed a cautious interest.
Ecologist leaders have tended to pour scorn on the idea in public(their private response has been warmer) and the centrists, who at present form part of the conservative coalition, have rejected it out of hand.
This was to be expected just before a general election, however.
Mr Rocard is more hopeful about what could happen afterwards.
In the meantime, he has given the Socialists a much-needed shot in the arm which might just save them from the total disaster they were expecting next month.
Cattle code
We are delighted to hear how the bullocks are cared for on Mr and Mrs Taylor's farm (Points of View, 15 February).
However, when we advocate such conditions we are assured that they are ‘not economic’.
Indeed, the first (voluntary) codes of recommendation for livestock drawn up by the Ministry of Agriculture were described as setting standards below which profitability would be jeopardised, not as being desirable for the animals' welfare.
Although the codes (still voluntary) have since been improved, the preface to them all still acknowledges that ‘nearly all livestock husbandry systems impose restrictions on the stock and some of these can cause an unacceptable degree of discomfort or distress by preventing the animals from fulfilling their basic needs.’
In some cases, including the cattle code, it is added: ‘Husbandry systems in current use do not equally meet the physiological and behavioural needs of the animals.’
Conveyancing
David Alves, of the REAL group of estate agents, in his letter published today concerning property selling and conveyancing fees, wished to correct what he considered to be an inaccurate statement in your law guide ‘The Session’, published earlier.
As he is interested in having inaccuracies corrected, perhaps I may be permitted to clear up some which appeared in his letter.
He states: ‘Like solicitors, estate agents generally charge only 1 per cent.
The difference in overall cost is in the price of conveyancing.’
Inaccurate: the actual difference in overall cost includes the price of conveyancing, completion of missives and discharging of secured loans if applicable, outlays and VAT.
He goes on: ‘And by using an estate agent you're dealing with a dedicated property specialist, a description which applies to only a handful of solicitors.’
Inaccurate: his use of the word handful is speculative and is hardly an accurate or appropriate unit of measurement in references of this kind, as he cannot possibly know how many solicitors are dedicated property specialists.
In Scotland, solicitors sell more properties than estate agents and it is probable, therefore, that there are more property specialists in their ranks than he imagines.
I believe it would be more accurate to say that by using a solicitor, you're dealing with a highly trained specialist in conveyancing and related matters, who, if not a property specialist in terms of marketing, may well employ one, a description which applies to no estate agent, let alone a ‘handful’.
In conclusion, Mr Alves states that a considerable saving can be made by using estate agents, as solicitors have traditionally used a scale fee.
Inaccurate: the council of the Law Society of Scotland abolished the conveyancing scale fees in 1985!
Unilever's profits soar over £2bn
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE Unilever juggernaut rolled its profits past £2 billion last year despite recession, increasing its turnover by 7 per cent to £24.7 billion and pre-tax profits by 13 per cent to £2,029 million.
The sale of 4P packaging and the BOCM Silcock animal feed business slowed sales growth, but helped cut net debt from £1.5 billion to £1.2 billion, and interest costs almost halved to £148 million.
Earnings per share after tax rose 12 per cent to 69.14p.
The weakness of the pound helped inflate the figures in sterling.
At constant exchange rates, turnover rose only 4 per cent, pre-tax profits by 11 per cent and earnings per share by 9 per cent .
Shareholders in the UK company get a 12 per cent rise in their final dividend to 15.6p, making a 10 per cent higher total of 20.8p.
Shareholders in the Dutch company get a 4 per cent higher total of 5.78 guilders.
The shares jumped 25p at first to 1,171p before settling back to 1,160p, up 14p.
Consumer products, especially cosmetics and detergents, generally performed better than industrial and professional markets, both for detergents and food.
Southern Europe grew faster than northern Europe, while North America showed a distinct improvement, especially in the fourth quarter.
Total turnover in the fourth quarter was up 5 per cent and profits up 13 per cent to £522 million, beating all three preceding quarters.
The new chairman, Michael Perry, sees no sign of an improvement in the UK trading environment, but promises further progress in cost-cutting and developing new products to win new markets.
Promotional spending rose from 10 per cent to 11 per cent of total sales and spending on research and development went up from £426 million to £461 million.
Last year's innovations include Promise Ultra, a spread containing no saturated fat, which has been instantly successful in the US, and is likely to arrive soon in the UK, and an iced tea, jointly promoted with Pepsico.
Unilever's success stories include its Italian ice-cream which now has 80 per cent of what should be the most sophisticated ice-cream market.
The main threats to the group are political, including the risks of a trade war, selective US taxes on foreign companies, and VAT on UK food.
Scots funds reach £103bn record
FUNDS under management by Scottish companies leapt 20 per cent during 1992 to reach a record £103.4 billion by the end of December, writes Bill Millar.
This compares to £86 billion under management at the end of December 1991.
Over the past seven years, funds under management by Scottish companies have risen nearly threefold.
According to Scottish Financial Enterprise, which released the figures yesterday, the increase illustrates the ability of the Scottish financial sector to compete ‘in even the toughest economic climate’.
SFE's executive director, James Scott, said that no-one should be in any doubt about the importance of the financial sector to the country as a whole.
In fact, the total rise reflects two separate increases — the first is the actual rise in new additional funds brought in, while the second comprises the increase in existing funds arising from investment performance — which combine to make the whole.
The largest sectoral rise came from the independent fund managers where funds rose 30 per cent to £31.7 billion by the end of 1992.
Funds under management at Scotland's nine life offices rose 16 per cent to £71.7 billion and SFE estimates that their share of the long-term life assurance and pensions market in the UK as a whole is currently in excess of 20 per cent and as high as 25 per cent in the pensions sector.
Nissan to close factory as £171m loss looms
From Peter McGill, Japan
JAPAN'S second largest car maker, Nissan Motors, has announced it is to close one of its main passenger car factories in Japan and shed 5,000 of its Japanese workforce by 1996 in a bid to restore the company to profitability.
Yesterday Nissan revealed that losses for the fiscal year ending this March will reach 29 billion yen (£171 million), more than twice what the company had estimated last November.
Nissan's Zama factory, outside Tokyo, which is to be shut down, had been a showcase for automation in the 1980s.
Zama produced 260,000 Nissan cars a year, one tenth of total output.
Nissan says that after two years car production in Japan will be concentrated in a new factory in Fukuoka, southern Kyushu, where the Zama workforce is to be relocated.
NHK, the Japanese state-controlled broadcasting company, reported last night that:
Other Japanese car-makers are also in trouble.
During the boom of the 1980s, they made massive investments in new production, but now that new factories and assembly lines are finally in operation they find the domestic market bogged down in recession, protectionism rising in key export markets and the yen rocketing to historic highs.
Yesterday the yen reached 116.78 to the dollar in Tokyo, fuelled by expectation that this weekend's meeting of G-7 finance ministers will agree to a strengthened yen to reduce Japan's high trade surpluses.
The yen began the month at 125 to the dollar.
In other bad news, Japan's domestic telecommunications giant, NTT, said it would cut another 30,000 jobs between 1994 and 1996, on top of a planned 40,000 jobs to be lost between 1990 and 1993.
Management buys last of Lilley offshoots
THE last remnants of the estate of the troubled Lilley Group were sold yesterday when the entire share capital of Dumfries-based builder Robison & Davidson was bought by a management team led by the managing director, Bob Robison, writes John Hatfield.
The buy-out, for an undisclosed sum, was funded by venture capitalists 3i, NatWest Ventures and the Royal Bank of Scotland, while the Bank of Scotland provided working capital.
According to Mr Robison, the firm's 730 employees can consider their jobs to be as secure as any job can be in the building industry at present.
‘There will obviously be some slimming down in certain areas, which is regrettable but necessary.’
Unlike the other seven Lilley Group businesses, Robison & Davison was not included in the receivership because the  management buy-out process had reached an advanced stage prior to the Lilley collapse.
With a current order book of eight months, the company is working on a number of large contracts throughout Dumfries & Galloway and Ayrshire, including construction of a £3.5 million police headquarters in Dumfries.
Commenting on the deal, joint receiver Ian Bennet, of Price Waterhouse, said: ‘This is excellent news for the firm's suppliers, sub-contractors and clients in Ayrshire and the south-west of Scotland.’
With the disposal of the eight Lilley subsidiaries now completed, Price Waterhouse reported that employment has been secured for more than 70 per cent of the Lilley Group's 2,800 employees.
Shares fall back after strong start
By Clifford German
SHARE prices weakened sharply after a sound start based on the overnight strength of Wall Street and the FT-SE 100-Share Index swung through nearly 40 points.
It gained 14 points in early trading but was down almost 25 points before rallying in the last hour to close 20.3 lower at 2,818.0, with just under 600 million shares changing hands.
Brokers blamed fears of rights issues from ICI and Glaxo this week, and higher than expected bad debt provisions at National Westminster for the change of mood.
NatWest slipped 16p to 443p.
Analysts revised forecasts lower for other banks yet to report and Barclays fell 21p to 428p, while HSBC slid 5p to 583p.
Fears that President Clinton will raise cigarette taxes triggered overnight falls in Philip Morris, and sent BAT 34p lower to 926p, with Rothmans losing 19p to 603p.
BPB fell 17p to 217p after issuing a £64 million 15-year Euroconvertible yielding a touch under 7.5 per cent, and confirming a cut in the dividend from 11.25p to 7.5p for the current year.
Investors were unsure how to take Professor Littlechild's promise to monitor electricity generators' profits and National Power reversed initial gains to close 2p lower.
On currency markets the French franc hovered close to its floor, 2.15 per cent below the current strongman, the Irish punt, while sterling fell almost 2 pfennigs to Dm2.3562, but closed almost unchanged at $1.4560.
Cameron Toll centre ‘under offer'
THE CAMERON Toll centre in south-east Edinburgh, the UK's first seven-day-trading shopping centre when it opened in 1984, is likely to change hands within the next two weeks, writes Bill Millar.
A spokesman for the owners, the Civil Aviation Authority Superannuation Scheme, yesterday confirmed that the centre was ‘under offer’ but would make no further comment.
It is understood, however, that the new owner will be a UK company and that the price is likely to be in the region of £25 million to £30 million.
The centre manager, Susan Nicol, yesterday described Cameron Toll as a ‘classy shopping centre’.
She continued: ‘I like it and I think it will always remain an excellent centre, although it could be doing with a degree of refurbishment.’
She said that Cameron Toll had always been fully let.
The centre has a weekly throughput of 200,000 shoppers and, in 1985, was named European Shopping Centre of the Year.
Watchdog gives green light for gas-fired plants
By Frank Frazer
CLEARANCE was given yesterday to regional electricity companies in England and Wales to go ahead with plans for gas-fired power plant in a judgment which was seen as a further setback for the coal industry.
Professor Stephen Littlechild, head of the OFFER, the electricity industry regulatory body, ruled that the companies had not broken conditions of their operating licences by investing in independent gas-fired power stations.
He also said there was no evidence that involvement by the companies with the independent generators had led to any increase in prices for electricity consumers.
His investigation of the plans was released ahead of the white paper on energy supplies in the wake of the controversy over British Coal plans to close 31 pits as a result of the dash for gas.
Prof Littlechild, however, said it would be inappropriate to regard his report as another nail in British Coal's coffin.
He pointed out that if the regional companies signed new contracts with National Power and PowerGen, as he had permitted, 41 per cent of their requirements would be met by coal-fired stations, compared compared with the 17 per cent generated by independent gas-fired producers.
He explained that under the terms of licences, the regional companies were entitled to seek alternative sources to coal-fired electricity to promote diversification in supply.
But he conceded that rising gas prices, while the cost of coal was falling, could mean further developments of gas-fired stations may not be justified to the same extent in future.
Howden paying £22m for Danish fan-maker
By John Hatfield
THE Renfrew-based engineer, Howden Group, yesterday consolidated its position in the international industrial fan market with the acquisition of a Danish-based fan manufacturer, Novenco Industries for £22 million.
It will fund the purchase via a two-for-seven rights issue at 52p a share to raise a total of £31.4 million.
The balance of the proceeds will be used to strengthen the balance sheet.
At the time of the news, Howden's shares were 63p.
Novenco, made up of five subsidiaries making fans for the power, tunnelling and mining sectors, has an annual turnover of £45 million and lost £2.8 million before tax last year.
Its parent company is Danisco, Denmark's largest sugar producer.
According to Howden's chief executive, Konrad Johnsen, the merger will create a strong fan group with a broad product and market spread, and considerable profits growth potential.
As well as giving Howden access to new markets such as Scandinavia and the Far East, the acquisition increases Howden's reliance on the fan business, which previously accounted for one-third of the group's £300 million turnover.
Under the terms of the deal, Howden is acquiring the business and property of Novenco for a price not exceeding £9.2 million.
A further £7.8 million will be used to pay off Novenco's debts, while the remaining £5 million represents the estimated costs of integrating the into Howden's  existing operations.
With the balance of £9.4 million going towards cutting Howden's own net debt from the current £32 million, Alan Maclachlan, Howden spokesman, forecasts that gearing will fall below 20 per cent by the year-end.
Shareholders may be encouraged by Howden's market performance since its last cash call in July 1991 when it launched a 1 for 1 rights issue at 30p.
UK fraud cases jump again to £468m
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
SERIOUS business fraud cases in the UK soared alarmingly by over 28 per cent in 1992, to £468 million.
The previous year's figure of £365 million itself reflected a 28 per cent rise on 1990.
The UK figure, from the fraud barometer of the accountancy firm, KPMG Peat Marwick, is based on cases where charges of over £100,000 have been brought.
But while the number of fraud cases in Scotland also increased, their total value fell.
Five major cases were recorded in 1992, with a total value of £2.9 million.
In 1991 there were two cases, with a total value of £4.275 million.
The KPMG barometer suggests that over the six years that fraud has been tracked, Scotland has been less affected than most regions, with total fraud in the overall period of £34.1 million or 2.1 per cent of the UK total reported.
The worst-affected region was the south-east with fraud cases for the six-year period totalling almost £1.21 billion.
KPMG's Scottish forensic partner, Robin Crawford, warned that the overall 28 per cent surge in UK fraud might not show the whole story.
‘Clearly these figures demonstrate an alarming growth in reported fraud in recent years, however this is probably only the tip of the iceberg.
I suspect that the growth in unreported or undiscovered fraud is even more significant.’
He continued: ‘It is perhaps encouraging that Scotland has suffered less than most regions, however, although the average fraud perpetrated in Scotland tends to be smaller than in some regions, the impact on Scottish businesses can be just as damaging.’
In recent years, fraud cases involving professionals had received a lot of publicity in Scotland, but there had also been a surge in mortgage and cheque frauds, primarily at the expense of banks.
The most heavily affected  during the barometer's six-year life, had been the financial institutions with reported frauds totalling £490 million.
Fraud in commercial companies was close behind at £473 million, followed at some distance by the general public, including investors, at £230 million.
Pension fund frauds came next at £147 million followed by the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise with a total of £99 million.
NatWest's £405m defies slump but bad debts persist
By Magnus Grimond
THE recession has continued to take heavy toll of National Westminster Bank, Britain's second-largest clearer.
Yesterday, NatWest reported another record total of bad-debt charges of £1.9 billion for 1992, after provisions which soared to £1.87 billion the previous year.
The chairman, Lord Alexander, said the pain continued to be felt amongst personal customers and small to medium-sized companies.
And he warned that more would suffer.
‘It seems inevitable that there will be other business failures and a high level of bad debts in our domestic business, even as economic recovery becomes established’, he said.
The level of provisions ‘demonstrates the immense damage which is done by extreme economic cycles and just how important it is for this country to strive to secure steady growth on a low-inflationary basis’.
The bad-debt figures knocked the shares, which fell 16p to 443p by the close yesterday, despite NatWest's announcement of a big recovery in profits last year.
At the taxable level, they leapt from £110 million to £405 million in the 12 months to December, including £26 million from an extended year at the Lombard North Central subsidiary.
The final dividend is being held at 11.375p, to make a same-again total for the year of 17.5p.
The payment to shareholders is being paid from reserves for the second year running, though earnings per share jumped from 3p to 12p.
Most of the bad debts fell on the UK branch business, where losses jumped from £66 million to £140 million last year.
NatWest's chief executive, Derek Wanless, said he expected a ‘modest improvement’ in the current year and welcomed a cut in the key cost to-income ratio from 67.5 per cent to 64.7 per cent.
NatWest cut staff by 7,200 in 1992 and is set to axe 4,000 more this year.
The increased UK branch losses were more than offset by a massive recovery in the United States, where profits at NatWest Bancorp soared to £109 million, after losses of £182 million the previous year.
NatWest also made a mint from the upheaval in the money markets last year.
Foreign-exchange turnover doubled in 1992 and total income from that source jumped from £136 million to £228 million.
Alex Robinson, a banking analyst at Smith New Court, said the broker was likely to raise its NatWest profits forecast for the current year slightly from the previous £710 million, in the light of yesterday's figures.
Sedgwick forced to halve dividend
By Richard Shackleton
SEDGWICK, the international insurance broker, yesterday revealed the extent of the difficulties posed by tough market conditions and falling interest income last year as it announced a sharp drop in annual profits.
The pre-tax figure slid to £58.2 million, from £82.4 million in 1991, and the dividend total is halved to 6p.
Though the figures were at the top end of City expectations while the company is in the middle of a four-year business plan, the shares fell 2p to 168p.
Sax Riley, chief executive, has set ‘demanding business targets’ for 1993 to improve revenue in an insurance market ‘which is not expected to show a significant improvement over 1992’.
Lower UK and US interest rates cut interest income by £10.2 million to £53 million, outweighing a £10 million rise in brokerage and fee income.
Premium rises had been achieved in some areas, but other sectors had been very competitive.
Profits suffered at the EW Payne reinsurance business and River Thames Insurance, where underwriting reserves had to be increased.
Analysts were worried by a big property write-down which cuts shareholders' funds by £73.2 million and pushes gearing up to 113 per cent.
Earnings per share slipped to 8.3p, from 12.8p.
Mr Riley said the dividend decision had been taken against a background of worldwide recession, continuing soft US insurance market conditions, contraction of London's insurance market and falling interest rates.
While Sedgwick had seen some encouraging new business gains in the early weeks of this year, ‘our overall view for 1993 remains cautious’.
Amstrad bounces back into black
By Magnus Grimond
AMSTRAD, the consumer electronics company, yesterday revealed that last year's failed takeover bid by its chairman, Alan Sugar, had cost it £1.1 million.
The £113 million attempt to take the company private collapsed in December, when Mr Sugar failed to gain enough votes from independent shareholders.
At the time, he estimated that he, personally, had spent more than £400,000 on making the offer.
Despite the bid costs, Amstrad was able to report a bounce back into the black for the six months to December.
Pre-tax profits of £5.61 million replace a loss of £12 million at halfway last time and one of more than £70 million for all of 1991.
The company is paying an interim dividend of 0.2p, after passing last year's final, against 0.4p in the comparable period.
A previous loss per share of 1.3p becomes earnings of 0.7p.
Mr Sugar gave little away yesterday about his intention to reshape the board, as promised during the takeover bid.
‘The board are currently selecting a short list of candidates who have been introduced to us independently by Pro Ned Limited.
We will shortly announce these appointments’, Mr Sugar said.
Mr Sugar is ploughing on with the rationalisation announced last year.
Amstrad has taken a £7.24 million charge for the restructuring of its Spanish subsidiary, and has also written down computer stock by £3.6 million more.
Mr Sugar warned that prevailing exchange rates were forcing Amstrad to raise prices, causing demand to fall for certain products.
Complex arena slows energy policy plans
ONLY three working days are left for ministers to fulfil their promise of a February publication date for the white paper on future energy supply designed to quell the fury over British Coal's pit closure plans.
Unless the leaky Government machine has failed to function by spewing out the usual advance warning of announcements in the pipeline, it seems unlikely that the deadline will be met — reflecting the complexities of trying to make rational long-term decisions in energy markets dominated by short-term thinking.
The UK's immediate problems with mining capacity have tended to be viewed in a gas-versus-coal context.
But that is too simplistic an approach when dealing with markets influenced by global trends, including currency movements.
The rise in oil prices towards $19 a barrel yesterday indicated that some traders are taking seriously the latest efforts by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries to trim output in an attempt to achieve a target level of at least $21 a barrel.
It is too early to conclude if the pact on quotas will stick.
But movements in oil prices have knock-on effects on other fuels, particularly gas on which plans for a new generation of power stations is based.
Analysts are divided in their views about the effectiveness of the OPEC deal — in spite of indications given by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates that they will cut supplies to customers from next month in accordance with the new quotas.
Because some members of the cartel have managed to find ways around production constraints applied in the past, observers do not rule out the possibility that it could happen again.
Predicting global energy trends has been made even more complicated by last week's decision by President Clinton to tax US fuel supplies on their heat content.
This has given fresh impetus to European Community moves to base a levy on carbon dioxide emissions.
The proposed measures could mean reworking calculations on which earlier assumptions about demand for the various fuels were made.
In the new circumstances, ministers may feel justified in taking a little longer to reach their conclusions so that they cannot be accused of hasty actions which they might later regret.
But with thousands of jobs in mining and the offshore industry at stake, it would be unkind to prolong the agony too long.
Scottish trusts show fine all-round growth
By Gordon Milne
FOUR Scottish investment trusts all had good growth to report yesterday.
A second consecutive year of strong asset growth at Martin Currie's Scottish Eastern saw net asset value grow 14 per cent to 79.2p — a shade ahead of the FT-A World Index, up 13.9 per cent.
The trust's portfolio was 55 per cent invested in UK equities, with the other 45 per cent in overseas markets, practically the same proportions as last year.
Pre-tax revenue rose by 13.8 per cent to £14.2 million, while earnings per share went up 12.8 per cent to 1.59p, from 1.41p.
The total rises 7 per cent to 1.52p.
American Trust, after a poor first half, has bounced back to report a 26 per cent leap in net asset value per share for the full year to 265.2p, from last year's 210.3p.
It is the second big rise in a row for American, an income and capital growth vehicle run by Edinburgh Fund Managers.
Last year, the North American specialist recorded an NAV increase of 30 per cent.
Earnings per share only edged up to 4.82p, from 4.77p, but a final dividend of 3.4p (3.3p) lifts the total from 4.8p to 4.9p.
Murray Income, Murray Johnstone's income and capital growth trust, has outperformed its benchmark indices in its first half-year.
In the six months to 31 December, the total return earned on net assets was 16.6 per cent— ahead of both the 14.7 per cent rise in the FT-A All-Share Index and the Kleinwort Benson Topsi 100, up 12.9 per cent .
Last October, an interim dividend of 6.75p, payable in three equal instalments, was declared — a 2.3 per cent rise on the previous year's 6.6p interim.
The forecast for this year's final dividend is 4.15p, a 3.75 per cent rise, making a 2.8 per cent lift in the total.
The board expects a similar percentage increase in next year's interim dividend from 6.75p to 7p.
Shirescot, the UK smaller companies specialist trust launched by Glasgow Investment Managers in August, has achieved a healthy total return in its first four months.
At 31 December, Shirescot's fully-diluted net asset value stood at 109.58p; well up on the initial NAV, after issue costs, of 95.07p.
Taking into account the proposed dividend of 2.2p, this amounts to a total return of 18.3 per cent, though it is less than the increase in the Hoare Govett Smaller Companies — up 24.1 per cent .
SmithKline Beecham gains 11% as sales boom
By Richard Shackleton
PRESIDENT Clinton's forthcoming healthcare reforms hold little fear for the SmithKline Beecham, its chief executive, Bob Bauman, said yesterday.
Speaking after the Anglo-American pharmaceutical and consumer giant reported an 11 per cent rise in pre-tax profits to £1.115 billion, on turnover also up 11 per cent at £5.2 billion, Mr Bauman said the improvement was entirely the result of better sales, rather than price increases.
He said the key to SmithKline's success was its ability to market and sell brands and cash in on the potential of new products.
‘We are on the right track for continued growth, despite an increasingly challenging worldwide environment.’
Total pharmaceutical sales rose by 15 per cent, with the US turning in a particularly strong performance.
Sales in eastern Europe soared by 92 per cent and in China, by 68 per cent.
SmithKline's antibiotic, Augumentin, became the group's second ‘$1 billion’ drug as worldwide sales reached $1.03 billion (£589 million).
The first was the anti-ulcer product, Tagamet.
Operating profits increased 9 per cent to £758 million.
In the consumer brands business, Ribena's sales rose 10 per cent and Horlicks's, 5 per cent, though sales of Lucozade were unchanged.
Overall, divisional profits rose 5 per cent to £244 million.
The animal-health division saw profits dip 2 per cent to £62 million after the US Food and Drugs Administration held back some products.
But the group remains a leading player in the pet and farm animal immunisation field.
Clinical laboratories which provide testing facilities to a range of organisations, including sports, saw profits rise 14 per cent to £77 million.
The shares jumped 13p on the figures before settling back to close only 2p up at 424p.
Foulkes attacks union leaders
GEORGE FOULKES, the MP for the large agricultural constituency of Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley, has criticised the leadership of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland after the Commons vote on HLCAs last week.
‘The Labour party opposed the cuts in HCLAs with a three-line whip but no real effort was undertaken by the NFU leadership to put pressure on Tory MPs to rebel or abstain,’ said Mr Foulkes.
‘If this issue had been built up by the NFU and sufficient Tory MPs had rebelled we could have reversed the cuts but there seemed to be little fight from Edinburgh.
‘Now they seem to be taking the same supine approach to the milk and potato marketing boards, where the Government is in the process of selling out the interests of farmers.
‘It makes me  believe that the NFU leadership is unwilling to do anything to really fight for the interests of farmers if it embarrasses the Tory Government.
Certainly they huff and puff but when the chips are down they chicken out.’
‘There has been no real determination in their opposition since the London demonstration of 1991, and that was led by Ayrshire farmers.
If the Scottish NFU had only half the fight of the Ayrshire farmers we would really see some action.’
George Foulkes: ‘when chips are down they chicken out’
Mat-making advised to increase grassland profits
GRASSLAND farmers are being advised to take up mat making to increase profits and cut pollution.
The mats are formed by a special cutting and macerating machine which harvests the grass and presses it into a five to ten millimetre layer which is placed back on the stubble.
North American trials have shown that system offers much faster drying rates than with conventional swaths, reduced field losses and a higher fibre digestibility rate for livestock.
‘Under favourable conditions, the mat making technique offers the potential to achieve very rapid fuel drying of forage,’ said Andy Knight of the Silsoe Research Institute, at the Kamira Grassland Conference at Stoneleigh, Warwickshire yesterday.
‘However, under typical UK conditions of high crop yield, high soil moisture content and somewhat unpredictable weather conditions it is essential that drying rates are maximised consistent with machinery system costs which are competitive with existing approaches.’
In joint simulation trials scientists from Quebec, Silsoe and Edinburgh showed that mat making could improve  profitability by as much as £2,400 per year on a 40 hectare 100 cow farm, provided a low-cost harvester was available.
Drying experiments at Silsoe showed that on an average non-rainy day, thin mats were ready to harvest for wilted silage after about three hours compared with between six and 36 hours of wilting with the unconditioned crop.
The experimental thin mats also reached 20 per cent moisture, suitable for hay, within two drying days.
The system also offers a reduced risk of effluent pollution as this is directly related to the dry matter content of the material at harvest.
However, the system is susceptible to high losses in bad weather.
Scientists envisage the development of either a start-stop system, an alternative to field drying or an additional pressing system to remove moisture could overcome that.
Mr Knight also acknowledged that a suitable high-speed pick-up machine was not yet available from a commercial manufacturer although they had shown their own adaptation with a high speed paddle rotor swept up all materials including small particles.
Further research has been conducted at Silsoe this year and the technique is to be displayed at the European Grassland Demonstration at Stoneleigh in May.
A record year for Limousin breed society
THE annual report from the British Limousin Cattle Society shows that Limousin breeders broke all records during the year ended July 1992 — for registrations, membership and profits.
Norman Cruickshank, Cleghorn, Lanark, chairman of the society, told members and guests at the annual general meeting in Carlisle last week that that demonstrated the continuing confidence of members in the long-term future of the breed — and the success of the carcase breed in meeting the demand from butchers for quality carcases and the demand from consumers for lean, tender and succulent beef.
Total registrations at 8,384 were more than 400 up on the previous year and membership increased by 50 to 1,728 at the year end.
‘Since the year end, this record breaking trend has continued,’ he added.
‘Registrations are running about 300 up on last year; average prices have been £300 to £500 up on the previous year; and our commercial customers have been taking top prices for finished Limousin crosses at markets through the UK.
‘But this doesn't mean we can become complacent — times are still hard in the beef industry — beef margins are tight and competition from other breeds is fierce.
We have the best breed for profitable dairy beef and suckler beef production in the UK.
We must continue to market and promote it aggressively and confidently,’ he said.
4,000 at spring show
THE supreme championship yesterday at the Aberdeen Spring Show at Thainstone, Inverurie, which attracted more than 4,000 people, was a rising one-year-old Limousin X bullock from a show enthusiast and Banff and Buchan District council official, Graham Taylor, Banff.
Mr Taylor, who has only six cattle, was clearly delighted with his triumph and he said afterwards that his ambition was to go on to win the Aberdeen Fatstock Show at the end of this year.
His champion was later unsold at £780.
The reserve supreme ticket went to Michael Durno, Auchorachan, Glenlivet, who lifted the award with the April 1992 Charolais X heifer Smarty Pants.
That home-bred entry was reserve at Keith Show last year and went on to sell yesterday for £1,900.
The reserve bullock championship went to Stuart Hunter, West Cairnhill, Culsalmond, with a Limousin X. The reserve heifer champion was shown by Mr and Mrs Stewart Brown, Roe Park, Brechin.
That 22-month-old Limousin X is out of a Simmental Angus cow and was bred by Peter Walker, Easterside, Dunnottar.
In the prime hogg section, the championship went to John Young, Arbroath, with a pen of Texel X. In the breeding sheep championship, the winners were W & J Brown, Hilton of Culsh, New Deer.
The dairy championship and the reserve title were taken by Kenny Mair, Kinnermit, Turriff, with Holstein Friesians.
Results in full Beef cattle and supreme — Graham Taylor, 9, Ogilvie Place, Banff, with rising one year-old bullock by a Limousin sire and out of an Aberdeen Angus cross cow.
Reserve — D&R Durno, Auchorachan, Glenlivet, with April-born home bred Charolais cross heifer, Smarty Pants by Allanfauld Vagabond and out of a Limousin cow.
Reserve bullock — Stuart Hunter, West Cairnhill, Culsalmond, with January 1992 Limousin cross by Shatton Pedro and out of an Aberdeen Angus Limousin cross cow.
CASH OPTION: Going for shares to avoid low interest rates
A warning for savers
YOU could be losing serious money simply by putting your savings in a bank or building society.
With interest rates at their lowest level for 15 years, your savings could be earning only 3 per cent interest.
Investing long-term savings in shares or unit trusts instead could pay far more, and you do not have to be a financial whizz-kid or ageing yuppie to do so.
In times of high interest rates, keeping your money in a safe investment such as a bank or building society can make sense.
But even then, over most periods of five years or more you would have done much better with shares.
Now they are even more attractive.
The price of shares can fall as well as rise, so it is worth noting these two golden rules:
Do not invest money which you may need back at short notice.
You should be prepared to invest for long enough to ride out any dips in the market.
Spread your money, and risk, across a range of companies and industries.
As a minimum, you should be investing in, ten different companies.
Because brokers' charges are high for small deals, you will need to invest at least £1000 in each.
Even with £10,000 to invest, you are still small beer for most stockbrokers and investment managers — some require a minimum portfolio of £100,000.
So smaller investors may need to take the DIY route, which is fine if you have the time and enjoy keeping track of your companies.
If not, unit trusts or investment trusts are the answer.
Unit trusts are ready-made portfolios of large numbers of shares and other investments.
Investors buy units in the portfolio.
The value of your units can go up and down reflecting the performance of the underlying investments.
The trust manager takes a percentage of your original capital, typically 5 per cent, when you first invest and a yearly fee of, say, 1 per cent of the fund.
Investment trusts are similar.
They are companies quoted on the stock exchange.
You buy a trust's shares, which give you a stake in its investment portfolio.
Some unit and investment trusts aim to provide capital growth, others income.
There are also trusts which specialise in small companies or recovery stocks, UK, Japanese or US shares, government stocks, and so on.
Many trusts offer savings schemes which let you invest small sums, £25 to £30 a month, on a regular basis.
Minimum lump sum investments tend to be £500 to £1000.
The performance of trusts — even of one type — is very varied so it makes sense to spread your money across more than one trust.
Fife set to fix tax rate
A COUNCIL tax ranging from £297 to £900 is set to be fixed for householders in Fife.
Water charges of between £39 and £118 are also be recommended to the regional council by their policy and resources committee when they meet on Thursday.
If approved, two people living in a band D house, will pay a combined regional council rates and water charge of £504 — that's £26 or 5.4 per cent more than they now pay in poll tax.
The various districts' council tax will have to be added to that.
Householders on the lower bands could pay less than they are paying now, while some in bands E to H may face increases greater than 5.4 percent depending on their circumstances and the amount of transitional relief eventually fixed by the Government.
The council's proposed gross budget of £351.4 million — an increase of £13.8 million or 4 percent — represents savings of almost £5 million.
Highlands win £100m EC aid backing
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
MORE than £100 million of European aid could be on its way to the Highlands and Islands following a European Commission recommendation yesterday that the region should get top priority in EC regional spending plans.
The recommendation is seen as nine-tenths of the battle, the final skirmish being an EC foreign ministers' meeting later this year to approve the commission's recommendation that the Highlands and Islands should have Objective 1 status.
Two-thirds of the commission's regional spending budget — £16.5 billion in 1993 — goes to Objective 1 areas.
Highlands and Islands Enterprise estimated yesterday it could mean £20 million a year until 1999.
A spokesman said the cash could unlock projects such as the proposed University of the Highlands and Islands, a vehicle ferry or causeway linking Lewis, Harris and the Uists, major upgrading of single-track roads, and provision of new factories, workshops and offices.
The HIE chief executive, Iain Robertson, said: ‘Objective 1 funding would provide a platform for growth for the Highlands and Islands which would take it from the edge of Europe to the community's very heart.’
Projects in Objective 1 areas get 75 per cent, and in some cases 85 per cent , funding from the EC, the rest to be shared by local and central government.
The regional affairs commissioner, Bruce Millan, also announced intentions to tighten up on the EC's additionality principle — the rule that EC spending must be additional to planned national government spending.
At a Brussels press conference, he confirmed that in spite of the resolution last February of a dispute with the United Kingdom government over additionality, local authorities had complained of government restrictions on their spending reducing their ability to make use of EC aid.
Mr Millan said that he was talking to UK authorities and expressed some optimism the matter could be resolved, although EC officials believe the tougher rules could lead to new battles with the Treasury.
In the north last night, in spite of the caveat of final approval yet to come, the regional and islands councils, enterprise bodies, MPs and MEP Winnie Ewing, joined in congratulating each other on the campaign.
Mrs Ewing said: ‘This decision, coupled with the pledge of support which I secured from John Major in Strasbourg last December, means that Europe's least densely populated area stands a much better chance of receiving justice.’
The Highlands regional convener, Duncan McPherson, said: ‘Team work has been a key feature of our approach and any success we can achieve will be through joint action.’
Merseyside is also expected to get Objective 1 status, a designation which now covers a quarter of the EC population including the former eastern Germany, Greece, Corsica, southern Italy, Portugal, Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
English firm wins Scottish Office deal from HMSO
By Gordon Milne
THE Government's principal printing and stationery agency, HMSO Scotland, has lost its £1.5 million contract to supply stationery to the Scottish Office — to a firm from south London.
The shock news comes just ten days after Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, castigated local sub-contractors for missing opportunities.
The tender, which has a potential value of £1.5 million, has been awarded to Cartwright Brice, a London-based subsidiary of WH Smith.
It is the first Scottish Office contract to have been lost by Her Majesty's Stationery Office since it was set up north of the Border in 1906 with the primary aim of servicing the Scottish Office.
Sources indicated yesterday that the pricing process had been taken out of the hands of Scottish management.
But Geoff Bedford, director of HMSO Scotland, insisted last night that the unsuccessful tender had been pitched at a price decided jointly with HMSO's UK headquarters in Norwich.
In spite of the loss, the Scottish Office will remain HMSO Scotland's largest customer.
A Scottish Office spokesman said yesterday that the agency would continue to be a leading supplier of Scottish Office publications, printing and printing procurement, adding: ‘The contract was awarded after a full and thorough evaluation of competing bids.’
The decision to put the Scottish Office contract out to tender is an example of ‘market testing’— an attempt to see if alternative sources can give better service and value for money than government departments and agencies.
In the past year, more than £6 million has been invested in new Edinburgh premises for HMSO.
Part of the reason was a plan to extend HMSO Scotland's services to government departments south of the Border.
‘We were expecting to grow with the English work,’ Mr Bedford said.
‘We still will, but perhaps a bit more slowly now.’
The news is embarrassing for Mr Lang, who ten days ago told an Edinburgh audience that inward investment had provided huge opportunities for local sub-contractors.
‘But there is no doubt that we haven't yet made the most of those opportunities,’ he said.
‘Chances have been missed to build up indigenous industry.
More needs to be done and I want to see more focus on this key area of economic policy.’
Alistair Darling, Labour MP for Edinburgh Central, said last night: ‘It is ironic that the Scottish Office is ordering its office supplies from south London.
I'm all in favour of the Government seeking to get the best value for money, but HMSO is not a private company.’
Mr Darling said private companies were able to take ‘strategic decisions’ when pitching for contracts, an avenue which is often blocked to government agencies.
‘I'm not saying it happened on this occasion, but it is not unknown for a private company to take a loss on government contracts to get a foot in the door.’
Scott Lithgow shipyard up for sale
By John Hatfield
SCOTT LITHGOW, the last major shipyard on the lower Clyde, has been put up for sale by its owners, Trafalgar House, the London-based property and engineering group.
Various companies have been approached but no buyer has yet been found.
The Norwegian-owned Kvaerner Govan yard on the Upper Clyde is using Scott Lithgow's 1,000ft dry dock while it fits out the Havis, the last of its batch of four liquefied petroleum gas tankers.
A spokesman, Bobby Gordon, ruled out any interest from Kvaerner in buying part of the yard.
‘At the end of the day, we build about two ships a year and we have the option of using dry docks at Harland & Wolff in Belfast or perhaps Yarrow,’ he said.
Trafalgar bought the Port Glasgow yard from British Shipbuilders for just £12 million in 1984, soon after it was converted from shipbuilding to offshore construction work.
The downturn in the North Sea meant there was too little work to keep all three of Trafalgar's facilities operational.
Trafalgar decided to concentrate on its RGC yard at Methil and the Redpath yard on Teesside.
At its peak of activity in spring of last year, Scott Lithgow employed 900 people but at present the workforce numbers just 25 involved in care and maintenance.
Graham Strachan, director of business development at Scott Lithgow, said that Trafalgar intended to sell the yard as a going concern: ‘We are quite clear that we won't be selling off bits and pieces.
It will definitely be kept as a single unit.’
Prospects for the 100-acre site, which comprises a mixture of developed and undeveloped land, are unclear.
Before the offshore operation was officially closed down last week, Scott Lithgow had established a reputation for completing contracts on schedule.
While the moth-balled shipbuilding facilities, such as landing berths, are still usable, heavy investment is required to upgrade them.
According to Nick Granger, director of the Shipbuilders' and Shiprepairers' Association, the equipment is 1960s vintage.
‘The pattern of construction has changed considerably since the days when Lithgow was laid out.
Ships are now built in modules rather than built in a whole from the base up in a dry dock,’ he said.
Initial reaction from William Scott, chief executive at the neighbouring Ferguson Shipbuilders in Greenock, was that the Scott Lithgow yard was on a larger scale than Ferguson would envisage using.
‘But if it's officially up for sale we will certainly go for a look around.’
Development at Scott Lithgow could be hampered by the fact that it lies on unimproved land outside the Inverclyde Enterprise Zone.
Rosyth unions accept job cuts proposal
By Gary Duncan
UNIONS at Rosyth will not fight plans by the Fife dockyard to axe 550 jobs — provided there are no compulsory redundancies.
After three hours of talks yesterday, union conveners at the yard said they felt it would be fruitless to oppose the proposed voluntary severances.
But they accused Rosyth's commercial managers, Babcock Thorn, of sacrificing the jobs in favour of casual labour and sub-contractors — a charge the company denied.
The union's decision came as Rosyth's arch-rival, the Devonport yard at Plymouth, launched its latest salvo in the fight over the lucrative contract for the refitting of Britain's Trident nuclear missile submarines.
In a surprise move, Devonport Management disclosed details of a scheme to create an oil tanker refitting facility at Rosyth providing more than 1,000 jobs.
At the Fife yard yesterday, the union conveners explained their reasons for deciding against action over the job losses.
‘We feel it would be maybe jeopardising more immediate prospects we have in here,’ said George Manclark, of the Transport and General Workers.
But he added: ‘Obviously if it cannot be provided by voluntary means that would be an entirely different ball game.’
Devonport's proposal to convert reclaimed land at Rosyth for oil tanker work — which it has passed to both the Ministry of Defence and the Department of Trade and Industry — initially caught the Babcock Thorn management unawares.
But the company later retaliated, suggesting the rival yard should devote its energies to managing its own facilities.
Devonport's plan is to use land Rosyth had intended for a new £267 million Trident refitting facility for the oil tanker work.
The Trident dock is now unlikely to be built after Devonport bid £162 million for the refitting contract and Rosyth submitted an alternative £147 million proposal to upgrade its existing submarine docks.
Peter Whitehouse, Devonport's business development director, said a costly and detailed analysis had shown Rosyth could win enough tanker work to provide more than 1,000 jobs for six to seven years initially.
But Babcock Thorn scorned the proposal.
It said it had its own, better, plans for the land and, in any case, there was already substantial spare capacity in the tanker refitting business.
It also questioned whether Rosyth could compete effectively for this business against firms in the Far East with their lower cost base and sites on the main tanker routes.
Defence ministry sources said last night that officials were aware of the tanker refitting scheme.
But they made clear it would not be a factor in the final decision about where to place the Trident work.
Unhappy duke quits Tories
THE DUKE of Westminster, said to be Britain's richest man, has resigned from the Conservative Party, claiming it has gone off the rails.
The duke resigned in protest at a government bill containing proposals which could force landlords to sell the freeholds of flats to leaseholders.
The 41-year-old duke said last night: ‘I cannot morally stay within a party which I fundamentally believe has ideologically gone off the rails.’
He resigned earlier this month in a letter to his local constituency party in Chester, where he succeeded his father as president in 1977.
‘It is a sad day.
It is distressing from a personal point of view,’ he said from his home at Eaton Hall, Chester.
The duke, who owns 300 acres of London's Mayfair and Belgravia worth about £3.5 billion, said he was concerned that the Government would ‘interfere with contracts freely entered into between two willing parties’.
He was also alarmed that, under the ‘misguided’ bill, one tier of the housing system of freehold, leasehold and rented properties would be completely removed, thereby removing choice.
‘Contrary to popular opinion, there are those who like to have leasehold homes,’ he argued.
Sources close to the duke insisted his decision was not about money.
He is understood to feel that compulsory sales would break up historic estates.
Stephen Maund, agent for the Conservative Party Association in Chester, said that in his letter of resignation, the duke cited the Housing and Urban Development Bill as the reason.
Earlier, it emerged that the duke had been forced to vacate his seat alongside other Tory peers in the Lords during Tuesday's second reading debate on the contentious government bill — because he had not taken an oath of allegiance to the Queen.
Such breaches of parliamentary procedure carry a £500 fine.
But parliamentary authorities said there was no question of the House's imposing the statutory fine of £500 ‘since a genuine misunderstanding has occurred and can easily be rectified’.
Tory peers mounted an onslaught on the Government's plans during Tuesday's debate, but denied their hostility stemmed from concern for Britain's millionaire estate owners.
The Environment Secretary, Michael Howard, is determined to press ahead with his bill.
He is understood to have warned hostile Conservative peers they must follow the convention that the Lords do not vote against reforms promised in a general election manifesto.
— PA
British Gas denies job cuts are imminent
BRITISH GAS last night denied a report on News at Ten that it would announce 2,000 more job losses today.
The company said last month that 1,200 jobs will be shed at its London headquarters.
The ITN report said that unions would be told of the job losses today, when annual profits are published.
The programme also said profits would be down by about £200million on last year's total of more than £1billion.
British Gas said that over the last 10 years it has lost about 2,000 workers a year with the switch to natural gas.
— PA
Branson waits on compensation deal
VIRGIN Atlantic's owner, Richard Branson, who is seeking compensation from British Airways for dirty tricks against his airline, was still waiting for an agreement last night.
Lawyers for Virgin and BA were working into the night, going over a settlement which could cost BA up to £10 million.
— PA 
Christie confirmed as Bairns chairman
By John Smith
CAMPBELL Christie, the general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, was confirmed yesterday as the chairman of Falkirk Football Club.
Mr Christie immediately pledged to try to restore trust and harmony to the club's warring board.
A keen Bairns supporter who lives in Falkirk, Mr Christie, whose new position was disclosed by The Scotsman on Tuesday, chaired his first board meeting at Brockville last night.
It is understood that there was nothing contentious on the agenda.
Mr Christie said that he had accepted the invitation to join the board only ‘while the manager and the team seek to recover from their present dangerous position in the Premier League’.
He had been asked to serve not only by the four remaining directors, but also by the three directors who were unseated at an extraordinary general meeting last week.
Mr Christie said that he had had an association with the town for 30 years, and he knew how deeply many local people felt about the team.
‘The present manager, Jim Jefferies, has had an excellent record since coming to Falkirk, and he deserves every support in his effort to ensure that we have Premier League football at Falkirk next year.’
Boardroom upsets could not have done other than harm to the playing side of the club, he went on.
‘If I can assist in finding a solution which restores local confidence in the board, I am prepared to do so.’
Mr Christie stressed that his appointment was of a temporary nature, saying that the agreement reached in the Court of Session last week had required a fifth ‘independent’ director to be appointed to ensure that all shareholding interests were properly represented.
‘This, however, cannot provide a proper long-term basis for running the club.
Proper trust and harmony must be re-established within the boardroom.’
Fellow directors had sought unsuccessfully in their court action to prevent the egm — called by majority shareholders George Deans and his father Hamish.
Both of the Deanses have been charged with fraud in a continuing police investigation into the affairs of the club.
Editorial, Page 12
Court order
A month ago my bank informed me that it had been obliged to arrest £250 of my money to satisfy a court order obtained by sheriff officers.
Since then, four telephone calls and two letters have failed to elicit from the sheriff officers the basis of this arrestment, beyond informing me that it was for a sum of £50.59, but without specifying why or how this sum was allegedly due.
How is it possible, in a legal democracy, for a sheriff to give a court order without evidence from both parties?
Is there not some obligation on the part of the pursuer to justify his claim?
Scottish electronics industry shows firms way on output
By Graeme Stewart INDUSTRY CORRESPONDENT
OUTPUT in the Scottish electronics industry in 1991 increased by 2 per cent over the previous year's, but the industry's share of employment in Scotland remained at about 13 per cent.
The figures come from the latest statistical bulletin, The Electronics Industry in Scotland, published yesterday by the economics and statistics unit of the Scottish Office Industry Department.
The bulletin said the number of employees in plants in the Scottish electronics industry in 1991 was about 45,300 — 1,200 down on the previous year.
But the industry's share of total Scottish manufacturing employment was still nearly 13 per cent.
Electronics accounted for 21 per cent of aggregate manufacturing employment in 1991, against only 7 per cent in 1981.
The impact of inward investment on the industry was emphasised by figures showing that less than 42 per cent of the workforce was employed in UK-owned plants by 1991.
The US was the largest investor in Scotland, accounting for more than 44 per cent of electronics jobs.
Investment in the electronics industry from the rest of the world increased steadily since the beginning of the 1980s.
In 1981, less than 1 per cent of the workforce was employed by the rest of the world companies, but by 1991 that had increased 15-fold to almost 11 per cent.
That increase resulted in the rest of the world overtaking the European Community, whose investment had been falling since 1987, reaching an all-time low in 1991, with a share of just over 3 per cent.
Since 1981, the electronics industry had increased output by an average rate of about 14 per cent a year in real terms.
The leading sector, in terms of annual growth, had been data-processing equipment, which grew at an annual average of 30 per cent in real terms.
In 1991, productivity rose about 3 per cent, which compared favourably with total Scottish manufacturing productivity, down more than 1 per cent .
In 1990, investment, in terms of net capital expenditure, accounted for more than 18 per cent of all investment by Scottish manufacturing industries.
The industry's investment figure increased by almost 13 per cent from 1989 to 1990, to £235 million.
Jetstream holds key to Prestwick expansion
BRITISH Aerospace yesterday held out the possibility of a multi-million pound investment in its operations at Prestwick in Ayrshire.
Mike Turner, chairman of BAe's Jetstream Holdings subsidiary, said that over the next few years ‘hundreds of millions of pounds’ are due to be invested in the Jetstream family of aircraft, construction of which is being concentrated at Prestwick following an extensive reorganisation at BAe.
He said the company would decide around the middle of the year whether to go ahead with a major re-engineering of the advanced turboprop aircraft and revealed that launch aid was being sought from the Department of Trade and Industry.
BAe said the costs of such a re-engineering could run into ‘three figures of millions’.
A decision to go ahead would further secure the position of Prestwick, whose future was ‘highly questionable’ had the ATP operation not been moved there, Mr Turner said.
The investment hinges on market research currently being conducted among existing and prospective customers as to whether they favour an upgraded ATP or an entirely new aircraft.
BAe is already investing £70 million at Prestwick — including a grant of £22 million from the Scottish Office — on new facilities relating to moving the ATP business.
Mr Turner said around 300 to 400 jobs, to be recruited locally, were likely to be required as a result of the move.
United Biscuits snaps up Phileas Fogg firm
By Magnus Grimond
UNITED Biscuits, the food conglomerate, yesterday moved to tighten its grip on the UK snacks market with the £24 million takeover of Derwent Valley Food Group, makers of Phileas Fogg snacks.
UB hopes to expand sales of Phileas Fogg in pubs and smaller retailers and turn it into an international brand, doubling sales from the present £24 million in five years.
David Hearn, managing director of KP Foods, UB's European snacks division, said: ‘Phileas Fogg is a strong UK brand, but it has lacked the financial and distribution muscle to realise its full potential.
I am confident that KP's substantial experience and resources can protect its unique brand values and build it into a major international brand.’
Derwent Valley, founded in 1982 with backing from the venture capital group, 3i, has been actively seeking a partner to develop its overseas business and is said to have talked to about 20 companies.
But it became clear that an outright sale was the best way forward, its spokesman said yesterday.
Based in Consett, Co Durham, Derwent has allayed fears about possible job losses after the takeover.
‘There is a written commitment for Derwent to stay at Consett.
In any case, the production line could not be absorbed easily into United Biscuits’, the spokesman said.
UB is paying for the acquisition by the issue of £9 million-worth of shares, with the balance in cash.
It expects to take on debts of about £3 million.
Derwent is expected to make trading profits of £2 million or so in the year to March.
Hopeful signs on Scottish exports
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
BRITAIN'S smaller business exporters have grown in confidence over the last three months, with Scotland's exporting companies, in particular, showing a marked improvement in profitability, according to the results of a survey released yesterday.
These are the main findings of the latest Royal Bank of Scotland quarterly survey of exporters, conducted by the Small Business Research Trust and sponsored by the bank.
The Royal's confidence indicator, which is derived from reports on annual export performance, future prospects and export profitability, has increased significantly to 27 per cent, reflecting a much greater all-round optimism about export prospects.
It stood at 17 per cent last October and 11 per cent last July.
According to the survey results, for the 12 months ending in January this year, 51 per cent of Britain's smaller exporters increased their overseas sales over those for the previous year, a further 23 per cent kept them at the same level and 26 per cent reported a drop.
This resulted in a positive balance of 25.6 per cent, compared with 18.7 per cent in the last quarter.
Profit margins in export sales also widened, with Scottish exporters, having shown the poorest performance with a zero net balance in the previous survey, now leading the way at 22 per cent.
Export sales increased more in the north, with a positive balance of 29 per cent, and were less buoyant in the English Midlands at 23 per cent .
Both Scotland and the south reported the same 27 per cent positive balance.
In general, exporters were also optimistic about export prospects for the year ahead.
But in spite of increased profits and exports, there was also increased uncertainty over exchange-rate fluctuations.
Fifty-eight per cent of respondents reported that exchange-rate movements had affected their cash flows, and more than 80 per cent reported that they took action to protect cash flows — nearly 40 per cent by maintaining a foreign currency bank  account , 24 per cent by taking out forward contracts and two-thirds by sending out their invoices in sterling.
Tokyo investment boom ruled out as yen soars
JAPANESE companies will find it cheaper to invest overseas if the yen clings to new heights, but the currency's surge is unlikely to spark an investment boom on the scale of the late 1980s, economists and officials were predicting in Tokyo yesterday.
‘Medium to long term, if the yen stabilises at these high levels it would promote a shift of production offshore,’ one Ministry of International Trade and Industry official said.
‘But the immediate impact of the yen's rise will not be to spur overseas investment, but rather to squeeze exporters’ profits and so dampen their ability to invest abroad,’he added.
The yen's dramatic surge after the 1985 Plaza Accord, in which leading nations agreed to weaken the dollar, sparked an overseas spending boom that saw offshore Japanese investment soar to a peak of $67.54 billion in the business year ended 31 March, 1990.
But the yen's latest rise — more than 6 per cent in the last three weeks — finds Japan's corporate profits slumping because of a stagnant domestic economy.
Direct overseas investment has fallen off sharply since the 1989/90 peak.
China and ASEAN (Association of South East Asian Nations) members such as Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia would likely be high on the list of potential sites for any rise in offshore investment by Japanese firms, the MITI official said.
Investment in Europe could also rise if the yen stays strong, since the yen's appreciation has been greatest against European currencies, Robert Feldman, economist at Salomon Brothers Asia, said.
Sterling, for example, has fallen from about 185 yen on February 1 to about 170 on Tuesday.
‘Japanese firms, especially car makers with plants in the United Kingdom, would have an incentive to source from their UK factories,’ he said.
— Reuter 
AP PHOTOS Trading tactics: As the yen rises against the dollar on the Tokyo exchange, a dealer shouts his orders
Move towards licensing all pensions advisers
By Ian Harper
THE chief executive of FIMBRA — the independent financial advisers' watchdog — has proposed that his members should be specifically licensed before they can offer advice on pensions to their clients.
Currently, all FIMBRA members are able to offer pensions advice, even though they may not be properly qualified in what is acknowledged to be a highly complex area.
The idea of a ‘pensions licence’ has been put by the FIMBRA chief, Godfrey Jillings, to the board of the proposed new super-regulator — the Personal Investment Authority.
It comes in response to comments made recently by the chairman of the SIB, Andrew Large, that the PIA, if set up, must bring about a ‘step change’ in regulatory standards.
If the proposal is implemented, it would place all but the most basic pensions advice into the category of ‘special activity’, of which there are currently ten in the FIMBRA rules, ranging from discretionary portfolio management, to acting as a scheme manager of a Business Expansion Scheme, and advising on options and warrants.
The licence would carry a one-off fee and an annual charge.
Mr Jillings said that since FIMBRA was established five years ago, the chief danger confronting the investor has shifted from fraud to bad advice, caused, he said, ‘by a lack of experience, competence and training’.
Last year, FIMBRA, along with the life-assurance watchdog, LAUTRO, issued detailed mandatory guidelines to be followed by their members before advising members of occupational pension schemes to transfer into private personal pension plans.
John Brown wins £65m order
JOHN Brown Engineering, the Clydebank-based Trafalgar House subsidiary, has won a £65 million contract to build a gas-fired power station in Malaysia, it was announced yesterday.
The contract is for construction of a 220MW twin-turbine station, capable of burning either gas or distillate oil, at Serdang, 30km south of Kuala Lumpur.
Sterling hits record low
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE pound fell sharply to a new record low against the mark yesterday afternoon, closing at Dm2.3213, down almost 3.5 pfennigs on the day.
Rumours of another realignment of the remaining exchange rate  mechanism currencies to coincide with the Group of Seven meeting this week-end triggered a rush for marks which also put the French franc and Spanish peseta under pressure.
Sterling also fell more than 2 cents to $1.4345, and its trade-weighted average value slumped from 77.0 to equal the previous record closing low of 76.0 per cent of its 1985 level.
Share prices showed little change throughout the day however and the FT-SE 100-Share Index closed just 1.0 down on the day at 2,817.0, with just under 593 million shares changing hands.
ICI reversed a 10p loss to close 6p better at 1,082p as fears eased of a massive rights issue to coincide with today's results and expected demerger plans.
The discount store group, Kwiksave, rose 14p at 842p as rumours of a full bid from major stakeholder Dairy Farm went the round again.
Dairy Farm now holds 28 per cent.
Airtours rose 5p to 302p and its bid victim Owners Abroad advanced 13p to 129p, after the DTI nodded through the bid and revived hopes of an increased offer or a counter-bid.
SmithKline Beecham also gained another 16p to 440p on further consideration of Tuesday's figures.
British Aerospace rose 13p to 265p after an upbeat presentation and a modest dividend payment which offset the expected massive losses.
British Airways rose 5p to 285p on hopes of a ‘cheap’ settlement costing no more than £10 million to the damaging dispute with Virgin over BA's dirty tricks campaign.
Restructuring pushes BAe into £1.2bn loss
By Magnus Grimond
BRITISH Aerospace, the UK's biggest exporter, yesterday unveiled one of the largest losses in British corporate history.
The previously-announced £1 billion cost of rationalising BAe's heavily-loss-making regional aircraft division led to a £1.2 billion pre-tax loss at the aircraft and defence group in the year to December.
The figure, which compares with a loss of £112 million in 1991, is thought to have been topped only by a near-£1.8 billion loss recorded by British Steel while still in state hands in 1979-80.
Despite the losses, BAe is paying a final dividend of 4p, cutting the total for the year from 25p to 7p and leaving distributable reserves of only £87 million.
The loss per share soared from 38.1p to 240.9p.
John Cahill, who took over as BAe's chairman from Sir Graham Day last year, described 1992 as ‘the most testing year in the company's history.’
He said problems in regional aircraft, which include the Jetstream turboprop business, at Prestwick, were largely responsible for an operating loss of £81 million in 1992, compared with a restated figure of £215 million the previous year.
The reorganisation moves and the joint-venture announced between the regional jetliner business and Taiwan Aerospace Corporation have ‘effectively stemmed the losses and secured the financial position’, he said.
But the problems ‘will only be fully resolved…by an industry-wide restructuring in which we are determined to play an active part’, he added.
Dick Evans, chief executive, said BAe had to find ‘an active partner’ for its turbo-prop business, just as it had for the jet end, but it was ‘too soon yet’.
Trading losses from commercial aircraft mushroomed last year from £37 million to £337 million.
Meanwhile Rover, the volume car division, cut its losses only marginally, from £52 million to £49 million in the year.
Mr Evans said tight cost controls allowed the business to maintain profitability and lower the break-even level, which, at 440,000 units was ‘significantly’ lower than last year.
But production only reached 421,000 last year and the real bright spot was Land-Rover, whose Discovery model helped it achieve the best year for sales since the first Land-Rover rolled out in 1948, while productivity jumped 25 per cent.
Mr Cahill said: ‘There are no plans to sell Rover’, but he admitted that defence remained the core of BAe's business.
Trading profits there slipped only marginally, from a restated £371 million (£500 million before the accounting changes) to £352 million.
He said the company had delivered on its promise to realise the potential of the European Fighter Aircraft, which now had a surer future as the Eurofighter 2000, and to advance the £4.5 billion defence contract with Saudi Arabia.
The Prime Minister, John Major, had helped secure ‘many thousands of jobs’ by the  commitment he received from the Saudis in January for an order for 48 Tornado aircraft, he claimed.
The market reaction to the figures was generally favourable and the shares jumped 13p to 265p yesterday, though some analysts apparently remain confused about BAe's accounting changes.
Drayton Asia warns holders against Dragon
By Gordon Milne
DRAYTON Asia Trust yesterday joined in a war of words with EFM Dragon, the Edinburgh-managed investment trust which targeted it for takeover a fortnight ago.
Describing the Dragon offer as ‘clearly inadequate’, the board of the trust — managed by Invesco MIM — advised its shareholders and warrantholders to sit tight.
The statement came in response to Dragon's broadside two days ago at Drayton Asia's ‘disappointing’ investment performance.
Two weeks ago, Dragon made an all-paper offer at a price equivalent to 96.4 per cent of Drayton Asia's formula asset value.
Earlier this week, it issued a letter explaining the rationale underlying its bid.
‘Since its launch in 1989, Drayton Asia's investment performance has been significantly below that of Dragon,’ the letter stated.
‘Not only has Drayton Asia's investment performance been disappointing, its share price has been trading at a discount to net asset value ranging from 26.8 per cent to 9.7 per cent during the year to 10 February.
‘In  comparison , Dragon's share price has been trading in the range of a discount to net asset value of 21.9 per cent to a premium of 1.7 per cent during the year to 10 February.’
It also promised that Edinburgh Fund Managers, Dragon's investment manager, would pay half the costs of termination of Drayton Asia's investment contract with INVESCO MIM, and reduce its management fee from 1.2 per cent per annum on Dragon's net assets.
Yesterday, Ratan Engineer, of Drayton Asia, said: ‘The offers are clearly  inadequate .
Even on the basis of EFM Dragon's own figures, shareholders are being offered paper with a net asset value of only 94.6 per cent of Drayton Asia's NAV and with a market value of only 92.5 per cent of NAV.’
Surprise as Airtours gets bid go-ahead
THE President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, yesterday refused to order a Monopolies and Mergers Commission inquiry into the £225 million takeover bid by Airtours for its rival holiday group, Owners Abroad.
His unusual decision to clear the hostile bid came despite a recommendation for an MMC investigation by the Director General of Fair Trading, Sir Bryan Carsberg.
The ruling was immediately condemned by Nigel Griffiths, the Edinburgh South MP and Labour's consumer spokesman, as ‘astonishing’.
He said the decision was ‘little short of a vote of no confidence in Sir Bryan Carsberg’ and called for an investigation of the role in the affair of the Corporate Affairs Minister, Neil Hamilton, between December and February, when he declared a possible conflict of interest and withdrew from consideration of the bid.
Mr Griffiths also claimed there had been interference by the DTI as far back as December, when it pre-empted the OFT by giving the bid the all-clear at an early stage in the proceedings.
Airtours and Owners Abroad compete for second place in the holiday market behind Thomson.
Industry observers had expected that the prospect of combining the two would warrant a monopolies inquiry.
If the bid by Airtours, based in Rossendale, Lancashire, is successful, it would corner about a third of the package holiday market — about the same share as Thomson.
But Mr Heseltine considered that the competition issues raised by the proposed merger were not sufficient to justify an MMC reference.
The Consumers' Association, which last month gave Airtours the thumbs down in a Holiday Which? report on tour operators, described the decision as ‘baffling’ and ‘a severe disappointment’.
It warned that a takeover would lead to the creation of a duopoly in the package travel industry, with a market share of 60 per cent.
‘There is an overwhelming case for referral,’ said Stephen Locke, the association's director of policy.
Airtours' chairman, David Crossland, said his company was ‘delighted’ by the decision.
Airtours' shares rose 5p to 302p and Owners' jumped 13p to 129p.
Thomson underwent an MMC investigation when it took over Horizon in 1989, but was cleared.
Owners Abroad has consistently fiercely opposed the Airtours bid.
It is backing a rival proposal from German-owned Thomas Cook to take a 10% stake in the company.
Mr Heseltine also cleared the Thomas Cook plan today, this time in line with Sir Bryan's recommendation.
Thomas Cook chief executive Christopher Rodrigues said the company was disappointed that Mr Heseltine had decided to ignore Sir Bryan's advice.
‘We believe that, if successful, the merger of Airtours and Owners Abroad would have a detrimental impact on competition in the UK package holiday market, and consequently represents a threat to value for money and customer choice,’ he added.
— PA 
Costs slash 61% off profits at McAlpine
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
ALFRED McAlpine the quarrying, construction and house-building group, weathered the recession and made profits in all four of its operating divisions last year.
Average borrowings fell from £80 million to £49 million, helped by the proceeds of the 1991 rights issue, and interest charges were halved to £2.6 million.
But group turnover fell 10 per cent to £560.7 million, profits after interest plunged by 40 per cent to £5.6 million and after writing off £2 million in exceptional charges, mainly redundancy costs, profits before tax dived by 61 per cent to £3.6 million, for their fifth consecutive year of decline.
Earnings per share fell 64 per cent to 5.1p and the total dividend is being cut from 10.3p to 6.5p, after a final trimmed from 5.8p to 3.5p.
The shares lost 8p to 131p on the news.
Bad debts alone cost £2 million, the departing chief executive, Graeme Odgers, admitted yesterday.
Operating profits from the construction division slumped from £13.1 million to £1.5 million, with turnover and margins adversely affected especially on construction tenders.
House-building rebounded from a loss in 1991 to a £2.6 million profit in 1992, thanks to a 6 per cent increase in sales to 1,289 units and improved margins, which more than made good an average 8 per cent drop in selling prices to £81,000.
The contribution from quarrying halved to £1.9 million, with dry-stone prices and sales suffering in the recession, demand for roadstone down and only slate performing well.
Profits from the US division fell more modestly to £1.9 million, with Florida timeshare making more, while central costs more than halved to £4.3 million.
The outlook in the UK is still gloomy, McAlpine says, borrowings short-term will rise, and a small loss is anticipated in the first half; but site costs are down, and site visits are up sharply.
A continued improvement in house-building and a contribution from AF Budge civil engineering, acquired recently for £7.25 million, should ensure better full-year figures.
DIGIT's income suffers
By Gordon Milne
THE effect of recession on UK dividend pay-outs makes Dunedin Income Growth Investment Trust's name seem more like an unsustainable ambition — for the time being, at any rate.
DIGIT, run from Edinburgh by Dunedin Fund Managers, has experienced a fair few dividend cuts from companies held in its largely blue-chip portfolio.
Earnings per share in the year to 31 January have slumped to 21.75p  from 24.87p, and the trust management will have to dip into revenue reserves just to meet the board's own proposed final dividend of 17p.
This will hold the total at 25.4p.
On a brighter note, net asset value rose 10 per cent to 596.5p, from 542.2p, in the 12 months.
While this was a shade under the 11.1 per cent increase in the FT-A All-Share Index, DIGIT's share price rose by 16.7 per cent over the year.
Float to value Atreus at £7.2m
SMALL investors are being offered up to 16.25 million of the 27.5 million penny shares in Atreus, a newly-formed company making and marketing shower screens and bathroom mirrors, writes Clifford German.
Atreus has bought URSI, a dormant US company, transferred the listing to the UK, bought DB(UK) a small unlisted firm making screens and mirrors under the Selecta brand name, and is now looking to raise £5 million net of expenses through a placing of 11.25 million shares with clients of the broker, Sheppard, and a public share offer at 20p.
Applications close on 22 March.
The UK company has a 12-year track record and made £1.1 million on sales of £6.2 million in the year to January.
At 20p, it will be capitalised at £7.2 million.
The shares will be valued at 9.85 times estimated earnings, and yield 5 per cent gross on a 1p notional dividend this year.
DB's founders, David Howarth and Bruce Ledwith, are each taking out £2 million in loan notes earning 1 per cent below LIBOR, and keeping a 10 per cent stake each in Atreus.
The balance of capital raised will be added to existing cash to create a £2 million acquisition fund.
The rush to get the new company up and running results from the excellent opportunities to expand and export resulting from the pound's devaluation and the drop in interest rates, according to the new chairman, Roger Harnett, a company doctor formerly with Benlox Holdings, Speedwell Gear Case and Hobson.
He will earn £75,000 and have options on 1.5 million shares.
Further options may increase the capital by up to 15 per cent over a ten-year period.
ScotAm cuts bonuses
THE Glasgow-based mutual life assurer, Scottish Amicable, has reduced the terminal and annual bonuses paid on its with-profits policies, writes Ian Harper.
For a man who took out a 25-year mortgage endowment policy at the age of 29 with a £30-a-month premium, the payout on a policy maturing this year has been cut from £62,543 to £59,602, which represents an annual rate of return of 13 per cent.
On a ten-year policy, the payout has been cut from £7,331 to £6,175, equivalent to an annual rate of return of 10.4 per cent.
The reversionary or annual bonuses paid on the bonuses already declared on with-profits endowments have been reduced from 7 to 5 per cent— although the bonus on the benefit assured remains at 3 per cent .
ScotAm managing director, Roy Nicolson, said: ‘Over the longer term, one of the major contributory factors to our good performance has been our commitment to smaller companies…
However, over the last few years smaller companies have fared less well, as the impact of the recession has continued longer than expected and this is  reflected in our short-term performance.’
Orders for durables fall in America
ORDERS to US factories for durable goods fell 1.7 per cent in January, the biggest drop in six months, produced in large part by a decline in aircraft, the government said in Washington on Wednesday.
Many analysts discounted the drop and pointed to other signs suggesting a strengthening manufacturing sector, including continued expansion of industrial production.
Excluding the volatile transportation sector, bookings were up 0.7 per cent.
The Commerce Department said orders for durable goods — items such as cars and communications equipment expected to last more than three years — totalled a seasonally adjusted $132.8 billion, down from $135.1 billion in December.
— AP
Offers to out-of-work execs rise
REDUNDANT executives are now getting more job offers, particularly in south-east England, experts said yesterday.
Ten per cent of out-of-work executives counselled by one firm received job offers in the first four weeks of last year, but for the corresponding period this year the figure rose to 16 per cent.
In the south-east the figure doubled, from 9 per cent to 18 per cent, followed by the Midlands, up from 10 per cent to 17.6 per cent .
Scotland and the north lagged behind the UK average, with an increase from 10 per cent to 16.2 per cent.
Drake Beam Morrin, which claims to be the world's biggest firm of ‘outplacement’ consultants, said its figures covered executives earning from £25,000 to £60,000. — PA
Costain appeals against US ruling
THE construction group, Costain, said yesterday it was appealing against a US court ruling banning the sale of its Australian coal mining business.
A federal court in St Louis, Missouri, yesterday granted a permanent injunction against the £172.5 million sale to a subsidiary of the French bank Credit Lyonnais.
It was asked to halt the deal by Peabody, the US-based Hanson coal subsidiary, which claims it already had an agreement to buy the Australian business at a lower price.
Costain's chief executive, Peter Costain, said yesterday: ‘We are disappointed with the ruling.
We have, therefore, immediately lodged an appeal, which will be heard within the next few weeks.
We firmly believe that we have acted entirely in the best interest of shareholders, and we shall continue to do so,’ he added.
Costain wants the money from the Australian sale to reduce its borrowings.
— PA
Kvaerner plans N Sea cable
PLANS for a North Sea cable to deliver environmentally-friendly electricity to England from Norway were unveiled yesterday.
Norwegian firm Kvaerner is proposing the 450-mile link in a scheme worth an estimated £400 million.
The company said it was seeking to assemble a consortium to undertake the project which would create a significant number of construction jobs.
The cable would run from Lista in southern Norway to England, where UK demand is highest.
Similar cables already exist between Norway and its Scandinavian neighbours.
— PA
BP names vessel partnership
IN LINE with a policy of securing long-term deals with contractors, British Petroleum has awarded a three-year contract to an Aberdeen-based partnership to provide engineering services for its production vessel, Seillean.
The work will be carried out by an alliance formed by Genesis Engineering, process and safety engineering consultants, and MacGregor Engineering which carries out fabrication and installation work.
The companies will work closely with BP in reviewing all aspects of the operation of the vessel used to produce oil from the small Donan oilfield 150 miles north-east of Aberdeen.
£24m contract won by Capita
THE Capita Group has won a contract worth around £24 million over five years to manage financial services for the London borough of Bromley, it was announced yesterday.
Capita, the UK's largest provider of management services to the public sector, will handle the council's payroll, pensions, business rates, council tax and benefits.
— PA
Asset leap at Pacific Horizon
SHAREHOLDERS in Pacific Horizon Investment must be congratulating themselves on their decision last August to switch the trust's investment management from Jupiter Tyndall to Edinburgh's Baillie Gifford, after news yesterday of a 38.8 per cent leap in net asset value per share at halfway, writes George Duthie.
The trust, a capital-growth specialist in Far Eastern investment, excluding Japan, lifted its NAV from 26.26p at the year-end to 36.44p in the six months to 31 January, easily beating the performance of the comparable benchmark, the FT Actuaries Pacific Basin ex-Japan Index, which rose by 20.1 per cent in sterling terms over the same period.
Baillie Gifford says its plan to restructure the trust's portfolio to change the emphasis to Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand, approved at the August extraordinary general meeting, is almost complete.
Nearly 81 per cent of assets is now invested in those economies, with Hong Kong getting the 42 per cent lion's share.
The balance has been placed mostly in the Philippines and Indonesia.
The Pacific region cannot fail to benefit from the current recovery in the US economy, Baillie Gifford believes.
There is, as usual, no interim dividend.
Canon slips
CANON, a leading maker of cameras and business machines, reported in Tokyo yesterday its net profit fell 31.2 per cent in 1992 due to slumping demand for optical goods and the yen's rise against the US dollar.
Canon, Japan's largest camera maker, said its group, profits fell to 35.9 billion yen (£216 million) in 1992 from 52.2 billion yen the previous year.
Sales edged up 2.4 per cent to 1.91 trillion yen in 1992 from 1.87 trillion yen (dlrs 16.1 billion), mostly because of strong demand for copy machines and laser and bubble-jet printers, it said.
Business machines accounted for 81.3 percent of net sales as demand for cameras and other optical products slipped, it said.
Sales of semiconductor manufacturing equipment also were slow because of sluggish capital spending in the semiconductor industry, it said.
Canon has diversified in recent years into business, computer-peripheral and semiconductor manufacturing equipment from its early reliance on cameras, which have neared market saturation.
Canon depended on foreign markets for 70 percent of its sales during the year, and said profits were hurt by the Japanese yen's strength.
A higher yen reduces the yen value of profits repatriated to Japan.
It forecast an increase in sales to 1.98 trillion yen (dlrs 17.0 billion) in 1993 and a net profit of 40 billion yen (dlrs 345 million).
— AP
Iran's output cut fails to boost oil prices
By Frank Frazer
AFTER soaring above $19 a barrel on Tuesday, oil prices fell back last night to $18.84 in spite of an announcement by Iran that it would cut its production next month.
Gholamreza Awazadeh, the country's oil minister, said the move was in line with the deal agreed last week by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries to trim supplies in an attempt to support prices.
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Libya told oil companies earlier that they were making cuts to comply with new quotas.
This was mainly responsible for Tuesday's surge in price.
Traders said yesterday's drop was intended as a correction to over-reaction by the market.
In a separate move, oil industry officials in the Arabian Gulf expressed fears that the US plans for an energy tax might upset market stability by causing some producers to cut back on investment.
The European Community is expected to respond to the US move by introducing a carbon tax.
But both measures are opposed by OPEC representatives worried that returns on investment in oil production could be hit.
OPEC producers claim that the US tax — which would mean buyers paying nearly twice as much per unit for oil compared with natural gas, coal and nuclear power — is discriminatory in environmental and trade terms.
Also yesterday, the Interfax news agency reported in Moscow that the Commonwealth of Independent States might soon create a single body responsible for co-ordinating oil and gas supplies and investment in the energy sector.
It said the ten CIS nations agreed to co-operate on oil and gas production at a meeting of heads of state last month.
But since then a major row has broken out over Russian supplies to Ukraine.
The Ukrainian deputy prime minister, Yuli Yoffe, was due in Moscow yesterday for talks with the Russian fuel and energy minister, Yuri Shafranik.
The meeting, to be followed by talks between their heads of government tomorrow, could head off a Russian threat to cut off natural gas supplies to Ukraine unless it pays for the gas it received in January.
Moscow is demanding world prices for its fuel supplies to Ukraine and other CIS members which do not benefit from subsidies under inter-governmental accords.
A senior official at the Russian gas industry monopoly Gazprom told Itar-Tass news agency that supplies to Ukraine would be cut off on Thursday.
‘Gas previously earmarked for Ukrainian consumers will be piped to the southern regions of Russia, where cold weather has set in,’ Anatoly Vorotyntsev, head of Gazprom's central production and dispatch department, said.
Tass said Ukraine, which depends on Russia for about 70 per cent of its gas needs, owed 165 billion roubles ($286 million) for gas supplied up to February 19.
Ukraine has threatened to charge world prices for transporting Russian gas to export markets in Europe if Russia goes ahead with charging world prices from February 1.
Tass said Gazprom's foreign customers had been warned of possible supply disruptions after Thursday.
Germany receives about a quarter of Russia's annual gas exports of about 100 billion cubic metres.
France, Italy and former Czechoslovakia are other big customers.
— Reuter
Trade tit-for-tat can be a dangerous game
THE legendary (but subtly different) charms of Bill Clinton and John Major will have been fully taxed at their first official meeting in Washington yesterday.
Quite apart from the continuing argument about whether the Tories worked to re-elect George Bush, and the more recent fuss about US interference in Northern Ireland and US plans to drop supplies by air in Bosnia, the two leaders face formidable protectionist pressures.
President Clinton himself has started running hares with his campaign promises to soak foreign companies taking unfair advantage of the US market and his more recent claims that European governments are subsidising the Airbus project and destroying jobs at Boeing.
But the latest thinking in Washington appears to be aimed more at foreign companies which penetrate the US market (and evade US taxes) by charging false prices on captive supplies from their overseas parents, and that seems to apply to Japanese companies, rather than European ones.
There is no knowing, however, where a sequence of tit-for-tat actions and reactions will end up.
President Clinton also inherited from the Bush administration a reluctance to approve foreign airlines taking controlling stakes in US airlines, and a hostile US attitude to EC farm subsidies which France, Spain and Belgium, in particular, are determined not to surrender.
The wrangle over airline stakes has already forced British Airways to rethink its plans, and the much wider argument over farm policies is still holding up the long-delayed Uruguay round of GATT talks on the further liberalisation of international trade.
The GATT treaty is already well past its proposed deadline for agreement, and the longer the recession lasts, the bigger the already vast Japanese trade surpluses will grow, and the more strident the complaints of injured parties everywhere will become.
Everyone agrees that the unprecedented growth in the economies of the Western world in the past 40 years owes as much to trade as to technological progress.
But that means nothing to the army of unemployed and to threatened companies which would rather have any work than none, or to politicians caught up in righteous anger at ‘unfair’ competition.
Penal US duties on European steel, wheat and wine are already in the pipeline.
Retaliation would be inevitable, and the truculent attitude of French farmers and fishermen to cheaper imports from other EC partners shows that there is no shortage of emotive issues or passionate responses.
Splendid recovery at Wickes
By Magnus Grimond
WICKES, the timber and building materials merchanting and retailing chain, yesterday reported a return to the black, with pre-tax profits soaring to £6.57 million for the year to 31 December.
The chairman, Henry Sweetbaum, said the profits, which represent a remarkable turnround from a loss of £6.72 million in 1991, ‘confirm the progress we have made in developing our retailing activities and reducing the costs of our timber businesses’.
Debt was slashed by £36 million to £73.2 million during the year, but there is still no dividend — nothing was paid for 1991 — because of the board's ‘determination’ to continue to cut borrowings, the company said.
A return to the dividend lists, however, remains a priority for this year.
The profits were struck after reorganisation costs of £1.98 million and fed through to earnings per share of 1.9p, replacing losses of 2.1p last time.
Longer term agreements move a step closer
A MOVE towards longer term farm agreements was signalled by the recently appointed European Community farm commissioner, Rene Steichen, at a London conference yesterday.
That is likely to be matched by further moves towards the free market for most farm produce and increased spending on structural or direct social support in rural areas.
And, in line with the avowed aim of the British farm minister, John Gummer, Mr Steichen pledged himself to reducing agricultural bureaucracy.
To that end he is setting up a working group to advise on how to make agricultural legislation less heavy and more rational.
He predicted the EC could be entering a period where the annual price negotiations assumed less importance in the farming year and the procedure moved closer to the five-year system applied in the US.
‘Why should the community be alone in the world in imposing this annual masochistic ritual on itself?’
He asked delegates to the annual Agra Europe Outlook conference.
‘Why can't we move away entirely and to a new system which after proper and full consultation would set prices and regimes periodically?’
Farmers had suffered from both the depressing consequences of over-production and the uncertainty of what the future held for them, and ever more bewildering changes were imposed on them every year.
‘It is my view they need an era of increased certainty which can now be built on the foundation of recent reform decisions and on which they can, with far more confidence than has been the case in the past, base and plan their futures.’
The statement was immediately welcomed by the English National Farmers' Union.
A spokesman said that anything which enabled farmers to make longer term plans with some confidence was a step in the right direction.
After dealing briefly with current price proposals, Mr Steichen went on to urge early resolution of both Common Agricultural Policy reform and General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
He gave warning that the longer the Council of Ministers waited before taking a decision on the former, the more time trading partners had to change their minds on the latter.
‘There is nothing to be gained by opening up this particular Pandora's box,’ he added.
He appeared to strike a strong position in relation to the current GATT round by stating: ‘I would say to those outside the community, we have reached the absolute limit in terms of our contribution towards a GATT deal on agriculture.’
But then he appeared to undermine that position by urging critics to question whether it was in agriculture's interest to unravel the agreement.
Finally, he reaffirmed the changing role of the CAP in helping rural people make a living off the land by encouragement of environmentally friendly farming methods, support for forestry and an early retirement and restructuring scheme.
‘Rural development will become an increasingly important element of community policies in the coming years,’ he said.
Opening the two-day conference, John Gummer renewed his attack on form filling and red tape inherent in the reformed CAP and again declared his opposition to the development of supply controls, such as compulsory land set-aside and the extension of the quota system.
‘They institutionalise high cost structures and production patterns, they restrict flexibility and they constrain the innovative and enterprising producer.
They are also extremely complex to administer.’
While the principles of CAP reform should remain, he said, there was a need to look again at how the agreement should be implemented.
Levy system changes
CHANGES to the Meat and Livestock Commission's levy system have been put before Parliament.
They include a 15 per cent increase in the maximum general levy for all cattle, sheep and pigs, a 40p per head rise in promotion levy for pigs and an amendment that refers specifically to lambs for live exports.
If the draft is approved by ministers the general levy for cattle will rise from 190p to a maximum of 219p, calves from 12p to 14p, sheep from 34p to 39p and pigs 48p to 55p.
It is expected the increases will be introduced in three annual stages of roughly 5 per cent.
The MLC's draft corporate plan for 1993-96 highlights the need for ‘carefully contained’ increases in levy income, which at present totals about £50 million a year.
Promotion or bolt-on levy for beef and lamb is to be frozen although the pig promotion levy is expected to double to 80p before the end of 1996.
But the most controversial move is a clause aimed at recovering levy from the suppliers of sheep that are slaughtered in other countries.
Ministers have been told that the present Levy Order does not explicitly provide for the recovery of levy from live lamb exports.
And the proposed amendment gives authority to do that.
However it has already been challenged by live sheep interests who are arguing that a large proportion of exported animals are sold for further feeding and not direct for slaughter.
They have pointed out that it will be difficult, if not impossible, for the commission to differentiate between store lambs bought for export and those purchased by other farmers.
And they have suggested that far from solving the commission's problem over lost income it will create more administrative difficulties — especially for auction markets.
It is estimated that the potential levy off live lamb exports is £750,000 a year.
The MLC estimates that about £300,000 of the 1992 levy has still to be recovered.
Rosyth verdict may be put off until summer
By Joy Copley, Parliamentary Correspondent
ROSYTH workers will have to wait until late spring or early summer for a decision on whether the dockyard will win the key Trident nuclear refitting contract, it emerged yesterday.
The defence procurement minister, Jonathan Aitken, told four Fife MPs of the further delay in the long-awaited announcement.
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor and Labour MP for Dunfermline East, said that it seemed the decision might now be as late as May.
‘The three months of more uncertainty must be justified by an open and independent evaluation of the bids.’
Paul Davison, director of strategic development at Rosyth, said he had become increasingly optimistic over the past few weeks.
But Devonport managers expressed ‘disappointment and frustration’ at the announcement that the decision was to be delayed further.
Mr Davison said: ‘We are aware that they are taking a fairly careful look again at all the information.
We believe that it can only be in our interests that they get it right.
There is nothing to be gained by a hasty and wrong decision.’
By Monday, Rosyth will have updated its bid to upgrade the docks for the nuclear refit work with a fixed-price bid, which is unlikely to differ greatly from the £147 million indicative price submitted in December.
Devonport's proposal is to upgrade its dock at a cost of £162 million and last night Eain Williams, a spokesman for the yard, said that there would be no new proposals coming from it.
‘We are aware of the further delay which has come after so many other delays,’ he said.
‘We are disappointed and frustrated, but we understand that it is a difficult decision for the Government.’
He said that despite the delay Devonport was still confident that, if ‘logic, common sense and value for money prevail’, it would be chosen as the site for the nuclear refitting work.
A Ministry of Defence spokesman said that Mr Aitken told the MPs that the department was continuing to make a thorough and fair assessment of the bids and was being ‘scrupulously fair’ to both sides.
The Fife MPs, Mr Brown, Rachel Squire, Henry McLeish, Lewis Mooney and Menzies Campbell, were assured by Mr Aitken that an idea by Devonport for Rosyth to refit oil tankers would not be material to his decision about the nuclear contract.
The MPs called for a full report from the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate on both bids; a detailed list of all the matters under review; precise statements on the terms of reference of the Rosyth review and on the relative weight to be placed on capital and current costs in the multi-million bids; and the social and economic effects of run-down on employment in Rosyth and Devonport.
Mr Brown said that there should also be an independent evaluation by the National Audit Office of the MoD's work on costing and consultation with the defence select committee and the Scottish select committee.
Push for Euro tax deal to help distillers
THE GOVERNMENT is seeking a better drinks tax deal in the European Community to boost the Scotch whisky industry, the agriculture minister, David Curry, said yesterday.
He was responding at Commons question time after Labour urged the Chancellor not to increase tax on whisky in the Budget on 16 March.
Mr Curry said: ‘A better balance on the taxation between wine, beer and spirits within the EC would be to the advantage of the UK and we are supporting that approach.’
Dennis Canavan (Lab, Falkirk W) said that 70,000 were employed directly or indirectly in the whisky industry and 700 redundancies and eight plant closures had been proposed by United Distillers.
‘Something must be done to save these jobs…
It is ridiculous that two-thirds of the cost of a bottle of whisky goes to the Treasury and the taxation rate is double that of imported wines.’
— PA
Fine, until the next time
IS THIS really how it is to be?
This time, with Digital, Ayr's gain is Galway's grief.
This time, with Hoover, Cambuslang's joy is Dijon's dismay.
Last time, with Unisys, Livingston's closure was Villers Ecalles's survival.
Last time, with Wang, Stirling's loss was Limerick's triumph.
All credit to the Ayr workforce, which has clearly earned respect in a demanding company, and all credit to Scotland's development authorities, notably Locate in Scotland, who played a shrewd and effective game.
All the same, what about the next time?
There may not be long to wait.
This could very well prove to be just how it is to be.
Truly, we have travelled a long way from the high hopes and higher hyperbole of the 1980s, when inward investment offered a fast-track escape route from a crumbling manufacturing base.
No-one could deny that it brought real benefit to Scotland, which built up one of the most advanced and successful electronics sectors in Europe.
Yet, there are persuasive reasons to suppose that the challenge ahead is to hold on to what is here, rather than expect to keep grabbing headlines with prestigious new gains.
For one thing, as Ian Lang rightly observed yesterday, that is how single markets work.
The promise of 1992 encouraged outside manufacturers to establish plants within the EC.
That stimulus is now past and, with European demand still torpid from recession, a period of rationalisation should surprise no-one.
The desktop boom has also subsided.
Sectors like computers are as sensitive to product cycles as to economic cycles, and investment in the medium term is likely to concentrate more on adapting than on building production capacity.
Competition has also heightened since LiS's early days for the diminishing mobile investment that remains, and some of the newer players in the game have more to stake than has Scotland.
There will still be gains.
But they are likely to be of greater strategic than employment significance, and there will be losses.
To this uncertainty must be added a further, familiar question — the depth to which Silicon Glen's high-growth plants are bedded in Scottish soil.
The sector's reputation for efficiency and technical excellence is deservedly high — growth averaged 14 per cent a year across the 1980s.
But a home-grown industry to supply, spin off from, create an infrastructure around the big incomers has largely failed to develop.
Only two in five Scots electronics jobs are with UK-owned firms, and just an eighth of input — components, materials, utilities — is Scottish.
It leaves a terrible vulnerability to distant decision-making.
Scottish Enterprise is right to refocus its attention increasingly from inward investment to the challenge of nurturing indigenous firms.
Many commentators argued that it should have done so long ago.
The rewards are gradual, rarely spectacular, and far from easy to achieve.
But they offer a more reliable, less volatile future.
The Digital decision is a proud victory, but a poignant warning.
Surprises in store from the Ford baby
THE terrace restaurant of the Hotel Du Palais on the seafront at Biarritz is, even in winter, hardly the most likely venue for a conversation on the merits or demerits of a budget family saloon.
The text of the conversation, exactly a week ago this morning, was if anything even more bizarre than the setting.
Fresh from the indulgence of driving the fastest and most powerful Jaguar saloon ever built over several hundred kilometres of demanding roads, I was about to set off on a journey that would take me from one end of Europe to the other.
It was a journey that would also take me from one extreme of the Ford range, the £46,600 Jaguar V12 saloon, to the other — £6,855 of Fiesta 1.1L.
‘But it's a fine motorway car,’ counselled an older, and sometimes wiser, colleague when I had finished bemoaning my apparent misfortune at having the Fiesta waiting at Edinburgh Airport.
‘Yes, but will it get me home in time to see Coronation Street tonight?’
I demanded.
‘And if not, why not?’
Small, budget-priced cars have never really featured in our driveway and when the Fiesta arrived, my wife, inquiring what it was like, was told: ‘Red, you'll enjoy it.’
Her XR3i, I calculated, would do me just fine for a few days.
But small, budget-priced cars are changing and Ford, at last, is right in the forefront with the class leader, offering good accommodation, economy, value for money and a surprisingly high level of comfort.
In the motorway cruise mode, for instance, the Fiesta is quiet and relaxed at 70mph in fifth with only the smallest traces of road and engine noise and no wind noise at all — even when crossing the Forth Road Bridge under a storm-induced speed limit.
That suggests that the little Ford is extremely well built.
This is confirmed by the solid way in which the doors close, the even panel fit and the shut lines on the test car.
The Fiesta is also surprisingly comfortable, given that the seats are the cheapest in the whole Ford range, the tyres are budget items and the suspension is the most basic in the manufacturer's huge parts bin.
But all the low-tech equipment works very well together and even after three solid hours at the wheel on a variety of road conditions which varied from motorway to unclassified minor roads, there were no tell-tale aches or pains.
Perhaps the biggest surprise was the amount of fun the Fiesta provided on the latter type of roads, thanks to a willing engine and gearbox, precise if slightly heavy steering and those narrow tyres which, nevertheless, provided exactly the right amount of grip.
A driver used to more power and rubber might expect to find himself in trouble if he attempted to maintain his normal pace with the cheapest Fiesta, but such is the confident poise of the car that it offers handling and grip of a far higher order than the tuned-for-economy engine can justify.
I did try on a couple of occasions to wind the engine up past the 5000rpm mark, where the torque curve begins to fall away rapidly, but it produced no more performance than was available by driving the car sensibly for economy.
The biggest and most obvious drawback is the near total lack of equipment save for a radio, a heater and a rear screen wipe/wash.
The manually wound windows I just about learned to live with, but the lack of central locking and the consequently long and awkward stretches to lock passenger doors provided the sort of exercise I can do without.
But with more than 50mpg available and the possibility of good deals to reduce the outlay, the cheapest Fiesta has made me take a long hard look at the lavishly equipped hot hatch we use as a shopping car.
Jim Dunn
The new Ford Fiesta
Comrade Paul
PAUL Lowenburg, the American-born chief executive of Edinburgh District Council, has been the victim of talk in the smoke-filled members' lounges of the capital's City Chambers.
First, in November he was seen sporting a badge saying ‘Birmingham — European Summit 1992.’
The real Summit, as everyone is now well aware, was to be held in Edinburgh.
Now we hear he has joined the Labour Party, which forms the ruling group in an uneasy deal with the SNP.
Perhaps he might be interested to know that, for reasons too complicated to explain here, he is known to his comrades in the People's Party as ‘Lowenbrau’.
MPs condemn Bank of England's BCCI supervision
THE Bank of England came under strong criticism yesterday from a cross-party committee of MPs over its role in the collapse of the Bank of Credit & Commerce International.
The Commons Treasury and Civil Service committee said the Bank had ‘failed to discharge its supervisory duties’ in relation to BCCI.
The MPs said the bank had to accept responsibility for its failure as BCCI's supervisor, which had been demonstrated so clearly in the report by Sir Thomas Bingham, a High Court judge.
They added that the failure to discipline staff over the BCCI affair had undermined its future effectiveness.
In response, the Bank of England said it did not accept the conclusions the committee had drawn from the Bingham Report.
It said the MPs offered no factual material that could not be found in the report.
‘The Bank has already made a full response to the Bingham Report, including a number of changes flowing from the lessons learned from BCCI and Bingham's recommendations.’
In his report Sir Thomas criticised the Bank of England, which supervises banks operating in the UK.
The Bank of England closed BCCI in July 1991 after discovering widespread fraud.
Since the Bingham Report it has set up a special investigations unit and improved staff training.
The Bank of England had told the MPs that it did not think it had failed to discharge its supervisory duties.
But the MPs said bluntly: ‘We disagree.
It is, in our view, impossible to conclude from the Bingham Report that the Bank's role and duty as supervisor was discharged ‘properly and competently’.’
The MPs said the absence of any disciplinary action against any of the individuals involved could undermine the Bank's future effectiveness because it might lead staff to conclude that failure to carry out their responsibilities effectively carried no adverse consequences for them.
Labour's Treasury spokesman, Alistair Darling, MP for Edinburgh Central, said: ‘The select committee has produced a damning indictment of the Bank of England supervision of BCCI.
‘It is especially noteworthy that no one at the Bank appears to have accepted responsibility for its failure.
‘Regulation of banking and financial services is in desperate need of overhaul.’
He said there was clearly a case for considering a new body whose sole responsibility would be banking supervision.
Leicester East MP, Keith Vaz, who has led the campaign for compensation for victims of the BCCI collapse, said he would seek an early meeting with the Chancellor to press for compensation.
The Bank said yesterday it did not believe there was any case for giving extra compensation to UK depositors beyond the statutory deposit protection scheme.
After the publication of the Bingham Report, Norman Lamont ruled out extra compensation above what was required by law.
Tony Newton, the Leader of the Commons, said the Government would consider the report but he thought it unlikely it would change its attitude.
Shock provision of £949m plunges ICI £384m into red
By Richard Shackleton DEPUTY CITY EDITOR
IMPERIAL Chemical Industries yesterday revealed details of the largest restructuring in UK corporate history together with a shock £949 million provision to cover that and environmental costs.
The City had been expecting the chemicals giant's confirmation that it would be hiving off its pharmaceuticals and agrichemicals businesses to a new company, Zeneca.
The remaining bulk and speciality chemicals operations, as well as paints and explosives, will remain inside the slimmed-down ICI.
But there was some astonishment at the size and timing of the exceptional write-offs, which will result in 9,000 job losses from a worldwide total of 128,600.
Most analysts had been expecting a more gradual approach to the complex rationalisation required by the Zeneca split and the recession's effects on trading.
The shares jumped 71p to £11.53.
About 7,000 of the jobs are going from the traditional ICI business, while the other 2,000 will go from Zeneca.
The £949 million provision cancelled out 1992 trading profits of £565 million, down from £789 million last time.
The outcome was a lurch in the pre-tax figure from profits of £843 million in 1991 to a loss of £384 million.
The chairman, Sir Denys Henderson, said the company hoped to save up to £300 million annually under the restructuring programme.
‘The restructuring of the industry is gaining momentum and we are playing our full part’.
This is the second major shake-up undertaken by ICI in two years.
In 1991, it shed 21,000 jobs and closed 40 plants in an effort to reduce capacity and boost profits by about £400 million annually.
Sir Denys blamed the  need for further closures on over-expansion in the 1980s.
‘We have spread our jam rather too thinly.
We will now have to concentrate on those areas where we can best create value for our shareholders.’
Sir Denys also revealed details of the proposed split between ICI and Zeneca.
The split is expected to take place in July after shareholders' approval and the publication of a pathfinder prospectus for Zeneca.
Investors will receive one Zeneca share for each ICI share already held.
They will also be asked to subscribe for additional Zeneca shares by way of a rights issue to raise £1.3 billion.
That will be the second biggest rights issue ever made in in the UK, lagging only behind the ill-fated BP issue in 1987.
The rights issue proceeds will be injected into the ICI rump to allow the former parent to pay down debt.
Zeneca will be left with net indebtedness to ICI of £400 million.
The gearing of the two companies will stabilise at around 30 per cent each.
Analysts are forecasting that Zeneca will make taxable profits of about £500 million in the current year, with ICI expected to come in at around £250 million.
Sir Denys said the two new companies would each pay a dividend of not less than 27.5p each in 1993.
It follows a held 55p total for the combined group for 1992.
Chickens set for US migration
ELM, the Glasgow-based maker of the ‘plastic chicken’ monitoring device plans to break into the US market and is negotiating with Marks & Spencer which is interested in introducing the chicken into its Canadian stores.
The chicken can imitate the thermal characteristics of foods kept in refrigerators and detects temperature changes.
Talks are also being held with various US corporations, including Ault Foods, as part of the export drive which began with a two-week fact finding mission to the US organised by Strathclyde Business Development.
According to Elm's sales director, Jim Cooper, the company is positioning itself ahead of a tightening of US food storage laws which is due to take place in the next 18 months.
Stronger buy-out activity about to improve even more
By John Hatfield
MANAGEMENT buy-out activity picked up in 1992 and is set to improve further in the current year, according to the latest edition of the KPMG Peat Marwick Blue Book.
The quarterly MBO survey reveals that the number, total value and average size of management buy-outs all rose in 1992 compared with 1991.
Last year there were an estimated 520 buy-outs with a total consideration of £2.99 billion.
The corresponding 1991 figure showed 500 buy-outs completed at a cost of £2.6 billion.
Included in the statistics are notable Scottish deals including the £94 million MBO at George Outram, publishers of the Herald and Evening Times, and the £26 million buy-out at the Clyde Port.
With a total deal value of £960 million the fourth quarter was the strongest, showing an increase of £340 million over the third quarter but a rise of just £20 million over the corresponding period in the previous year.
Those figures were, however, slightly distorted since the fourth quarter witnessed the Gardner Merchant MBO out of Forte which, at £402 million, was the largest deal since July 1989.
KPMG's corporate finance specialists Chris Beresford and Stephen Cole predict that 1993 will be a hectic year for MBOs for a number of reasons.
‘Corporate balance sheets are mostly starved of cash.
The pressure to raise money through selling non-core businesses will continue.’
‘Conversely few companies are in a position to compete strongly in the auction when subsidiaries are put up for sale,’ they said.
However, there is still evidence of a lack of deals in Scotland as the standard deals of under £10 million — from family succession, rationalisation, privatisation or insolvency — have virtually dried up in the past two years.
In the opinion of Alan Malcolm, KPMG's corporate finance partner in Glasgow, this is largely due to the fact that vendors' price expectations still greatly exceed what managements are prepared to pay and what banks and institutions are prepared to back.
Pound recovers as tensions ease
THE recent dive in the value of the pound was checked yesterday, as tensions within the European exchange rate mechanism eased, and an otherwise dull stock market was enlivened by ICI's demerger plans, writes Magnus Grimond.
Sterling opened at Dm2.3157, just above the all-time low it touched on Wednesday, but picked up through the day as dealers switched away from the German currency.
It ended more than two pfennigs to the good at Dm2.3372.
The trade-weighted index was also lifted by the better sentiment towards the pound, rising from a historic opening low of 75.7 to end at 76.3.
The pound outpaced a buoyant dollar, closing at $1.4317, up from $1.4280 at the start.
Meanwhile, the stock market was dominated by the fireworks display at ICI, which finally announced it was going ahead with a demerger.
The accompanying huge rights issue — which, at £1.3 billion, will be one of the largest in history — has been long expected and a market growing weary of cash calls was heartened by news that the new money is not to be raised until June.
The shares immediately jumped 40p, but did not really take off until American buying late in the session pushed them up 71p to end the day at 1,153p.
That accounted for three of the final 11.7-point rise in the FT-SE 100-Share Index to 2,828.7 yesterday.
Other important trading statements from Shell, Royal Insurance and British Gas caused few surprises and left little or no change in the share prices.
But further question-marks over Barclays Bank knocked 4p off its shares, leaving them at 420p.
By contrast, Warburg, the merchant bank adviser to ICI, added 8p to 628p.
January trade figures cause City scepticism
THE UK clocked up record exports of £4.3 billion in January, but nobody was cheering in the City yesterday, writes Magnus Grimond.
The advent of the European single market has made redundant the ‘anything to declare?’ channel at EC borders and, with it, the crucial information on which statistics covering more than half Britain's trade is based.
The Government's Central Statistical Office says it could be July before a new system of European trade statistics is up and running and next year before the whole picture emerges.
So yesterday's record-beating export figure only covered trade with the world outside the EC and few analysts thought it worthy of much analysis.
Robert Buckland, an economist at brokers NatWest Markets, summed up the City's view: ‘We're sceptical about one month's figures for a start.
Second, we are sceptical about trade figures in general and, third, these figures only account for less than half Britain's trade.’
And the limited information available showed that non-EC trade was ‘still fairly awful’, he added.
Imports fell from December's record £5.44 billion last month, but at £5.32 billion were still well ahead of exports and led to a visible trade deficit of £1.02 billion, the third-biggest ever.
The UK remained in deficit with all parts of the world outside the EC, except the oil exporting countries, where the massive Al Yamamah defence contract with Saudi Arabia is helping to maintain a positive balance.
The deficit with Western Europe outside the EC was cut from £613 million to £521 million.
Improving orders boosting confidence
IMPROVED orders have boosted confidence in economic recovery among manufacturers, according to a survey published today by the Confederation of British Industry.
Total order books, while still regarded as below normal by almost half the companies questioned, are at their best levels for two-and-a-half years.
Output expectations for the next four months are the highest recorded by the authoritative monthly survey since May last year.
For the second consecutive month, manufacturers indicate they expect to increase output in the next four months.
Export orders showed a substantial improvement on January, suggesting sterling's devaluation may now be helping to raise demand from foreign customers.
The survey results, which are closely watched by Government and in the City, will raise hopes that the end of the recession may be in sight.
But signs of a pick-up will do nothing soon to cut unemployment, now at the top of the economic agenda.
Unemployment traditionally lags other economic indicators in a recovery and it will take some time before firms feel sure enough of the trend to consider expanding workforces again.
The CBI's findings were supported by a quarterly survey of more than 11,000 business executives in 16 countries by the international business information group, Dun & Bradstreet.
Sales optimism had rebounded in the UK, suggesting a recovery was set to take hold, said D&B's chief economist, Joseph Duncan.
‘In addition, the profits outlook rose sharply, approaching pre-recession levels.’
But he noted that expectations for jobs remained low, similar to the pattern in the US.
The outlook for most other European countries remained depressed and Japan was another weak spot.
— PA
Sea gales batter oil gains
By Bill Millar
THE North Sea gales which drove the oil tanker, Braer, aground on Shetland last month, were equally unkind to UK oil revenues.
As a result of the bad weather, the Royal Bank of Scotland's oil index fell for the second consecutive month to 114.5, the second lowest January since the index began ten years ago.
This represents 1.89 million barrels a day which is a drop of 5 per cent on December's 1.99 million barrels.
The estimated daily value of North Sea crude fell by 8 per cent to £21.3 million, nearly £2 million down on December, in spite of a more beneficial dollar/sterling rate.
The effect of the bad weather was not felt uniformly.
Some fields actually increased output while others, in particular Mobil's Beryl and Ness Fields and BP's Donan, recorded falls in excess of 40 per cent.
Tanker-loading operations were also disrupted by the weather with Shetland's Sullom Voe — the most severely hit terminal — seeing throughput fall by 59,000 barrels a day, 6 per cent down.
British Gas profits plummet £700m
By Frank Frazer
WITH competition beginning to bite in industrial gas sales, British Gas suffered a drop of about £700 million in profits last year to about £1 billion on a historic-cost basis.
Robert Evans, the chairman, said that warm weather and lower margins on sales to households and other tariff customers also contributed to a drop of about £230 million in turnover to £10.3 billion.
Earnings per share fell from 27.3p to 15.8p, but BG will pay a total dividend of 14.2p for last year, against 10.25p paid for the nine-month trading period to the end of 1991.
On a current-cost accounting basis, BG's pre-tax profits fell from £1.5 billion to £1.2 billion, before allowance of £320 million for exceptional charges, including the additional 3,200 job lay-offs announced yesterday.
Mr Evans said that capital spending had been cut back from original plans to offset the squeeze on profitability.
But he believed there was still enormous potential from operations in the UK and overseas to develop a world-class company.
Cedric Brown, BG's chief executive, said that competitors had taken over 27 per cent of total contract gas sales last year, compared with just 5 per cent in May 1991.
But with competitors still excluded from sales to households and other small-scale customers, BG last year managed to attract 290,000 new customers.
BG is also awaiting the outcome of the Monopolies Commission's investigation it requested into gas trading and transportation.
Mr Brown claims that considerably effort had already been made by BG to encourage competition in the gas market under the terms of an agreement signed last year with the Office of Fair Trading.
‘British Gas asked for a wide-ranging review in order to clarify our regulatory environment and develop a clear way ahead for the future.
We are in the middle of this inquiry, so it is far too early for anyone to make predictions about the outcome,’ he said.
Among other provisions in the accounts is a sum of £125 million put aside for environmental work at sites used for gasworks made redundant by the arrival of North Sea gas in the late 1960s.
French wine exports fall
FRENCH exports of wines and spirits fell last year for the first time in 20 years as recession caught up with one of the country's proudest industries.
Exports fell 1.5 per cent to Ffr34.2 billion (£4.33 billion) overall, while wine exports dropped 2.9 per cent and champagne sales abroad tumbled by 9.3 per cent, the French wines and spirits exporters' federation said.
‘Excluding any political accident, the prospects for 1993 seem to be a repetition of the mediocre year in 1992,’ champagne producer, Claude Taittinger, said.
The prospects for spirits looked brighter, with exports of Cognac and other French liqueurs up 1.2 per cent worldwide.
— Reuter
MGN board backs changes at Mirror
MIRROR Group Newspapers yesterday repeated assurances that its titles backed the Labour party — and chief executive David Montgomery's changes at the daily newspaper.
The MGN chairman, Sir Robert Clark, is believed to have flown back from Bermuda for a board meeting but board member Lord Hollick, a Labour peer, stayed abroad ski-ing.
The board said it regretted that Lord Hollick had informed the chairman that he could not support its statement of support for Mr Montgomery in full.
Lord Hollick is believed to have been Mr Montgomery's main backer originally but there were rumours of a rift following the resignation of the Mirror's political editor, Alastair Campbell, last week, according to the Sunday Times.
This was denied and speculation that the paper would move from its traditional support of the Left was quashed by the four banks which are the majority shareholders in the group.
Yesterday's board meeting issued a statement which said: ‘The board of MGN has  reaffirmed its support for the business policies, previously adopted unanimously by the board, for the future of the group.’
‘The board confirms its confidence in the management and has authorised David Montgomery and his colleagues to continue the agreed strategy.’
The administrator and banks were pleased with the company's recent performance and progress, the statement added.
In another development, Mr Campbell was appointed assistant editor on Mr Montgomery's old paper, Today, by Richard Stott, former editor of the Daily Mirror.
Ready for takeoff, but still in for a bumpy ride
ICI is now just one small step away from its giant demerger.
The new bio-science company has been christened and its management and debt structure finalised — now all that remains is shareholder approval and the successful launch of the £1.3 billion rights issue.
That it is proceeding at all, despite the intense financial and media scepticism that followed last summer's initial announcement, is a tribute to Sir Denys Henderson and his team.
The recent lacklustre share price performance has suggested that there has been some doubt as to the practical benefits of  separation , not least how future dividend payments will be structured.
In the absence of any turnaround in the fourth quarter, ICI can only just afford to pay the maintained 1992 dividend of 55.0p at a cost of about £400 million from ‘clean’ earnings per share of 48.8p.
Distributing next year's maintained payment between the two new companies has clearly not been an easy task and question marks must remain over the board's decision just to split the 1993 payment straight down the middle with the promise that each company will not pay less than 27.5p a share.
Zeneca will have little problem in paying its whack, but for the residual ICI businesses problems clearly remain.
Industrial chemicals lost £49 million in the fourth quarter, suggesting that there is a little more pain to come from ICI's core businesses.
A cyclical chemicals business could be forgiven for paying a once covered dividend at this stage in the cycle with the prospect of recovery not too far off, but overcapacity and the prospects for continued recession in most of  their important European markets make it far from clear that this side of the demerged business will be able to pay its way.
By eschewing the obvious solution of a differential dividend payment, the group has had to fall back on the option of endowing the chemicals company with additional cash by way of a rights issue from Zeneca.
But a combination of the £1.3 billion cash call and the general lack of confidence in the pharmaceutical sector means that Zeneca is unlikely to get off to the sort of flying start that some had hoped for.
The problems are compounded by the patent expiry on its biggest-selling drug and the general impression that the company has a less promising research pipeline than, say, Glaxo.
Demerger is clearly the right road but it is not a freeway to success.
Fourth-quarter surge sees Shell top £3bn
WITH net income rising by 28 per cent to just above £3 billion, 1992 was far from being the feared annus horribilis for the Royal Dutch/Shell group, writes Frank Frazer
But Sir Peter Holmes, chairman of the UK-based Shell Transport & Trading wing, urged caution yesterday about reading too much into results influenced by changes in accountancy practices to meet new US rules, and currency movements.
He believed a truer picture of the company's performance was given by earnings figures calculated on a current-cost basis, which rose by just 8 per cent to £3.1 billion on turnover which fell by more than £1 billion to £73 billion.
Earnings per share at Shell Transport rose from 24.9p in 1991 to 32.5p last year.
The company yesterday announced a final 12.6p dividend, lifting the total to 21.9p for the year, compared with 20.9p in 1991.
Performance was helped by higher earnings from exploration and production, particularly during the fourth quarter, when net income surged from £454 million to £928 million.
Shipping, manufacturing and marketing operations also did well, but the chemicals division reported a loss, partly through a deteriorating petrochemicals market hit by surplus European ethylene capacity.
Because operations remain vulnerable to low levels of economic growth in Shell's main markets and also because of sluggish oil prices, the company will continue to put emphasis on the cost-effectiveness of its activities in the North Sea and elsewhere, as well as looking at ways of rationalising its portfolio of assets to maintain profitability.
But it also plans to increase its worldwide capital spending in 1993 to £6.6 billion, from £5.2 billion last year.
European operations last year absorbed £2.1 billion of the total, which was a drop from £2.5 billion in 1991.
There was also a fall from £1.5 billion to £1.3 billion in US spending.
Spurs nets over £3m
TOTTENHAM Hotspur may not have got it quite right on the pitch, but off it, Spurs plc, chaired by the Amstrad tycoon, Alan Sugar, netted profits of £3.28 million before tax in its first half-year, against only £810,000 before.
Revenue from normal trading fell, but the club made it up from the transfer market.
Shareholders got a special interim dividend of 3p in November to cover these results.
Earnings per share more than doubled, from 8p to 19.2p, but the shares fell 12p to 101p. — PA
Finance expert drafted into Japanese treasury operations
SHELL is sending a top financial professional to Japan to take charge temporarily of treasury operations of an affiliate company which has lost huge amounts on currency speculation.
The multinational oil group, which has a 50 per cent stake in the Showa Shell Sekiyu refining company, was forced yesterday to write off £131 million in its 1992 accounts to cover liability for losses.
Sir Peter Holmes, Shell's chairman who admitted that he was ‘astonished’ to discover that the  irregularities had occurred through an associate company failing to follow strict rules against speculative dealing, said that he expected any further exposure to be limited to a £65 million charge which the company would take in its accounts for the first quarter of 1993.
His remarks coincided with an announcement in Tokyo that the president and all senior management of Showa Shell Sekiyu had resigned after the losses estimated at to $1.3 billion from foreign exchange deals which went wrong.
The company has been forced to sell land and stock holdings to recoup some of the shortfall.
Telegraph news good
CONRAD Black's Telegraph group has lifted its 1992 pre-tax profits by 9.4 per cent, from £40.5 million the year before to £44.3 million, it revealed yesterday.
The rise was achieved mainly through increased circulation revenue, including a cover price rise, which accounts for 46 per cent of total newspaper income.
Advertising revenue rose only 4 per cent, down £29 million from 1989's record.
The group, which publishes the Daily Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph, was floated on the stock market last July.
Group turnover went up from £219.1 million to £237.2 million in the 12 months, while earnings per share rose from 23.8p to 25.4p.
A final dividend of 6.5p makes a total of 11p, after a special dividend of 10p which was paid in June.
The Telegraph's shares firmed 5p to 349p on the figures.
— PA
In the three months to 31 January, SIT's net asset value rose by 9 per cent to 236.9p.
This compares favourably with both the 7.2 per cent rise in the UK market and the 7.8 per cent rise in the World Index.
Woolwich thriving in slump
UNEMPLOYMENT is the biggest cause of mortgage arrears, the Woolwich Building Society's chief executive, Donald Kirkham, said yesterday.
He was commenting on the society's 1992 profits, which rose from £136.4 million in 1991 to £149.3 million before tax, despite a doubling of provisions for loan losses to £144.7 million.
Demand for mortgages remained sluggish last year despite five cuts in the mortgage rate, Mr Kirkham said.
‘Research indicates that unemployment and the fear of unemployment, coupled with general uncertainty about the health of the economy, deterred many potential first-time buyers and movers from acting.
Unemployment is still the major cause of borrowers falling behind with their mortgage repayments.’
The Woolwich, Britain's third-largest society, had acted to help customers with mortgage payment difficulties last year, said Mr Kirkham.
‘As a result, around three-quarters of all borrowers in serious arrears are being helped with new and more affordable repayment terms.’
Tight cost control helped boost profits, despite lending reduced from £3.1 billion to £2.7 billion and net receipts which fell to £893 million, from £1.13 billion.
— PA
Aberdeen posts final offer for oil target
BRITAIN'S oil ‘minnows’, many of them companies whose shares are trading at big discounts to their asset values, are hoping to grow by acquisition before they are swallowed by much bigger predators, writes George Duthie.
London-based  Aberdeen Petroleum, which yesterday reported annual profits which have soared from only £78,000 the year before to £355,000 before tax, is one such minnow.
Its board says it is ‘following a strategy of consolidating smaller, publicly-quoted UK oil and gas companies’ to increase shareholder value.
Part of that policy is the unlisted market group's recent £7.2 million bid for Brabant Resources, where it already owns a 9.99 per cent stake and has irrevocable undertakings to accept its offer from holders of 11.4 per cent more.
Brabant says it makes no sense: Aberdeen buys holdings in North American oil and gas ventures; Brabant is mainly a North Sea explorer.
David Hooker, Aberdeen's managing director, said yesterday that a final offer was being posted to Brabant's shareholders, with a circular seeking approval for it from his own shareholders.
Meanwhile, US-based Bellwether approached Aberdeen in December, while the Edinburgh-based Pittencrieff oil and mobile phones company this week raised its stake in Aberdeen by 2.5 per cent to 19.1 per cent.
Aberdeen's latest figures are flattered by £201,000 of exceptional gains from the sale of Australian interests and investments as it cleared the decks for expansion in the UK which, it says, would cut overheads and increase liquidity.
Earnings per share jumped from 0.12p to 0.73p, but no dividend has ever been paid.
City talk has it that Pittencrieff, which is rich enough to swallow both Brabant and Aberdeen, is about to bid about £11 million for Aberdeen, valuing it at 22p a share.
The shares rose 1.75p to 15.75p after the figures.
MIT sees assets top indices
By Gordon Milne
DESPITE the sluggish global economic background, Murray International Trust has increased both dividends and net asset value in the year to 31 December.
The £304 million fund, run from Glasgow by Murray Johnstone, recorded a total return on net assets of 22.3 per cent— ahead of both the FT Actuaries World Index, at 17.2 per cent , and the FT-A All Share Index, at 20.5 per cent .
Net asset value per share rose to 293.3p, from 253.7p a year before.
A final dividend of 3.5p (3.4p) helps lift the total from 10.9p to 11.4p.
David Briggs, MIT's manager, said yesterday: ‘1992 was characterised by a very sluggish global economic background with only the USA, of the major economies, showing signs of sustainable recovery.’
The current outlook appeared much brighter, he added, with an easing of monetary policy in both Japan and Europe.
MIT has reduced its weightings in the US in favour of the UK and Europe, and has put in place a £20 million loan facility for investment in European bonds.
The shares firmed 2p to 304p after the figures yesterday.
BT invests £3m a week in Scotland
BRITISH Telecom is putting £3 million a week in Scotland every week, its chairman, Iain Vallance, told the London dinner of Scottish Financial Enterprise last night.
‘We are doing it because we believe that Scotland, with its innovative financial community is the location in which that investment will be best exploited.
Mr Vallance said the most innovative approaches to home banking using telecommunications that he had come across anywhere were the different approaches of the Bank of Scotland the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Barwell buys back Thomson titles
THOMSON Regional Newspapers is selling six of its stable of 40 free newspapers back to their former owner Keith Barwell.
The titles are the Herald and Posts at Stevenage, Welwyn, St Albans, Hoddesdon, Harlow and Bishop's Stortford in Hertfordshire and Essex.
No price for the deal was revealed.
— PA
Inchcape offloads timber business
INCHCAPE yesterday ended its withdrawal from natural resources with the sale of the timber interests of its 63 per cent-owned subsidiary in Singapore for about £24 million.
Inchcape's chief executive, Charles Mackay, said the strategy was to focus on the long-term development of its three core businesses: cars, marketing and services.
— PA
Abtrust New Euro on new track
ABTRUST New European has changed its investment strategy.
The continental European specialist will become a ‘tracker’ trust, replicating the portfolio of the FT-SE Eurotrack 100 Index.
The Eurotrack 100 yields about 3.1 per cent, which exceeds the current yield of the trust's portfolio.
In addition, Abtrust Fund Managers is to reduce its quarterly management fee to 0.2 per cent from 0.25 per cent .
New IBM cuts ‘will not harm Europe'
IBM's announcement that it expects to slash its workforce this year by more than the 25,000 first planned will not affect its European operations, said a  spokesman at the company's Greenock plant.
He said the reductions would be made only in the computer giant's American operations.
‘This hasn't changed the European position.
There has been no announcement regarding Europe and none is expected.’
While Greenock's 2,200 strong workforce is due to be cut by up to 150 in the current year this will be achieved by voluntary redundancy.
Microsoft denied ‘Windows’ marque
THE US government has tentatively denied Microsoft a trademark for the ubiquitous word ‘Windows’, according to reports.
If upheld, the preliminary decision by the US Patent and Trademark Office could hurt the company's ability to fend off imitators of its widely used computer software.
Microsoft plans to appeal.
— AP
Royal Insurance cuts losses by two-thirds
By Clifford German
ROYAL Insurance cut its losses by two-thirds to £119 million in 1992, and yesterday launched a £100 million, ten-year Eurobond issue to cut borrowings.
After tax, the loss amounts to 17.1p a share, but Royal's chief executive, Richard Gamble, announced a final dividend of 3p, slashing the total to 5p for the full year, from 11.25p in 1991.
Premium income fell by 1 per cent to £3,423 million and investment income was down 4 per cent to £486 million, mainly as a result of falling interest rates, but underwriting claims reduced.
In the UK, losses fell from £367 million to only £50 million.
Underwriting losses more than halved to £259 million and investment income rose by 20 per cent to £210 million.
Losses on domestic mortgage indemnity policies alone, where insurers stand the first slice of losses on the sale of repossessed houses, were cut from £257 million in 1991 to £160 million.
Weather and subsidence claims were lower, motor and marine insurance results improved and only industrial disease claims required higher provisions.
In the US, profits rose from £3 million to £24 million, despite further heavy losses on hurricane insurance.
Losses on reinsurance business doubled to £79 million, the estate agencies suffered a drop in revenue from £121 million to £104 million and losses rose from £19 million to £33 million.
Profits from the life assurance operations halved to £29 million.
The global trend, however, improved steadily throughout last year, the UK market making a £7 million profit in the fourth quarter for the second quarter in a row.
During the final three months, group capital and reserves rose by £16 million to £1,480 million and the group's solvency margin at the end of the year was up two points to 42 per cent.
Brewin in talks with Bell Lawrie White
By Magnus Grimond
BREWIN Dolphin, the London-based private client stockbrokers, confirmed yesterday that it is in talks with Bell Lawrie White, its Edinburgh-based counterpart, which could create one of the largest private client brokers in the UK.
The combined firm, which might be in existence as early as the end of March, would have funds under management of about £4 billion and handle the affairs of more than 30,000 clients.
Describing Bell Lawrie as ‘old friends of ours’, Brewin's managing director, John Hall said yesterday: ‘We are at the moment in negotiations, but it is pretty difficult to say too much until it is clear where we are going.’
‘We would like to conclude [the deal]by the end of the financial year — but that is going some,’ he said.
He is due to travel to Edinburgh today to continue the discussions.
The structure of the transaction has not been finalised, but it is likely that management at the Scottish broker will end up with an equity stake in the combined business.
A ‘due diligence’ investigation by accountants is thought to be already under way.
Bell Lawrie was acquired by Hill Samuel, the merchant banking arm of the TSB banking group, in 1989 and merged with another broker, Robert White, the following year.
It has been an open secret for several months that Hill Samuel was willing to entertain reasonable offers and several possible buyers have apparently shown an interest, but Brewin Dolphin is understood to have been given exclusivity in the negotiations earlier this month.
Brewin was sold to management by Scandinavian Bank for about £6 million last year, when it made pre-tax profits of £1.4 million on turnover of £14.4 million.
It was one of the six pilot sites used to test Taurus, the paperless share transfer system being developed by the Stock Exchange.
Battle to get shopper buying British
By Victor Robertson
THE ‘shop till I drop’ syndrome evident in the 1980s has all but left the scene and, as increasing waves of redundancy hit all ranks — and officers — a more penny-pinching approach is in order.
Trading down from fillet steak to mince or sausages, from Cooper's Oxford marmalade to supermarket own brand or from real coffee to soft-focus Gold Blend is as much a symbol of the 90s as lengthening dole queues and expanding cardboard box- dwelling communities.
The search is on for value for money, real or perceived, and food producers, processors and retailers at home and abroad are all after a share of your food pound.
Food from Britain, the marketing and promotion organisation which is part-funded from the taxpayer and part by the food industry, is intent on ensuring that the bulk of the food you buy is British.
The Government has no little interest in this as the negative food trade gap is about £5.7 billion.
The food minister, John Gummer, and others have desperately tried to convince consumers that home-produced food is — in spite of real and hyped food scares — among the safest in the world.
Yet the label ‘British’ has little real impact when applied to food.
At a recent presentation by the Danish Bacon & Meat Council, one of the less-boring pronouncements was that consumers may spend up to one minute rummaging through the bacon counter at supermarkets before making their choice.
 Perspicacious as ever I asked the council's marketing director, John Howard, if he had then researched what consumers were looking for during the 60 seconds that were being removed from their lives for ever.
Sorry, don't know, was the summarised answer.
However, a bright lady from one of the northern co-ops came up to me later with the simple answer: they were looking at the prices and making their choice on that basis in much the same manner as they might go into a butcher's shop with a price tag for the weekend shopping firmly implanted in their minds.
This must be quite disappointing to the Danes who have spent millions of pounds over the years building up ‘Danish’ as a trademark on a par with Bisto or Nescafe.
To some extent the Dutch and the New Zealanders, with their lamb, must fall into the same category.
But the marketing agencies of all three countries have recently unveiled multi-million pound promotional campaigns for the British market within recent weeks, which would appear to indicate they have researched the market and consumer response within it and found it worthwhile.
Dr Clive Black, food policy advisor with the English NFU, has taken this all on board.
Yet his own researchers have confirmed that the ‘British’ tag on food has about as much impact now as ‘made in Hong Kong’might have had on other commodities a couple of decades ago.
‘The bulk of consumers are urban-based and are very busy people.
They are generally more interested in questions of taste and convenience and price than where it comes from,’ he says.
But this is not absolutely true, he adds.
If there is a product which, by its association with a particular country or region, is deemed to offer a guarantee of authenticity and excellence, then this will influence the consumer mightily.
Scotland is extremely lucky in this context, with its record on beef, whisky and salmon — not to mention oatcakes and haggis — which sets it apart or differentiates it from the rest of the market place.
Some French cheeses, German sausages and Italian hams, for example, fall into the same category, and can be found in shops and supermarkets, as John Gummer is wont to say these days, ‘from Scotland to Sicily.’
So, why promote British?
The Meat and Livestock Commission, with its campaigns for British beef, lamb and pork, is unrepentant.
‘We are a British organisation charged with promoting British produce and financed by British producers,’ says a spokesman.
But of course, it is more subtle than that.
What the MLC is doing is trying to keep the meat-eating habit going; to expand — or at least to slow down the contraction of — the overall market.
Over and above that are the various assurance schemes designed to offer as near as possible a guarantee of quality, safety, wholesomeness and implied animal welfare in the whole process in much the same way as the lion's stamp once guaranteed eggs in the pre-Edwina Currie days.
Some people may feel that the collapse of the Soviet Republic and the re-emergence of the nation state and even regions is part of an international trend.
Maybe so, I am no political pundit.
But there are some parallels in the food sector.
Just as curry may have become identified as a traditional British dish with the blurring of ethnic and other socio-economic and  demographic trends, there is an equal and opposite trend to identify positively regional specialities such as West Country farmhouse cheddar or Welsh lamb or Scottish beef as offering that bit more than the ‘commodity’ product.
It is a trend that supermarkets are belatedly beginning to recognise and is forcing them to break out of the straight jacket of their centralised buying habits.
The mirror image is the development in England of regionalised groups such as the Taste of East Anglia and the Taste of the West.
Scottish food interests cannot afford to rest on their laurels and must continued to expand their record of excellence to ensure their share of the food pound.
Challenge for meat industry
THERE WAS little to cheer the meat and livestock industry in yesterday's crystal ball gazing exercise at a London farm conference.
If anything, poultry meat consumption looks set to continue its upper drive while red meats will struggle to maintain their status quo.
Martin Palmer, head of the Meat and Livestock Commission's economics department, admitted the whole European industry faced a serious challenge in trying to stimulate consumption.
He urged that the EC Commission should divert some of its attention from controlling production to become more involved with demand issues.
This was what becoming more market-orientated was all about
Poultry had benefited from efficient, low-cost, intensive production systems which had led to a prize competitive product.
Consumers throughout the EC and in other wealthy countries had responded by increased purchases, making it the fastest- growing sector of the meat industry
This had been aided by its image as a low fat meat and from the development of an extensive range of process, value-added products which matched the trend towards convenience foods.
Political and economic changes as a result of EC farm policy reform and a possible GATT agreement would be unlikely to favour the red meat sector, particular beef and lamb.
‘The main thrust of the CAP reforms in reducing cereal prices and therefore feeding stock prices in the EC means that competition from the intensively-produced grain-based meats such as poultry and pig meat will remain intense,’ said Dr Palmer at the Agra Europe Outlook Conference.
The affect on the beef sector would depend crucially on how consumers reacted to falling beef prices.
‘It is possible that a slow economic recovery and lower beef prices will coincide to increase consumption in the next few years but in the wake of consumer scares, such as BSE, the market needs a push.
/
Any real growth in consumption of all meats would tend to be led by lower prices.
This would favour those meats perceived to be competitive or good value.
But there were other socio-economic issues to be tackled, such as changing  lifestyles , attitudes on diet and health and increased expectations of food quality.
‘In addition,’ said Dr Palmer, ‘the meat industry needs to counteract, through better marketing and promotion, the negative image generated in the past few years by food activists and by media sources.’
£2,500 in prizes offer for Friesian breeders
MORE than £2,500 in prizes is on offer to Friesian breeders in the 1993 BOCM Pauls Premier Breeder Awards Scheme organised in association with the Holstein Friesian Society.
This year, for the first time, a Scottish section has been included in the competition.
In addition to the Royal Highland, the shows at Ayr and Dumfries and the Scottish Winter Fair are eligible.
The scheme, now in its 13th year, involves more than 60 agricultural shows and specialist events throughout the United Kingdom.
Its object is to recognise the importance of the breeder of successful show-ring animals, who is often not the exhibitor.
There are two competitive sections — national and regional — based on points awarded to successful pedigree Holstein Friesian females at the nominated events.
To be eligible, all animals must either be registered in the Holstein Friesian Society's herd book or the B or C sections of the supplementary register.
To encourage the breeder who shows at local events only, there are 11 regional contests, with points counting towards Premier Breeder awards within that region.
The prizes at £75 for the winner, £50 for the runner-up and £25 for the third place.
Every competitor is eligible for the national section of the scheme, but no breeder may receive more than one regional first prize.
Cumulative points obtained at any of the named national shows will automatically be added to any won at the ‘National’ events — the Royal Show, Royal Welsh, Royal Highland and the European Dairy Farming Event — to determine the National Premier Breeder Award.
The three breeders with the highest total scores after the final show will receive national prizes to the value of £500, £300 and £200, in addition to any prize money won in the regional contests.
700 farmers back protest over ‘lunatic’ beef scheme
HUNDREDS of farmers from both sides of the Border condemned new arrangements for Beef Special Premium as unworkable at a special meeting in Carlisle on Wednesday.
More than 700 farmers gave their backing to the Carlisle mart firm Harrison & Hetherington which had called the meeting because it believes the new system could paralyse cattle marketing.
And sales at one of the country's biggest marts could create traffic chaos, with more than 1,000 steers having to be put through a race at Borderway mart to check ear tags, causing traffic to back up onto the motorway.
The firm's managing director, Jim Heslop, was applauded when he described the scheme as ‘EC and MAFF bureaucratic lunacy.’
And the whole meeting gave its backing to urging the Government to re-think the scheme.
The National Farmers' Union in Cumbria is also against the new BSPS and butchers are concerned at its effects on the beef market after its introduction in April.
‘Auctioneers in general consider it an unworkable scheme which will create absolute chaos to the services provided by livestock  auctioneers to the agricultural community,’ said Mr Heslop.
Auctioneers nationwide are also angry that they, who have been expected to check ear tags with Cattle Identification Documents on all cattle going through the mart, have not been consulted by the Ministry of Agriculture on the new scheme.
The scheme, along with other CAP reform details on sheep and suckler cow quota, as well as new stocking density calculations, was explained to the meeting by a senior Meat and Livestock Commission economist, Mrs Lesley Greene, who has been monitoring CAP changes for the last six months.
Mr Heslop outlined some of the problems with the scheme.
Farmers would have to be 100 per cent accurate in the identification system to avoid losing out on premium payments.
Cattle Identification Documents would have a value as they carried the holder's potential right to premium payment, which this year will be £56.34, rising to £70.42 in 1994 and £84.15 the following year.
The system would be seriously exposed to fraud.
Proposals for a maximum carcase weight of 380kg, which was more than likely to be introduced this July, could mean heavier animals having to be marketed earlier before the second qualifying period.
It would create unfair trading as some buyers may already have reached their 90-claim limit.
Cattle would be carrying different CIDs, depending on what premium has already been claimed.
Including heifers, there would be four categories of cattle going through the market.
Auctioneers would have to face the problem of liability over CIDs and have to engage extra staff to check cattle ear tags with CIDs.
He said he hoped auctioneers in Cumbria could find a workable system to operate the new regulations.
This could mean farmers getting involved before the cattle leave the farm and at the mart.
Buyers would also have to be satisfied that their documents were in order.
Harrison & Hetherington, along with auctioneers nationwide, has been lobbying MPs.
At Borderway on Tuesday county auctioneers are meeting a senior ministry official, Richard Cowan, to discuss the problems.
Civil Service sound warning to top three
TOUCHE ROSS, the pace setters, and defending champions Kelburne were given a timely reminder last week that this season's Torrie Stockbrokers' National Men's League has a long way to go, as they both sustained their first defeats of the season.
It is possible that none of the top three will take the honours, for Edinburgh Civil Service are once again coming with a tremendous run, reminiscent of last season, when they fell at the final hurdle.
They won the B Division of the European Cup Winners' Cup last Easter.
Unfortunately they went back to their bad old ways during the autumn in the championship, but they have now regained that hungry look which can only spell trouble for their rivals.
Andrew Kay, the Civil Service captain, confirmed yesterday: ‘We are beginning to play as a team again and as we extend our winning sequence the more confident we are becoming.’
That is certainly not what Menzieshill, their opponents tomorrow at Maryfield, want to hear.
The Taysiders will be playing their first competitive outdoor match of the year for, unlike their domestic rivals, they were on international duty last week in Basle, doing Scotland proud in winning the B Division of the European Indoor Championship.
Touche Ross and Kelburne meet at Countesswells.
Neither side is likely to take any unnecessary risks in a key game for both teams, so a draw is likely.
Relegation-threatened Inverleith and Stepps clash, with the odds appearing to favour Inverleith, but, as Kelburne found out to their cost last week, there are no pushovers in the lower half of the table.
Stepps, the bottom club, could well emulate the giant-killing act of their local rivals, DW Clydesdale.
Western Klick Photopoint should consolidate their lead in Division I of the Torrie Stockbrokers' National League when they meet fourth-placed Grove at Stepps tomorrow, then face bottom club, Kirkcaldy, at McDiarmid Park, Perth, on Sunday.
Edinburgh Ladies and Royal High Gymnasts, currently second and third, clash at Cramond tomorrow, with Gymnasts aiming for revenge after their recent 1-0 defeat by Ladies in the quarter-final of the National League Cup.
Heriot-Watt SCPE, who triumphed 2-1 over Edinburgh in the quarter-final of the British Universities' women's championship on Wednesday, will meet Cardiff in the semi-finals next Wednesday in Liverpool.
Holders Loughborough contest the other semi-final in Bristol.
Decline puts industry ‘at risk'
STATISTICS released yesterday reveal that the continuing fall in the number of horses in training is now jeopardising the future of the entire racing industry.
The figures included in the Jockey Club report show that, by the end of the year, the average number of horses in training will have fallen by 1,963 (16.2 per cent) since 1990, with significant reductions in both four-year-olds and jump horses.
The Jockey Club is urging that action be taken to restore confidence in the industry, adding: ‘It will require positive action by all in the industry, by bookmakers and by the Government.’