

THE BBC last night axed Eldorado, the supersoap set on the sunny Costa del Sol that turned into a multi-million pound flop.
The news came as a crushing blow to the cast and production team on the £10million set in Spain who had hoped for a reprieve after a recent upturn in viewing figures.
The new controller of BBC1, Alan Yentob, said he made the ‘very hard’ decision last night to halt the soap after its first 156 episodes end in July.
He added: ‘Eldorado has been a brave venture to which many people have given huge energy and commitment.
But I believe it is better to call a halt now at a point when the option to renew contracts has arisen.
I know that this decision will be painful for the cast, production team and crew.’
The show was the brainchild of producer Verity Lambert, who saw Mr Yentob in London yesterday to be told his final decision.
Afterwards, she said: ‘Everybody has worked very hard from the beginning and in recent weeks their efforts have paid off on screen.’
The show was filmed entirely on location in Spain, where a 25-acre village was specially built for the purpose.
It had a cast of virtual unknowns and failed to score highly in the ratings, with average viewing figures of only five million — although it had picked up in recently.
Several of the original cast were written out within months of the launch, and there were many other changes — but all failed to make the soap a winner.
The BBC head of drama services, Peter Cregeen, flew to Spain yesterday afternoon to break the news.
Some of the 150 cast and production crew he gathered together at a local hotel broke down and wept.
The location publicity officer, Liz Kallend, looking shaken, said: ‘Everyone thought that the show had turned the corner.’
Victim of a serial killer, Page 3
Eldorado shutdown proves all that glitters isn't golden Eldorado was named after the legendary land where wealth was easily made.
As Audrey Gillan reports, it will now go down in television history as something very different.
THEY had a homosexual, a nymphomaniac, an alcoholic and a Cockney crook — but they didn't reckon for a serial killer.
The people behind the BBC soap opera Eldorado had been filled with fear and trepidation.
He could be out to get them.
And he did.
They had been waiting anxiously, trembling even, for a call from Blighty.
Last night that dreaded communication came…it's over, the end.
The word had been handed down from the so-called serial killer, Alan Yentob, the newly-appointed BBC1 controller.
On taking the job he expressed his feelings on Eldorado rather bluntly.
‘It has failed,’ he said, then suddenly looked as if he wished he had bitten his tongue.
If he had sliced a door with an axe shouting ‘Here's Johnny’ the Eldorado crew might have been happier.
While the team lurked around the set in Malaga, Verity Lambert, whose company Cinema Verity produces the show for the BBC, flew back to London for what proved to be the fatal meeting with Mr Yentob last night.
Then just before 9pm (was it timed to make the national news) came the announcement the cast had all feared — this show won't go on.
The only thing missing was any tribute to mark its passing.
Eldorado pitched itself to the tabloids as a ‘sun, sea, sex and sangria’ story.
Hungry hacks were flown out to the set to experience the four S's for themselves.
It was hoped that the Bonkidorm and Costa del Bonk set would tune in avidly, that the programme would rekindle memories of the singles holiday in Torremolinos or the villa trip to El Capistrano.
It was launched last July, and the critics hated it.
The characters were said to be stiff.
Later many of the actors were sacked.
There were rumours of a fatal coach crash.
In a last bid for survival the programme had more recently tried to pick up social realism, taking on subjects such as bisexuality, suicide and abortion in a Catholic family.
Eldorado's ratings have bounced from a low of 2.6 million to 8 million.
Many experts are now asking: ‘Did they come in for the kill a little too early?’
EastEnders dipped to 5.5 million in its early days with Michelle becoming pregnant by Dirty Den before things improved.
In the same vein Coronation Street was voted a disaster 32 years ago.
The first few episodes of Liverpool's Brookside also took a heavy panning from the critics.
Now the viewing figures prove they were all wrong.
Richard Kilborn is head of film and media studies at the University of Stirling and has recently published a book titled Television Soaps.
‘It takes most soaps quite a long time to establish themselves in the favour of the audience.
Even the much-beloved soaps such as Coronation Street and Brookside took a while to settle down.’
Eldorado may go but, he explained, the traditional British soaps will stay because of their gritty realism.
Audiences become attached to soaps that have a strong sense of social realism.
Brookside and Coronation Street are never-ending stories that keep people absorbed.’
In contrast to the British soaps, the Australian soaps — in spite of their lack of realism — offer something different and plenty are willing to watch.
Surf and suntans, antipodean accents, endless brothers and sisters cropping up out of nowhere are all part of the appeal.
Eldorado, says Mr Kilborn, tried to become a hybrid of the two — plenty of sun and sand, glamour, leisured living with a storyline.
Frank Cox, producer of Scottish Television's Take the High Road, explained that hooking the audience by providing compelling characters is the most important thing.
‘Characters are important.
You have to want to know what is happening to the people.’
Take the High Road, which has been running for 13 years, doesn't make the ratings tables because it is not slotted in a peak viewing time across the country.
‘If it did,’ says Mr Cox, ‘it would probably beat Emmerdale Farm.’
Having produced episodes of EastEnders as a freelance, Mr Cox knows the soap business from inside the box and out.
Soaps are very important socially, he says, because the audience has basically invited the characters into their living room.
‘I think it's important that soaps are not issue driven but do deal with issues because issues are a super way of revealing character and telling good stories.
High Road has tackled all kinds of issues from pit bull terrier fighting to cot death in order to illuminate character.
If there is any educative quality from that then I think the job is done.
‘Eldorado was pulled forward and rushed and I think that's the last thing you should do with a soap.
There's no reason why it shouldn't have worked.
Once people get hooked on a show you have them.’
Dream in Scotland for ballet composer
By Susan Dean
THE Australian-born composer Barrington Pheloung, creator of the chart-topping theme music for the television series Inspector Morse, visited Glasgow yesterday to put the final touches to one of his latest compositions.
Barrington has composed the music for Scottish Ballet's new production of A Midsummer Night's Dream, which opens at Glasgow's Theatre Royal on 19 March.
Yesterday he met up with Scottish Ballet's music director and fellow Australian, Alan Barker, to go over the details of their collaboration.
While Pheloung may be best known for his work on the small and large screen — he wrote the award-nominated music for the film Truly, Madly, Deeply, as well as composing for the 13-part television series Boon in 1985, his first TV series.
However he has also written the music for about 50 ballets.
He has drawn on the works of his hero, the 19th century composer Felix Mendelssohn, for inspiration for the Scottish Ballet production.
Mendelssohn wrote the Overture and Incidental Music for A Midsummer Night's Dream between 1826 and 1842 and Pheloung's composition weaves in and out of the music of his predecessor, who he describes as an often underrated genius.
Dreamtime in Scotland for ballet composer
By Susan Dean
THE Australian-born composer Barrington Pheloung, creator of the chart-topping theme music for the hit television series Inspector Morse, visited Glasgow yesterday to put the final touches to one of his latest compositions.
Barrington has composed the music for Scottish Ballet's new production of A Midsummer Night's Dream, which opens at Glasgow's Theatre Royal on 19 March.
Yesterday he met up with Scottish Ballet's music director and fellow Australian, Alan Barker, to go over the details of their collaboration.
While Pheloung may be best known for his work on the small and large screen — he wrote the award-nominated music for the film Truly, Madly, Deeply, as well as composing for the 13-part television series Boon in 1985, his first TV series.
However he has also written the music for about 50 ballets.
He has drawn on the works of his hero, the 19th century composer Felix Mendelssohn, for inspiration for the Scottish Ballet production.
Mendelssohn wrote the Overture and Incidental Music for A Midsummer Night's Dream between 1826 and 1842 and Pheloung's composition weaves in and out of the music of his predecessor, who he describes as an often underrated genius.
PETER DEVLIN Final polish: Barrington Pheloung, right, checks his score with Alan Barker, musical director
Musical merger made in heaven LEONARD FRIEDMAN/PETER EVANS QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
THAT violinist extraordinary, Leonard Friedman, gave the third of his current recital series Friedman and Friends at the Queen's Hall on Wednesday with the pianist Peter Evans.
At the age of 63, Friedman seems in better technical shape than ever, and to many of the younger members of his substantial audience, these performances must have come as a revelation.
Friedman has always had a special insight into certain areas of the repertoire (some of it surely gathered from his great teacher Max Rostal, who died 18 months ago, and whose achievement was to some extent being celebrated in these recitals).
Everywhere in Wednesday's concert there were breathtaking moments where original phrasing and dynamics brought out quite unexpected aspects of the music.
He was, of course, blessed in his pianist.
Peter Evans's uncanny ability to stay with even the most wayward soloist, coupled with his magisterial technical security, make him a recital partner in a million.
All three of the large-scale works on the programme received precise, sensitive readings which brought out their special qualities and stature.
William Walton's deceptively smooth and cool Sonata of 1949 (written for Menuhin and Louis Kentner) was contrasted with Ravel's  quirky and passionate Sonata of 1924-27 with its ironic central Blues and the moto perpetuo finale which leads straight into the G major Piano Concerto.
In all of this music, as in the mighty Schubert Rondo in B minor of 1826, both Friedman and Evans entirely at one, each yielding precedence at the behest of the music.
In the Corelli/Tartini/Kreisler encore, and in the Dvorak Sonatina and Humoresque which began and ended the recital, the violin naturally took precedence, and here Evans's accompaniments were masterpieces of rich understatement, putting a seal of understanding on Friedman's nostalgic readings.
Neil Mackay
Cinema's local hero is celebrated Glasgow's ‘Mr Cosmo’ was a reluctant sitter for a sculpture to honour him, writes Emilio Coia
BORN on the first day of this century — so we always know how old he is — George Singleton is a veteran of the golden age of cinema.
The founder of the famous Cosmo in Glasgow, he inherited an interest in the cinema from his father Richard Vincent Singleton.
RVS was a master printer and an amateur pianist, the latter facility enabling him to help out a friend who was touring the Glasgow districts before the First World War with a projector and a bag full of short silent films.
Eventually Singleton senior was printing by day and showing films in the evening.
On leaving school at 14, young George was ‘put to the printing’, as was the term, but he was more interested in helping his father with the flicks and, with developing a business of his own.
With borrowed money he took advantage of an opportunity that presented itself in the 1930s when Oscar Deutch set about forming a third circuit of cinemas — after those of the Rank Organisation and ABC — by buying up the best sites.
George was active locally in more ways than one, his political sympathies always directed to the Left and to helping such bodies as the Spanish Relief Committee.
He was a leading light in the Cinematograph Exhibitors' Association and expanded his business by acquiring and developing a chain of cinemas — which he named Vogue — in places like Govan, Rutherglen and Shettleston.
A founder member of the Films of Scotland Committee and associated with the Scottish Film Council, George was also interested in theatre and music.
He had been brought on to the board of the Citizens Theatre, Glasgow, by its founder, the playwright James Bridie.
He served there for many years, ultimately becoming chairman.
A long time member of the Scottish Arts Council, George also served on the Arts Council of Great Britain and on the board of the British Film Institute — his down-to-earth assessments of proposals not always going down well at meetings of these organisations in London.
George was also on the board of the Scottish Orchestra (currently the Royal Scottish National Orchestra) but it is as creator of the much-loved Cosmo cinema in Glasgow in the 1930s that he will always be remembered.
Courageously he ignored the advice of his colleagues and friends in the trade who maintained that George was ‘off his head’ to open a small cinema (seating only 812) in a city centre site with the policy of showing films in foreign languages with English subtitles.
He had spotted a gap in the market.
The Glasgow Film Society, headed by Charles Oakley, was the largest in Europe and had indicated a certain demand already existed in Glasgow for the kind of films which the Curzon and Academy Cinemas showed in London.
In time George's enterprise paid off.
The programming of ‘Films for the Discriminating’, as the advertisements put it and ‘Music for your Pleasure’, played in the intervals met an enthusiastic response from the public.
The bubble burst with the arrival of television.
At first it had affected Mr Cosmo very little, but when the little screen began putting out quality material, the Cosmo (then under the control of George's son Ronald Singleton) was no longer viable and the family sold it, with great reluctance, to the Scottish Film Council.
Though the building has been internally divided, it continues to flourish as the Glasgow Film Theatre.
George Singleton was always aware of the social and artistic value of the cinema and, to this day, continues to express a serious interest in the arts in general.
Every Friday he lunches in the Glasgow Art Club with about a dozen friends and only displays momentary irritation when he fails to hear an occasional bon mot.
The most genuinely modest personality it is my pleasure to know, George had to be bullied by a number of us to sit for his sculpture by Archie Forrest who could well be considered as adept with clay as he is with paint.
Cosmic: Archie Forrest puts finishing touches to the sculpture of George Singleton, 93, alias Mr Cosmo, champion and patron of foreign language movies
Literary prize will mark lifetime's achievement
By James Johnston
THE FIRST winner of the United Kingdom's richest literary prize will be announced at a ceremony in London today.
The David Cohen British Literature Prize is a joint venture involving the Arts Council of Great Britain, the banking firm Coutts & Co and the David Cohen Family Charitable Trust.
The £30,000 prize will be awarded every two years to a living British writer in recognition of a lifetime's achievement.
In addition, the Arts Council will provide an extra £10,000 to enable the winner to commission new work which will encourage young writers and readers.
Since the prize was first announced, a panel of distinguished people has been involved in the delicate task of choosing the first recipient.
Members of the public were invited to put forward suggestions.
Commenting on the prize, Lord Palumbo, chairman of the Arts Council, said: ‘Literature is one of the greatest arts of the United Kingdom and perhaps our finest gift to the world.
Until now, however, there has been no prize which has honoured our major creative writers not just for a single work but for the achievement of a lifetime.’
He said he hoped the prize ‘will come to be regarded as the supreme accolade for a living British author’.
The criteria for eligibility for the prize, which will be administered by the Arts Council, are that the recipient must be a living British writer, novelist, short-story writer, poet, essayist or dramatist whose work must be written primarily in English, Gaelic or Welsh.
In addition, the winner must be a British citizen.
The panel of judges for the first award included Eleanor Bron, the actress and writer; Penelope Lively, the novelist and a past winner of the Booker Prize; and John Mortimer, QC, the novelist and playwright and chairman of the Royal Society of Literature.
That great British trouper, Tommy Steele, now aged 56, will on Wednesday become the first non-Scandinavian to receive the Hans Christian Andersen Award since it was established by the Hans Christian Andersen Committee three years ago.
The award, which will be presented to the singer and entertainer at the Danish Embassy in London, comprises a silver-plated wooden shoe, which is a replica of the one worn by Simple Simon in the adventure story of the same name, a silver plaque with a drawing of the house where the author was born and 188 Danish hundred kroner notes in recognition of the 188th anniversary of the birth of Hans Andersen.
Tommy Steele has been chosen for the award for his part in the 1970's musical Hans Andersen, in which he played the title role.
On Saturday, Princess Margaret, in her capacity as patron of the Scottish Ballet, will attend a gala performance at the Theatre Royal in Glasgow in aid of the Scottish Children's League, of which she is president.
The next day the princess will attend the launch of a national balloon race at 3pm in Holyrood Park, Edinburgh, which is being held to celebrate the centenary appeal of the Scottish Children's League.
It is hoped that more than 15,000 balloons will be released from the park and four other locations.
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, will tomorrow unwrap Britain's last spring Budget in the House of Commons.
After tomorrow the annual financial statement and programme will be announced in Parliament round about the end of November or the beginning of December.
In London on Wednesday details will be given of the Royal Review to be held at RAF Marham in Norfolk on 1 April to mark the 75th anniversary of the founding of the Royal Air Force.
The Queen, who will be accompanied by other members of the Royal Family, will on that day present a new colour to the RAF.
The ceremony will take place before 10,000 invited guests, service personnel and their families.
Weather permitting, there will be a flypast by 148 RAF aircraft, while on the ground there will be a display of 66 aircraft.
In sport, Rangers play their European Champions Cup return league match against Brugge of Belgium at Ibrox Stadium on Wednesday.
Tomorrow, Clydebank have home advantage in their Tennents Scottish Cup quarter-final replay with Aberdeen.
Alex Taylor: folk and rock guitarist
ALEX Taylor, a recording artist whose brothers and sisters included the musicians James, Livingston and Kate Taylor, has died after a heart attack.
Taylor, 47, was taken ill last week while working on his third album in a Florida recording studio.
He was unconscious by the time he arrived at hospital in Sanford and remained in a coma until he died.
Taylor lived on Martha's Vineyard for most of his life.
A folk and rock musician who played the guitar, he had recorded two albums, Dancing with the Devil and Family and Friends.
Alex was the oldest of five Taylor children.
James, Livingston and Kate are musicians with recorded albums.
He is survived by his wife, Brent, and son James — his uncle's namesake and the subject of James Taylor's 1970 song Sweet Baby James.
Students' winning words
By Susan Dean
TWO LAW students at Strathclyde University are the winners of The Scotsman Scottish Inter-Varsity Debating Tournament 1993.
Tommy Tonner, 19, a third-year student from Motherwell, and Alison Brolls, 21, a fourth-year from Bishopbriggs, beat teams from Glasgow, Dundee, and Edinburgh to win the final, held at Strathclyde University's students' association premises on Friday evening.
Their success follows hard on the heels of their performance just over a week ago at the Observer International Mace debating competition, when they won their way to the four-team final in a field of 150 teams.
Friday evening was an occasion for double celebration for Ms Brolls, who also took the prize for best individual speaker.
Mr Tonner, education convener of Strathclyde's students' union, and Ms Brolls, a former vice-president and debates convener of the union, argued second proposition for the motion: ‘This house believes that the break-up of the family has led to the break-up of society.’
Judging the final was a panel chaired by Andrew Welsh, Scottish National Party MP for Angus East.
The other judges were Magnus Linklater, editor of The Scotsman; Craig Winn, editor of M8 magazine and a semi-finalist representing Strathclyde University in the 1988 World Student Debating Championships; Paul Sinclair, a researcher with Scottish Television and a winner last year for Glasgow University of the Observer International Mace, and Paul Spencer, a previous winner for Strathclyde of The Scotsman tournament.
Mr Welsh, who congratulated The Scotsman for its sponsorship of the tournament, described the standard of performance as high.
Mr Linklater said: ‘The art of debate is alive and well in Scotland, I am delighted to report.’
Representing the universities in the final were: Dundee (first proposition)— Sam Hamilton, 20, third-year law, from Glasgow, and Richard Rattray, 28, fourth-year American studies and political science, from Auchterarder.
Edinburgh (first opposition)— John Sudworth, 23, fourth-year politics, from Farnborough, Hampshire, and Stephen McGhee, 19, second-year English literature, from Dunfermline.
Glasgow (second opposition)— Stephen McCloy, 20, third-year law, from Wishaw, and Neil MacLean, 20, third-year law, from Bishopton.
Other teams from Edinburgh, Glasgow and Strathclyde were knocked out in earlier heats, while St Andrews University pulled out of the contest.
STEPHEN MANSFIELD Top talk: Tommy Tonner and Alison Brolls with the Scotsman trophy
JOHN RENBOURN/ISAAC GUILLORY OLD ST PAUL'S CHURCH, EDINBURGH
THE guitar styles of John Renbourn and Isaac Guillory are impressively accomplished and satisfyingly complementary.
After a brief opening spot by local musician Jim Malcolm, which suggested that his is a talent to watch, Guillory came on.
A lean American, his terse, impassioned singing and expansive-toned guitar work evoked wide horizons, like the trio of train songs, standards all, to which he gave a compelling urgency,
Less hungry-sounding were a lazy Cuban shuffle and an exuberant conga — a neon light of a tune that spluttered dazzlingly above audience percussion.
If Guillory hollered his blues, Renbourn confided his, looking as solidly English as roast beef and sounding wistful and worldly-wise, his playing strolling along affably until one suddenly realised that — as in an old Booker T number — things were really starting to shift with indecent ease.
Other delights included a sublime gospel melody, The Sunday School Freight Train from Heaven; a languid jazz ballad blossoming with harmonics; and, of course, a flourish of old English tunes.
The required duetting gelled pleasingly, if perhaps at the expense of individuality, although two items — a gutsy blues improvisation and that old chestnut Sixteen Tons — still brought out some steel.
Pastime with good company, indeed.
Jim Gilchrist
THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST ALDWYCH THEATRE, LONDON
WITH a likely cast headed by Dame Maggie Smith, and with Nicholas Hytner as director, London's new Importance of being Earnest should be a knock-out.
On the night I saw it, the audience was slow to respond to its volleys of Wildean wit and the brilliant preposterousness of the story.
For all its professionalism, impeccable timing and diction, it glowed rather than crackled, more especially during the central act.
There, without the presence of Lady Bracknell, it tended to dwindle, to sink into the relatively humdrum.
The fact is that Dame Maggie alone owns to charisma, a responsibility which she bears with easy, unpretentious authority, dominating the stage whether bestriding it or merely sitting by idly.
Although her role is haunted by the memory of Edith Evans with her eldritch cry of ‘a handbag’, Maggie Smith plays it marvellously, with her command of the withering imperious glance and trenchant vocal nuance.
Hers is a performance of indisputable class making little but tremendously effective use of her famous fluttering gestures.
The gels, the sturdy Gwendolen of Susannah Harker and Claire Skinner's pretty ingenue Cecily did well enough, though their voices suggested current RADA-speak rather than, I imagine fin-de-siecle deb talk.
I liked Alex Jennings's put-upon, blustering John Worthing but warmed more to the ‘decadent’ Algernon of Richard E Grant with his fancy clothes and flow of even fancier aphorisms.
Oddly enough, The Importance of being Earnest of almost a century ago doesn't date, unlike some of Noel Coward's inter-war comedies.
Christopher Grier
Designs on flights of fancy
IN the post-war years when a shortage of building materials led to a virtual moratorium on construction, the young lions of the architectural scene moved into exhibition design.
The Scot Basil Spence achieved recognition first, not as an architect of buildings, but as a designer of pavilions such as at the 1951 Festival of Britain.
The same sense of skill transfer dictated by recession is evident in the current exhibition at the RIAS Gallery.
Here four young Scottish practices present ideas across a broad spectrum of subjects from the design of armchairs to buildings and skyscrapers.
What is most notable about the exhibition is its tactile quality.
Colour, fabrics and the distinctive materiality of raw steel and rough wood give the show richness and depth.
On entering the exhibition, one is confronted by three objects in space surrounded by a perimeter of panels of drawings.
Each is a focal point demanding attention.
The first, a grid of glass and polystyrene frames on the floor, presents a narrative of design process beneath one's feet like some pavement light illuminating a basement.
The grid of drawings tells the story of a building locked within the architect's mind.
On the wall behind, the ideas are developed into more tangible proposals.
The second object in space is a model of an unsuccessful entry by Adrian Hawker for the Glasgow Tower competition.
In its leaning position parallels are inevitably drawn with Pisa, yet the tower based upon a pair of translucent cliffs modelled on the Old Man of Hoy takes the romance of Scottishness to its ultimate conclusion.
Irrespective of the validity of the architectural content, the model and drawings are works of art in themselves.
The third object in space consists of a metal armchair designed by Mark Cousins yet as distorted as anything by Gaudi.
Here rusting metal is allowed to take the shapes of nature not man, creating perhaps by accident some Arthurian throne for a warrior king.
The exhibition at the RIAS Gallery, 15 Rutland Square, Edinburgh, continues until 19 March.
The three free-standing objects introduce complexity  through the marked difference in content and philosophy.
The same is true of the wall panels where the ordered rationality of certain designs (such as the Inverewe Garden Restaurant which balances firm and loose edges) give a framework for flights of fancy lie the evocatively rendered ‘Electronic Cottage’ in Shetland.
Between the extremes stand the work of Ewan and Fiona McLachlan whose designs have featured in a recent RIBA Forty under 40 exhibition.
As a creative act architecture can exist without building.
The core of the discipline is concerned with matters of space, light, structure, colour and movement.
This exhibition displays the principles of a worthy craft until the opportunity returns to construct the flights of fancy.
Brian Edwards
ROYAL SCOTTISH NATIONAL ORCHESTRA USHER HALL, EDINBURGH
ELGAR'S The Kingdom and its companion The Apostles may lack the popular appeal of The Dream of Gerontius; the combination of England, Empire and religious ecstasy is, at the very least, unfashionable.
Yet well done, this is music that stirs passions beyond mere jingoism and shares with Wagner's Parsifal an infectious certainty and Germanic romanticism that few can resist.
Last Friday night with the RSNO under Owain Arwel Hughes proved just such an occasion.
Above all, this was a perfectly paced performance, Owain Arwel Hughes admirably capturing the shifting tempi and at his best with Elgar's quintessential Noblemente.
Every climax was given its full space whilst avoiding the all too easy pitfall of self-indulgence.
Baritone Stephen Roberts and tenor Neill Archer infused life and conviction into their readings of the apostles Peter and John.
It was particularly appropriate, given that the sponsor was the Baptist Missionary Society, that the most moving moments were from Roberts as Peter, lyrically declaring ‘Repent and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ.’
The other soloists fared less well.
Helen Field especially lacking the necessary power and depth.
The Sun Goeth Down, Mary's great aria, never felt comfortable, hindered as it was by a disappointing violin solo from Andrew Martin, substituting after the interval for an indisposed Edwin Paling.
In contrast alto Ameral Gunson, replacing Carolyn Watkinson, grew with the performance and her recitative The Man That Was Lame conveyed just the right tone.
The newly augmented RSNO Chorus sang with precision, clarity and polish, although it was occasionally uncharacteristically subdued.
Stephen Strugnell
SCOTTISH CHAMBER ORCHESTRA QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
THE Viennese composer and conductor HK Gruber returned with more inspired lunacy in a programme which the SCO teasingly billed as an evening of Gothic Horror.
It was never quite that, despite the music's associations with Dracula and Frankenstein, but proved an entertaining affair.
They began in relatively conventional mode with the thematically appropriate Rumanian Dances and Three Transylvanian Dances by Bartok, strung together in lively fashion.
They were followed by Gruber's recent Photofit Pictures, a kind of musical detective story which demonstrated his skill as a fabricator of agreeably simple musical structures, and his penchant for pastiche.
Like Gruber, his Vienna contemporary Kurt Schwertsik has rejected the sterner face of the serial and post-serial avant-garde in favour of a more accessible, tonal music.
Dracula's Haus — & Hofmusik revealed itself as a work of pleasing surfaces, but no great depth or impact.
Gruber's Frankenstein!! filled the second half.
It is a scurrilous romp through the poet HC Artmann's mildly subversive modern children's songs, which seek out the clay feet of contemporary heroes like Batman and Superman, as well as invoking more traditional horrors.
Gruber intoned these rhymes in his celebrated (or infamous) semi-sung, semi-spoken fashion, breaking off to play the occasional motif on one or other of the toy instruments arrayed alongside him.
The orchestra did not miss out on the fun either, starting with an unscored game of hunt-the-missing-French-horn-part (eventually found lurking on the bassoonist's stand), which delayed the start.
Once under way, they got to burst plastic bags, twirl lengths of gaily coloured plastic tubing, blow on plastic whistles and kazoos, join in on occasional chanted lines, and generally commit mayhem.
The conventional orchestral writing was again skilfully wrought and effectively deployed, however, with some striking passages for woodwind and brass in particular.
Apart from the odd darkening of mood and menacing dissonance, its radicalism is all on the surface, and pastiche never far away, but the immediate appeal of its humour and vigour was hard to resist.
Kenny Mathieson
SINFONIA OF SCOTLAND ST JOHN'S KIRK, PERTH
THE Fair Maid returned to her native city amid fanfares on Friday night with the premiere of Martin Dalby's substantial new work.
Commissioned by the Sinfonia of Scotland, Variations for a Fair Maid of Perth stitches fragments of a Reverie from the supplement to Bizet's opera, based on Scott's novel, through an exquisitely wrought and entrancing score and revealing its sources only in the last ‘variation’.
The piece's unity and momentum derives in part from the reappearance between each section of versions of the riotous opening fanfare, a set of hidden variations of their own, and in part from recurrences of thematic material.
It derives too from the emotional dynamic, the mood sinking into a black hole of a middle section with cries on the brass alternating with eerie undulating woodwind passages, and gradually being restored to serenity.
The orchestra, under its guest conductor Nicholas Braithwaite, unfolded the complex textures with care and clarity.
Those uneasy with the idiom would have found much to capture the ear in the intricate interplay of sounds throughout the piece.
Other works included Haydn's recently discovered Cello Concerto, in which the soloist was Robert Irvine, principal cello of Scottish Opera, playing with delicacy in the second movement and with fine control in the vivacious final movement.
The programme also included Beethoven's Eighth Symphony, and works by Mendelssohn and Rossini.
The Sinfonia continues its policy of including a Scottish work in each of its concerts, having given the first performance the previous evening in Lanark of Nigel Don's Suite for Cello and Strings.
Douglas Galbraith
Tremain wins James Tait Black prize
THE 1992 winners of one of Scotland's longest established and most respected literary awards are announced today.
Rose Tremain's Sacred Country has won the novel category of the James Tait Black Memorial Prize and Charles Nicholl's The Reckoning: The Murder of Christopher Marlowe has won the biography award.
The prizes, worth £1,500 each, have been awarded annually since 1919 on the recommendation of the Professor of English Literature at the University of Edinburgh.
Previous winners include DH Lawrence, EM Forster, William Golding, James Kelman and William Boyd.
This year's prizes will be presented at a ceremony in Waterstone's Booksellers, 83 George Street, Edinburgh at 7.30pm, Wednesday 17 March.
Music mightier than machine-guns A Scottish composer is helping Sarajevans save their city's soul, writes Susan Nickalls
FOR people in Sarajevo, the music they most often hear is a continual bombastic symphony of shell, mortar and sniper fire.
Tonight the cellist Vedran Smailovic, who has come to represent the very soul of the besieged city, performs simultaneously with three other cellists in different capitals around the world.
While Smailovic in Sarajevo plays the Adagio specially written for him by Edinburgh-based composer Nigel Osborne, he will be joined by American cellist Evelyn Elsing at the Capitol in Washington DC, Florian Kitt at the Red Cross Depot in Vienna and music student Diana Isaacs in Edinburgh.
Osborne, who is Professor of Music at Edinburgh University, conceived this imaginative and daring project ‘to draw attention to the courage of musicians and the artistic community of Sarajevo by offering the solidarity and support of musicians throughout the world’.
Visiting Sarajevo a fortnight ago, Osborne joined Smailovic for an impromptu performance in the devastated remains of the Skenderija Stadium.
Surrounded by snow and dressed in concert clothes, the two musicians played for a German television crew and a small audience of artists while Serb snipers perched only 150 yards away at the front line took pot shots.
Despite the danger, for Osborne this moment was a dream come true.
‘I had heard about Smailovic and his Sarajevan Opera String Quartet some time ago and had the idea of offering him support by writing a piece and joining him in one of his concerts at the front line.’
With the three other members of the quartet sadly now dead, Smailovic relished the opportunity to play with another musician and to further affirm the presence of cultural values in the city.
‘Every day Smailovic risks his life playing to the dead in the graveyards of Sarajevo.
He says: ‘The snipers have their guns but my weapon, the cello, is stronger’.’
Osborne too felt his viola was mightier than the machine-guns: he used it as his only protection, making a conscious decision not to wear a flak jacket.
‘The people of Sarajevo have no such luxuries and live under pressure every day running across dangerous junctions and intersections.’
Despite horrendous conditions, Sarajevo was enjoying a 40-day cultural festival during Osborne's visit.
‘The artists resolved to hold the Sarajevan Festival of the Arts, which was first held in 1984 at the Winter Olympics, as a gesture towards civilised life and civic identity.
Whenever a beautiful building is destroyed or damaged, artists and sculptors fashion from the debris artworks to protect the identity of the building and offer a token of care and morality.’
As part of Osborne and Richard Demarco's Sarajevo-Edinburgh project to bring contemporary artworks out of Sarajevo, Scots will be able to gain some insight into life in the city when these works are exhibited in Edinburgh in the spring.
‘The artistic community along with the soldiers are the people keeping Sarajevo going.
It's the most extraordinary place — both heaven and hell simultaneously.
If you could cut out the sound track of shells and sniper fire, ignore the gaping holes in the beautiful buildings and the lack of water and electricity, and didn't notice the rubbish in the streets, you would think of it as a normal city.’
Another problem of great concern to the indefatigable Osborne is the treatment of the civilian and military wounded.
‘One evening in the Veterans’ Club in Sarajevo, I was summoned to a dark room lit by just one candle to meet the army commander of one of the central districts of Sarajevo.
He should not be named, but he begged me to tell the outside world of the appalling situation where the wounded are dying unnecessarily because the UN are refusing to transport the wounded out of the city.’
Live on stage: Vedran Smailovic (left) and Nigel Osborne brave sniper fire to play in Sarajevo
Acting independently Tilda Swinton's latest film role could make her a star, not just a darling of the avant-garde.
Brian Pendreigh meets her
TILDA Swinton is fast becoming an icon of British arthouse cinema, though she would probably dispute the term.
She doesn't even like the term actress (or actor), seeing herself more as a performer.
One of her greatest successes has been Manfred Karge's one-woman play Man to Man, in which she played a woman pretending to be a man.
She appeared in the Traverse production at the 1987 Edinburgh Festival and later transferred to London.
She has played Mozart on stage and in her new film Orlando plays someone who starts off as a man in Elizabethan times and ends up as a woman in the present.
A close association with Derek Jarman has helped establish her current arthouse ascendancy, but she reached her widest audience with Your Cheatin' Heart on television.
While she is lauded in London intellectual circles, she is less well-known to the general public.
We arranged to meet on Saturday night at a hotel in Haddington where I was informed ‘Emma Swinton’ would be late.
When she does appear someone confidently strikes up a conversation about her new film, Othello, instead of Orlando.
Her family is Scottish — the Swintons of Swinton in Berwickshire.
Her father is a major-general, Lord-Lieutenant of Berwickshire.
She has a brother in Haddington, hence the location.
Orlando, which is adapted from a novel by Virginia Woolf, is her biggest-budget movie so far and the subject of a Scotsman premiere at Edinburgh's Cameo tonight.
Swinton and director Sally Potter will discuss it afterwards.
It is wonderful to look at, and more fun than it might sound, a sprawling historical and sexual tapestry, whose pleasures range from the tremendously atmospheric locations in Russia and Uzbekistan to the perfect Queen Bess in Quentin Crisp.
Swinton jumped at the chance to film Orlando and was involved in the project virtually from the outset.
‘I first came across Virginia Woolf through Orlando when I was a teenage person and it was the first time that I felt really addressed by a writer,’ she says.
‘It's so difficult to remember, but I've said this before, so I'll probably have to stick to it.’
Swinton has a reputation for being a difficult interviewee, when she gives interviews at all, which isn't often.
She would rather be articulate on screen.
And yet, in person, she is in no way intimidating, rushing into the hotel apologising profusely for the delay.
She is serious and yet chatty.
Not only does Orlando explore gender issues and sexual politics, in which Swinton is interested, but it also presents a sweep of family history, with which she can identify; the family line stretching back through time, the ancient portraits in which one can see one's own features.
Sir Walter Scott once said he was honoured to be a mere twig on the Swinton family tree.
Swinton thinks perhaps she stumbled on Orlando in the school library.
She spent some time at Fettes College in Edinburgh, but most of her schooling was in England.
She was born and lives in London but regards herself as Scottish.
She feels at home here while disliking England which seems foreign and represents boarding school.
‘I think it's a point worth making that there are people walking around with English voices who are Scots.
And why have they got English voices?
I think there was a law passed in Scotland…that a certain class should educate its children, its boys, in England, to alienate them from the people they were going to come back and rule over.
And so I have an English voice because I come from that background.’
Swinton read  political science at Cambridge and is active in the Democratic Left, as the British Communist Party now styles itself, while her father is a former local Conservative chairman.
It is an independence of mind reflected in her choice of films as well.
With noble, fine-boned features that have brought comparisons with Audrey Hepburn, she could have gone to Hollywood but has chosen British projects which she feels mean something — though she has routinely worked for the mere promise of a salary at some future point when the films make money.
Rather than take the easy route of making populist entertainment, she is now doing all she can — even press interviews — to persuade the audience to come to her.
Historic role: Tilda Swinton will be at Edinburgh's Cameo cinema tonight for a screening and discussion of Orlando
THE MEADOWS ORCHESTRA QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
THE Meadows Orchestra has for years had an excellent reputation for presenting interesting programmes at a very high level of performance.
Sunday's concert at the Queen's Hall, Edinburgh, conducted by Edward Harper of Edinburgh University (who incidentally will be featured as composer in the orchestra's next concert) maintained this tradition.
The concert ended with a vital account of the rarely-heard First Symphony by Mendelssohn.
This was written in 1824 when the prodigious composer was only 15.
It shows every sign of youthfulness and intense feeling, but absolutely no sign of technical immaturity.
Harper, interestingly, chose to interpolate the scherzo from the slightly later but equally God-given String Octet.
Mendelssohn evidently did this himself when he conducted the symphony for London audiences in 1829.
The orchestra projected this challenging work with fine balance, sweet intonation and urgent attack.
They also found the filigree lightness necessary for the Octet scherzo.
The concert begun with Haydn's Symphony No 82, The Bear.
Again, this is virtuoso music, and the first three movements on this occasion didn't always seem quite comfortable.
The bold and stylish readings of the finale, however, was completely successful.
Gabrielle Lester was the soloist with Bartok's 1928 Second Rhapsody for violin and orchestra.
She delivered this extravagant Hungarian folk music with real panache.
Sometimes the orchestra slightly overpowered her, but nothing could disguise Lester's obvious affection for this incredibly colourful music.
Neil Mackay
THE STRAINS OF A 20TH CENTURY GENIUS PETER MICHAEL HAMEL RSAMD, GLASGOW
FACING his audience like some avuncular dentist after the British premiere of Peter Michael Hamel's The Cycle of Time, conductor Adrian Shepherd said: ‘There now, that didn't hurt!’
True — but can you imagine saying the same after a performance of Don Giovanni or Tchai 4?
It didn't hurt, that was just the problem, and I would suggest that it goes to the core of cantilena's options for survival.
Should we regard music as a kind of anaesthetic for weary executives so that we can opt out a warm bath of string sound?
The suggestion is not that music must hurt but great music both reveals wounds and provides a balm.
Hamel's companion work The Arrow of Time was more mature in this respect.
His lecture and recital at the RSAMD earlier in the week revealed Hamel's genius as very profound but possibly not always as a composer.
He is an artist of dazzling perception and an improviser of magnetic fantasy.
The four works which we heard on his mini-tour to Glasgow showed that his searching mind will never lack ideas.
His weakness may be his improviser's talent for eroding the ideas to death.
But, what a teacher!
Perhaps one of our music institutions will have the foresight to invite him as a visiting lecturer?
On Thursday, Hamel's gifts were brought to light before a sadly sparse audience.
His Mandala for Prepared Piano was quite hypnotic, bearing no relation to piano-sound at all but dependant on the stopping of the strings to produce harmonics.
Jazz rhythms emerged as easily as did the eastern element and music of genuine integrity was the result.
His Novum Organum strengthens the perception of Hamel as an invaluable crucible of late 20th century musical thought.
Haste ye back.
George Wilson
PARAGON RSAMD, GLASGOW
PARAGON'S Sunday concert in Glasgow at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama provided a showcase for the Romanian composer Violeta Dinescu.
It was an interesting event for she has a distinct voice in which melody reigns supreme.
Three of her works were played, one of them, a Trombone Concerto was commissioned by Paragon and received its first performance.
It was given a second one after the interval.
Associated with the concert was an exhibition of paintings by Hans-Werner Berretz.
There is a two-way influence here between Dinescu and Berretz for some of her works have been inspired by his paintings and vice versa.
The paintings were all abstract, patches of dense colour intersected by calligraphic black curving lines.
The composer herself, interviewed by David Davies before the repetition of the Trombone Concerto, said that the connection between the paintings and her music was both that of a reflection in a mirror and a conversation with the image.
Here the lines of the paintings, it seems to the listener, are reflected in her music for she is a linear composer.
All the works played clearly displayed this facet, especially the first two Alternances for wind quintet and Scherzo da Fantasia III for violin and cello.
There was noticeably a strong folk influence in these.
Again, the composer spoke of the Romanian voice in her music which came from a Jungian kind of collective unconsciousness.
Alternances was built on fragments of Romanian folk songs but there was also a feel of this in the Scherzo too for its somewhat frenetic and flamboyant violin melodies brought to mind the gypsy fiddlers of Eastern Europe.
John Kenny played with drama and panache a whole range of effects from his first entry, in which his breath metamorphosed into sound, to talking and singing while playing and producing chords.
It was a virtuoso performance.
Janet Beat
HICKEY TO RETIRE FROM FILMHOUSE
JIM HICKEY has announced that he is to leave his post as director of Filmhouse in Edinburgh to pursue a career in film-making.
As director since 1979, he has overseen a transformation of Filmhouse from a small 90 seat cinema in Morrison Street Lane to the current two-screen complex, with a main cinema seating 285, and cafe bar.
He was also director of the Edinburgh International Film Festival from 1980 to 1988.
Announcing his departure, Hickey commented: ‘I am leaving the post at a natural time in Filmhouse's history and on a personal level it enables me to take on a new challenge while moving to another area of the film industry.
‘I have enjoyed my years at Filmhouse immensely, knowing what we do makes an invaluable contribution to the cultural life of the city.’
The search for a new director to oversee future expansion has now begun and it is expected that Hickey's successor will be in post by early summer.
Lyceum plans season of summer farce
KENNY Ireland, the new director of the Royal Lyceum Theatre, Edinburgh, is forming a company of actors who will perform three farces in repertoire throughout the summer.
His declared strategy is to ‘compartmentalise’ the Lyceum's programme, with a summer season of farce being followed by the Edinburgh Festival and then a season of classics, after which he hopes to produce some new plays.
The new work may be produced in association with other theatre companies in Scotland, so that the plays can be toured.
He will open the summer season with his own production of a Feydeau farce adapted by John Mortimer — A Little Hotel on the Side.
Benjamin Twist will direct the second play, Noises Off by Michael Frayn and the classic Aldwych farce, Rookery Nook by Ben Travers will be revived by Richard Baron.
All three productions will be designed by Craig Hewitt who recently designed The Price for the Lyceum.
Introducing the season, Ireland said: ‘Farce requires great skill and energy.
Fortunately Scotland has always had a fine reservoir of comic talent and so I found the idea of letting a Scottish company loose on these plays totally irresistible.
The three plays will be performed in repertoire by a single acting company.
This will give people the opportunity to see the same actors play three different parts, and it will give me that essential ingredient of a good farce: strong ensemble acting.’
Allen Wright
Kenny Ireland: opens the summer season with his own production of a Feydeau farce
Composers get cash help from SAC fund
THE Scottish Arts Council has awarded grants totalling over £30,000 in its first allocation of funds for new music commissions for 1993/94.
The money will go to support Scottish composers, all but one of whom lives on native soil.
Two composers have had three commissions supported — the young Edinburgh composer, Kenneth Dempster, who will write works for the Hebrides Ensemble and the Leda Piano Trio, and the established Glasgow composer and folk musician, Edward McGuire, who has  commissions from the Chamber Group of Scotland, the Silver Duo, and from the  Mendelssohn on Mull Festival, for a work with local children.
The SAC, keen to spread its awards over different parts of the country, and to encourage a wide range of musical initiatives, has also supported commissions from amateur organisations — the Cunninghame Choir, Dalkeith Symphony Orchestra, the Meadows Chamber Orchestra, and the Scottish Chamber Choir.
There is also encouragement for young composers — support for work from Jane Gardner, from James Dillon, this for a work for his fellow composer/pianist James Clapperton, from David Horne, currently studying in the United States, and from Magnus Robb, presently a pupil of Louis Andriessen in the Hague.
The range of commissions is formidable — from chamber works to concertos, piano studies for teaching purposes to works for free-bass  accordion , and for Northumbrian pipes.
The Royal College of Organists have commissioned from Thomas Wilson for their centenary, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, towards the fee for Sir Peter Maxwell Davies's Strathclyde Concerto No8.
For the SAC, music officer Helen Jamieson reported delight at the wealth and variety of excellent proposals, and at the evident enthusiasm for new Scottish music.
Mary Miller
Making a Dream come true Christopher Bowen talks to one of the great innovators of contemporary dance, Robert Cohan, who is currently working with Scottish Ballet
DESPITE Oberon's joyful pact with Titania, ask any dance enthusiast to name a ballet based on a Shakespeare play and the chances are the one they'll mention is Romeo and Juliet.
Which indicates, perhaps, how few of the Bard's other works have been translated into full-length ballets.
John Cranko, of course, created a notable double with versions of both Romeo and Juliet and The Taming of the Shrew and Soviet choreographers have staged versions of Macbeth and Hamlet.
Yet, apart from these and a couple of stagings of The Tempest, choreographers have tended to present Shakespeare only in one act form, at best condensing the great poetic dramas into intense and intimate character studies at worst, turning them into a slide show of cliched vignettes.
The Scottish Ballet, which currently has productions of Othello and Macbeth in its repertoire, spectacularly demonstrates both extremes.
Now the company is about to add A Midsummer Night's Dream to its roster of Shakespearian ballets and not in any truncated form, but as a full-bloodied 90-minute production.
The tale has been tackled before in dance, most notably by Ashton and Balanchine, and for its first new full-length commission since Peter Pan in 1989.
The Scottish Ballet has aimed high, choosing Robert Cohan, arguably the single most important figure in the introduction of contemporary dance to Britain.
A long time member of Martha Graham's company and for many years her regular partner, Cohan became founding artistic director of London Contemporary Dance Theatre in 1967.
In his work he has been at the forefront of a movement fighting to drag British dance into the 20th century.
Twenty five years on Cohan may not be, as he readily admits, at the cutting edge of contemporary dance, yet the technique he advocates is a world apart from the rigorous classicism the Scottish Ballet has sought to reinforce through its association with Oleg Vinogradov, director of the Kirov Ballet, and the appointment of Soviet-trained ballerina Galina Samsova as artistic director.
Yet it was from Samsova, says Cohan, that the idea for A Midsummer Night's Dream originally came: ‘We had been talking about the company doing Forrest, one of my earlier works, when Galina mentioned The Dream.
I immediately agreed because it seemed like a natural idea for me.
I had been looking for a full-length piece to do anyway and I was also attracted to the idea of working with a ballet company.’
‘For years I have been in a luxurious situation.
I trained every one of those dancers at LCDT — hand picked them — I only had to begin a movement and they would finish it.
To work with a company where you have to teach the basic idea of the movement is an interesting challenge.’
And also, one is bound to think, a challenge fraught with frustration.
Classical dancers' body-and-mind-sets are geared to a specific set of rules, one which stretches the body in long, clean lines away from an erect spine.
A Martha Graham-based technique with its low centre of gravity, draws everything into the solar plexus in a more primal — some might say natural — form of dance.
The two schools hardly seem compatible; given the Scottish Ballet's almost exclusive immersion in classical technique, one wonders if, somewhere down the line, someone's artistic integrity isn't going to be compromised.
‘That isn't a word I would use,’ says Cohan.
‘One has to lay down some ground rules for any work of art.
This is a ballet company: I'm not going to try and change their lives.
I'm going to use what they can give me and try and make them look good.
On the other hand I'm not a ballet choreographer, so I'm going to enjoy this process and move the way I want to and try to teach them what I do and why I do it.’
One of the first ground rules to be established was the use of point shoes, initially with the characters of Titania and Hippolyta — to give them heightened significance as ‘sort of goddess figures’— but later extended to some of the fairies as well.
‘I decided to mix the techniques further, since this whole project is a combination of classical and contemporary.’
That combination indicates perhaps Cohan's key to the entire venture, for the ‘technique mix’ scenario doesn't begin and end with his association with the Scottish Ballet.
The music for A Midsummer Night's Dream utilises Felix Mendelssohn's famous 1843 score, expanded and adapted by Barrington Pheloung, composer of numerous, chiefly electronic, dance scores for LCDT and of the theme music for the Inspector Morse television series.
Given that A Midsummer Night's Dream represents the meeting of two worlds — the spiritual and human, the structured and the chaotic — and the need for balance between the two.
It isn't hard to see where this could lead in choreographic terms.
But Cohan promises that the conjunction will ultimately, be a harmonious one.
‘I want to challenge and excite as much as I can but I'm not going to create a work for the Scottish Ballet that is going to drive their audience away.’
A Midsummer Night's Dream opens at the Theatre Royal, Glasgow, on Friday 19 March, then tours throughout Scotland.
Taking a breather: The choreographer Robert Cohan in rehearsal with the Scottish Ballet's principal dancer Noriko Ohara
Pictures from Academy collections
I write to correct two inaccuracies in Ruth Wishart's article today, ‘Exhibiting sense and purpose’.
First, of the some 96 paintings given to the National Galleries of Scotland from the Royal Scottish Academy's collections, only a small number were by academicians.
The larger number comprised works by European and earlier Scottish masters and included works by Bassano, Raeburn and William Blake, together with 2,000 old master drawings.
Secondly, the students' exhibition currently in the RSA galleries shows works by students from the four Scottish art colleges and associated schools and departments of architecture.
Arrow danger
I sincerely hope that Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind does not shoot for the Royal Company of Archers in the manner depicted in your front-page photograph today.
The bow is overdrawn.
The pile of the arrow could catch on the inside of the bow.
With the arrow in this position, it could lead to injury to the face.
Stirling's decision not to continue writer in residence is ill-advised
I was saddened to read in Mike Mitchell's letter (Points of View, today) that Stirling District Council will not be employing a writer in residence after June.
Everyone is trying to cut spending at the moment, but this decision is ill-advised.
Such things as housing maintenance, refuse collection, lighting, etc may seem like more urgent priorities but, in these increasingly bleak times, anything which encourages the life of the spirit is of immeasurable value.
When I worked in and around Stirling, I was astonished at the number of people who aspired to write poetry, fiction, drama and articles.
Through meetings and workshops connected with the writing residency, these people exchanged ideas and criticised each other 's work.
Many of them improved, and now get published regularly.
People who write grow to understand themselves and others.
They can achieve fulfilment.
They can get closer to the truth.
Unfortunately, these are not qualities which make much impression on a balance sheet.
The loss of Stirling's writing residency is one more nail in the coffin of enlightenment.
A hollow hooray for Hollywood Joan McAlpine detects a cynical streak among the film-makers who make fortunes from bringing violence to the screen
THERE has not been so much breast-beating in the cinema since Bernadette.
It's the sound of perfectly manicured hands striking crisp Gucci polo shirts.
Hollywood repents.
In recent weeks, movie people — and a few small screen celebs — have lined up to say it was all a terrible mistake, this indiscriminate violence on our cinema and television screens.
Edward Woodward is the latest star to join the queue for the confessional.
He now believes The Equalizer, his vigilante TV series, went beyond the boundaries of acceptable aggression.
‘I would not show it to my grandchildren,’ said the 63-year-old actor.
Now his conscience can be as comfortable as his lifestyle — it's simple to rest easy if you have already earned £1.6 million.
Public recanting was made fashionable by Clint Eastwood.
He confessed in the magazine Psychology Today to being uneasy with fans who asked him to make their day by autographing their guns.
He can afford to draw back a little.
Just like Sir Anthony Hopkins can afford to turn down the £1 million reputedly offered to make a sequel to Silence of The Lambs.
Sir Anthony famously discovered in Cardiff this month what the rest of the country had known for a year: that many children saw the grisly film and were delighted by his Oscar-winning portrayal of the cannibalistic anti-hero.
‘We've seen some awful things in Britain recently.
We must all think very carefully about the films we make,’ he offered.
Despite after-the-event hypocrisy, there is a significance in the mass mea culpa act.
Up until now, movie makers have been quick to quote the ‘art imitates life’ argument or, without flinching, its opposite: ‘just a piece of fantasy’.
Many point to psychological reports which fail to prove a causal link between on screen violence and real-life slashings, shootings and rapes.
Now it is not so easy to voice those arguments.
When John Major complained of the relentless diet of violence on our screens he tapped into a real public concern.
That is why Alan Yentob, controller of BBC1, felt duty bound to reply, publicly apologising for an episode of Casualty which featured a riot.
But Yentob pursued an ethical balancing act, still arguing there was no proof of a causal link.
This father of a three-year-old also said parents should control what their children watched — as he did.
This is contradictory.
If television washes over innocence without leaving so much as a water mark, why bother ‘exercising control’?
The power of the media to psychologically influence us in other ways is not in doubt.
In fact it is acknowledged.
Advertisers pay to have their products ‘placed’ in big name movies and television dramas.
The pick-up truck being screeched round the corner by a masterful hero, the soft drink sipped by the teenage lead actress — both products paid good money to be there.
Tobacco is barred from the seductive small screen while spirits are subject to a voluntary telly ban.
Yentob is being slightly disingenuous when demanding parental control.
Many parents simply don't bother.
Those who do find their ten-year-olds coming back from friends' birthday parties where the highlight was a showing of a grisly movie like Freddy's Revenge.
One in five families now own three television sets.
Children have their fingers on the record button and watch what they like.
The gratuitous gore of the Terminator and Lethal Weapon movies is well known — what about the rows of middle-ranking chiller/killer videos which grace the shelves of the local hire shop?
In a sense, Yentob is the wrong man to be replying gallantly to the PM's criticism.
British television is the most strictly controlled in Europe.
It is the deregulated, free-market media world of satellite television and video recorders where the real violence is played out.
We should also remember that official disapproval is a recent phenomenon.
Who gave Sir Anthony his knighthood?
And which US president cited the sadistic and much-imitated Rambo as his favourite Saturday night video viewing?
There is no indication that Hollywood is turning over a new leaf, free of bloodstains.
Quite the opposite.
Soon children will be lending each other America is Falling Down in which Michael Douglas, a disillusioned middle-class businessman, grabs his gun and storms a merry path through the city, showering bullets like confetti on anyone who gets in his way: especially if they happen to be Korean or Cuban.
When the film was shown in Arizona, the audience responded with all-American whoops and hollers.
It smashed to the top of the box-office ratings within days of its release.
The director, Joel Shumacher, is defensive: ‘Politically correct movies are fairy tales.
The culture is politically incorrect, so violence gets cheered.’
In much the same way, one presumes, as the crowds in this country once gathered to cheer public executions.
Falling Down represents a New Brutalism in the cinema.
This is a macho ‘see it if you dare’ tendency which particularly appeals to young men.
The New Brutalism is characterised by Quentin Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs, and Abel ‘Driller Killer’ Ferrara's Bad Lieutenant, with Harvey Keitel.
Significantly, both directors pay homage to Martin Scorsese's re-released 1973 film Mean Streets.
Even Scorsese is concerned: ‘There's a coldness that's chilling, that's very different from the violence of Mean Streets.’
It's a modern violence which, in the words of film-maker Bryan Forbes, director of Whistle down the Wind and The L-Shaped Room, ‘lacks any compensating morality’.
‘These films' avowed aim is not art but commercial exploitation of our basest instincts — for which they are slavishly applauded by those terrified of being considered unenlightened.’
The fervour has become so great that some now argue for a tightening of the Obscene Publications Act.
Critics say the wording, which demands offending material must ‘deprave or corrupt’, is too archaic to be properly applied to video nasties.
This will cause outrage among the anti-censorship crew.
But Forbes warns it may come unless film-makers abandon the pornography of violence for which there is no excuse.
Colours of a dancer's mettle A stint in television made choreographer Lea Anderson long for the pure movement of live theatre.
She tells Allen Robertson about her latest work
TODAY'S world premiere at the Tramway, Glasgow, will be performed by an amalgamation of two separate companies, the Featherstonehaughs (five men) and the  Cholmondeleys (five women).
Precious, has choreography by Lea Anderson who was the compere for the recent Channel 4 series Tights!
Camera!
Action!
She also had her own half-hour work, Cross Channel, screened by BBC2 last year.
‘But,’ she says, ‘I've come back to live theatre with a vengeance.
Doing all that TV stuff made me realise that, no, what I'm interested in is pure movement.
You can talk about the nature of art — blah, blah, blah — and I did do some dribbling off into text and stuff, but now I know that movement says more to me than any of this other tosh.
‘Anyhow, I was so busy last year doing five things at once that it really did my head in.
So this year I'm doing just one new production and I'm really glad we're opening at the Tramway.
Most of the other venues sympathetic to new work are, unfortunately, the ones with the titchy theatres.
They're very supportive, but they're not the sorts of theatre where you want to open.’
Anderson, now regarded as one of the country's top dance makers, got into the field by the back door.
She was a singer in a band which was on the verge of big pop success when the group started to be messed around by the men in suits.
As promises were broken and things started to crumble she opted for St Martin's School of Art.
It was only later that she switched to the Laban Centre and started dance training.
‘A different passion enveloped me,’ she purrs in a parody of a pretentious starlet.
Two of her compatriots from Laban, Teresa Barker and Gaynor Coward, are still with her today.
‘The longevity of these two companies is something that makes us special,’ says Anderson.
‘I know it sounds sentimental and kind of naff, but it's quite moving to see a group of people working together like this.
We have such a huge knowledge of each other.’
The ten dancers, plus a three-man band of composer Steve Blake and two percussionists, approach the scale of Rambert or London Contemporary Dance Theatre, but Anderson's group tours without all the back-up support.
‘It's ridiculous, but we haven't got the resources.
For a company of our size to tour without a stage manager and only one technician is a nightmare.
Every dancer has got a different job to do on the road — as if dancing weren't difficult enough — but you know what most people would say: ‘It's art, it's dance, it's Britain, you should be grateful to be doing it at all’.
I'm not bitter about that, but it would be nice if the realities were a bit different.’
The starting point for Precious was Anderson's long-time fascination with alchemy.
The work, which runs about an hour and 20 minutes, is made up of four sections; Black, White, Red and Gold.
The costumes fluctuate from beatnik black, to ecclesiastical gold, with swanky white tie and tails and sexily sophisticated red gowns in between.
The designer, Sandy Powell, has known Anderson since their first day at St Martin's when they played truant and headed off to the pub after about 15 minutes.
Powell, whose career in films includes the costumes for Orlando and The Crying Game, won an Evening Standard design award last year for Derek Jarman's Edward II.
‘I'm really chuffed that Sandy chooses to go on working with us.
We can't afford anything like the kind of money she can get elsewhere but her loyalties lie with the work she really loves.
‘That's how we all feel.
So we don't have enough money, but we spend our time doing stuff we really care about.
Having worked with actors, with different people and in different companies, believe me, I do know how lucky I am.’
A serious pleasure QUARTERMAINE'S TERMS KING'S THEATRE, EDINBURGH
THERE is a sly line early on in Quartermaine's Terms when one of the characters claims a dislike of Chekhov.
She doesn't go to the theatre, she says, to see people suffering.
Little does she know how bad things will get for her.
This is one of playwright Simon Gray's literary moments, an ironic reference to his own comedy, in which grim real-life material is woven into a sparkling comic structure.
In Kevin Billington's production, Quartermaine's Terms comes over as a deceptively sedate and profoundly funny play that is a serious pleasure to watch from start to finish.
Billington has assembled a high-octane cast which has the play sitting up and begging.
Edward Fox's St John Quartermaine is a memorable portrait of a nice-but-dim English teacher, whiling away great swathes of bachelor leisure time sitting absently in the staffroom.
The part fits Fox's mannered but magnetic acting style perfectly, and between them, he and the author have succeeded in making a great comic character out of a man who does almost nothing at all and who speaks only in cheery formulae, and yet has strange powers of happiness denied to those more vulnerable to the wear and tear of life.
Quartermaine is the oblivious pivot around which the other members of staff at the Cambridge language school circulate and occasionally collide.
These parts are superbly realised by the cast; Clive Francis, James Grout, Sarah Badel, Richard Huw and Lucy Scott all giving the sort of lived-in and clearly progressing performances that you rarely find in the same play.
Peter Barkworth's dainty but needling school principal is another candidate for the comic hall of fame.
Not to be missed.
Colin Donald
Careering between two extremes Described by one director as being ‘an actress who can do anything’, Edith MacArthur talks to Colin Donald ‘The play is all about charm…
I must say it's nice to be back in silks and satins after the nighties and hairnets'
FEW actors enjoy being typecast but even fewer can do much about it.
Not so in the case of Edith MacArthur, until recently best known as an elegant presence in repertory theatre drawing-rooms, or as Mrs Cunningham, doyenne of Glendarroch in Take The High Road.
Last year, with triumphant results, she gambled her comfortable reputation on a pair of unglamorous and intensely challenging roles; in CP Taylor's classic play Good and John MacGrath's TV movie The Long Roads.
After many years of steady stage and television work, it was as if she were exploring a rich new emotional seam in her work.
This week she returns to the familiar territory of Perth Theatre as Comtesse de la Bruyere in JM Barrie's comedy of manners, What Every Woman Knows.
She is back to grande dame mode having proved herself, as John MacGrath put it, ‘an actress who can do anything’.
MacArthur is modestly surprised by all the praise and talk of awards that has greeted her recent performances: ‘These roles have a lot to do with the reason I became an actress in the first place — I still think of my career as being about to begin!’
In Good she played the hero's senile, wheelchair-bound elderly mother (‘I had nothing on my face and had to use a toilet on stage’), shrieking asperities at her hapless son as he wrestled with the temptations of Nazism.
‘That was the first stripping off of the so-called glamour that women of my age tend to cling to, not just actresses’.
It was an astonishing performance in a first-rate production, and it led directly to her casting as Kitty MacVurrich in The Long Roads, McGrath's TV film about a cancer-stricken Skye woman and her husband, visiting their children for the last time.
Critical reaction aside, Edith MacArthur has had piles of letters from viewers who were moved by her portrayal of the dying woman confronting the limits of her family relationships.
Transformed by cunning makeup and a virtuoso display of technical and emotional acting skill, her portrait of a frail but flinty island woman achieved its power by suggesting more than it said.
‘I've never done anything that has had such a wonderful response.
John's script was so true and real and fine, I felt I had to do honour to that, and to the kind of people that it was talking about.
In a way it was challenging and in a way it was totally natural.
I felt it would be impertinent to pretend in a role like that.’
The director of The Long Roads, Tristram Powell, agrees that less equalled more in that performance: ‘I was aware that she had played all these glamorous parts, and I had to get her to trust me and do much less than she was used to.
Once we agreed on the idea of pulling back on the emotion and letting the situation she was in speak for itself, the part took off.
She gave this powerful sense of her character's emotional repression, and the sense was there that she had had a hard life.
Edith is very quick to respond to direction and she got the truth of the part in a flash.
‘Someone on the set who didn't know her asked if she really had been ill recently and I said no, she's actually quite young and looks amazing underneath all that.
I think she's an outstanding actress, and this part proved it.’
Born in Ayrshire, Edith MacArthur's career since the mid-Fifties has centred mainly on Scotland's repertory theatres; the Lyceum, The Citizens, Perth and Pitlochry.
She lived for 20 years in London and has a string of TV credits and many well-known and much-loved roles.
She has never been, she says, ‘pushy’ and as a late starter her career has not taken in much Shakespeare, or any film.
‘Sometimes I ask myself what have I done with my career,’ she jokes, ‘coming back to do rep, exactly where I started off.
People imagine that if you do well in something then the offers come pouring in, but it doesn't work like that.’
Perth's What Every Woman Knows, directed by its new artistic director Andrew Mackinnon and also starring Andy Gray as the Scotsman on the make, John Shand, continues an association with Perth Theatre that began in 1955.
Her character, the Comtesse, is a classic MacArthur role, a salon sophisticate unlikely to keep her worldly wisdom to herself.
‘The play is all about charm, and the importance of having a sense of humour.
I must say it's nice to be back in silks and satins after the nighties and hairnets.’
A rich seam: Edith MacArthur as we are used to seeing her and, inset, in ‘Death of a Salesman’
RSAMD OPERA NEW ATHENAEUM THEATRE, GLASGOW
IF Gidon Saks has been in the last year the bovver boy of Scottish Opera, singing splendidly but speaking out of turn, he has surely redeemed himself this week directing the RSAMD Opera Class in two productions at the New Athenaeum.
His touch is sure from the start; Ravel's L'Enfant et les Sortileges he paces beautifully, and by making his fantastic characters tiny beside a huge, solid door, takes us at once into a child's world to be thrilled and frightened.
His cast is wonderful, avoiding fussiness in a work whose circus-like twists and turns can so easily become a brawl.
Here they present a series of polished, funny and at times alarming caricatures.
Karina Gauvin, as Tuesday's enfant terrible(there are two casts, over four nights), has a voice bell-bright and focused and creates her havoc with a delightful gaucheness.
She shines, too: one never could ignore her despite the enormous charm of her victims come to seek their revenge, first in Saks's gloomy room then in his enchanted  Gauguin -esque forest, whose colours the child herself might have smeared on the walls with sticky fists.
If getting Ravel right is tricky, putting on Puccini, hot on the heels of Elijah Moshinsky's classic for Scottish Opera, was a formidable challenge.
And everyone knows La Boheme, so that any wrinkles become an offensive crease, an unignorable intrusion.
Act Two opened on to a stark strip of grey.
There was no distraction other than a poignant roll of rags in which a baglady scuffled, and snow fell so that one could almost smell the cold.
But such spareness asked a lot of young singers, and initially, they did blunder about — apart from Rafael Rojas, a remarkable, stage-wise Rudolpho.
But Lesley Cook, her Mimi ugly and bedridden in Act Three, became beautiful, her singing simple and subtle, her death dignified and gentle.
Rojas, too, sang with enormous vivacity, his laddish companions touching in their support.
These are fine productions: the talent is here, and healthy.
MELANIE O'REILLY MUSIC BOX, EDINBURGH
SINGER Melanie O'Reilly drew a standing-room only attendance for the last of the inaugural season of Assembly Direct's ‘The Jazz Club’ promotions.
The venture has been conspicuously successful in giving a platform to Scottish musicians, and in building audience momentum around the country, although the break from now until the autumn could threaten the latter achievement.
This was a strong finish, though, from a singer who may have felt she had something to prove after a disappointing debut with her current trio in Edinburgh last year.
The rough edges on the opening Mean To Me quickly gave way to the most assured and accomplished performance I have heard from her.
Standard tunes are her forte, and she was heard at her best in Cole Porter's I Concentrate On You, given just a hint of a Latin groove, and a delicate, emotional My Foolish Heart, in which her subtle singing was perfectly matched by pianist Brian Kellock's lovely solo.
While she sang a couple of blues tunes, and scatted on a version of Dizzy Gillespie's Hot House which they inserted into What is This Thing Called Love, neither is really her style.
She is essentially a shaper of lyrics, and both her voice and her manner of delivery are geared to the rich melodic contours and sophisticated words of these tunes.
By way of variation, though, she sang a simple setting of a poignant old Irish poem, which began in a lovely duet between her and Kellock, with drummer John Rae on bodhran, but eventually turned into a full-steam work out for the trio, which was completed by bass player Andy Mitchell.
Kenny Mathieson
Eastern philosophy in a western key A Chinese composer who sees Scotland as a second musical home, talks to Mary Miller
ONE meets the Chinese composer Tan Dun with all sorts of preconceptions.
He's a composer who seems to attract rather precious commentary — talk of the fundamental expression of the human soul, of primitive silence, of other-worldly styles.
Certainly, he seem airily exotic with his cropped hair and face like an oriental cherub.
But he is a rarer bird — a composer who can talk about his music and with words, sketch the remarkable individual sound world which he has created, and which he changes with every new work.
For it is perhaps this ability to change, to flow forward, which makes him so remarkable.
Tan grew up in his grandmother's village in Hunang Province, in southern China — a land, he says, whose culture is far removed from that of the main country — more ritualistic, mysterious, shamanistic.
He says music was not a performing art: it was connected to everyday events, to births and deaths, a new house, or a departure.
Everyone sang — he demonstrates the style, a gentle wailing — and the young Tan learned folk instruments and Chinese fiddle.
He couldn't call himself a violinist, he says, because, for four years, his fiddle had only three strings, forcing him to virtuosic feats of improvisation.
Looking back, he says with some amusement, his creations were impressively avant-garde.
He didn't encounter a keyboard instrument until he was 19, and a student at Beijing Conservatoire.
Lucky, he says.
The roughness of his musical background, he is sure, has been fundamental to the development of his adult musical style.
And pre-Beijing, there was more tough training.
During the Cultural Revolution, he was sent to the countryside to plant rice for two years.
Chairman Mao insisted on re-education: ‘He said that despite our intellectual development, we still had dirty minds which must be cleansed by contact with true working classes — lucky again, because I learned much folk music from my colleagues.
Then later I was selected by the local opera in Peking, as fiddle player and arranger.
The experience was critical.’
He was selected, out of 11,000 candidates, one of 30 to gain admission to Beijing Conservatoire, newly opened after the revolution.
There he fell in love.
Tan heard Bach and Beethoven for the first time, and ‘totally forgot about myself’.
He immersed himself in all things western, surrounded by Russian-trained professors and  visiting composers — Alexander Goehr, Henze, George Crumb, Takemitsu.
China then was totally open, he recalls.
Though his compositions won many prizes internationally, Tan says that gradually, he found himself unable to express his real self.
He began to remember, to re-acknowledge his roots, and to realise that immersion in western music was not his purpose, simply a training.
In 1986, he went to New York to take a fellowship at Columbia.
His time since then has been taken up with self-examination —‘finding my real identity, trying to reorganise my own language combining western techniques with the voices from my earliest experience.’
Currently, he is fascinated by the interaction of different cultures and is in Scotland for two premieres.
Tonight's with the Scottish Early Music Consort, for whom he has written Lament: Autumn Wind, which blends medieval western instruments with those of ancient China.
The soloist sings a 16th century Chinese love song, but also vocalises in the style of Peking opera.
Old Chinese music, Tan says, reflected nature, old western music, religion.
He wanted to fuse the two —‘to express the religion, the ritual of nature’.
To the BBC SSO, whom he holds in great affection — he first came to Scotland in 1988 for their Festival of New Chinese Music — he has gifted a new work, Death and the Fire: a dialogue with Paul Klee, to be premiered on 27 March.
‘The dialogue explores my understanding of certain colourings — Klee's images fascinate me, and somehow, my ‘Chineseness’ compels me to investigate them.’
The work has ten movements, the first Tan's personal portrait of Klee, the fifth, a self-portrait.
The discussion, he says, is about colour and differing cultural perceptions.
Writing an opera for the 1994 Edinburgh International Festival, Scotland, says Tan is his second musical home; and home to a dear friend — the composer, Eddie McGuire, who shares Tan's love of cross-cultural exploration and like him, deeply influenced by John Cage.
He reveres Cage for his rigorous search for simplicity, his fantastic openness to experiences and ideas.
And Tan's music surely reflects this in its yearning to reveal an inner voice, its east/west sound world, and its sense of theatre.
His second guru has been Shostakovich, for the sheer power of his expression, and, because, like every true artist ‘he stood up firmly on his own cultural earth’.
For Tan Dun, composer and thinker, lover of all countries, still surely has his feet planted in south China's soil.
Chinese whispers: gentle notes from Tan Dun on a ceramic wind instrument
Two coups for arts festival The recession has not affected the calibre of the 1993 Perth festival programme, says Mary Miller
ALTHOUGH Perth Festival of the Arts admits to having felt the nip of recession, 1993 programme planners have opted, wisely, for quality rather than quantity.
The opening concert on 19 May presents something of a coup — the Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra, with composer/conductor Krzyztof Penderecki, to play Penderecki's second cello concerto, with soloist Timothy Hugh.
The programme includes Dvorak's New World symphony.
The following night, the Lark Quartet, a much acclaimed ensemble from the United States plays at Scone Palace, while Miles and Millner entertain at the Salutation Hotel with The Complete History Of Music.
Friday 21 May sees the opening of Perth Festival Opera at Perth Theatre, where John Currie directs Gluck's Orpheus, to be sung in English, and designed by James Paterson.
Four performances run, Sunday excluded, until Wednesday 26.
On Saturday morning, the young violinist Clio Gould plays a recital in St John's Kirk, with Brenda Cochrane in concert in the evening at the City Hall.
Sunday 23 May brings coup number two, with the St Petersburg Glinka State Choir, to sing Tchaikovsky's St John Liturgy — in St John's — and Monday sees the start of the Nash Ensemble's residency, a melee of recitals and workshops with children, beginning with a recital at Battleby House, with quintets by Schumann and Mozart.
On Tuesday 25 May, the European Community Chamber Orchestra plays with Austrian violinist Benjamin Schmid and the following day, after a morning Nash concert, Wildcat open at Perth Theatre with Morag Fullerton's Musical Chairs, directed by David MacLennan.
The Nash, meanwhile, play an evening concert at St John's — Milhaud, Faure and Brahms — and at Battleby, Karin Fernald gives an illustrated lecture Young Victoria and the Arts.
The Nash Ensemble gives master classes on Thursday morning to Tayside's young musicians, while pianists Howard Shelley and Hilary Macnamara play in the evening at the City Hall.
Friday brings Iona Brown and the Norwegian Chamber Orchestra to the same venue, and Scottish Ballet Two to Perth Theatre, with a classical programme.
On Saturday, the Perth-born soprano, Carole Marnoch, sings in recital at St John's, while the Pasadena Roof Orchestra invites a wallow in nostalgia at the City Hall.
Sunday's closing concert sees John Currie conduct the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, the programme to conclude with Stravinsky's Symphony of Psalms.
Throughout the festival, St John's Kirk will, as ever, host lunchtime concerts, with a different local school performing each day.
Perth Jazz Extravaganza will rave at the Jazz Bank from 26-30 April, and although major art exhibitions have had to be cancelled because of the recent disastrous flooding, many local artists will have work on show.
World beater
Last night I watched a classic tale on television of how a British ‘eccentric inventor’ teamed up with a high-technology company to produce a world beater.
This morning I woke up to discover another major British engineering company expected to require 5,000 fewer workers.
In spite of the differences that have developed between Mike Burrows and Lotus, the story of Chris Boardman's Olympic gold medal winning bike should be inspiring.
Britain still has a bicycle industry; frames and complete bicycles are manufactured here, though most of the components are imported.
Over the past 20 years much of the research and development in bicycle technology has been done in Japan, notably by Shimano.
There are few bikes (especially mountain bikes) that don't have Shimano gears or brakes.
Bicycles are no longer children's toys or ‘poor man's transport’.
They are increasingly sophisticated machines, often using high quality aluminium and titanium alloys, spin offs from the aerospace industry.
Surely in these days of environmental awareness and urban transport problems, companies such as Rolls Royce (and Lucas) should invest their technological knowledge and workers' skills in such things as bicycle components, where there is a growing demand.
This would reduce imports, save jobs and perhaps even provide the once promised ‘peace dividend’.
Senior BBC executives in Scotland are now concerned at what they see as a crucial shift in the balance of power to London.
Alan Wilson examines the core of the broadcasters' unease Changing channels ‘What these figures mean is that less than one third of the Scottish licence fees was spent north of the Border, while the comparable figure for England was over 90 per cent'
AS the BBC's board of governors meets in London today to pronounce formally on the future of the corporation's director-general, and perhaps that of its own chair, BBC Scotland has become preoccupied with pressing problems of its own.
For although the new moves to the doctrine of ‘producer choice’ beginning on 1 April have been exhaustively discussed in the national media, the implications for Scottish programme makers have not been fully appreciated.
Many senior executives are now concerned at what they see as a crucial shift in the balance of power from Scotland to London.
At the core of their unease is the BBC's new Resource, Engineering and Services Directorate.
This is the separate business unit which will control engineering, premises, and support services for news and current affairs, television, radio, and regional directorates including Scotland.
The new resources director for BBC Scotland, recently appointed from London, is Andy Davey.
And his line manager under the new structure is not the controller of programmes in Scotland, John McCormick, but Bill Dennay, the acting managing director of Resources, Engineering and Services in London.
Dennay and his deputy were in Scotland earlier this month for a meeting with senior staff, and were left in little doubt about the general unhappiness at the new set up.
In the current climate, few executives were prepared to risk airing their anxieties publicly, but privately they express a wide range of fears.
‘What this actually means is that a huge number of BBC Scotland staff, are now directly under London control,’ said one departmental head.
‘And we are talking about a huge skill base within Scotland, a major training resource which is vitally important to Scotland and to thousands of Scottish students in everything from engineering to media graphics.
We just do not feel that it is appropriate that this whole area should now be run from London.
We have no quibble with the actual staff involved in running resources, but operationally there are certain to be differences between what BBC Scotland regards as priorities, and what London sees as theirs.’
In terms of television these conflicts might arise in the deployment of outside broadcast units.
As part of an earlier rationalisation process Scotland lost one such unit based at East Kilbride.
SOME outside broadcast requests might now have to be fulfilled by a team from Manchester.
The theory behind the cuts was that there was no point in having maximum OB resources available on a year round basis.
But many Scottish broadcasters argue that in deploying minimum resources there will be instances where the new directorate won't authorise Manchester to fill the gap and they are faced with the choice of hiring independents at what might prove a greater cost, thereby going over budget, or perhaps losing the programme.
Some staff involved in setting up new schedules for BBC Scotland raise another concern.
They suggest that in previous eras BBC Scotland got what was in essence a block grant from London in respect of costs of making programmes for Scotland.
On top of that sum they could bid for further income to make network programmes, or for capital investment.
Now, they say, while the programme controllers of radio and television in Scotland, James Boyle and Colin Cameron still commission work and report to McCormick, the ultimate decision as to whether their programme strategies are accepted and funded lies with Ron Neil, the managing director of regional broadcasting in London.
Neil, as it happens, is himself a committed Scot, but the Scottish-based executives say that it is not the current incumbent of that post, but the fact that the regional directorate enjoys ultimate power of veto which worries them.
Members of the Broadcasting Council for Scotland have also expressed private distress at the new arrangements.
Some say they were unaware of the full impact of the new line management structure when they met to discuss it.
Some of them apparently feel that the move flies in the face of the philosophy expressed in the document prepared by the task force which examined the way ahead for BBC Scotland.
That document, completed last spring, has never been made public, but those who have had access to it assert that its main thrust was to give Scotland more rather than less autonomy.
In particular, it examined how the current financial arrangements worked, and concluded that these had not been especially favourable to the Scottish licence feepayer.
As a particular exercise they examined the year 1990/91 when BBC Scotland's viewers and listeners contributed over £110 millions to the national coffers.
That represented some 8.5 per cent of the UK income, compared with 5.25 per cent contributed by Wales.
In return BBC Scotland received £27 million to make the programmes screened during the periods it opted out of the national network, and £14.5m towards the cost of making programmes in Scotland for the network.
Wales attracted £34m plus £15m for Welsh language programming
The fact that Scottish-sourced network TV accounted for just 1.5 per cent of the national output and 0.8 per cent of the radio programming suggested to the task force it seems, that there should have been more money available for commissioning north of the border.
They noted too that Scotland contributed fully to the costs of all network programmes while seeing only 94 per cent of them, and paid a full share for network radio despite patchy reception in some areas.
‘What these figures mean is that less than one third of the Scottish licence fees were spent here that year, while the comparable figure for England was over 90 per cent,’ said one disgruntled producer.
The Government's own paper on the future of broadcasting acknowledged that ‘the special needs of individual countries’ should be recognised and that there should be a ‘guarantee of national culture and national debate.’
The BBC Scotland task force suggested that the best way to pursue these guarantees might be to reverse the previous arrangement and keep the licence money in Scotland, paying out from it those fees imposed for taking network programmes and utilising corporate resources.
That methodology, some members argued, might enhance the Scottish budget given that Scotland was currently paying for a share of some centralised services which it neither used nor needed.
Neither had it been able properly to exploit marketing arms such as BBC Enterprises which was heavily skewed towards London-based programming.
And, where it had successfully sold Scottish products, had not re-invested the profits there.
With the establishment of the new resources directorate, these plans to enhance BBC Scotland's semi-autonomous role have been put sharply into reverse, say many of Scotland's most senior broadcasting executives.
Though their controller of programmes in Scotland indicated, in an interview he gave The Scotsman earlier this year, that many of the aims and aspirations of the Scottish task force had been incorporated, in his view, in the final version of ‘Extending Choice’, John Birt's mission statement for the future of the BBC.
‘The importance of diversity in programmes and recognition of the cultures of different parts of the UK with a special service for Scotland run right through the document like letters through a stick of rock.’
In that document the director-general, John Birt, spoke of the need to create level playing fields throughout the UK and indicated he wished ‘to transfer support services away from the centre to directorates’.
Yet in two weeks' time, some 450 of BBC Scotland's 1,100 employees will become ultimately answerable to a London-based controller.
Birt added that his plans must be seen as being about ‘greater freedom to operate, not less, greater initiative and enterprise within mutually agreed strategies.’
It seems that many people within BBC Scotland view the post-April reality as likely to be more restrictive than liberating.
And the strategy for allocating resources centrally from London, they say, has found precious little agreement with Scottish programme makers.
Auntie's purse-strings
THERE is more to John Birt than his inventive way with an income tax return.
The neglected, but instructive, sub-text to the passions aroused by the BBC director-general's financial affairs is the ambitious and contentious agenda of reforms over which he has presided in the run-up to the renewal of the corporation's charter.
Familiarly, the reforms have been presented in the bright packaging of choice and value for money; terms which usually end up meaning cutbacks.
In Scotland, concern has been expressed over the implications of studio closures and job losses, but it has met with soothing words from the BBC's executives and from its political masters in government.
Mr Birt himself has stressed his desire to transfer support services out from the central bureaucracy in London.
The doctrine of ‘producer choice’ has been portrayed as devolving power to the programme makers, wherever they be.
A BBC Scotland task force last year is widely believed to have proposed greater autonomy for the corporation's Scottish operations.
The Government's green paper on the future of the BBC spoke inspiringly of the particular needs and interests of the UK's constituent nations, which it said any recast structure should reflect.
All of that would seem set fair to ensure that, even in straitened circumstances, BBC Scotland would remain distinctive and discrete, its command of its own affairs at least preserved.
Yet things are evidently not that simple.
Fears are deepening at Queen Margaret Drive that the ascendancy of a new Resource, Engineering and Services directorate in London represents a significant transfer of authority from Glasgow to London.
If the fears are well-grounded, it would mean not just that two-fifths of BBC Scotland staff became responsible to a controller in London rather than to the BBC Scotland controller, John McCormick.
It would also mean that Scottish programme makers would have to bid for resources to London, where priorities might well be different from their own.
Purse-strings, whether tightly or slackly held, tend faithfully to trace lines of power.
No-one should argue with the concept of greater efficiency in the BBC, but the reforms are also meant to be about decentralising power to where the creativity resides.
Today's report must cast real doubt on the degree to which that is now in prospect.
In a recent interview with this newspaper, Mr McCormick said: ‘I would be the first to complain if I felt we weren't getting a fair crack of the whip.’
The bigger question is who is cracking it.
Letting the boy out of the box Margaret Forster had exclusive access to a huge cache of intimate letters for her revealing new biography of Daphne du Maurier.
She talks to Penny Fox ‘She felt like a cuckoo in the nest.
Daphne felt that if she hadn't been a girl, she would have been happy’‘The letters show beyond doubt that Daphne had an affair with the American actress Gertrude Lawrence'
MARGARET Forster completed what she thought was the final draft of her biography of Daphne du Maurier in April 1992 and had dispatched it to the publisher.
Shortly afterwards, over lunch at the Savoy, the daughter of du Maurier's American publisher announced to Forster that she had hundreds of letters from Daphne to her mother, Ellen Doubleday.
She described the revelatory information they contained and said she was prepared to make them available.
Margaret Forster ‘almost fainted’.
She recalls: ‘The book was done by this time.
I then spent three months going through these letters and realised that the whole heart of the book would have to be changed.
I had to write to the family with the new material; they reacted in different ways, a mixture of distress and anger.
I don't think I slept for weeks — it was literally a nightmare and you do get it all out of proportion.
You do get obsessive.’
Du Maurier died in 1989 having produced nearly 40 books, mainly fiction, including a number of collections of short stories.
Many have been filmed: Hitchcock's The Birds, Nicholas Roeg's Don't Look Now, but it is her novel Rebecca we associate with du Maurier — that moody, mysterious tale of the second Mrs de Winter, of Manderley and Mrs Danvers.
The process of biography is, says Margaret Forster, a load of worry.
‘It's thrilling and it's a tremendous job of work, so you feel extremely satisfied.
But the worry is — are you being responsible?
Are you being right?
Are you being fair?
‘For this book, an awful lot has come from live people, her family, her friends.
At the beginning, I spent the whole summer reading everything du Maurier had written.
I don't think you should go to a writer's life through the life; I think you should go through the work.’
That body of work provided much food for thought and Forster responded with a series of questions: ‘Firstly it was interesting to note how varied it was.
Why, in the middle of her life, her writing changed.
Why the men are always awful.
Why the women change mid-career — in the early books they're pathetic, victims, and then suddenly, when du Maurier reaches her forties, these women start becoming the strong ones.
I wondered why all this changed.
Why does she rely so heavily on retreating into the past?’
The family agreed to an authorised biography and Forster started reading du Maurier's letters, begun when she was ten years old writing to her governess — nearly 30 years of unbroken correspondence.
‘The main impression was of how funny she was.
I'd never associated her with any kind of wit, but these were  joky and mocking, very amusing letters.
The second thing was all the teenage angst; very disturbed letters.
Why was she so unhappy when she had such a charmed life?
I was conscious that this was a quite extremely double-faceted character; she had two definite sides.
The next stage was to meet the family — two daughters and a son who, having read an appreciation of du Maurier written by Forster, felt confident enough to give the go-ahead for a full-scale biography.
‘They felt that in the appreciation I had somehow caught what she was about, this thing about how she loved to be in Cornwall and loved to wear her scruffy clothes and wellington boots.
How in her work you can tell that she's an extremely complex person, that her writing sprang from deep within.
I said how wrong I thought it was that she wasn't rated in the literary canon, that she was thought of as a ‘popular’ novelist, and how some of her work was very much better than that.’
For a biographer, meeting the family is where the real process of empathy begins, says Forster: ‘You see the facial characteristics, the old vibes do start churning in a different way.
It's quite dangerous, as well, because you want to be objective and you do get sucked into the picture they're presenting to you.
Also, as you get friendlier, you can get too far away from the centre of the life.
That was in danger of happening.
The most important thing is that you're in danger of not being able to ask the nasty questions because the family are all so lovely and you get on so well with them and don't want to ask impertinent questions.’
Those ‘nasty’ questions concern sex or money and this is where a biographer treads on delicate ground.
‘It does take some nerve and a nerve I wasn't quite sure I'd got.
The whole thing is about gaining trust, is dependent on trust.
Time after time, people would slowly open a drawer and give me something they knew perfectly well they'd had all the time I'd been visiting them and talking to them, but the moment was now right.
They'd decided they could tell me, they could trust me.
It's trusting me to understand the significance of it and why they are giving it to me.’
Du Maurier always said that her life would be dull, not to her but to other people.
But, says Forster: ‘It's a story of what was going on in somebody's head, rather than externally.
I was surprised to find that she had such a rich and violent internal life and that all this was smouldering and seething away.
I hadn't expected to find this turmoil.’
Rebecca perhaps indicates some of that conflict and is, says Forster, incomparably better than anything else she wrote.
‘It came from deep inside her.
She was writing about her own feelings of intense jealousy and great insecurity about what she was.
People tend to read Rebecca in their early teens.
An enormous proportion of the book is taking place in Mrs de Winter's head — it is all fantasising; endless pages about what might happen.
Hardly any of it is in the present.
It's a picture not just what of jealousy can do to you but what insecurity can do.
‘When she was writing Rebecca she had been married for about four years, had one child and during the writing of the book, had her second child.
She was having to face up to the confusion in her: that she was married to a man she loved but there was this ‘Boy-in-the-box’.’
The ‘Boy-in-the-box’ is the mystery, the revelation, of du Maurier.
She felt herself divided within, a deep contradiction between distinctive parts she called No 1 and No 2.
She wrote to her daughter, Flavia: ‘When I get madly boyish No 2 is in charge, and then, after a bit, the situation is reversed.’
To her biographer, the meaning of all this was revealed over time and finally clarified by the letters to Ellen Doubleday.
‘Du Maurier felt she went through her life acting; her life was what she called ‘one long lie’.
It was so deep this dislocation, this feeling that she was two people.
No 1 was the calm, pleasant, very attractive, amusing outer woman, the mother of three children, easy-going and casual who had a lovely life and everything was wonderful.
No 2 was all the other bits: No 2 was the writer, the ‘Boy-in-the-box’, the one who came out and wrote the books and expressed itself.
If No 2 had nothing to do, it could drive her mad.
The No 2 person was vicious and vindictive; the short stories she wrote are incredibly revealing — they are very nasty, full of murder and violence.’
The identity of the ‘Boy-in-the-box’ was unmasked by those letters referred to over lunch in the Savoy and which sent Forster back to the book she thought was finished.
‘The letters show beyond doubt that Daphne had an affair with Gertrude Lawrence (the American actress), that she was passionately in love with the wife of her American publisher but that it wasn't consummated, and that she had some sort of an affair with her French teacher when young.’
THIS was all part of what du Maurier referred to as ‘Venetian’ tendencies, lesbian tendencies.
At 18, she decides after her affair with the French teacher that outwardly she is a girl, she looks like a girl, and she can't go through life thinking she's a boy.
In that era, notes Forster, if you had ‘Venetian’ tendencies, you thought it was because you were meant to be a man and that there had been some mistake.
So du Maurier decided to put the boy in a box and shut the lid, inside her.
‘I think it was agony for her often, the balance between No 1 and No 2.
I think it started with her father, not being able to be what he wanted her to be.
In looking at childhood photographs, her sullenness, always seeming to be apart, looking rather sour, tense.
She felt a cuckoo in the nest.
She felt that if she hadn't been a girl, she would have been happy.’
The biography itself, to look at and hold, is also a representation of du Maurier's No 1 and No 2.
Between the covers, the endpapers are elegant and sepia-tinted: at the front a romantic photograph of Menabilly, the large, elegant house in Cornwall where du Maurier and her family lived for years, and, at the back, a mirroring idyllic picture of du Maurier and her three young children, sitting, in all the innocence of short white socks, on a fallen tree trunk with a wide view of the sea behind them.
In between these two delightful images lie the words, the description and details of du Maurier's inner life, what she called ‘the torments of hell’ and her belief that ‘every one of us has his, or her, dark side’.
Life stories: writing a biography may be an absorbing voyage of discovery but, says Margaret Forster, it is also a conscientious process fraught with worry JEANNIE MORISON
Radio first
In his review of the production of 84 Charing Cross Road (8 March) Aaron Hicklin observes that ‘it would sound great on the radio’.
How perceptive he is, but didn't he know that the BBC had already produced it about two years ago with Frank Finlay and Miriam Karlin?
The production is excellent, and for the sake of the audiences at the Brunton Theatre, Musselburgh, I hope that the BBC gives the play another airing very soon.

Helen Hayes: first lady of American stage
THE ACTRESS Helen Hayes, who came to be called the first lady of the American stage in a career that spanned eight decades, died on Wednesday at the age of 92.
She died in her sleep at Nyack Hospital, north of New York, where she had been admitted on 9 March suffering from congestive heart failure.
Miss Hayes, who lived in a 21-room Victorian house overlooking the Hudson River at Nyack, acted in her first professional role at the age of six.
She won two academy awards, had two Broadway theatres named after her and wrote two novels and an autobiography.
She always kept herself busy.
Even in her later years she worked on film and television projects as well as with a US daily radio commentary, The Best Years, consisting of homely reminiscences about the elderly.
‘There comes a time when you really have to say, ‘Get up old girl,’ or you run the risk of making the bed your habitat,’she once told a reporter.
‘It's a sad thing when people are ashamed of their age.
I'm so proud of my age.’
When she was not travelling round the world, Miss Hayes lived at Nyack or spent time with her adopted son, James, who became known to television viewers as detective Dan Williams on the series Hawaii Five-O.
The younger generation perhaps knew her best from her Oscar-winning performance as a cantankerous passenger in the 1970 film Airport.
But millions of theatregoers remembered Miss Hayes for her long-running Broadway career that included leads in such shows as What Every Woman Knows (1926), Mary of Scotland (1933), Harriet (1944) and Mrs McThing (1952).
Broadway's Fulton theatre was given her name in 1955 to celebrate her 50th year on the stage but was torn down in 1982 to make way for a hotel.
A year later, The Little Theatre, was renamed after the actress.
‘I hope this one will outlive me,’ she said at the 1983 dedication ceremony.
Born in Washington on 10 October, 1900, Miss Hayes had her first professional role at the age of six as Prince Charles in The Royal Family.
The experience so thrilled her that she decided to make a career of it, and by the age of 10 she had performed in three Broadway shows.
She earned a degree from the Sacred Heart Academy in Washington in 1917 and went back to New York, starring in Penrod, Dear Brutus, On The Firing Line and The Wren.
By the mid-1920s, Miss Hayes had become one of Broadway's most sought-after actresses, appearing in George Bernard Shaw's Caesar and Cleopatra and in Jed Harris's Coquette.
She married the playwright Charles MacArthur in 1928, despite the playful objections of his literary friends of the legendary Algonquin Hotel Round Table.
The satirist and social critic, Robert Benchley, said: ‘What on earth are they doing together?
Charlie's a man of the world, and she makes Pollyanna seem like a painted hussy.’
The marriage lasted 28 years until MacArthur's death in 1956.
‘It had its rough times, very rough times,’ remembered Miss Hayes, who never remarried.
‘With us, everything was extreme, extreme happiness and extreme fury.’
Miss Hayes turned to films in the 1930s, winning her first of two Academy Awards for her role in The Sin of Madelon Claudet (1931).
Among her other pictures were Arrowsmith and A Farewell to Arms (1932), The White Sister and Night Flight (1933) and Vanessa — Her Love Story’(1935).
But her heart was still in the theatre and she returned triumphantly to Broadway in 1935 in Victoria Regina, which some critics regarded as her best performance.
Portraying 80 years of Queen Victoria's life in 2 hours, she starred in the role for 517 performances on Broadway, and played it over 400 times more in a 1937-38 tour that grossed an unheard-of $1.2 million at the box office.
At a Washington gala marking her 90th birthday, she herself cited Victoria Regina as her greatest role.
Miss Hayes continued her Broadway success into the 1950s with Harriet, a portrait of the 19th century American author Harriet Beecher Stowe, the first London production of The Glass Menagerie, and Thornton Wilder's The Skin of Our Teeth.
Though she spent some 70 years in the limelight, Miss Hayes said she had no regrets about her career choice.
‘Oh, I was always happy in the theatre.
No, I wasn't.
I was miserable most of the time, but it would be a towering ingratitude to say that I'd have done anything else with my life.’
— Reuter 
Helen Hayes and Vincent Price in Victoria Regina which was a Broadway triumph in 1935 Helen Hayes two years ago at a Washington gala
Storybook tones THE BANYAN TREE TAG THEATRE TRON THEATRE, GLASGOW
A YOUNG girl comes from India to stay with her brother in Glasgow with only the seed of the banyan tree connecting her to her homeland.
Alan Spence's gentle trans-cultural fable, aimed primarily at older children, has many affecting moments, and features a fine central performance from Luna Rahman.
It makes some thought-provoking connections between Indian and Scots story-telling traditions, mainly through William Armour's portrayal of a twinkly-eyed, formerly sea-faring Glasgow grandfather.
The best thing about TAG's heartening play (recently returned from a British Council trip to Singapore) is its sympathetic, though occasionally sentimental, view of what life is like for people who courageously transplant themselves into another culture.
There are more common factors, it suggests, than might at first appear.
The short play is preceded by a programme of Bharata Natyam dance, indigenous to the state of Tamil Nadu.
Geetha Sridah's performance of these intricate celebratory religious dances is mesmerising; the idiom of movement and facial expression expresses a mysterious and sexy sort of intelligence that rivets the attention.
But for all the strengths of its component halves, as an evening in the theatre (even a short one) The Banyan Tree seems severely misconceived.
Younger natives in the audience were made distinctly restless by an unadorned programme of traditional Indian dance, while even un-jaded oldies could be forgiven for finding the storybook tones of the play more testing than they should be.
This feeling of being addressed in a special, understanding way does not happen with the best children's theatre, and greater credit could be given even to a young audience, with less recourse to pantomime-like delineation of character.
Colin Donald
Sensational movements CHOLMONDELEYS AND FEATHERSTONEHAUGHS TRAMWAY, GLASGOW
IF 80 minutes of dynamic non-stop dance, combined with reverberant rock music seems like an irresistible combination, then head for Glasgow's Tramway fast to catch the stunning new show from the Cholmondeleys and Featherstonehaughs — Chummlees and Fanshaws to you and me — as conjured out of choreographer Lea Anderson's febrile imagination.
With two drama/percussionists and a saxophonist — composer Steve Blake — the Victims of Death band creates a relentless musical background that sends the dancers rushing across the stage in the opening section of Precious, an endless succession of attract/repel contacts, with walks, runs and jumps, not dance steps per se, but crafted  seamlessly into a totally interactive structure.
Dressed alike in dark suits, the female Cholmondeleys, and male Featherstonehaughs are integrated with completely unisex choreography for both the first and last sections of the evening's journey into alchemy.
If we commence with a vision of the dross of daily human existence, transmutation has clearly been achieved in a finale resplendent with shimmering floor-length cloth of gold kaftans, a mood infused with Eastern spirituality, and tableaux which pay homage to the Pre-Raphaelite vision of medieval allegory.
In part two, as the Featherstonehaughs preen themselves in pristine white tuxedos, flaunting two-foot mug shots offering surrealist images of bodyless faces, hands and legs emerging and retreating, the word precious takes on a different meaning: while yet further connotations appear as the Cholmondeleys, in voluptuous crimson velvet, sensually stimulate the imagination in part three.
Despite great variations of height and build, and the remarkable gazelle-like quality of Mark Lorimer, which brings to mind Michael Clark, there is perfect homogeneity in the persuasive power of these dancers' performances, proffering a sensationally satisfying experience.
Geoffrey West
Dynamite on a long fuse Myles Palmer talks to singer, Brenda Lee, returning to Scotland on tour, and celebrating 33 years in the music business ‘I know what entertainers have gone through to get to that point on the stage, to put the performance on for you.
So it heightens my respect for them'
BRENDA LEE was only 15 when Sweet Nothings charted number four in 1960, but the little girl from Lithonia, Georgia, sensibly stayed at high school for another three years before taking up show business full-time.
A dynamic performer whose voice can galvanise up-tempo songs, Brenda was known as Little Miss Dynamite.
She built on that early breakthrough with numbers like I'm Sorry, Speak To Me Pretty, Here Comes That Feeling and Let's Jump the Broomstick, accumulating 17 top 30 hits in the UK between 1960 and 1965, and 19 top 20 hits in America.
‘This is the first time I've been back in eight years,’ says Brenda, who is at the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall tonight and the Playhouse, Edinburgh, tomorrow.
She still does about 100 concerts every year with her six-piece band.
‘I love to sing, and I love to perform, but it's a double-edged sword — I also like to be home in Nashville with my family.
I have two grown daughters.
One is in marketing, and the other's a parole officer for the State of Texas.’
She doesn't do anything special to look after the distinctive voice which has kept her in the music business for an astonishing 33 years.
‘I don't smoke and I don't drink.
I just have to get my rest, and be very careful with it.
I do Lean On Me, the Bill Withers song, and Wind Beneath My Wings, a big Bette Midler song from a coupla years ago, and some Elvis and Little Richard things.’
Author and DJ Charlie Gillett reckoned Brenda's vocal style was more influenced by R&B singers like Ruth Brown and LaVern Baker than by country artists, but this turns out not to be the case.
‘I didn't even know of them until later on in my teens, after I'd been recording for several years.
But they are wonderful.
Believe it or not, I listened to people like Edith Piaf, Bessie Smith, Judy Garland, Dinah Washington, Nancy Wilson and Tony Bennett.’
So how did such a young girl come to sing such hi-energy music?
‘I don't know.
I had always been singing energetic music from the time I was just a little girl, and when I started getting songs like Sweet Nothings, I loved those songs, and I wanted to sing them.
And so I did.
I recorded them.’
She still has immense affection for the pioneering early rockers, who were also from southern states like Mississippi, Texas and Louisiana.
‘Jerry Lee Lewis was wonderful.
He was a wild man.
He had so much excitement and so much energy, and a wonderful voice too.
I worked with Elvis, we did a show together at the Grand Ole Opry in 1957.
Neither he nor I had ever performed there before.
It went down great, they enjoyed it, although they didn't quite know what to think, because we were both rockabilly.’
Brenda also worked with The Beatles in Germany in 1961.
‘I really liked them a lot.
They were very, very talented.
I worked at the Star Club and some other clubs in Hamburg.
I love all kinds of music.
I listen to classical, jazz, rock, MOR, everything.
I don't really have a favourite performer.
I'm a big fan of Elton John, but I love all entertainers — I happen to be an entertainer-lover!’
Does being in the business spoil her enjoyment in seeing a concert?
‘No, it probably makes me appreciate it a whole lot more.
Because I know what they've gone through to get to that point on the stage, to put the performance on for you.
So it heightens my respect for them.’
Brenda was a youthful veteran of package tours where groups and singers did brief sets of their big hits, and can recall touring Britain in 1964 with Manfred Mann, Marty Wilde, and Johnny Kidd & the Pirates.
‘That was great fun.
I enjoyed touring with all those people.
I've been looking at some of the old programmes that some of the fans brought from those shows, and it was interesting to look back and see the people that I travelled with.’
In 1964 she record Is It True? in London with producer Mickey Most, which made No 17 both in the UK and the USA.
‘I thought he was quite good.
He was very easy to work with.
I enjoyed that session a lot.’
She has also sung in musicals, and had cameo roles in movies, including Smokey and the Bandit 2 with Burt Reynolds in 1981.
‘Burt and I met in the early Seventies and became really good friends.
He's one of the nicest guys, I think, in showbusiness.
He's a wonderful man.
Very relaxed, very accommodating.’
For relaxation, Brenda loves to read, and collect things like miniatures and dolls houses.
‘When I'm on the road I shop, and I try to see all the towns, and the landmarks.
I've played all over Europe, although we are only going to Scotland, England and Wales on this trip.’
Human interest thriller MY BROTHER'S KEEPER TRAVERSE THEATRE, EDINBURGH
IF THERE is such a thing as theatre for the people this comedy thriller probably comes close to delivering the goods.
Playwright John McKay, perhaps best known for his Channel 4 sitcom My Dead Dad, has written a neat, pacy story that combines humour and suspense with concise and colourful dialogue.
Cumbernauld Theatre have duly translated it into an enjoyable and amusing production.
Without giving too much away, low-lifer Sammy Dodds (Matthew Costello), an essentially good guy driven to crime, awaits Terry Flowers (Iain Stuart Robertson) a cool psychopath with a penchant for 7-UP, who has escaped from Barlinnie.
Sammy has brought along his Uncle Tam, a canny old head, ‘to hold his wallet’— Sammy is inclined to do things he regrets when he drinks.
However, as they are waiting, Sammy's estranged brother, Lenny Dodds (John Kay Steel), a rich, sensitive television arts executive from London, appears in a bid to reconcile his relationship with his elusive and hostile brother, much to the latter's chagrin.
What follows is really two stories, one suspense, one human interest — how Lenny gets on with his brother, and what happens to the escaped prisoner.
Caroline Scott's circular set, with its floor patterned like a spiralling cockle shell, flanked by two ascending balustrades, is simple but evocatively conjures up the lighthouse, while at the same time providing an interesting setting for the action to work in and whirl around.
Liz Carruthers's inventive direction makes full use of this exciting space, while also taking on board an eclectic mix of theatrical styles, notably miming and human sound effects of the Whose Line is it Anyway variety, entirely appropriate here to McKay's comic style.
Together with well balanced performances from each of the four actors, this makes an amusing and untaxing night at the theatre.
Robert Alstead
Jodami steals in to grab big prize from Rushing Wild
JODAMI, a first Festival runner for Yorkshire trainer Peter Beaumont, captured Cheltenham's greatest prize yesterday when beating the long-time leader, Rushing Wild, by two lengths in the Tote Gold Cup.
Seven lengths further back came 66-1 chance Royal Athlete, with the 5-4 favourite, The Fellow, finishing fourth.
At least half a dozen six-figure offers for Jodami have been rejected, and Beaumont said: ‘They eventually got the message he was not on the market.
The next target is this race next year.’
Rushing Wild, a late ride for Richard Dunwoody after the defection of Another Coral, set out to make all the running and, jumping brilliantly, looked to have the prize netted rounding the final turn.
But Mark Dwyer came out of the pack with Jodami to range alongside two fences out.
Aware he had the measure of Rushing Wild, he looked over his shoulder in an attempt to find The Fellow.
He saw nothing to worry him.
Jodami and Rushing Wild jumped the last together, and Jodami found the vital extra gear to edge away.
So much was expected from The Fellow.
He started at the back, remained there for a lap and, when the pace was turned up, was unable to get within a challenging position.
Rushing Wild's jockey, Richard Dunwoody, gave Dwyer a pat on the back a few yards after the winning post.
He enthused: ‘I had a super run the whole way.
He jumped brilliantly and I decided to put the pressure on to get away from them at the top of the hill.
We had everything beaten expect Jodami, who has done us for foot.’
Royal Athlete surpassed expectations in finishing third and advertised his Martell Grand National claims.
Jenny Pitman's first string, 1991 winner Garrison Savannah, was put out of contention with a mistake at the final ditch and finished seventh.
The race was marred by the death of Cherrykino.
Winner of his previous six races, and fitted out in the Arkle colours of Anne Duchess of Westminster, he broke his elbow in a fall at the seventh fence and was destroyed.
The field was reduced to 16 following defections from Another Coral, Bradbury Star, Gold Options and Kings Fountain.
— PA
DONALD MacLEOD
THIS photographic exhibition opening in Glasgow today, featuring alleged atrocities committed on Serbians, is at the centre of an apparent government departmental muddle over import laws and claims of attempted censorship, writes Susan Dean.
Organisers of the Selective Silence exhibition claim it is a UN sanctions-busting event, set up in defiance of a Department of Trade and Industry ban on links — including cultural — with Serbia.
The 25 pictures on temporary show in Glasgow's Converse Gallery are a sample of about 200 photographs and instruments of torture from a Belgrade exhibition countering what sympathisers describe as Western censorship of the horror and cruelty suffered by Serbian minorities in the civil war.
The original exhibition's UK tour, planned for January, was abandoned when the organisers were told by the DTI that a UN embargo suspended cultural exchanges and visits between UN nations and Serbia or Montenegro.
The organisers claim they were dissuaded from going ahead with the event because of the tone of a letter from the DTI which said it would not grant an import licence if one were needed.
The Glasgow exhibition — which features 25 photographs, mainly of mass killings and torture against Serbian civilians — is the latest stop in a tour of the exhibition, which will open in Edinburgh's 369 Gallery from 2 April for two weeks.
In a letter to the London gallery, The Edge, a DTI official stated that details of the case had been passed to Customs and Excise for them to consider whether an offence had occurred as a licence had not been granted for the photographs in the current exhibition.
A Customs and Excise spokesman said they cannot tell if there has been an offence as they are not sure if an import licence was ever necessary.
If there was no monetary gain involved — and the organisers claim there was not — C&E say it has nothing to do with sanctions.
Meanwhile, the DTI has refused to give Customs a ruling on the requirement for an import licence.
‘She gave us a big jug of water and big brushes and put on blues and greens and let them run and I was away from then.
Away in a different world’ A Glasgow Girl's life rich in wonder and colour One of Scotland's art treasures, Mary Armour tells Ruth Wishart that she has no regrets now that her work is complete
SHE sat in her first classroom, aged five, watching bug-eyed as her teacher demonstrated with sheets of coloured Cellophane how the overlaying of two primary colours produced a third from the mix.
‘She had yellow and blue and suddenly there was green.
It was a miracle.
And then purple and orange.
I felt little cold shivers going right down my back.
I couldn't wait to run home and tell my mother that I knew how to mix colours.’
But of course Mary Armour was already something of a veteran by then.
As a toddler she filled in concentric circles provided for her amusement by her father's youngest brother, young enough to be her own big brother.
Then there was her mother's brother, the amateur botanist who took this little mobile curiosity zone on country walks.
These were to prove precious learning experiences for the young Blantyre girl who was to go on to produce such wonderfully vibrant work, often featuring floral themes, who was to become only the third full female member of the Royal Scottish Academy.
Now 92, she is the last surviving member of what came to be dubbed ‘the Glasgow Girls’, the group who went through Glasgow School of Art during the early part of the century.
She lives now in converted weaving cottages in Kilbarchan, a walled garden already rich in spring colours.
She sits amid colourful evidence of her immense creativity and that of her late husband, Willie Armour.
Rows of the many splendoured jugs which became something of a trademark in her work dangle from the ceiling beams, and one of her own last canvases from the 1980s rests on a paint-splattered easel at the window.
She gives you a tour of that painting in cheerful detail, noting with satisfaction that she had managed to achieve in part of the backdrop the right kind of ‘girny’ blue.
There's not much else noticeably girny in encountering Mary Armour, though her prejudices about everything from her education to the general lot of her sex remain refreshingly intact.
A bursary took her to Hamilton Academy, the kind of option not then normally on offer to steelworkers' daughters.
It wasn't an easy transition.
‘I was very conscious of my speech for one thing, and the teacher, an Englishman, took it out on me.
He told us too that Rabbie Burns wasn't a real poet and he could tell by my face that I didn't like that or him.’
But she had a stroke of good fortune when she inherited Penelope Beaton as her art teacher, a woman who laid aside ‘the nice tidy little shell paintings’ favoured by her predecessor in favour of teaching her class the pleasures to be had from working with the wonders of unpredictable watercolour.
‘She gave us a big jug of water and big brushes and put on blues and greens and let them run and I was away from then.
Away in a different world.
I remember thinking that I knew what painting was about at last.’
The journey to good painting, she firmly believes, starts with an inner compulsion.
‘You've just got to have it in you to start with.
You paint because you can't help it even if you never make any money with it.’
Yet it wasn't a talent the school as an institution particularly nurtured.
‘They were training up people for the university, teaching me Latin.
Art was for the dunces.’
But characteristically she got her way about going to art school, Beaton persuading her to get her father to come up to the academy and talk about the future of his precocious daughter.
‘My father backed me, as he always had.
He was a fine man, very bright.
He worked all through the war at the steelworks, working till nine at night never taking time for the castings to cool.
My job was to rub his back down with a rough towel when he came in.
But his health was ruined in the works and he died in 1954.’
She began at Glasgow School of Art in 1920, via a council scholarship and a Carnegie bursary worth £8.
These less than princely sums she supplemented with three nights teaching, and sixpence a day from her frugal mother for tea to wash down her piece.
It was because of that meagre income that she became incensed at her tutor, Maurice Greiffenhagen, who had a habit of sitting down at his students' drawings and paintings and finishing them off.
‘Then he'd tell you to go and get another canvas and that cost you three and six.
I thought he was a very toffee-nosed man, a good draughtsman in a commercial sort of way, very accurate of course.
But he didn't care for his students or pull out of them what they had and what could be augmented.
I asked him about going to the Highlands and seeing the wonderful colours there and he just looked at me and said ‘too amorphous’.
I think he didn't like the idea of gentle mists because you  couldn't put a hard line round them.’
The young and feisty Armour didn't much care for what she thought of as the anglicised overlay of GSA at that time.
‘When we saw other people's work, like the French Impressionists, it was a different world.
We didn't want to go to England to study because their painting didn't appeal, they had no sense of colour, their drawings were often so tight and lifeless, no flair.’
She prospered at GSA nevertheless, coming out with the second highest marks in her final year, which should have given her a valuable travelling scholarship.
But when they discovered she planned to marry fellow student Willie Armour, they gave the prize to a young man in the year below.
It was not the last time that Mary Armour concluded that women artists were consigned to a different class of compartment.
‘When we got married for instance, I had to give up teaching because there was a regulation which said husbands and wives couldn't both teach and of course it was the wives who left.’
The enforced retirement from academic life proved valuable in other respects as the next decade became a prolific one for her own work.
‘When I got the sack, then it gave me the chance to paint really hard.
But I didn't sell my first painting you know until 1975.
Even then I felt guilty about it, and felt I should give the money back.’
It seems little short of incredible now that such a talent should not have been any source of income for half a century after she left art school, but heartening that the lack of any fiscal reward and only intermittent recognition from her peers made no impact on her creative energies.
A retrospective arranged by Roger Billcliffe for the Fine Art Society to coincide with her 85th birthday confirmed her as one of Scotland's partially hidden treasures.
Spanning several generations of schools and styles, her own recollections are a fascinating mix of knowledgeable anecdote and scurrilous gossip.
Peploe, she'll tell you, regularly bought the roses featured in so many of his highly priced canvases from ‘tinkers’ who specialised in the paper variety.
Cowie, she insists, used the same rubber apple for batches of his still lifes.
She speaks with warmth of Maxwell, Redpath and Gillies and there's a keen eye too kept on contemporary talents.
Among the range of paintings adorning her home, recent works by people like Duncan Shanks are scattered among the woodcuts of her late husband and earlier favourites like DY Cameron.
Her own body of work was complete five years ago, when failing eyesight and less mobile hands forced her to retire.
It's a fate she's accepted with surprising equanimity.
‘I don't have the time now.
You just become too slow.
But listen, you mustn't think I'm wearying about not being able to paint any more.
I did as much as I could for as long as I could.
I'm happy with that.’
Full colour: ‘Listen, you mustn't think I'm wearying about not being able to paint any more,’ says Mary Armour.
‘I did as much as I could for as long as I could.
I'm happy with that’
Lower sights
Your advertisement (12 March) for a literary lunch states that Brian Blessed, the actor, has climbed Everest.
This is incorrect; he has never climbed Everest.
While he may have tried to climb it, he failed.
To say miserably is perhaps a bit unkind because, for someone who is not a climber, he did in all fairness get further than people thought he would.
The North Col on Everest, however, is still a long way from the summit.
Everest: Blessed re-created George Mallory's 1942 climb for TV
Local games
Further to the correspondence on children's games, the local history branch of the East Lothian Community History and Arts Trust is also interested in the subject.
We have a package of games we take round local schools.
What interests me is the singularly local nature of some phenomena.
I note the argument regarding the name of the peevers game.
Some time ago, a writer indicated that in Torryburn, Fife, the game was called babs.
In Rosyth, eight miles away, the game was called bebs and in Kirkcaldy, another 15 miles on, the game was poldie beds.
In Rosyth, there was a playground game called knifie, played with a penknife in a bed of moist clay.
(Every boy had a penknife, but none would ever dream of sticking it in anyone).
I believe that, in Inverkeithing, one mile away, the game was unknown.
In Musselburgh, there was a beach game (called fitba) in which the goals were of little sticks and the ball a dried bladder of seaweed flicked with the middle finger to score.
This game was apparently unique to Musselburgh.
Blowing a rare trumpet VALERY PONOMAREV THE LEMON TREE, ABERDEEN
VALERY Ponomarev may have been born and brought up in Moscow, but the idiom and vocabulary of his music is pure New York.
The trumpeter defected to the West in the mid-Seventies, and clearly found his musical home in the Hard Bop finishing school which was Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers.
He was in less exalted company for this date, leading a classic bop quintet with saxophonist Gordon Cruickshank, pianist Chick Lyall, Ronnie Rae on bass, and Bill Kyle on drums.
Their first set was all up-tempo, driving stuff, from Sonny Rollins's Tenor Madness to Harold Arlen's My Shining Hour, and they acquitted themselves well enough alongside the visitor, although the rhythm section were a little at-odds with each other stylistically.
Cruickshank was in good form.
If he works in a relatively narrow vein, he does so constructively, and his strong, lucidly expressed improvisations provided a robust foil for the trumpeter.
Lyall's more obliquely modernist approach to harmony was less readily integrated, while the piano suffered from being too low in the sound-mix.
Ponomarev was impressive in almost everything he did.
His harmonic conception, founded on the example of Clifford Brown and Freddie Hubbard, was unalloyed bop, and as such derivative, but he played with great facility and imagination within those boundaries, and never faltered in his articulation, however fast the tempo or complex the harmonic sequence.
Most impressive of all, though, was the depth and sonority of his trumpet tone, full and rich with no hint of astringency, but with plenty of bite and muscle.
His one break from bop conventions lay in the pacing of each set, since he favoured fast tempi almost exclusively, and we had to wait for the penultimate tune of the night to hear a ballad played at real ballad speed.
Kenny Mathieson
Chinese whispers full of surprises TAN DUN AND SCOTTISH EARLY MUSIC CONSORT QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
THE Chinese musician Tan Dun likes to quote early Taoist poetry on the subject of silence — the most beautiful sound in the world.
His new work for the Scottish Early Music Consort, Lament: Autumn Wind is full of it.
But what is remarkable, is that this work confounds what other more contemporary commentators are wont to suggest — that the orchestra, as a performance mechanism is dead.
For Tan Dun, the orchestra is just beginning.
In Lament, quite apart from using a melee of ancient East/West instruments and sounds, and these in tiny shreds and smudges, he creates instrumental theatre, manipulating the stillness by confounding our expectations.
The silences might be sudden, our held breath diffused by Tan beating shapes in the air, or we might be slid into stillness on an outbreath, to be surprised by a scrape of rebec sound, or a curve of pure trill from Fiona Milne's skilful soprano.
It is music of surprises, but of incredible cleanness — listening was like waiting for dawn to arrive.
The programme captivated, a fantastic mix of early Chinese and European music — sheng and p'i-p'i twanging happily alongside recorder and viella.
We heard immensely jolly Italian instrumental pieces, solo p'i-p'i works (this a slender stringed precursor of the guitar) which seemed to condense whole operas into minutes, and poignant 9th and 13th century song.
The sheng, looking like a bunch of firewood, mouthpiece attached, was perhaps the greatest shock, producing sounds like a mini-Wurlitzer.
So the second half settled into sophisticated rioting, with a tiny medieval version of Old McDonald's Farm, sung with incredible vivacity by Milne, and Liu Qi-Chao's so-na solo, Harvesting Plums — a noisy family row for instruments uncannily like klaxons.
This was early music at its best — we were led somewhere new, moved close to tears, and booted back, smartly, into laughter.
Mary Miller
Maestro who is scoring well The programme planning, always fastidious, often fantastic, is so much the hallmark of a Wigglesworth concert today Mary Miller talks to the conductor Mark Wigglesworth about his burgeoning career
THE pressures on the conductor Mark Wigglesworth seem considerable — his career constantly compared to the early days of Simon Rattle, and the rising star tag firmly attached to his travelling bag.
So, to get the comparisons over with, and leaving musical considerations aside, what he does have in common with Rattle is charm.
Mark Wigglesworth has a smile which would beam the most recalcitrant string section into bowing with bravura.
He's a nice chap.
But also, he is tough.
And this is as well, for among his current activities is an associate conductorship with the BBC Symphony Orchestra.
The players, not known for their tolerance of youth, have shown him, on occasion, bared teeth.
Wigglesworth has remained calm, coped with the aggravations and resolutely has soldiered through the work, saying only that what he can't bear is orchestral apathy.
Few, in the ranks, now would deny his talent.
Wigglesworth has strong feelings about orchestral training.
At the Royal Academy, he exhausted himself planning and presenting concerts, and establishing the Premiere Ensemble, now his professional companions at the Opera Factory, and in recitals.
But it infuriates him that, at the colleges, the best players are often exempted from participation in orchestral practice, then to gain prestigious jobs in the profession, without the musical ballast of learned repertoire and style.
He conducted recently in the Netherlands, where the Dutch National Youth Orchestra allows membership up to the age of 25.
They played Shostakovich for a week, before turning to Mozart.
Wigglesworth expected to spend days re-establishing a classical style — but no, they knew about Mozart, and economy and focus.
They had been trained, he says.
‘What is disturbing is conducting the National Youth Orchestra in Britain — wonderful, disciplined players — and knowing next time I will see them, in years to come — all that sense of orchestral order may be lost.’
In terms of the pacing of his own career, Wigglesworth is holding the reins tightly.
He won the International Kondrashin Competition four weeks after leaving the Royal Academy of Music, a music degree at Manchester already accomplished, and turned down all offers to conduct for a year.
Admirable restraint, one suggests.
No, he says candidly, sheer fright —‘I wasn't any more skilful the day after the prize than the day before.
No-one begged me to conduct then, so why should they afterwards?’
But he spent the year studying, playing piano rehearsals for Scottish Opera's Salome, and elsewhere.
He pays tribute, too, to the enormous support he gained from conductor George Hurst.
He was still at school when Simon Rattle directed him to Hurst.
Schooldays, for Wigglesworth, were not, curiously, filled with concert-going, or sitting at the baton-end of the great.
He was educated in a system where pupils created their own performance and he was involved in music-making with his peers.
But he had barely attended a professional orchestral concert before he went to university.
Then, Wigglesworth sat like a pensioner in the 50p front row seats, gawping at the Halle through overture, concerto and symphony.
That the programme planning, always fastidious, often fantastic, is so much the hallmark of a Wigglesworth concert today, owes much, perhaps, to learning from those dull but honest days.
‘If the programme is right, if it excites the players and the marketing people and the audience, then you can demand everything.’
In this area, he will not compromise.
He simply absents himself if he feels the programme to be wrong, and his self-discipline is unswerving about doing his homework, and knowing his own way forward.
Recently, he has given concerts at which his seniors might quail — massive Messiaen, and Beethoven's Ninth.
The pieces which are most difficult for the orchestra, he claims, are the easiest to conduct.
What would really terrify him would be to take to an experienced orchestra a Rachmaninov symphony, or well-known works, where everyone had expectations of a fresh miracle.
And on this tack, he does feel slightly sore, particularly with Norman Lebrecht in his book The Maestro Myth which bemoans the lack of starry young conductors.
‘One can hardly appear wearing L-plates, but no-one stands up for their first performance of a great work saying: ‘This is the definitive version.’
Twelve performances later, then one can look critics in the eye, and invite challenge.
But we must be allowed to learn, those of us who are willing.’
He loves opera, in that the long rehearsal span and run of performances allows him ‘to get the psychology out of the way in the first few days’— clearly, he worries a great deal about the mental interchange with his workforce — but he intends to keep a balance with concert work.
He's having a wonderful week here with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, he says, with the opportunity to develop his Shostakovich programme over four performances.
Perhaps there is a tendency, as yet, to see things in black and white.
‘Sometimes, to give a clear beat destroys the sweep of emotion,’ He shows reluctance, as yet, to balance the rush of blood to the head with the tempering of bows hitting string, but Wigglesworth, as maestro, is no myth.
Although he loathes the Nineties cult of the personality, one suspects that, in future, it won't just be his players who are watching him.
Mark Wigglesworth conducts the SCO at the Queen's Hall, Edinburgh, tonight.
Soprano Sarah Walker replaces Elise Ross, who is indisposed.
Bafta win for Thompson
THE Oscar-nominated actress Emma Thompson last night won the best actress prize in the British Academy of Film and Television Awards for her role in Howards End, which was also named best film.
Another Oscar nominee, Robert Downey Jnr, won the best actor award for his role in the film Chaplin.
The award for best British film went to The Crying Game, which, along with Howards End, has been nominated for several Oscars.
Cool response to temptation from slice of Forbidden Fruit Alison Daniels, in Dublin, gauges reaction to the publication of extracts from a book about a woman's affair with the former Bishop of Galway
REACTION was muted in Dublin yesterday when the Sunday Times published the first extracts from Forbidden Fruit, the book detailing Annie Murphy's affair with the then Bishop of Kerry, Dr Eamon Casey.
Revelations last year that the much-respected former Bishop of Galway had a 17-year-old son, Peter Murphy, in the United States following an affair in the 1970s were greeted with shock and disbelief.
Ms Murphy, a divorcee, was 25 when she spent several nights with the bishop at his home in Inch on the Dingle peninsula.
But the first graphic details, serialised for ‘a lot of money’ before the book is published, were met with a mixture of curious interest, sadness and a dose of suspicion about the ‘English’paper's motive.
Few were shocked because they had already heard the story and sexual embellishments like ‘his whole body trembling and shuddering next to mine…’ and ‘this was an Irish Famine of the flesh’added little.
However, unscandalised as the people professed to be, a larger than usual number were prepared to buy the Sunday Times.
Newsagents across the country had cleared extra floor space for the 60,000 additional copies of the paper.
In Dublin, many had plastered tantalising billboards over more subdued Irish Sunday paper advertising.
By mid-afternoon the piles of papers had shrunk significantly and the newspaper sellers were optimistic about shifting the remainder.
‘Normally I take 30 copies of this paper,’ said one.
‘Today I've taken 50 and it's definitely selling well but mainly to students and English rugby fans.’
A Communications Union activist, Chris Hudson, collecting signatures for ‘A Peace in Ireland’ petition at the corner of St Stephens Green said he had met Dr Casey a couple of times in Ireland through his work with a third world charity.
‘I remember when the story broke feeling very sad.’
But like most, Mr Hudson was not gloating.
‘He should be allowed back to Ireland instead of having to hide.
He'd be surprised at the reaction he'd get.
It was wrong what he did but he should be shown compassion.’
As for Annie Murphy, whose life the Irish papers say has been threatened, if she returns, Mr Hudson felt she had showed great courage.
Unprecedented secrecy and conflicting information surrounds the launch of the book.
While London-based publishers Little, Brown are adamant it'll be April Fool's day, the chairman of one of Ireland's largest distributors, Easons, was hedging his bets.
‘Yes, it'll definitely be this Tuesday,’ he told The Scotsman but then told the Irish Times it would be 1 April.
Music for the eyes Mere sketches can be monumental, Edward Gage discovers at a National Gallery show of Old Master drawings Drawings bring one intimately into the creative presence of a master
A TREASURY of drawings is on show at the National Gallery of Scotland at the Mound, Edinburgh.
The major portion is a touring group of Eighteen Old Master Drawings from Holkham Hall, Norfolk which celebrates their saving for the nation by a consortium of museums and galleries — assisted by the National Heritage Memorial Fund — following their sale by auction in 1991.
Consisting originally of 326 items, the collection was assembled by Thomas Coke, who acquired the majority of the drawings in Rome between 1714 and 1716; so they represent the work of artists most highly regarded in Italy at that time — dominant masters in Rome of the high Baroque.
After a long gap, Coke resumed collecting in the 1750s when he acquired works from artists/dealers/auctions in Italy and Paris: some of the best examples come from this period.
Chamber music of the visual arts, drawings bring one intimately into the creative presence of a master, for they are generally a means to an end: a means of discovery concerning individual forms or formal composition.
The first is here exemplified in Guercino's firmly detailed Woman Seated on a Bed Raising a Curtain, while the second is clearly illustrated in the sinuous design arrangement proposed in Parmigianino's mannerist Virgin and Child.
Among several unusual figurative images, Salvatore Rosa's Philosopher Pointing to the Ground with a Companion beside Him derives mysterious qualities from its mixture of ink and brown wash over black chalk.
But the most exciting use of media occurs in Head of an Oriental in Profile by Castiglione which distantly seems like one of Leonardo da Vinci's ink-blot games but is actually a monotype — Castiglione's personal innovations.
Besides the technical rarity and interest of this work, one must comment upon its aesthetic resemblance to the art of Rembrandt and recall that they were contemporaries.
Unusual and atypical — not only for its lack of classical allusions — Nicolas Poussin's View of the Tiber Valley recedes planimetrically while evoking oriental airs of contemplation.
Drama, however, is powerfully engendered in The Sacrifice of Isaac where chiaroscuro successfully poses Abraham as a tall and threatening silhouette drawn in pen, brown ink and brown wash, lightened with white in a drawing by Baciccio, a protege of Gianlorenzo Bernini — himself represented by a precise Design for the Tombstone of Cardinal Carlo Emanuele Pio da Carpi.
Contrasting strongly with the intimacy of this neat memorial, Ventura Salimberi's The Death of St Clare, with Pope Innocent IV blessing her, is a crowded and public affair in stately surroundings.
This squared up modello, which reveals unusual cut-and-paste revisions, was a design for one of a series of frescoes in Assisi.
However, the finest study for a painting — and the fabulous moment in the show — does not emanate from Holkham but is a Raphael drawing acquired by our National Gallery through private treaty, and purchased not via national funding bodies alone but from the legacies of the late Keith Andrews (Print Room Keeper 1958-85, a devoted scholar and delightful personality) and his sister Rene.
Executed in brush and wash with white over black chalk, Raphael's Madonna del Pesce c1514 is a preparatory study for painting now in the Prado, Madrid, representing the Holy Family enthroned with the young Tobias and the Archangel Raphael on their left.
Highly detailed and finished, the drawing dramatically accentuates the Madonna's grace and dignity by placing her head against warm darkness — whose curving lower edge counterpoints folding draperies across her lower limbs.
Only just over 200mm square, this work is nevertheless a monumental acquisition.
Co-operative clean-up A carefully restored Georgian tenement is a success story with a moral, writes Brian Edwards
HOUSING associations and co-operatives make a valuable contribution to the diversity of residential accommodation in Scotland.
Together they provide about 60 per cent of the housing for single people and almost a quarter of all wheelchair access dwellings.
No wonder Scottish Homes is anxious to increase its impact upon the market.
With about half the housing provided by associations and co-operatives for tenants over the age of 60, its activities are rightly concentrated within central areas.
The housing co-operative movement has a long pedigree in Scotland.
Part of its roots are to be found in the building trade co-operatives of the mid-19th century, which produced such developments as the Colonies in Stockbridge with entrances for different floors on opposite sides of the block.
More recently co-operatives have focused their attentions upon inner city refurbishment, producing a fine blend of social housing provision and historic building conservation.
In Scottish city centres the refurbishment of traditional tenements is more likely to be carried out by housing associations and co-operatives than any other agency.
Their impact upon the quality of environment of older urban areas often goes unnoticed, yet as in this scheme in Edinburgh's Lauriston Place, their access to government funding can lead to major townscape enhancement.
Scottish Homes is now in its fourth year of operations.
The amalgamation of the Housing Corporation in Scotland with the Scottish Special Housing Association (SSHA) makes Scottish Homes both the nation's biggest landlord and the prime source of finance for house building and refurbishment.
Its four main objectives — greater home ownership, a more diverse rented sector, community regeneration and improvement of housing quality — are beginning to change the shape of Scottish housing.
Although Scottish Homes' flagship schemes, such as the renewal of Wester Hailes, capture most attention it is in smaller projects that most of the agency's efforts are concentrated.
At Lauriston Place, a group of ‘B’ listed tenements formerly owned by Lothian Health Board has been refurbished by the Lister Housing Co-operative.
Using funds from a variety of sources — notably Scottish Homes, Historic Scotland, Edinburgh District Council and Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Ltd — the Lister Co-operative has created 50 flats at affordable rents out of former dereliction.
The previous owners had acquired the property for redevelopment, and only a public inquiry in 1985 forced the health board to face up to its environmental responsibilities as the owner of listed buildings.
The transfer of ownership to the co-operative in 1988 has resulted in one of the most conspicuous restorations within what is flexibly called the Old Town of Edinburgh.
The project has provided housing for local people in low-paid employment, a third of whom were previously homeless.
In addition there are six flats for tenants with special housing needs.
Building work uncovered signs of early use of the buildings: shops on the ground floor with brick bread ovens were discovered behind the more recent Blood Donor Centre.
Decisions were made on a co-operative basis, with potential tenants having an important voice on the management committee.
The housing accommodation is mainly for those just above the care net of the local authority; as a result the interior accommodation makes little concession to Georgian character, while previous neglect by the health board left little to restore.
Lauriston Place is a handsome development of 1810 by two Edinburgh builders, George Lorimer and Thomas Miller, who created artisan tenements of unusually fine design for this class of housing.
The use of merlons and fluted aprons around doorways make these tenements look like transplants from the New Town, not speculations on the edges of the Old Town.
After the Second World War these tenements began their social decline.
Acquired by the University of Edinburgh as trustees for a memorial in honour of the pioneer of antiseptic surgery, Joseph Lister, the buildings were emptied with the intention of erecting a Lister School of Medicine.
A change in the boundary of the Old Town Conservation Area in 1985 and the public inquiry resulted in the realisation of saner plans.
The architects Forgan and Stewart oversaw the restoration of Lauriston Place.
The £5 million contract contained a large measure of conservation work for details such as the replication or repair of Georgian sash windows, panelled doors and stonework.
In addition, a considerable sum was spent on environmental improvement including repaving in setts and rebuilding an access balcony complete with decorative ironwork.
From the street the terrace looks much as it did when Lorimer and Miller had finished their works nearly 200 years ago.
On the inside, however, all is modern and functional in appearance with an emphasis upon ease of maintenance, safety and security.
From several perspectives this project has worked out well.
Yet again it confirms the moral supremacy of conservation in the inner city, the days of large bureaucracies forcing gross modernist buildings on the community look to be past.
Restoration here has not only led to the repair of townscape, it has also created jobs for skilled craftsmen (conservation creates more employment per pound than new build), and led to much needed housing for homeless and disadvantaged people.
Socially the target of Scottish Homes to diversify the rented sector and encourage community regeneration has also been achieved.
It is a shame other parts of the estate have been lost: the north side of Keir Street is now a car park for Edinburgh College of Art, and earlier demolitions on Lauriston Place bear witness to a clash of architectural cultures.
Clean lines: after its £5.5 million facelift, the tenement now provides 50 homes for rent
POSTCARD FROM OVERSEAS: GRAHAM TEARSE IN PROVENCE Crazy drivers and a struggle for daily bread
FOR years French drivers have had the reputation of being the most frightening thing on earth for a British tourist — except for a plate of garlic-covered snails.
For a lot longer than that, the French themselves have viewed the driver from Marseilles as the most horrific encounter possible, except for an English breakfast.
Well, snails aside (more about them later), it's all true.
The latest official road safety figures released here show that not only are French roads still among the most murderous in Europe but that within France the highest number of dead and injured are on roads in and around Marseilles.
Last year the Bouches-du-Rh∘one departement, which includes the Mediterranean port, counted 340 dead and just under 20,000 injured in road accidents.
The most disturbing figure was the relatively small number of accidents to make this grim total — 7,960 — which says a lot about the circumstances.
When I first came to the region I had thoughts of using a bike for a lot of short travelling.
Within days I had changed my mind and it seemed that the only sensible form of transport would be a Sherman tank.
I say that as somebody who learned to drive in Paris (second worst on the national table)!
Everyone here, from little old ladies in small Renaults to stout men on tractors — drive to their limit, spread over the white line, and taking bends…well, you are better off getting out and walking.
Some might joke unkindly that road deaths in the region are not limited to traffic accidents.
One of the best-known hoodlums in the south east, 44-year-old Jean-Louis Fargette, was last week found shot dead on a road-side wasteland at the Franco-Italian border.
Nicknamed ‘The Soap’ for the  ease with which he escaped from custody, Fargette was apparently trying to expand his hold over the area in and around Toulon where he was in control of numerous gambling bars and night clubs.
Linked to the Mafia he was also behind counterfeit currency scams and drug trafficking.
Now the local press has reported that he was ‘involved’ with unnamed politicians on the coast, an interesting remark considering that the country is in the middle of two rounds of parliamentary election voting.
The National Front leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, has been given some ironic advice from members of his own party in the Riviera capital Nice.
The portly Breton was standing in the town in yesterday's parliamentary elections but it would appear that he does not see eye to eye with local activists.
The Front's traditional candidate in the town told reporters that ‘my friend Jean-Marie would do better to stand elsewhere’ explaining that Niçois voters did not trust outsiders!
Now that sounded a little like ‘Foreigners Go Home!’
Police are considering the theory that the election campaign was the reason behind an assassination earlier this month in the pretty university town of Montpellier, where Jacques Roseau was shot dead behind the wheel of his Peugeot car.
Roseau was the active spokesman of an association which grouped together what are called ‘pieds noirs’ in French, literally ‘black feet’.
Such was Roseau's importance that the Gaullist leader and former premier Jacques Chirac, along with a representative of the king of Morocco, later attended his funeral.
The pieds noirs are the former French residents of the one-time French colonies of North Africa, in particular Algeria.
After the bloody war of independence which ended in 1962, the pieds noirs left everything — houses, belongings, money — behind them in a mass exodus to France, arriving in their thousands by boat in Marseilles.
Many set up home across the south, beginning lives again from scratch.
Well-known pieds noirs include fashion designer Yves Saint-Laurent and the French philosopher Bernard-Henri Levy.
Many of them (they numbered over one million) met with hostility from mainland French people who regarded them as more foreign than French.
As a result there has always been a clan spirit which has kept the 600,000 first and second generation pied noirs together.
Roseau's appeal to members of his association to vote for the Gaullists carried considerable weight.
As a single group the pieds noirs represent more than half the number of farmers in France!
Roseau's family now claim he was the victim of right-wing pied noir extremists, who had already twice beaten him up and who were unhappy with Roseau's association with the Gaullists.
It was General de Gaulle who granted Algeria independence and the far-right have never forgiven him.
Further up the Rh∘one valley near the market town of Cavaillon, there has been a worrying development in what has become known as The War of the Bakers.
The small bakers shops, of which there are fewer and fewer, are finding new competition from chain shop bakers supplied by baker factories.
Along the roads of Provence the tall McDonalds-like chain shop signs are springing up everywhere and prices are naturally very competitive.
Within you can find everything from a pain de  campagne to a hot take-away pizza.
The small independent bakers, already affected by the supermarket bakeries, see this as the last straw.
The more militant among them have formed a bakers' commando and have blown up several stores belonging to their ‘industrial’ enemies.
One can imagine that soon duels will be fought at dawn between men brandishing baguettes.
AND so back to snails!
Further east, in the Luberon, in a small family restaurant I recently had a dozen delicious snails a la.
The hot garlic butter sauce poured over the snails obviously has a lot to do with the success of the dish, but to those who say that that is all you taste I have always protested that the soft, salty flesh of the snail is very much part of the enjoyment.
It is now time, however, that I eat my words.
Many are those who believe they are munching the famed Grey Burgundy snails, picked from the soft, green hills of France when in fact, they are swallowing nothing less than imported slugs, many from the Far East!
The slugs, slipped into recycled snail shells, make up for what might otherwise lead to the extermination of the French snail.
I now admit that I cannot tell the difference — but to hell with it, the sauce is so good!
Pass the bread please.
Pain and pan: The tranquillity of Provence has been disturbed by the War of the Bakers NATASHA STEWART Rippling torsos sell everything from ice-cream to watches, while beefcake bimbos like the Chippendales have helped to swell the number of regular weight-trainers to 500,000 as they twitch their biceps around the world.
Clearly it was not Nick Kamen's jeans we desired.
It was his body.
Rippling torsos sell everything from ice-cream to watches, while beefcake bimbos like the Chippendales have helped to swell the number of regular weight-trainers to 500,000 as they twitch their biceps around the world.
Clearly it was not Nick Kamen's jeans we desired.
It was his body.
Barrie's vintage drama a well-aged favourite WHAT EVERY WOMAN KNOWS PERTH THEATRE
IF Peter Pan is the most popular of JM Barrie's plays in the world at large, the one which is most frequently revived in the playwright's native Scotland is What Every Woman Knows.
The heroes of both these plays arrive upon the scene in a dramatic manner — adventurously entering through a window instead of prosaically walking in the door.
But there ends any resemblance between Peter Pan and John Shand, the latter as perpetually pompous as Peter is eternally young.
There is no saying what Maggie Wyllie sees in the insufferably humourless prig, who deludes himself that he is completely self-sufficient, but he represents a challenge to her feminine guile.
Perhaps only Barrie could have made a successful match between two such unpromising characters — a man who boasts that he has never laughed in his life and a woman who is acutely aware of being devoid of charm.
But perfectly matched they are in this grand old play which seems to steadily improve with age, and which is receiving a very good production from Colette O'Neil at Perth.
Shand, the self-educated Scotsman carving a career in politics, is played by Andy Gray whose splendidly solemn performance seems to exude smugness, while Leigh Biagi very skilfully conveys the dogged determination of Maggie, unobtrusively ensuring that her man's ambitions are fulfilled.
In the cunningly crafted first act, Maggie's father and brothers are amusingly portrayed by Ralph Riach, John Yule and Paul Nivison.
It is one of the lightest and at the same time sharpest passages of Scots comedy that Barrie ever wrote, with its comments on the value of education and also on the subtly self-effacing but strong influence exerted by a woman in a seemingly male-dominated household.
When the scene changes to London, the more socially sophisticated characters are played with great assurance and style by Edith MacArthur (as the epitome of charm), Karen Pierce-Goulding, and James Cairncross.
The production is particularly well served by Edward Lipscomb's ingeniously flexible set.
Celebrating colour: 70 years after the Scottish Colourists held their first joint exhibition in London, paintings by Peploe, Hunter, Cadell and Fergusson are being shown at the MacRobert Gallery, Stirling University, writes Allen Wright.
Voiles Indiennes (left) is one of three paintings by Fergusson from Stirling University's own art collection and other works by this artist have been lent by the Fergusson Gallery, Perth.
Among the most striking works in the exhibition which marks the 25th anniversary of the MacRobert Gallery, is Cadell's The Orange Blind, lent by Kelvingrove Gallery, Glasgow.
Dundee City Art Gallery, Dundee University, Edinburgh University's Talbot Rice Gallery, Kirkcaldy Museum and the Lillie Art Gallery, Milngavie, have lent notable paintings to this exhibition which runs until next weekend.
Valerie Walker who selected the exhibition will conduct a guided tour of the major works next Saturday morning, and in the afternoon there will be a children's painting and drawing workshop.
Captured, enraptured by masterful Bluebeard
ENGLISH National Opera's latest double-bill at the Coliseum, London, consists of a revival of Bartok's Bluebeard's Castle (1991) and a new version of Tancred and Clorinda, both the work of the controversial American director, David Alden.
Bluebeard remained sensational, with the Anglo-Hungarian conductor, Adam Fischer inspiring the orchestra to heights of virulence and sweetness.
Once again Gwyne Howell was masterly in the title role.
A figure whose authority and weight crumble into a desperate poignancy before his wife's obsessive importunities.
Sally Burgess, mime and dancer almost as much as singer, recruited all her allure and sensuality to overcome her husband's reluctance to disclose his sinister secrets.
At the last, she is reduced to a frightened little girl, victim of her own curiosity.
Hers is a compelling and intensely dramatic performance.
Played in English on a steeply-rigged stage in a shabby hall, this revival packs a pulverising punch, the most gripping account I have experienced of it over the years.
It is, of course, exactly the sort of piece in which David Alden excels.
In Tancred and Clorinda, his touch seems much less assured.
Prefaced by a group of madrigals of amorous frustration, just as Monteverdi wanted, his Combattimento came across as a highly stylised, even stilted, affair.
In more or less timeless modern dress, the duel between the Christian knight Tancred and his former Saracen girlfriend Clorinda, she metaphorically encased in cap-a-pie armour is described by the narrator but enacted unseen behind a sofa.
Were we to understand, perhaps, that their heroic ding-dong battle was essentially sexual, ending by implication in a rape?
The path to Christian conversion may, I suppose, take many routes.
I didn't swallow the interpretation though half persuaded by the quality of Christopher Ventris's sturdy Tancred, by the appealing and aspirant Clorinda of Patricia Rosario and the eloquence of Paul Nilon's narration.
An on-stage instrumental ensemble is conducted by Westminster Abbey's Harry Bicket.
Its members serviceable rather than specialists in this particular early 17th century idiom.
With such singers, such music and such a story, Mr Alden's approach seemed nevertheless too fanciful by half.
Christopher Grier
MUSIC REVIEWS
ARCHITECTURE
HADLEY COURT SINGERS GREYFRIARS KIRK, EDINBURGH
JOAN Bassett has been the conductor of the Hadley Court Singers for over eight years and in that time she has welded this group of 45 singers based at Haddington into a flexible corporate whole motivated at all times by her own perceptive musicianship.
They are no strangers to Edinburgh and there was a good audience on Friday evening at Greyfriars Kirk to support their concert in aid of St Columba's Hospice.
The resonance of this fine building did not do much for the choir's inaccurate diction, but made amends by enriching the gracious stone quality of the singing in Haydn's Little Organ Mass and Faure's Requiem.
Two strongly contrasted works by composers who did, however, share an optimistic view of religion not acceptable to their more conventional contemporaries.
Faure had no place in his Requiem for hell-fire and roaring lions, and Haydn saw no reason why he should not be cheerful in church.
In both works the centrepiece is a soprano solo reverently rendered on this occasion by Linda Howie.
Stephen Doughty had the advantage of the Greyfriars instrument in the organ  obbligato in Haydn's Benedictus.
Roderick Somerville contributed to stylish baritone solos in the Requiem.
Also in the programme was Salve Regina by Scarlatti for soprano (well done by Joan Busby) and strings.
The accompaniments were in the capable hands of the Edinburgh Players who, led by Philip Taylor, opened proceedings with a workmanlike account of a Concerto Grosso by Geminiani.
David Griffiths
ROYAL SCOTTISH NATIONAL ORCHESTRA, USHER HALL, EDINBURGH
SMETANA and Dvorak — the RSNO's programme had been tailor-made for Walter Weller and one had looked forward to a good wallow; to tunes, and torrents of the particularly lush sounds he and his orchestra make together.
But Weller — unlike a large number of the audience who had chosen to bring their snorts and sniffles with them, was laid up with flu in Vienna.
So we sat, the spirit still willing, as the elegant Takuo Yuasa faced his forces.
Smetana's Vltava was pleasant, beautifully in tune — parts of the piece are cruel to the wind players — but it trickled into glorious Prague like a kindly trout stream, instead of surging with splendour.
Had Weller been present, one suspects that he might have put Lydia Mordkovitch, violin soloist in the Mendelssohn concerto, over his knee.
Mordkovitch is a fantastic fiddler — her Shostakovich recordings are legendary.
But she tugged at the Mendelssohn like a bad child.
Wilful and wasteful of such innocent, joyful music, Mordkovitch wrenched at the tempi, disregarded the dynamics and, showing a wanton unfeelingness for the orchestra's commendable attempts to accommodate her in a notey accompaniment, trailed Yuasa reeling in her wake.
Alas, the tempo tweaking didn't end with Mordkovitch's final flounce off the platform.
For Yuasa did his own lily-gilding in Dvorak's New World Symphony.
The gentle fanfare-like first movement melody tenderly laid out by the flautist, John Grant, Yuasa had the strings repeat with an ungainly skip, which left him little to develop.
So despite Stephen West's lovely cor anglais solo, and some noble brass sounds, the orchestra sounded choked.
There is no doubt about Yuasa's sincerity, or his commitment to the music — he did not choose the programme,— but this New World sounded worn and weary.
THE BRENDA LEE SHOW PLAYHOUSE, EDINBURGH
SHE teetered on to the vast Playhouse stage and into the Pointer Sisters hit I'm So Excited — and suddenly the audience was too.
All it took was 4ft 9in of pure dynamite.
When Memories Music Club presented Miss Brenda Lee, the rockers of yesteryear, who half-filled the venue began to sparkle.
And it was more than just the light reflected from their balding, silvery heads.
The durable li'l lady from Nashville who began her recording career when she was just 11 years old proved age had not mellowed her as she belted out the songs of the Fifties and Sixties which made her one of the best selling female vocalists of all time.
From Sweet Nothin's and All Alone Am I to I'm Sorry they just kept coming on Saturday night.
And in a show that gave good old-fashioned value for money Miss Lee stopped singing only long enough to declare: ‘Ah thank you so very very much,’ and ‘Ah'm so very very glad to be here.’
Once quoted as saying ‘I'm everybody's biggest fan’, she proved it by including numbers from Bette Midler, Elvis Presley and Status Quo in her repertoire.
The only sour note was when her memories coincided with those of the supporting artistes and she duplicated a couple of songs they had already warbled through.
In retrospect, this may have been a deliberate gimmick as she so embarrassingly outclassed the first half's performances by The Bruvvers, Chris Montez, Len Barry and Johnny Tillotson.
The evening came to a resounding crescendo when a standing ovation was followed by an explosive rendition of Rockin' All Over The World.
Sadly, many in the audience had forgotten the concert protocol of their youth and missed the encore, having trusted Miss Lee when she bellowed: ‘Thank you very much Edinboro and goodnight.’
Sarah Chalmers
Gloria in the highest at closing time London's famous Town and Country Club shut up shop with a superb show from Van Morrison, reports Myles Palmer
IT was a great idea to have Van Morrison close the T&C, but thank heavens the unpredictable Irishman was in fine form.
One has rarely heard him sing with more authority, and never seen him so communicative, happy and funny.
The T&C, the best gig in London for seven years, had always wanted to book Morrison, who only plays all-seater venues, not ballrooms or clubs.
Eventually, though, they got their man, and the wait was worth it because the greatest vocal stylist in rock gave us two hours of inspired Gaelic mumbo-jumbo that was tough, joyful, sometimes sad, but ultimately fluid, festive and free, a celebration, a party for 1,800 delighted fans.
There he was, a chunky 47-year-old manic depressive with grey sideburns, wearing a blue shirt and tan waistcoat, with the stage lights reflecting off his sunglasses, singing his heart out, playing guitar, alto sax and harmonica, and thoroughly enjoying himself.
There were too many highlights to list.
Suffice to say that nobody else can make the old songs new again so often and so well, nobody can get away with such extensive improvisation, and nobody else has Morrison's vocal attack or his spirit.
The difference between good music and great music in soul.
For once, the encores were perfectly appropriate.
A vibraphone began a long, tasty Moondance, and a magnificent, stomping Gloria, kicked off by special guest Bap Kennedy, the singer with Energy Orchard, segued into Shakin' All Over.
It was the Belfast belligerence of 1963 all over again.
Van Morrison: a magnificent and spirited vocal attack 
Cheering
To Leslie Hills (Points of View, 13 March) I say, ‘The lady doth protest too much’.
Ian Rutherford's beautiful, coloured photograph that she refers to was in the best possible taste and the reference to Gilbert and Sullivan could have caused offence only to someone with an inbuilt dislike to the two old stalwarts.
Besides, the caption made it clear that the International Women's Day included much more of substance: ‘…music, workshops, speakers and exhibitions from around the world.’
Who could possibly object to such comprehensive, unsolicited publicity?
I felt that the whole package imparted a little welcome humour and information to what was otherwise a gey thin and dreich Monday issue of The Scotsman.
Melrose legions
In the exciting report of the prospect of finding a Roman amphitheatre at Newstead in the Borders (11 March) the legions are said to have been there from ‘about 43 AD’.
The Romans were certainly prime movers, but not that quick, and without introducing a pettifogging intimacy with dates, names, and trifling matters of fact, might it be mentioned that the legions were desperately occupied at that time around the Medway and not Melrose?
It was to be five emperors, ten governors, and about 40 years on before the hill-top occupants of Eildon Hill North were rudely dislodged by the Romans and Newstead fort established.
Roman interest in Scotland was only slight and patchy at best, and their general view seems to have been expressed in the Severus separation of Britain into superior and inferior provinces.
Some comfort for us though in that the line of inferior division was not north of Luton, but of York; nothing changes!
Guitarist heading for hall of fame A pupil of John Williams, Nicola Hall has been described as an extraordinary musical talent, reports Kenny Mathieson
NICOLA Hall has one of those biographies which read a little like the Hollywood notion of the musical prodigy.
She took up guitar at seven, gave her first recital at nine, her first concerto at 10, her first radio broadcast at 14, won an international guitar competition at 17, and has continued to pick up awards and critical plaudits on her chosen instrument.
‘The first time I ever heard the Rodrigo guitar concerto, I fell in love with the sound of the instrument, more than anything else.
OK, it's maybe a little quiet, but there are ways of getting around that if you are a strong player, but I felt that the atmosphere which it created was unique.
I was seven at the time, and I decided quite literally there and then that what I wanted to do was play the guitar like John Williams, and that was that.
I tried both violin and piano, but always went back to guitar.’
Now a veteran of 23, she is described by Williams, her teacher ‘for about five years, on and off,’ as both amazing and extraordinary.
Listening to her debut recording for Decca, it is difficult to disagree.
The disc is an unusual one, featuring as it does seven works originally written for other instruments, from  Rachmaninov's Prelude in G minor to Bach's  Partita in D minor, all in Hall's own transcriptions.
‘Virtuoso Guitar Transcriptions was really my producer's idea.
Paul (Myers) sat me down and asked me what I liked to play, and I mentioned all the things I do, including these transcriptions.
He asked if I had enough of those for a whole album, because he felt it would make quite an original debut, to do only music taken from other instruments, rather than something from the standard guitar repertoire.
I had just about enough, and added one or two others, and we decided to go ahead with it.’
The technical accomplishment with which she plays the music is startling enough, but there is an even more surprising maturity and musicality in her interpretation.
That is clearly innate, but she also acknowledges the part played by Williams in helping her to develop that faculty.
‘John was a big influence on me.
He dealt very little with guitar techniques and almost entirely with musicality and musical ideas, which is what I needed at that stage.
I think it is much healthier for a young artist to be treated like that, rather than told play this or that in a particular way.
He taught me a lot about recording in the studio as well, because I didn't have a clue about any of that.’
Hall is philosophical about the sacrifices which a musical career demands, and feels that she had a ‘fairly normal childhood’, and only felt deprived in her late teenage years, when ‘the social life has to go, and you tend to form passing acquaintances rather than real friendships.’
There is no doubt in her mind that it has all been worthwhile.
What she does regret, though, is the comparative lack of guitar repertoire from her favourite Romantic period (she cites Rachmaninov as a special hero).
Against that, though, there is a ‘vast contemporary repertoire — the guitar has come into its own in popularity in this period, and people are now writing for it with a vengeance.
She is already at work on her next disc, but what of that Rodrigo concerto which set her off in the first place?
‘We are going to record the Rodrigo concerto in 1995.
There are so many versions of it already, and now doesn't seem the right time to do it — I think I would rather wait until I was more established, and have something different to say about it.’
Orchestrated risks TOM BANCROFT ORCHESTRA QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
THE return of the Tom Bancroft Orchestra confirmed their place as the most adventurous contemporary big band in the country.
Bancroft's enigmatic compositions largely eschew tradition and draw their structures and spectacular effectiveness from juxtaposition of thematic material and instrumental sonorities.
The first set was consistently impressive, with electrifying solos from saxophonist Phil Bancroft and pianist Brian Kellock on Cat and Mouse, and from Bancroft again and trumpeter Paul Jayasinha on Pieology.
The dark, spectral voicings of Sleepy Head brought a change of mood.
The evocative China Heart, with its shifting layers of sound and teasing instrumental textures jumping dramatically into a demented tango, remained the best of the songs but none of them were at all suited to Fionna Duncan's voice or delivery.
She is a fine singer in her usual idioms, but her inclusion here was a bold experiment which did not come off.
The second set began with the emphasis on theatricality in a take-off of a television talent show, in which trombonist Rick Taylor took the honours with a memorably awful rendition of The Eagles's Desperado.
Two new songs, Time Will Come and The Ocean Liner of Love, both suffered from over-elaboration, as well as vocal mis-casting.
There was no lack of power in the slamming but complex funk riffs of Pump Out the Miles, and
The band finished with a glorious flourish in Scottish Heart, a mini-suite which opens with chromatic evocations of folk and pipe tunes, and ends in a furious, high-energy jazz whirl, with scintillating solos from Kellock and guitarist Kevin MacKenzie.
It was great to hear so many risks being taken, and hugely satisfying to hear so many of them paying off in such exhilarating fashion.
Kenny Mathieson
KATIE MURRAY
Screen violence
Joan McAlpine's article today on screen violence (‘A hollow hooray for Hollywood’) was not the balanced journalism most of us expect from The Scotsman, but an ill-informed, highly politicised, rant.
In this instance, the ‘commonsense’ of John Major, Tony Blair, and a host of ‘moral commentators’is far closer to nonsense.
First, to dismiss the large body of academic work on media influence, particularly with regard to the effects of violence, and replace it with a series of insinuations (which are not backed up by hard evidence of any sort) displays a breathtaking arrogance on the part of the writer.
Secondly, the clearly assumed model of media effects that she uses, portraying the viewers as unthinking receptacles, with communication occurring in a social and interpretive vacuum, is ridiculous.
Finally, ignoring the context within which violence is portrayed is decidedly risky.
Surely the Home Alone films, with their scenes of appalling violence having no apparent ill-effects on the victims, are much worse than Clint Eastwood films, where it is clear that violence has severely unpleasant results?
Lumping all screen violence together, Gladiators, Tom and Jerry and Rugby Special hardly makes for disciplined analysis.
£250,000 cash deal for Scots ensemble The sponsorship should have further-reaching effects, providing music away from the concert hall — the Ensemble plans 20 concerts annually in hospitals and hospices Sponsorship from British Telecom has opened a whole new horizon for the 11-piece Scottish Ensemble, says Mary Miller
THE Scottish Ensemble yesterday announced a sponsorship deal of such significance that they have now chosen to amend their name.
British Telecom and the Scottish Ensemble have agreed a £250,000 co-operation which will allow the 11-player BT Scottish Ensemble to develop its work substantially both on the platform and in the community.
The sponsorship, agreed for three years, will begin this July, enabling the Ensemble to give 60 concerts a year throughout Scotland, including regular series in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow.
It will support a BT Scottish Ensemble island festival each summer — the first is planned for Skye in June 1994 and will involve multi-media and community projects, concerts and recitals.
But the sponsorship should have further-reaching effects, providing music away from the concert hall — the Ensemble plans 20 concerts annually in hospitals and hospices.
There is also the intention to establish a major schools music competition, which will culminate in a special BT Scottish Ensemble concert.
Currently, BT and the Ensemble are researching proposals, but there is already a determination that schools outwith Scotland's central belt should be the beneficiaries.
The Ensemble will continue to record regularly with Virgin Classics, and apart from its expanding workload, with an increased commitment to taking chamber and small scale orchestral music to Scotland's rural areas, will augment this season's touring schedule in Europe with trips to Finland and Russia.
Next season will open with a commission from Scottish-based composer Sally Beamish, and an opening out of the Ensemble's programming — to date, fairly conventional — is promised, as BT enable the base of their work to broaden.
Madness in the melodies THE NASH ENSEMBLE QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
THERE'S always a problem with solo wind and string chamber music — and none so acute as the balance of horn and violin.
However skilful the playing, the violin tends to sound like the horn's spinster cousin bent on shrill admonition, and the horn, lumpish and sulky.
So the Nash Ensemble's concert offered a first half of Mozart and Brahms which left one feeling vaguely unsatisfied.
There was nothing precious about the playing — no feeling of careful compromise so as to accommodate the work's problems, and certainly, to hornist Frank Lloyd's playing, one can listen, whatever the technical complexities, in the comfortable knowledge that nothing will slip between bell and lip.
But the Mozart, in spite of Elizabeth Layton's elegant violin playing, was dull.
Lloyd played streams of difficult notes with extreme accuracy, but his melodic lines with no feel of inner engagement.
One missed that generosity, which makes chamber music something for performers and audience to share.
With the Brahms trio, matters improved.
The piano and violin set off with the air of those ready to bask in the music's warmth, and it seemed that, for once, this awkward, unbalanced work — for it is unsatisfactory, not just in its instrumentation, but in its musical make-up — might be entirely convincing.
But again, Lloyd sounded dislocated from the work's emotional current, even in the gentle, passionate slow movement exchanges with the violin, which perhaps offer the most satisfactory music.
But the second half's Shostakovich, the G Minor Piano Quintet, was magnificent.
With strings and piano, all restraint vanished, and we heard a fantastic balance of wildness, sophistication and seeming improvisation — the last movement's mad little melodies sounded as though hurled to the sky, to settle softly, for the work's curiously inconclusive finish.
Mary Miller
Triumph over inexperience ACADEMY CHAMBER ORCHESTRA QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
EVEN where, as in the case of the Chamber Orchestra of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, previous experience has been auspicious, a student ensemble is always something of an unknown quantity.
We knew the first violin would be able to play a bit— he was, after all, Leon Spierer, the concert-master of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra — but what of the rest?
Well, they could play too, and if not as well as their director, that is hardly a criticism.
They launched vigorously into Haydn's tricky overture from the opera L'isola disabitata with generally good ensemble discipline and sound intonation, and did not allow tension to mar their enthusiasm, albeit to the point of overplaying a little at times.
They were joined by Icelandic pianist Arinbjorn Arnason, currently  studying under Philip Jenkins at the RSAMD, for the rather more telling challenge of Beethoven's Piano Concerto No 4.
The pianist was sensitive enough, even if he brought no great sense of individual character to the music as yet, and the orchestra competent but a little routine, and not well-enough focused rhythmically.
This was the one occasion when I missed the clearer control which a conductor, rather than a performing director, could have brought.
They devoted the second half to a work written by a composer who was also a student at the time of its creation, Josef Suk.
The influence of his teacher, Dvorak, hangs over the Serenade in E flat, but it is a bright, attractively varied piece which they played with fine control, rich sonorities, and exemplary attention to dynamics and rhythm.
They gave a sprightly Anitra's Dance from Grieg's Peer Gynt Suite No 1 for an encore, after which Spierer ushered the whole orchestra to stage front, and a well-deserved bow.
Kenny Mathieson
Aga saga: a morality tale for the nicer Nineties Despite the recession a novel published today is likely to make its author a millionaire.
Gillian Harris looks at what constitutes a success in the eyes of the publishing trade and the book-buying public.
IT TOOK Vikram Seth three years to write his 1,349-page novel A Suitable Boy which is published throughout Britain today.
In London it has already sold out and a second print-run is under way.
With a £250,000 advance under his belt, Mr Seth has created a best-seller and with rights being snapped up all over the world he is well on his way to becoming a millionaire.
He has been helped by a generous dollop of hype.
‘Stands with Thackeray's Vanity Fair as an exploration of human foible, with Eliot's Middlemarch as a story of courtship and Tolstoy's War and Peace as a commentary on the fate of nations,’ gushed the publicity material.
But as aspiring authors know, there is more to a blockbuster than a fulsome blurb.
There is fashion, style and the economy to take into account and that is before concocting a viable plot.
The talk at this week's London International Book Fair at Olympia was of recession and ‘Aga-sagas’, so-called because they feature the type of characters whose homes would be incomplete without an Aga.
‘In hard times people do not want to read the sex-and-shopping novels of the Eighties,’ explained Kate Paterson, an editor with Century publishing.
‘Now glitzy novels are out of vogue, people are writing more about real issues.
People want to read about real struggles in the sort of books written by people like Joanna Trollope and Mary Wesley.’
As publishers mourned declining sales of hardback fiction, they also celebrated rising sales overall (customers will buy two Aga-saga paperbacks for every one hardback).
According to Nicholas Clee, from the bookseller J Whitaker and Sons in London, any writer planning to embark on such a book would be advised to create a family living in rural bliss with a gaggle of children then land them in a crisis, preferably involving the central character in an affair with an older/younger man/woman.
‘Aga-sagas have taken over from the steamy sex bonkbusters of the Eighties.
Fashion has moved away from the big, glitzy authors because all that conspicuous consumption is just not admirable or enviable any more,’ he said.
‘Plus, the form has become exhausted.
After all, every sexual permutation has been written about.
The only danger for Aga-sagas is that the market will become saturated.
There are so many of them around.’
One publisher, who did not want to be named, agreed: ‘Jackie Collins has got a new book out called American Star but I cannot see it doing very well.
Certainly not as well as her books sold a few years ago.
In the gentler Nineties, people want nicer books.
Joanna Trollope, for example, really took off last year.
She is the doyenne of the Aga-saga authors.’
Ian McGarry of James Thin Booksellers in Edinburgh confirmed the move to Aga-sagas by the book-buying public.
‘Aga-sagas are really everyman's alternative to Jane Austen.
In our experience, the vast majority of people who we find buying these Aga-sagas are women between 25 and 40,’ he said.
‘These are the people who make up the vast majority of the paperback book-buying public.’
Mr McGarry added that neither Aga-sagas nor Seth's A Suitable Boy were the future of the novel.
‘People who buy these pale impressions of literature instead of the real thing are bound to be disappointed sooner or later.’
Nevertheless, the recession has also sparked an upturn in the sales of Mills and Boon books.
At the company's headquarters in the appropriately named Paradise Road in Richmond, they are chalking up a sale every two seconds.
‘Our books have always been popular because they provide a light-hearted, escapist, romantic read,’ said a spokeswoman, Carol Cherry.
‘The characters are like someone you would meet in the street, although they tend to be a bit more romantic.
You often find that when times are hard people buy a Mills and Boon for an inexpensive treat.’
At £20, Mr Seth's novel is a more expensive treat but it remains true to the saga genre, spanning three generations and chronicling the lives of four Indian families.
Publishers have declared it a one-off hit.
‘I would advise authors against racing off to write their own 1,400-word Indian sagas,’ said Mr Clee.
A greater chance of success seems to lie in the sequel.
The author, Susan Hill, was given a large advance to write a sequel to Daphne du Maurier's Rebecca and Emma Tennant is penning a follow-up to Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice.
While purists purse their lips in disgust, publishers cackle with glee.
‘The publishing industry likes books which they think cannot fail to make money,’ explained Mr Clee.
Foot in the door of press freedom
AFTER Calcutt, Kaufman.
The lynch mob is gathering outside the Last Chance Saloon.
First there was Sir David Calcutt's report, with its call for a statutory complaints mechanism to curb press excesses.
Now there is Gerald Kaufman and the Commons heritage select committee with no fewer than 43 proposals for an elaborate apparatus to prevent prurient pressmen from violating the privacy of the public.
Members of the public, that is: public figures, says the report, need not expect quite the same degree of sanctuary.
Perhaps the distinction would become clearer with time.
Very well, no-one would expect a leading article in a newspaper — even a newspaper like this one which has, we hope, a reputation for behaving responsibly — to applaud plans to curb the freedom of the press.
It is also entirely possible that the public may be less exercised about this matter than are newspapers, and perhaps less hostile to the notion of regulation.
That is understandable, but it neglects the fact that press freedom is an issue for more than just the press.
It is an issue about the public's entitlement to know what is happening.
That entitlement is already feebler here than in many countries.
To weaken it further would be an inconvenience for newspapers, but an assault on democracy.
We would readily accept that a few members of our profession have, on occasion, behaved deplorably.
Their excesses diminish the standing of the press as a whole.
That is why most newspapers, including, it has to be said, the much-maligned tabloids, have lent their weight to the Press Complaints Commission's code of practice, and instructed their journalists to abide by the code's provisions.
We see no evidence that the code, as recently strengthened, has proved inadequate.
It follows that we see no case for placing it on the semi-statutory footing proposed by the select committee.
Mr Kaufman insisted that he opposed statutory regulation, and that the report amounted to a request for self-regulation.
This is a rather puzzling interpretation of the recommendations.
They would empower a new Press Commission to impose penalties for offences defined by the report, and would back it up with an ombudsman, chosen by the Lord Chancellor, and given statutory authority to enforce fines by court order.
There is something to be said for an industry ombudsman, who would certainly command greater respect than the in-house prefects appointed by some proprietors.
But the role and powers proposed are less those of an ombudsman than of a commissar.
What no-one seems ready to notice is that, by and large, self-regulation is working.
The sort of events which gave rise to calls for statutory curbs — long-lens shots of the Duchess of York's poolside exploits, or the ‘Squidgy’ tape — have not recurred.
Indeed, the Camilla tape lay dormant in British newsrooms for months until it was published overseas and widely circulated in Britain.
If the public is outraged by press behaviour it will stop buying newspapers.
If public figures are outraged it is not reason enough for oppressive constraints.
Role of BBC
The disparity between the revenue raised by the BBC in Scotland and the resources allocated by London to Scotland, reported today, highlights just how crucial is the debate over the BBC's charter and how vital it is that it is made much more prominent in Scottish life.
Just as the publication of the moving image section of the Charter for the Arts in Scotland has received scant attention, the erosion of BBC Scotland's operational autonomy and the potential denudation of its programme-making resources should be a matter of widespread concern.
At a time when BBC Scotland and independent programme-makers are making important strides forward in breadth and quality of production, it is vital that the critical mass of human and technical resources is enhanced and that control of those resources remains firmly within Scotland.
Similarly, the proposed reorganisation of the screen agencies in Scotland, outlined in the Charter, ought to be the subject of intense public debate, rather than being left solely to the agencies themselves.
John Hersey: award-winning writer
THE Pulitzer-prize winning author John Hersey, a Second World War correspondent who captured the horrors of the first atomic bomb attack in his book Hiroshima, died yesterday in Florida.
He was 78.
He won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 1945 for A Bell For Adano, his third book.
It was followed by his account of the bombing of Hiroshima in 1945.
He published more than 20 books including The Wall, A Single Pebble, The War Lover, The Child Buyer, The Algiers Motel Incident and Aspects of the Presidency.
His last book, Antonietta, published in 1991, tells the story of a Stradivarius violin, and Hersey inserted himself as a character.
A Bell For Adano told of the impact of American soldiers occupying an Italian village.
It was written after he returned to the US at the end of a stint covering the war in Africa and Italy.
Hiroshima was originally written for the New Yorker magazine, which devoted an entire issue to it in 1946.
It was made into a film of the same name.
Judith Jones, his editor for the past 15 years, said Mr Hersey not only wrote, but fought for the rights of all authors and was active until the end.
‘He was extraordinarily versatile, a wonderful story writer, a wonderful journalist,’ she said.
‘He brought some of that journalistic ability to his novels.’
Mr Hersey was born June 17, 1914, in China, the son of American missionaries.
His parents returned to the US when he was ten.
He graduated from Yale University in 1936.
His first books were written while he was a correspondent for Time magazine, which assigned him to cover the Far East.
For many years, Mr Hersey was associated with Yale University as a lecturer, adviser and professor.
He retired in 1984.
He had four children with his first wife, Frances, and a fifth with his second wife, Barbara.
Harry Sim: popular Grampian councillor
HARRY Sim, one of the most popular and long-serving councillors in Grampian, died yesterday in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, aged 69.
Mr Sim, of Kingsmill, Turriff, was a local authority councillor in the north-east for 38 years, first with Aberdeen County Council and then with Grampian Regional Council.
He was deputy convener of the region for 12 years and leader of the Conservative group for ten years.
Mr Sim was made an OBE in 1982 for public and political service.
Popular even among his political opponents, Mr Sim served on a wide range of public bodies, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Valuation Advisory Committee and the North east River Purification Board.
Mr Sim was chairman of the North East Water Board from 1970-75 and played a crucial role in the authority's  response to the needs of the developing North Sea oil industry.
He was an honorary vice-president and past president of Banff and Buchan Conservative Association and an active member of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland.
Councillor Bob Middleton, the Labour convener of Grampian Region, paid tribute to Mr Sim's tremendous contribution to local government over the past four decades.
He said: ‘He was a kenspeckle figure who was regarded with special affection and respect by all sides on the regional council.
‘He had the happy knack for a politician of making friends, not enemies of those who disagreed with him.
He will be missed by a wide circle of friends in public life.’
Mellow Elton BEN ELTON PAVILION THEATRE, GLASGOW
WHAT will Ben Elton's comic epitaph eventually be?
I would suggest ‘He was a great realist’ or perhaps ‘He was never afraid of looking like a prat’.
Four years after he last took his ranting persona on the road, Elton seems both to have mellowed and to have honed his probings between surface and reality — using himself as exhibit A.
To do this he has to set himself up as one of the scared people of the modern world, a textbook example of homo neuroticus.
This is where his real radicalism lies, on the soft underside of the protective shell of right-on propriety in which his observations are encased.
Elton's emphasis on women's health issues (the horrors of cervical smears etc) is an antidote to his underlying laddishness.
His gigs are guaranteed to bring a whiff of the student union bar into any auditorium; full of lager, lavatory jokes, thwarted sexuality, and tinged with aggrieved politics and environmental concern.
There is a twang of self-satisfaction — even patronage — about his relentless signalling of his own good bloke-ism, but this is a small price to pay for his ingenuity and willingness to let his principles dangle.
Leaping around the stage like a hyperactive elf, his relationship with the audience is notably more relaxed and chatty than his most caustic and hectoring period.
The spangly suits and red specs have given way to designer-jacketed ease.
The impression was reinforced by Elton squatting down comfortably on the front-stage light box mid-story.
He quotes Shakespeare, informs us about whale reproduction, tries on a Glasgow accent, even sings!
If the criterion of a good comedian is whether or not he or she confronts prejudices rather than strokes them, Ben Elton looks as impressive as ever.
Colin Donald
Trapped by the definitive article THE SOUND OF MUSIC KING'S THEATRE, EDINBURGH
FOLLOWING its success on tour last year, the Rogers and Hammerstein musical about Nazis, nuns and clothes conjured out of curtains, is back in Edinburgh.
Not surprisingly this production in many ways emulates Robert Wise's film, of 1965.
It seems that the director, Wendy Toye, has tried to mirror the film on stage.
This is immediately obvious in the casting — few characters differ greatly from their celluloid counterparts.
Liz Robertson (Maria), a veteran musical performer, bears a striking resemblance to Julie Andrews.
And Christopher Cazenove as the aristocratic Captain von Trapp is very Christopher Plummer.
Terry Parsons's lavish sets capture the sprawling, dramatic Austrian scenery, the grandeur of the Von Trapp home, and rarefied atmosphere of the convent.
The nuns' harmonies and children's choreography are polished and effective.
Linda Hibberd, as the Mother Abbess, gives a powerful rendition of Climb Ev'ry Mountain, and Robin Nedwell is perfect as the ebullient Max.
Of the six local children cast and trained especially for the production, eight-year-old Eve Macdonald makes a cute Gretl.
Yet, despite these strengths, it is ultimately only a fine imitation of the film.
The show runs until 3 April.
Robert Alstead
Blue launch at Ingliston
DEACON Blue will begin their first tour for over a year at the newly revamped Ingliston auditorium on the outskirts of Edinburgh.
The concert, on 1 April, is the venue's first with the stage repositioned to give a clearer view and reduce the distance the sound has to travel.
New drapes will enhance the acoustics and create a more intimate atmosphere.
There will be three possible configurations for the venue, currently all-standing.
A small auditorium may be set with a capacity of 2,000.
The standard auditorium will hold 4,000 and the grand auditorium, 6,000.
The improvements ensure there will be a major venue for pop concerts while the Edinburgh Playhouse is out of commission this summer for refurbishment, and for the rest of the year when Les Miserables will be in residence.
The Ingliston management is discussing with Lothian Region Transport the provision of a shuttle bus service from Edinburgh city centre and arrangements are being made to run coaches from Aberdeen, Dundee, Perth, Kirkcaldy, Glasgow, Kilmarnock and Ayr.
Time for the Tide Sir Peter Maxwell Davies, composer of a work being played tonight by the SCO with children, talks to Mary Miller
TONIGHT at the Royal Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra present their version of The Turn of the Tide, composed by Sir Peter Maxwell Davies on an environmental theme for performance by orchestras and children nationwide.
It is written, he explains, with ‘windows’, into which the children can slot their own compositions, created with the help of orchestral musicians.
To end, there is a chorus, full of what Max (as he is known) describes as ‘physical rhythms — the kind children grasp immediately’.
So, everyone does their own thing, the SCO with gamelan instruments assembled from recycled bits and pieces — old cars etc — and involving children from all over Lothian.
Maxwell Davies's participation in the SCO's development programme has, of course, been substantial, via the Strathclyde Concertos and associated educational projects.
He has long been involved in teaching but how does he feel about music education in schools today?
The idea of structureless meanderings on electronic keyboards, of musical tasks being in any way simplified, appals him.
Teaching in Cirencester 30 years ago, his obsession was not with pupils' achievements, but with their learning.
‘The kids were uninhibited and came to music very fresh.
That I was a composer was infectious — all they wanted to do was compose.
In order to do that to any interesting standard, they had to become musically literate.
I expected them to learn how to read.
They made sounds and then needed to explore the symbols which would reproduce those pitches and rhythms.’
He found that, with the minimum of pushing, his pupils began to work together, creating, improvising.
Nowadays, he is sad that few teachers have the training, the freedom and thus the confidence in their own creative skills, to set such positive activities in motion.
He is enthusiastic about the work through which orchestras enable children to create with the help of teachers, but feels that players too, need specialised training to maximise their communication skills.
What is essential, he feels, is that such skills become a natural part of a player's working life — not that the children are given a ‘treatment’ as the result of a dislocated training package directed by those who do not really understand a musician's mind or motivation.
What is essential, Max says, is that children become musically literate at an early age; learning some sort of instrument, to sing, and, most importantly to listen.
‘In my lifetime, it's unlikely that I'll see that sort of system — the one which currently is being dismantled — back in place and in good health.
I hate the idea that only the well-to-do will have the possibility of instrumental teaching; it refutes everything I believe to be just.
In Scotland things are still intact, but the signs are not good’.
MAXWELL Davies would be happy to supply a curriculum for an ideal world.
He says: ‘I'd like to see primary school children begin with music which is relevant to them — live music from their own culture.
When Scottish kids start to compose, they start naturally with pentatonic tunes.
It's vital that music in school isn't seen to be something entirely separate from what they are familiar with at home on TV.
‘As time moves on, and instrumental skills develop, I'd like to see the children become immersed in really engaging repertoire.
Not the kind of stuff some maudlin adult has deemed lovely for the kiddies but proper music, full of the sort of challenges which are really encouraging to meet, and robust enough to stand constant repetition.’
Here, he feels that composers have a responsibility, to forget Art (with a capital A), and to make their work relevant.
Max believes in the child's imagination, in the immediacy of the child's expression.
He says, too, that children have a natural desire to organise their sound world and quotes in evidence playground games, and the complex rhythms a child will produce with percussion.
And he insists that the writing down of the sounds and patterns is important, even at the most elementary stage.
‘Can you imagine teaching English literature without teaching people to write?
Composition, is after all, only laid down improvisation.’
He would expect older children to master basic harmony —‘grammar and syntax, we cannot communicate sensibly without.
In music, it's just as essential, and as in spoken English, it is part of the joy.’
The Turn of the Tide, for many, has already brought joy and surprise.
At a London performance, a spy was sent out to research audience opinion.
One child, wide-eyed, wrote down this reaction —‘I never knew that there was music which made you think’.
So, tonight, we'll hear gamelans and a green piece, with kids and chorus and choruses.
All over Britain, musical tides are turning.
It makes you think.
Maximising potential: Sir Peter Maxwell Davies believes children need to become musically literate when young HAMISH CAMPBELL
A beastie to carry the burden From cherub to abstract flying muse, Ruth Wishart reveals only the fifth logo to be attached to the Edinburgh International Festival
IS it a bird?
Is it a plane?
Hey come on, you're not trying.
‘Tis of course a flying muse by recent appointment to the Edinburgh International Festival.
And today the design I have absolutely promised not to call the Picasso Zebedee will be introduced formally as only the fifth logo to be attached to the 45-year-old jewel in Scotland's cultural crown.
The 1947 variety merely boasted a modest Lion Rampant and was superseded by the classical Jean Cocteau motif in 1961.
Then 1967 brought the popular superimposition of doves and castle ramparts in a graphic which was very much a child of its design age.
And latterly, the Festival has employed the multicoloured ribbons informally describing the letters EIF, first introduced in 1979.
The road to this latest merry muse, whose Sunday best is pink and purple, but which will appear in a variety of black and white guises, is littered as you might imagine with fallen images.
Joanna Baker, the Festival's director of marketing and public affairs, spoke to a number of design houses before finally giving a brief to the Edinburgh firm of McIlroy Coates.
What the Festival was looking for, she says, was a completely new corporate identity to simultaneously reflect the changes in the Festival while reinforcing its perceived strengths.
McIlroy Coates was therefore asked to come up with ideas which incorporated ‘quality, excitement, reassurance, internationalism, multiplicity of art forms, creativity, styles, and festival’.
To produce your average design miracle in fact.
Baker admits the firm found the brief pretty daunting but says the process of refining the final choice was helped by close collaboration between the designers and the senior Festival management team.
‘Because that team is almost all new, we were very wary of rushing in and making inappropriate changes, which is why we did nothing permanent with the marketing of the 1992 Festival which was Brian McMaster's first.
It was important, too, that we took time to understand the existing strengths of the Festival, while examining how we should be trying to position it in the future to maximise audiences.’
Having a background in the arts — she was poached from McMaster in his old fiefdom at Welsh National Opera — Baker is well aware that selling a festival does not approximate to shifting soap powder.
So there is little chance that the 1993 programme will go for short-term audience gain at the expense of long-term credibility.
But the commissioned research does flag up a number of interesting pointers to building a bigger core support.
Some of that research was provided by a sub-division of Milward Brown International which has developed a track record in analysing arts audiences.
But some of the most valuable and fascinating material also came from the Festival's new computerised booking system which provided Baker's team with hard facts about the booking patterns, typical whims, and geographical location of last year's ticket buyers.
That information included the fact that a depressingly low percentage of Festival-goers had been lured from the greater Glasgow and Strathclyde areas, in spite of half the population of Scotland living there.
It confirmed that opera lovers were most likely to spread their favours across the art forms.
And it suggested there was also a substantial younger audience who were apparently active attenders at opera, ballet or concerts but not at the Festival itself.
A number of that 25-35 age range were brought in as one of two groups who had an opportunity to look at the various stages while the possible designs were still being examined.
The second group, in the 45-55 age range, were a mix of potential attenders and existing audience.
The original batch of potential logos included a sun, a reworking of the castle theme, several variations on trumpets, a somewhat indistinct cockerel, typographical puns on the lettering, and what came to be known as the Festival cherub.
It was the latter which still found itself on the drawing board when the rest had hit the cutting room floor.
Yet although the cherubic muse blowing its horn for the brave new world seemed to the Festival staff to sum up the kind of things they were trying to say about the EIF, there remained one potent snag.
Nobody actually liked it much.
So everybody got back round the table, fended off panic about the deadline galloping towards them — the image had to be in place for next week's  programme launch — and tried to figure out what next to do.
Enter stage south the London-based illustrator, Brian Grimwood, whose credits include the campaigns for Singapore Airlines, Sony, Barclays Bank and ITV.
Grimwood it was who had his graphic way with the cherub, turning the classical, familiar, somewhat uninspiring image into the stylised, abstract muse-based beastie you see before you.
It will doubtless cause the compulsory stushie at its formal launch later this morning when some of the Festival staff wear sweatshirts demonstrating its versatility.
There will be factions nostalgic for the Festival ribbon, and the typographical thought police may find the lettering out of synch with the image.
But my guess is that the Festival is on to a real winner in the merchandising stakes, having seen bits of the logo featured in imaginative guises on clothing, stationary, mugs, and even Festival cheques.
And for my taste it fulfils the first law of festivals — it's fun.
Celtic scholar and top tax authority Professor Donald Meek, head of the department of Celtic at the University of Aberdeen, pays tribute to Dr Victor E Durkacz, who has died aged 40
HISTORIANS and linguists within Celtic studies were deeply saddened to learn of the sudden passing of Dr Victor E Durkacz.
Victor was known within Celtic language studies as the author of a seminal book whose title, The Decline of the Celtic Languages (John Donald, Edinburgh, 1983), disguised the richness of its scope, just as it disguised the alternative interests of the author.
Beyond the field of Celtic linguistic history, Victor had another, very different identity as one of Britain's leading authorities on value added tax.
His brilliance as a tax consultant was matched by his remarkable skill in historical analysis, and experts in the one field were often unaware of his achievements in the other.
Born in Dundee on 4 September, 1952, Victor Edmund Durkacz was the third child of a Polish emigrant who came to Scotland with part of the Polish army during the Second World War, qualified in medicine and dentistry, and married a Scottish girl.
His parents' cultural and academic interests were reflected broadly in Victor's later education, which showed a keen enthusiasm for languages other than English.
Entering the University of Dundee, he graduated with first-class honours in history in 1975, and then pursued postgraduate study.
His thesis, A Comparative View of the Language Question in Gaelic, Irish and Welsh Educational History with Emphasis on Gaelic Scotland, 1688-1872, earned him a Doctorate of Philosophy from Dundee in July 1980.
The thesis provided the core of the book The Decline of the Celtic Languages.
Victor's book shed much new light on the Celtic languages in relation to formal educational processes in Scotland, Ireland and Wales.
With an unusual capacity for gathering and synthesising evidence relating to all three countries, he demonstrated the ways in which the fortunes of the respective Celtic languages reflected similar or divergent developments.
Showing that the role of Christian institutions and churches was central to the fortunes and misfortunes of the languages, Victor made a major contribution to our understanding of Scottish Gaelic in the religious context, particularly in his outstandingly fine third chapter, entitled Evangelical Religion and the Rise of Literacy in the Mother Tongues.
Scrupulous and fair-minded, he was the first academic researcher to provide a rounded appreciation of the critically important contribution of itinerant preachers and non-conformist bodies to the evangelisation and enliteration of the Scottish Highlands.
The value of the book was further enhanced by a bibliography which showed the breadth of the author's research and brought to light many historical sources which had been ignored, forgotten or underestimated by previous writers.
Having gained significant status as an academic historian, Victor Durkacz changed his career track.
He was admitted as an associate of the Institute of Taxation in 1983, and, by submitting another thesis, qualified as a fellow in 1985.
Having served with several major tax firms, he established his own consultancy business, Durkacz and Co, in Edinburgh in 1989.
His brilliance was carried lightly, and he possessed a wry sense of humour.
One of his most recent historical discoveries was that he was Victor Edmund on his birth certificate, and not Victor Edward as on the cover of his book!
Good humour helped to see Victor through his prolonged ill health, caused by a lung complaint which led ultimately to a transplant operation from which he did not recover.
His passing leaves a sore gap in his family circle and in his wider circle of friends and acquaintances.
A former business associate of Victor Durkacz writes:
Victor's death at such a young age will not only be a tragedy for his family and friends but will have a major impact on many engaged in dealing with the increasing complexities of value added tax.
VAT is certainly not a glamorous subject and it is easy for those dealing with it to be cynical about it.
They need a person who sets standards of competence and integrity to be aimed at.
Victor Durkacz was such a person.
It seems inappropriate to refer to a man of his years as a father figure or, in the context of such a mundane matter as VAT, as inspirational, but both descriptions can be applied to Victor.
Virtually everybody involved in administering or advising on the tax was influenced by his work.
In Scotland in particular there is a coterie of men and women working on VAT for whom he set an example to be followed.
All who knew Victor respected him both for his depth of knowledge of VAT, particularly in the land and property area, and for the innate wisdom and common sense he showed in advising his many friends and clients.
With one exception, he won every case he presented to the VAT tribunal — the exception being when the tribunal decided it did not have the jurisdiction to hear the case.
The tax profession has lost not only a practitioner of the highest calibre but also a very good friend.
Victor Durkacz: brilliance as a tax consultant matched by skill in historical analysis
Hamilton prize money increased
By Isobel Cunningham
HAMILTON Park, due to launch the Flat season in Scotland on Monday, yesterday revealed record prize money of just under half-a-million pounds for the months ahead — £105,000 up on last year.
A £10,000 handicap on 6 September will also be the richest race ever run at the Lanarkshire track.
Chief Executive Hazel Dudgeon, fronting the course's annual preview for the first time, said: ‘We have got back the two evening meetings (15 and 29 July) we lost last year and now have six of these on our 17-strong programme.
‘It gives us the opportunity to work on persuading the huge catchment area around us that it is perfectly possible to get the Hamilton habit after work when experiencing a top evening out.’
Hamilton, like the other Scottish courses, bucked the national trend of falling attendances last year with a 15 per cent increase.
The ongoing vigorous policy of offering paddock admission (£7 per head) at £10 per couple and Club enclosure facilities (£12 individually, but £20 for couples), plus various theme days and a draw for a gallon of whisky at each fixture, will help to continue the success story.
The Levy Board has increased its forecast levy yield for 1993/94 by £2.25m to £49.8m to take account of the evening opening of betting shops.
DOUBLE FANTASY ARCHES THEATRE COMPANY, ARCHES, GLASGOW
MARK Chapman was the nerd from hell who shot John Lennon just as he was entering his musical renaissance, born out of contentment at being just another drug-free millionaire house-husband.
Thirteen years later, interest has waned in a killer dismissed by many as the least interesting of the famous assassins.
This is not the view of Andrew Dallmeyer, who has written a very thought-provoking play linking Chapman and Lennon through corresponding aspects of their haunted lives.
Lennon fans might well object to the implicit glamorisation of his nemesis, but it is clear that Dallmeyer has serious points to make about the noble ideals of the Sixties, loneliness, and the emotional abuse of children.
Double Fantasy has some plodding and facile aspects, and it is undermined by an overly whingeing conception of Chapman (otherwise convincingly played by Grant Smeaton).
But it is richly written and dramatically involving, well staged by Dallmeyer himself and designer Graham Proudfoot.
The play follows Chapman from his miserable youth in suburban Georgia, where he was systematically bullied and humiliated by his father.
The Beatles were his key to liberation through fantasy.
Andrew Simister's Lennon (also an excellent performance) visits him through the cupboard, exhorting him to free his mind with drugs, Indian mysticism and love.
In the second half, Chapman imagines a return visit to late-period Lennon, by then wracked by heroin and primal emotional pain.
The discovery of his idol's feet of clay proves intolerable to the lonely, emotionally stunted fan.
What is Double Fantasy saying exactly?
Chapman was mentally ill after all, and therefore a slippery basis for an unsensational play.
But Dallmeyer's greatest success is to convey the idea of the two men as polar opposites united by disappointment; one embraces life, the other avoids it.
We are invited to locate ourselves somewhere in between.
Colin Donald
SCHUBERT ENSEMBLE BIGGAR MUSIC CLUB
THE Schubert Ensemble, wending their way south on a Scottish tour, reached Biggar and the snows on Tuesday, with, among a particularly joyful bunch of offerings, the work they commissioned from Judith Weir for the 1992 Cheltenham Festival.
It takes courage to play new music at rural music clubs, where, with declining membership, patrons are less likely to entertain risk.
But Weir's music does not deny us beauty — she tends to re-organise conventional sounds in her own particular way.
Thus I Broke Off a Golden Branch, which incorporates Croatian folk melody, begins by seducing the ear with warm string tone and lilting piano colouring which grows, the rhythms becoming tougher and more insistent, the emotional tension mounting.
In the second movement, the bough bends to a beseeching cello lament, the music fretting and restless, before an uncertain ending — this fracture perhaps reflecting Weir's awareness of her musical source's sadness and war-torn insecurity.
But we began with joy and Rossini and to sunshine we return with Hummel's E flat Piano Quintet, and singing melody — pretty, but never quite elevated to greatness by a composer reluctant to accord his accompaniments a higher status than that of faithful doggedness.
But the Schuberts are a skilful bunch — real grown-up musicians with a fantastic sense of performance.
If the Hummel sparkled, their E flat Dvorak piano quartet — a riot of Czechoslovak charm — fairly glinted with riches.
Mary Miller
NEW MOVES VICENTE SAEZ COMPANY NEW ATHENAEUM, GLASGOW
THE wail of pipe music is overlaid with the gentle sound of running water, low-key light picks out dappled hues of rust and ochre stretching from horizon to sky as three black-clad figures weave lazy patterns across a dusty landscape.
We could be anywhere hot and dry.
In fact, we are at the New Athenaeum Theatre at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama where New Moves is presenting the Vicente Saez company from Spain, the first of three European groups to round off a superb season of dance.
Hot and dry as Spain can be, and despite the flamenco guitars which occasionally steal into the rhythms of the music, Saez has looked further south to find inspiration for Uadi, a dreamy, hypnotic evocation of the North African desert.
The title means ‘river’ which is entirely appropriate.
It flows steadily, sometimes relentlessly, on with frothy bursts of activity and still, reflective pools of calm.
Saez works much of the choreography in circles with arms and torsos taking the lead, driving the movement forward.
A curved arm scythes through the air and the body follows its lead, spiralling to the ground where deft work (and powerful abdominal and back muscles) produce a smooth synthesis of movement, driving it across the floor and up into the next sequence.
There are no rough edges: the three men and three women drift from solo to duet to ensemble with seamless ease.
It is an effect which could prove soporific, but here an underlying energy, and the sheer beauty of some of the shapes produced by the dancers, keeps the viewer enthralled.
Saez borrows movement influences from a variety of sources.
Contemporary techniques predominate, but the men perform martial arts sequences and there are hints of jazz and a strong folk presence.
These are sometimes used in isolation, at others blended into curious hybrids which somehow manage to appear ‘authentic’.
None of it is.
Saez is a gifted impressionist, conjuring a flickering illusion of other places and cultures.
But on a cold Glasgow night, who is going to complain too much about that?
Christopher Bowen
MRS CEAUSESCU'S ORGANISATION OF LOVE THE TRON, GLASGOW
TO the rattle of gunfire, breaking glass and harsh orders, a semi-naked couple scramble into the circular arena of the stage.
This is Romania 50 years ago in the middle of the pogroms.
Terrified, they seek fruitlessly for a means of escape from their hunters.
Finally, in order to avoid being rounded up, they pretend to be locked in a passionate embrace in a doorway.
On that evidence alone, ‘love can save us all’, might be the nostrum being pushed in Phil Smith's Mrs Ceausescu's Organisation of Love.
However, we learn from a repeat of the incident later in the play that the ruse was unsuccessful — both as act of survival and as act of love.
Similarly, a dictator may feel secure and God-like because he believes he has the love of the people.
Then they turn against him and show how far he has been deluded.
In Smith's raw and relentless piece, the Ceausescus are displayed as proof that power is the ultimate sex substitute.
Neither, we are told, had had it for the past 40 years.
The four-strong Plain Clothes Productions carry off a variety of historical and other roles with a sort of grunge-Brechtian style of acting.
Whether as intentional homage or not, there were recurring echoes of Mother Courage, Arturo Ui and The Threepenny Opera throughout the evening.
They further confused the tone of a piece that had about it the whiff of 1970s radical agitprop.
It maintained the opening note of disappointment throughout a confusing account of the Ceausescus' rise to power and their fatal misjudgment which led to the people entering that famously well-wardrobed bedroom.
But not as lovers.
Virginia Radcliffe gave an alive, vampish performance as Elena, suggesting powerfully the will to survive and ability to manipulate.
She provided the most lively moment in a barnstorming speech (reminiscent of another female leader recently toppled) lambasting the people for not recognising the true benefits of communism — tidy streets, punctual trains and predictable politics.
THE PITCHFORK DISNEY CITIZENS THEATRE, GLASGOW
IT would be, presumably, rewarding to work out exactly the implications of the names of the four characters who figure in Philip Ridley's play.
There are the twins Presley and Haley Stray, and the surname plainly marks them out as abandoned waifs, far removed from parental care.
They are visited by spectres of childhood terror, the debonair Cosmo Disney and most sinister, the masked Pitchfork Cavalier.
Disney must indicate some fantasy realm and Pitchfork some tendency towards cruelty.
The imagination of Presley has been rendered uncomfortable by the presence of the serial killer known as Pitchfork Disney.
So is Cosmo cosmic?
I was still left looking for any element that could be described as cavalier.
Mr Ridley plainly has a taste for the weird.
Once Wordsworth could believe that the sound of angels' wings comforted childhood sleep but now, thanks to Dr Freud, the belief is that childhood imagination is an extended video nasty, with unacknowledged lusts and cravings giving way to fantasies of violence and the visitation of mutants.
In the case of the twins, the id seems wholly detached from the ego.
The two tower alone in a dingy apartment but perhaps they are really inside a womb which has run short of amniotic fluids.
Each has their own schizoid features, Presley gorging on chocs and biscuits, Haley preferring to lapse into drugged sleep and oblivion, but both paralysed with terror of the world outside and indulging in dreams of the golden days when mummy and daddy were alive and all was right with the world.
These days are assuredly gone, for contemporary society, as Cosmo (Matthew Wait) declares, is based on ‘the survival of the fittest’ and he knows what he's talking about.
He makes his living as a bar-room performer, whose principal turn is chewing cockroaches and occasionally sucking snails.
Director Malcolm Sutherland, who had a major success with his adaptation of The Wasp Factory is plainly drawn to the wayward or the warped, but this play promises more than it delivers.
From seeming to be a parable or a satire, it ends up as no more than a glimpse of the stunted mentality of a twosome.
The production is slick and smooth, with the monologues the high point, and Michael Matus as Presley was skilled throughout in his effortless switch from quiet playfulness to nervous energy.
Joseph Farrell
Sampling the dance
THE sixth Scottish Youth Dance Festival is to be held in Dundee from 4-11 July.
The festival has a rolling programme which aims to take the event — normally attended by 120 young people — all around Scotland.
Previous festivals have been held in Stirling, Dingwall, Edinburgh and the Borders.
Within a festival which operates on the principle of integration and sharing, competition and individualism are anathema.
Classes for dancers of differing levels of technique have therefore been dispensed in favour of mixed ability sessions.
The principle of integration extends wholeheartedly to people with special needs who can take part in all of the week's activities.
Participants, who are recruited mainly from a burgeoning youth dance group scene around the country, generally have some dance experience.
The timetable is arranged so that they can sample as wide a range of dance styles and theatre skills as possible.
As well as the mainstay of contemporary dance — on offer are ‘taster’ classes in flamenco, acrobatics, voice movement work, and contemporary reggae.
There is an alternative to the pot-pourri approach however.
More experienced participants can opt to spend the week working on a more specialised project — either in contemporary dance with English choreographer Janet Smith, or in traditional dance with expert Joan Henderson.
Groups will get a chance to perform in front of the rest of the festival participants in an evening programme which has been given an extra fillip with the inclusion of professionals of the stature of Siobhan Davies Dance Company as well as Dundee Rep Dance Company.
The festival is an intensive, residential event but people who live locally can also attend classes on a daily basis within a community programme which will operate throughout the region.
Kay Smith
Mayfest: a bouquet of barbed slogans?
Strange poster captions aside, says Joseph Farrell, the newly announced Mayfest programme brims with innovation
MAYFEST this year will come bedecked with a posy of brand new slogans, logos and images.
A couple of weeks ago, the new logo was unveiled revealing a patently insane, bald-headed man, leaning backwards and bawling at the top of his voice — MAYFEST!
Yesterday, the full programme was announced and a new poster put on display.
The programme carries the legend Europe's Boldest Festival, while the poster features a cute little girl with curls in her hair and a flower in her mouth.
The words on the poster read: ‘Mayfest 1993, As Rare As A Glasgow Kiss’.
These are words which will be much repeated, and not just by assorted comics and satirists.
Neither Mayfest chairman Bob Gray nor director Robert Robson chose to comment on them.
So what do they mean?
As infrequent as a Glasgow kiss?
A Glasgow kiss is as underdone as a red meat steak?
Or should ‘rare’ be pronounced ‘rerr’?
Europe's boldest festival offered to enlightenment.
The festival itself is moving into its second decade and keeps basically the same shape as in other years.
It has a strong community base, consisting exclusively of home-grown products, and a wide ranging programme of theatre, dance, classical and popular music, comedy, film and the visual arts.
Some venues, such as the Ferry on the Clyde, the Arches Theatre and the Centre for Contemporary Arts will be mounting mini-festivals of their own.
All three of the spaces at the Citizens will be in use with the resident company performing The Marowitz Hamlet and Heinrich Henkel's Old Rose, and Tag producing a revival of Sunset Song.
The Royal Concert Hall will play host to a variety of performers including Victoria de los Angeles and Joan Baez, while the most inventive piece of programming will see the Glinka State Choir of St Petersburg perform in St Aloysius Church.
In Robert Robson's view, Mayfest's main functions are to provide a platform for major Scottish work, to play host to quality work from overseas and to celebrate community initiatives.
Among the Scottish work, he drew attention to the collaboration between 7:84 and the young people's group from Berlin to the ambitious events entitled Sabotage at the Tramway and to the VS, a new composition by James MacMillan commissioned by the Scottish Chamber Orchestra.
The international section is dominated by Canada, with Ireland making a strong contribution.
With the Canadians, Mr Robson suggested that the work from Toronto was more text-based and that from Montreal more visual in its appeal.
He lavished praise on The Tale of Teeka, and since the company is the renowned Les Deux Mondes from Montreal, there will be little dissent from that judgment.
The Canadians are prominent in the dance section, with O Vertigo Dances and Carbone 14 lining up alongside companies from Africa and Germany.
Canadian cinema will be featured at the Glasgow Film Theatre throughout the period of Mayfest, as will works from the London Lesbian & Gay Film Festival.
The Glasgow Print Studio is celebrating its 21st birthday with a special exhibition at the McLellan Galleries, and other exhibitions will feature the cartoon character Angus Og, the paintings of Peter Howson and the prints of William Blake.
The Museum of Religious Art will be fully functional from immediately before the opening of Mayfest.
The popular music element now makes Mayfest the largest event in that field in Britain.
There will be 73 acts at the Ferry alone, and those appearing will include Hue and Cry, Carol Laula and Loudon Wainwright III.
The overall statistics indicate that this year Mayfest will feature 153 companies or individuals, 31 exhibitions, 11 films, making use of 84 venues and producing a total of 547 events.
Sponsorship has risen to almost £89,000, and the one black spot on the horizon is that arts council funding has dropped.
Spectacle of human rites RITES BRIGGAIT, GLASGOW
IT is heartening to see that in the wake of Glasgow 1990 and despite increasing difficulties in funding, large scale multi-media events can still take place.
From the seemingly endless stable of ambitious and extraordinary projects from the Scottish Chamber Orchestra comes Rites.
This one-off music, dance and art extravaganza took place in the Briggait, one of Glasgow's lesser-used venues — larger than Tramway and as cold as the Harland & Wolff shipyard.
Taking the universal themes of birth, marriage and death, the project involved sets of distinct commissions with each of the three sections interpreted by an artist and a composer.
Alongside these the special needs company, Jigsaw Dance Theatre, evolved a colourful choreography.
The composer William Sweeney and artist Johnny McGuinness explored the miracle of Conception.
Sweeney's Brittenesque, atmospheric score provided a counterpart to McGuinness's vision of suitably hatted dancers, as chromosomes and genes, swishing about in a vibrant multi-coloured womb.
Marriage was introduced by an endearing Charlie Drake-ish master of ceremonies whose slapstick humour little hinted at the Ortonesque parody that followed as, to an adapted version of Sir Peter Maxwell Davies's An Orkney Wedding With Sunrise, Keith McIntyre assembled a three-dimensional Brechtian black and white tableau.
This was on-the-edge black comedy that dispelled any vestige of condescension that might have been felt towards the performers.
For Death artist Stuart MacKenzie evoked the bleakness of a post-nuclear winter.
Against skeletal projections the dancers worked with soil and spades in a ritual of burying and, finally, burning.
Chick Lyall's score, with its eerie electronics, completed the feeling of sombre desolation and left the audience strangely moved.
Stephen Strugnell
Prologue to an era Perth Theatre's new director is keen to build on its success, writes Allen Wright Among the traditions he is determined to uphold is Perth's grand pantomime, to which Walter Carr will return next Christmas
ANDREW McKinnon, whose theatrical career began at Perth Theatre 20 years ago, has returned to that theatre as artistic director.
Announcing his first programme yesterday, he spoke of the ‘awesome responsibility’ of following Joan Knight who has turned it into one of the most successful theatres in the country with an average audience of more than 7,000 people for each production.
In his first season, McKinnon will present two plays which were first seen at the Traverse Theatre, Edinburgh.
These are a Scots translation by Martin Bowman and Bill Findlay of The House Among the Stars by Michel Tremblay, and Anne-Marie di Mambro's nostalgic study of life in a Scots-Italian family over 40 years ago — Tally's Blood.
McKinnon said he would like to see more plays of this quality receiving second and third productions in Scotland where there was a tendency to forget about a play after its premiere.
He is also planning to present new plays next year and, with funds provided by the Scottish Arts Council, he is commissioning work from two writers.
In July he will open his first season as director with a production of the Jerry Bock romantic musical, She Loves Me.
Later in the autumn he will direct Eduardo de Filippo's Grand Magic, and Sheridan's The School for Scandal.
He explained that early notice of the autumn season had to be given to the theatre's subscribers.
Each season at Perth about 5,000 people pay to see five plays for the price of four.
The new director hopes to extend the theatre's range of drama without losing these regular supporters.
Among the traditions he is determined to uphold is Perth's grand pantomime, to which Walter Carr will return next Christmas.
Joan Knight will also be returning to the theatre which she has run for the last 25 years, Andrew McKinnon having invited her to direct Tally's Blood.
She is also working again at Pitlochry Festival theatre in the coming season.
Having trained with Ms Knight, McKinnon became her associate director at Perth and went on to become director of York Theatre Royal and Northern State, Newcastle.
Latterly he has been director of the Actors' Centre in London.
Donning the mantle: Andrew McKinnon began his career in the theatre 20 years ago at Perth, training there in the early days of Joan Knight's reign
EDINBURGH QUARTET STRATHCLYDE UNIVERSITY MUSIC CLUB, GLASGOW
ROBERT Crawford's quintet for clarinet and strings, which received its premiere at Strathclyde University with the Edinburgh Quartet and clarinettist Douglas Mitchell, seemed a pleasant piece, appealing in that it explores the musical possibilities of letters from Crawford's name, and satisfying in that clarinet and strings blend in a mellifluous combination.
Much more one cannot say, because although Mitchell made admirable attempts to colour and project his lines, the quartet playing was so uncommitted and flabby, so lacking in dynamic range and in lustre, that Crawford's music had little chance to make more than superficial impact.
This was a pity because the score, an EQ commission, although hardly suggesting musical revolution, does invite some spicy variation in sounds, and provides opportunities for rhythmic pointing.
The quartet, clearly, were not on form.
The E flat Schubert Op 125 followed, beginning with some queasy intonations from the leader, Miles Baster.
And he can play this music with real elegance, one knows.
Although there were fleeting moments of engaging interplay between the lower strings, the performance was strangely dispiriting.
Mary Miller