

Churches stop short of backing anti-AIDS campaign
By Tom Morton
A CHURCH conference on AIDS in the Highlands yesterday stopped short of approving Highland Health Board's AIDS prevention campaign, which focuses on safer sexual practices for those at risk.
The gathering of about 90 delegates from most Highland denominations took place a year after the churches' first AIDS conference.
The condemnation then by some churchmen of the health board's stance on AIDS caused controversy.
Yesterday William Weatherspoon, the conference chairman, and former Inverness headmaster, said this year's conference had provided hopeful signs that the various churches' positions could be harmonised.
‘The signs are that we can work together on a more certain basis, that we can find principles on which we can agree.’
While compassion and concern were hallmarks of the churches' approach to the victims of HIV and AIDS, he went on, the central message of the churches remained the same.
‘Not in any great sense of condemnation, but quite clearly the scriptural teaching is that the one safe situation is to have one partner, within the Christian view of marriage.’
A Nairn Free Church minister, Colin Rogerson, said it was impossible for Christians to lower their standards from that of scripture, but added that a common meeting place with the ‘morally neutral’ health board was possible.
The Highland AIDS liaison officer, Brian Devlin, a former practising Roman Catholic priest, said that while the churches were usually happy to see clean needles and syringes made available to drug addicts, the question of sex and sexuality was a frequent sticking point in their attitude towards AIDS prevention.
‘In my opinion it is wrong to say we are morally neutral,’ he said.
‘I believe that what we do is morally positive in that it is keeping people alive.’
People might take 50 or 60 years to make up their minds on how they wished to live their lives, he went on.
‘Unfortunately, by that time they could be HIV positive.
Many simply will not listen to the churches’ message.’
Preparing for donkey work Bishop Sessford, right, may be at the centre of controversy over the ordination of women but he plans a quiet life when he retires, writes Tom Morton
THE Rt Rev George Sessford, Bishop of Moray, Ross and Caithness in the Episcopal Church, knows his donkeys.
A fully paid-up member of the Donkey Breeding Society, he regrets that he cannot have a stable or two in his large and well-kept garden.
‘I had donkeys when I was in Forres, 23 years ago,’ he says, somewhat wistfully.
‘But there is a by-law which prevents the keeping of asses or swine within the burgh limits of Inverness.’
A retirement home awaits, in his beloved Aultbea, and donkeys are on the agenda there along with his other main hobby, sailing.
However, there are stormy waters to be navigated before the 65-year-old bishop retires.
He is embroiled in a controversy over his opposition to the ordination of woman priests in the church he has served for more than 40 years, the last 23 as bishop.
An apparent threat to leave the church should the Scottish Episcopal Synod in June vote in favour of woman's ordination received wide publicity, although he feels he has been misrepresented.
‘In all secular matters I am a feminist,’ says the bishop, who is widowed and remarried, with three daughters by his first wife.
‘One of my daughters is an ardent feminist and she and I were appalled at this ‘Bishop slams women’ publicity.
I can assure you I have never slammed a woman in my life.’
Acknowledging that the church in the past has failed to give women sufficient power, Bishop Sessford nevertheless takes his stand firmly against a female priesthood.
‘Just because we are independent of Rome doesn't mean we have jettisoned the Bible, the creeds, the sacraments, the ministry.
Our priesthood is a continuation of the old pre-Reformation church and is all part of our inheritance.
I maintain that our little church does not have the authority to change something which in essence does not belong to it.’
Until the entire Catholic tradition reaches a consensus approving women's ordination, Bishop Sessford will oppose it.
Should this year's synod vote for female priests, Bishop Sessford will not leave the church immediately.
It will take a year for the synod's decision to be fully ratified and if the June 1994 synod does mark the final step towards ordaining women, not only will nothing happen for six months, but the college of bishops will present three resolutions safeguarding the positions of those within the church who do not agree.
Without those safeguards, Bishop Sessford will leave.
But where would he go?
He shakes his head sadly.
‘I wish I knew the answer to that question — I honestly don't know.
There are a number of options, but I most certainly would not lead a breakaway church.’
Possibilities include joining another Anglican communion, such as the Welsh one, or the ‘Roman ticket’.
Although married Anglican priests have been accepted into the Catholic priesthood, no precedent exists for a bishop, ‘although it may be the price humility demands’.
Rejecting the value of his past ministry would be hard for the bishop.
A pioneering post as the first Episcopal priest in Cumbernauld and 23 years in the Highlands ordaining all but one of the priests now in post are sources of satisfaction to him.
However, he longs to explore the nature of Celtic Christianity.
And there are the donkeys, of course.
Retirement, though, could not be taken as an easy escape from controversy.
‘You don't stop believing,’ he says.
Onward Christian socialists The annual lecture to commemorate RH Tawney, the economic historian and Christian socialist, is being given in London today by the Labour leader, John Smith.
In the following extract from a new book, he delivers a moral agenda for his party
THE goal of individual freedom and the value of society, which we advocate as democratic socialists, is a theory of sustained intellectual force.
When tested in the experience of humanity it can be found to be a better explanation of the lives and purposes of men and women than its rivals on the laissez-faire Right or the Marxist Left.
We ought therefore, in the battle of ideas which is at the centre of the political struggle, to be confident in the strength of our intellectual case.
But I believe we must also argue for our cause on the basis of its moral foundation.
It is a sense of revulsion at injustice and poverty and denied opportunity, whether at home or abroad, which impels people to work for a better world, to become, as in our case, democratic socialists.
The powerful contribution of Christian socialists in all the denominations of the Church has always focused on the moral purpose of political action.
How true it is that the Labour Party has owed more to Methodism than to Marx.
But it was that great Anglican, William Temple (Archbishop of Canterbury), who identified what he called ‘the real wealth of human life’, who saw that the individual was best fulfilled in the context of a strong community bound together in fellowship.
That is a truth I want to re-assert today with confidence and conviction.
It is why I believe the Labour Party must be bold in demonstrating our commitment to enhance and extend individual freedom by building a society which is dynamic and responsive to the aspirations of all our people.
Temple defined the relationships which constituted our real wealth as existing in terms of family, community and nation.
We ought to support family life as one of the foundation stones of a good society and in consequence fight determinedly against the unemployment, poverty and lack of opportunity by which it is so often menaced.
When Labour founded the National Health Service we lifted a great burden from the shoulders of ordinary families who were set free from the financial perils of ill health.
In 1993 we ought to reflect that in this year a new American president is following in the footsteps of a pioneering Labour government 45 years ago.
Let no one tell me that the principles of democratic socialism — of which the NHS is a fine example — are dated.
They are, as in this comparative example, often ahead of their time.
By the same token we must strengthen our communities and our sense of community.
The undermining of local government (which is part of the deliberate down-grading of all alternative power systems to the central State) means that communities are being weakened by having no means to advance their own ambitions and to tackle their own problems in their own way.
That is why I urge a renaissance of local government in the context of a more pluralistic and diverse society.
It is why I believe that devolving power from an overcentralised Westminster and Whitehall to Scotland, Wales, and the regions of England is a necessary part of the refurbishment of our democracy.
Democracy has to be a vital and constantly refreshing element in our socialism.
We want also to build a society which strives always to unlock the talent and skills of its own people, to harness what Tawney once magnificently described as ‘the extraordinary potential of ordinary people’.
More and more we realise, as deskilling and lack of training inhibit our economic capacity, that a policy of social opportunity also makes the most obvious economic sense.
As we near the end of the 20th century our horizons must extend well beyond our own national frontiers, to our new relationships which are developing fast in the European Community and to our obligations and opportunities in the exciting, but often perilous circumstances of the post Cold War world.
Thanks be to God that we now perhaps have the opportunity of diverting our resources from the piling up of armaments which threaten our planet's existence, to tackling the profound injustices and deprivations of the north/south divide.
There is no doubt whatever where our obligations lie both as Christians and as socialists.
We must never allow the needs of the developing world, where live the majority of our fellow world citizens, to be anything but central to our political purposes.
There is no good reason why Britain should not have emulated the achievements of the Scandinavian countries who, profoundly influenced by their social democratic tradition, have set standards which in recent years our country has fallen well below.
In Britain and the world of the new century which approaches we will need to give the enhancement and protection of our environment a prominence which simply did not enter into the consciousness of earlier generations.
The earth upon which God has placed us should be for us a special trust from one generation to another.
The need to develop effective action to implement that trust is a dramatic illustration of how economic forces need to be contained and controlled for the good of the world community right across both frontiers and generations.
We ought to approach our politics with a sense of optimism for the future.
There is so much of good that can be done if we seize the opportunities which a modern world makes available.
Instead of carrying the miserable burden of mass unemployment, we could be investing in new technology and in new skills, training and retraining our talented people to face a fiercely competitive world: instead of our education system declining and our health service fracturing, we could be building high-quality public services which extend security and opportunity to every family in the land; instead of a society diminished by the violence and dishonesty of crime, we could be building strong communities which provided opportunity as well as protection for every citizen.
There is so much we can do; there is so much we need to do.
The second commandment [St Matthew XXII, 39]calls upon us to love our neighbours as ourselves.
It does not expect a frail humanity to be capable of loving our neighbours more than ourselves: that would be a task of saintly dimension.
But I do not believe we can truly follow that great commandment unless we have a concept of care and concern for our fellow citizens which is reflected in the organisation of our society.
In this vital way we can ally our Christian faith to our democratic socialist conviction.
In the pursuit of both we can aspire to lead our country to find the real wealth which only a good society can provide.
Religious views
Your political editor has inadequately researched his statement that the Prime Minister ‘has not made his religious views known’(report of 20 March).
During the second-ballot campaign for the Conservative leadership, after the preacher of the admirable ‘Sermon on the Mound’ had withdrawn, all three candidates acknowledged themselves (in separate interviews carried by the BBC Radio 4 Sunday programme) as belonging to the Church of England.
John Major, like Douglas Hurd and Michael Heseltine, discussed the way that this adherence shaped his approach to politics and national life.
As was suggested in a paper published last year by the 1988 Forum (as it then was) Mr Heseltine was sure that the Church was part of the fabric of national life; Mr Hurd appeared to have established agreeable diplomatic relations with the Almighty; and ‘John Major seemed the least ‘churchy’ yet perhaps the most thoughtful and original’in discussing faith and politics.
Your political editor might like to seek transcripts of the interviews from the BBC.