

Fish traders blame home fleet for price slump
By Frank Urquhart
A FISH merchants' leader last night blamed illegal landings of black fish by Scottish and English boats for the collapse in quayside prices which has sparked an outcry against imports of foreign fish.
Robert Milne, chief executive of the Scottish Fish Merchants' Federation, dismissed as ‘garbage’ claims by fishermen that cheap foreign imports had led to the price slump and pointed the finger of blame firmly at British skippers.
He said that large amounts of black fish, being landed almost daily, were at the root of the price problems.
Mr Milne declared: ‘Much of the black fish lands up south of the Border and is sold at prices we just cannot compete with.
This is the issue which must be addressed with all urgency.’
Geoffrey Molloy, chairman of the Association of Frozen Food producers, also blamed British fishermen for the crisis.
He said: ‘The much vaunted influx of Russian fish is a myth.
Only 400 tonnes of fresh and less than 2,000 tonnes of frozen cod, have been landed in the UK by Russian vessels so far this year.
‘The increases in landings which the fishermen complain about are, in fact, caught by UK fishermen themselves.’
Scottish fish merchants and processors also united last night in condemning a campaign by English fishermen to secure a ban on the import of Russian cod.
Mr Milne said his members were appalled at the stand being taken by the Grimsby-based Nation Federation of Fishermen's Organisations.
Mr Milne warned that the NFFO demand would jeopardise the herring and mackerel export trade to eastern Europe which was vital to Scotland's pelagic industry.
He revealed his federation had sent an open letter to Russian skippers telling them: ‘You are welcome in Scotland.’
Mr Milne said: ‘The NFFO has no remit whatsoever to talk for Scotland which is, of course, by far the more important part of the UK fishing industry.
‘At least eight companies in the north-east of Scotland, employing about 1,000 people in total, are very heavily dependant on the type of fish obtained from the Arctic and future viability will be doubtful without these supplies.’
He states in his letter to the Russians: ‘On behalf of the Scottish fish processors may I say that we have appreciated the trading link that we have with you and we would hope that this will continue.
‘Although we have no mandate to talk for Scottish fishermen we are quite convinced that they too would want to continue exporting large amounts of herring to your country.’
The NFFO yesterday drew back from calling for a sea and road blockade to stop the supplies of foreign fish.
Instead the organisation's east coast  committee voted to press for a temporary import ban on Russian cod to allow EC markets to stabilise.
Nigel Atkins, chairman of the east coast committee, said a blockade had been dismissed as being ‘inappropriate at this juncture’.
He said: ‘Our intention is to defuse the situation at present with a view to trying to negotiate our way through the problem and secure an outcome in the months ahead which will satisfy all our fishermen.’
Bull market
SAY what you like about City ethics, but at least resignation seems not to have passed completely out of fashion in the Square Mile.
Peter Rawlins, having failed in his mission to set up the stubbornly impracticable Taurus computer trading system, has done what used to be called the honourable thing.
For the Stock Exchange chief executive, the ignominy of having cost the City several hundred million pounds was reason enough to take the long walk.
It is probably churlish to contrast that with those who spent $15 billion last autumn vainly trying to prop up the pound and who remain in post at Threadneedle Street and 11 Downing Street.
There is a lot that is very far from funny about the Taurus episode.
There are the lost jobs, the lost money and the lost prestige as London battles to maintain its reputation among the world's financial centres.
And yet, many will draw some sour satisfaction from the fact that the stockbroking trade, with its air of effortless mystique and superiority, is clearly no better at computers than the rest of us.
Every secretary whose word processor refuses to talk to its printer, every technologically-challenged hotel receptionist, every journalist who has ever seen his scoop disappear forever through the hole in the ozone layer can walk a little taller.
Yes, even the chaps in the red braces and rhomboid haircuts can be humbled by technofear.
The irritating thing about the City is its clubbishness.
It acts as if it is looking after all our interests in ways too subtle and refined for us to understand.
Many British institutions are secretive, but few are quite so patronising about it as the City.
Therefore, when it comes a cropper, there is a tendency among the rest of us to enjoy a quiet chortle, even if suspecting that all our wallets will end up lighter as a result.
In classic City style, however, the precise dimensions of the cropper remain obscure.
Top estimates so far put the cost at £450 million (the Guardian) and 1,000 jobs (the Independent).
No question — Taurus is a lot of bull.
Titanic job with a sinking feeling It's all in the red bag.
Gordon Milne takes a light look at the Budget
WHEN Norman Lamont opens his battered old red box on Tuesday, his action will signal the end of a tradition which has stretched back at least two centuries.
Ever since the 18th century, the taxman's springtime fancy has turned lightly towards thoughts of revenue gathering.
When Britain was an agricultural economy, government finances hinged around the collection of the land tax and April was the beginning of the agricultural year.
But come December, budget day finds a new place on the calendar — just three weeks before Christmas.
To commemorate the move, the accountancy firm, Peat Marwick, has produced a booklet of budget trivia.
Britain's first attempt to draw up a national balance sheet was in England in 1362, under Edward III.
(It should come as little surprise that it showed a deficit, albeit of only £55,000.)
However, it was almost four centuries later that the word ‘budget’ was applied to the annual parliamentary event.
The word derives from the old French word bougette, meaning a little bag.
In slang used at the time, to open your budget meant to speak your mind.
In 1733, 26 years after the Act of Union, a pamphleteer accused the prime minister, Sir Robert Walpole, of behaving like a quack doctor.
‘The Budget is opened: and our state empirick hath dispensed his packets by his Zany Couriers through all the Kingdom,’ he wrote.
Nowadays, the Zany Couriers of the Inland Revenue dispatch a sheaf of press releases to newspapers, television and radio channels throughout the country one minute after the Chancellor sits down.
IG Index, bookmakers to the City, now run a book on how many minutes the Chancellor will take.
Since the war, the speeches have tended to last between 90 minutes and two and a half hours.
The range was far wider in the 19th century, and the shortest speech on record was Benjamin Disraeli's in 1867, at 45 minutes.
The longest came from his great rival, William Ewart Gladstone — that clocked in at a mind-numbing four hours and 45 minutes.
An arduous task.
Because the budget speech is regarded as something of a marathon, the Chancellor of the Exchequer — and only the Chancellor — is by tradition allowed on Budget day to bring alcohol into the chamber of the House.
Hugh Gaitskell's chosen tipple was rum and orange.
Denis Healey plumped for brandy, Selwyn Lloyd enjoyed a wee dram and Sir Geoffrey Howe drank gin and tonic.
Sadly, that tradition has lapsed over the past five years.
In Nigel Lawson's first year as Chancellor, he fortified himself with whisky and soda, but tempered his consumption latterly by sipping spritzers while upping alcohol duties.
As one might expect from John Major, he drank only mineral water in 1990, his one stint with the budget box.
Shetland's own Norman Lamont fortifies himself with nothing stronger than Scottish spring water.
(Nor does he puff Raffles cigarettes in the Commons — there is a strict smoking ban in the chamber at all times.)
Possibly the most curious budget tipple was Sir Derick Heathcoat-Amory's, rum and honey in cold milk.
In 1959, Amory collapsed during his speech.
It later transpired that in the days immediately preceding the budget he had found time to eat only once — a poached egg at the Lyons Corner House which was then opposite the House of Commons.
Roy Jenkins, chancellor from 1968 to 1970, acknowledged the strain when he said: ‘I think it is the most back-breaking job in government and indeed it has broken the back of nearly everyone who has held it since the war.’
But for the final word on the huge difficulties facing Chancellor Lamont in his last ever springtime budget, we should heed the wise words of Prime Minister Major: ‘It will take some time, it always does, to change the economy.
It's like turning the Titanic round, as you know.’
Taxing tipple: Denis Healey as Chancellor of Exchequer sipped brandy; while Geoffrey Howe (below) preferred gin and tonic
Soft line on taxes may harden rates
THE threat of higher taxes in next week's Budget gave the stock market a severe panic attack this week, when the FT-SE 100-Share Index was within 20 points of the 3,000 line, which the bulls had confidently expected it to reach by Budget Day.
By mid-afternoon, the Footsie had fallen almost 80 points, or 3 per cent, from the all-time peak reached at the start of trading on Tuesday.
The economy remains stagnant, yet share prices rose 15 per cent last year and another 5 per cent up to the beginning of this week.
Leading shares now earn just 6 per cent gross and pay dividends of 4 per cent.
The strength of the stock market has been built entirely on the belief that the economy is about to start growing again at a time when inflation, earnings growth and interest rates are all low and falling, creating ideal conditions for a period of non-inflationary growth.
Paradoxically, the arguments in favour of higher taxes which brought the euphoria to an end have also been directly strengthened by a growing feeling of confidence that the recession is over and the start of a recovery is imminent, so that the economy can now stand some tougher treatment from the Chancellor.
Indeed, the hard-liners who always argue that monetary stability has to be a higher priority than growth and jobs have claimed that the Chancellor would be irresponsible in not raising taxes as soon as there is scope for him to do so.
The pragmatists, who would like to have it both ways, believe that raising taxes will bring any incipient recovery to a halt, by putting up prices and reducing the spending power of consumers, who already face the prospect of sharply falling pay settlements, which could well dip below inflation this year.
One's sympathies are with the pragmatists, but it has to be admitted that if the markets do get the impression that the Chancellor is taking a soft line on inflation to promote growth, then the pound could come under pressure, and the next move in interest rates could then be up not down.
Recovery is the best medicine for the market, but it must be sustainable.
Pittencrieff to bid for Aberdeen Petroleum
PLANS were announced last night by the Edinburgh-based Pittencrieff company to merge its US oil and gas production operations with those of London-based Aberdeen Petroleum to save on overheads, writes Frank Frazer.
The move would stem from a takeover bid which Pittencrieff will launch next week for Aberdeen, in which it already holds 19.1 per cent.
It will offer two new Pittencrieff shares for every 49 of Aberdeen.
Terry Heneaghan, Pittencrieff's chief executive, said he did not look at the deal in terms of oil or gas production and reserves which would be acquired, but rather in terms of cash flow which could be generated for his company by rationalising operations of the two companies in parts of the US where they both have interests.
He believed that the two operations could be run with the staff of about ten employed by Pittencrieff at its office in Abilene, Texas, after closing Aberdeen's office in Denver, Colorado, which has between ten and 15 staff.
It was also planned to rationalise operations in the UK, but Mr Heneaghan gave an assurance that Edinburgh, where his company employs five people, would remain as headquarters for the combined operation.
The bid is conditional on Aberdeen shareholders deciding to reject their company's bid for Brabant Resources, another small oil company.
Nuclear looks at overseas suppliers
By Peter Woodifield, BUSINESS EDITOR
SCOTTISH Nuclear is considering buying fuel from abroad for its nuclear power stations at Torness and Hunterston as part of its drive to cuts its costs by 25 per cent over the next few years.
Informal approaches were made six months ago to companies in the United States, Japan and France to see if they would be interested in supplying fuel for the advanced gas-cooled reactors at a considerably lower price than charged by British Nuclear Fuels.
James Hann, Scottish Nuclear's chairman has made it clear he wants to continue buying fuel from BNF but has said he is prepared to look abroad if he can't obtain a reasonable price.
BNF is currently the world's only supplier of fuel for AGRs, and Scottish Nuclear, which is expected to make profits of around £28 million this year from supplying electricity to ScottishPower and Scottish Hydro-Electric, is considering putting up the money to build the necessary fuel production facilities if its latest move comes to anything.
Scottish Nuclear currently has annual running costs of £400 million but wants to cut that to £300 million.
That would have the effect of cutting the cost per unit from 3.2p to around 2.5p, which would make nuclear fuel far more competitive with gas and coal.
A major start has already been made with the agreement that Scottish Nuclear can store its spent fuel on site rather than send it to BNF's reprocessing plant at Sellafield in Cumbria, which will save £45 million a year.
A planning inquiry into its application to build a dry store at Torness to hold the spent fuel has already been held, although the decision has not yet been announced.
It will soon submit an application to build a dry store at Hunterston.
Scottish Nuclear's annual fuel bill is currently £25 million a year.
At the beginning of last year it agreed in principle a 15-year deal covering fuel supplies and  reprocessing at a cost of £2.7 billion, but the contracts have not yet been signed.
As part of its drive to improve its efficiency and make itself ready for the private sector should the Government decide to privatise it following the review of the nuclear industry next year, Scottish Nuclear recently appointed Charterhouse, the merchant bank, as its adviser.
City jitters knock 37.5 off Footsie
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE FT-SE 100-Share Index fell nearly 50 points by mid-afternoon yesterday and was in imminent danger of dropping below 2,900 before a late rally helped it recover to close at 2,915.9, down 37.5 on the day, in busy trading.
The market was easier from the start, with investors concerned about the threat of higher taxes in the Budget at home, worries about the future of the Maastricht Treaty and European economic and monetary union, and the more immediate dangers of Russia lapsing into chaos if the open confrontation between its president and parliament continues.
HSBC, which is expected to release good profits on Monday, still fell 38p to 603p, reflecting the 200-point drop in the Hang Seng index after the Hong Kong governor's decision to proceed with plans for partial democracy in the colony in the teeth of Chinese hostility.
Other shares with Hong Kong interests also suffered.
Inchcape fell 26p to 583p and Cable & Wireless ended 10p lower at 713p.
Glaxo lost more ground initially after Thursday's departure of the chief executive, but staged a recovery on US buying and closed just 4p lower at 664p.
Industrial stalwarts like Rolls-Royce, down 3.5p to 128p, GKN, down 8p to 472p, and IMI, 6p lower at 472p, all reflected City disillusionment with the sector.
Events in Russia again encouraged switching from marks to dollars, Swiss francs and pounds, and sterling closed three-eighths of a pfennig higher at Dm2.3887, but a fifth of a cent lower at $1.4345.
The revised output figures, confirming an 0.2 per cent rise in gross domestic product in the fourth quarter of last year, made up of a 6.3 per cent rise in oil and gas production, a static service sector, and falls of 0.2 per cent in manufacturing, 0.8 per cent in construction and 1 per cent in farming, provided little fresh inspiration.
Gross domestic product in the fourth quarter was 0.1 per cent above the last quarter's in 1991, but 0.5 per cent down between 1991 and 1992.
Money GDP rose 3.8 per cent last year before inflation, and the index of total home costs rose 4.4 per cent, while gross national disposable income, in real terms, fell 0.8 per cent .
Early indications that importers are having difficulty in passing on the higher costs of imports, and the latest savings ratio of 11.6 per cent in 1992, compared with 9.7 in 1991 and 12.4 in 1981, caused little surprise.
Lang welcomes training systems
COLLECTORS of business acronyms were boosted yesterday with the unveiling of a new model which is set to become the buzz of the training community, writes Douglas Fraser.
SQMS, or the Scottish Quality Management System, was given the approval of Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, for bringing ‘rationalisation to what is sometimes referred to as the quality jungle’.
He said in Edinburgh: ‘It will minimise duplication and overlap for training organisations and provide mutuality of recognition by key agencies.
It will result in more students and trainees having access to learning opportunities of a guaranteed high standard.’
The system, the first of its kind in the UK, has been devised over two years by a wide range of training bodies, including Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Vocational Education Council.
It is aimed at providing a common standard for all training providers, including the 22 local enterprise companies, 45 further education colleges and more than 1,500 other training organisations.
From April next year, providers are expected to have shifted to use of the guide to quality in vocational education and training and the 14-part system for auditing documents and qualifications.
John Young, of the Scottish Further Education Unit, pointed out this should avoid the duplication which colleges now face.
Oatridge Agricultural College in West Lothian, for instance, is required to meet the varied quality requirements of eight different LECs, and many  contracts have to be separately audited for quality assurance.
The new system should allow for one audit to be acceptable to all purchasers of training.
Iain Robertson, chief executive of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, explained: ‘By having all types of training meeting one common standard, we can ensure that a school leaver in Caithness with a training credit, a college student in Inverness or Stornoway, and the employer of a trainee in Shetland undertaking a Scottish Vocational Qualification, all benefit from further education and training to a standard which is underpinned by a recognised set of quality measurements.’
Pilkington makes £95m acquisition
PILKINGTON moved one step closer to vertical integration yesterday after its £95 million acquisition of Heywood Williams's merchanting and distribution business, writes Richard Shackleton.
The sale to the world's biggest glass company came as Huddersfield-based Heywood announced a 71 per cent crash in profits for 1992 to £5.5 million, from £19.2 million in 1991.
The businesses being sold make and distribute toughened and laminated glass doors and mirrors for the building trade and employ 2,400 staff at 50 sites in the UK and Eire.
The acquisition will initially increase Pilkington's gearing to 90 per cent, but this will fall after the anticipated sale of the spectacle-lens business, Sola.
It is the latest stage in a fundamental restructuring which has seen the loss of thousands of jobs and the disposal of peripheral businesses.
Heywood Williams said the sale was agreed after changes in the glass market which saw more competition, over-supply of glass and a fall in prices.
The sale proceeds will be used to pay off Heywood Williams's debts and give it net cash of £65 million to fund expansion.
Its chairman, Ralph Hinchcliffe, said the price fully reflected the value of the businesses.
The sale cash and its confidence about the future has allowed the group to hold its dividend total at 12.5p.
‘While it is too soon to be certain that there will be an appreciable improvement in the UK economy this year, the early signs are encouraging,’ said the board.
It believed ‘we now have good reason to expect that we will make considerable progress in 1993’.
Earnings per share plunged to 1.7p, from 17.4p, though turnover increased from £347.4 million to £389.4 million.
Cheap alternative to Taurus sought
THE Royal Bank of Scotland is to lead an industry-wide move to consider and promote alternatives to the now-defunct Taurus paperless share-settlement system, writes Richard Shackleton.
The bank has called a London meeting of leading share registrars and custodians for next Tuesday to discuss the fall-out from Thursday's decision by the Stock Exchange council to scrap the £400 million Taurus project.
The results of the meeting will then be forwarded to the Bank of England's new task force set up to consider possible alternatives.
Among the items for discussion will be the establishment of a clearing house to settle institutional transactions, currently 80 per cent of the market total by value.
Individual shareholders will continue to have their transactions settled through the existing Talisman system, which issues share certificates and transfer forms.
The bank is also considering a rolling settlement period to replace the current fortnightly accounting system, as well as‘delivery versus payment’, the automatic exchange of shares for cash after a stock market transaction has taken place.
A precedent for this form of twin-tier settlement already exists in the money markets, where a central clearing house deals exclusively with the big institutional currency deals.
Terry Pearson, head of the bank's global custody division, said the system could be set up for well under £50 million.
‘If we can settle institutional deals in a secure environment, then that could perhaps be quite a cheap exercise and fairly simple to establish.
We see that as a possible way forward.’
City sources believe that the Bank of England's task force will come down in favour of any alternative to Taurus that is cheap and simple.
But many member firms are concerned that control of any new system should be taken away from the Stock Exchange and given to a new independent agency, or even the Bank of England itself.
City firms have already stumped up more than £300 million for Taurus and are in no mood to inject any more cash into a replacement.
Securities houses are determined to have a big say in how any new system develops.
‘Although we have wasted money on Taurus, this is an ideal opportunity for firms to wrest control of their destiny back from the Exchange,’ said one.
But most are worried about the effect that any delay would have on London's European primacy as a financial centre.
£2.4bn losses for Lloyd's?
LOSSES at Lloyd's the London insurance market may be even greater than the £2 billion lost in 1989 when the final figures for 1990 are released this summer, according to analysts in the City.
They fear collective losses could reach £2.4 billion, imposing further swingeing losses on many of the 20,000 individual investor ‘Names’, who join syndicates to share the risks and profits of underwriting.
Previous losses have fallen heavily on members of some syndicates, giving rise to claims that insiders have diverted the best business to selected syndicates and channelled the higher risks and charges to ‘dustbin’ syndicates, with a high proportion of investors with little or no knowledge of the business.
Hundreds of these unfortunates now face losing their homes and many have already done so, in spite of a campaign to limit individual liabilities.
The former chairman of Lloyd's, David Coleridge, had expressed the hope last year that losses in 1990 would be smaller and more bearable.
Smaller Borders firms ‘losing out on enterprise aid’
By William Chisholm
THE directors of a small Borders textile business, which has landed its largest order, from Japan, claim that the region's local enterprise company is devoting too many of its resources to large firms.
By comparison, companies in the 20-50 jobs bracket suffer from neglect, they say.
Orde, of Jedburgh, yesterday outlined its grievances to the Roxburgh and Berwickshire MP, Archy Kirkwood, who is to ask the Prime Minister for increased Government support for the manufacturing sector.
Kevin Orde, managing director, said he was particularly concerned by the lack of assistance from Scottish Borders Enterprise for the four local member companies of the Scottish Apparel Group.
Last year, the group, comprising 25 small companies, set up its own showroom in central London.
Mr Orde said the centre's budget for 1993/94 would be £130,800, and the Borders companies were having to meet 100 per cent of their share.
‘There have been approaches to the LEC on several occasions, but apart from an initial contribution of £1,000, there has been no help’, Mr Orde said.
The London showroom already attracts buyers from the Far East, South Africa, Europe and the US.
Mr Kirkwood predicted: ‘It will either get adequate support to allow it to make progress, or it will be unable to continue, and that would be disastrous for companies like Orde.’
The £48,000 order for coats and jackets has been won by Orde at a time when the Japanese economy is in deep recession, and competition from other countries is intense.
The SBE's director of enterprise development and training, Bernard Rutherford, refuted Mr Orde's allegations that larger Borders businesses were getting an unfair share of assistance.
‘We have a very large textile initiative which has been up and running since our formation’, he said.
‘A textile and design centre is being developed and we have a sizeable programme of help for every sector of the industry.’
We are here to encourage any firm with plans for expansion or to increase their market share.’
New interest in old savings scheme
HOW many readers are aware of the fact that they can save up to £20 a month for five years which, if left untouched, will attract an interest bonus equivalent to 14 months' savings?
The scheme is called Save As You Earn (SAYE) and was introduced by the Government in 1969.
But, thanks to a combination of high interest rates on traditional deposit accounts over much of this period, coupled to a distinct lack of publicity for SAYE, it has been relegated to little more than a footnote in the long list of savings options.
However, according to the Halifax Building Society, there has been a major surge in interest for SAYE of late, thanks to low interest rates.
In a nutshell, SAYE is a regular savings scheme offered by just a few building societies which can be opened by anyone aged 16 or over.
The rate of interest, in the shape of a tax-free bonus, is set by the Treasury.
The investor can make a fixed investment of between £1 and £20 a month for five years and at the end of this term, interest is added as a tax-free bonus of 14 months' savings.
This is equivalent to a fixed rate of interest of 8.3 per cent(worth 11.07 per cent to basic rate taxpayers, or 13.83 per cent to higher rate taxpayers).
If the money plus the bonus is left for a further two years, an additional bonus of another 14 months' interest is paid, boosting the tax-free return to 8.62 per cent(worth 11.49 per cent to the basic rate taxpayer, or 14.37 per cent to a higher rate taxpayer).
If the maximum of £20 a month is saved, this will be worth £1,480 after five years and £1,760 after seven years.
Payments can be stopped and the money withdrawn from the account at any time.
However, if this is done in year one, there is no interest paid at all.
If it is withdrawn between years one and five, the investor will receive a rate of 6 per cent tax-free, or 8 per cent in the event of death.
In addition, savers can miss up to six monthly payments over the five years provided they are made up in the months immediately following the five-year term.
While the maximum that can be saved by an individual aged over 16 is £20 a month, more than one SAYE account can be held by the saver — provided they are held with the same institution and are opened at least one month apart.
Building societies offering SAYE accounts include the Halifax, Alliance & Leicester, Bradford & Bingley, the North of England and the Scottish.
Incentives for bank staff come under spotlight Performance targets introduced by the Royal Bank of Scotland have triggered a consumer row.
IAN HARPER investigates
THE ISSUE of awarding banking staff performance-related pay has been thrown into sharp relief by the current controversy over the Royal Bank of Scotland's ‘Performance Plus’ scheme.
According to the bank's branch banking division managing director, Tony Schofield, it has been introduced because staff are failing to charge customers for such ancillary services as stopping cheques or returning standing orders unpaid.
Under the scheme, each branch has been set two targets in the current quarter.
The first is to maximise the income from charges for ancillary services — that is, recalled standing orders and unpaid direct debits; cheques returned unpaid; referrals; letters on overdrawn accounts; and bank giro credits.
If the branch achieves the target, each employee (bar the manager, who is assessed separately) will receive £40.
The second target is to achieve a set increase in personal deposit balances on such products as current  accounts , TESSAs and 90-day accounts.
If this target is reached, branch employees will also receive £40 each.
If both targets are met, then employees will receive £100.
According to Nigel Griffiths, the Edinburgh South Labour MP, the scheme is designed to ‘milk every penny of profit from account holders,’ and marks a situation where ‘the bank is removing any incentive for managers to treat the individual needs of customers with sympathy and understanding’.
But such assertions have been hotly denied by Mr Schofield.
In an open letter to MPs this week, he stated: ‘The programme is intended to extend performance-related pay to clerical staff, to reward them for their success and hard work.
In the current quarter, it cover two areas.
‘First, as part of our current advertising and marketing campaign, it is intended to reward staff for their success in attracting deposits…secondly, it is intended to create more consistent charging practice across the bank's network…‘
According to a Royal Bank spokesman, in April the focus of the scheme could shift to mortgages or even to the life assurance products sold by the bank's insurance subsidiary, Royal Scottish Assurance.
Incentives to sell life and pensions products are not new at the Royal Bank, however.
Life Line, the internal publication for the bank's employees, which keeps them in touch with the activities of Royal Scottish Assurance — publishes a table which shows the top 20 branches in 1991/92 ranked by insurance commission earnings.
At the top of the list is the Great Tower Street branch in London (£22,615) while the top Scottish branch is East Kilbride (£16,116).
Elsewhere in the same publication, under the title The Power of Networking, a list details the importance of referrals by ordinary branch staff in the sale of insurance.
Following his introduction to a Royal Bank customer at the Carluke branch in Scotland, a Royal Scottish consultant sold — a £10,000 single premium bond to the customer (commission to the branch, £200); a £25,000 bond to the customer's sister (branch commission £500); and a £35,000 pension transfer (branch commission £710) and a £20,000 bond (branch commission £400) to the customer's son-in-law.
At the time of the list's publication, business was still pending over three of the son-in-law's colleagues.
One Scotsman reader, who this week deposited £32 into his business account at his local Royal Bank branch, was asked by the teller: ‘Is this your own account?’
On replying: ‘Yes,’ he was reminded that the end of the tax year was approaching and asked if he had considered investing in a pension.
He said: ‘I was dumbstruck to be asked this by the teller.’
‘It is intended to create more consistent charging practice across the bank's network’
Best policy is to shop around
GEOFFREY BERNSTEIN looks at a way to hedge your bets to protect income
ONE way for savers to boost their income is by purchasing an annuity from an insurance company.
Whilst building society interest rates have halved over the last 18 months or so, annuity rates have not fallen anything like as much, because they depend upon the rates on long-term bonds.
For example, where 18 months ago the annual income on a level annuity might have been 13 per cent , now a new annuity might offer 12 per cent .
On an index-linked annuity the rates may typically have fallen from 9 per cent to 8 per cent.
The differences between quotes from different insurance companies can be much larger.
In a recent case taken on by the Pension Income Maximiser Service, the best quote was nearly a third more than the worst, and was 10 per cent better than most of the others.
Getting the best quote may be at least as important as getting the timing right, and it is certainly easier to do.
Bearing in mind uncertainty about the future and the likelihood of an increase in inflation from the present very low rates, an index-linked annuity must represent a sensible hedge.
Is now a good time to buy an annuity, or would it be better to wait for rates to go back up again?
A number of phased retirement schemes have come on the market to enable people to stagger the purchase of their annuities under their pension arrangements.
The argument runs that annuity rates have come down (which they have done) and that, therefore, they will go back up again (which they might do, or they might go down further).
Spreading the annuity purchase over a period of years will average out rates over that period, but whether this will result in a bigger pension at the end of  the day is highly speculative.
Watch out that the charges under these arrangements do not more than eat up any advantage.
There will generally be 5 per cent, or more, commission payable to the introducing agent.
This will come out of the policyholder's own fund.
Also, the insurance company will charge around 1 per cent a year for administering the arrangement.
These arrangements are an unknown quantity and the administration may not turn out to be up to scratch.
In particular, there is bound to be a large amount of work involved in buying a number of small annuities over the years and it may be difficult to get the appropriate advice at the time.
How to prepare yourself for a life after work
ARE YOU paying adequate attention to your retirement needs?
According to a recent Gallup survey of 1,034 adults throughout the UK commissioned by the Abbey National, people in Scotland and the north of England may not be.
The survey reveals that almost three in four of those living in Scotland and the north do not know how much of their current salary is contributed to their pension, while almost half have no idea about the approximate level of return of their pension.
When it comes to planning for the future, however, a pension plan — whether a company scheme or a private contract with a life company — is more tax effective than any other savings or investment vehicle.
The contributions attract tax relief at the individual's highest rate of tax (unless of course the Chancellor makes changes in next week's Budget) while pension funds themselves are also exempt from tax.
But the subject of pensions is an extremely complex one and even for the more modestly paid individual, there are many factors to take into account.
In this Pensions Special, we have brought together a top team of writers to address some of the key factors which all people who are concerned to have as comfortable a retirement as possible should take into account.
For example, should you contract out of the state earnings related pension scheme (SERPS) into an appropriate personal pension contract.
And if it is advantageous to do so now, is there a point in the future when it may not be.
If you decide to take out a personal pension, what are the costs involved in commissions to advisers as well as the costs and expenses of the pension provider?
For the company director, we examine the implications of holding down your salary, possibly to reduce their tax liability to the Revenue.
Many directors who take dividends in lieu of salary may think they are on to a good thing.
But the implications come retirement could be very serious.
When the time finally comes to retire, what are the options for the accumulated fund that years of contributions have built up?
A certain proportion can be taken as a tax-free lump sum, but the balance must invariably be used to buy an income stream in the shape of an annuity.
The problem is that annuity rates fall as interest rates fall, so is it a good time to buy an annuity when interest rates are low and what can be done about it?
Unfortunately, people can die before they reach retirement and some of their spouses may have a rude shock when they discover that instead of receiving a huge pension fund, they are entitled only to a return of the premiums.
Why is this and what can be done about it?
When many people take out their pension, they may be happily married, but the sad fact is that many will have divorced before reaching retirement.
Splitting such obvious assets as the matrimonial home may be strewn with problems, but what about an accrued pension fund?
Finally, and perhaps most importantly in view of the continuing economic recession and the associated high level of redundancies, what factors should you take into account when considering to transfer your company pension  scheme .
And is there a relatively simple means of knowing what the transfer value is that you are entitled to?
Where should you go to get pensions advice?
There can only be one answer to this — an independent financial adviser who (a) is a specialist in pensions, and (b) offers the option of paying by way of a fee as well as by commission.
Counting the cost of divorce
BRIAN DUFFIN examines the financial problems of marriage break-ups
‘MARRY in May and rue the day’ run the words of an old saying.
Perhaps today it should be turned into a couplet with the second line being ‘Half your pension's too much to pay!’
The emotional trauma of divorce is well known, but the financial complexities are only now beginning to hit home.
The position in Scotland is  established by the Family Law (Scotland) Act 1985, which included a modernisation of divorce law.
The principle behind the act is that marriage should be regarded as a partnership which is dissolved on divorce allowing both parties to have a ‘clean break’ and go their separate ways.
All assets built up during the marriage should be regarded as jointly owned and therefore jointly divided on divorce, apart from those which are clearly intended for one party or the other through a specific gift or bequest.
It also follows that any assets brought into the marriage at its commencement by either party should be left out of the reckoning on divorce as well.
There is specific provision for two items to be taken into account as a prior charge on the assets before any division is made.
The first relates to providing for any children of the marriage and the second allows for a temporary income to be given to either partner who is likely to suffer immediate hardship — this support may last for up to three years.
In other respects, the principle is clearly that the assets should be divided fairly between the two parties.
The most obvious asset in most marriages is the matrimonial home, but the act also provides specifically that the ‘rights or interests of either party under an…occupational pension scheme’ should also be taken into account.
Pension schemes are already notoriously complicated, so it is not surprising that lawyers have turned to the actuarial profession to establish valuations of the pension benefits in divorce cases.
The size of these valuations, which in some cases exceed the value of the matrimonial home, has come as a surprise to many lawyers and to their clients.
It has also raised some practical difficulties in making a transfer of assets from one party to another when a portion of those assets consists of a pension which is not payable for many years to come.
Actuaries have recently been considering the particular difficulties of calculating pensions valuations in divorce cases, but have also been looking at the much wider issues raised by the changing pattern of divorce and marriage.
Developments in Scotland are also being followed keenly south of the Border, where it is expected that a Scottish Lord Chancellor will introduce family legislation for England and Wales which will follow the example set by his countrymen.
A recent paper* submitted to the Faculty of Actuaries in Edinburgh gave a good example of how divorce is bringing a change in the way we live.
In England and Wales the percentage of men in the age range 60 to 64 who were married was 83.4 per cent in 1961 falling a little to 81.3 per cent in 1990.
However by the year 2030, if current rates of divorce and re-marriage persist, this proportion will have dropped to 63 per cent.
Divorce rates in Scotland are following a similar trend, although they are roughly five years later in taking effect.
Another complicating social factor is the change in working patterns.
It is now much more common for both partners in the marriage to be employed, and therefore for both to be members of pension schemes, than when the design of most schemes was undertaken.
The original intention was to allow a husband to retire in a similar standard of living to that which he enjoyed while working and to allow his surviving widow to be comfortable after his death.
In future years, it is quite possible that both husband and wife will enjoy a healthy level of pension in their retirement and that both will continue to derive a good income from their partner's pension scheme when that partner has died — as a widow's or widower's pension being paid in addition to the continuing pension from his or her own scheme.
Consequently a widow or widower will enjoy a higher retirement income than if or she had been single when they retired.
This raises questions of fairness which deserve to be debated publicly.
They are thrown in sharp contrast against the benefits which emerge from ‘money purchase’ schemes, where the pension and other benefits are determined solely by the value of the fund built up by each pension scheme member at retirement.
In these schemes, a widow's or widower's pension can only be achieved if the member gives up part of their own retirement pension.
Consequently the question arises, do we wish married and single people to be treated equally regarding their pension benefits and, if so, how can this be achieved in a final salary pension scheme?
Time to find whether opting out adds up As the 2% incentive to contract out of SERPS nears an end, LIZ WALKINGTON takes stock
THE Government's scheme to encourage people to contract out of the state earnings related pension scheme (SERPS) via personal pensions has produced results way beyond expectations.
Enticed by a 2 per cent incentive payment on top of the National Insurance rebate, some five million people have taken up the option since it was introduced in July 1988.
For insurance companies it was the marketing story of the decade.
Rebate-only plans apparently offered a free pension, as all the money came from the Government.
Of course, SERPS rights had to be forfeited, but for younger people these were calculated to be worth much less than the personal pension could offer.
Now, however, it is time to take stock.
The 2 per cent incentive comes to an end on 5 April and in the new tax year the national insurance rebate will drop from 5.8 to 4.8 per cent or, grossed up with tax relief, from about 6.5 to about 5.4 per cent.
To prevent a mad rush back into SERPS, the Government is adding a 1 per cent bonus for those over 30 who contract out through personal pensions.
This may herald a move to a broader system of age-related rebates at the next rebate review, due in April 1996.
The benefits of contracting out at younger ages stem from the fact that the flat-rate rebate is based on an average of the costs of providing benefits for all age groups.
In reality, the cost drops the further you are from retirement, as there is longer for the benefits to  accumulate .
A report from the government actuary last year included a table of estimated costs for providing a guaranteed minimum pension equivalent to SERPS benefits.
For men in the 16-19 age group it was just 1.9 per cent, while for the 60-64 age group it was 10.2 per cent .
For women, the costs are higher, as their retirement age is lower.
But the pattern is the same — a figure of 2.7 per cent for the youngest ages, rising to 11.9 per cent for those aged 55-59.
This explains why contracting out has been so popular.
Including tax relief and the 2 per cent incentive, the total rebate was worth around 8.5 per cent.
Even allowing for the investment risk of personal pensions, this amounted to a guaranteed gain for younger people and a fairly sound proposition for anyone aged up to about 40 for women and 45 for men.
Moreover, as things stand, contracting out is not a once and for all decision.
As soon as you reach the cross-over age where there is no longer a gain, you can contract back into SERPS.
Ironically, the Government encouraged the SERPS exodus because the projected costs of the scheme were too high.
It has indeed made a saving of some £3 billion, but the costs of the rebates paid so far has been estimated at around three times that much.
So long as people can milk the benefits of contracting out, but still return when the gains run out, the Government is in a heads they win, tails we lose situation.
One solution is a system of fully age-related rebates, reflecting the true costs involved and removing the current bias.
Once state pension ages have been equalised for men and women, this would become administratively more feasible, so there may well be a move in 1996.
The decision on whether to be in or out of SERPS still hinges chiefly on age.
John Housden, of Hill Samuel, and Lesley Dunbar, of Life Association of Scotland, both cite 40 for men and 35 for women as the pivotal ages under the new rebate.
But if you are close to these ages and not currently contracted out it may not be worth changing your status.
For one thing, a plan based only on the rebate probably needs to run for about five years to be practical, otherwise the charges will eat up too much of the benefits.
Stewart Ritchie, of Scottish Equitable, suggests there is a grey area, of 40 to 45 for men and 35 to 40 for women, within which it is probably not worth making a change whether you are currently in or out.
He explains: ‘It is probably better to wait and see what happens with age-related rebates.
Otherwise you could be changing status now only to change back again very shortly and it is not worth the upheaval for what would only be a marginal difference.’
One exception is if you previously contracted out but your earnings have since fallen substantially.
On low earnings the rebate payments will be too small to justify the personal pension plan charges.
John Housen explains: ‘The 2 per cent incentive was subject to a minimum of £1 a week, but the new rebate has no minimum.’
He suggests a minimum earnings level for contracting out of around £8,500 to £10,000, while LAS similarly recommends £9,000.
One other consideration is the investment risk.
The cross-over ages are usually calculated on an assumed growth rate of 2 per cent above national average earnings — if actual growth is lower, the SERPS benefits may not be matched.
So for the risk-averse, the relevant ages are lower, while the optimistic may stay out of SERPS to a higher age.
Higher cover comes at retirement price
JOHN GLENDINNING explains why life offices may not return the value of a pension fund if the policyholder dies before retiring
HIGH inflation rates and product developments have led to a focus on the death benefit provided by older generations of personal pensions.
Personal pensions were introduced in 1956 and tended to be targeted at the self-employed.
The legislation allowed contracts to provide either pension or death benefits or both.
A death benefit could be provided under the contract which primarily offered pension but the amount had to be restricted to a return of the premiums paid with ‘reasonable interest’.
Most life assurance companies marketed a retirement contract which provided for a death benefit of the return of premiums, or a return with around 5 per cent interest, and since most policyholders had alternative provision for death benefit, a significant number of policies were set up providing just a return of premiums on death.
Policyholders were able to benefit from higher levels of retirement benefits for the same premium because the death provision was limited.
The development in the 1970s of unit plans was one of the most dramatic and far-reaching revolutions in the life and pensions industry.
One of the less well-known consequences was that, when the companies who wrote unit-linked business wished to introduce personal pensions, they found that their natural mode of operation led them to return on death the fund which had built up for the policyholder, rather than any specific guaranteed rate of return.
They agreed with the Inland Revenue that the return of the fund on death fell within the definition of reasonable interest which the legislation required and so introduced this new concept.
Other life offices introduced a similar area into their conventional with-profits policies as an option, though the higher death benefit which was provided inevitably meant a lower retirement benefit.
Two decades later, policyholders who have contracts which provide just a return of premiums on death, with that amount ravaged by inflation in the intervening period, have compared the modern alternative and found the earlier contracts wanting.
But the focus is often entirely on the lower death benefit, with the higher retirement benefit — often the main purpose of the contract — being overlooked.
The difference has become more stark once policyholders reached 60 and are then able to compare the fund available for retirement with the current death provision.
Some have even been tempted to transfer these old contracts into newer personal pensions, despite all the costs associated with discontinuing the contract and starting a new one, and the possible downsides such as a lower amount of tax-free cash under the new legislation.
Many insurers are able to alter the majority of earlier contracts from their original basis to provide a return of fund on death.
The higher death benefit before retirement is allowed for by an equivalent reduction in retirement benefit.
Reductions depend on what death benefit already applies under the policy, how old the policyholder was when he took out the policy, how old he is now and when the pension is to be taken.
Companies may look for confirmation that you are in good health.
Changing circumstances and financial conditions inevitably and rightly lead to the need to review your pensions portfolio.
If you have an older personal pension, you should check out the details of your plan.
If you are concerned about death benefits, you should certainly consider an alteration to your existing policy to change it into a plan which meets your needs.
But remember that any increase in death cover is likely to come out at the expense of a lower retirement benefit.
Some policyholders who have contracts which provide just a return of premiums on death have compared the modern alternative and found the earlier contracts wanting
Wealth warning on plans that carry a death penalty
ALAN STEEL sounds a warning on pensions that return only premiums if the holder dies
ANYBODY with unit-linked pension plans invested in mixed or equity funds will have seen the value of their investment rise by between 20 per cent and 35 per cent in the last six months or so.
Strange then, isn't it, that the traditional with-profit companies are announcing, one after another, reductions in their standard bonus rates, and their terminal bonuses continue on a downward path.
It was equally baffling how, over the past three or four years, when the various markets were showing extremely poor returns, that with-profit plans were increasing their standard and terminal bonuses.
However, in case you think it's that simple, terminal bonuses, supposedly surplus profits earned from investments in previous years, have varied in their direction simultaneously from life office to life office.
It is all very confusing.
As a  businessman remarked only the other day: ‘Every time I leave a meeting with pensions people, I feel wholly inadequate.
They speak another language and everything's cloaked in mystery.’
Some of the shortcomings of the with-profit system, designed as it was in a bygone era, are all too obvious, but some, unfortunately, only become apparent when it is too late.
In the mid 1980s, Andrew was secure in the knowledge that his pension fund was estimated at his retirement at age 60 to be around £800,000.
By late last year, despite investing even higher premiums, the estimate had slipped to £550,000 — a substantial fall.
He was advised that the insurance company involved had been gradually reducing its terminal bonus rates.
The impact was rather obvious.
What isn't so clear to the pension investor is the impact on their final returns that results from a reduction or a termination of regular premiums, and the situation that arises on the investor's death before drawing retirement benefits.
For a period of twenty-five years or so, many with-profit pension plans returned on death only the premiums without any allowance for any growth.
Some returned a small amount of interest while other plans returned absolutely nothing.
Spokesmen for the insurance companies seeking to justify this practice have wheeled out a few explanations which include ‘the client understood that by settling for a poor return on death his ultimate retirement fund would be higher.’
In all my years of experience, I would suggest that only the smallest minority of pension holders have appreciated the fact that returns on death were derisory, and that there was a relationship between the benefits on death and the benefits at the end.
I have long been suspicious of the official line that terminal bonuses are directly attributed to investment surplus and that poor value on death or on policy premium amendment is the price for higher returns if you are lucky enough to make it to retirement.
But if, indeed, higher returns on retirement can be bought at the expense of derisory returns on death, how is it that terminal bonuses play such an important part in the ultimate returns.
The volatility and their non-guaranteed status do not sit comfortably with the official line linking the two benefits.
Because of the cloak of mystery that surrounds actuarial discretion in the with-profit companies, we will never know the truth, but.
It seems logical to me that funds earmarked for those who die or cannot keep premiums up, could well be used to swell terminal bonus pay-outs for others.
I know of no other investment that returns less on death than it does should you live.
Imagine your response if, when you were depositing funds in a building society account, your attention was drawn to the fact that if you died only the original investment would be returned, but if you lived you would keep all of the interest.
I cannot imagine that the building societies would have many takers to that kind of practice.
Calculating Your Occupational Pension Scheme Transfer Value:
Example: Male aged 25 retiring at 65 leaves his company pension scheme,(which promises a pension of one-sixtieth of his final salary for every year of service) after ten years service, that is, at age 35, with a salary of £24,000.
1.
The pension at leaving is ten-sixtieths of £24,000 = £4,000 a year at age 65.
2.
This must now be revalued by law (Social Security Act, 1986 and 1990) by the lesser of 5 per cent or RPI.
If we assume the maximum of 5 per cent this gives a revalued pension of £17,000 a year at age 65.
3.
Now, assuming the pension costs ten times its value, the cost at age 65 is £17,000 x 10 = £170,000.
4.
The next step is to cash discount the above sum for 30 years (that is, years to retirement at age 65).
Discounting at the rate of 9 per cent a year (the standard actuarial assumption for occupational pension schemes) this gives a transfer value of £13,000.
Note: The only technical information needed in the above calculation is the compound interest factors of 5 per cent and 9 per cent over 30 years, and this is available in every good bookshop or library.
The 9 per cent discount rate can vary, but a scheme must link this to a recognised index such as the long term yield on government stocks.
This will also explain why transfer values will go up if interest rates go down, as more has to be invested now to produce the same sum at retirement date.
5.
However, the above calculations have not provided for (a) increases to pensions in payment, as will be required when the ‘limited price indexation (LPI)’ provisions of the Social Security Act 1990 are enacted;(b) male and female pension rights to be equalised retrospectively once the Barber and GRE judgment of 1990 has been clarified.
Taking the above example, the effect of (a) would be to increase the £13,000 transfer value to £16,000 (assuming pensions in payment are increased by the maximum of 5 per cent a year); while the effect of (b) would be to increase the transfer value to £22,000 (assuming male and female pension age, are equalised at age 60 with full retrospection of benefits).
And if we assume a 1 per cent fall in interest rates, this £22,000 transfer value would increase to £30,000 (because as interest rates drop, a larger sum needs to be invested to give a certain sum at a future date; and vice versa).
Salary directed at highest gains Controlling the way your wage is paid can be well worth it, says STEWART RITCHIE
SOME people are lucky enough to be able, within limits, to control their salary.
Take directors who own their own companies: every year they have a choice as to how much of the profits they want to take as earnings and how much as dividends on their shareholding.
This is often a difficult decision and requires expert advice, since it involves knowledge of the finances of the company, the finances of the individual, tax law, national insurance rules and pensions law.
Sometimes the pitfalls in not looking at it from all these angles become painfully clear.
I heard recently of a case where a director nearing retirement was advised to restrict his salary and pay higher dividends, purely on the grounds that this would save national insurance contributions.
Nobody thought to consult an independent adviser.
The director retired soon after with a tax-free cash lump sum a lot smaller than it need have been, because all the calculations were based on an artificially small definition of final pensionable salary.
Benefits under a tax-approved company pension scheme are always limited by reference to earnings from the company.
The normally-quoted limit for a full working lifetime is two-thirds of final pensionable earnings, and there are related limits for tax-free cash, dependants' pensions and lump-sum, death-in-service benefits.
It follows that a decision to restrict earnings in order to boost dividends is likely to lead to lower tax-approved maximum benefits.
Sometimes this is a problem and sometimes it isn't.
First, a couple of examples of where it is not a problem.
One is where there is no intention to fund for anything close to maximum tax-approved benefits at the moment.
In this case, however, careful thought is needed about the cover against unexpected death.
— if there is limited scope to do this in the pension scheme the spotlight should focus on the adequacy of the company's keyman life cover.
Another example is where the director could pay himself a very high salary but is caught by the tax-approved pensionable earnings ceiling of £77,400 per annum(from April).
In this case there may be little to lose by restricting earnings to £77,400 per annum.
It may well be a mistake for a director to restrict earnings in favour of dividends, however, if he thinks he might want to retire within 13 years.
This is because earnings within the 13 years prior to retirement can be used for working out tax-approved maximum benefits.
Bearing in mind that retirement in normal health is possible at any age from 50, directors aged 37 or more should look seriously at this issue.
Similarly, if a director is thinking of selling the company in the near future, but continuing in the same employment thereafter, it might be better not to to restrict salary.
A realistic salary established prior to the sale may establish a proper benchmark for the director's remuneration package from the new owners.
One could argue that this point could be covered in the sale and purchase negotiations, but it is a bit dangerous to rely on this happening during the frantic cut and thrust of a takeover deal.
I have been talking only about directors who own their own company but the concept of restricting earnings can often be profitably applied to other employees.
The term used to describe this is ‘salary sacrifice’, which is unfortunate since it wrongly implies a loss rather than a gain to the individual.
Let us consider a 55-year-old married man earning £32,500, not contracted out of the state earnings related pension scheme.
His employer offers him a rise of £2,500 but instead he wants to boost his pension by this amount.
The alternative calculations are illustrated in the table.
This represents a relief rate of almost 46 per cent on the contribution and the actual cost to the employer is nil because both salary and pension contributions can be offset against corporation tax.
An employee may prefer to do this if he is already paying the maximum 15 per cent cent in employee contributions (including AVCs) or to maximise tax-free cash.
As ever, the potential gains through a properly thought-out strategy emphasise the importance of talking to a specialist independent financial adviser.
Benefits under a tax-approved company pension scheme are always limited by reference to earnings from the company.
Sir Hector rejects survey claims
A CLAIM by Borders Area of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland that Government cuts in hill ewe subsidy would take £120,000 out of the local economy in three valleys alone has been criticised by Sir Hector Monro, Scottish minister of agriculture.
In a letter to Archy Kirkwood, MP for Roxburgh and Berwickshire, Sir Hector said that the survey made by Borders NFU, after Government lopped £2.25 per ewe off Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowances, ignored very large compensating increases which had been made to farmers.
The survey, revealed in The Scotsman on 13 February, concentrated on three valleys, Yarrow, Ettrick and Borthwick, where about 60,000 ewes on more than 60 farms, is the basis of the whole economy.
Sir Hector claimed that the £120,000 loss seemed to have been arrived at by applying the £2.25 HLCA reduction to most of the sheep flock.
But that did not take account of what he called the very large compensating increases in Sheep Annual Premium and the Less Favoured Area supplement.
Those increases, he said, meant that each eligible hill ewe would now get a total subsidy of £30.55 compared with £24.78 previously.
He also dismissed the Borders NFU claim that the differential premium for hill and upland farmers, in Less Favoured Areas, had been eroded.
He said that the LFA differential with lowland sheep farmers was now £13.07 per ewe, compared with the previous £11.87.
He also repeated an argument put forward several times recently by the Scottish Office that a farmer's net income, which can include allowances for rent and depreciation, and where, for example, transport and housing costs may be apportioned to the business, cannot be compared directly with the average UK wage.
Cash income, which is total receipts minus total trading spending, is a better indication, said Sir Hector.
And in 1992/93 the average cash income for a hill farmer, from a sizeable sample of Scottish farms, is £16,700, compared with the average manual earnings of £14,000.
Five-year plan for research council
MORE support for wealth creation in the food and farming sector through the provision of new technologies and products is envisaged in the latest five year corporate plan from the Agriculture and Food Research Council.
It also aims to increase its funding from the private sector.
In 1987/88 £20 million out of a total budget of £156 million came from external funding.
That rose to £24 million out of £168 million last year and is expected to rise to nearly £28 million out of £193 million by 1997/98.
The plan also splits up the Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics Research into two units from next month, with the Roslin Institute near Edinburgh being separated from the Babraham Institute, Cambridge.
Those units were joined in the latter part of the 1980s in a rationalisation plan.
Machinery rings win their battle with taxman SCOTLAND'S machinery rings will not have to make tax deductions for self-employed workers who provide services through them, writes Fordyce Maxwell.
After protracted negotiations, the Scottish Machinery Ring Association has reached that agreement with the Inland Revenue.
Insistence that there was no such thing as a self-employed farm worker was threatening to be a major headache for machinery rings, where demand and supply for farm services is matched among members.
Those services include self-employed people providing labour-only, for example, holiday-relief milking.
The Inland Revenue originally wanted the machinery ring to be responsible for tax deductions for such workers.
Now those who can prove conclusively that they are self-employed will be responsible for their own tax deductions and claims.
Reaching agreement has taken more than a year as the machinery rings have continued to argue their case, backed by the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society and the accountants Reeves and Neylan.
Ron McHattie, project manager with SAOS, closely involved all the way through, welcomed the agreement as recognition that the original submission to the Inland Revenue was valid.
Political polls hold key to further economic integration The shape of the EMU depends on the French elections, Danish referendum and British MPs' vote on Maastricht.
NIELS AALEN reports
THE future of the European monetary system depends on three key political events in Europe, the first of which is the French National Assembly elections, which begin at the weekend.
The centrist Union pour la Democratie Francaise (UDF) and right-wing Rassemblement Pour la Republique (RPR) look set to win a landslide victory in the French legislative elections on 21 and 28 March, taking between 38 per cent and 44 per cent of the vote.
The Socialist Party (PS) is trailing badly with around 20 per cent support with the ecologists close behind.
The Communist Party (PC) is expected to win 8 per cent of the vote and the National Front (FN) 11 per cent.
National Assembly elections involve two rounds of voting on consecutive Sundays with the two most successful candidates in the first round and candidates polling over 12.5 per cent of the vote going on to the second round.
The UDF-RPR (UPF) have agreed to forward single candidates in all but 84 of the 551 constituencies.
The PS is trying to draw the ecologists into a pact and this would make a considerable difference to the outcome.
To date the ecologists have refused to be drawn, but a last-minute pact cannot be ruled out.
Both UDF and RPR have resigned themselves to a two year ‘cohabitation’ under the Socialist presidency of Francois Mitterrand.
At the moment  Jacques Chirac's RPR is favourite to win most seats and former finance minister Balladur is likely to become prime minister.
Mr Chirac seems to want to wait for the presidential election in 1995.
If the UDF win more seats Francois Leotard seems likely to be chosen as prime minister, particularly if his Republican party performs well in the elections.
Giscard's position has been weakened by his refusal to declare his candidacy and the animosity between him and Mitterrand.
The outcome has an importance that stretches beyond domestic considerations.
Speculation over the future of the European monetary system continues and there are still enough problems to ensure that the system remains basically unstable, at least until mid-year.
The pressures can be linked to specific events — most obviously these French elections, but also the second Danish referendum on Maastricht on 18 May, and the vote(s) in the British parliament to ratify the treaty — and to the general pressures associated with the need to lower interest rates across Europe to bolster economic activity.
Any EMS break-up depends on how fast the Bundesbank eases monetary policy but also on the results of these three key European political events.
As far as the French elections are concerned, despite talk of change, the UDF-RPR (UFP) programme is little different in essence from the present government's policies.
However, the measures proposed are not costed, and its policy document lacks credibility.
The conclusion is that something has got to give if the UPF is to generate growth, reduce unemployment and win the presidential elections in 1995.
The UPF manifesto proclaims commitment to monetary stability and exchange rate mechanism co-operation, and is reinforced by a promise to make the Bank of France independent.
However, the main concern must be that pressure from the right to reduce interest rates may become irresistible, or that the markets will in the interim test credibility to the point where the pressure builds up for higher rates which would be very difficult for the new government to accept.
Short-term the outcome depends on the market.
Further on, the reality is that the UPF cannot be more committed to a franc fort policy than the socialists; and if the test comes there is a clear risk that the new government will not speak with one voice.
A forced devaluation would clearly be potentially lethal for the EMS, breaking the key French franc-German mark link and sparking off a round of competitive devaluations in southern Europe involving the peseta, escudo and lira.
As far as equities are concerned, and depending on one's view of developments, selection might focus on stocks likely to benefit from falling interest rates such as Michelin, Rhone Poulenc and Pechiney, and those benefiting from reflationary measures in the economy, such as Bouygues.
In Denmark, opinion polls continue to point to a sizeable majority in favour of the revised treaty in the referendum on 18 May.
As long as this remains the case things should proceed smoothly — as long as the Bundesbank acts as predicted (keeps rates coming down).
There is no obvious reason to expect sentiment in Denmark to be affected by Britain's problems but the impression could gain ground that the UK will be able to work out an accommodation with the EC without Maastricht and that there is therefore an alternative for Denmark.
If there are signs of the ‘yes’ vote sliding significantly, nerves would start to fray and the DKK would come under renewed pressure.
Although Britain has marginalised itself by its recent actions, if it fails to ratify the Maastricht Treaty the markets will hedge against the whole EMS edifice collapsing and the perceived risk will create fresh currency pressures.
It is almost impossible to predict the result in Parliament with many voting combinations possible, and the collapse of the Government is a real risk.
However, it is reasonably clear that:
the EC has prepared a draft treaty to exclude the UK in the event of a British ‘no’, that is Maastricht can and will go ahead without the UK;
that the cost to the UK of being out on its own are enormous.
On balance, it is probable that the UK will ultimately ratify, in the absence of any suitable alternative.
The process of economic convergence, which after all is at the heart of plans for economic and monetary union, will be greatly eased by a return to positive economic growth in Europe and in the more immediate future by lower German interest rates.
As well as allowing the ‘hard-core’ countries to reduce their rates recently (with the obvious exception of France), the process of easing German monetary policy should allow a reduction in some of the currency anomalies that have arisen over the past six months.
A strengthening of sterling and the lira in particular would reduce the risk of the EMS being subjected to another round of competitive devaluation.
It is widely assumed that the Bundesbank council will effect a 50 basic points cut in official rates at either the meeting this Thursday or on 1 April.
German stocks likely to profit from rate cuts include the banks, and chemicals should benefit through the year from a stronger US dollar.
However, it is important to stress that the conditions for a sustained easing of monetary policy are not yet present and the prevailing view is likely to be that, barring a breakthrough on the solidarity pact and a resolution of the east German wages situation, the next cut in rates may be at least a couple of months off.
This carries the clear risk that once the initial rate cut euphoria has subsided there may be a revival of EMS pressures.
Nevertheless, these unresolved problems concerning the ratification of the treaty are to some extent diverting attention from the more positive medium-term outlook.
It is still more likely than not that all EC countries will have ratified the Maastricht Treaty by the end of 1993, and it can then be left to one side for a year or so while the easing of German monetary policy and a return to positive European economic growth ease the pains of convergence.
The eventual formalisation of a two-tier system is still the probable long-term result and many EC states will not achieve the EMU targets even by 1999.
Despite this, if the three immediate hurdles discussed above can be overcome — and the signs are that they will be — then the next six months will see the crisis management of the last half year replaced by more positive discussion about the pace and nature of convergence.
£70m vessel prepares for single trip
By Frank Frazer
A PRIEST gave a blessing and a pipe band played as the 125,000-tonne hull glided down the slipway.
But the vessel, now being fitting out in an estuary in northern Spain, has been designed for just one voyage.
Later this year, it will be towed to a location 130 miles north-east off Aberdeen where it will be anchored permanently as a floating oil storage unit for the new Alba oilfield under development by Chevron.
Though oil companies have previously used converted tankers for similar purposes, the £70 million Alba vessel is the first of its type to be purpose-built for holding on station by a novel technology developed by the Glasgow-based marine specialists YARD.
The system will allow the vessel, designed for up to 20 years of service, to weathervane around a turret near the bow while shuttle tankers collect cargoes to transport ashore.
More than 3,000 tonnes of anchor chain will be piled into the seabed to keep the ship in position during even the most severe gales encountered in the North Sea.
Stress on the 12 anchors will be constantly monitored by a computer which will sound an alarm if there is a change in the angle of any the chains.
Though the vessel does not have an engine or a conventional rudder, it has been equipped with a thruster unit to give some manoeuvrability in the rare event of it going adrift from its location about two miles from the Alba platform.
Chevron's decision to use a purpose-built vessel for storage poses a problem for authorities responsible for offshore safety: they will have to decide if it should be classified in the same way as a conventional ship or regarded as part of a fixed installation.
Though the oil company regards it as a fixed installation for which a safety case will have to be prepared under the new regulations administered by the Health and Safety Executive, it has taken the added precaution of having the hull constructed in compliance with rules issued by Lloyds Register of Shipping.
Bidding for the construction contract was keen with the UK's Swan Hunter yard competing with Japanese builders as well as Spain's Astano which eventually won the order for its yard at Ferrol, near Coruna.
Though completion of the contract leaves the yard empty, the management hopes to sell the idea of purpose-built floating storage ships to other offshore operators.
Fixed position: Alan Higgins, manager of the Alba oilfield, studies a memento of the vessel after its launch in Spain
Gulf oil states discuss energy tax retaliation
COMPANIES trading with the Middle East may face retaliation if oil sales are hit by energy taxes proposed in Europe and the United States, writes Frank Frazer.
The issues were discussed yesterday by the Gulf Co-operation Council, representing six oil-producing states which fear their revenues could be hit by measures intended to reduce fuel consumption.
No official announcement was made on the specific types of retaliation under discussion at the talks in the Saudi Arabian port of Jeddah.
But Kuwait's oil minister, Ali Ahmad al-Baghli, said later that GCC members could tax imports from countries which imposed an energy tax in line with a pledge by the council to protect oil interests by ensuring a continued flow of supplies to markets without restrictions.
Announcing that special committees had been set up to make recommendations to the next meeting in Oman in April, Mr Baghli added: ‘We see that the American administration is serious in imposing the tax and the European countries are uniting their ranks to impose this tax to threaten our basic source of living.’
The threat co-incided with an announcement by British Gas that it had secured an exclusive deal with Bahrain, one of the GCC members, to develop plans for a large power station there.
BG has been given a year to complete feasibility studies on the gas-fired scheme with an associated desalination plant which is geared to expected growth in demand for power and water.
But after yesterday's GCC talks, Youssef Shiraw, Bahrain's oil minister, confirmed that member states might be forced to cut production and abandon expensive development plans in response to energy tax proposals by fuel consuming countries.
An oil industry executive working in the Gulf said that the tax issue had created unusual unity among producing states, though it was too early for agreement on how they should react.
166 million days lost to illness cost £13bn
SICKNESS absence from work is costing UK employers £13 billion a year but the absence rate is falling, writes Bill Millar.
According to a CBI survey, preliminary results of which will be announced in London tomorrow, the average number of days lost for every worker in both the public and private sectors through sickness last year was eight days.
This means that 166 million days were lost through sickness absence in 1992.
‘The costs of absence are now shown to be much higher than had previously been thought,’ said Robbie Gilbert, the CBI's director of employment affairs.
‘Closer study shows that there is no simple solution, no one right answer, no single ‘management style’ that delivers better results.’
He said that one thing which was clear was that when management addressed the problem, improvements usually flowed.
‘Contrary to what some have suggested,’ he continued, ‘the problem is not worse in recession.
Absence rates are now falling.
Sickness absence overall fell sharply last year by almost 0.5 per cent of working time from the 1991 figure of 4.0 per cent.
This compares with the 1987 figure of 3.6 per cent, which rose to 3.9 per cent for both 1989 and 1990.’
The survey covered 300 organisations with a combined workforce of 1,220,000 showed that 94 per cent of those questioned have notification procedures; 83 per cent disciplinary procedures where necessary; 82 per cent operate recruitment checks to eliminate the work-shy and 76 per cent circulate absence statistics to managers, to enable departmental comparisons to be made.
Absence from work through sickness was found to be 41 per cent higher in the Health Service and at town and county halls than among private sector firms.
Analysis showed that employees in the public sector received on average six days more authorised absence (excluding sickness) than did those in the private sector.
The survey also showed that full-time blue-collar workers lost 10 days a year in both manufacturing and services, almost twice the amount of time lost by white-collar workers in manufacturing with five days and in services with six days.
Absenteeism was concentrated among certain individuals and work groups according to seventy per cent of those taking part in the survey, unskilled blue-collar workers being mentioned most frequently.
Oil output to ignite Scottish growth
By Frank Frazer
FIRED by a 20 per cent surge in oil production, the Scottish economy is expected to grow this year by more than three times the UK average, according to a survey published today by the Stirling-based Mackay Consultants.
Its economists estimate that Scotland's gross domestic product will rise in 1993 by 3.5 per cent, compared with the 1 per cent predicted for the UK as a whole in the Government's economic statement last autumn.
Even if the North Sea oil bonus is stripped out, the firm expects Scottish growth of 1.4 per cent after a fall of 1.3 per cent in non-oil output between 1991 and 1992.
The predictions co-incided with a survey by the recruitment firm, Manpower, which shows that Scotland — along with the west of England, Yorkshire and Humberside — is one of the few areas where employers expect better job prospects in the spring.
Reasons for optimism by Mackay Consultants include changes in Government economic policy and the devaluation of sterling after last year's withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism.
‘The withdrawal from ERM and the subsequent devaluation of sterling should be of particular benefit to Scotland because of the higher propensity to export.
Industries such as North Sea oil, Scotch whisky and tourism should benefit through greater sales or higher profits,’ it says.
But it also believes that the external value of the pound has fallen too low and is undervalued at current exchange rates.
Because it expects the pound to strengthen in the months ahead, it has based its North Sea oil calculations on an exchange rate of $1.60 to the pound.
The Manpower survey, based on information from about 2,000 firms throughout the UK, showed that manufacturers in Scotland were most optimistic about future job creation, helped by marked improvements in the electrical and electronic engineering sector.
Though there was less overall pessimism about job prospects throughout the UK over the next few months, the survey also showed that one in five firms expects fresh redundancies and only 17 per cent predict job increases in the three months to June.
Local government organisations were the most negative about job prospects and banks also forecast further redundancies.
But Lilian Bennett, a Manpower executive, said there were some encouraging signs in the findings.
‘This is endorsed by our experience in the market place where employers are using more temporary staff while assessing the strength of recovery and to give themselves greater flexibility,’ she added.
Power date
ABOUT 1.4 million payment notices for the final 70p instalment for Scotland's two privatised electricity companies Scottish Hydro-Electric and ScottishPower were sent out yesterday.
Payment cheques, must arrive at banks by 1 April to be cleared in time for the 6 April deadline.
The final day for selling the shares without paying the last instalment is 26 March.
Certificates will be posted within 14 days of the payment being received.
Call for fact-finding action on effect of council tax
FEARS that the council tax will put an enormous burden on rural estates and workers has led to a call from an Aberdeenshire farmer for a national information gathering scheme.
At a meeting of the of Aberdeen and Kincardine area executive of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland the Dunecht Farms' manager, Jim Arbuckle, made a plea for the union to co-ordinate the scheme.
He added that valuations so far appeared not to take into consideration the question of tied cottages leading to an enormous jump in the bills that estates and individuals were likely to face.
‘We need to let our members know that this is happening so that they can check out their own individual situation and we need to write to the regional council to find the basis for banding of agricultural housing here,’ he said.
‘I am not sure that people realise the extent of the scale of increase in cost that will come about under the new system.’
He also urged national co-ordination to find out what was happening in rural areas elsewhere.
Mr Arbuckle's appeal for speed on the issue was backed by the cereals committee convener, David Jack, who said he would like to see a representative sample of information from ten farms in the area's 17 branches gathered together.
Then area officials would see what sort of pattern was emerging.
Another urgent call for action came from a Newmachar farmer, Sandy Buchan, who revealed that an unacceptable level of nitrate pollution, probably from agricultural sources, in the Ythan catchment and estuary was about to become a subject for discussion and action in Europe.
This is believed to be the first time that such a report has been made from Scotland through the Scottish Office to Europe under the EC nitrates directive and Mr Buchan, vice chairman of the River Board said there were far reaching implications.
‘If the EC decides to make it a vulnerable zone under the directive the Department of Agriculture will be required to do something about it,’ he said.
‘If it is classified then the agricultural policy in the Ythan Valley is going to be horrendously changed.’
Take up of set-aside and ever reducing fertiliser usage might satisfy some of the requirements of the directive in time but Mr Buchan said he hoped that farmers would take urgent note of the board's action and start planning ahead.
Food for thought
A PLEA for renewed export attacks on the North American food market left at least two substantial sectors of the Scottish food industry relatively unmoved last week.
Tony Matthews, Food from Britain's man in North America, was enthusiastic about the opportunities for both meat and meat products sales there as well as a renewed Scotch salmon venture when he spoke to food industry figures in Edinburgh.
His enthusiasm was not matched by representatives of those industries and it is expected that EC countries will remain the main export targets.
‘Major opportunities exist for meat, particularly bacon, ham and lamb,’ said Mr Matthews.
‘Until we get an abattoir approved, not only can meat itself not be imported, neither can the many traditional products containing meat like steak and kidney pie in canned or frozen form.’
But the stumbling block to abattoir approval by the US Department of Agriculture remained a major barrier, according to trade sources.
The Meat and Livestock Commission said that US rules were different from EC approval in many areas, ranging from the need for higher hanging rails to the demand for sloping window ledges.
‘It has been estimated that building a new abattoir from scratch to meet US rules would cost about 5 per cent more than an EC approved type,’ said a spokesman.
Refurbishing an existing unit would also be expensive.
John Scott of Paisley, senior vice president of the Scottish Association of Meat Wholesalers, was unimpressed.
‘It is possible that one or two plants might think it worthwhile to upgrade but they would have to be very sure there was a large and lucrative market there to warrant the investment.’
That is unlikely to be the case because of the higher cost of beef, lamb and pork in Britain compared with US production.
That would mean only niche markets, possibly for added value processed products.
Bill Crowe, chief executive of the Scottish Salmon Growers Association, was equally sceptical.
‘We withdrew from the US market when the pound was at 1.90 US dollars.
Now that the exchange rate is around the $1.40 to $1.45 mark there could be a case for going back but we might have the difficulty of seeming opportunistic.
Our main export market is still France.’
However, Marine Harvest, the former Unilever subsidiary which was bought over by the US MariFarms Inc Group last year, has remained in the US market although only a small proportion of its 10,000 tonnes production from Scotland is sent there.
The group will be making a marketing push at the Boston Seafood Show next week.
Mr Matthews said that UK food and drink exports to Canada had risen by 15 per cent since 1989 while those to the US had seen an 11 per cent lift.
Still a star attraction, ten years on The village which provided the setting for the film Local Hero is still pulling in the tourists.
Report by Frank Urquhart
THEY slapped a preservation order three years ago on the most famous red telephone box in Scotland.
And ten years after the kiosk starred in Bill Forsyth's film Local Hero it still acts like a magnet for hundreds of fans drawn to the Buchan village of Pennan.
‘It never ceases to amaze me,’ said Norrie Grierson, owner of the Pennan Inn, the village's only pub.
‘They still come in their thousands every year to see the village and the famous telephone box.
‘It just never stops.
The film has been translated into almost every language in the world and whenever it is shown on, say Spanish or Austrian television, we have a steady stream of people from these countries coming within two or three weeks to see where the film was made.
‘We have never tried to commercialise its popularity because we want to keep the place as tranquil as possible, but they still manage to find us.’
Mr Grierson explained: ‘You get the real fans stopping their cars at the top of the hill and then playing Dire Strait's Going Home — the theme from the film — as they drive down the brae.
‘You get people in tears coming into the pub just because they have got here at last.
And they all make a bee-line for the famous phone box, calling whatever part of the world they come from, no matter what the time difference is.’
What few people realise, however, is that the setting for Local Hero was filmed in two separate locations on each side of Scotland.
Pennan provided the setting for the movie village, but the picturesque beach was filmed at Morar, near Arisaig.
Mr Grierson said: ‘They come and ask where the beach is and you have to tell them it's 250 miles away.
To say they are disappointed would be an understatement.’
George Murdoch, a 61-year-old retired school teacher, is one of only two villagers still living in Pennan who took part in the film.
There are now only 23 permanent residents in Pennan, which was once as popular with smugglers as it now is with film fans.
Most of the cottages, sheltering beneath the high crimson cliffs, have been turned into holiday homes.
Mr Murdoch recalled: ‘The crew were here filming for two or three months and it was great fun living in a film set.
‘I was lucky enough to be one of the extras.
I was a dancing villager, a drinking villager and a menacing villager.
But I think that last bit got cut — I never saw myself being menacing.’
Hilary Fleming, Banff and Buchan's tourism officer, said the popularity of Local Hero had helped to raise the profile of the entire north-east corner of Scotland throughout the world.
The area was still reaping the benefits a decade after the film's release.
She said: ‘It is amazing how popular it is ten years on.
It is an international attraction and we are planning to do a study later this year in Pennan to find out how many people come to the village and why.
‘A similar survey will also be conducted at nearby Slains Castle because of its connections with Dracula, which is again a very popular film.
We want to find out exactly what impact these films are having on tourism.’
A BT spokesman said: ‘The Pennan box must be the best known in the whole of Scotland.
It is now a listed building and it is maintained annually at a cost of £1,000 a time.
‘The box, because it is situated on the seafront, takes a fair battering from the weather and special paints, developed for the North Sea oil industry, have to be used to paint the box every year.’
The real McCoy: The village of Pennan sitting beneath the cliffs and (right) a street scene which evokes memories of ‘Local Hero’
George Murdoch: One of the film's extras
Scotland's most famous telephone box: Still a lure for visitors
Green market plea to Scots
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
SCOTTISH companies could choose to become major players in the £136 billion world market for green technologies, or risk being left behind in the race to win orders, it was claimed yesterday.
Strathclyde Business Development, the economic arm of the regional council, says the environmental sector is one of the fastest growing global markets.
With a projected growth rate of 5 per cent a year, it could be worth £204 billion by the end of the century.
SBD is appealing to Strathclyde firms to get into the marketplace at a major international environment conference in New England next month.
Harry Baxter, of SBD, said: ‘There is a vast potential for the science and technology of Strathclyde companies to service this growing marketplace.
We must become involved in the world-wide search for new and better ways to preserve and protect the environment.’
The group has organised a trade mission to the New England Environmental Expo 93 exhibition and conference and is anxious to attract more firms to the trip.
‘The conference will attract key buyers and suppliers from throughout North America.
This is a marvellous opportunity for a Strathclyde company to tap into the vast markets of North America,’ Mr Baxter said.
Issues highlighted will include air pollution control, underground storage, air quality analysis, asbestos, energy conservation, hazardous waste, medical waste, recycling and sewage treatment.
The field is being led by Germany which recorded a £6.8 billion trade surplus in environmental  technologies .
Critics say British industry has been slow to see the opportunities.
Roxburgh wants Walker to fill goalkeeping gap
By Hugh Keevins
THE Hearts goalkeeper, Nicky Walker, will be the surprise selection in Andy Roxburgh's Scotland squad for the friendly against the world champions, Germany, at Ibrox next week.
Walker, who has turned 30 and has been at Tynecastle for over three years, will get his full international grounding at a time when goalkeeping problems abound for the national coach.
Bryan Gunn, who was Andy Goram's understudy for the World Cup qualifying tie against Malta, is unavailable because his club, Norwich, have a vital championship match against Aston Villa.
Two other deputies who have recently been tried, Celtic's Gordon Marshall and Henry Smith (Hearts), no longer command first-team places at their clubs.
There is also a dearth of Scotsmen playing in goal the Premier Division.
Walker was watched by Roxburgh on Saturday when Hearts beat Dundee United at Tynecastle and was rated ‘outstanding’ by the national coach, who once worked with the goalkeeper at Scotland Youth level 12 years ago.
The former Highland League player, who also played for Leicester City, Motherwell and Rangers, is now in the midst of his longest run in the first team at Tynecastle.
He has played 17 in succession since replacing Smith in December.
The rest of Roxburgh's squad, which he  announces today, will be an amalgam of the young and the peripheral, who will get their opportunity in a Premier Division-based group because of league commitments in England.
Injured players, like Rangers' Richard Gough, Ian Ferguson and Andy Goram, will be chosen.
‘If any of them can play by Saturday (when Rangers face Celtic), that will be time enough for me,’ said Roxburgh.
Young players, like Stephen Wright and Scott Booth, of Aberdeen, and Dundee United's Duncan Ferguson will also be chosen.
Rangers full-back David Robertson, once a regular part of Scotland's Under-21 side but uncapped at full international level since leaving Pittodrie for Rangers, will be included in the squad, too.
Rangers' John Brown, consistently impressive for his club and a member of the Scotland squad against Portugal earlier in the season, will not be selected to meet the Germans.
Prost outwits arch-rival in stormy duel
FRENCHMAN Alain Prost made a victorious return to formula one yesterday in an incident-filled South African Grand Prix on his first outing with his new Williams team.
In a race that ended in chaos with thunder, lightning and heavy rain, Prost cruised home 1 minute 19 seconds ahead of his long-time adversary Brazilian Ayrton Senna in a McLaren.
His win increased the Frenchman's record total of grand prix victories to 45 and maintained the Williams team's superiority over their rivals in the season's opening race.
Mark Blundell produced the race of his life when he finished third on his debut with the Ligier Renault team.
He finished one lap down but had every reason to be proud of a fine drive in his first Formula One race since 1991.
He said: ‘It was very emotional for me and I had a tear in my eye as I came across the line.
I have been working for a moment like this for nine years and finally it has arrived.
This is my reward for all of that.’
Ligier team-mate Martin Brundle's had a luckless 100th grand prix and was forced to retire and Damon Hill's challenge in his first race with Williams also ended early as he collided with Italian Alessandro Zanardi in a Lotus after 16 laps.
Hill said: ‘I shouldn't have been in that position in the first place if I had not spun on the opening lap.
That was my fault because I got too close to Senna.
I was second and I lacked experience.’
Derek Warwick was also out of luck after a storming drive in his Footwork Mugen Honda.
After a bad start and an early tangle with Michael Andretti's McLaren, which saw a wheel ripped off the American's car, Warwick worked his way through the field.
He was running sixth and looking good for a point after a tense battle in the final laps when he slid off the track on the last lap.
Only seven cars were classified as finishers from the 26 who started.
Prost and Senna produced a thrilling duel early on.
Prost on pole made a poor start and Senna took the early lead, holding it for 23 laps before Prost, after several previous attacks had been rebuffed, forced his way by.
The Frenchman then had an untroubled run to the flag except for the downpour on the final two laps.
All the leading cars traded places briefly during a flurry of pit-stops but it had little effect on Prost who was able to pull clear and win comfortably.
Senna struggled for a long time with what he later described as an undriveable car and he collided with Germany's Michael Schumacher after 40 of the 72 laps.
Schumacher in a Benetton tried to force his way by but Senna pulled across, their wheels touched and the German spun out of the race.
Brazilian Christian Fittipaldi was fourth in a Minardi ahead of Finland's JJ Lehto who grabbed fifth place in the rain-drenched closing stages for the new Swiss team Sauber.
Austrian Gerhard Berger was sixth in a Ferrari.
— Reuter.
Leader of the pack: Ayrton Senna pulls away at the start of the South African Grand Prix 
Lawson calls for Budget tax increase Boost for economy as Lamont prepares for crucial test
By Ewen MacAskill Political Editor
A CALL for a substantial increase in tax in this afternoon's make-or-break Budget was made yesterday by Lord Lawson, the former Chancellor.
The unexpected, and probably unwelcome, advice came as the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, was busy rewriting the Budget speech in an attempt to secure his own political survival.
Lord Lawson did not specify which taxes should be increased but he appeared to be calling for higher indirect taxation, rather than higher income tax, to bring in an extra £6 billion.
It will be a decisive day for the Government as a whole, which is desperate for a Budget coup to lift its fortunes after a series of setbacks on economic policy, pit closures and Maastricht.
An unprecedented publicity blitz is being planned by Treasury ministers for tomorrow, a clear indication of how much is riding on this Budget.
Mr Lamont received an eve of Budget boost from better than expected figures on manufacturing output.
Although both Downing Street and the Treasury welcomed them, the figures were not strong enough to indicate whether economic recovery was finally under way.
Speaking at a London conference of City executives, Lord Lawson, who was Chancellor under Baroness Thatcher and Mr Lamont's former Treasury boss, urged a tax increase to cut the soaring public deficit.
Lord Lawson, who has restricted his comments on the economy since his resignation four years ago, said: ‘If the Chancellor is to make significant early inroads into the budget deficit he has no option but to increase tax substantially.’
He said that he did not favour an increase in taxation but ‘when it has to be done it has to be done’.
Lord Lawson lines up alongside other members of the old guard such as Lord Howe, the late Lord Ridley and Lady Thatcher herself, who have been banging on the monetarist drum with the message that the deficit is one of the keys to the economy.
The problem for Mr Lamont is that he has to attempt to control the public spending deficit but at the same time not take any measures that might stall a sluggish recovery.
Although the Government signalled in the autumn that growth was the priority, Mr Lamont may still be sufficiently Thatcherite on economic policy to make an attempt to curb the deficit and if taxes have to be raised, the first Budget after the general election is a good time to get it over with.
Mr Lamont discussed the Budget with the Prime Minister, John Major, last week and the package was finalised late on Friday.
The Chancellor spent yesterday making substantial stylistic changes to the speech but the main elements were left untouched.
The Treasury said the speech would last about one hour and 20 minutes.
Speculation about what will be in it ranges from a package of measures to help reduce unemployment to increases in petrol, alcohol and tobacco.
There are fears of VAT being placed on newspapers
It will be the last spring Budget.
From November, both taxation and spending will be rolled into one Budget.
Taxation measures in this Budget will apply from April this year and any in the November Budget from April next year.
Mr Lamont, who will be sipping at the despatch box from Highland Spring water and Highland Park whisky, has broken the traditional Treasury silence in the run-up to the Budget to fight for his political survival by stating publicly he wants to remain as Chancellor.
Downing Street said yesterday Mr Major was relaxed about the Chancellor's comments.
City sources indicated they did not want a wide-ranging Budget that would tackle much-needed reforms such as mortgage tax relief and that it would be better for the Chancellor to do as little as possible.
They are prepared for the Chancellor to announce some tax increases.
Labour attempted to pre-empt any jobs package by stressing yesterday that it had been pressing for such measures since before Christmas.
The shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown, underlined this in a speech at Westminster in which he set out a series of measures to stimulate jobs.
Inconsistent
The position of estate agents, as regards fees, is not as consistent or as clear-cut as David Alves, chairman of Real estate agents, represents in his letter (5 March).
Having recently paid John Sale/Royal Life Estates their commission of 1.5 per cent on the sale of a cottage, I wrote to their Peebles office drawing attention to Mr Alves's claim that ‘estate agents’ fees are currently 1 per cent, not 1.5 per cent ’.
In a reply dated 8 March, Harry Lukas, ARICS, has written the following on behalf of John Sale:
‘One occasionally sees a comment regarding cut-rate estate agency prices; however, this is usually for a reason, either buying business or desperation.
At the moment I understand the Edinburgh agents are competing very strongly with solicitors.
However, there is no official going rate for estate agency fees and if individual agents are prepared to cut their fees, this is only for a business reason.
‘The active marketing that a firm like ours carries out requires a lot of staff and it would be impossible to run a business on 1 per cent fees.
Many so-called estate agents merely place advertisements and wait for the telephone to ring, which is not a successful method, particularly in a poor market like this.’
I award Mr Lukas good marks for frankness, if not for discretion.
I suggest that it would be useful to publish his comments, not so as to set estate agents at each others' throats, entertaining though that might be, but so that members of the public who intend placing their properties on the market may shop around and take their decisions in a more informed way.
Savage blow
Budget day marks the fifth anniversary of the change in the method of encouragement for the planting of trees for future benefit from the previously long-tried fiscal relief to grant aid.
It is timely to review the effect.
The total cost of incentives to the taxpayer for private forestry in 1988 was approximately £20 million.
Planting in 1988 came within 15 per cent of the national target, but has fallen now to one-third of that level for the same cost to the taxpayer as in 1988.
A more savage blow to a young, once resurgent and world competitive industry would be hard to demonstrate.
The opportunity of further inroads into the national timber trade deficit (currently £5 billion per annum) has also been lost, for no saving to the Exchequer.
The human cost of extra rural unemployment is greater.
Despite its success, this company alone can employ less than two-thirds of its previous staff and, when transitional relief finally ends on 5 April, many more traditional woodland jobs will have been lost from our countryside.
Costs previously carried as a contribution to woodland maintenance, heritage and amenity will no longer be borne as owners seek to comply with the new requirements.
A commercial enterprise of national value to our successors will have been severely damaged.
Taking the wrong course has been expensive for us all.
Perhaps in the new era of encouragement for native industries where the UK retains quality and price competitive advantages, a change in approach should receive consideration from the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Trident costs
I refer to two reports (9 March).
One forecasts a huge increase in the ever-escalating costs of the Trident programme.
It is likely that we will have to add £200 million to the billions of pounds we are already committed to spending on a genocidal weapon, which even from a purely military point of view is regarded as redundant.
On another page we read of a homeless man being allowed to freeze nearly to death in the centre of our capital city, and having both legs amputated from frostbite.
There is much talk from our politicians about a moral crisis we are facing.
Might the roots of this crisis lie, not among the victims of poverty who are now being blamed, but in the political priorities which devote our wealth to the destruction of life, and leave nothing over with which to care for the economic casualties of Thatcherism and Majorism?
Debate needed
Today The Scotsman contains a four-page insert which opposes the extension of VAT.
I agree.
It appeals to my prejudices, but that is my objection.
These four pages are totally one-sided.
The writers are pretending to examine the situation, but don't.
They tell readers nothing about the arguments in favour of the extension of VAT.
They tell readers what to think and supply ready-printed letters to send to MPs and to the Chancellor of the Exchequer stating, for example, that an extension of VAT ‘would mean misery for me and my family’, etc.
This is an attack on liberal democracy.
It is an attempt to control people's minds.
It assumes that everyone is selfish, not interested in the common good.
It does nothing to promote an honest public debate, in which we could examine a wide range of factors — including the present uses and abuses of VAT by the Government and many others — and then arrive at some morally-decent decision.
More important, in an honest public debate citizens can each develop their minds and be increasingly able to tackle issues constructively.
High hopes of brisk business during first weeks of beef premium scheme
PROPHECIES of an extreme shortage of finished animals in the first weeks of the Beef Special Premium Scheme (BSPS) may have been self-defeating.
General opinion in the markets now is that an unexpectedly high number of prime cattle could come through after it starts on 1 April.
No-one is suggesting that the forecast famine will be transformed into a flush but auctioneers anticipate prices being so strong they will be impossible to ignore and predict that reasonable numbers of finished steers and bulls will be pulled on to the market.
Most of those could be animals whose consignors have not applied for the special beef premium payment (BSPS) or which do not carry a CCD (Cattle Control Document) or passport.
Cattle may be short in specific areas because finishers have already pushed through everything they have got before they are hit with the complications of the subsidy system.
Jim Heslop of Borderway market in Carlisle believes the general situation will be steadier than at first thought.
His centre pulls in entries of about 1,500 head each week from both sides of the England-Scotland border and is accepted as the largest beef stock market in Britain.
‘I think supplies in April will be just as high as they are now.
We will of course be in the middle of a natural seasonal shortage but I am advising finishers that they cannot afford to ignore current prices and I think that a reasonable flow of cattle will still come forward,’ he said.
The Ministry of Agriculture reports that passport applications have already topped the quarter-of-a-million mark but stresses that that does not mean that cattle for which a premium claim has been made will be sold immediately.
‘We are heartened by the fact producers have responded so quickly to the system.
At the end of the first week in March, 260,000 applications had gone through.
We do not think there will be a dramatic shortage,’ a spokesman confirmed.
However, auctioneers believe that most of the applications will be for eight to ten-month-old store cattle.
‘Some of them will undoubtedly be for finished bulls but my impression is that most will be for younger cattle from owners who want to claim BSPS as quickly as possible and then sell them,’ said Mr Heslop.
‘Nevertheless, we believe that many farmers will decide there is no point in holding on to cattle if prices hold current levels.
Averages of over 140p per kg are hard to ignore.
My advice to regular vendors would be to keep selling right through April — even if it means missing out on the subsidy.’
The MLC confirms that slaughterings were eight per cent higher on a national basis at the beginning of the month.
‘It's the price that has been pulling them out as well as the thought of missing out on some paperwork.
If the market remains strong there may not be as sharp a gap at the beginning of April as we first feared because the strong trade will encourage more even selling,’ added a senior economist, Jane Moore.‘
British Gas reveals compromise plans
By Frank Frazer
PLANS for a voluntary split of business interests is among options which British Gas has proposed to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission which is due to report on the future of the industry next month.
The proposal — involving the setting up of three wholly-owned subsidiaries to separate handling of household supplies, industrial sales and pipeline transmission — represents a compromise on the more radical  proposals put forward by the industry watchdog, Ofgas, for dismantling the company into separate regional suppliers.
Under the BG plan, the present central purchasing arrangements would be disbanded and the subsidiaries would make their own arrangements to buy supplies from North Sea producers.
BG has claimed that the Ofgas plan could cost £3 billion over ten years and cause widespread disruption to the business during the transition period.
It has also warned that some customers could be faced with paying more if it lost its hold on the household market.
Competitors have claimed that it would be easier for independent suppliers to break into the market if the purchasing power of the former state monopoly was diminished by breaking up the business.
The results of the MMC investigation, which was sought by BG after a series of acrimonious exchanges with Ofgas, are due to be presented to  Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, on 30 April.
Shell loses out in £1bn oil strike
By Frank Frazer
SHELL has lost out on an oil bonanza worth at least £1 billion through a decision to cut its stake in exploration territory west of Shetland.
The company originally had a 50 per cent holding in the block where the UK's biggest oil find for five years was made during a secret drilling programme late last year.
But before operations began to assess the prospects, the multinational giant exercised an option to lower its stake to 20 per cent, leaving British Petroleum as the operating partner to shoulder the rest of the costs.
As a result, BP can claim four-fifths of the ‘elephant’ find confirmed earlier this month, which is expected to spark a rush by rigs into an area where geologists say other huge reservoirs could be found.
A spokesman at Shell's headquarters in London was unable last night to give reasons for the decision to cut its stake in the block.
He said the company never commented on partnerships in any wells.
But the move may have been part of the general trend by oil companies to reduce drilling commitments as cash flow was squeezed by sluggish oil prices and huge spending programmes in the North Sea.
Though no official cost has been put on the deep-water well which led to the West of Shetland find, industry sources suggest the total outlay may have been less than £10 million.
On that basis, Shell would have saved about £3 million by reducing its stake in the well.
With BP estimating that the new field contains 250 million to 500 million barrels of oil, the 30 per cent reduction in Shell's stake meant the transfer of oil worth at least £1 billion at current prices.
Because of the heavy outlays which will be required to develop the field, profits eventually flowing to the companies would represent only a fraction of the value of the oil, particularly after various taxes have been applied.
Because of this, the final cost of Shell's reduced stake may be only a few hundred million pounds.
But the company has an opportunity to make other gains through a 50 per cent stake it has secured with BP in five surrounding blocks where an intensive exploration programme will begin later this year in an attempt to discover other ‘elephant’ fields.
BP announced last night that it had reached agreement with Venezuela's state oil company to re-activate the Pedernales oilfield in the Orinoco delta which has been out of production since the mid-1980s.
The deal, which should enable BP to restart output soon, is the first of its type involving a major international oil company since the Venezuelan industry was nationalised in 1976.
Aberdeen rejects bid
THE bid by Edinburgh-based Pittencrieff for Aberdeen Petroleum was rejected yesterday as inadequate, with Aberdeen executives pointing out that there was no cash alternative to the all-share offer which valued the company at £7.5 million.
In another move, Brabant Resources, for which Aberdeen has made an all-share offer, said it had received a second bid approach which could lead to a cash offer.
Dismissing the Pittencrieff bid, Aberdeen's London-based managing director, David Hooker, said: ‘We remain convinced that the smaller oil and gas companies should consolidate to add value for shareholders and expect to arrange a meeting with Pittencrieff in the near future.’
Pittencrieff, which has built up a stake of 19.1 per cent in Aberdeen, has made its offer conditional on Aberdeen's bid for Brabant failing.
Midland little help as profits soar at HSBC
By Magnus Grimond
SHARES in HSBC Holdings, parent of the Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation, firmed 7p to 602p yesterday after it revealed profits had nearly doubled last year.
News of a final dividend hoisted from 9p to 14.2p, to raise the 1992 total 49 per cent to 19p, helped the shares shrug aside a further collapse in the colony's stock market yesterday after the continuing disagreement between China and the governor, Chris Patten.
An HSBC director, John Bond, said the bank had no plans to diversify out of Hong Kong.
‘During my life time, I have seen more uncertainty than exists today…
We have confidence in Hong Kong's long-term future.’
HSBC's pre-tax profits rocketed from £880 million to £1.71 billion in 1992.
Just over half the rise came from the Asia Pacific region, where there were strong performances from Hang Seng Bank, in Hong Kong, and the more widely based Hongkong Bank, plus an exceptional profit of £270 million on the sale of a the group's Cathay Pacific airline stake.
HSBC's Scots-born chairman, Sir William Purves, described the results as satisfactory.
‘Although economic growth in Asia was robust, the continuing recession in several of our major markets made 1992 quite a difficult year, and resulted in a significant increase in the level of provisioning.’
The figures were achieved with very little help from Midland Bank, the UK clearer acquired last June after a tussle with Lloyds Bank.
After writing back £122 million of restructuring costs taken to reserves and several other adjustments, Midland chipped in only £184 million to attributable profits of £1.22 billion.
A 19 per cent slump in the value of sterling against the Hong Kong dollar was a big contributor.
There was a big turnround at HSBC's Marine Midland subsidiary, in the US, where a £102 million attributable loss became a £72 million profit last year.
But Concord Leasing, also based in the US, slumped to a £75 million loss, from profits of £11 million last time, and the London stockbroker, James Capel, saw profits dive from £14 million to only £2 million.
Bad-debt provisions leapt by £683 million to £1.18 billion, chiefly through the acquisition of Midland's bad loans and a £297 million charge for Olympia & York, the collapsed Canadian developer of Canary Wharf.
Earnings per share soared from 36p to 62p.
By Bill Millar
BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
BRITISH Airways put some of its recent troubles behind it last night when the Clinton administration approved a $300 million investment by the British airline in USAir Group, in the process overriding objections from the three largest US airlines.
The deal, which was agreed by the two airlines in January after BA had pulled out of its original proposed $750 million link-up with USAir in December, confirms the strong negotiating position BA has always been in and puts its aim of becoming a global airline firmly back on course.
It will also help it to deflect the spotlight currently trained on it and its relationship with Virgin Atlantic.
The greatest benefit of the deal for BA comprises the sharing of flight codes which means that transatlantic passengers booking on to a USAir flight in the US would automatically transfer to a BA flight for the Atlantic crossing.
This is expected to provide a considerable boost to BA volumes.
The three biggest US airlines — American, United and Delta — had hoped that approval of the BA-USAir deal would have been linked to their gaining a bigger foothold in the UK market.
They said the original $750 million proposal would have given BA wide entry into the US market but restricted US airlines in the UK.
Those objections have been overridden, not least because USAir has lost $1 billion in the past three years and urgently needs BA's cash, although the US transportation secretary, Federico Pena, laid down a warning marker on the type of negotiations to come when asked about British resistance to allowing US airlines to land at Heathrow Airport.
‘Our definition of open skies is open skies throughout a nation.’
Sir Colin Marshall, BA's chairman, said last night: ‘We are delighted that Secretary Pena and his team have given us the opportunity to offer our customers the facility to travel on a global network with simplified booking and check-in procedures.’
They include one check-in to and from London and one-stop shopping for reservations and fares.
Sir Colin and two other BA directors will also join the USAir board.
American Airlines said that it was ‘profoundly disappointed’ by the decision.
Mr Pena said the deal would be reviewed in a year and that congressional action would also be needed before BA could proceed with an additional $450 million investment, giving it more than 25 per cent of USAir.
He also said the US administration would seek an additional agreement that would give US airlines new access to British airports and confirmed that he hoped a new aviation agreement could be reached this year between the US and the UK.
The US would defend the rights of its carriers abroad, he said.
Blocking the BA/USAir deal would have required him to renounce the current aviation treaty between the two countries which would have been ‘a very dramatic step’.
In Brussels yesterday, EC transport ministers took a step towards allowing the European Commission to negotiate transport accords on behalf of EC states, when they agreed to set up a working party to see when and how the Commission could negotiate.
The Commission said this was insufficient and is considering court action.
Maintaining that it had the power to negotiate now that there was a common market for air transport, the Commission said it would be better if the EC negotiated key accords with major competitors such as the US and Asia.
Ropemaker has award tied up
THE Cairngorm Climbing Rope Company is today named as the second winner of the quarterly Enterprise in Europe Eureka Award, sponsored by Grant Thornton in association with British Airways and The Scotsman.
The judges were impressed by the way the company, based in Newtonmore and which employs 14 people, has increased turnover in the past year from £40,000 to £400,000 and is tackling the European market — even before its Smart Rope, which warns climbers by changing colour when it gets over-stressed and on which world patents are pending — goes into full production later this year.
James Oag, who was appointed managing director a year ago, said: ‘We are delighted to have won the Eureka award.
We hope that the fact that we have won this encourages other small companies to strive for better things.’
Mr Oag will be using his prize of two return BA return tickets to any European destination and up to £1,000 of accommodation provided by Grant Thornton, with introductions to local contacts, to try to find a distributor for the German market.
Cairngorm Rope, which will shortly move into new factories provided by Highland Regional Council, already has distributors in several European countries but not yet in Germany, although there are a number of interested companies.
Professor Ian Percy, senior partner of Grant Thornton and chairman of the judging panel, said Cairngorm Climbing Rope Company displayed all the criteria the judges were looking for — technological innovation, enterprise and initiative in trying to develop a European market.
‘We look forward to learning how this small company exploits the opportunity created by this award.’
The other judges were Ian Reid, general manager of British Airways Scotland, Bill Hughes, chairman of Grampian Holdings, and Peter Woodifield, business editor of The Scotsman.
Rope scope: Jim Oag, of Cairngorm Rope, will use the award to find German distributors
Rise in output figures boost market confidence
By Clifford German
A welcome rally in manufacturing output — up 0.8 per cent in January — helped bolster investor confidence yesterday.
However energy output fell in January, and the last three months together continue to suggest both manufacturing and energy output is flat, indicating little or no general progress out of the recession.
Investors were reluctant anyway to take major decisions until the Budget details are known and the Chancellor has shown whether growth or control of the borrowing requirement is his top priority.
Turnover figures were among the lowest of the year with just 578 million shares changing hands and the FT-SE 100-Share Index closed just 6.5 better on the day at 2,922.4.
The approval of British Airways stake in USAir came too late to have much effect and BA shares gained just 3p.
The acquisition of 13.4 million shares an 8.4 per cent stake in Owners Abroad by Thomas Cook in an attempt to block the Airtours bid pushed Owners Abroad shares down 9p to 138p.
HSBC rose 20p to 624p in spite of the 300-point slump in share values in Hong Kong triggered by the angry response of the Chinese government to the Governor's democratic reform package.
Redland gained ground on hopes of an early cut in German interest rates in the wake of the general agreement between the German government, opposition and local governments on the future financing of reunification and reconstruction costs.
Currencies had a quiet day, with sterling closing just under half a pfennig lower at Dm2.3835 and a tenth of a cent down at $1.4330.
Designer pig planned for Euro markets
A PAN-European group plans to produce a high performing designer Euro-pig for sale throughout the European Community and even farther afield.
The scheme has been hatched by the £80-million-a- year Suffolk-based UPB Porcofram company, which has strengthened its links with sister groupings in Germany, Spain and Italy to form UPB Europe.
That has provided it with a group nucleus of up to 2,500 sows testing a minimum of six mainstream lines backed up by artificial insemination facilities with more than 100 boars.
More importantly, it has centralised its research and development effort to select the key breeding elements to suit the needs of each country.
Initially, the development programme will hinge on the transfer of frozen AI material but, speaking at the unveiling of the group in Cambridge yesterday, Dr Rex Walters, consultant geneticist, said he would not rule out embryo transfer and even live animal exchange in the future.
In spite of the separate developments of the three companies in the past, dam lines based on the two major white breeds with the addition of the Danish Duroc blood for outdoor rearing, have proved remarkably similar, while boars had been developed to produce meat suitable for distinct markets, such as Parma ham in Italy.
But, said Dr Walters, if the group produced a top-class boar in Italy which was not suitable for Parma ham production, it would then be used to improve stock in another market, such as the Netherlands or Denmark.
The company is using the latest techniques for development, but Dr Walters expressed reservations about the Best Linear Unbiased Prediction (BLUP) programme developed by the Meat and Livestock Commission.
‘It tends to select from too narrow a band of families, which allows inbreeding to reduce the full benefit of improvement programmes.’
The company is working with the MLC and other groups to produce a programme which will provide an improved selection index taking account of the inbreeding factor.
Owners could slip Airtours' net
By Magnus Grimond
THERE looked a slim possibility yesterday that Owners Abroad might escape the clutches of rival travel group Airtours, just a few hours ahead of the close of the £290 million bid battle at 1pm today.
Owners' shares slumped 9p to 138p, some 11p short of the 15-for-34 bid terms with Airtours, down just 1p to 338p, suggesting dealers were preparing for the failure of the offer.
Thomas Cook, the travel agency chain which has said it will tender for 12.5 per cent of Owners stock at 150p if the bid fails, moved into the market to pick up what may prove to be a crucial 8.4 per cent stake in Owners.
Including that holding, Owners was last night claiming the support of holders of more than 25 per cent of its shares, while Airtours, despite purchases in the market and the assent of what is thought to be Mercury Asset Management's 15 per cent stake, claimed control of just 22.8 per cent.
What may prove crucial is whether the seller or sellers of the shareholding included fund managers Gartmore, who have not yet made their intentions clear, or Phillips & Drew Fund Managers, who are thought to be against the bid.
Meanwhile, the two sides continued to trade insults about the value of the savings to be gained from the rival strategies being put to shareholders.
Airtours announced that it had signed contracts with suppliers which quantified the savings from a merger at over £20 million a year.
Of this figure, £14 million would come from overseas cost reductions, £2.8 million from airline costs, £2 million from central costs and £1.2 million in sales and marketing.
The Owners chairman, Howard Klein, rejected the statement as ‘a last minute response to a glaring omission in [Airtours']arguments to date.’
Heath quits Baring
CHRISTOPHER Heath, once the UK's highest paid businessman, has resigned as chairman of Baring Securities, which he founded.
Mr Heath, 47, earned £3 million in 1989 when the international share dealing business was turning in record profits but ‘a disagreement about strategic policy’ has led to him giving up his directorships at the City's oldest merchant banking group.
His departure is described as amicable and he will stay on as a consultant.
At its height Baring Securities generated up to two-thirds of the privately-owned merchant bank's profits and in 1988 won a Queen's Award for Export.
However, the share dealing arm plunged into the red and lost between £10 million and £20 million in the six months to June 30.
It was forced to axe 108 staff and reorganise in order to return to profits.
It is believed the differences in strategy stem from Mr Heath's desire to expand while the rest of the board wanted to retrench.
A management team headed by chairman, Miles Rivett-Carnac, will take over.
Watmoughs leaps 51%
WATMOUGHS, the colour printers, yesterday announced a new contract to print the News of the World colour magazine in 1994, a 51 per cent jump in profits for 1992 and an ambitious £100 million investment programme over three years, writes Clifford German.
The fast-expanding group made £12.2 million before tax and also committed £59 million of capital spending, including £31 million on its new printing operations just outside Madrid, which should start printing Hola and Hello magazines next month.
Turnover increased by only 11 per cent in the face of competitive contract printing prices, said the board.
Profits were flattered by comparison with a poor 1991 first half and by interest saved after last year's £22 million rights issue.
But underlying growth in profits was probably about 30 per cent.
Interest charges fell from £2.5 million to under £500,0000 and gearing has been held at 29 per cent.
Trading is still tough, but Watmoughs now detects some scope for selective price increases and the devalued pound is already helping win new contracts, especially against German printers.
Earnings per share rose 26 per cent to 26p and the dividend goes up by 13 per cent to 11.50p.
The shares firmed 15p to 620p.
Olivetti deeper in red
THE Italian computer-maker, Olivetti, yesterday in Ivrea revealed that its losses for 1992 had jumped by 40 per cent and that it would ask shareholders to invest a further 900 billion lire (£392 million) through a capital increase.
The group, one of Europe's leaders in the field, said it lost 650 billion lire (£284 million) last year, compared with 460 billion lire (£201 million) in 1991, because of heavy competition and the international economic slowdown.
But it said it was confident of surviving and would seek shareholders' approval at a meeting on 29 April.
Shareholders will be offered the alternative of buying six new shares for every four held, at a price still to be set, or else taking three shares and three bonds carrying warrants making them convertible into shares at a later date.
— Reuter
Alliance Trust again outperforms index
By Gordon Milne
ALLIANCE Trust outperforms the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index regularly and yesterday's full-year results produced no shocks.
Dundee-based Alliance — one of the UK's largest general trusts, with assets topping £900 million — saw net asset value per share increase by 15.6 per cent in the 12 months to 31 December, 1992.
That rise means Alliance has outstripped the FT-A Index for the fourth successive year, this time by nearly 5 per cent.
The shares closed 6p firmer at £16.95p.
Lyndon Bolton, the managing director, yesterday described prospects as more encouraging than they were at the time of the interim report in August.
‘A year which would encompass elections with economic significance in both our main areas of investment and, as it turned out, a currency crisis of substantial proportions at home, did not necessarily augur well for our capital performance.’
About half Alliance's portfolio is concentrated in the UK, with another 30-odd per cent in the US, and Mr Bolton pinpointed the strength of the dollar as the most significant contributor to the trust's performance.
‘As we had maintained our large weighting in overseas equities and cash throughout the period of UK membership of the ERM, this cautious perception of the political and economic risks being run has stood us in good stead.’
Funds within the trust's PEP and savings scheme, managed by Alliance Trust Savings, now exceed £110 million.
This activity has significantly increased the proportion of stock owned by private individuals, and has contributed to a narrowing of the discount between NAV and market capitalisation.
Oil producers seem to be sticking to OPEC curbs
By Frank Frazer
MOVEMENTS by tankers in the past two weeks suggest that leading oil exporters are sticking to new limits on production, according to the Middle East Economic Survey.
The weekly trade newsletter said yesterday that the deal struck by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries last month called for shipments to be cut by about 2 million barrels per day on the February level of about 25.6 million bpd.
‘So far, happily, tanker movements in the early part of March indicate a pretty good response from key OPEC members as regards production restraint, with Iran, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait all within their quota limits,’ the survey reported.
The producers cartel set the quotas in an attempt to prevent over-supply of the fuel causing a price slump when demand falls with the onset of warmer weather.
The weekend blizzards in the US caused a short-lived rally in oil prices yesterday, with quotes for North Sea Brent blent rising from Friday's close of $18.89 a barrel to touch $19.11 before falling back to $18.91 a barrel.
Estimates published yesterday by both the Middle East Economic Survey and the Reuter news agency showed that OPEC's total  output rose from 25.3 million bpd to 25.6 million bpd last month, resulting in surplus oil flowing on to the market.
The newsletter commented: ‘Clearly, a pretty strict observance of the new March production limits will be required to dissipate the impact of the February overhang and make any kind of a positive impression on a market which already seems to be losing the bullish tone which was in evidence after the mid-February OPEC accord.’
Rugby defies slump to inch ahead at £57.6m
RUGBY Group last year defied one of the worst building recessions this century to edge pre-tax profits up from £57.3 million in 1991 to £57.6 million, writes George Duthie.
The building materials company has been a market defensive favourite for the past decade as it concentrated on keeping down the costs of making its cement, and joinery, glass and steel products.
Its margins and growth have consistently outperformed those of rivals.
Turnover jumped by just over 22 per cent, from £532.6 million to £650.1 million, boosted by acquisitions.
Earnings per share stayed at 13.1p and the dividend total of 6.45p is maintained after a held final of 2.85p.
NatWest Securities, the broker, points out that Rugby is one of only three companies in the entire sector to have cash in the bank and to have maintained a strong balance sheet throughout the downturn.
It is just as unique in having a dividend still covered twice.
Rugby's board said the slump had continued to depress UK sales, but US sales and profit margins had improved.
But it warned that trading conditions had deteriorated in the second half of last year.
The start of 1993 in the UK and Europe had been slow, but improvement in some sectors was expected towards the end of the year and prospects in the US and Australia looked better, it added.
The shares gained 14p to 236p.
IMI holds total despite third annual setback
By Richard Shackleton
US economic recovery has failed to stem a 1992 profits decline at IMI, which yesterday reported its third successive annual setback.
The company, formerly part of ICI, saw the pre-tax total drop by 7 per cent to £68 million, on turnover up nearly 4 per cent at £1.01 billion.
Despite growth in IMI's drinks-dispensing and special engineering divisions in the US, the continued downturn in European markets, particularly Germany, cut margins from 7.6 per cent in 1991 to 6.8 this time.
Birmingham-based IMI's drinks-dispensing business contributed most, its operating profits rising to £28.6 million, from £22.9 million.
The group continues to prosper from its close association with Coke and Pepsi
Building products also improved, from £21.5 million to £22.4 million, on demand from Germany for copper tube and fittings at the start of the year.
But the abrupt end to the eastern German boom and continued decline in the UK slowed profits growth.
IMI's chairman, Sir Eric Pountain, said the fluid-power business, whose profits fell from £22.2 million to £16.9  million , had been hit by the engineering  downturn .
Special engineering activities suffered with the depressed aerospace and defence markets, profits falling from £14 million to £12 million.
He said the continuing difficulties had meant 1,100 jobs going last year, contributing to rationalisation costs of £6 million.
Earnings per share fell to 13.6p, from 15p, but a held final dividend of 5.8p keeps the total at 10p, and the shares added 11p to 270p.
MAI sees broking pay off
MONEY and securities broking is doing well for MAI, the financial services and media combine run by the Labour peer, Lord Hollick.
A return of £21.9 million on its broking activities allowed the group to boost pre-tax profits by 12 per cent in the six months to 31 December, from £30 million at halfway in 1991 to £34 million.
Turnover climbed from £187.2 million to £204.5 million, while earnings per share rose from 5.8p to 6.5p.
Lord Hollick, the managing director currently embroiled in a boardroom battle at Mirror Group Newspapers, where he is a director, saw the broking business grow from £18.9 million against a background of declining interest rates and increased supply of government, corporate and US municipal bonds.
The product range was extended during the half-year to include Dutch and German government bonds.
On the media front, the group said that the south of England TV station, Meridian, in which it is a major shareholder, was achieving higher-than-expected audience ratings and advertising revenue.
MAI is optimistic about current trading.
With most of its profits arising overseas, it expects to benefit from the strength of the dollar and other currencies against sterling.
The group yesterday announced the appointment of Sir James McKinnon, director general of the consumer watchdog, Ofgas, as deputy chairman.
He succeeds Sir Graham Day, who continues as a non-executive director.
MAI's interim dividend goes up from 1.4p to 2p and the shares firmed 1p to 184p. — PA
Unity Trust in black
UNITY Trust, the trade union bank, is preparing to offer its basic banking services to charities, many of which now face being charged by commercial banks as if they were profit-making small businesses.
Unity Trust itself wrote off £1 million in bad debts in 1992, mainly on property development loans, but still made profits of £656,000 after two years in the red.
Its subsidiaries, including interests in financial services, personal pensions, in collaboration with Colonial Mutual, and investment management, contributed to profits for the first time.
The ballot service, similar to that offered by the Electoral Reform Society, cut its losses on increased business.
Unity Trust reduced its loan book last year, but added 11 per cent more accounts and now has more than 15,000 customers, a quarter from outside the trade union sector.
Laporte expects Evode to enliven earnings
THE speciality chemicals group, Laporte, is expecting its recent £129 million acquisition, Evode, to boost earnings in the current year.
Integrating Evode's chemicals and plastics businesses with its own activities without dilution was on schedule, Laporte said yesterday as it unveiled its 1992 results.
They contained no nasty surprises, since the board had warned at the time of the Evode bid that profits would fall to £86 million.
In the event, they dropped by about 10 per cent, from £96.4 million to £86.6 million, partly because of a decline in the metals and electronics division.
Turnover rose from £424.2 million to £521.8 million, while earnings per share fell only 2 per cent, from 40p to 39.2p, because of the smaller number of shares in issue.
Luton-based Laporte's board said that, despite recession, its prospects were good and would be enhanced by the Evode deal.
It is confident enough to raise its total dividend from 18.9p to 19.5p, via a final of 12.5p, but the shares lost 9p to 676p.
The group finance director, Richard Dickinson, is retiring at the annual meeting in April, to be replaced by his deputy, William Hoskins.
— PA
Scots set for Spain
SPAIN is the destination for the Scottish Council Development & Industry's 250th overseas trade mission which begins on 7 June.
Taking in both Madrid and Barcelona, the four-day Spanish mission, supported by the Clydesdale Bank, will be the fourth undertaken by the SCDI.
Its aim is to boost Scotland's manufacturing exports to Spain which last year totalled £474 million, an increase of 10 per cent over the 1991 figure.
Commenting on the mission Iain McTaggart, SCDI's trade promotion executive, said: ‘The high profile events in Spain last year have added fresh impetus to the country's economic development and we are hoping to capitalise on the emerging opportunities in the principal commercial centres of Madrid and Barcelona.
 Further information is available from the SCDI on 041 332 9119.
EuroLeisure losses over
THE discos and snooker halls group, European Leisure, currently embroiled in a Serious Fraud Office investigation, has moved back into the black in its first half-year to 31 December.
Pre-tax profits of £54,000 replace a gigantic loss last time of £45.82 million, caused by anticipated losses on sales, a goodwill write-down and lower trading profits.
Ian Rock, the chief executive, said yesterday: ‘The group's position is more stable than for some time, but it still requires a substantial improvement in the economy and a solution to the group's gearing before it can achieve satisfactory returns on shareholders’ funds.’
The Leicestershire company has sold off many of its loss-making businesses to cut debts, but they remain at £76.6 million — more than double shareholders' funds.
No dividend is being paid, but losses per share slashed from 28.6p last time to 0.65p, and the shares rose 1.25p to 5.5p.
The SFO inquiry relates to share dealing before the £73 million takeover of Midsummer Leisure in 1992. — PA
Write-downs shattering for English China Clays
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
TURNOVER at English China Clays fell by 4.5 per cent to £966 million and profits dived by 25 per cent to £86.2 million last year, roughly in the middle of market forecasts.
Operating profits dropped by 18 per cent to £105.9 million and interest charges were slashed by two-thirds to £5.4 million.
But write-downs on housing land and properties and redundancy costs combined to create net exceptional costs of £14.3 million, compared with a modest £2.2 million exceptional credit on the pension contribution in 1991.
Turnover was maintained at ECC International, which contributed £90.5 million to operating profit, a drop of 7 per cent, reflecting over-capacity among the division's major customers in the paper industry worldwide, and price competition among suppliers.
But the construction materials side saw operating profits plunge 36 per cent, especially in the UK, and both sales and profits in construction fell by about 40 per cent .
Only 243 houses were completed, at an average price of £71,000 each, compared with 417 completions at £73,400 in 1991.
Capital expenditure was treble the 1991 level at £63 million, of which almost half was spent in the US, while borrowings rose 30 per cent to £173 million, largely as a result of the increased value of foreign debt.
But ECC's balance sheet has been strengthened by redeeming US auction preferred shares and restructuring debts.
After-tax earnings per share fell 30 per cent to 21.87p and only just cover a dividend total held at 20p by a final of 13.4p, but the shares firmed 3p to 458p by the close.
Lord Chilver, the chairman of the Reading-based group, said yesterday that European markets were unlikely to make much progress in 1993, but the US was showing signs of recovery.
He expects to pay at least the same dividend again in 1993.
Boom year at Takare
TAKARE, the nursing-homes group which has three establishments in Scotland, saw 1992 pre-tax profits soar by by 56 per cent, from £7.6 million to £11.8 million, writes Richard Shackleton.
The chairman, Keith Bradshaw, said the group was now breaking ground on its 45th site and that the current year had started well.
It had started construction on more than 1,000 new beds and he predicted that 4,785 beds would be fully operational by 1 April.
The emphasis on self-funding in the recent Government consultation document on community care would increase demand for privately, or part-privately funded geriatric services provided by companies such as Takare, he said.
The stringent health and safety standards laid down for homes would also tend to direct patients to its purpose-built facilities.
Turnover jumped by 62 per cent to £48 million, while earnings per share rose from 10.1p to 12.1p.
A final dividend of 1.2p lifts the total by 20 per cent to 1.8p, but the shares were unchanged at 239p.
Lamont likely to say: Can you hold, please?
NORMAN Lamont is likely to satisfy few people when he unveils his Budget today.
All the signs are that it will be a holding speech, waiting until December for the first of the combined spending and taxing Budgets, with, maybe, some radical tax reforms thrown in.
For all the worries about VAT, for instance, the Chancellor is likely to produce a consultation document with the real decision postponed until later.
The collapse of Taurus will also give revenue an unexpected bonus as the scrapping of stamp duty on share dealings will be postponed, while Government borrowing looks as if it may not be spiralling out of control at quite the rate first feared.
Nevertheless, Mr Lamont has a long way to go before he can recover the confidence of Scottish business leaders.
The survey carried out by Pannell Kerr Forster and BBC Scotland shows that fewer than three in ten of them understand the Government's economic policy, while only four in ten think the Government understands business needs.
About the only thing that will keep the Chancellor singing in his bath is that three in four want to stay out of the exchange rate mechanism.
What emerges from the survey as most worrying for the Government is that there is little support from even its most natural supporters for some key policies, like the privatisation of water and the railways.
If business leaders, who say their companies have benefited from previous privatisations, do not support such changes why should anybody else be expected to?
But at least there is near unanimity that we really will be out of recession by the end of the year.
That confidence could feed on itself, but what will encourage industry more than anything else would be help on investment allowances, with half those taking part saying that is the one thing above all others they want to see.
Mr Lamont can forget about workfare or any other wheezes the Treasury may have dreamt up.
The common view, backed up by hard evidence is that investment has been badly hit by the recession.
Add in the Department of Trade and Industry's negative report on manufacturing in Britain, and the enthusiasm for help with investment becomes clear.
Properly targeted, together with training incentives, the Chancellor could do quite a lot at not a huge cost.
Whether or not he will please at least the business community we will know this afternoon.
What's so smart about this Smart Rope?
THE Smart Rope changes colour permanently when stressed to its set limit.
Worn sections can then be cut out or the entire rope disposed of.
One major potential market is in the United States, where frequent litigation over equipment affects the many indoor climbing walls.
‘With the Smart Rope, the condition of the rope being hired is visible and the hirer can sign for it in the full  knowledge of its condition,’ says Jim Oag.
Cairngorm's traditional high quality climbing ropes usually come in bagged lengths of 50 metres for the UK market, although in France ropes are usually sold at 60 metres and for indoor climbing the length drops to 30 metres.
The current Cairngorm range sells in shops at between £59.99 and £99.99 per length, although some shops buy reels of up to 300 metres and cut their own sections to order.
Cairngorm sells to the Ministry of Defence and the oil industry as well as to the climbing world, and new markets being looked at include the whole range of marine ropes.
A new lightweight rope ladder, featuring injection-moulded steps and aimed at speleologists (potholers) is also on the stocks.
International rope manufacturers are now courting Cairngorm, their eyes on the Smart Rope's international potential.
A recent visit to Japan, paid for by the Japanese government, has opened up major possibilities.
Oag pays tribute to Yoyo Nakajima, senior trade advisor in Glasgow.
A licensing agreement with Japanese conglomerate Nissho Iwai is on the cards — although licensing in Europe will be limited.
‘We might be able to do something with licensing agreements in Europe, but we want to be able to market our own products.
We are in an interesting position, where we could shoot ourselves in the foot — but we want to grow our own business, here in Newtonmore.’
Sales promotion moves up a gear
KAY BLAIR looks at the techniques employed by some companies to boost sales
QUESTION: What is one of the most popular leisure pastimes after watching television?
Answer: Taking part in sales promotions.
Every month almost two thirds of the British population participate in some kind of sales promotion, either by trading in a money-off coupon, entering a competition or sending away for a free gift.
Sales promotion is big business — and growing.
Given the difficult economic climate, many clients have decided to opt for the old adage that things can only be managed if they can be measured.
Marketing services are no exception, with sales promotion lending itself to this quest for measurable results.
Around two thirds of promotional budgets are now reckoned to be spent on the less glitzy marketing activities such as direct marketing and sales promotion.
Yet sales promotion is by no means a modern discovery.
As far back as the Middle Ages, price promotion was used as a way to develop market economics.
In the early 19th century shopkeepers began offering free gifts as an inducement to trade, while in 1844 the first co-operative dividend scheme was introduced.
Trading stamps and cigarette cards followed.
In 1930 the jam maker, Robertson's, came up with the free golly badge scheme while, just two years later, the Miss Pears competition was devised.
Sixty years on and the market has grown considerably.
The research company Mintel estimates that the business-to-business incentives and promotions market alone is worth a staggering £1.32 billion, while the Institute of Sales Promotion values overall expenditure at over £7 billion.
The magazine Campaign reckons that sales promotion agencies are outperforming every other marketing services sector.
The errant child of the mid 1980s, says Campaign, has now ascended to near the top of the marketing class.
While manufacturers were perceived as the traditional users of sales promotion, now retailers and financial institutions are realising that these techniques can help build business.
As Steve Bevan, editor of Sales Promotion magazine says: ‘Companies are now using sales promotion on a more strategic basis, ensuring it ties in with an overall brand strategy.
Sales promotion used to be the preserve of the junior brand manager but now companies are beginning to understand the importance of trade and consumer promotions.
They are briefing consultancies sooner and are doing so at a more senior level.’
One company which has just moved into Scotland, the Marketing Store, believes that the market here is ripe for development.
With a turnover in excess of £10 million, it claims to be the fastest growing independent sales promotion consultancy in the UK.
With a client list which includes Thomas Cook, Walkers Crisps, Rumbelows and Asda, it is hoping that its pragmatic approach will tempt more Scottish clients to test the benefits of sales promotion.
‘Sales promotion is all about giving something extra which is relevant and enhances the brand.
What we have to do in Scotland is to be better than the good companies which are already here, provide better quality of service, better results, better creativity and better motivation.
We have to add value to what the clients have already got.
There are far too many people dabbling in sales promotion,’ says the consultancy's director, Andrew Ryan.
Willie Biggart, a partner with the Glasgow-based consultancy, Biggart Donald, feels that today's economic climate calls for more accountable marketing activity.
He says: ‘As the recession deepened clients looked for a greater degree of measurability and a lower investment requirement.
Sales promotion is typical of this in that it need not cost a lot of money and its success can be clearly evaluated in terms of turnover and profit objectives.’
To support his views on results-oriented activity, Ryan quotes the work carried out by the Marketing Store for the supermarket Asda in building traffic and customer loyalty.
With a targeted cash prize competition and a tie-up with local radio, traffic, claims Ryan, was boosted by almost 5 per cent.
An incentive scheme to encourage the staff of electrical retailer, Rumbelows, to sell insurance alongside electrical products doubled insurance sales, while efforts to persuade Nationwide customers to redeposit savings with the building society after the BT flotation met with success.
Ryan says: ‘Nationwide was concerned that, when BT floated, it would permanently lose a great deal of business.
Even though customers might not receive the allocation of shares requested, once their money was effectively in their hands they might decide to shop around rather than return to Nationwide.
We could have bumped up interest rates but the client was reluctant to do this and we felt that a more cost-effective promotion would work.
‘By organising a holiday competition we were able to get over one third of our target market to come back to Nationwide.’
Biggart Donald's promotions for Clydesdale electrical stores have involved blue chip brands such as British Airways, Stakis, Euro Disney and Northwest Airlines to build sales and long-term customer loyalty.
Biggart says: ‘The Northwest promotion, which offered two for the price of one tickets to 74 international destinations, met the prerequisite for a successful sales promotion.
Clydesdale achieved its sales and profit targets, Clydesdale's suppliers benefited with increased product sales, Northwest Airlines raised awareness and filled spare capacity while, most important of all, the customer benefited.
So far, there are several thousand customers who have enjoyed a well-earned break.’
Biting campaign: Walkers Crisps, a company promoted by the Marketing Store which has just moved into Scotland
Going up in world of climbing ropes A Highland rope company is climbing to dizzy heights of success with its innovative product, the Smart Rope, which has rocked the international climbing world.
‘We have applied for worldwide patents, and there is no question that we will have them’
TOM MORTON reports
JIM Oag means it when he says: ‘The world is our oyster, it's fantastic.’
And he is probably right.
He is the managing director of a Highland company which, since he took over exactly a year ago, has increased its workforce from four to 14 and its turnover from £40,000 to £400,000 a year.
A new, exclusive product has shaken the climbing world and is attracting intense interest.
For The Cairngorm Climbing Rope Company, the sky seems to be the limit.
At the moment, while a new test rig and two 2000-sq ft factories are being hurriedly built nearby, the world is Jim Oag's Portakabin.
Calls flood in from Japan, the US and from all over Europe.
Oag has just returned from Tokyo, and will set off for a climbing exhibition in Grenoble in a few days.
In the tiny temporary office, things are not humming, but roaring.
The company's award-winning ‘Smart Rope’, world patents pending, which changes colour after being stressed, is tying up Strathspey's phone lines for hours.
Nothing like this has been seen in Newtonmore before.
Newtonmore is a little quiet; some would say behind the times.
After all the Christmas lights remain up on the main street, and are still working.
‘They're not Christmas lights,’ jokes Dave Wotherspoon, ‘they are winter lights.
There has got to be something to stop the skiers losing their way when they fall out of the pub.’
Until a year ago, Cairngorm Rope was Wotherspoon's baby.
His family has been involved in braiding and ropework for more than a century, and four years ago he came to Newtonmore to set up a small, high quality production facility for climbing ropes.
Success was real, but modest.
Wotherspoon is the first to admit that he an ideas man, practical but not practised in the arts of marketing.
Although still a shareholder, he is no longer on the board, and likes it that way.
Jim Oag, the Nairn-based energy source behind the meteoric rise of the company in the past 12 months, smiles.
‘Dave is our boffin, our crazy, lunatic, eccentric and we love him for it.
He is first and foremost a brilliant engineer and he is happy to be free to concentrate on research and development while I get on with marketing.’
Oag, formerly marketing director with a major computer industry concern in London, had grown tired of weekend commuting from Nairn, and began to look for a local company he could invest time and money in.
His involvement with Cairngorm Rope coincided with Dave Wotherspoon having a very good idea indeed.
It was while reading an article about frozen food packaging equipped with a warning patch which changed colour as the food melted, that Wotherspoon made the connection which lies at the root of all great inventions: why not a climbing rope which changed colour after it had been stressed?
‘Every climbing rope should only undergo a set number of falls before being thrown away,’ explains Oag.
‘The number it can take is in the technical specifications.
Most climbers will note each fall they undergo and realise when the rope should not be used.
But confusion can arise with climbing clubs and indoor climbing walls where ropes are being used by a lot of different people.’
The Smart Rope changes colour permanently after any section has reached the safe limit for fall stress.
Wotherspoon went to Strathclyde University, where the idea became reality (‘I'd love to tell you how it works,’ says Oag ‘but we have signed strict confidentiality agreements with Strathclyde’).
Courtesy of the Department of Trade and Industry's SMART (Small Firms Award for Research and Technology) awards, the Smart Rope became an economic reality.
‘We have applied for worldwide patents, and there is no question that we will have them,’ Oag says.
His confidence is infectious and convincing.
After all, the increase in turnover and sales in the past year is based not on the Smart Rope — which will not go into full production until the end of the year — but on intensive and intelligent marketing of the company's traditional products.
‘There were a number of things which had to be done when I arrived,’ says Oag.
‘I had to look at why we hadn't penetrated the potential markets, and I did a research project on that, and how we could go about it.’
He makes it sound simple but the success speaks for itself.
It is, after all, an old formula: engineering brilliance and quality linked with forceful, imaginative marketing and, last, but not least, cash.
Oag hopes to employ 40 people by the time his new factories are up and running, and stresses his sense of responsibility to the Highlands.
‘This is a long-term project.
We are not in this for a fast buck.
We will be sticking to our guns.’
And Dave Wotherspoon has a few more tricks up his sleeve, too.
‘We are already considering our next product, which will be a development in rope technology even more dramatic than the Smart Rope — which was the first innovation in ropes in 30 years.’
What it is exactly, remains to be seen.
On current form, it seems unlikely that Oag is stringing anyone along.
Pictures: GARY ANTHONY
Smart moves: David Wotherspoon, left, founded Cairngorm Rope while Jim Oag, the managing director, has engineered a phenomenal rise in turnover in just 12 months — and that before the Smart Rope earned them international attention
Roped into work: Alison Crosbie checks one of Cairngorm Rope's products.
The company expects to hire 40 more staff when new factories are up and running
Are we ready for a French lesson in inward investment?
‘It is a healthy environment.
We do not promote it as a deprived area where there are financial incentives’
CONGRATULATIONS on becoming one of the poorest regions in Europe.’
There was the faintest whiff of irony in the fax which Grant Baird, head of Scotland Europa, sent to Highlands & Islands Enterprise on hearing that it had been elevated to Objective One status in the European Community, entitling it to the maximum amount of regional development funds.
Large tracts of Scotland are now in receipt of assistance from the European Commission, recognising the plight of industry in this country.
It is, therefore, not surprising that Scotland relies heavily on inward investment to sustain the local economy.
Locate in Scotland, the agency charged with luring foreign multinationals to set up in Scotland, is generally seen as competing with the Welsh Development Agency and the Irish Development Authority to secure these coveted new tenants.
So it is mildly unsettling to realise that the richest regions of Europe also have their own inward investment agencies.
Of particular interest is the Rhone-Alpes region surrounding France's second-largest city, Lyon.
It bears many similarities to Scotland, with the same population and an equally diverse geography.
Like Scotland it has a traditional reliance on textiles and alcoholic drinks — 20,000 people work in Beaujolais production alone.
It is also an important finance sector, playing host to 20 foreign banks but is developing major presence in high-tech and research industries with big names such as Merlin-Gerin, Schlumberger, Sun Microsystems, Bull, Thomson and Sema resident in the area.
The comparison stretches to the fact that both Lyon and Edinburgh are bidding to host the European Central Bank.
Even the promotional literature — with its focus on excellent communications, quality of life, highly trained workforce, proliferation of universities, and so on— bears an uncanny resemblance to Locate in Scotland's brochures.
As well as enjoying the services of Invest In France, the French inward investment agency, there is a plethora of local agencies all offering aid and assistance to companies.
But as Thierry Bernard, the director of ERAI (Enterprise Rhone-Alpes International) points out: ‘This is one of the few regions which does not offer financial incentives.
‘If a firm is interested in Rhone-Alpes, then it has to be interested in the region intrinsically.’
While ERAI is more concerned with promoting Rhone-Alpes firms abroad ADERLY (the Economic Development Agency for the Lyon region) is the body charged with attracting investment into the greater Lyon area.
Bruno Dellinger, international business development manager, also believes that Lyon can thrive without offering short term bribes to companies.
‘It is a healthy environment — we do not promote it as a deprived area where there are lots of financial incentives.’
Nevertheless, regional development grants worth as much as 25 per cent of the capital cost of setting up a plant are available in certain departements (counties) in the Rhone-Alpes region.
Eighty thousand employees work for foreign-owned companies in the region such as Hewlett Packard, Caterpillar, ICI and Unilever.
Recent UK arrivals include Farnell Electronics, the RAC and British Airways, which relocated its French-speaking reservations system to Lyon from Paris.
Marc Pugens, Hewlett Packard's communications director, says that the digital networks group chose to locate its European headquarters in the Rhone-Alpes because it was a major university centre and offered excellent opportunities for technology transfer.
The track record shows that France attracts 9 per cent of all foreign investment in OECD countries, making it second only to Britain in this respect.
With Rank Xerox having just announced that it is to set up its European research centre in the region in the autumn and the Euronews satellite channel destined for the area, Rhone-Alpes is maintaining its momentum.
The Conservatives may have refused to sign the Social Chapter in order to attract investors to the UK's cheap labour costs, but Rhone-Alpes has proved that you do not have to be a sweatshop to bring in foreign capital.
Flying the flag for investment: Rhone-Alpes' success does not stop the region fighting for, and winning, foreign capital
France is there to be conquered.
En avant!
JOHN HATFIELD examines the opportunities for Scottish companies in France and looks at the booming environment of a French region that is peculiarly similar to Scotland
NOBODY is planning a tapestry to commemorate the events of the recent Scottish invasion of France.
But if the citizens of Ballantrae or Blantyre decide to emulate the townsfolk of Bayeux and embroider a record of the Scottish Council Development & Industry's recent trade mission to Paris and Lyon, there will be no shortage of bad omens to depict.
In the Norman tapestry it was Halley's Comet which bode ill: not, as it turned out, for the invading forces of William the Conqueror but for the defenders led by King Harold.
A modern version would have to include scenes of French farmers burning British lamb, Breton fishermen destroying Scottish-caught fish, French truckers blocking the autoroutes, last week's French press announcing the official arrival of the recession in France, French anger over Hoover's decision to switch production from Dijon to Glasgow and a Barclay's survey revealing France as the most import-hostile country in the EC.
But it may be that, as in 1066, the signs are bad for the defending country rather than the interlopers.
Already this year France has seen territory fall to the Brits with Tesco acquiring the 90-store Le Catteau supermarket chain in Northern France.
More significant is Kingfisher Group's purchase of Darty, a major electrical goods retailer, which sees the ‘nation of shopkeepers’ getting a firm foothold in the Gallic market place.
With recession in the home market and a temporary competitive advantage thanks to the  devaluation of sterling, the French economy is beginning to look attractive to smaller companies who may have been intimidated previously.
The logic is inescapable and is supported by no less a body than the French Centre d'Observation Economique (CEO), which published a report last month showing that French franc appreciation hit French export competitiveness in mid-1992, while French manufacturers have been losing ground in their domestic market since the middle of 1991.
And despite its reputation for being wrapped in red tape, figures from the Scottish Council Development & Industry show that France is already one of the top destinations for Scottish produce.
In 1991 Scotland's manufacturing exports to France totalled £1.17 billion.
This accounted for 13 per cent of total exports, making France Scotland's second most important market after Germany.
There is a further incentive for firms to break into the robust French economy, which has a GDP 15 per cent greater than the UK's despite a slightly smaller population, since it still enjoys a substantial trade surplus.
This amounted to FF29.2 billion last year with the French having a surplus in their trade with Britain to the tune of £729 million.
It seems, however, that the decision to withdraw sterling from the exchange rate mechanism has paid dividends.
Britain's non-oil exports to France were up by 12 per cent last December, compared to the same month the year before.
Although historic links between the two countries go back long before the days when the French were sending troops to help the Jacobite rebellions, the French presence in Scotland remains relatively small.
There are very few French employers in Scotland apart from tyre giant Michelin, which has a large factory in Dundee, Pernod Ricard which owns several distilleries and drilling rig builder, UIE Scotland, which is a subsidiary of Bouygues Offshore.
But if the French are reluctant investors in Scotland, there are plenty of opportunities in France for the thrusting Scot, as Graham Romaine, British commercial vice-consul in Lyons points out.
‘We export more to France than we do to the entire 50 countries of the Commonwealth.
France is an extremely large and sophisticated market.
This is the first division.’
Although he warns against treating France as an extension of the British market, he dismisses the view that it is an awkward place to do business: ‘There is a market for everything in France and the chances are that the French don't need any British imports — it's a question of making it worth their while.
‘A Frenchman is not a Brit with a beret and a baguette, but having said that France is not a difficult market but a different market.
If it was really difficult it wouldn't be our second-largest export market.’
His remarks are reinforced by the fact that, according to the DTI's Overseas Trade Service, more than 2,000 British companies have already established subsidiaries in France or have set up some form of joint venture with French companies.
Since 1990, when France lifted all exchange controls, and especially since the opening of the Single European market on 1 January, it has become easier to do business with the French.
Although sectors such as machinery and transport equipment are the most significant export earners for British companies in France, all sectors of the Scottish economy were represented on the trade mission.
The companies involved range from specialist textiles and engineering, to management consultancy and language training.
Most were looking for a local representative.
Ronald Whyte, chief executive of Aberdeen cooperage machinery manufacturer, Schoolhill Engineering, spoke for most of the mission members when he said that the recession and the exchange rate advantage had encouraged him to seek new markets in France.
The right wing coalition parties, RPR and UDF, are expected to triumph at the French legislative elections due to take place at the end of this month but, regardless of who wins, the French economy is set to go into recession in the first half of this year with even the most optimistic forecasters predicting zero growth.
But it is at precisely this time that price advantage comes into its own and companies become more willing to switch from existing suppliers if they can cut costs by using a new source.
The tapestry could well end with a Scottish victory.
DIP puts electronic files at your fingertips Invest in a data image processor and do away with paper mountains and walls of filing cabinets, suggests
SASKIA GENT
DOCUMENT Image Processing is a way of turning paper files into computer files.
Paperwork is scanned, indexed and stored on optical disk, ready to be recalled, viewed on a screen or printed out.
DIP systems come into their own when you need rapid access to paperwork or you cannot afford long lead times between the documents arriving and being available for reference.
DIP systems do not, however, come cheap.
You will have to budget at least £7,000 for the most basic DIP system, including hardware and software, and you could spend several hundred thousand pounds on a sophisticated networked system.
However, there are a few economical software-only packages available such as FilePlus from Greengage and Imara Lite from Image Systems Integrators that start from as little as £400.
DIP systems vary enormously.
At the low end of the market there are small, single user systems that replace your trusty filing cabinet, like Canon's Canofile 250 from £13,000.
More sophisticated systems can be attached to local or wide area networks or mainframe computers with corporate-wide ‘Workflow’ systems.
There is a powerful Apple system called MARS available from Callhaven or a Unix system from Linkhand Image.
The hardware and software components that perform the four main DIP functions ( scanning , indexing, saving and retrieving) are a scanner, a database and an optical disk.
However, the success of your DIP system will depend on retrieving the right index.
This means you must know how you want to organise your documents.
If you do not know what documents you have and how they relate to one another, your priority should be to put them in order rather than to transfer them to an electronic system.
In fact, you should not go anywhere near a DIP system until you have a clear picture of your paper records.
The ability to customise your index is a major consideration when choosing DIP software.
Customisation refers to the ability to tailor the software to your application and includes alterations, from re-naming fields to major programming changes.
The degree of user customisation varies from system to system.
Some allow you to change virtually everything yourself, while others need the supplier to make the most minor changes to the system.
The latter arrangement will only benefit those with minimal technical ability who are prepared to pay the service charges that such an agreement will incur.
Kodak offers a turnkey service on its KIMS 4000 system, with a great deal of hand-holding.
The appearance of the index on screen, the ‘front end’ to use the jargon, depends on several factors.
The operating system and operating environment are significant as is the database software on which the system is based, although suppliers can make these vary in looks.
One system, FilePower from Optika, has icons of filing cabinets with names underneath which makes it simple to use, while others will have more recognisable fields and records.
There are clear advantages in buying a system based on software which you are familiar with (and that you are happy with, of course).
Once documents have been scanned and indexed, they have to be saved to optical disk.
They look rather like a music CD but they are kept permanently inside small plastic cartridges for protection.
Optical disks range in size and technology, but their common feature is their high storage capacity.
This ranges from 128MB (megabytes) on a 3.5in re-writable disk to 10.2GB (gigabytes) on a 14in phase change disk.
Drives for these disks cost from £1,000 to about £3,000, with huge jukeboxes costing as much as £250,000.
ONE consideration, when looking at storage media for archiving purposes, is the lifetime of optical disks.
Optical disks have only been around long enough to test the integrity of stored date for ten years, but some manufacturers will give a guarantee of 50 years, achieved by artificially ageing the disks.
By contrast, microfilm can be stored for several hundred years.
Although data integrity will no doubt be safe for many years, there is no substitute for the real thing if you have to produce the document in a court of law 15 years from first filing it.
However, while that document is filed away in a warehouse for 50 years just in case, you can use a digital version for reference whenever  necessary .
Business prepares to bounce back from recession The nation is feeling positive despite some hard times, reports JOHN GREENLEES
IN the first three days of 1993, Japan's National Police Agency reported record numbers of visitors at the country's Shinto shrines. 1992 had been such a bad year that people were keen to pray for better fortunes in the months ahead.
The euphoria and sense of well-being which accompanied the boom years of the 1980s has been replaced by a mood of despondency as companies and individuals experience the effects of a western-style recession.
Many of Japan's largest and most famous corporations, including Matsushita Electric, Hitachi and Nippon Steel, have reported major drops in profits while nearly a third of the country's medium-sized companies are thought to be losing money.
Cuts in salaries, bonuses and overtime payments have reduced many family-incomes and caused a sharp drop in consumer spending.
Department stores and other retail outlets are suffering from a slump in sales and profits.
The Bank of Japan's ‘'tankan’ survey of manufacturing and non-manufacturing companies shows that business confidence is at its lowest level for 17 years.
It is in fact the Bank of Japan's tight monetary policies which have been blamed for the downturn.
Yasushi Mieno, the bank's governor, raised interest rates to stem the wave of speculative spending that had sent the price of shares and property soaring in the late-1980s.
The bursting of the ‘economic bubble’ resulted in a sharp fall in stock and property prices and an unprecedented number of corporate bankruptcies.
Marginal projects financed from cheap money have become a financial burden for many companies.
Increasing competition in international markets is forcing Japanese companies to cut costs and even, in some cases, pull out of markets altogether.
Isuzu has already announced it intends to cease production of passenger cars while NEC says it will no longer make VCRs at its own factories.
Yet in planning for the new financial year, which starts in April, the Japanese government has forecast an economic growth rate of 3.3 per cent.
Other analysts, however, are less confident about the economic outlook and reckon the country's growth rate will fall to between 2 and 3 per cent.
The most pessimistic observers are predicting growth rates of less than 1 per cent, and are suggesting that the Japanese economy is heading for a deep and prolonged recession.
But pessimists have predicted the downfall of Japan Inc before.
The oil shocks of the 1970s, and the sharp increase in the value of the yen in the mid-1980s, encouraged some analysts to forecast the total breakdown of Japan's economic juggernaut.
In each case, however, corporate Japan's response was a positive one, with companies restructuring their operations and emerging from the difficulties in a stronger position than before.
In the 1970s Japanese companies reacted to the steep increase in oil prices by making their factories more energy-efficient and investing in the high-tech, low energy-using industries which have since become key elements in the country's economy.
The ‘endeka’ or high value of the yen forced companies to reduce their costs by cutting production overheads and establishing new overseas factories.
Lower costs meant that Japanese exports remained competitively priced.
In the case of the present downturn, however, analysts are less confident of a quick return to high growth.
Restructuring for the remainder of the 1990s, they say, is likely to require a reduction in labour costs through cutbacks in overtime and part-time working.
The axing of permanent posts may also be necessary for some companies.
Already the Pioneer Electronics Corporation has disregarded its lifetime employment policy by demanding that 35 mid-level managers accept early retirement.
If there are not enough volunteers, the company has warned, compulsory redundancy notices will be issued.
But tampering with lifetime employment policies, and pushing unemployment upwards, is likely to affect the morale of a workforce that has always been Japan's most valuable asset.
Leading business figures, like the chairman of Sony, Akio Morita, say it is in fact time for companies to show more consideration for their employees, shareholders and local communities.
Mr Morita has also voiced the opinion that companies will quickly address their structural problems and help the country return to high growth.
Certainly the huge sums of capital that Japanese companies invested in new factories and equipment in the late 1980s will help the country maintain its lead in sectors such as cars, electronics and robotics.
Recent statistics from the ministry of finance show that both inflation and unemployment are still below 3 per cent.
A forecast from the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development suggests that Japan's economic growth in 1993 will be higher than the average for the six other leading industrial nations.
New products, including liquid crystal display televisions, long-life batteries and new materials offer promise for the future.
Japanese companies are also expected to emerge strongly in the biochemical and telecommunication fields.
Some firms are actually enjoying the recession; 397 of the 1,410 companies recently surveyed by the Nihon Keizai newspaper said they expect to show an increase in pre-tax profits at the end of the financial year.
Companies managing to buck the recession by having a good year include computer games manufacturers, cosmetics companies, food processors and shipbuilders.
The ten trillion-yen stimulus package recently announced by the ministry of finance will expand public works spending and help the flagging construction industry.
With a spate of infrastructure projects already planned, the government hopes that Japan can build its way out of the recession.
930316 
Power- house: huge sums of capital invested in new factories and equipment in the last decade will help Japan maintain its lead in car and electronics manufacture Inflation and unemployment are still below 3 per cent 
No initiatives to encourage savings
ENCOURAGING savers was the last thing on the Chancellor's mind and the Budget contained no significant initiatives.
There was one major shock in that he did not increase the ‘pensions cap’— the maximum level of earnings for which pension provision may be made with tax relief.
This had been expected to rise to £77,400, but it remains at £75,000.
The key change was the announcement that the income tax charge on company dividends is from 6 April to be cut from 25 to 20 per cent and that the accompanying tax credit will also be cut to 20 per cent.
The Chancellor also announced some minor changes to Personal Equity Plans.
The main one is that investors who wish to make regular subscriptions for a period of years will need only to complete one initial application form.
Following the Budget, National Savings announced the reintroduction of the FIRST Option Bond.
Applications will be accepted from 2 March and the guaranteed rate for the first year will be 6.34 per cent gross, equivalent 4.75 per cent.
Ian Harper
£17.4m hope for N-east housing
By Frank Urquhart
SCOTTISH Homes is to invest £8.7 million to build and improve housing in Banff and Buchan, it was announced yesterday.
Sir James Mellon, chairman of the national housing agency, said that the initiative should attract a matching investment from the private sector, leading to the construction of 350 homes in the area.
He said: ‘We recognise, along with Banff and Buchan District Council, the very real difficulties in the supply of sufficient housing in this area.
Like other parts of Grampian, pressure on existing housing supply is making access very difficult, particularly for families, single people and the homeless.’
In a separate housing initiative in the north-east, plans were revealed for housing co-operatives in Grampian to build homes for rent for the first time.
Three sites, providing a total of 70 homes, are to be developed by co-operatives at Garthdee in Aberdeen, Kemnay and Fraserburgh.
John Fairley, chairman of Grampian Property Partners, said: ‘The plans to build homes for the first time is a significant move for housing co-operatives in the area and underlines our commitment to help meet the housing needs of people in Grampian.’
Water self-help
In view of the current debate on the privatisation of water in Scotland, it might be well to plan for the future.
Housebuilders would be well-advised to build bathrooms and toilets on ground floors so that rain water from house roofs can be channelled to storage tanks on garage roofs to allow gravity feeds where EC standard water is not needed, so saving water meter charges.
Dish and clothes-washing machines with strong outlet motors should be purchased to allow the recycling of soapy water to another tank on the garage roof for car washing, hosing down the driveway, etc.
Mains pipes with their higher pressure should have turbos fitted to work pumps to lift bathwater from a sump tank to the soapy water tank.
An antiseptic drip may be necessary for this tank.
For those whose mains supply is disconnected, or who cannot afford to pay the meter charges, stand-pipes should be provided as a public facility by local councils (if they still exist).
This will allow pensioners, the unemployed, single parent families and unemployed mansion house mortgagees to collect their own water in buckets as is normal in third world countries.
Leisure centres may care to run classes in head porterage of buckets.
Some people who have difficulty in paying for their water may prefer to have prepayment meters fitted.
Where sewage disposal is also to be privatised one wonders whether there would be a standard charge, or if it might be metered.
In many third world countries human waste is used as fertiliser, and indeed in some oases night soil clearance areas are valued.
Would efficient sewage companies make a profit from compost and give rebates to prolific producers?
Keen gardeners may wish to have their own sludge tanks as is normal on farms.
Cool response to £230m jobs package
BILL MILLAR finds union leaders and business chiefs unimpressed by plans to get unemployed people back to work
THE CHANCELLOR'S package of employment measures was given a less than effusive welcome yesterday.
Norman Lamont had announced £230 million worth of measures to help 100,000 unemployed people find work.
More than £20 million of this would be made available to carry the measures through in Scotland, according to the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
Mr Lang said that, taken together, the measures showed the Government's determination to tackle the problem and give unemployed people the best chance of getting back into jobs.
But the general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Campbell Christie, said that the Budget was bound to be bad for jobs.
‘We asked the Chancellor for a Budget for jobs.
Apart from the construction industry in the south-east, it does nothing for jobs.’
Roger Young, director-general of the Institute of Management, gave a cool response to the proposals, saying that allowing 30,000 long-term jobless to take up vocational courses without losing their benefits — one of Mr Lamont's proposed measures — was a ‘drop in the ocean’.
The Employment Secretary, Gillian Shepherd, said that the new measures gave the unemployed more ways to use their time constructively.
Mr Lang said that the additional package of employment measures announced by the Chancellor was excellent news for Scotland.
‘Well over £20 million will be available to carry the new measures through, of which more than £10 million will be available to the local enterprise company networks.’
He said that the new ‘learning for work scheme’— intended to provide opportunities for the unemployed to pursue vocationally relevant full-time courses of education, with fees paid and an allowance equivalent to their benefit entitlement for up to a year — gave another opportunity for the longer-term unemployed to take up training opportunities and thus to increase their chances of finding employment.
The ‘business start-up scheme’ proposals provided more funding for additional places, enabling more people to start their own businesses, although Mr Lang did not say how many of the additional 10,000 UK places would be made available to Scotland.
‘And the new LEC challenge fund which will be administered by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise will give enterprise companies the opportunity to bring forward pioneering and imaginative schemes to tackle long-term unemployment,’ Mr Lang said.
This is a fund to which it is intended that LECs will bid competitively with the intention of developing innovative ways to help unemployed people into work and create jobs.
‘Besides these measures,’ said Mr Lang, ‘the employment service in Scotland will be spending more than £10 million on the new community action programme which will enable unemployed people to undertake work of value to the community while retaining their entitlement to benefit.’
He made no comment on the ‘workstart pilots’ scheme under which four schemes in different parts of the country will test how effective it is to encourage the recruitment of long-term unemployed people by paying a temporary subsidy to employees.
Employers who take on people who have been unemployed for longer than either two years or four years, depending on the pilot area, will be paid a subsidy related to average benefits.
‘A damned disgrace and no help to people like me'
MARY BRYCE admits a certain sympathy for Norman Lamont after his treatment by the press over the past few months.
But as a pensioner she did not think much of his performance in the Commons yesterday.
‘It's a damned disgrace and won't be any help to pensioners like myself,’ Mrs Bryce, 81, said after watching the Chancellor's speech at her flat in Dalry, Edinburgh.
‘I worked all my life and saved so I would have no worry when I retired but it's a different story now.
‘Putting more tax on the heating will hit older people very hard.
I leave my heating on during the night because I don't want to get up in a cold flat but people I know try to save their money by living in the cold.’
Mrs Bryce has lived by herself since her husband Robert died 17 years ago.
Their only child, Gabriella, is married and lives in Toronto.
She worked for 25 years at the Burtons Biscuit factory, now based at Sighthill, and for many years was a union branch secretary.
Her weekly pension is £57 and she gets a work pension of £52 each month.
Most of her rent — £96 a month — is covered by housing benefit but she still has to pay about half of her poll tax.
She was not eligible for the heating allowances that run during the winter.
‘I have to use my pension just to pay for food but it's not enough to cover the bills or if you need a new coat or linen.
If I did not have a little bit in the bank I would not be able to pay for it all.
‘Pensioners hardly even got a mention in the Budget, it was all about small businesses and the like.
‘To tell you the truth, towards the end I was getting bored stiff because there was no help for the elderly.’
Graeme Wilson
Mary Bryce: ‘Putting more tax on heating will hit older people hard’
House sellers must discard rose-tinted spectacles
‘BEAUTIFUL modern villa, ten minutes from sea, recently rewired, reduced to 40,000 for quick sale’.
An estate agent's dream is sometimes a purchaser's nightmare.
The modern villa was in fact built this century, but early in the century.
Ten minutes from the sea is for those who possess a helicopter or seaplane.
Recently rewired — well certainly there were new fittings put in 20 years ago.
The price is not reduced, the property has never been on the market before.
We are all familiar with the rose-tinted particulars produced by some of the less reputable estate agents.
The public has been rebelling for years.
Estate agents rank in public esteem with double-glazing salesmen, second-hand car dealers — behind even politicians and journalists.
Eventually when the public are fed up and lodge a sufficient number of protests, governments will take action, and action was taken in 1991 when Parliament passed an Act called ‘The Property Misdescriptions Act’.
It is one of the quirks of modern society that even when acts are passed by Parliament and signed by the Sovereign, they do not always take effect.
Very often, an act has a clause in it saying that it will take effect only when an order is issued by the appropriate Secretary of State.
And this is what has happened with the Property Misdescriptions Act.
An order, quaintly called the Property Misdescriptions (Specified Matters) Order 1992 rules when the act comes into force.
And that date is 4 April, 1993.
And it certainly is an act with teeth.
Where a false or misleading statement is made in the course of an estate agency business or a property development business, otherwise in providing conveyancing services, the person by whom the business is carried on shall be guilty of an offence.
That is a statutory offence or, more bluntly put, a criminal offence.
The penalty on summary conviction is a fine of up to £5,000.
If the matter is taken in a more serious case by indictment then the fine is unlimited.
And of course if an individual is fined and does not pay the fine then it is to prison he will go.
And, as we know, many solicitors engage not only in conveyancing but also in providing estate agency services.
They, too, will risk a criminal charge if they are not extremely careful.
The offence concerns a statement which can be made either orally or in writing.
Such a statement could, of course, include pictures or plans.
The only good news in the act for those who sell houses is that it is not a criminal offence to omit information unless an omission results in a statement being misleading.
But the statement which is made must be neither false nor misleading.
Let's say that there is subsidence.
There is no requirement to draw attention to subsidence, but it would be a criminal offence to say that there is none, or that the property is free from defect.
Lengthy leases come under the protection of the act which covers disposals or acquisitions of ‘an interest in land’.
An opening example: If the price is advertised as being reduced and yet the house has never been on the market before, then it clearly cannot have been reduced.
And an estate agent claiming so would be guilty of an offence.
Before purchasers of a faulty building go out and celebrate, let me point out that, while the act penalises those who commit an offence, it does not help those against whom the offence is committed.
If an estate agent is convicted under the act the client does not automatically have a right of action in civil proceedings for loss which may have been brought about as a result of the offence.
And, as importantly, a conviction does not make any subsequent contract unenforceable.
The reason for this is quite clear.
At the end of the day purchasers must satisfy themselves through legal advisers or surveyors, or both, that they are not buying a pig in a poke.
Or if they are buying a pig in a poke at least they know that they are so doing.
The estate agent is selling for a third party and it would be totally wrong that his client should suffer because of the false window-dressing of his agent.
No-one should buy a property solely on the strength of the initial particulars.
What the Government is trying to do is to persuade the estate agents that they shouldn't give false particulars at all.
And if they do, they will be taken before the courts.
Furthermore, the prosecution does not need to show that anyone has suffered loss.
The offence is one of what is called ‘strict liability’.
The only defence is that the estate agent took all reasonable steps and exercised all due diligence to avoid committing the offence.
To my mind it would not be sufficient for an estate agent to say that the false information was provided by the client.
The estate agent would have to show what steps were taken to check the information.
Of course, we shall have some interesting cases over the issue of what Parliament means by ‘all reasonable steps and the exercise of all due diligence’.
It has been suggested by one author that, for instance, written records of staff training should be kept.
Solicitors are being advised by the chairman of the Edinburgh Solicitors Property Centre that all office systems should be reviewed.
Casual conversation should not include any representations or comments, records should be carefully kept and the utmost care must be taken on checking sales particulars even for typographical errors.
I think it is fair to say that this act has come about more as a result of the conduct of estate agents in the South.
In Scotland we do not have the same problem.
Nevertheless the act does apply here.
Estate agents, solicitors and indeed anyone dealing with the business of selling property, will require very much to be on their toes.
And that, I respectfully submit, is no bad thing.
From next month, it will be a criminal offence to give false or misleading descriptions of property for sale.
Professor Ross Harper points to some side effects of the new law
Good for firms, bad for people
REGARDLESS of how much longer Norman Lamont survives at No 11, his Budget will be around for a long time.
Faced with narrow options, the Chancellor broadened them in the only way realistically open to him — chronologically.
What he had to announce for this year was, particularly in its revenue-raising aspects, decidedly thin, indeed fiscally neutral.
Only from next April does the full bite start to apply, when the tax take rises by a daunting £6.5 billion, to be followed by a still more severe £10 billion rise in 1995-96.
In a two-Budget year, it might seem perverse to devote so much thought to the middle-distance.
In fact, there are in present circumstances clear advantages to such an approach, aside from the Chancellor's aspirations to linger in posterity.
We have inveighed here often enough against short-termism in the British economy.
Certainly, Mr Lamont could not be accused of that.
At the present uncertain stage in the economic cycle, the commodity most urgently lacking is confidence.
Mr Lamont has, not without resourcefulness, recognised that in sketching his perspective so long.
Whether he has addressed it convincingly and appropriately is another matter.
The massive tax increases that lie ahead should go some way to reassure the financial markets that he is determined to redress a recessionary budget deficit now projected to run at £50 billion — £1 billion a week — in the current year.
Equally, there are literally dozens of measures — some fiddly, others more substantial — designed to persuade business that the Government is sympathetic to its grievances and ready, within limits, to help.
But whether that amounts to a positive incentive for companies to boost production and revive investment plans is open to doubt.
Certainly, there is little active disincentive and, at the margins, measures like expansion of export credits provision will help (though key export markets, as Mr Lamont noted, look cheerless).
The proposals for small businesses are quite radical, but that is always a longer game.
The only real guarantee of output and investment growth, however, is demand growth.
There, alas, Mr Lamont's vision seems to extend only to the end of this year.
His gamble appears to be that the moratorium this year on tax increases will encourage people to relax their self-discipline and do some spending.
The same logic appears to apply in relation to the housing market, where a doubling of the stamp duty threshold giveth this year what reduced mortgage tax relief next year taketh away.
Yet, surely there is a danger that the public proves as far-sighted as the markets are presumed to be, and that apprehension of the miseries ahead will encourage thrift, which will deepen as the bills arrive.
That must apply in particular to the devastating decision to levy VAT on domestic fuels.
As John Smith correctly noted, this should finally dispel the myth that VAT applies only to commodities open to consumer choice.
It may also disabuse ministers of the belief that people notice indirect taxes less than direct ones.
This is a measure that will cause real and conspicuous hardship, and the Government should occupy the year before its implementation in drawing up proper measures to soften its impact on vulnerable groups, not all of whom will be covered by upgrading of benefits.
Moreover, the looming rises in direct taxation (coupled with a drastically-increased cost of motoring) seem destined to hit the middle-earner particularly hard, and that is surely where ministers should be looking for any significant rise in consumer demand.
Besides, the biggest disincentive to spend is fear of the dole, and Mr Lamont raised little cheer in that regard.
Modest measures to help the long-term unemployed back to work are laudable in all but their modesty; they do little to make the employed feel more secure.
That being said, it would be churlish not to make mention of some elements in the package which are notably welcome.
The freeze on spirits duty acknowledges, if it does not yet rectify, the wholly unjust domestic tax regime against which the Scotch whisky industry has had to struggle for years.
If imported drinks like wine still enjoy much more benign treatment, at least the gap has been somewhat narrowed.
We should hope that it presages a more thorough review of alcohol taxation.
We must also offer due gratitude for the continued absence of VAT on newspapers and books.
Press hostility to this idea was scarcely free of self-interest, but there were bigger issues at stake and it is right that they prevailed.
Not that home heating fuels were a better option.
Whisky is not the only element of particular interest to Scotland.
Mr Lamont plausibly presented his reforms of petroleum revenue tax as taking sensible cognisance of a much-changed industry.
The industry itself, however, is less sure.
While the changes may go some way to prolong the life of existing fields, there are fears that it could discourage the development of new ones.
Transport is also a notably relevant issue in Scotland.
It is tempting to react sourly to a string of major infrastructural projects in south-east England though, in truth, they will also help Scotland's connections, particularly with continental Europe.
Of more concern is the sharp rise in motoring costs, which must impact particularly severely on rural Scotland.
A Budget for sustained recovery and a Budget for jobs, said Mr Lamont.
Well, maybe.
The proof will be in whether solid but undramatic encouragement on the supply side can take effect before the delayed but severe clawback on the demand side strikes.
In that, there is hope but little certainty.
Lift for spirits Fuel hardship
Child care failings fuel a young couple's concern
THE Budget was a disappointment to John Heywood and his wife Ines Garcia.
They felt it offered no child care  provisions , did not promise much for the unemployed and will mean a rise in fuel bills from next year.
The couple, who have a ten-month-old baby, own their own flat in a tenement block off Edinburgh's Leith Walk but have just bought a new flat and will be moving soon.
John is an adult education officer, Ines works part-time in an office.
Between them they earn slightly more than £14,000.
With a baby to look after neither has much opportunity to go out, so the increase in the cost of a pint of beer or a bottle of wine will have little impact on their lives.
Nor are they worried about the rise in cigarette and cigar prices since neither smokes.
Although the couple do own a car and use between four and five gallons of unleaded petrol a week, the rise in the cost of a gallon of petrol and vehicle excise duty will not make a large dent in their finances.
‘I think we can cope with that increase, it is not really significant.’
However, the rise in all domestic fuel costs from April next year was met with dismay by Mr Heywood.
‘The flat we are moving into is quite cold; a rise of 17.5 per cent will be quite a bit.’
He is also angry at the effect this increase will have on the old, the unemployed and those on low incomes.
He would have preferred greater child provision, too.
‘A significant chunk of what we earn goes on child-minding.
There should have been major expenditure on affordable provision, this would be a major factor in getting people back to work.’
Alison Daniels
JACK CROMBIE
Unimpressed: John Heywood and Ines Garcia had hoped to see improved child care provisions
Mixed reaction from business world
GRAEME STEWART finds opinions differ depending on the size of firm represented
THE Budget has polarised opinion in the business community.
Small businesses see it as a boost to get them out of recession while other, larger firms criticised Mr Lamont.
The Federation of Small Businesses reacted positively to the Budget and said it was the result of the Chancellor's meeting its representatives and listening to what they were saying.
In particular, the federation welcomed the introduction of income tax self assessment and the proposed reduction of audit burden for small businesses.
Improvements to the Export Credits Guarantee Scheme and the Loan Guarantee Scheme were praised while the improvement in VAT cash accounting and the allowance for bad debts at this time was particularly helpful.
The imposition of VAT misdeclaration and serious default surcharges was something the federation had opposed since its outset.
‘We thank the Government for relaxing these but this is rather like thanking somebody for refraining from hitting you on the head with a heavy stick,’ said Brendan Burns, the federation's Scottish-based UK vice-chairman.
The National Westminster Bank welcomed the changes to the Small Firms Loan Guarantee Scheme (SFLGS) announced in the Budget.
Derek Wanless, group chief executive, said: ‘By increasing the maximum loan available for existing businesses to £250,000, the Chancellor has substantially enhanced the impact of the scheme.’
Scottish Chambers of Commerce regarded the Budget as a good one for business, in particular the help for exporters, the freeze on business rates and the additional assistance to small businesses.
The support for jobs and training for the long-term unemployed will also be supported by the chambers.
‘Members will be pleased that the Chancellor has not increased tax in this Budget, but will watch the impact of the tax increases proposed for 1994-95 and 1995-96…we are pleased that tax on whisky is not to be raised, but perhaps the tax basis should be brought into line with tax on other alcoholic drinks,’ said Andrew Moore, director of the chambers.
However, the Budget was criticised by Scottish Engineering, the employers' organisation which represents hundreds of Scottish manufacturing businesses, and the brewers, angry at the Chancellor's decision to raise excise duty on beer.
Colonel Howard Jordan, chief executive of Scottish Engineering, said the Chancellor had disregarded the engineering industry's pleas other than for help with exports by lowering the premiums and increasing the span of ECGD.
Brian Stewart, chief executive of Scottish and Newcastle, said the Budget was wide-ranging but in the context of his own industry, the Chancellor's decision to raise excise duty on beer flew in the face of commercial reality.
He was backed by the Brewers' Association of Scotland, which said the real price increases on the pint across the bars of pubs would be considerably more than the Chancellor's claimed increase of 1.5p per pint.
‘What was needed to rejuvenate the industry was a reduction on excise duty to get beer on to a more equitable level with other drinks,’ said Angus Meldrum, president of the association.
Cautious welcome for £1bn boost to business Business reacted with a mixture of short-term relief and long-term anxiety to Mr Lamont's measures, writes Magnus Grimond
EARLY reactions last night suggested that the Budget's £1 billion boost for business was receiving a cautious welcome from the supposed recipients.
The Confederation of British Industry said this was close to the Budget it had asked for, with increased export credits, the advance corporation tax (ACT) question addressed and smaller firms helped.
The CBI also expressed satisfaction that the Chancellor had taken its advice not to raise business taxes this year.
However, Howard Davies, the CBI's director-general, said: ‘We would have liked an assurance on the continuation of investment allowances and the Budget comes with a sting in the tail — future tax increases.
‘If the recovery gathers strength, those increases may be supportable.
We, like the Chancellor, hope that turns out to be the case.’
There was a similar reaction from the Institute of Directors.
A representative said: ‘In the first year, there doesn't seem to be anything likely to cause too much concern.’
However, there was concern over the effects of the measures announced on future years.
The IoD estimates that the increased taxes announced yesterday will have the effect of adding 7p to income tax.
‘That will have a substantial effect on consumers’ expenditure and will also affect the retail prices index.’
The Association of British Chambers of Commerce echoed the feelings of other business groups, welcoming the Chancellor's statement as ‘a cautious Budget for recovery’.
The moves to help smaller firms were a ‘somewhat tardy recognition of the contribution small business makes’, Richard Brown, director of policy, claimed.
The downside of the Budget were the additional duties on fuel, he said, but these had to be reluctantly accepted in view of environmental considerations.
While the Budget was long on rhetoric concerning business, as expected there were no significant changes to direct business taxation.
Few believed the Chancellor would announce any reduction in corporation tax or any increase on last year's reintroduction of first-year investment allowances at 40 per cent.
But there will be relief that the Chancellor has not tapped business to ease his problems with the public sector borrowing requirement by raising taxes directly.
One of his main contributions has been the extension of last year's freeze on rises in the uniform business rate, which at £370 million represents a large part of the £1 billion boost for industry.
That should help major high street groups like the banks and big retailers and will be of particular benefit to those operating in the south-east of England, which was hardest hit by the 1990 revaluation of properties and the recession.
The Chancellor's ACT reforms will also be widely welcomed, although the £550 million saving is likely to be a drop in the ocean compared to the surplus ACT hiding away in many large companies' balance sheets.
It may, on the other hand, create difficulties with the many tax-exempt pension funds which dominate the share registers of most companies quoted on the stock exchange.
The reduction in the tax credit on dividends from 25 per cent to 20 will reduce the amounts they and other non-taxpayers can reclaim from the Inland Revenue, saving the Government £1 billion a year.
Meanwhile, higher-rate tax payers will pay 5p in the pound more on their dividends, adding a further £200 million to Treasury coffers.
Finance directors up and down the land will also be chewing over the implications of the Chancellor's other proposal that dividends paid out of foreign earnings could attract a reclaim of ACT.
It is possible that this could herald the introduction of a choice for shareholders between receiving dividends net of tax, as at present, or gross in the form of the new ‘foreign income dividend’.
The infrastructure projects unveiled yesterday were not unexpected, but will give a welcome fillip to the construction sector.
ALLAN MILLIGAN Watching brief: companies will benefit from the measures implemented this year, but there is concern about the ‘sting in the tail’ A number of questions remain to be answered, however.
It remains to be seen just how much public money has had to be promised for the Heathrow to central London fast rail link to break the deadlock between airports operator BAA and British Rail.
An even bigger question mark hangs over the proposed Channel Tunnel railway between St Pancras station and the coast, given the enormous controversy the project has already raised among dwellers along the various routes proposed.
Lamont derails Scotland's international link
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
A SCHEME to build a transport interchange under King's Cross station in London — which would benefit Scottish travellers — was thrown into doubt by the Chancellor.
He confirmed that a railway would be built between the Channel Tunnel and London, but not serving King's Cross as planned.
Mr Lamont's announcement that St Pancras will be the terminus of the £3 billion Channel rail link implies that international trains to and from Scotland will be much slower than first thought.
There is also uncertainty about proposals for easier connections at King's Cross between Scottish trains and services in the London area.
The Chancellor's comments were viewed with dismay by many senior railway managers, who had feared that the Treasury would seek to cut the cost of the plans by abandoning the King's Cross scheme.
However, Sir Bob Reid, the chairman of British Rail, refused to be critical.
‘To have a direct link is an enormous breakthrough, absolutely enormous.
This is really a great day for British Rail and the railways in Britain.
If St Pancras can in fact be rehabilitated then that will give me the greatest pleasure,’ he said.
Mr Lamont also announced that the £300 million Heathrow Express line would proceed.
But the £1.7 billion cross-London Crossrail line would be reconsidered as a possible joint venture between the public and private sectors.
Details of the route between London and the Channel Tunnel are expected to be spelt out today by John MacGregor, the Transport Secretary.
Mr Lamont's comments seem to indicate that the plan for Edinburgh-Paris and Brussels trains to run through the King's Cross development has been shelved.
The use of St Pancras would require trains between Scotland and the Continent to stop in London for longer than previously expected, because of the need to reverse direction in a terminal platform.
It had been hoped that the station would be reached at high speed by tunnel from east London, but getting to St Pancras from the Channel route would involve a tortuously slow route over a heavily congested suburban line.
The Chancellor said: ‘Subject to the results of detailed work by British Rail over the next few months, the London terminus of the new link will be located at St Pancras.
This will provide a new lease of life for this magnificent Victorian building, which will become a gateway to London for international passengers.’
Mr MacGregor would be inviting the private sector to tender so that the project could be taken forward as a joint venture as soon as possible, Mr Lamont said.
‘We hope to be able to introduce a bill as soon as the legislative timetable permits and to see the new line completed around the end of the decade.’
He also announced that the scheme for a high-speed railway between London and Heathrow airport would proceed.
It has been delayed pending final clearance.
The line from Paddington station could open in late 1997 and airlines such as British Airways and Virgin Atlantic would operate at least some of the trains that would take just 16 minutes.
The project is a joint venture between the airport operator, BAA, and BR, with BR putting up an initial £15.3 million and BAA £35.3 million.
The rest of the money will be raised by BAA through City institutions.
The Crossrail scheme for an east-west underground passenger line would benefit London, but it was being re-examined, Mr Lamont said.
‘We now believe it would be preferable to take this project forward as a joint venture with the private sector.’
Oil firms fear new threat to jobs The change in the offshore tax system, says Frank Frazer, may cut exploration
COMPANIES in the North Sea oil industry want urgent talks with the Chancellor to discuss changes in taxation which could have an immediate impact on rig jobs.
The Budget measures, which came as a surprise to many offshore operating companies, include a reduction from 75 to 50 per cent in petroleum revenue tax (PRT) on existing oilfields and abolition of the charge on new fields.
Though the move could help to speed up investment in a few large projects, there were fears last night that the sudden change in the offshore tax system could hit the bulk of the smaller oil and gas projects which were expected to provide most of the work for the offshore supply industry over the next few years.
An immediate threat to jobs may stem from a sharp cutback in exploration work as a result of the Chancellor's announcement that drilling spending can no longer be offset against PRT which is due to be paid on existing fields.
That will mean a four-fold rise in the cost of new exploration wells to companies which have interests in existing oilfields and could stop the practice of stakes in older oilfields being bought as a tax shelter by smaller independent oil companies wanting to financing exploration plans.
Many of the other budget measures left oil companies confused about the overall impact on their revenues at a time when oil industry funding is under pressure from sluggish international prices.
Harold Hughes, the director-general of the UK Offshore Operators Association, said that the measures were too complicated for immediate analysis.
‘I am almost certain we will be going to see the Chancellor to complain about the way this was done,’ he added.
Mr Lamont justified the measures by pointing out that when PRT was introduced in 1975, oil prices were high and oilfields were relatively large.
‘As profits in many existing fields attract a marginal rate of over 83 per cent, there is little incentive for companies to keep costs under control or for additional investment in existing fields,’ he claimed.
The sting for the oil industry came in the Chancellor's later acknowledgment that he expected the changes in the oil taxation system to yield £300 million in additional Government revenue in 1994-95 and about £400 million the following year.
The basis of the calculations caused some confusion among oil companies which were planning to run overnight computer programs on the impact of the changes on their operations.
Those would assess if they would be among the winners and losers from the reform of a tax system which Mr Lamont said was starting to appear increasingly anachronistic.
He claimed that the changes would simplify the regime by exempting new oilfields from 300 pages of complex legislation so that the only levy charged would be the standard 33 per cent corporation tax.
‘The paradox of this reform is that despite the abolition of PRT for new fields, and the reduced rate for existing fields, after 1993-94 it will actually raise revenue for the Exchequer,’ he added.
Dr Hughes, who said UKOOA would urgently seek views of members on the detailed impact of the moves, pointed out that the changes could mean the industry as a whole losing from £300 million to £400 million in cash flow which could have been used for reinvestment over each of the next two years.
Ian Wood, the head of Scotland's largest indigenous offshore service company and chairman of Grampian Enterprise, said he was surprised that the Government appeared to have taken ‘unhelpful’ steps hitting exploration activity and the development of smaller projects when there was a need to give the industry reassurance of support.
Under pressure: oil firms fear the impact of changes which will mean up to £400 million lost to the industry
Corporation tax promise kept
By Magnus Grimond
THE Chancellor's focus was firmly fixed on the benefits to the economy of smaller business yesterday, but larger companies also had reason to give at least two cheers for the Budget.
As expected, there was no change in corporation tax, which remains at 33 per cent.
Investment allowances also remain unchanged after last year's introduction of a 40 per cent first year rate.
But the Chancellor did show he had been listening to some of industry's gripes.
He announced that he was making good last year's promise to look into the knotty question of advance corporation tax, an impost which has been the subject of a crescendo of complaints from some of Britain's biggest companies.
The present arrangement penalises companies with large overseas tax bills, because ACT payable on dividends to shareholders can be used only to offset ‘mainstream’ tax on UK earnings.
That has led to mountains of surplus ACT in companies where UK earnings are not high enough to absorb the ACT.
The main boost for those groups will come from the reduction in the rate of ACT on dividends from 25 per cent now to 22.5 per cent next year and 20 per cent in the 1994-95 tax year.
The Chancellor believes that measure alone will give an overall cash flow benefit of nearly £2 billion a year in both the next two tax years and reduce the ACT mountain by £300 million a year.
The other ACT reform announced by the Chancellor was more nebulous, but potentially more far-reaching.
An Inland Revenue consultative document will herald a scheme whereby dividends paid out of foreign income could partially bypass ACT.
Although the advance tax would be payable on the special dividends, it could be clawed back under the Chancellor's proposed scheme.
That would benefit foreign earners like the mining giant RTZ, the Inchcape trading group or the Anglo-American conglomerate, Hanson.
It would bring fewer gains to the likes of water companies, which suffer high rates of effective taxation through ACT because capital allowances reduce their mainstream tax bills.
Russell Walls, finance director of the textile group Coats Viyella,, which has about £70 million ACT surplus to requirements, said both reforms were good news for companies with surplus ACT and foreign income.
‘It was a bit of a surprise he addressed ACT — we had almost lost hope.’
The Chancellor also gave a further boost to exporters.
Following on from last year's 20 per cent cut in rates charged by the Export Credit Guarantees Department, rates are to fall by an average of 7.5 per cent.
There is also to be an increase of £1.3 billion in export credit insurance cover to certain markets, ranging from China and India to Mexico and South Africa, over the next three years.
That will be on top of the £200 million for the current year and £500 million for next announced in the last Autumn Statement.
Foreign businesses, which have invested heavily in Britain over the past few years, were not left out yesterday.
A tax regime starting in 1994-95 will encourage them to set up head offices in the UK.
The Chancellor also used his statement to close the loophole whereby companies acquired other businesses merely to take advantage of their capital losses for tax purposes.
In future, companies joining a group with such losses will be allowed to use them only against gains on other assets owned at the time it was acquired.
However, tax relief for certain types of reserves for losses at insurance companies is to be extended and the Chancellor announced a streamlining in the treatment of foreign exchange gains and losses.
£32m business rates cut
BUSINESS rates in Scotland are to be cut by an extra £32 million, Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, announced yesterday, writes David Scott.
The reduction is on top of the £68 million rates subsidy given at the beginning of the year, bringing a total cut of £100 million for 1993-94.
The further reduction in Scotland is a consequence of the Chancellor's decision to assist businesses in England.
Mr Lamont said a freeze in bills last year would have resulted in substantial increases for many businesses this year.
He announced measures which would reduce the total business rates bill by 2.6 per cent and said the same reduction would apply in Scotland and Wales.
Scottish business leaders last night welcomed the further relief.
But they claimed the decision would do nothing to reduce the existing £240 million rates gap between Scotland and England.
Taurus loss is £1bn gain
LAST WEEK'S decision by the Stock Exchange to abandon the Taurus computerised share-trading system will bring a windfall saving of £1 billion in the coming year, the Chancellor said yesterday, writes Richard Shackleton.
In the 1990 Budget, the then Chancellor, John Major, announced plans to abolish the 0.5 per cent stamp duty on share transactions to coincide with the introduction of the computerised scheme.
Norman Lamont's calculations will also have been influenced by the fact that, even before Taurus was cancelled, its introduction had been postponed until April 1994, thereby netting extra revenue from the duty.
Stamp duty on share transactions will be reviewed after the Bank of England's steering committee has reported its conclusions in June.
Loophole closed for wealthy investors
By Gordon Milne
A LUCRATIVE loophole used by wealthy investors to earn high tax-free returns was closed in yesterday's Budget.
The Chancellor slapped an immediate ban on Business Expansion Schemes offering loans to investors, a device used to give them a quick payback worth the equivalent of as much as 30 per cent per year.
The ban was backdated to midnight on Monday.
When the BES programme was started ten years ago, it aimed to provide tax incentives for entrepreneurs willing to take the risk of investing over five years in new small businesses.
Previous abuses led Mr Lamont to announce last year that he would be ending new schemes from December 1993.
Yesterday's announcement brings that plan forward by nine months.
With ‘loan-back’ schemes, which mainly concerned repossessed properties being bought by BES companies, an investor might pay 100p for each share.
If — as was usually the case — that investor were a higher-rate taxpayer, the effective cost per share was just 60p after tax relief.
After only six months the investor would be entitled to receive a bank loan of perhaps 72p per share, normally secured on the shares.
In combination, that would result in an annual tax free return of more than 30 per cent.
Banks and building societies have been strenuously selling such products in recent weeks ahead of a possible Budget ban.
Mr Lamont commented: ‘The BES was set up to encourage investment in small business — not to provide highly subsidised loans for top-rate taxpayers.’
He also plugged three more loopholes exploited by companies.
Those were:
The practice whereby group companies buy up other companies with capital losses, in order to set those losses against their own capital gains;
Situations where changes in company ownership could create scope to avoid advance corporation tax; and
A charging to tax of interest payable within multinational groups to UK companies by non-resident associated companies on certain loans.
Mr Lamont estimated that the four moves would save the Exchequer £70 million in the next tax year, rising to more than £480 million the following year.
VAT reforms will give help to small businesses
By Gordon Milne
COMPLIANCE with the VAT regime places a particularly heavy burden on small businesses, according to the Chancellor.
His solution?
To keep them out of the value added tax system altogether.
Yesterday, Mr Lamont outlined a series of proposals which will affect more than 100,000 small businesses, slashing the administrative burden for many.
Firstly, the VAT registration threshold is to be increased from £36,600 to £37,600.
Next, the ability to reclaim VAT on bad debt is to be extended.
Two years ago, traders were allowed to reclaim VAT on invoices which remained unpaid after 12 months.
‘I propose to halve that qualifying period to six months,’ Mr Lamont said.
The scope of the Cash Accounting Scheme, whereby traders have to pay VAT to Customs only once they themselves have been paid by their customers, is also to be extended.
The turnover ceiling below which firms may join the Cash Accounting Scheme also rises by £50,000 to £350,000.
There is to be a further series of reforms to the current system of VAT penalties.
At present, the misdeclaration penalty is directed at the trader whose VAT return contains significant inaccuracies — whether deliberately or otherwise.
The reforms include:
Focusing the rules so that only larger errors and the most persistent offenders will incur penalties for misdeclaration.
A cap on interest charged on misdeclarations, so that assessments of interest will not date back more than three years.
Reform of the VAT default surcharge, including an immediate reduction in the top rate of surcharge from 20 per cent to 15 per cent and a new minimum surcharge of £200.
Mr Lamont had one final reform up his sleeve.
‘Following Lord Keith's 1983 review, the Government concluded that it would be wrong to give Customs discretion over the level of VAT penalties,’ he said.
The Government had now come to believe, however, that it was wrong to have a penalty regime which was almost entirely automatic.
‘I propose therefore that Customs should be given some discretion to mitigate the penalties for some misdeclarations, to enable them to take account of the individual circumstances of the trader.’
‘Names’ win losses help
By Richard Shackleton
MEMBERS of the Lloyd's insurance market will have capital gains on their premium funds taxed in the same way as those of other corporate insurers the Chancellor said.
At present, special tax rules apply to members' special reserve funds which are maintained to meet future losses and are liable to tax relief at the higher rate.
But the procedures for establishing relief are cumbersome and have given rise to delays in settling a Name's tax liability.
That has put some Names under pressure when losses incurred by Lloyd's syndicates seem likely to breach £2 billion for the second year in succession.
Under the Chancellor's proposals, the reserves will be redesignated as tax deductible reserves where 50 per cent of profits from underwriting business may be deposited tax free.
All income and tax gains from assets in the reserve will be free of income and capital gains tax.
Mr Lamont said: ‘My proposals will greatly simplify the taxation of Lloyd's.
Lloyd's has had a difficult time recently but it remains vital if London is to retain its pre-eminent position in the world insurance market.’
He said the reforms he was proposing would be ‘revenue neutral’.
Last night the Lloyd's chairman, David Rowland, said: ‘I am pleased the Chancellor has recognised the desirability of replacing Lloyd's current arrangements with a better targeted reserve.
Individual members will also appreciate the reduction in work and expense which will follow from the changes.’
Marketing awards for Scots firms
By Kay Blair
AN ELECTRICAL retailer, a garden centre and a milk processor were among the winners of this year's Scottish Marketing Awards.
Last night, Scottish Industrial and Trade Exhibitions (SITE), organiser of the awards, revealed the six winning firms to an audience at Glasgow's Moat House Hotel.
Clydesdale Electrical, the Glasgow-based electrical retailer which has shown impressive growth in what is currently regarded as a lacklustre sector, won the judges' unanimous approval for its courageous and aggressive marketing strategy.
The thoroughness of its marketing approach placed it so far ahead of its short-leet rivals — Scottish Amicable and Britannia Life — that the judges had no doubts about awarding it the top accolade in the category for Large Service companies.
The business, which has seen a remarkable change in its fortunes since Henk van Eck, a Dutch executive, rescued the ailing operation in 1985 and subsequently installed an ambitious management team, now has an impressive 20 per cent share of the Scottish market.
Last year its share of the UK market rose from 2 per cent to almost 3 per cent sales rose 50 per cent with profits more than doubled.
Much of its success is due to a consistently aggressive promotional drive, with high-profile advertising and attractive sales promotional campaigns.
Using the slogan ‘Switch onto the New Clydesdale’ to capture the company's new image, Clydesdale devised a marketing strategy which improved staff skills, service levels and motivation and gave it a more upmarket profile in tune with the width and quality of its product range.
With 120 stores throughout Scotland and the North of England, it is now considering a summer stock-market flotation to help with further expansion into England.
Robert Wiseman Dairies, the milk processor and distributor which is widely recognised by its distinctive black and white corporate identity, beat rival Yarrow Shipbuilders to take first prize in the category for large manufacturing companies.
Conscious that it was operating in an extremely competitive market which faced the possible de-regulation of traditional milk marketing boards, this East-Kilbride-based family company opted in 1988 for a radical marketing strategy to change its fortunes and take it from a West of Scotland dairy company to a major force.
Although the business had grown steadily since it was established in 1948, the owners realised that the market was changing with more consumers buying milk in shops.
The need to brand what was generally regarded as a commodity led Robert Wiseman Dairies to launch a black and white ‘Friesian’ identity which is consistently applied on all merchandiseable items, lorries, milk floats and stationery.
From selling 11.75 million pints of branded milk cartons in November 1989, the company now sells over 5 million cartons a year.
Findlay Clark, the garden centre business with outlets in Glasgow, Kinross and Aberdeen, won the medium service category because of its impressive growth record.
By stimulating repeat business, encouraging higher-value purchases and more frequent visits, Findlay Clark increased sales by 7 per cent during a severe retail slump.
Much of the company's success was attributed to an effective customer care policy, targeted and highly innovative promotional initiatives and the provision of a more pleasant overall shopping experience.
Winner of the medium manufacturing category was the temperature control and information systems company Elm.
Set up in 1985 mainly to service the supermarket sector, Elm's emphasis on technical innovation, product quality and customer service helped it build a strong customer base and penetrate international markets.
A planned strategy to take the company to the top of the market in temperature control and monitoring equipment led to better branding, more targeted marketing and sales initiatives.
In 1985 turnover amounted to £69,000.
Last year turnover was 4.4 million while this year's figure is expected to exceed 6 million.
Recent success has seen a new temperature control product designed in conjunction with Marks & Spencer.
The small service category was won by Rosslea Hall Hotel, a country hotel on the shores of the Gareloch.
Three years ago it was taken over by the Queen's Moat Houses group and new performance disciplines were imposed.
A marketing plan was put in place which helped reduce dependence on the naval base, Faslane; targeted other sources of revenue; improved the hotel's profile and instituted an effective staff training programme.
As a result of these measures turnover has risen by 22 per cent over the last two years with profits up by 447 per cent to an annual average of 93,000.
The meat producer McKechnie Jess took the prize for best small manufacturing company.
Its determination to change the emphasis of the company from the traditional — and successful — red meat business to the unknown area of quality meat products impressed the judges by its bravery.
McKechnie Jess's strategy was to offer meat products with the quality associated with a local butcher but with the affordability of mass produced foods and the innovation and imagination normally associated with other food sectors.
The introduction of Teds, a bear-shaped burger-type product, under the specially created ‘My Favourite’ trademark is only one of a new range of products targeted at new customers.
From a small, localised clientele, the company has now expanded into a customer base which stretches from Southampton to Wick.
As McKechnie Jess says, it has proved that, even in a sector which lacks a history of innovation, it is possible, through effective marketing, to change the shape of an established product.
Drambuie seeks job cuts
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
THE DRAMBUIE Liqueur Company has made five senior managers and one director redundant and is seeking a ‘significant’ number of further job cuts across all levels of the company following its recent decision to focus on core business activities.
The director whose redundancy was enforced was Claude Naylor, the commercial director who has been with the company for 10 years.
The others came from the middle management layer.
It is likely that a total of around 30 job losses are being sought from a total of 150 employees, following the company's recent extensive review of current operations and future opportunities.
Drambuie's wine merchant subsidiary, Cockburn's of Leith, was recently sold off and management buy-out negotiations are currently taking place over the disposal of its Perth-based glass manufacturing subsidiary, Caithness Glass.
The vehicle retailing operation, Glenvarigill, is to be retained.
Last year, Drambuie, the parent company of the liqueur company, announced losses of £4 million reflecting the failure of the company's recent diversification strategy into other areas of activity.
Peter Evans, the first non-family chairman to be appointed to the liqueur company when he joined late last year, said yesterday that the company had spent considerable time evaluating its needs in the light of its decision to focus on its core business, the production of Drambuie Liqueur.
‘We have concluded that future growth opportunities can best be exploited by a simpler and more efficient organisation than exists today and we will be making a significant capital investment to increase production efficiency at our Kirkliston site as well as increasing our marketing effort worldwide.’
Mr Evans said that the redundancies were regretted but believed that the measures taken would ensure a leaner, fitter company better positioned to take advantage of the recovery when it came.
‘We're hoping to avoid any further forced redundancies,’ he added.
Specialists agree new settlement system
By Ian Harper
A GROUP of 60 securities specialists brought together by the Royal Bank of Scotland will propose the phased introduction of a three-day, rolling securities-settlement system and the setting up of an institutional shares clearing house.
After a meeting in London yesterday to discuss a replacement for the Taurus paperless trading system — which collapsed last week after incurring development costs of more than £400 million — Terry Pearson, the Royal Bank's senior securities adviser, said: ‘We had total agreement on some key issues.
The feeling of the meeting was very positive and constructive and there were no recriminations.
The desire was to learn a lesson from the past and put something together with limited objectives.’
Outlining the proposals, which will be put in writing to the Bank of England task force set up in to pick up the pieces after Taurus, Mr Pearson said the key point was that any new system should focus solely on the professional market — leaving the private shareholder with paper certificates and the existing fortnightly settlement system.
But for the institutions, he said, the initial aim would be to introduce a ten-day, rolling settlement system which could be reduced in stages as it became practical, first to five days and then to three days.
He said a ten-day system could probably be implemented ‘fairly quickly’, reducing the risk factor by a factor of ten in the process.
The systems for such a move were ‘already in place and working very well’, in the shape of the INS (institutional net settlement) system.
The clearing house would be the next step, he said, but over the longer term.
This would embrace all the institutional players and allow for the rolling  settlement system to be cut to just three days — in line with the systems in other international centres.
On costs, Mr Pearson stressed: ‘The market cannot afford a big bill.’
CALA spies recovery after losses double
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
THE recovery in the housing market has come just at the right time for CALA, the Scottish house-builder, which saw interim losses nearly double to £2.85 million.
The improvement has been sustained in Scotland since the start of the year and since the beginning of December, south of the Border, according to Geoff Ball, CALA's chairman.
‘If this is a false dawn, it is the longest so far,’ he said.
‘The recovery in the market appears to be genuine, although subject to potential short-term fluctuation if political and economic stability wavers.
‘We are getting the volumes to make a decent profit if the market holds up,’ he added.
The deepening losses were blamed by Mr Ball on the uncertainties following Black Wednesday, together with the reintroduction of stamp duty in August.
The combination ‘frustrated all prospects for a normal autumn market, and our reservations from mid-September to the end of November fell some way below budget’.
The impact of the two is underlined by the sharp 24.7 per cent drop in turnover in the six months to 31 December, traditionally CALA's weaker half.
There was a particularly rapid downturn in sales in Scotland, which has underpinned CALA's performance in recent years.
Price cutting had maintained volumes at the expense of margins, but reservations since the start of the year had been encouraging, he said.
The scale of the losses had been anticipated by the City, and the shares were unchanged at 56p.
With clear signs of a recovery, analysts are pencilling in a modest profit for the full year.
To bring the dividend pay-outs more in line with the trading pattern, the interim is being cut to 0.75p.
But CALA said it intended to pay a final dividend of 1.55p, for an unchanged total of 2.3p.
One bit of good news is that prices have stopped falling in the south — where CALA has 60 per cent of its sales and where the recovery is most noticeable.
The group has started to buy land again, and some of the recent purchases have, for the first time in four years, achieved margins above what had been estimated at the time they were bought.
It has also increased land under option from 5,000 to 6,500 plots.
Gearing is still high, but about £4 million is accounted for by the group's taking houses in part-exchange, particularly in the Midlands, where 60 per cent of all sales involve part-exchange.
A cost-cutting programme has continued; at the year-end, CALA employed 120 people, about half the total at its peak.
Building plans: ‘The recovery in the market appears to be genuine,’ says Geoff Ball
Borrowing total knocks market
By Martin Flanagan
INITIAL shock gave ground to more considered calm in the market after Mr Lamont's forecast of a £50 billion public sector borrowing requirement had at one stage wiped 14 points off the FT-SE 100-Share Index.
Once dealers had time to digest more of the Chancellor's speech, however, the consensus around the trading screens was that it was a broadly neutral budget, and a late rally reduced the fall to 3 points to leave the index at 2,919.30 at the close.
Gilts were not so lucky.
The Government securities slumped a full point.
Sterling fared better, remaining firm through the speech.
Against the German mark it was trading at Dm2.4050 after Dm2.4000 before the Chancellor started.
Late in the day, against the dollar the pound was trading at $1.4490 compared with $1.4495.
Mr Lamont was still talking, in one of the longer Budget addresses in recent years, as the market officially closed at 4:30pm.
At that stage the broader-based FT-SE 250 index closed up nearly seven points.
Volume levels sank to below 500 million.
Drinks shares staged a useful recovery as Budget increases were limited to 1 to 1.5p on a pint of beer and five pence on a bottle of wine.
Guinness, reporting full-year results tomorrow, advanced 15p to 495p as spirits escaped further excise duty penalties.
Allied Lyons rose 14p to 582p, although Whitbread eased 5p to 487p on a negative County NatWest circular.
Stores also improved with companies like WH Smith, recently depressed by the threat of a widening in the value added tax net to take in books and newspapers, recovering 10p to 445p.
Building and construction issues pushed ahead in anticipation of possible help for the industry in the shape of a cut in interest rates and increased infrastructure spending.
Wimpey rose 11p to 137p, also helped by a confident trading statement for the future.
Wolseley was up 16p at 600p, and AMEC added 13p to 94p.
BICC spurted 9p to 375p and Costain rose 5p to 35p.
Oils, meanwhile, staged a late rally in response to Budget news that petroleum revenue tax is being reduced to 50 per cent from 1 July.
BP rose 9p to 295p, LASMO firmed 5p to 186p and Enterprise Oil were 4p better at 492p.
Cook stake helps Airtours fly out of Owners' clutches
By Martin Flanagan
THE hostile £290 million takeover bid by Airtours for its rival holiday operator, Owners Abroad, lapsed yesterday, as the bidder received acceptances for only 35.18 per cent of the target.
Along with shares bought in the stock market, this left Airtours with 43 per cent of the equity — just over 7 per cent short of control in what developed into a cliff-hanging battle.
Owners' shares fell 12p to 126p, while Airtours' lost 11p to 327p.
Airtours' chairman, David Crossland, blamed his defeat on what he called ‘the spoiling action’ of the eleventh-hour intervention by Thomas Cook, the German-controlled travel agency, which on Monday snapped up 8.4 per cent of Owners to try to ensure it remained independent.
But Howard Klein, chairman of Owners Abroad, was ‘delighted’ with the outcome, and rejected the criticism of Thomas Cook, which is owned by the German tours group, LTU, and Westdeutsche Landesbank.
He said ‘I don't agree.
The answer is that the stock market and press were calling for a demonstration of support by Cook some time ago.’
Bruce Jones, a leading leisure analyst at the broker, Smith New Court, said the outcome was always going to be difficult to call, ‘given that Cook's 8 per cent stake was a blocking factor’.
Airtours still retains its 8.2 per cent stake in Owners, and Mr Crossland said he would be watching events at the company closely.
But Mr Jones said there was little likelihood of Airtours returning for another tilt at a takeover in a year's time, which it is entitled to do, given the Cook stake.
Cook has already promised to take a 12.5 per cent stake in Owners via a tender offer, provided the Airtours bid failed.
Another leisure analyst, who declined to be named, said Airtours had ‘shot itself in the foot’ by announcing only last Monday estimated cost savings of £20 million in the 1993/94 financial year if the merger went unconditional.
‘It was a very big figure to come out with right at the death and probably didn't impress the institutions,’ he added.
The failure of the offer, which the President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine, refused to refer to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, despite the recommendation of the Office of Fair Trading, leaves Thomson as the clear market leader, with 33 per cent.
Industry sources believe both Airtours and Owners Abroad each enjoy a market share of about 15 per cent.
Mr Klein said he agreed with initial City reaction yesterday that the onus was on Owners Abroad to perform.
He said ‘We are going to have to deliver.
But everyone is in that position.’
Owners has been reported as estimating that the benefits of the tie-up with Thomas Cook will be worth £20 million over the next two years.
PSBR near-twice total for 1991
THE public sector borrowed £5.4 billion in February, bringing the total borrowing requirement to £27 billion with a month of the financial year still to go.
But this still leaves room to borrow £8 billion more in March before reaching the Chancellor's latest PSBR estimate of £35 billion, which, in turn, is £2 billion less than predicted last November.
Excluding privatisation proceeds, the Government borrowed £5.8 billion, but its receipts included £404 million of proceeds from the last tranche of payments on the British Telecom share sale.
In February last year, the borrowing requirement was only £855 million, and the cumulative total, £7.4 billion, before rising to £6.4 billion in the final month and £13.8 billion for the full year.
The Inland Revenue took in £4,684 million last month, almost 5 per cent less than in February 1992.
Corporation tax receipts were also below last year's.
Government spending, however, totalled £20,046 million, 15 per cent up.
With a month to go, Inland Revenue receipts had reached £70.8 billion, down 4.5 per cent on last year, while Customs & Excise receipts had risen 2.5 per cent to £58.4 billion, and social security contributions were 3 per cent higher at £32.3 billion.
Interest and dividend income had fallen 11 per cent to £7.3 billion and other receipts, including the national business rates, had gone up only 1 per cent to £15.6 billion.
Boost to loan guarantee scheme
By John Hatfield
SMALL business leaders and bankers welcomed the proposals to strengthen the Government loan guarantee scheme and relax capital gains tax liabilities for entrepreneurs.
Mr Lamont said that both measures were aimed at helping small businesses lead the economic recovery.
Introduced to provide finance for promising entrepreneurs who lack sufficient track record or collateral, the loan guarantee scheme is being improved with the maximum loan available up from £100,000 to £250,000.
In addition, the premiums charged are being reduced from 2.5 per cent to 0.5 per cent for fixed rate loans and to 1.5 per cent for variable rate lending.
Those premium levels, which seek to encourage firms to use more fixed rate borrowings, will now apply to the whole loan and not just the guaranteed portion.
The proportion of the loan guaranteed by the Government will be increased from 70 per cent to 85 per cent.
Commenting on the new arrangements, Jim Gorie, of the Forum of Private Business, said they would have an impact on small expanding companies.
‘We have a problem in Scotland in that our company start-up rate is about half that of England's and banks haven't been very keen on it in the past.’
The banks were unanimous in welcoming the news.
According to Ian Sutherland, the Royal Bank of Scotland's director of commercial banking, the improvements in the scheme will provide a shot in the arm for thousands of small businesses.
Roddy Neill, the Clydesdale Bank's business sector manager, said the improvements had the bank's full support.
Roll-over tax relief on reinvested capital gains has also been introduced to stimulate the activity of business angels in the venture capital industry.
Mr Lamont also relaxed the rules on CGT retirement relief by reducing the size of the qualifying shareholding from 25 per cent to 5 per cent and extending the relief to cover full-time employees as well as directors of companies.
Taken together, the CGT concessions will cost the Treasury an estimated £50 million in a full year.
Whisky firms hail ‘step in right direction'
A relieved whisky industry welcomes a move towards alcoholic equality, reports BILL MILLAR
THE Scotch whisky industry breathed a collective sigh of relief yesterday when the Chancellor held the rate of excise duty on spirits at its current level.
In the UK the industry has been losing sales estimated at one million cases a year and has also been concerned about the message being sent from this country to export markets, implying that high excise duty levels may be acceptable.
But while the absence of additional tax on spirits yesterday was welcomed, it was also generally described as only the first step on a long road before Scotch and other spirits were able to operate on a level playing field against other alcoholic drinks, in particular, wine.
While increasing the duty on wine and beer yesterday by about 5.5p per bottle and 1.5p per pint respectively, Mr Lamont said that he had received many representations this year about the taxation of spirits, especially the taxation of whisky.
He described the whisky business as one of Britain's most successful exporting industries.
The Scotch Whisky Association (SWA) has been particularly vociferous in its campaign to protect the industry from further rises in duty and to have all alcoholic drinks taxed on an equal basis.
James Bruxner, chairman of the SWA, said: ‘We are what you might call pleasantly welcoming.
At last this is a move in the right direction.
We regard it as a first step, good though not big, towards equal treatment for all alcoholic products.
But we will be keeping up the pressure.’
Chris Greig, managing director of Invergordon Distillers and a member of the SWA's taxation committee, described Mr Lamont's decision as a ‘bit of gentle relief’.
‘They have at long last recognised that the spirits business is a very important part of the British economy.
This is a very small step but a step in the right direction.
But make no mistake, it is just a first step.’
The senior Scotch whisky industry analyst, Alan Gray, said he was not relieved, ‘just pleasantly surprised’.
He said there was more to be done but that the Chancellor deserved a cheer for going along this route at the moment.
However, Jim Turle, the director of communications at Lang brothers, said that while Mr Lamont had gone some way to redressing the balance, he had by no means levelled the playing field.
A spokesman for the biggest Scotch producer, United Distillers, said: ‘Encouraging is the word.
And it is encouraging that the Chancellor has listened to the message from the industry.
In next year's Budget it is to be hoped he will take a further opportunity to reduce the differentials between Scotch and wine.’
Dram come true?
Producers say there's still some way to go before they can operate on level playing fields
Simpler self-assessment
By Gordon Milne
THE complex system of taxing the self-employed is to be simplified — but not until 1996/97 at the earliest.
The Chancellor yesterday promised measures which he said would amount to the most fundamental reform of income tax administration since the introduction of Pay As You Earn in 1944.
His plans to introduce income tax self-assessment and to reduce the audit burden were welcomed last night by small business organisations.
The planned legislation, to be introduced in next year's finance bill, will simplify the system so that the self-employed are taxed on profits earned in the current year, rather than the complex preceding year system which currently exists.
The Chancellor's aim is to reduce the administrative burden on small businesses, and the reform will be accompanied by a document examining the need for the statutory audit for small incorporated businesses.
‘Self-assessment of income tax has operated successfully in many countries, including the United States.
But none of my predecessors has found a way of introducing it here,’ Mr Lamont said.
‘For most people that has not been a problem — the pay-as-you-earn system already deals very simply with the tax affairs of some 16 million employees.
But for the 8 million taxpayers who have to fill in a tax return each year, the current arrangements are very far from simple.’
Mr Lamont said that following a detailed consultation exercise, he now proposed to offer these people — which included four million self-employed, the option of self-assessment.
‘Legislation will be brought forward in next year's finance bill to implement the proposal from the earliest practicable date, which is 1996-97.’
However, he added, for self-assessment to work, the tax has to be simple enough for taxpayers themselves to be able to fill in their own tax returns.
The present tax system was too complicated; people setting up in business on their own were more or less forced to employ an accountant.
‘It would be difficult to invent a more complicated system for taxing the self-employed even if one set out with that very objective,’ Mr Lamont said.
Under the new proposals, people are to have just the one tax bill each year, covering all their income.
‘Taken together, these two measures amount to the most fundamental reform of income tax administration since the introduction of PAYE in 1944.’
The consultative document on the need for the statutory audit for small incorporated businesses will be issued shortly by Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, the Chancellor said.
At present, all UK companies require an annual audit, and many — particularly small businesses — feel the cost of this requirement far outweighs the benefits to the small owner-managed business.
Bill Anderson, Scottish secretary of the Federation of Small Businesses, welcomed both the introduction of income tax self assessment and the proposed reduction of the audit burden for the smallest businesses.
Jim Gorie, Scottish spokesman for the Forum of Private Business, described the moves as ‘positive steps’.
Defence run-down hammers Graseby
A FALL in defence earnings resulted in a profits collapse last year at Graseby, formerly known as Cambridge Electronic Industries, writes Richard Shackleton.
The pre-tax figure fell from £7.5 million in 1991 to only £1 million after net exceptional losses on disposals of £5.8 million, the group revealed yesterday.
These included the £650,000 sale of Bute-based Flexitech to its management last summer.
The slimmed-down group, with Scottish interests concentrated at Kelso, saw profits surge in its instrument division, but the medical, defence and environmental sides all fell back.
Earnings per share dived from 8.7p to 1.3p, but a held final dividend of 7.6p keeps the total at 10.9p.
Paul Lester, the chief executive, also outlined plans for the flotation of the US operation, Graseby Andersen.
The disposal of a minority stake would raise about £17 million.
Huge loss turning-point for Wimpey
By Magnus Grimond
GEORGE Wimpey, Britain's second-biggest house-builder, yesterday joined the growing chorus of businesses seeing signs of economic recovery, despite unveiling huge losses for 1992.
The new chairman, Sir John Quinton, claimed: ‘The economy is poised to move upward this year and in 1994.
I think we are at a turning point for this company and the industry.’
Sir John said the pace of recovery was likely to be slow and they remained cautious about the current year, with slow but steady recovery not being seen until 1994.
And, speaking just hours before the Budget, he warned that confusion in the signals being given by the Chancellor in his handling of economic policy would damage the ‘fragile confidence’ now emerging.
Wimpey revealed it had plunged even deeper into the red last year.
Under the weight of a barrage of provisions, pre-tax losses mushroomed from £16.1 million to £112.4 million in the 12 months to December.
In line with the announcement at the halfway stage, the 1992 dividend total is halved to 5.25p, after a final cut by the same proportion to 3.25p.
Provisions against Wimpey's extensive property portfolio and housing land on both sides of the Atlantic accounted for £37 million each out of a total exceptional charge of £114 million.
The company has also thrown into reverse certain interest rate-fixing arrangements at a cost of £25.5 million.
The finance director, Roger Wood, said savings over the next two years were likely to total £13 million as the company took advantage of the new low-interest-rate environment.
Wimpey refused to quantify the additional charge it has taken for its involvement in the Channel Tunnel project, but it is thought to be similar to the £8 million announced by its fellow Chunnel contractor, Balfour Beatty, recently.
Joe Dwyer, chief executive, said it had been a ‘mistake’ when the first £12 million provision had been made in 1991.
It was still his belief that part or all of that would come back when the tunnel was completed.
He warned that the continued lack of co-operation between the contractors and the operator, Eurotunnel, threatened the early commencement of revenue services and the commissioning of rolling stock.
Further cost-cutting at Wimpey saw the workforce cut by another 10 per cent last year, taking UK numbers down to 10,300 employees, from 14,500 three years ago.
But the shares yesterday were marked up 10p to 136p after Mr Dwyer said he was hopeful 1993 would prove to be ‘a springboard for recovery’.
Japan's trade surplus surges
JAPAN'S trade surplus surged in February, intensifying pressure on the government to stimulate the faltering economy and boost imports.
‘Above all, Japan should take fiscal measures so that it can prop up domestic demand to rectify the imbalance,’ said Tatsufumi Okoshi, economist at Nomura Research Institute.
The customs-cleared trade surplus widened to $10.56 billion (£7.04 billion) in February from a revised $10.18 billion surplus a year earlier, the Ministry of Finance announced yesterday.
A 2.8 per cent fall in imports due to sluggish consumer demand and weak corporate business activity helped widen the surplus, analysts said.
Exports declined to $27.97 billion, 0.5 per cent down on a year previously, but imports fell 2.8 per cent to $17.41 billion, the ministry said.
‘The pattern that imports decreased more than exports remains unchanged, which could help maintain the surplus and problems with other nations,’ Mr Okoshi said.
Japan's trade surplus with the US widened to $4.37 billion in February, before seasonal adjustment, up from a surplus of $3.68 billion a year earlier.
The politically explosive bilateral trade gap is certain to loom large when the Japanese Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, holds talks in Washington next month with President Clinton.
The US leader has said he wants Japan to take strong action to reduce the surplus.
Unlike the era of the Plaza Accord in 1985 when the surplus with the US was the main agenda, criticism is flaring not only from Washington but also from other nations.
— Reuter.
‘There's no immediate remedy to correct the swelling of the surplus,’ said Hiroshi Yamamura, chief economist at NLI Reserach Institute, an affiliate of Nippon Life Insurance.
Japan may have to open up its domestic markets so that consumers can buy foreign goods steadily to shrink the hefty surpluses, he added.
Economists said trade figures did not yet reflect much of the yen's recent rise against the dollar but the effect of the yen's rise could figure in the March and April trade figures.
Exports were calculated based on an exchange rate of 123.77 yen in February against 125.59 a year ago.
The yen has stayed below 120 to the dollar in March after trading above 130 yen in March 1992, a MOF official told a briefing after Japan's February trade data was released.
The dollar fell as low as 115.88 in New York on February 22, against around 125 yen in early February.
The yen's rise could help trim the trade surplus in the long run as it could make U.S. exporters more competitive, although in the short-term that could help lift the amount of exports in dollar terms from Japan.
Yamamura said it may take two or three years until the positive effect of the yen's rise appears.
REUTER PKB MVB SM
Smith opens fire on broken tax promises JOY COPLEY and JOANNE ROBERTSON report on the Labour leader's attack on higher taxation
THE Labour leader, John Smith, accused the Government of cynically and ruthlessly betraying its election pledges on taxation.
Launching a savage attack on the ‘shameful’ Budget in a cutting speech which silenced Tory backbenchers, Mr Smith said that taken together the tax increases announced in the Budget were one of the biggest hikes ever.
‘And all this from the party that said it was the party of low taxation.
They have betrayed their pledges and caused unnecessary increases in the cost of living.’
He said the Government accused any critics of talking the country down, but in real life the people were more concerned about the Government ‘pulling the country down’.
Mr Smith mocked the Tories' claim to be the party of low taxation and said people would be ‘shocked beyond belief’ at the cynicism of the Government, in extending the scope of VAT and raising national insurance contributions.
He pointed at Mr Major and demanded: ‘I do not know how you can sit there as Prime Minister of a Government that is capable of deceit on such a scale.
I am sure the conclusion that the public will have of this Budget is simple and it is clear: the Conservative Party is a party without honour and a party without shame.’
Labour backbenchers yelled ‘cheats!’ as Mr Smith recalled Mr Major's election promises that he had no plans to raise VAT or extend its scope.
‘The Conservative Party have cynically and ruthlessly betrayed the pledges which they gave the people of this country and they will not be forgiven for it.’
Mr Smith said the 17.5 per cent VAT rate on fuel bills would push families already ‘on the edge’ into despair.
Millions of poor people who did not qualify for income support would be ‘hit savagely by this increase in the basic cost of living’.
Claiming that the Budget measures were wholly inadequate to deal with Britain's jobs crisis, he reminded Mr Lamont of his often-quoted comment that unemployment was a price ‘well worth paying’ to get inflation down and said the Chancellor had never apologised for it.
The Liberal Democrat spokesman on trade, industry and employment, Malcolm Bruce, attacked the Chancellor's statement as a Budget of despair and disappointment which provided a little relief for the unemployed and nothing for those attempting to counter the effects of the recession.
He poured scorn on the Conservatives' pre-election assurances on their low-tax policy, describing the Government as ‘political cheats who have got into power by sheer dishonesty and by defrauding the electorate’.
Criticising the Government for promising tax cuts to the electorate, despite its record, he added: ‘This is a tax-raising Budget.
It is tax, tax, and tax again: tax this year, tax next year, and tax even more the year after.’
He claimed the majority of taxpayers would be £1.50 a month worse off as any gains from the widening of the 20 per cent tax band would be lost by the freeze on general allowances.
He described the Budget package aimed at the unemployed as ‘desperately disappointing’, and attacked as totally appalling the decision to increase VAT on domestic fuel.
The former Conservative Cabinet minister, John Biffen, welcomed the priority given to the industrial sector but voiced the concerns of a number of Tory MPs over the size of the public sector borrowing requirement, which is expected to rise to £50 billion in 1993/4.
Another former Conservative Cabinet minister, David Howell, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee, praised the Budget as a ‘balanced and prudent’ statement which would pay off in the long term.
He welcomed moves towards ending the traditional pre-Budget Treasury ‘purdah’, which he said had been ‘a guarantee that tax reforms will be ill-considered, ill-prepared, and then dumped on an unsuspecting world in ways that have to be heavily revised at great cost afterwards’.
A Tory MP, David Knox, congratulated Mr Lamont on producing a skilful Budget despite the difficult economic background against which it was set.
Supporting the Chancellor's decision not to raise the basic rate of income tax, he said: ‘Despite the size of the PSBR, I am glad he introduced a neutral Budget.
It would have been very dangerous if he had not.’
Labour MPs attacked the Government over the decision to abolish the zero rating of VAT on gas and electricity bills for individual homes.
The MP for Newport East, Roy Hughes, described the extension of VAT to fuel bills as criminal when dismissing the Budget as a whole as ‘uninspiring’.
Despite strong support from the Government benches for Mr Lamont's proposals, Mr Hughes said: ‘The Chancellor has not met the nation's needs and he should go without further delay before he does more damage.’
Lamont lands City with a curate's egg
THE City's first reaction to the Budget was adverse.
The Chancellor's admission that the PSBR will reach £50 billion in 1993 is no more than City economists were bandying around last autumn.
But the fact that the PSBR for the current year has looked like falling short of the Chancellor's revised forecast of £37 billion had persuaded some analysts that his estimate for the coming year would turn out little, if any, more than last November's Treasury forecast of £44 billion.
They had also convinced themselves that the Chancellor would read the runes and introduce additional tax measures to ensure the PSBR fell well short of £50 billion.
In the event, the Budget takes only about £500 million out of the economy in 1993-94, much below the figure City economists had been expecting.
The initial reaction has been that if the Chancellor is only taking out a token sum in higher tax, then the scope for further cuts in interest rates has been severely diminished, and fixed-rate gilt-edged stocks were marked sharply lower.
But if, as seems likely, the Chancellor's commitment to take more than £6 billion out of the economy in 1994-5 and £10 billion in 1995-6 has done enough to reassure the foreign-exchange markets, the risk of a big misjudgment of market sentiment will diminish over the next few days.
The City also believes that the Chancellor has taken some positive steps to implement the Prime Minister's commitment to encourage the hard-core manufacturing sector of the economy.
The decision to ease the burden of unrelieved ACT will benefit mainly manufacturing companies like T&N and GKN, with substantial overseas earnings.
The measures to improve the quality and cut the cost of export credit will also benefit the hard core of manufacturing industry, rather than the soft surround of UK-based companies which rely largely on consumer demand from the home market.
That said, the drinks sector seemed relieved that the Chancellor has paid some attention to the risk of driving business across the Channel to the Calais supermarkets, the building sector was prepared to look for possible beneficiaries from the approval the Chancellor has given to rail links in South-east England, oil benefited from the abolition of PRT on new North Sea fields, the motor trade seemed to take the threat of fuel taxes in excess of inflation in its stride, and WH Smith reflected a sense of relief that VAT has not been extended to books and newspapers.
A Budget for all seasons Norman Lamont has laid out plans to increase taxation without nipping recovery in the bud.
This excerpt from his speech explains his thinking
THE last-ever spring Budget speech was presented as part of a continuing reform in economic policy-making.
Norman Lamont, the Chancellor, told the Commons: ‘From November this year, public expenditure and taxation will be brought together in one annual Budget statement.’
In that context, he said, the Budget should be ‘considered alongside the Autumn Statement I delivered just four months ago’.
He said: ‘The advantages of the new system are clear.
Ensuring that tax and spending decisions are taken at the same time will allow better control over Government borrowing…
And with tax, spending and borrowing decisions presented in a single statement the relationship between them will be much easier to understand.’
Referring to the Autumn Statement's firm limits on public sector wage increases, its public spending ceilings and its priority for programmes that would help the economy, Mr Lamont said those measures had played a key role in putting Britain on course for recovery and would be continued.
He said the Budget had two objectives in that respect: to support the recovery in the year ahead; and to set out a clear medium-term strategy for bringing the borrowing requirement back towards balance.
The Chancellor insisted that Britain's economic fortunes were inseparable from the world situation —‘as an open economy which exports a third of its output, developments abroad have a profound impact on Britain’.
‘The one ray of light on the world scene,’ he said, ‘has been the recovery in North America and particularly in the United States.
The US economy grew by over 2 per cent last year, with growth in the final quarter revised up to an annual rate of 4.75 per cent.
‘But the success of the US stands in marked contrast to developments elsewhere.
Industrial production has been falling in many of the world's largest economies — over the last year it has fallen 2 per cent in Italy; by 2.5 per cent in France; by 6.5 per cent in Germany; and by 7 per cent in Japan.
‘By contrast, in Britain industrial production has actually risen.’
He went on: ‘The recent indicators of GDP confirm this gloomy world picture.
Even Japan has now been visited by the prospect of recession, with GDP declining by 0.75 per cent in the second half of 1992.
France and Italy have also had to cope with falling output, and Germany, still struggling with the costs of reunification, has now suffered three successive quarters of declining GDP.
Moving on to the problem of unemployment throughout the European Community, the Chancellor said: ‘Last year unemployment in the community rose by 1.25 million and it is projected to rise further this year to some 11 per cent of the work force.
‘France, like Britain, has 3 million unemployed; in Ireland and Spain more than one in six are out of work.
Even in western Germany, unemployment is rising once again.’
Mr Lamont said the problem could not simply be blamed on recession ‘and it cannot be reduced simply by stimulating demand’.
‘A deep-seated problem needs more fundamental solutions.
It requires more flexible markets, not just for labour but also for goods and services.
It requires support given by governments to be directed less at propping up declining industries, and more at helping the unemployed to rejoin the workforce.
‘Above all…we must continue to resist the imposition of job-destroying measures emanating from Brussels.
The high-cost economies of the EC cannot insulate themselves from the world outside — from the more flexible economies of the Pacific Rim and North America.
‘Nothing would do more damage to job prospects…across Europe, than the imposition of further tax or regulatory burdens on employers.
That is why this Government will never sign the [Maastricht Treaty's]social chapter.’
The Chancellor said the European Commission expected Britain to be the fastest growing of all the major European economies, this year and next.
‘And with interest rates down by 4 percentage points in just six months, Britain enters the year ahead in a more favourable position than most of our major competitors.
‘Lower interest rates have contributed to a pick-up in the growth of narrow money, while retail sales have been on a steady upward trend for almost a year.
The abolition of car tax has prompted a surge in activity in the motor trade, right at the heart of British manufacturing.
New car registrations were nearly 16 per cent higher in the latest three months than a year earlier.
‘Although house prices remain weak, building society commitments and advances are stronger and both housebuilders and estate agents are now reporting increased activity.
‘According to the CBI, manufacturers are more optimistic now than at any time for almost five years.
‘The recovery we have seen in confidence rests, above all, on one crucial foundation the dramatic progress we have made in reducing inflation.’
Mr Lamont said: ‘There has been much debate about Britain's experience with the ERM.
Today I wish to make just two observations.
‘First, it was absolutely vital to get inflation in this country down.
The two years we spent in the ERM were tough.
But the war against inflation was one we had to fight and one we had to win.
‘Second, once sterling left the ERM, and with inflation sharply down, we were right to take the opportunity that gave us to relax policy and get interest rates down.
‘Inflation is now at its lowest level for over 25 years.
Even more significant, is the fall in underlying inflation — down in the last year from 5.5 per cent to 3.25 per cent.
Except for a few months in 1986, after the collapse in the oil price, underlying inflation has not been this low since February 1968.’
Commenting on the expectations for growth, Mr Lamont said the first report of the Panel of Independent Forecasters, formed to demonstrate that the Government decisions were not based on one single forecast, predicted growth in 1993 of between 0.25 and 2 per cent, with an average of just over 1 per cent .
Mr Lamont said the Government's forecast was ‘broadly in line…
We expect GDP to grow by 1.25 per cent this year, with the recovery gathering pace.
Growth in the year to the second half of 1993 might reach 1.75 per cent, rising to 3 per cent in the first half of 1994.
The Chancellor cautioned that uncertainties remained, however.
‘Significant downside risks’ were that it would be ‘very difficult to be sure when consumers will feel that their finances are sound enough to support a stronger growth of spending’.
There were also doubts about the prospects for our major export markets.
‘This will inevitably affect the prospects for the current account.
The [balance of trade]deficit in 1992 was about £12 billion.
As the economy recovers and the unfavourable short-term effects of the fall in the exchange rate feed through, I expect the deficit to widen this year to £17.5 billion.’
Mr Lamont said: ‘The key to an improved trade performance lies in the competitiveness of our products — and the signs are encouraging: earnings are now growing more slowly than at any time for 25 years; labour productivity has been rising rapidly, and while unit wage costs in manufacturing have been rising in Japan and Germany, here they showed no increase at all during 1992.
‘British business now has a great opportunity to expand into overseas markets and to replace imports at home.
But costs must be kept under firm control.’
The Chancellor said the strategy for sustained growth rested on three principles: that growth comes from the private sector, not Whitehall; that a continuing commitment to low inflation was vital if competitiveness were to be maintained; that the only way to increase the country's long-term growth rate was by improving the supply performance of the economy.
‘But if long-term improvements in economic performance are determined largely by the supply side, we have seen all too often in the past 20 years how short-term prospects can be blown off course by inflation.
I am absolutely determined that this should not happen again.
‘The Government's objective is to keep the underlying rate of retail price inflation within the range of 1 to 4 per cent.
‘I expect underlying inflation to be 3.75 per cent at the end of this year, close to the top of its target range.
But inflation should fall further over the medium-term.
Monetary policy is set to meet that objective.
‘Interest rate decisions are based on a continuing assessment of monetary conditions, measured principally by the growth of narrow and broad money and movements in the exchange rate and asset prices.
‘And alongside the target for inflation, I am setting monitoring ranges for both the narrow and broad measures of the money supply.
For the period of this Parliament the ranges are 0 to 4 per cent for M0 and 3 to 9 per cent for M4.
‘In judging the prospects for inflation, I have to weigh the evidence from all the indicators taken together.
If any one is out of line, it is particularly important to assess its significance against the others.
‘Following the recent substantial reduction in interest rates M0 growth may be above its monitoring range in the period ahead.
‘But on the basis of the indicators taken together, I believe that interest rates at their current level are consistent with the achievement of the Government's inflation objectives.
And at the lowest level in the EC, they are also fully consistent with the prospects for recovery this year.’
On funding —‘a subject of peculiar fascination for many City commentators’— the Chancellor said: ‘The Government's full fund policy ensures that its borrowing does not add to inflationary pressures.
I am clear that this policy remains appropriate.
‘But from time to time it has been right to reconsider its detailed application.
I have therefore decided that transactions by banks and building societies in gilts will, from now on, be included in the funding definition.
‘In periods when banks and building societies reduce their holdings of gilts, extra sales to other sectors will be needed.
But in current conditions the change I am making will help to ease the pressures on liquidity and avoid complicating money market arrangements.
‘In the year ahead, sales of gilts will as usual form the bedrock of the funding programme.
But National Savings will again make an important contribution.’
Mr Lamont said: ‘In controlling inflation, monetary policy must of course be supported by a sustainable fiscal policy.
I expect a Public Sector Borrowing Requirement in the current financial year of £35 billion, slightly lower than projected at the time of my Autumn Statement.
‘But because unemployment tends to increase for a while even after growth has resumed and because some taxes, particularly corporation tax, are collected a year in arrears, I expect borrowing next year to rise further.
‘The PSBR for 1993-94 has therefore been set at £50 billion, some 8 per cent of GDP.
Unless action is taken, large deficits will continue over the medium-term.
‘The PSBR could still be around 6 per cent of GDP in 1996-97, the last year of this Parliament.
I do not believe that borrowing on that scale is acceptable and I shall be announcing measures today to reduce it progressively over the years ahead.
‘In the early 1980s…we nearly halved the ratio of public sector debt to GDP.
We did not shrink from making the necessary changes then and I will not shrink from making them today.
‘The rise in the PSBR since 1989-90 is largely due to the recession.
And because of the reduction in the national debt in the 1980s, I have been able to allow the so-called ‘automatic stabilisers’— the increases in public spending and the reduction in tax receipts that directly reflect the weakness of the economy — to operate fully.
‘It was right to do this to maintain the level of demand during the recession.
But just as a business cannot go on year after year ignoring a fall in cash flow…so too the Government cannot keep on running up debt in the hope that recovery will solve our problems.
‘Even if the higher debt we now face was largely caused by the recession, the extra borrowing still has to be financed.
And as debt mounts up, so too do the debt interest payments.
In this way, what might have started off as a cyclical deficit will soon become a structural deficit unless action is taken to bring borrowing down.
‘I believe that the greatest threat to sustained recovery in Britain would come not from a lack of demand, but from excessive Government borrowing over the medium-term.
We have to address that problem now.’
Expressing the belief that public spending ceilings set last autumn for the next three years would keep the growth of spending below that of the economy as a whole, the Chancellor stressed: ‘Proper control of public expenditure cannot be achieved simply by setting targets.
It requires a continuous examination of each and every department and of all the functions of Government.
‘What was once a desirable role for the public sector may no longer be appropriate today.
And that is why the fundamental reviews of public spending programmes are so important.’
In an indication that Britons would be paying more in indirect taxes in the medium term, but the the blow had been deferred until future years, the Chancellor said: ‘These reviews will inevitably take time, so I have also had to look to the revenue side of the account.
‘In doing so I have had to balance two key objectives.
First, the essential task of helping recovery.
Second, the need to tackle the deficit so that the recovery will be sustained.
‘I believe that my proposals strike that balance.
In the year ahead, 1993-94, their effect will be broadly neutral, thus allowing the recovery to take hold.
‘But for subsequent years, as the economy strengthens, my proposals are designed to build in a wedge of steadily rising revenue.
‘In deciding where to look for additional revenue, I have been guided by a number of principles.
First, that, where possible, money should be raised in a way that will not damage the working of the economy.
Second, that in general this means reducing the value of allowances and broadening the tax base rather than increasing marginal tax rates.
And third, that taxation should support social, health and environmental objectives.
‘My objective has been to strengthen the recovery by giving help to business.
But in order to pay for this, I have had to raise revenue from other sectors of the economy.’
After a detailed explanation of his revenue-raising proposals, the Chancellor concluded: ‘In the first Budget of the Parliament, I have set out the Government's economic strategy.
‘I have cut the tax burden on business and given help for small businesses, exports and the unemployed.
I have demonstrated clearly how we will bring Government borrowing down in the years ahead.
‘That is the only way to sustain growth and build a strong and sound economy in the 1990s.
‘This is a Budget for sustained recovery and a Budget for jobs — not just for this year and next year — but right through the decade.
I commend it to the House.’
‘This is a Budget not just for this year and next year, but the decade.’
‘My objective has been to strengthen recovery by giving help to business.’
Hill farmers keen to bid for quota of a good thing
MORE THAN 2,000 rights for sheep quotas were on offer in Lanark Mart.
Judging by the trade and the spirited bidding, Scotland's hill farmers now know that they are on to a good thing.
The first lots to come into the ring were for the annual lease of ewes.
This year that right to keep a breeding ewe will attract a subsidy in the region of £23 per head and consequently interest was keen.
Top price settled at £11 with one of the vendors, a Berwickshire farmer, Billy Runciman, of Woodheads, Lauder, saying that he was well satisfied.
The serious business, however, started when the absolute right to quota came under the hammer of the auctioneer, Iain Thomson.
From a cautious opener of £30, the bidding soared to a top of £48.
At that price, Gordon Gray, of Over Kirkhope, Ettrick, Selkirk, bought 320 units for a grand total of £14,382 — including value-added tax.
Another to pay out a substantial sum was one of Scotland's leading hill farmers, William Mitchell of Hazelside, Douglas, Lanark, who bought 102 units of quota at £46.
Mr Mitchell, clearly reflecting on his transaction, commented later: ‘In this day and age, farming is far more than a way of life — it's a business and you've got to be in there to protect the right to keep sheep.
‘We know what the rules are at present but the bureaucrats in Brussels could easily shift the goalposts.
I regard the £46 per head that I have paid as a sound and solid investment.
With ewe hoggs now being eligible for subsidy, it's important to get everything you can from the system.
‘The lesson of milk quotas is that you've got to get in at the start.
The ewe premium is a valuable commodity which has to be protected.’
Regarding the possible capital value of quota, Mr Mitchell commented: ‘All the banks and the Department of Agriculture say that there is no capital value attached to quota but the message of today is that they are wrong.’
Robert McTurk, who farms in Dumfriesshire but who is winding up his business, also had a smile on his face.
He said: ‘I think the values for leasing are perhaps on the low side, considering that people know what they are going to get this year.
On the other hand, the capital value seems very high.
People are jumping on a band wagon for the thrill of it.
‘I very much doubt that these figures are sustainable in the long run.
There is no guarantee that all the current subsidies will be there in the future.’
Angus Kennedy, chairman of the Blackface Sheep Breeders' Association, was equally doubtful.
‘I think the prices are too high.
If lamb prices rise over the next few years, as they may well do, then the subsidies will fall.
There could be tears yet.’
The auctioneer, Iain Thomson, was, however, delighted with the results of this first major sale of quota.
‘As auctioneers we are pleased at the prices.
If the market dictates that we provide this service then we shall do it.’
Post sale talk left most farmers with broad smiles on their faces.
And who can blame them if, after all, the right to keep 1,000 ewes is worth in excess of £40,000.
But perhaps the most telling comment came from one elderly farmer who has seen it all before.
‘I thought for the £48 you got the sheep as well as the quota.’
Contest for Ayr area seat on milk board
JOHN DUNCAN is to challenge the sitting member, Bill Weir, for election to the Scottish Milk Marketing Board's South Ayr area.
Mr Duncan, Burton, Ayr, who challenged unsuccessfully for vice-president of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland only ten days ago, is 50.
Mr Weir is 69.
Both men have the chance to put their cases at a series of election meetings between 22 March and 8 April, with voting papers to be returned by 12 May.
It is certain the board would prefer to see Mr Weir re-elected as it tries to keep a united front over the next few months when it has to produce new proposals for its future which are acceptable to the Scottish Office and the Office of Fair Trading.
Adam Gray has been re-elected as member for the board's Dumfries area because, in spite of speculation, he was the only nomination.
Bill Weir: sitting member who faces a challenge
European market looks to Longhorns
THE LONGHORN cattle breed is about to move centre stage again, thanks to the move towards more extensive beef cattle ‘ranching’ throughout northern Europe after changes in European Community farm policy.
But there is one major hurdle to overcome before the pent-up reservoir of top genetic material in Britain can be released to Europe — the export ban on live cattle brought in almost exactly three years ago after the bovine spongiform encephalopathy scare.
However, with the outbreaks of that disease in cattle beginning to plateau, Keith Meldrum, the Ministry of Agriculture's chief veterinarian, has gone on record as saying he expects EC countries to start lifting the ban towards the end of the year.
Once that happens, according to the Meat and Livestock Commission, ‘the floodgates will open and prices will go through the roof.’
Longhorns, Galloways, Highlanders and other hardy breeds are all expected to benefit from the booming demand from Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands.
‘They desperately need the improved genetics of UK stock for these breeds which they cannot get elsewhere,’ said an MLC spokesman.
Longhorns are the world's oldest ‘improved’ breed, having been subject to the attentions of Robert Bakewell of Leicestershire more than 200 years ago, and until recently were listed with the Rare Breeds Survival Trust with only a few hobby farmer enthusiasts.
Now, says the breed society secretary, Libby Henson, there are 500 registered breeders with some 3,000 cattle from Orkney to Cornwall and a strong unrequited demand from Germany.
Sabine Zentis of northern Germany is one such fan since she bought a heifer from a Borders breeder, Peter Close, who runs a 30-strong herd alongside his Simmentals at Fishwick Mains, Berwick on Tweed.
Since then she has expanded her stock by the embryo transfer technique.
‘I see a growing demand for the Longhorn from Continental farmers who are moving out of dairying and are looking for easily kept beef cattle that can thrive outdoors all year round,’ says Mr Close.
That description has applied to Galloway and Highland cattle for a long time and recent sales of the breeds in Scotland have shown an undiminished interest.
A number of Germans and Danes have either bought or rented land in Scotland to keep the cattle they have bought at sales in recent years or have made management agreements with local farmers pending the lifting of the export ban.
Highland cattle are expected to benefit from the booming demand from Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands
Tories join outcry over VAT charge on heating
By Ewen MacAskill, Political Editor
THE Chancellor, Norman Lamont, found himself in the middle of a full-scale row last night over his Budget decision to put value-added tax on domestic fuels.
The proposal was condemned by Tory back-benchers as well as the opposition parties and a host of pressure groups, particularly from Scotland.
The flak even extended to the Prime Minister's press office, which created a storm in parts of the media for suggesting that Scotland had done well out of the Budget.
The VAT row gathered pace when the Treasury, after a series of Commons exchanges, confirmed that more than five million pensioners and others on low income will not be compensated in full for the planned 17.5 per cent rise in domestic fuel bills in 1995.
Mr Lamont, speaking to journalists at a Treasury press conference, justified the imposition of VAT, saying he believed only fiscal measures could produce the necessary energy savings to meet commitments on global warming.
Mr Lamont, who sees the Budget as his attempt at political rehabilitation, was boastful, saying he believed last year's Budget had contributed to the Tory victory at the election and this one would also prove a winner in the next election in 1996 ‘or whenever the election comes’.
With VAT on fuel bills scheduled for 1994 and 1995, the strategy is beginning to shape up as one aimed at allowing the Conservatives to go for a tax-cutting Budget in 1996 or 1997 in an attempt to win back ground in the run-up to the election.
One Tory back-bencher dismissed the VAT proposal as ‘mental’ while others predicted that the Government would eventually be forced to scrap it altogether or at least reduce the planned amount.
The shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown, wrote to Mr Lamont asking him to confirm whether he will compensate in full pensioners and others on income support for the rise, which he estimated at £2 a week.
The Treasury later insisted that benefits would rise only in line with inflation.
In another development, a Downing Street press officer, when questioned about the fuel rises, jokingly asked if it was any colder in Scotland.
He cited benefits that Scotland had received from the Budget such as the decision not to raise the duty on whisky and the North Sea measures.
That was reported in the Glasgow Evening Times as ‘You Scots whingers!
Downing Street hits back in storm over VAT’.
The Scottish National Party put down a Commons motion calling on the Prime Minister to dissociate himself from his press spokesman.
The motion said it believed ‘Downing Street's message to the Scots can best be summarised as ‘Let them drink whisky’ '.
Downing Street tried to dampen down the story, saying the press officer had not mentioned anything about ‘whingers’.
Betrayal charge, Page 6
Threat of legal action over fish import charges
By Frank Urquhart
THE trustees of Peterhead harbour were yesterday threatened with court action after accusations that the board was attempting to block foreign fish imports into the port by raising some charges by 600 per cent.
Robert Milne, chief executive of the Scottish Fish Merchants Federation, claimed the board's review of import charges was deliberately aimed at discouraging foreign fish consignments at Europe's premier white-fish port.
Last week, a mob of 100 fishermen went on the rampage at Peterhead and destroyed the £200,000 cargo of frozen cod due to be landed by the Russian trawler, Romb.
Mr Milne said: ‘I am convinced that certain parts of the north-east community have a death wish for the fish processing sector in this area.’
He said: ‘We cannot survive without imports.
We are fighting to trade freely and openly within the law, as we have been doing for many years.
We have a responsibility to our companies, our staff, our customers and the north-east economy to stay in business.’
Mr Milne claimed: ‘The action taken by the Harbour Board is to increase the cost for importers using the harbour by 600 per cent.
We live in an age when inflation is in the order of 1.7 per cent.
‘I believe that as a trustee port they have a responsibility to all port users and that includes my members.
I am left with no alternative but to seek legal advice on this matter which I believe has been taken for one reason and one reason only — that is to discourage the importation of fish to secure employment in the Grampian area.’
John Paterson, chief executive of the harbour board, denied the allegations and stressed that the review of import charges had been started before the recent imports row.
He said: ‘The trustees have removed an anomaly which previously existed in their charging structure whereby some frozen fish was imported at a lesser rate than other fish products.
‘Now all fresh, frozen and chilled fish are imported at the same rate, being 2.5 per cent of first sales value of the imports.
Some frozen fish had been on a totally different per tonne basis.’
He said the board's decision had ‘nothing to do with the Romb incident’ or the dispute over allegations of cheap foreign imports undermining local quayside prices.
‘This was on the agenda for the meeting and had been discussed previously,’ said Mr Paterson.
The deepening crisis over foreign imports is due to be discussed at a meeting of the EC Fisheries Council today in Brussels.
John Gummer, the fisheries minister, has already angered fishermen south of the Border by stating that the British delegation will not back the demands of English catchers for an all-out ban on imports.
Scottish fishermen's representatives are opposing an all-out ban and are calling for a series of restrictions on imports until there is a balanced supply at the markets.
Officials of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation plan to lobby today's crucial talks.
Perth jobless forecast to rise by a third
JOB LOSSES in whisky bottling and the post office will increase unemployment in Perth by more than a third, according to a report commissioned by Tayside Regional Council.
It follows the announcement of the closure of the Dewar's bottling plant in the city, which employs 340 people.
The report, produced by Alan McGillivray, a senior economics lecturer at Dundee Institute of Technology, states that the Dewar's workforce represents 9 per cent of the full-time employed manufacturing jobs in Perth.
The loss of income to Perth is estimated at £7.5 million a year.
The closure will increase unemployment from 6.8 per cent to 8.6 per cent and that will rise to 10.0 per cent when job losses from the post office in Perth take effect.
Mr McGillivray fears that the policy adopted by Dewar's parent company, United Distillers, of moving close to the market-place will lead to a further reduction in bottling capacity and jobs in Scotland.
Graphics firm set up
TWO Lanarkshire businessmen have set up a reprographics firm which aims to compete with Middle and Far East firms for orders originating in Scotland, writes John Hatfield.
Advanced Outlook, founded by Liam McGrath and Douglas Perrot, has invested £700,000 in computer technology to enable it to win contracts which are currently awarded to firms in Dubai and Hong Kong on account of the substantially lower labour costs there.
Based in East Kilbride, the firm currently employs seven people.
Spring Ram trade halted
By Richard Shackleton DEPUTY CITY EDITOR
SHARES in the kitchens and bathroom group Spring Ram once a favourite with City investors, were suspended on the stock market early yesterday at the company's request pending an announcement about its forthcoming results.
In recent months the company, based in Birstall, West Yorkshire, has fallen victim to a false accounting incident at a subsidiary as well as profits downgradings by analysts and a flurry of rumours concerning the sales of large blocs of shares.
After a 1992 high of 181p the shares have been in near constant retreat, hitting a low of 83.5p before recovering to yesterday's suspension price of 129p.
The company's results for the year to 3 January are due on Monday with analysts pencilling in £40 million compared with £37.6 million last time.
Most of the company's followers will be more concerned at how the company has dealt with a profits overstatement at its Balterley Bathrooms subsidiary, which had an annual turnover of about £10 million.
Last November the company admitted that it had discovered a series of accounting errors by the subsidiary's finance director that had overstated stock figures to boost profits from 1989.
The problem was discovered last February during a final audit and the director was asked to leave.
Consequently, the company made charges of £2.1 million against 1991's profits to cover the overstatement and thought the problem had been solved.
It said that it had been advised by its auditors, Arthur Andersen, that the problem need not be disclosed and that the director's actions had been the result of corporate competitive pressures rather than fraud.
But a further investigation by the auditors resulted in a £5.6 million exceptional charge being levied against the 1992 results.
Last night analysts were speculating that this figure might have to be increased to cover the overstatements.
Pension managers may spurn equities
By Ian Harper
TOP pension fund managers are having to consider shifting funds into government gilt-edged stock as a result of the fall in the yield on UK equities brought about by changes announced in Tuesday's Budget.
In a move which pension fund managers describe as ‘pension fund taxation by the back door’, the decision to cut from 25 to 20 per cent the tax credit that can be reclaimed on dividends, has reduced the yield on the FT All-Share Index from 4.1 per cent to 3.9 per cent and could cost the funds £1 billion a year.
Tom Crombie, the chief investment manager at Scottish Equitable, said: ‘It is a bit of a worry.
Whenever the yield has gone below 4 per cent before, it has been time to get out of the door and sell equities.’
Standard Life deputy chief executive, David Ritchie, said: ‘Yes, it is an additional tax on pension funds.
Yes, you could say that pension funds are being asked to finance the economic recovery.
But in a way that puts cash into companies which may allow them to increase their dividends.’
John Clamp, the chief executive of Combined Actuarial Performance Services, which monitors the performance of 1,800 pension funds valued at £185 billion, said the immediate impact could be to force the many employers using fund surpluses to take contributions holidays to start funding again.
This need would be particularly acute in mature schemes where most members are drawing their pensions and the need for income generating investments is greatest.
Mr Clamp said the Budget move could also force more employers away from final salary pension schemes and into money purchase schemes which do not guarantee retirement benefits.
Currently, the average UK company pension fund is invested 80 per cent in equities (60 per cent UK) and and only 9 per cent in bonds — in sharp contrast to US and European funds which are invested about a third in bonds.
Insured life office pension funds are typically more balanced, being invested about 40 per cent in bonds.
Tax changes could assist huge BP field
By Frank Frazer
AS oil companies continued assessing the impact of Budget tax changes on North Sea operations, British Petroleum indicated that the measures might help to hasten development of the huge oilfield found last year in waters west of Shetland.
Though other oil companies remained guarded in their reaction to the package announced by the Chancellor, the reduction from 75 to 50 per cent in petroleum revenue tax (PRT) on existing fields was welcomed by David Simon, BP's chief executive.
‘PRT at 75 per cent was originally imposed as a windfall profits tax when the oil price, in real terms, was three times today's level.
A levy of that size makes no sense in current circumstances.’
With PRT also abolished on new projects, analysts suggest the changes could be worth more than £100 million a year to BP.
But the company was unable to confirm the figure while taxation specialists study details of an Inland Revenue document outlining the proposals.
Mr Simon, however, said he believed the changes would encourage additional investment in existing oilfields and raise the prospects of extending their productive life.
‘Looking to the longer term, I believe these reforms will significantly encourage the development of larger discoveries, such as West of Shetland, where a higher rate of return is necessary to balance the increased risk and costs of operating in a more demanding deep-water environment.’
Other leading North Sea investors, including Shell and Esso, continued to study the changes which were announced without warning.
The UK Offshore Operators Association, representing 36 North Sea companies, confirmed last night that the measures were fundamental changes in a tax system to which the industry had adjusted and were put forward without prior consultation.
‘They are put forward at a time when industry uncertainty about the result of the current energy policy debate is starting to affect confidence in future investment offshore and halfway through a licensing round when industry application have already been made,’ a statement said.
Jeremy Peat, chief economist at the Royal Bank of Scotland, said the halting of PRT allowances for drilling costs could prove a setback for the Scottish oil industry by prompting companies to redirect exploration activity elsewhere.
‘The abolition of PRT for new fields sounds at first blush like good news for North Sea developments and hence the Scottish economy.
But the heavy cost of offshore exploration activity has until now been set against PRT,’ he explained.
Warning that the future level and pace of North Sea development could be put at risk, he pointed out that estimates suggests about 100,000 Scottish jobs were directly or indirectly oil-related.
‘The relative buoyancy of this sector in the early 1990s was one reason why Scotland has suffered less severely in the recession than the rest of the UK,’ he added.
Share prices give thumbs-down to Budget
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
INVESTORS took their cue yesterday from the generally dubious reaction of the media to the Budget and the FT-SE 100-Share Index fell 36 points in the first 15 minutes of trading before staging a partial rally to close 29.4 lower on the day at 2,889.9, 100 points below its all-time high two weeks ago.
Turnover was slightly higher than on Tuesday at 671 million.
Fears focused on the £50 billion borrowing requirement for 1993-94 and the narrowness of the window the Chancellor has left for economic recovery in the next 12 months before he begins tightening the tax screw in earnest.
Reuters fell 30p to 1,364p in the belief that ACT changes will reduce the scope for dividend increases, stores were generally easier on the absence of consumer incentives in the Budget, and the 0.2 per cent rise in retail sales between January and February, though welcome, was little more than expected.
In the last three months, the volume of retail sales was 0.3 per cent higher than in the previous quarter and 1.75 per cent higher than the corresponding period a year ago.
Utilities were among the more buoyant sectors, helped by the search by pensions funds for higher-income investments to compensate for the five-point drop in their investment returns as a result of the Budget changes.
The change in the formula for grossing-up net interest caused some uncertainty, though it is not expected to have any significant impact on the level of net dividends companies pay.
More important is the ability of companies to increase earnings per share by enough to push share prices any higher at a time when they are already trading on an average 18 times earnings.
Shares were also affected by the growing understanding that the Chancellor's decision to defer the bulk of his tax increases until next year means there is less scope for him to reduce interest rates.
Hopes that a cut in German rates would somehow create an opportunity for UK rates to fall were shortlived yesterday.
A Bundesbank council member, Reimut Jochimsen, speaking in Dusseldorf yesterday, emphasised that the current German inflation rate of 4.2 per cent was beyond the margin of tolerance allowed either by the Maastricht treaty or the Bundesbank's own remit.
In London, the Bank of England emphasised the point by leaving the discount market more than £200 million short of funds to balance their books, sending overnight interest rates as high as 30 per cent as members struggled to cover their requirements.
The pound had a good day, and gained 1.5 pfennigs to Dm2.4138 and almost half a cent to $1.4491, encouraged both by the prospect of no further cuts in interest rates and the evidence of a modest UK economic recovery contained in the retail sales figures.
Production rises push PremCo's profit to £15.1m
By Frank Frazer
A RISE in production from interests in UK oilfields contributed the bulk of improved earnings by Premier Consolidated Oilfields, which yesterday reported a rise of 27 per cent to £15.1 million in profit after payment of tax for 1992.
The UK interests contributed £53.1 million of the £56 million turnover for the year, compared with £32 million for the previous nine-month trading period to 31 December 1991.
Earnings per share in 1992 rose from 1.72p to 2.90p as the company's production reached a record average of 13,888 barrels per day.
Though Premier will pay no dividend, it is recommending a bonus one-for-20 share issue after the results, which Roland Shaw, the chairman, described as ‘very encouraging’.
He added: ‘There is no reason, barring unexpected changes in crude oil pricing and dollar/pound exchange rates, why Premier should not continue to prosper in 1993 and subsequently.’
The extra output in 1992 include contributions from an  extension to the Wytch Farm field in Dorset and the Thistle oilfield in the North Sea.
The company also shared in new output from the Angus field and has an interest in the recently discovered Fife field.
Mr Shaw also reported that net debt had decreased from £63 million to £58 million.
‘The company's finances are, therefore, in a very healthy position and we now have substantial cash flow and cash balances to fund a full exploration and development programme as well as attractive acquisitions,’ he added.
‘Green’ Co-op Bank gets back into black
By Magnus Grimond
THE Co-operative Bank, the ‘green’ banking offshoot of the Co-operative Wholesale Society, revealed yesterday that it had ended banking arrangements with certain customers which contravened its code of business ethics.
Terry Thomas, managing director, said about half a dozen accounts had had to be ‘squeezed out’ where the customers were engaged in activities such as factory farming and hunting.
The code, which was published last May, also resulted in the loss of about a dozen personal accounts and the same number of small corporate customers which opposed the bank's position.
But Mr Thomas said customer deposits had risen 13 per cent in 1992, compared with a more normal growth of 4 to 5 per cent while there had been ‘an enormous increase’ in applications for the Co-op Bank's ‘free-for-life’gold credit card.
Only a foolish customer would join the bank purely because of the ethical stance, but it attracted their attention, Mr Thomas claimed.
He was speaking as the bank unveiled a bounce-back into the black for 1992, with pre-tax profits of £9.84 million replacing the previous year's loss of £5.97 million.
Mr Thomas said the Co-op Bank was one of the few to cut its charge for bad debts, which fell from £47.7 million to £42.8 million in the year to 9 January, while profits before debt provisions leapt 26 per cent to £52.7 million.
The bank had ‘provided earlier and more prudently than others and slimmed down quicker’, Mr Thomas added.
In 1991, more than 1,000 staff, or 22 per cent of the workforce, were shed, but the bank actually increased staff by 100 last year to the equivalent of 3,600 full-time staff.
The bank's ethics code prevented it cashing in on the bonanza reaped by others from the pound's departure from the European exchange rate mechanism last September.
It made only £450,000 from ‘normal’ foreign-exchange dealings for customers last year.
Mr Thomas also claimed the taxpayer had lost at least £29 million as a result of the 1990 sale of the Post Office's Girobank operations to the Alliance & Leicester building society, in preference to the Co-op Bank's bid.
The loss on the sale — recently the subject of an investigation by the National Audit Office watchdog — resulted from the delay while the law was changed to allow the Alliance to complete the deal and the loss on Girobank's gilt holdings in the meantime, Mr Thomas said.
Boost for Thomson travel
ENOUGH Britons took a holiday from the recession in 1992 to provide Thomson, the leading travel company, with a near-14 per cent boost in operating profits to a new record.
But the company's Canadian parent, The Thomson Corporation, lost ground on its publishing side after providing for the sale or closure of titles in the UK and north America.
Total write-offs of £117 million took post-tax earnings down to £114.5 million from £201.4 million in 1991.
In the travel business, Thomson Tour Operations, sold 3.3 million holidays in 1992, up 10 per cent on the previous year.
Profit margins were squeezed by substantial over-capacity in the market, however.
But travel agent Lunn Poly substantially increased profitability following major expansion in recent years.
A further 68 holiday shops were opened, bringing the total to 578.
More than 1.6 million summer holidays were sold through the shops, a 29 per cent increase on 1991.
Newspapers in North America suffered in the recession, but paid-for regional papers in the UK are said to have had a good year.
‘However, free newspapers had a very difficult year and incurred significantly increased operating losses,’ said the corporation.
Thomson said last month it was scaling down its involvement in free papers in the UK.
Earnings per common share fell to 30 cents from 53 cents, but the dividend per common share remains at 11.3 cents.
— PA
Bowthorpe inches higher
BOWTHORPE, one of Britain's few remaining home-grown electronics groups, yesterday unveiled a small rise in profits for 1992 but warned that the incipient German recession was already hitting current trading.
The chairman, Anthony Vice, said: ‘The management results for the first two months of 1993 show a small improvement in the United Kingdom and the United States, but this has been offset by the effects of recession in Germany.’
In the year to December, pre-tax profits edged ahead from £40.3 million to £42.7 million.
Earnings per share moved up from 14.04p to 15.36p and the company is raising the final dividend from 4.34p to 4.57p, to boost the total by 5.3 per cent to 6.36p.
The £33 million acquisition of ‘black box’ crash recorder maker Penny & Giles last year added £1.6 million to trading profits which rose from £36.9 million to £40.9 million.
Translation of foreign currencies added £900,000 to profits in 1992 and, if rates stuck at present levels, could boost this year's results by £5 million.
The shares were unchanged at 300p yesterday.
Drayton plan rejected
DRAYTON Asia's reconstruction proposals, issued on Friday to derail EFM Dragon's takeover attempt, have been rejected, writes Gordon Milne.
Edinburgh-based Dragon launched the all-paper bid for its rival Far Eastern trust last month.
Although Dragon is only about half the size of Drayton Asia, its superior investment performance has got the bid off to a good start.
At 3pm on Tuesday, the first closing date, the Dragon board announced that it had received acceptances from 750 shareholders in respect of 39.71 per cent of Drayton Asia's issued share capital.
On Friday, Drayton Asia offered its investors a choice between an existing unit trust and a new split capital investment trust, a move designed to defeat Dragon's bid.
Those who opted for the unit trust — the South and East Asia Growth Trust — would have been able to realise their holdings for cash at about 98 per cent of Drayton Asia.
Drayton claimed the alternative, the split capital Asian investment trust, would have offered investors between 101.5 and 102.3 per cent of its diluted net asset value, compared with 98.7 per cent under the Dragon offer.
But the proposals needed the approval of 75 per cent of shareholders' votes.
Sir Hugh Byatt, Dragon's chairman, said last night: ‘The 39.71 per cent support for the Dragon offer suggests that the reconstruction proposals may not, therefore, be put to shareholders for approval.’
Sir Hugh added that the Dragon offer has been extended for a further 14 days.
Lamont leaves City with much to ponder
TRYING to assess the impact of what even Norman Lamont admitted were fairly ‘arcane’ tax reforms proved a difficult job for the City yesterday.
The initial reaction had been an assumption that shares would fall on the back of the changes in  Advanced Corporation Tax and tax credits on dividends which, to put it simplistically, will suck £1 billion out of Britain's pension funds, the largest providers of equity for industry.
That turned out to be true, but once the initial markdown had occurred the Footsie index traded in a fairly narrow band all day, although the number of transactions and the volume of shares traded held up strongly.
But the adverse reaction was confined largely to the bigger companies, with the more widely-based FT-250 and FT-350 indexes showing smaller falls.
Equally, sterling held up well as dealers ruled out an early cut in interest rates, or at least until the Bundesbank eventually shows its hand with some cuts of its own.
Quite how shares will move in the next few weeks and months is unclear at this stage and will take some to clarify as the pension funds decide what strategy to adopt in the wake of the unwelcome attack from Mr Lamont.
Will they switch from to higher yielding shares to try to maintain their income?
Or will they watch the market drift lower until the overall yield matches their new expectations?
Either way, the ACT changes will add some uncertainty to an already complicated situation and it  would be no surprise to see the Footsie fall back in the short-term.
An irony of the Budget was that what it gave with one hand it took away with the other.
The £1 billion package for business and industry was exactly matched by the £1 billion that the pension funds will  lose once the new ACT rules come into effect.
As for reaction to the abolition of Petroleum Revenue Tax, probably the best judge will be the comments of individual companies.
BP's John Browne was bullish yesterday, suggesting that BP will be one of the gainers, but there will be others who may prefer to stay rather more mute.
Short-term City reaction to Budgets can be notoriously wrong, but this spring a better guide might be how easily the Government can finance next year's massive £50 billion PSBR.
That in turn will give an indication of how believable the City finds the Chancellor's figures.
Marley profits plunge
MARLEY, the roof tiles to automotive components group, saw profits plunge two-thirds last year and is halving the final dividend.
But yesterday's grim news was not unexpected and Marley's shares slipped just 2p to 108p.
Pre-tax profits slumped from £25.0 million to £8.1 million in the 12 months to December.
The final payment to shareholders is being cut from 4.25p to 2.1p, to make a total of 4.2p for the year, down from 6.35p last time.
Marley's ‘heavy side’ building products side — concrete blocks, bricks and the like — dived into the red, with operating losses of £5.3 million replacing profits of £4.1 million last time.
The figures also had to bear the cost of rationalising the company's Thermalite aircrete block factories in the UK onto three sites, which accounted for most of a £10.4 million exceptional charge.
The chairman, Sir George Russell, said the group's strategy ‘has enabled Marley to withstand a UK recession of exceptional duration and severity.’
But it ran into criticism from Robin Gilbert at brokers Panmure Gordon.
He said the group had expanded to supply a new housing market of 200,000 units a year at a time when activity had slumped to 135,000 units.
There was better news from Marley's plumbing, plastic moulding and flooring businesses, where operating profits edged ahead from £27.3 million to £28.8 million, while automotive components more than doubled to £2.8 million.
Earnings per share crashed from 6.0p to just 0.7p.
Dairy herd falling says 1992 census
THE RESULTS of the December agricultural sample census of main holdings for 1992 were published yesterday by the Scottish Office Agricultural and Fisheries Department.
During the year to December 1992 poultry numbers rose by six per cent to 14.9 million and cattle numbers remained constant at 2.1 million.
Within the cattle total the dairy herd continued to fall, by one per cent in 1992 to 235,000, while the beef herd rose by four per cent to 511,000.
The number of beef heifers in calf rose by 11 per cent to 64,000.
The sheep flock continued to fall, by 194,000 (three per cent) to 6.5 million.
The breeding flock fell, by 91,000 (three per cent) to 3.14 million.
The pig herd fell by 9,000 (two per cent) to 498,000.
Within the poultry total, both the breeding and laying numbers rose.
The number of table birds increased by 549,000 (6 per cent) to just over ten million.
Total employed labour on farms fell by six per cent continuing the long term trend decline.
Sale does not quell sheep quota doubt
IN SPITE OF Tuesday's lively sale of sheep quota at Lanark, top price £46, doubts remain among some farmers and other marts that their colleagues may have jumped the gun, writes Fordyce Maxwell.
Quota transfer forms have not been issued yet to sheep farmers and, on past form, grey areas in the legislation have still to be clarified.
As things stand, buying at Lanark has been described as more a sale of intent rather than actual sale of quota.
But buyers there may simply have stolen a march on the market.
A quota sale by Aberdeen & Northern Marts, originally billed as the first national sale, will not be held until quota transfer forms are issued.
Well over 5,000 units of quota have now been entered for that sale, date to be specified later, but almost certainly in April.
At the Lanark sale the top price was £46.
Gordon Gray, Over Kirkhope, Selkirk, paid £45, not £48, for 272 units of quota.
Yesterday the Scottish Landowners' Federation also got in on the act, claiming that the quota sale had confirmed fears about value.
Simon Fraser, the SLF director, said: ‘In spite of what Government and others might say about quota not having a value, there are clearly farmers willing to pay very large sums for the rights to Sheep Annual Premium.
Their reasons for doing so are obviously partially speculative and partially a result of ewe hoggs now being eligible for subsidy.’
He said clarification was still needed from Government on the UK regulations covering trading and transfer of quota.
He added: ‘It's now clear that the capital value of quota is considerable.
It is also clear that the higher the quota value the higher the hurdle for new entrants.’
If a fair regime was not established, he warned, then landlords would see it as tenants removing capital value.
It confirmed landlords' fears that the imposition of quotas meant trouble.
Membership of the SLF slid a little further during 1992, down from 3,600 to 3,576, it reported.
The small slip was the difference between 241 new members and 278 resignations.
It was an improvement on 1991, when 195 new members joined but 337 resigned.
The federation's finances also picked up, mainly because subscriptions rose from £286,000 to £323,000.
Administration and running costs were reduced.
Half-a-loaf welcome for Budget from NFU
THERE was not a lot in the budget for farmers according to National Farmers' Union of Scotland analysts after a day's reflection.
But Robert Lamont, convener of the union's legal and commercial committee, did give what was there a traditional half-a-loaf welcome yesterday.
He welcomed the fact that VAT had not been extended to food and that there would be no increase in employers' National Insurance contributions.
‘Also, the proposal to extend capital gains tax rollover relief to ewe and suckler cow premia is welcome, and the extension of this relief to proceeds of disposals of shares in family companies.’
He added: ‘The Chancellor has also accepted the union's recommendation that job-related accommodation provided by a farmer, free of rent and Council Tax, should be treated as a free benefit for income tax purposes.’
But it was unfortunate that the provisions on capital allowances, introduced last autumn, had not been extended: ‘We recommended the reintroduction of 100 per cent capital allowances on plant and machinery, limited to a first portion of £50,000, to benefit smaller businesses in particular.
The Chancellor must not miss the opportunity in his November budget.’
The increase in duty on road fuels would have a particularly severe impact on farming and the rural community in general: ‘We deplore the Chancellor's failure to show restraint in taxing these important farm inputs.
To extend these duties to fuel substitutes such as rapeseed diesel is regrettable, because this will tend to stifle some initiatives in arable crops.’
However, he welcomed the introduction of an option of self-assessment for tax and the fact that a common accounting date would not be necessary.
Accountants Touche Ross estimated that the increase in the price of diesel would add about £1 an acre to arable farming costs.
Call for more ‘green’ goals, less red tape
INCENTIVE schemes for farmers should concentrate more on green goals and less on red tape, the Government was told yesterday.
The Countryside Commission, which advises ministers on landscape conservation, said value-for-money schemes had to be ‘selective and properly targeted.’
In a new policy statement the commission chairman, Sir John Johnson, said: ‘Objectives must be set and the best means to pursue them chosen.
‘They should also focus upon the achievement of clear environmental results and not on detailed, prescribed management practices.’
Payment schemes come in many forms.
Some like ‘set-aside’ provide grant incentives for farmers to let land lie fallow in order to reduce grain surpluses.
Others are management schemes where farmers are persuaded to treat the land in a particular way.
The policy statement, Paying for a Beautiful Countryside, suggests farmers should be invited to say what they can produce for the good of the countryside, rather than being compensated for not carrying out certain types of farming.
It also urges Government departments and agencies to get together more often so that schemes can be streamlined and integrated.
‘One option would be for all schemes to be  channelled through a single agency, so land managers only had one port of call for payments,’ said the commission.
Organic farming is better for wild birds as well as producing healthier food for humans, according to early returns from a three-year study by the British Trust for Ornithology.
Skylarks, suffering a national population decline, are recorded more often on organically-managed fields — both cereal and grass — than on land where conventional agriculture is practised.
While stressing it is too early to predict the final outcome, the survey organiser, Jeremy Wilson, says in the latest issue of BTO News that ‘significant results’ have emerged from analysis of early findings.
Seven of the nine types of bird most commonly occurring on farmland were ‘significantly more frequent’ in hedgerows on organic farms.
Mr Wilson says organic farms reverse many modern agricultural trends.
Synthetic fertilisers and pesticides are banned and soil fertility and pest control is achieved through crop rotation and mixed farming systems.
These include components valuable to birds, such as temporary grassland, spring sowing and winter stubble.
The purpose of the survey is to find out exactly how the benefits work.
The BTO, based at The Nunnery, Thetford, Norfolk, is appealing for more volunteers to help with the remaining two years of the research.
More than 30 organic farmers have offered to have their plots surveyed.
Two handbooks on tree growing were published yesterday, one by the Forestry Authority and one by the Scottish Crofters' Union.
The authority's book deals with the principles and practice of growing quality broadleaved timber, bearing in mind landscape design, amenity, value to wildlife and conservation.
Broadleaves account for 36 per cent of British woodland, although only for 18 per cent in Scotland, with oak, beech, ash, sycamore and birch the main species.
Publication of the Crofting Forestry Handbook follows last year's Crofter Forestry (Scotland) Act, which gave them the chance to plant trees on common grazings.
The handbook shows how suitable small-scale forestry developments can be integrated with, and enhance, traditional crofting and the practicalities of tree planting.
Prince Charles will be presented with a copy at next week's Scottish Crofters' Union conference in Stornoway.
The Forestry Authority handbook is available from its publications section, Alice Holt Lodge, Forestry Commission, Farnham, Surrey, £13.50 plus £1.30 postage.
Social fund up to £346m
THE social fund is to be raised by £44 million to £346 million for 1993-94, Nicholas Scott, the social security minister, said yesterday.
The fund, which provides loans and grants for those receiving social security benefits to buy essential items, has grown by more than 50 per cent since 1991.
Mr Scott said in a Commons written reply: ‘Between April 1992 and January 1993 almost £1.5 million non-repayable grants and interest-free loans were made.
This is nearly 200,000 more than during the same period last year, an increase of 14 per cent.
‘The increases from April will allow even more people to be helped.’
Companies queue for room to manoeuvre
BEFORE the concrete foundations of the stage have even had time to set, and while the great steel girders of the fly tower are still being erected, Edinburgh Festival Theatre is receiving a succession of visitors from the leading opera and dance companies in Britain.
Angela Serota, chairman of Rambert Dance Company, brought news of exciting developments in that company when she called this week on the new theatre's general manager, Paul Iles.
It is hoped that Rambert will be one of the first companies to appear at the Festival Theatre when it opens next year, by which time Christopher Bruce will have taken over as artistic director of the company with which he used to be a leading dancer and choreographer.
Serota, who danced with the Royal Ballet (as Angela Beveridge), persuaded Bruce to apply for the position of artistic director because she believed he could restore Rambert to the forefront of British dance.
She is conscious of the fact that the Arts Council is looking at the entire range of dance companies which it supports, and that funds will be concentrated on those which seem to have the most positive artistic policy.
She said: ‘I will be very disappointed if the Arts Council does not support our new policy of occupying the middle ground between classical ballet and contemporary dance.
There is great scope for a company of classically trained dancers performing modern work with the leading European choreographers.’
Serota, whose husband Nicholas is director of the Tate Gallery in London, is determined that Rambert should regain its place on the number one theatre touring circuit in Britain — but the Edinburgh Festival Theatre holds special attractions because of the size of its stage.
‘There is no dance house in London which is big enough for what we want to do,’ she said, looking admiringly at the spacious stage area being laid out to the rear of the former Empire Theatre.
With a total area of 1,000 square feet, the stage of the Festival Theatre will be bigger than that of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, double that of the Theatre Royal, Glasgow, and three times that of Edinburgh's King's or Playhouse Theatres.
Allen Wright
Pupils clock on to creativity
AS renovations continue at the temporarily closed Fruitmarket Gallery in Edinburgh, the creative life of the art space continues in the shape of an outreach project for pupils from four disadvantaged primary schools in Lothian.
With financial support from Lothian Region's education department arts development fund, the project, entitled ‘Ring the Changes’, has encouraged pupils from each school to create a giant collage clock celebrating aspects of their daily lives, from playing football to dreaming.
The project has been guided by the Fruitmarket Gallery's education officer, Sarah Knox, and sculptor, Jeremy Cunningham.
‘It's based on the 16th century Book of Hours where monks recorded events of the year, except we're just covering one day.
The clock is divided into hourly segments in which each of the children depicts an activity,’ says Cunningham, speaking during his work with pupils at St David's Primary School in Pilton.
The children form two groups, each of which creates half a clock.
First they gather information about their neighbourhood before coming back to the school to translate their ideas,(in best Blue Peter fashion) with glue, cloth, cigarette packets, and other recyclable materials, into a colourful collage clock.
Day two, and the pupils learn how to shape their creations into a clay model clock — quite a demanding process since it requires them to build in mirror-image — and cast it in plaster, ready for display in the school foyer or playground.
The pupils of St David's primary are in no doubt as to the merits of the project compared to normal paint and brush work.
‘It's fun,’ says one of the girls.
‘It's like having a real thing,’ chimes in another.
Even at the end of the day, when the first stage of the clock has been completed, the children are still eagerly pasting, sticking, or simply having fun.
A boy with a cardboard box on his head and two cardboard boxes on his feet shuffles over.
‘Ahm Robocop,’ he grins.
Knox hopes that the relationship formed through the project with the schools will encourage children to come with their parents or teachers to the gallery when it reopens in July.
‘This helps make the gallery seem like a friendly place to them, rather than just somewhere other people go.’
Robert Alstead
Bank's takeover bid in doubt
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
THE proposed takeover of the Heart of England Building Society by the Bank of Edinburgh looks set to fall through.
Doubts have continually dogged the potential deal between the bank — set up in the capital over two years ago with £26 million of institutional backing as a building society acquisition operation — and the Heart of England with which it has been talking for almost two years.
A shareholders' meeting is now understood to be being planned to discuss the future of the banking operation.
The Heart of England, with assets of more than £1 billion, is the UK's 25th largest building society.
A wall of silence has now descended over the key players.
Ken Murray, the Bank of Edinburgh's principal founder was not available for comment and Graeme Knox, deputy managing director of Scottish Amicable, the biggest shareholder with 39.2 per cent, had ‘no comment to make at all ’.
The Scotsman understands that the deal is now unlikely to go ahead and a minority shareholder in Bank of Edinburgh, the Brighton-based Family Assurance Society, confirmed that there were difficulties.
John Reeve, chief executive of Family Assurance which owns around 3 per cent of the bank, said: ‘It is difficult for me to comment.
There is a meeting of shareholders being planned to discuss the future of the Bank of Edinburgh.
Clearly the Heart of England deal has not been completed and there are difficulties with it, which is a pity as it would have been a good start to the venture.
‘I can't say I'm unaware of rumours and difficulties,’ he continued, ‘but I don't know more than that.’
As to suggestions that if the deal did not happen, it could throw doubts on the future of the bank, he said: ‘I think that is not an unfair conclusion.’
In spite of the suggested difficulties, Carol Thompson, Heart of England marketing director said: ‘The negotiations are continuing for the moment.’
A spokesman for another minority shareholder, the London-based Liverpool Victoria Friendly Society had no comment on the situation.
‘We just have nothing to say.’
There has been considerable speculation about the position both of the Bank of Edinburgh and some of its shareholders.
As recently as January, the bank's bid for the heart of England was reported to be in difficulties with the regulatory authorities.
At the same time, it was stressed by Graeme Knox that Scottish Amicable did not have an interest in taking a majority stake as some reports had suggested.
Fears over North Sea safety plans
By Frank Frazer
FEARS were expressed yesterday that safety plans for North Sea platforms may put too much emphasis on equipment and hardware, rather than management and human factors, which were shown to be a main contributory cause of the Piper Alpha disaster.
The concern was highlighted in Glasgow yesterday by Gary Kenny, a safety specialist with Cremer & Warner, who was a member of the Piper Alpha inquiry team.
He told a conference organised by Paisley University that some of the safety cases being prepared by oil companies for the Health and Safety Executive seemed to be putting emphasis on the technology involved in operations.
Yet it was clear from the outcome of the inquiry that about two-thirds of the topics which needed to be tackled involved people.
Colin MacFarlane, professor of shipping and marine technology at Strathclyde University, said there had been oil industry resistance to workforce participation in safety discussions before the outcome of the Cullen inquiry.
Though that recommended the appointment of safety representatives from among workforces on rigs and platforms, Prof MacFarlane said that, unlike Norway, UK safety representatives had no legal status and rights to stop unsafe work.
‘When no status comes from position, then it falls to the individual to develop it — and that is the most difficult task, requiring education in technology, negotiation and psychology,’ he said.
According to Campbell Christie, general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the European Community's COMETT training and education initiative, in which the STUC participates, provides facilities to help offshore safety representatives improve their skills.
The scheme includes access to databases on health and safety topics which can help representatives overcome the sense of isolation they might otherwise experience from being based offshore, he said.
Securities proposals submitted
By Bill Millar
A STATEMENT of joint proposals prepared by the Royal Bank of Scotland after the collapse of the Taurus paperless trading system was yesterday passed to the Bank of England task force on securities settlement.
Among the proposals was the adoption of a rolling settlement system, initially on a trade plus ten days basis, considered achievable in the present processing environment.
Once paper movement was eliminated from the system, it was proposed that trade plus five days should be achieved, moving to trade plus three which, it was felt, was crucial in restoring confidence in London among international investors.
The setting-up of an institutional clearing house, initially under the auspices of the Bank of England, was also proposed.
Yesterday's statement was agreed by more than 30 members of the securities industry and drawn up by Terry Pearson, senior securities adviser at the Royal Bank, after securities specialists met on Tuesday to find a practical replacement for Taurus.
‘The statement is the result of an industry-wide initiative,’ said Mr Pearson.
The members had set down seven proposals which would provide a useful starting point for the task force.
Sterling bounces back after German rate cut
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE pound bounded ahead yesterday, gaining almost 4 pfennigs to Dm2.44 and almost 3 cents to $1.4735 as the UK economy enjoyed two unexpected items of good news.
The Bundesbank's decision to cut its discount rate from 8 per cent to 7.5 per cent was widely welcomed, although leaving its Lombard rate unchanged at 9 per cent injected a note of caution to the markets.
The fall in seasonally adjusted unemployment of 22,000 last month was even more of a surprise, at a time when forecasters had expected a further rise of 35,000.
Some analysts pointed to a further fall of 13,000 in manufacturing jobs which could indicate the overall fall may be due to problems with seasonal adjustments, and expect the upward trend to resume in March.
The latest money supply figures showed a rise of 0.7 per cent in the narrow band last month taking the annual rate up again from 4.3 per cent to 4.5 per cent.
Meanwhile broad money M4, rose 0.6 per cent in February and 3.3 per cent over the past year.
Bank lending however is not noticeably buoyant, with sterling lending by the UK banks rising less than £200 million in February, compared with a revised £1.1 billion in January and a recent monthly average increase of almost £700 million.
Loan demand was noticeably weak, with companies benefiting from increased Government spending and increased use of the capital market.
Consumers repaid a substantial amount of debt and the amount of consumer credit outstanding from UK banks was actually less than a year ago, Lord Inchyra, the director-general of the British Bankers' Association said yesterday.
Only mortgage lending seems buoyant, running 18 per cent higher in the first two months of the year compared with a year ago.
The Bank of England stepped in yesterday to signal that a drop in UK interest rates would be premature and longer-dated gilt edged stocks gained as much as £1.
The FT-SE 100-Share Index moved lower in early trading, but was nearly 7 points higher on balance after the unemployment figures and the German interest rate cut, only to drift lower again in spite of a bright start to trading on Wall Street.
The index closed 10.2 down on the day at 2,879.7, with 705 million shares changing hands.
Spring Ram more than halved to 63.5p after forecasting a 28 per cent drop in profits to £26 million, with 25 million shares changing hands when trading resumed after Tuesday's suspension.
Pension fund managers were again in search of high-yielding stocks to protect their incomes after the Budget changes.
Riddell quits Capital House post
By Peter Woodifield
NORMAN Riddell, the chief executive of Capital House, the fund management arm of the Royal Bank of Scotland, has resigned to take up a similar position at Invesco-MIM.
Mr Riddell, who launched Capital House for the Royal Bank in October 1987, just before Black Monday, is being succeeded by Paul Field, currently managing director of the retail operations of Capital House.
Mr Field, 47, a chartered accountant, has worked for Capital House, which now has more than £4 billion under management, since its inception, having previously worked for Save & Prosper and Britannia Unit Trust Managers.
Tony Schofield, managing director of the Royal Bank's branch banking division, said he was confident Capital House would continue to flourish under Mr Field.
Mr Riddell worked for Invesco-MIM, which has around £40 billion under management in total, in its previous incarnation, when it was known as Britannia Arrow.
He resigned as group chief executive to join Capital House shortly after Lord Stevens, who is retiring as chairman at the next annual meeting, became a shareholder.
In his new job Mr Riddell will be chief executive of the UK and European operations, which are about the same size as the whole group was when he left.
‘It is a different and exciting challenge working on a much bigger stage for one of the biggest fund management groups in the world,’ he said last night.
Paul Field: Takes over at Capital House
L&G soars to £106m
REDUCED losses on mortgage indemnity insurance helped the financial services giant, Legal & General, to report a big jump in annual profits yesterday and the shares responded with a gain of 16p to 481p.
The pre-tax total soared to £116.1 million, from £38.8 million in 1991, as the mortgages loss was cut from £106.1 million to £75 million.
Overall losses on general insurance fell from £157.3 million in 1991 to £61 million last year, and the group also did better on its core life assurance and pensions business.
David Prosser, chief executive, said withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism and interest cuts had greatly improved business prospects.
The group expected economic recovery in 1993.
Shareholders benefit from a dividend total lifted from 18.8p in 1991 to 19.1p, after a final of 12.9p, but holders of L&G investment policies will not do so well.
In line with other insurance companies, the group announced lower bonus rates for its life assurance and pensions schemes in response to poorer investment returns over the last few years.
— PA
Reed Elsevier hails merger success
REED International's chairman, Peter Davis, yesterday hailed the success of his company's £6 billion merger earlier this year with Dutch-based Elsevier as the new, combined operation reported a 19 per cent leap in pre-tax profits.
The two companies combined on 1 January to form one of the world's biggest publishing groups.
Mr Davis said central staff were already ‘working well together’ and good progress was being made elsewhere.
Organisational initiatives had been taken to ensure that the medical publishing companies were managed on a unified basis, the business-to-business operations in America were merged and the scientific journal businesses in the UK were integrated.
The Reed Elsevier group lifted pre-tax profits to £412 million for 1992, from £346 million last time.
Reed International, changing its year-end to conform with Elsevier's, saw pre-tax profits rise 10 per cent for the nine months to December to £137.1 million.
Its books division showed strong growth as costs were cut.
The business-to-business and consumer publishing sectors achieved big profit gains, while in the US, Cahners performed strongly in the medical and specialist consumer sectors.
The consumer publishing division's results were helped by a return to profit in the television listings sector and a good performance by IPC's core consumer magazines and Reed Regional Newspapers.
A final dividend of 7.25p makes a total of 12.75p for the nine-month reporting period, a pro rata increase of 6 per cent.
For the 12-month period to December 1992, Reed International lifted pre-tax profits by 28 per cent over 1991's to £243 million, £4 million up on the forecast in the merger document.
The shares rose 13p to 656p. — PA
NAV leaps at Currie Pacific
By Gordon Milne
A HIGH exposure to Hong Kong, coupled with an underweight position in Japan for most of the year, has helped to boost Martin Currie Pacific's net asset value by 27.4 per cent last year, well ahead of the relevant benchmark index.
The shares firmed 6p to 341p.
The Edinburgh-managed trust, which invests for capital growth in the stock markets of the Pacific Rim, excluding Japan, saw NAV per share rise from 297.2p to 378.7p in the 12 months to 28 February.
This compares with a rise of 16.2 per cent in the FT-A World (Pacific Basin) Index, in a volatile year for Far Eastern markets.
Although income from investments has increased by 22.3 per cent, pre-tax revenues fell 9 per cent to £180,000 — mainly because of higher interest charges on borrowings.
Earnings per share dipped from 1.1p to 0.94p, and the dividend is held at 0.4p.
Allan MacLeod, the manager, said yesterday that the portfolio's weighting in Hong Kong had been trimmed from 42 per cent to 24 per cent in the course of the year.
A mid-year 15 per cent position in Japan had grown to 30 per cent after the Japanese government's fiscal package.
‘We're comfortable with a 30 per cent position in Hong Kong,’ Mr MacLeod said.
There had been activities behind the scene to sort things out there, he said, and he remained confident about the future for Asian economies.
Rentokil's dividend boosted
RENTOKIL reacted swiftly yesterday to the Budget move which cut the value of company dividends — at a cost of £1 million.
It boosted annual net dividends by 36.5 per cent to compensate shareholders for the Chancellor's tax change.
Normally, the international environmental services company raises dividends in line with earnings per share, which jumped last year by 28.6 per cent to 8.018p.
David Newbigging, the chairman, said the decision to raise the total dividend by a larger percentage to 2.31p, from 1.692p, was a direct response to the Budget.
No shareholder would now be worse off because of the tax measure.
Rentokil aims to raise pre-tax profits and earnings per share by at least 20 per cent a year — and easily did it again in 1992.
Turnover rose 21.9 per cent to £474.1 million, and pre-tax-profits jumped 29.3 per cent, from £94.6 million to £122.4 million.
Though UK turnover growth was held back to 7.3 per cent by the slump, sales increased 30.9 per cent in Europe, 27 per cent in north America and 39.8 per cent in Africa and the Asia-Pacific region.
Cash reserves more than doubled, from £27.2 million to £60.2 million, helping to lift net interest income from £1.6 million to £4.7 million.
The board expects 1993 to be another good year, but the shares eased 6p to 224p.
Budgeting to keep investors satisfied after dividend raid
RENTOKIL was quick off the mark yesterday when it decided to increase its dividend by more than earnings to compensate for the Chancellor's decision to cut the tax credit on dividends from 25 per cent to 20 per cent.
That is one way of keeping shareholders happy, notably the big institutions, who will lose a considerable chunk of their dividend income under the new rules.
But whether it is the right thing to do is another thing.
It is all very well for companies like Rentokil, or Guinness, which said it could not act this time round but was considering similar action at a later date, to compensate their shareholders.
Although the latter's earnings fell its dividend is handsomely covered, while a company like Rentokil is growing so healthily that it can afford to pay out the extra £1 million that its generosity has cost.
But it was some of those same institutions who made it clear soon after the start of the recession that they would prefer companies not to pay out dividends they could not afford without straining the balance sheet.
Since then we have seen a host of companies freezing their dividends, with a much smaller proportion cutting them, and then generally under duress.
In too few cases has the reduction been accompanied by an admission that the new base will be more sustainable in future.
Had more companies been honest with themselves a dividend passed completely would have been better and then a new base could have set at a suitable level.
The question is whether the institutions will adopt the same rather altruistic attitude that they did then now that their income from even the best-performing companies will shrink permanently unless action is taken by the companies to leave them with the same net effect.
But it would be a mistake for many, if not most companies, to follow Rentokil's example.
In many cases they already pay out too much in dividends, money which would be better used for investment or at least retained in the business for some useful purpose.
But institutions could compensate for their loss of income by taking a more active role to ensure better performance from the management, which would at least give them the chance of a greater capital gain, so that their total return is unaffected.
US setback takes big bite of United Biscuits profits
By Gordon Milne
SHAREHOLDERS in United Biscuits learned of a dividend standstill yesterday after crumbling fortunes at the group's US operations hammered profits.
Strong performances by most parts of the food conglomerate were largely cancelled out by a slump at the US subsidiary, Keebler, according to Sir Robert Clarke, the chairman.
‘Despite the toughest trading conditions for many years, most of our businesses improved on last year's profits.’
‘Our continental European operations have again delivered particularly strong profit growth,’ he said, adding that current trading in all divisions had begun well.
But Keebler, the troubled biscuits and snack maker, which accounts for about a third of UB sales, has been caught short by price competition in a recession-stricken US market.
Its profits plunged 60 per cent to £31 million, though Sir Robert said remedial measures were now in place.
Brian Chadbourne, who was appointed in 1992 to refocus the division, has so far closed an underused bakery in California and bought Bake-Line, giving Keebler entry into the expanding own-label cookie market.
Eric Nicoli, group chief executive, said yesterday that Keebler would recover this year — though not all the way in one go.
Elsewhere, there were some crumbs of comfort.
McVitie's, UB's European biscuit business, increased sales by 5 per cent to £831 million and operating profits by the same percentage to £111.8 million.
KP Foods, the savoury snack business, lifted sales 5 per cent to £530 million and operating profits 3 per cent to £44.8 million.
Last month, UB expanded in upmarket snacks with the acquisition of Derwent Valley, makers of the Phileas Fogg range.
Ross Young, the frozen-foods business, put 4 per cent on operating profits at £28.5 million after extensive reorganisation.
Terry's, sold earlier this month to Kraft for £220 million, saw operating profits fall 6 per cent to £13.4 million.
UB's shares rose 11p to 398p on the figures and bid speculation.
Coats Viyella delights City with rise in total
By Magnus Grimond
STERLING'S collapse is prompting leading UK retail stores to forsake foreign suppliers and look again at sourcing in the UK, the Coats Viyella textile giant claimed yesterday.
Its chief executive, Neville Bain, said he is seeing many more inquiries from retailers currently buying from Far Eastern producers, while some continental suppliers which had been undercutting British producers are being forced to increase prices.
There was ‘significant potential’ for import substitution, he said.
Coats had ‘a unique competitive advantage’, as its ‘quick-response’ UK clothes-manufacturing facilities were now 20 per cent more competitive.
But he warned that buyers' foreign-exchange hedging operations meant that it would be the fourth quarter of 1992 before the full impact came through in orders and deliveries.
Mr Bain was speaking as Coats delighted the market with a near-13 per cent jump in annual pre-tax profits to £109 million and an unexpected rise in the final dividend from 4p to 4.25p, lifting the total from 7p to 7.25p.
Earnings per share edged ahead from 10p to 10.2p, and the shares gained 11p to 245p.
The figures were complicated by the application of the new accounting standards, FRS3 and FRED3.
The main effect was to reclassify Coats' £98 million Euroconvertible preference issue as debt, which knocked profits by £12.9 million and bumped up gearing by 20.4 per cent to 53.5 per cent.
UK profits soared 60 per cent to £60 million as the loss-making shirt and fabrics businesses were turned around.
There was also a full year's Tootal contribution.
North America jumped 27 per cent to £41.3 million, but Coats's Achilles' heel continues to be Brazil, which plunged into losses of £15.7 million, after profits of £1.5 million in 1991.
Bill Drummond, the man brought in to sort out Coats's clothing side two years ago, has been sent out to restore Brazil to profits in 1993.
Already 2,000 people have been axed, but it is a tall order.
THIS IS FOR PAGE 18 PIC ALAN RICHARDSON
£125m closure costs knock all froth off Guinness's figures
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
TONY Greener, who took over as chairman of Guinness last year, has presided over the first fall in its annual profits for more than a decade, reflecting the effects of the recession on sales and margins and the high marketing spending necessary to support the group's premium brands.
Whisky sales volumes were virtually unchanged and beer volumes fell slightly, though market shares increased.
Prices kept ahead of inflation, and exchange-rate changes were beneficial, but trading costs rose by 9 per cent.
Trading profits edged up 3 per cent in both distilling and brewing, but the contribution from LVMH fell 18 per cent to £101 million, and interest costs rose by 26 per cent to £204 million.
After deducting exceptional costs of £125 million to cover the restructuring of the Spanish beer and Scottish whisky businesses, pre-tax profits fell 12 per cent to £795 million, towards the bottom end of market expectations, and the shares eased 17p to 468p.
Spirits contributed trading profits of £769 million, before deducting reorganisation costs of £48 million, while brewing made £252 million before deducting £77 million worth of costs at Cruzcampo.
Spirits sales suffered from destocking in Japan, where the legendary expense-account drinking has been severely affected by the recession.
Sales and profits increased in North America and Europe, but the UK market suffered in line with the industry as a whole.
Sales of Guinness fell slightly in a national market which shrank by up to 5 per cent.
Irish sales were strong, but the Spanish beer market was hard hit by inflation and a drop in tourist traffic.
Earnings per share fell 11 per cent to 27.8p, but a final dividend of 8.5p lifts the total by 10 per cent to 11.85p.
Borrowing rose 13 per cent last year to £2,029 million, reflecting the cost of acquisitions and the exchange-rate effects on foreign currency borrowings.
Gearing rose from 50 per cent to 56 per cent, while dividend cover fell from 3.1 to 2.8.
Capital expenditure rose to £200 million last year and will be higher still in 1993.
Spending plans include a £200 million programme to improve productivity and quality in production and packaging, split equally between Spain and Scotland.
Oil well costs set to jump
By Frank Frazer
RIG owners are expected to be the main losers from oil tax changes announced in the Budget, according to a study issued yesterday by the Edinburgh energy consultants, Wood Mackenzie.
The firm estimated that ending of the petroleum revenue tax concession on drilling costs would raise the effective cost of new wells from 17p to 67p in the pound after tax allowances.
It pointed out that drilling levels were already falling and predicted this would mean a further considerable reduction.
WoodMac also forecast a switch in exploration funds to other countries as a result of the removal of an incentive to re-invest profits from oilfields which was introduced in 1983.
‘Indeed, there is an increasing number of countries competing for the limited funds available for re-investment and will be glad to welcome new entrants.
For the UK-orientated drilling contractors, the proposals introduced in the Budget must be a great disappointment,’
But other changes in the tax system should mean huge gains for companies with shares in the giant Brent and Forties oilfields, the UK's two largest finds which have been in production since the 1970s.
Calculations by the company show that cash flow from the Forties field over the next five years is expected to rise from £863 million to £1.3 million.
Over the same period, cash flow from Brent will rise from £571 million to £1.2 billion.
There will also be an increase from £355 million to £489 million in cash flow from the UK's largest onshore oilfield at Wytch Farm in Dorset.
Milk board withdraws bid
By Fordyce Maxwell, Agricultural Editor
THE SCOTTISH Milk Marketing Board has bowed to pressure and withdrawn its bid for the Co-op's Scottish milk business.
Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, announced yesterday that he had accepted a statutory undertaking from the SMMB to that effect.
Mr Heseltine had accepted the Monopolies and Mergers Commission recommendation that the merger should not be allowed, because it would give the board more than a 50 per cent share of the market.
Through the Office of Fair Trading he has now accepted the board's undertaking.
The MMC report also criticised SMMB plans to retain its commercial business, Scottish Pride, when it changes from statutory monopoly to voluntary co-op for dairy farmers from next April.
That criticism was accepted by Ian Lang, Scottish Secretary, and Sir Hector Monro, Scottish minister of agriculture, who asked the board to rethink.
It has now accepted that it cannot keep Scottish Pride as an integral part of its business.
Alternative plans are being considered which may have been discussed unofficially with the Scottish Office and the Office of Fair Trading to find out if they are acceptable.
The next meeting of the board's directors is on 1 April, exactly one year before the change from statutory to voluntary is due to take place.
After it, a new plan for its future may be presented officially to the Scottish Office.
Meantime, action has already been taken to cut costs and staff at Scottish Pride.
Several managers have gone in the past ten days, including Ken Marr, marketing director, Charles Cottam, sales director and Bill Walker, marketing.
In Brussels, European Community farm ministers have agreed to leave the milk production quotas of most member states unchanged for the next 12 months pending a review next month.
The review was accepted as a compromise to break the deadlock over a linked EC proposal to cut butter support prices by five per cent.
Ministers will also have another look at planned quota increases for Italy and Greece and demands to restore the 4.5 per cent of the milk quota which was suspended in 1987.
‘A decision was needed today to avoid a legal vacuum when quotas expire at the end of the month,’ an EC spokesman said.
A one per cent cut in milk quotas from 1992's 102 million tonnes, agreed under last year's farm policy reforms, was postponed because of an easing of market surpluses, he added.
Germany, supported by France and four other member states, opposed plans to cut butter prices to boost demand.
Italy and Greece, on the other hand, were unhappy about their milk quota increases of 900,000 tonnes and 100,000 respectively being delayed until they have satisfied the commission that all its conditions have been met.
The Italian farm minister, Giovanni Fontana, said Italy had done everything it had been asked to do but the commission still had some technical questions.
The commission and other member states want to be certain Italian farmers will respect the new quotas after overproducing for years.
A 500,000-tonne quota increase for Spain has been cleared.
The commission strongly resisted French, Irish and Luxembourg demands to restore the suspended milk quota for dairy farmers in mountain areas.
‘Neither the milk market nor the budget can take it,’ the EC farm commissioner, Rene Steichen, was quoted as telling ministers.
Black Wednesday's surprise harvest
By Robert Forster
THE complexities of the international money market are occupying the minds of Scottish farmers.
Lingering public images of them as men with heathery legs have been swept aside now that they are forced to protect their livelihoods by keeping in touch with the movement of sterling against the franc — or even the  deutschmark against the lira.
For them there is no such thing as Black Wednesday.
When the pound slipped through the fingers of the ERM last September and plunged in value against important trading currencies, it became Golden Wednesday instead.
The shift in exchange rates not only opened lively red meat and grain markets in Italy, Spain and France.
It also increased their support payments, which are paid through an infernally complex Euro-mechanism which ties in the notorious European Currency Unit (ecu) with the equally notorious (agricultural) green rate.
Anyone who claims to understand those deserves an award.
But the net effect was to undo the threat that the reformed CAP would haul down production safety-nets and bathe developing export markets in a warm glow instead.
Aberdeenshire grain farmers who last autumn stiffened themselves to trade wheat against the back stop of just £95 a tonne for product sold to the EC Commission for intervention, are now looking at at an ex-farm price of £140 a tonne.
Good quality barley is making £151 a tonne so, not unnaturally, both farmers and merchants are rubbing their hands.
And cattle and sheep farmers from Dumfriesshire to Sutherland have to pinch themselves because all types of slaughter stock, even retired breeding animals, are attracting record prices.
Only pig and poultry farmers who are being forced to feed large quantities of high priced grain are losing out.
Run-down old cows have gained a third in value because their meat is popular in France — and still cheap because sterling is 20 per cent weaker against the franc.
Top-quality Scotch beef is replacing more expensive German beef in Italy and the price for the best and heaviest home-killed bullocks has been forced up to £1,000 a head — which goes some way to explaining why fresh meat is suddenly so much dearer in shops.
But while they are determined to make hay while the sun shines, farmers are still watching the monetary horizons for the clouds of revaluation and are ready to scamper for figurative shelter if the rains of realignment fall.
Their problem is two- pronged and affects both markets and subsidies.
Old cows, for example, could be stripped of £100-£120 of their value if the pound suddenly recovered against the franc.
And the support price for all commodities including wheat, which is already poised to reduce by 29 per cent over the next three years under CAP reform, could plunge if the value of sterling suddenly improved.
Just in case there is any complacency, farmers are also being bombarded with warnings.
They are being told it is dangerous to believe the sterling windfall can last forever.
The Ministry of Agriculture has said that sooner or later the pound will get an easier ride on the currency markets and that cereal farmers, who since Black Wednesday have almost doubled their projected income, must guard against being caught by sudden changes.
As a result, grain farmers, who already include the latest reports form the agricultural futures markets in their morning reading, are learning to sniff the financial air through the latest exchange rate columns and business page comment.
They are clearly determined not to be beguiled and are prepared to trade quickly at the first sign that sterling's recent advantage is beginning to dissipate — although they are also finding that the money market is an ants' nest where one man's guess is as good as another.
Livestock farmers are more relaxed.
Their markets are also being fuelled by a series of natural and artificial supply shortages.
For instance, last year's lamb supplies are running out, most of this year's have still to be born, and French demand is on fire.
Even if the pound soars, they still have a trade and most other markets are expected to maintain their recent impetus until June-July.
At the bottom of it all, there is a feeling that sterling will never regain all the ground it has lost since autumn.
Farmers and agricultural traders believe it may eventually trade at 2.55, even 2.6, against the  deutschmark and perhaps even 8.8-9.0 against the franc.
That still leaves them with a significant advantage.
Increase in cost of chemicals forecast
SCOTTISH cereal farmers should be prepared for an increase in their growing costs, particularly for chemicals and to a lesser extent for fertilisers, as a result of successive devaluations of sterling since the United Kingdom's departure from the exchange rate mechanism.
Speaking in Perth yesterday at a press briefing on possible future strategies for the arable sector following the new set- aside regulations, a chemical manufacturer, Peter Botham of WBC Technology, gave warning that the increases which farmers have enjoyed in recent months in grain values were not without a cost.
Mr Botham explained his reasoning, saying: ‘Farmers have enjoyed exaggerated returns in recent months but they should remember that we as a country have to import many of our basic raw materials and as the pound has fallen costs have risen on a pro rata basis.’
As far as the agro-chemical industry is concerned, Mr Botham added: ‘For us costs have gone up by 15-18 per cent and that in turn means that farmers will be paying 8-12 per cent more — and that's way above the rate of inflation.’
However Mr Botham discounted the idea that with 15 per cent of arable land now in set aside, farmers were cutting back on their inputs to a parallel degree.
‘They are going for maximum output from this reduced acreage and that in turn means that they have to use all the most cost-effective technology — including chemicals as and when required.’
The difference that is becoming increasingly clear, said Mr Botham, is that farmers are taking a thoroughly professional attitude and concentrating on precise timing of every application.
Another new technique which, according to Mr Botham, was likely to become more popular is tissue testing of plant material.
He said: ‘By testing an apparently healthy plant and applying the suitable remedies before symptoms of crop disease actually appear, the farmer can be well into pocket.’
From the farmers' viewpoint, set aside will have many implications.
One which worried an Aberdeenshire farmer, John French, of New Keig, Alford, was the dependence on subsidies and support.
‘Fifty per cent of my gross margin for cereals will come from area compensatory payments and set aside.’
Mr French conceded that that could in time be a major issue with taxpayers but he thought that they would be willing to accept the principle provided the countryside was well looked after.
Mr French was also convinced that set aside will not result in a 15 per cent cut in cereal production this year.
He commented: ‘Most farmers will be doing what I am doing — taking their worst land out of production to start with.
It will be a year or two before set aside begins to bite but even then 15 per cent may not be enough to achieve the aims of the CAP reforms.’
New motoring tax regime under consideration
FEW motorists should have been surprised by the rise in fuel duties and road fund licence in Tuesday's Budget, writes Jim Dunn.
The only real shock was the Chancellor's decision to maintain the price differential of around 20p per gallon in favour of unleaded petrol over leaded four-star.
That is being interpreted as proof of the Treasury's intention to play the environmental card to milk the motorist and road user in the immediate future.
With sales of unleaded now well ahead of those of leaded and set to surge even higher after the Budget, the survival of relatively cheap unleaded petrol is assured only as long as the Autumn Statement which from this year replaces the traditional spring Budget.
If the furore surrounding the proposed introduction of value added tax on domestic heating bills is sufficient to force a U-turn, then the 20p per gallon tax on unleaded, the best-selling fuel in the land, is an obvious alternative revenue earner.
Increased fuel duties are, however, believed to be merely the overture to the new motoring tax regime under consideration at the Treasury, where officials have already been charged with finding a solution to a particularly difficult problem.
While fuel duties are by far the most attractive tax and are virtually impossible to avoid, they fail to discriminate between casual users, such as city centre dwellers, and essential users, such as country dwellers who have no alternative means of transport.
That is why the road fund licence, which taxes ownership rather than use, has been increased more rapidly after a period of stagnation.
Yet if the cost of the road fund licence soared to a level sufficient to become a significant tax on ownership, it would hit low-paid country dwellers hardest and hurt those whom it was supposed to help.
One potential solution under consideration, which would discriminate positively in favour of rural motorists, would be to link the road fund charges to ownership of a parking space — similar to the system prevailing in major Japanese cities today.
Rebates from the standard road fund licence would favour country dwellers, who generally have abundant parking, while the full rate would penalise those in larger cities who do not have off-street parking.
Opponents of the parking tax argue that it would be too complex to enforce and police.
Supporters argue that it would involve no more than one extra piece of paper being produced alongside insurance and roadworthiness certificates, when the road fund licence is bought — while there remains the more radical possibility of issuing the number plate annually consequent on the tax being paid.
Other possibilities include the levying of road fund licence charges according to postcodes.
A little classic in the making
By Jim Dunn, Motoring Correspondent
HAD Ford not already reserved the name for its forthcoming off-road leisure vehicle, Volkswagen might well have called its sporting flagship the Maverick rather than the Corrado — for it is, indeed, a car that goes against so many accepted practices.
A first glance at the Corrado suggests that the stubby, two-plus-very-small-two coupe is one of the least practical cars on the market, particularly as the compact dimensions also limit luggage accommodation to little more than a week's family shopping.
In VR6 form as tested, it is also a particularly expensive little coupe, virtually double the price of the old Honda CRX which pioneered then dominated a limited niche market until Honda turned it into a two-seater ugly duckling.
You can, for substantially less money, buy bigger, flashier coupes which not only better the VW on interior and luggage accommodation but, thanks to more powerful engines, easily outperform it in acceleration and top speed and, marginally, in fuel economy.
Compared with the Rover 220 Turbo Coupe or even the BMW 325 coupe, the VW just does not make any sense at all— at least on paper.
On the road, however, in regular use, the Corrado VR6 is the one that stands out in the driver's mind as the quickest, most comfortable, most civilised and most user-friendly of all.
That is due mainly to the unique construction of the six-cylinder engine which, thanks to modern metallurgy, is cast as a sort of staggered, in-line six which allows the compact dimensions of a V6 with the unbeatable smoothness of a straight six.
In spite of the 190bhp power output capable of taking the little car from standstill to 60mph in under seven seconds and on to double the UK speed limit, it is that smoothness and flexibility that impress rather than the muscle.
Careful attention to engine mounting and sound insulation means that the large engine sounds almost as though it belongs to the car in front — a remote burbling noise that seems to have travelled a long way before it reaches the driver's ear.
That quality is retained throughout a rev range that goes up to and beyond 6500rpm so that even when the electronic engine speed limiter cuts in, the VR6 sounds subdued and untroubled.
Most owners, however, will keep the engine speed between 2000rpm and 4500rpm where there is sufficient torque to outperform any remaining GTi without having to put up with the din from a high-revving multi-valve power GTi unit.
The smoothness and evenness of the big engine's power delivery helps the car's handling and cornering ability as well and there is never any sign of wheelspin or torque steer under acceleration, which is endemic with powerful, front-wheel-drive machinery.
Force a squeal from the Corrado's front tyres, even under brisk acceleration, and it is the driver's technique that is at fault and not the chassis.
Though the seats are typically German in their firmness, the suspension is slightly softer than expected so that the ride, even when pushing on over bad surfaces, is never anything other than smooth.
Added to straightforward handling which gives just a hint of oversteer when the throttle is lifted on the entrance to a corner, the result is a car that can accomplish long distances over give-and-take roads without ever tiring the driver.
The standard equipment includes anti-lock brakes, electric windows, mirrors and sunroof as well as a good sound system to help justify the price of just under £21,000 on the road.
There is also a speed-sensitive rear spoiler which  automatically raises itself at higher speeds, though most owners will find the built-in anti-theft alarm and immobiliser much more practical for use in the UK.
Such are the smooth, easy driving qualities of the big-engined Corrado (the same engine is also available in the VW Golf and Vento saloons) that I suspect that this is the sort of car that drivers will appreciate when they own it, be sorry when they sell it, and describe it for years as the finest car they ever owned.
The VW Corrado VR6: A real driver's car
The most comprehensive legal aid system in the world
I refer to the article by Sir Nicholas Fairbairn (‘The wronged losing the right to redress,’ 4 March) concerning the Government's proposals to reduce the financial eligibility limits for legal aid.
He quotes four ‘typical’ examples of individuals whose right to redress their wrongs will become ‘prohibitively expensive’as a result of the changes in financial eligibility.
In the examples given, it needs to be said that all the people would qualify for advice and assistance and for full civil legal aid after 1 April, on the information given.
In the first and fourth examples, the individuals would have a contribution to advice and assistance, after 1 April, of £7.
Their contribution for civil legal aid would depend on their circumstances, of which insufficient detail is given.
Presumably they all have accommodation costs, for example, and if these amount to a little over £26 a week (including council tax), then the first and fourth examples would qualify for civil legal aid without payment of any contribution.
The little insert in the middle of the article, which I take it is not down to Sir Nicholas, is even more misleading because it suggests that the income eligibility limit on civil cases would be reduced from £3,060 to £2,293.
These are actually contribution thresholds below which people are entitled to free legal aid.
The income eligibility limit (above which a person does not qualify for legal aid) in fact remains unchanged at £6,800 for a non-reparation case and £7,500 for a reparation case.
The point also needs to be made that these figures do not relate to gross income or net income in the sense that any member of the public would normally understand it.
These are the figures of disposable income which is arrived at after deduction of the various allowances which can be made against income to assess whether someone is financially eligible.
It is not a calculation which any member of the public should attempt by himself or herself and it should certainly not tend to discourage people from seeking legal advice on problems when they need it.
This country has the most comprehensive system of legal aid in the world and spends more on it per head of population than any other country.
It would be a great pity if anyone was discouraged from taking advantage of it as a result of misinformation, however well intended it may have been.
Insurers protest too much on disclosure
FACED with what can best be described as a public relations crisis, the Association of British Insurers' vigorous over-reaction to Thursday's conclusion by the Office of Fair Trading that key rules governing the sale of life products are anti-competitive is, to put it mildly, stupid.
But two of the recommendations made by Sir Bryan Carsberg, the director general of the Office of Fair Trading, cast serious doubt on whether the OFT actually grasps the reality of this complex area.
The first is Sir Bryan's proposal to stimulate competition by allowing life assurers to offer similar products at different prices through their tied outlets.
Currently, the rules require a life office's products to be offered at the same price through all its tied outlets.
The theory behind Sir Bryan's thinking is that the more efficient tied agents — such as the building societies — will offer the products to consumers at lower prices than smaller and less efficient tied agents.
But will this happen in practice?
Under the present regime, where differential pricing is forbidden, big tied agents like the Halifax, Nationwide and Leeds Permanent — taking advantage of the fact that they are powerful distribution channels with ‘hot client bases’— have pushed up the commissions they receive from the life offices to which they are tied to huge levels.
Indeed, faced with mounting bad mortgage debts and reduced margins caused by low interest rates, insurance commissions are becoming ever more important to building society balance sheets.
In that context, can anyone believe that the introduction of differential pricing will mean they will suddenly push commissions down again?
The second point at issue is that while Sir Bryan wants independent financial advisers to disclose their commissions in hard-cash terms at the point of sale, he rejects the case for similar hard disclosure by tied agents because ‘the costs would probably outweigh the usefulness’.
One wonders if Sir Bryan has read the report by his counterpart organisation in Australia, the Trade Practices Commission.
Australia has a similar system of tied agents and independent advisers, and the TPC has no doubt about the usefulness to the consumer of universal remuneration disclosure.
It has given the life industry three years to develop a satisfactory method of remuneration disclosure.
If it does not, the TPC will make its own recommendations.
Where there's a will, there's a way.
190 jobs at risk as Blantyre firm calls in receivers
By John Hatfield
MORE than 190 jobs were put at risk yesterday when a Blantyre-based civil engineering company, RJ Levack, called in the receivers on the instructions of Clydesdale Bank.
According to the joint receiver, Ian Murdoch, of KPMG Peat Marwick, Levack, which made pre-tax profits of £240,000 on turnover of £22 million in 1991, appears to have been undercapitalised.
This meant that it was unable to cope with delays in contract payments, resulting in a cash-flow crisis.
But Mr Murdoch stressed that Levack's troubles did not stem from the recent collapse of Lilley group; it had only low exposure to subcontracting.
Levack had been involved in several big contracts, including the Johnstone by-pass, a joint venture on the M74 with Edmund Nuttall and reconstruction of Rothesay Pier, all of which are now completed.
It was also involved in two contracts worth £1 million each for treatment of contaminated land on the sites of former steelworks, though this work did not cover Ravenscraig or Gartcosh.
Despite Levack's recently winning contracts totalling more than £6 million for Marks & Spencer's Maybury site, in Edinburgh, and the Bankhead Interchange, in Fife, the recession was cutting back new business.
There had been no big order to replace the M74 work.
While RJ Levack is in receivership, the holding company, Levack International — owned by John Levack and his wife, Margaret — which owns 80 per cent of RJ Levack, is still solvent, for the time being.
The balance of the shares in RJ Levack is held by a director, John Myles.
Given that the preferred creditors, such as PAYE and VAT, have substantial claims on the assets, the receivers were not optimistic that unsecured creditors would see any of their money back.
Mr Murdoch said it was too early to say whether the firm could be sold on as a going concern; much depended on negotiating settlements on contracts.
Comeback staged by Cairn Energy
By Frank Frazer
CAIRN ENERGY, the Edinburgh oil and gas exploration and production company, achieved a big turnround last year by returning to profits, after suffering a huge loss of £27.6 million in 1991, caused by exceptional write-downs.
It made £818,000 before tax in 1992 on turnover which rose from £12.3 million to £13 million.
Cairn's performance was helped by US natural gas prices rising from an average of $1.61 to $1.84 per thousand cubic feet over the year.
It was also boosted by the pound's strengthening against the dollar.
Norman Lessels, Cairn's chairman, said a combination of the two factors meant that the sterling value of US gas spot sales was about double that of a year ago.
Cairn was now expecting to increase revenues from US gas production through environmental pressures and the impact of the new administration's policies favouring the fuel.
Trends in the US market could have a major bearing on Cairn's prospects because of its share in the East Cameron discovery, in the Gulf of Mexico.
The field is expected to go into production in the third quarter of 1994, and to increase Cairn's total output from the equivalent of 4,500 to 7,500 barrels per day of oil.
There is no annual dividend; there never has been.
The shares were unchanged at 49p yesterday.
Markets shrug off rise in inflation
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE great sales-price wars which sent inflation down to its lowest level in a quarter of a century during January came to an end in February.
There are also early signs that the increased cost of imports resulting from the devaluation of sterling last September is beginning to work through to the shops.
The cost of living, which fell almost 1 per cent in January, rose by 0.7 per cent in February and the annual rate of inflation edged up from 1.7 per cent in January to 1.8 per cent in the year to February.
The underlying rate of inflation, excluding mortgage interest payments, rose from 3.2 per cent in January to 3.4 per cent in February.
The City was slightly disappointed by the figures, and gilts lost ground, but share prices rebounded from early falls and the FT-SE 100-Share Index closed near its best of the day, up 20.4 points at 2,900.1, with 824 million shares traded.
The pound rose almost 2 cents to $1.4945, but fell half a pfennig to Dm2.4350.
Seasonal food prices went up by 2.1 per cent in February, and average prices of clothing and footwear rose by 1.8 per cent, after falling 4.6 per cent in January.
Motoring costs and non-seasonal food rose by 0.9 per cent, while household goods gained 0.7 per cent .
The headline rate should fall again next month, when the latest cuts in mortgage interest rates alone should cut inflation by 0.3 per cent, equal to the whole of the increase in the retail prices index last March, but the underlying rate could go higher.
The Budget increases in excise duties will add just over 0.5 per cent to the cost of living in April, a touch more than last year's effort, but this could be offset by the switch from poll tax to council tax.
The real impact of the Budget will, however, take effect next year.
Over-indexing petrol duties could add a quarter per cent a year, the switch of mortgage interest tax relief from 25p to 20p in the pound will add 0.25 per cent to inflation, other things being equal, and the first stage of value added tax on domestic heating will add 0.37 per cent to the cost of living in April 1994, and another 0.44 per cent in 1995.
The latest inflation figures are based on new weights which reflect changes both in the cost of different items and in the volume of demand.
The importance of housing costs in the retail price index has been scaled down from 172 per mille to 164, motoring costs from 143 to 136 per mille, and food from 152 to 144 per mille.
Alcohol has edged down from 80 to 78 per mille, but leisure services have risen from 32 per mille to 62, entirely as a result of the inclusion for the first time of foreign holidays, which are now deemed to account for 30 per mille (3 per cent) of the cost of living.
Warning on levy as Anglia TV's profits soar
By Magnus Grimond
ANGLIA Television, the Norwich-based independent TV contractor, yesterday unveiled a big rebound in profits for last year, but warned that the recent ITV franchise shake-up would cut profits for 1993.
The new franchise system, which will see Anglia's Exchequer levy soar from last year's £2.42 million to £17.8 million, plus a difficult trading environment, would ‘result in lower profits in the current year’, it said.
But, with signs of an economic upturn and a strong balance sheet, Anglia faced the future confidently.
Every £1 in extra revenue brought in 93p at the bottom line, said the board, with the new 7 per cent Government levy on sales the only deduction.
Anglia saw pre-tax profits leap to £14.5 million in 1992, from £8.38 million in the previous 14-month period.
The restatement of the 1991 figures in accordance with the new FRS3 accounting standard cut prior-year profits by just £348,000.
This was despite the inclusion above the line of the £15.9 million profit on the sale of a stake in First Leisure Corporation and a £13.3 million write-down of the investment in BSkyB.
Earnings per share jumped from 15.04p to 21.59p.
Anglia is holding its dividend total at 9.26p, and the shares added 9p to 258p.
The company revealed that its £10 million investment in shares in Village Roadshow, an Australian-quoted leisure group, is now worth around £30 million.
The 17.5 per cent stake represents roughly a quarter of Anglia's market capitalisation, but David McCall, chief executive, said he believed ‘the share price has a long way to go yet’.
Coal sale on as Hanson and Costain make up
HANSON, the Anglo-American tobacco to jacuzzis conglomerate, is going ahead with its $200 million (£134 million) acquisition of Australian coal assets from the Costain construction group after patching up its dispute over the sale, writes Magnus Grimond.
After an agreement between the two sides, signed yesterday, Costain has dropped its appeal against an injunction granted recently to Hanson's Peabody coal-mining subsidiary which prevented the assets being sold to another bidder.
The sale was first mooted last October, but Hanson took out the injunction after Costain later announced it was concluding a sale with Altus, a venture-capital subsidiary of Credit Lyonnais, the French bank.
The deal marks the first venture by Peabody, already the biggest US coal-mining company, into the Pacific Rim.
A spokesman said yesterday: ‘This is an important start in the Pacific Rim, which might or might not lead to further opportunities.’
The acquisition gives Peabody an estimated 663 million tonnes of low-sulphur coal in the Hunter River Valley, in New South Wales, along with several long-term sales contracts to Pacific customers.
As well as the $200 million consideration, Peabody will pay an adjustment — estimated at $34 million — for final net assets and take on borrowings of about $65 million.
Miller to construct £6m retail park
By Gordon Milne
MILLER Developments is to transform the builders' yard next to its Edinburgh head office into a retail warehouse park.
The £6 million scheme, which is expected to create 150 jobs with 85 more during construction, will provide DIY, electrical and furniture shopping facilities for the north-west of the city.
Around six warehouse units are envisaged.
Discussions are at an advanced stage with a number of nationally-known retailers, and one retail DIY outlet has already confirmed that it will be renting a unit.
The 11-acre redevelopment means the relocation of around 100 Miller staff from the joinery factory, vehicle repairs depot and open storage facilities.
Miller Group HQ will remain at neighbouring South Groathill Avenue.
A spokeswoman said yesterday that the exact timescales depended on finding suitable alternative properties for the current occupiers of the builders' yard, but the development is expected to be open for trading by the summer of next year.
The plans were prompted by the decision of Sainsbury, the supermarket company, to build a 75,000 sq ft food store on an adjacent site in the city's Craigleith area.
The Miller spokeswoman confirmed that Sainsbury had been aware of the plans, and that as it was a non-retail development, there would be no conflict of interest.
There had been a full programme of consultation with residents of the surrounding area, she added.
Debt ruling will hit ScottishPower
By Gordon Milne
SCOTTISHPOWER'S current year profits will be dented by more than £10 million after a decision by the accountancy profession's regulatory body.
A ruling yesterday by the Accounting Standards Board means any premium or discount when a company repurchases its own debt must be be written off in the same year it is incurred.
Up to now, ScottishPower has adopted another treatment — deferring the difference on repurchase and amortising it against the finance cost of the term of the original borrowing.
Until yesterday, this was acceptable.
Though the ruling need not be implemented until accounting years ending on or after 22 June, ScottishPower has chosen to adopt the published ruling immediately — causing a net pre-tax charge in the year to March 1993 of £10.4 million.
This is because ScottishPower repurchased £142 million of government debt last November, in the light of falling interest rates.
Management decided heavy costs could be saved by using cash to replace long-term, debt-bearing interest at an annual rate of 11.856 per cent.
If the base rate was to remain at 6 per cent, there would be an annual interest benefit of more than £5 million per annum .
This year, however, the the net charge will be £10.4 million.
Greenside development prospects improve
THE prospect of a big office development opposite the St James Centre, in Edinburgh, improved yesterday with the news that the huge car park at Greenside Place is to be extended and completed, writes Peter Woodifield.
Mount Charlotte Investments, the hotels group, has awarded a £5 million contract to Tarmac Construction to carry out the work after buying the site's freehold from Edinburgh District Council for ‘a few million pounds’.
Work will start within the next week or so.
Once completed, the car park will have 880 spaces, compared with under 700 now, while the next stage in the proposed bridge link from the site to the St James Centre will also go ahead.
It is currently used by 2,500 cars a day.
Mount Charlotte already has detailed planning consent for 230,000 sq ft of offices and a 270-bedroom hotel, but Robert Peel, group chief executive, said it might apply for planning consent to create one big office development of 300,000 or 400,000 sq ft.
That would be big enough to relocate the Scottish Office from New St Andrew's House, or for a headquarters for an international company, he said.
It could also be built in 18 months once the car park work was complete.
‘We have invested a lot of money in Greenside Place, and we are quite prepared to put something up competitively in the shortest possible time,’ Mr Peel said.
Rumours of £1bn Lloyd's issue
THERE was speculation yesterday that the Lloyd's of London insurance market is considering making a jumbo £1 billion bond issue to plug a yawning gap in its finances after recent huge losses.
A report in the London Evening Standard stated that the chairman, David Rowland, and the chief executive, Peter Middleton, are ‘actively considering’ tapping international capital markets to help bail out financially strapped ‘names’, the individuals whose capital supports the market.
Lloyd's has seen its capital base contract sharply as Names have deserted the market in droves after disastrous losses.
The deficit for the 1990 underwriting year is expected to soar to £2.4 billion, after £2 billion of losses were suffered in 1989.
But a £1 billion Eurobond would be the biggest the market has ever had to digest and capital markets experts were yesterday sceptical about how easy it would be for Lloyd's to make such an issue without hefty costs.
Dealers thought it might need a substantial premium.
Rathbone pays out early
RATHBONE Brothers, the quoted private banking and investment management group, will next week declare a second interim dividend to be paid in lieu of its final dividend for the year ended 31 December in order to avoid the adverse impact on shareholders of Budget changes to the advance corporation tax regime, writes Ian Harper.
Its major shareholders include British Coal Pension Funds, with a 7.8 per cent stake and British Steel Pension Funds, with a 4.3 per cent holding.
Rathbone had intended to announce its results and declare a final dividend on 5 April — the day the ACT changes come into force.
Rathbone's marketing director, Mike Bryant, said the cost to the company is  negligible and he urged other companies who are due to pay dividends in the next three months to declare their dividends before 5 April.
Married couple's allowance on the rocks
ONE allowance which looks almost certain to disappear altogether at some point in the not-too-distant future, judging from its treatment in the Budget, is the married couple's allowance, or MCA.
Currently, the MCA is like any other tax allowance and allows a taxpayer to reduce his or her liability at his or her highest rate of tax.
And because it can be shifted from one spouse to the other, either in whole or in part, it is a valuable tax-avoiding tool.
For example, the current allowance of £1,720 for someone aged under 65 reduces their tax bill by £688 (40 per cent of £1,720) if they are a higher rate taxpayer, but by only half that amount (£344, or 20 per cent of £1,720) if they are a lower rate taxpayer.
However, in his Budget speech, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that with effect from 6 April, 1994, the tax relief allowed on the MCA will be restricted to the lower rate of 20 per cent— meaning that the maximum by which tax bills can be reduced will be £344 — irrespective of the taxpayer's marginal rate of income tax.
The restriction will also apply to related allowances — the additional personal allowance (which goes mainly to single parents); the widow's bereavement allowance (which is paid to a widow in the year of her husband's death and in the following year); and the relief for maintenance payments to a divorced or separated spouse.
If the widening of the 20 per cent lower income tax band to £3,000 in 1993/94 is taken into account (which will be worth a further £25 a year to all basic and higher rate taxpayers), then the net effect of this and the change in the MCA on a married man aged under 65 who pays tax at the basic rate of 25 per cent will be an increase in tax of £1.17 a week or about £61 a year.
But for the higher rate taxpayer aged under 65, there will be an increased tax charge of £6.13 a week or about £319.
Taxpayers with an annual income of £6,500 or less will not be affected by the changes.
People aged 65 and over will also be covered by the restriction of the MCA to the 20 per cent tax rate.
However, they will receive an additional £200 increment on their allowance so that the  maximum loss to a basic rate taxpayer aged 65 and over will be no greater than the loss to a  basic rate taxpayer — £61 a year — aged under 65.
Ian Harper
Pension funds face shortfall An increase in employers' contributions cannot be discounted, says DEBBIE HARRISON
THE cut in the tax credit on dividend interests from 25 per cent to 20 per cent announced in the Budget could have significant implications for the future value of occupational pension funds.
In some cases, this may trigger an increase in contributions from employers and possibly from employees.
Occupational pension funds are valued on a regular basis by the scheme actuary to make sure that their assets — current contributions and the accumulated fund — match their liabilities — the pensions actually being paid and shortly to fall due.
The actuaries of larger schemes value the fund on its stream of income or ‘discounted cash flow’ rather than on its capital value.
One of the advantages of pension funds — both company and individual — is that provided they are approved by the Inland Revenue they are exempt from paying tax on the growth of the fund.
For this reason funds can claim a tax credit on the dividends they receive on their equity investments.
These tax credits form an important element in the stream of income or discounted cash flow calculation.
In the Budget the Chancellor proposed to reduce the tax credit on dividends from 25 per cent to 20 per cent.
Nick Fitzpatrick, investment partner with the actuaries and consultants Bacon & Woodrow, said: ‘Because of the way the discounted income stream is calculated this change will impact on the whole of the fund, reducing the notional value of assets by 6.25 per cent.’
Stewart Ritchie, pensions manager at Scottish Equitable, added: ‘Where the value of the dividends is reduced and the other assumptions in the calculation are unchanged it must follow that the value of the fund's assets are reduced.’
Alex MacIntyre, a director of the actuaries The Alexander Consulting Group, pointed out: ‘It may be possible for the actuary to adjust the underlying assumptions in the fund value calculations to avoid the need for increased contributions.’
Moreover, where a pension fund is in surplus it may be able to absorb the impact of this change in dividend credits.
But while many funds accumulated a large surplus during the bull markets of the 1970s and early 1980s, the volatility of recent years combined with the general trend towards employer contribution holidays, have reduced these surpluses considerably.
In fact employer contribution holidays are still widespread.
According to the National Association of Pensions Funds (NAPF), in 1992 53 per cent of larger schemes took a complete employer contribution holiday or paid reduced contributions.
But following this change in tax credits on dividends some employer contribution holidays will have to stop, while other less well-padded schemes may be forced to invest more in secure vehicles such as bonds and gilts rather than maintain the heavy weighting towards equities typical of most funds at present.
If the change in dividend credits creates an imbalance in the fund, the actuary may suggest an increase in the contribution rate.
Whether this increase will be applied to the employer's or to the employees' contributions remains to be seen.
However, employers could find themselves in a tight corner if they attempted to increase employee contributions or reduce benefits.
For years company pension schemes have argued that a pension fund surplus rightfully belongs to the employer — hence the proliferation of contribution holidays.
Employers have justified this argument by pointing out that they are also responsible for making good any shortfall if the pension fund cannot meet its liabilities.
Perhaps the time is coming when they will have to honour that pledge.
Personal pension-holders will be similarly affected by the Budget change in that the funds in which they invest their contributions will also suffer a reduction in the value of the tax credits on dividends.
Some investment managers may compensate by making a slight switch in emphasis towards capital growth investments and away from high yielding equities.
However, Stewart Ritchie suggested that there was certainly no need to panic but instead individuals should continue to monitor their fund's growth and perhaps in the future increase contributions if there is a potential shortfall.
Individual shareholders will also be affected by the changes announced.
The chartered accountants Clark Whitehill summarised the main points as follows:
Shareholders who are not liable to tax will be paid the tax credit on dividends at the lower rate of 20 per cent.
Shareholders whose income falls within the lower rate band of 20 per cent will not be entitled to any tax credit payment as the tax credit will no longer exceed the liability.
Shareholders who are liable at the basic rate of 25 per cent will have no further tax to pay.
After 5 April 1993, the tax credit will continue to match the liability exactly, but at 20 per cent.
Shareholders who are liable at the higher rate of 40 per cent will incur additional tax payable at 5 per cent on the dividends received.
One surprise measure in the Budget was the freeze on the ‘earnings cap’ which was introduced in the 1989 Budget to restrict the amount of salary that could be used for pension contributions for high earners.
The earnings cap, originally £60,000, was supposed to increase each year in line with retail price inflation.
However, the Chancellor decided to freeze the cap for the next tax year at its current level of £75,000.
The RPI increase, had it been allowed, would have raised the cap to £77,400.
At present employees can pay up to 15 per cent of their salary to an approved pension scheme and gain from several important tax advantages.
But two groups of employees affected by the cap can only pay pension contributions or receive a pension calculated as a proportion of the capped figure no matter how high their actual salaries are.
Capped employees include those who are members of schemes set up after the 1989 Budget or who joined any final salary scheme after 1 June 1989.
Employers and pension providers expressed dismay at the freezing of the earnings cap since this means that as salaries rise, more employees will gradually be caught by the restriction.
End of mortgage tax relief nears
THE end of mortgage interest tax relief came a step closer this week when the Chancellor of the Exchequer — while retaining the existing interest relief ceiling of £30,000 — announced that from next year, the rate at which relief is given will be cut from 25 to 20 per cent.
Assuming interest rates of 8 per cent, no borrower will be worse off by more than £10 a month.
But as the tables show, if interest rates rise again to the 15.4 per cent level of three years ago, this would double to £20 a month.
At the same time, the Chancellor announced that with immediate effect the threshold for the 1 per cent stamp duty charged on houses would be lifted from £30,000 to £60,000, which will cut the cost of buying a £60,000 home by £600.
The moves received a mixed reception from the homeloan lenders.
The Halifax, the UK's largest lender, said that the changes to MIRAS relief were ‘not unexpected’, and that the increase in the stamp duty threshold: ‘Will have an immediate benefit for the influential first-time buyer market.’
The Abbey National's deputy chairman, John Bayliss, said the decrease in mortgage interest relief is unlikely to hold back the recovery in the housing market.
In Scotland, while the stamp duty change will benefit more homeowners than elsewhere because of the lower property prices, the change in tax relief will be a hindrance because mortgages tend to be lower.
According to the Halifax, the average price for houses paid by first-time buyers in Scotland is £40,592 and the average mortgage advance is £33,535.
This compares to an average UK-wide price of £44,050 and an average advance of £37,865 to first time buyers.
For all house purchases, the average Scottish price is £59,125 and the average mortgage advance is £42,303, which compares to a UK average house price of £63,150 and an average advance of £46,133.
The cut in mortgage tax relief will not, however, affect elderly people — aged over 65 — who have taken out a mortgage loan as part of a Home Income Plan in order to buy a life annuity.
Such plans are covered by separate legislation under the 1974 Finance Act and will continue to attract tax relief at the rate of 25 per cent.
Ian Harper
Careful thought now needed before investing in PEPs
BASIC rate taxpayers who are considering investing in a Personal Equity Plan should carefully consider the implications that changes introduced in this week's Budget may have on such an investment.
On Tuesday, the Chancellor of the Exchequer reduced the tax credit on the dividends paid by UK companies from 25 to 20 per cent.
This move means that — if nothing else changes — the yield on an equity or an equity-based unit trust PEP is likely to decline.
According to the Unit Trust Association, the current gross yield of 5 per cent could fall to 4.69 per cent after 5 April, when the Budget changes come into effect.
The actual new yield on the PEP will depend on the reaction of the companies, who may increase their dividend payments, so preserving the yield, and of the fund managers, who may move to higher yielding shares, such as utilities and bonds.
However, if the yield does fall on equity-based PEPs, it means that other investments, such as gilts and building society deposits will become more competitive.
The situation could be particularly acute for basic rate taxpayers who invest in PEPs.
The vast majority of PEPs in numerical terms are sold to basic rate taxpayers.
And although PEPs offer a tax shelter against income and capital gains tax, it is the income tax advantages which are the most significant for basic rate taxpayers.
For example, a basic rate taxpayer currently receives a net dividend distribution of £75 on his equity investment.
Under the current regime where tax credits are worth 25 per cent, this dividend  will be grossed up inside the PEP to £100.
However, after 5 April — when the value of the tax credit falls to 20 per cent— this £75 when grossed up inside the PEP will be worth just £93.75 to the basic rate taxpayer.
That is, the tax that can be recovered inside the PEP will reduce from £25 per £75 dividend distribution to £18.75 — a fall in income of 6.25 per cent .
The point that the basic rate taxpayer must note is that once all the charges — in particular the annual management fee — are taken into account, then the net benefit of being in the PEP could be seriously eroded or even disappear altogether.
If that same investor holds his equities or unit trusts directly, he would receive £75 both before and after the tax credit changes and would face no further charges.
For the higher rate taxpayer, the situation is more complex, but less serious than that facing the basic rate taxpayer.
Inside the PEP, the amount of tax that the higher rate taxpayer can reclaim on a £100 gross dividend distribution falls from £25 currently to £18.75 after 5 April.
So instead of  receiving a gross dividend of £100 inside the PEP, the higher rate taxpayer will receive £93.75.
Again, this represents a fall in income of 6.25 per cent.
If the basic rate taxpayer invests in equities outside the PEP, he will currently receive income of £60 after paying tax on a gross dividend of £100.
After 6 April, however — because the reduction in the tax credit to 20 per cent pushes up his marginal rate of tax from 15 per cent to 18.75 per cent— he will receive income of only £56.25.
So unlike for the basic rate taxpayer, the impact of the Budget tax credit changes is much  less significant for the higher rate taxpayer — particularly as the capital gains tax exemption the PEP provides is likely to be of far more value to wealthier investors.
As a result of the Budget, basic rate taxpayers must be very careful to ensure that they select PEPs with the most favourable charging structures.
Equally, PEP managers, mindful that the bulk of their business is carried out with basic rate taxpayers, may either look to cutting their charges or to innovating.
The most popular PEPs are based on equity unit trusts and when it comes to charges on, the market breaks down into three.
Firstly, there are is the  mainstream of PEP managers who do not impose any additional charges on the PEP over and above the basic unit trust charges, which are typically between 5 and 6 per cent initial and 1 to 1.5 per cent annual.
At the other extreme, there are the PEP managers who levy an additional PEP charge of between 1 and 2 per cent initial and 0.5 per cent on top of the unit trust charges.
But in the middle are a group of ‘innovators’ who  effectively abolish the underlying unit trust charges and instead impose a smaller initial charge which is coupled to a sliding scale of exit charges on the PEP, which disappear altogether after three years.
Currently, this group comprises Fidelity, Gartmore and Scottish Equitable but others could soon follow.
The advantage of such a charging structure is that the investor is rewarded with a lower initial charge.
But for the basic rate taxpayer, the problem of annual management charges eroding a diminished dividend yield remains.
One course of action fund managers are likely to pursue is to introduce more funds which combine gilts with high yielding equities.
The unit trust industry has been vigorously lobbying the Government to allow them to introduce funds which can be put into a PEP which are solely based on gilts and bonds.
However, the Chancellor confirmed in the Budget that in order to qualify for a PEP, the underlying funds must contain no more than a 49 per cent bond/gilt component.
Because of the reduction in tax credits from 25 to 20 per cent, unit trust PEPs with a bond or gilt component are likely to have an enhanced yield.
According to Fidelity — one of the few companies which is to date offering these funds — the yield on its Tax Free Income Plan (a unit trust comprising 51 per cent equities and 49 per cent bonds) will fall from about 6 per cent now to 5.75 per cent after 5 April.
ACCORDING to the Unit Trust Association, the impact on unit trust PEPs of the changes announced in the Budget are almost impossible to predict with certainty.
However, it does admit that if nothing else changes, then the yield on an equity-only PEP could fall.
If the current yield is 5 per cent, the post-April yield could be 4.69 per cent .
The UTA also says that unit trust PEPs with cash, bond, gilt or Treasury Bill component are likely to have an enhanced yield.
In addition, the UTA admits that for basic rate taxpayers the benefit of a PEP is slightly reduced because the amount of tax that can be recovered reduces from £25 per £75 of income distribution to £18.75.
For higher rate taxpayers, outside the PEP they will face a marginal tax rate of £18.75 compared compared with £15 currently.
Inside the PEP, the amount of tax reclaimed will fall from £25 currently to £18.75 per £100 gross distribution.
Whisky scheme raises spirits
MANY Scotch whisky-drinkers dream of owning their own cask or two.
Now they have the opportunity with tax relief, courtesy of a novel Business Expansion Scheme known as ‘The Spirit of 1992’.
The BES is based on the fresh production — rather than past stocks — of fine malt Scotch fillings from Ledaig Distillery, Tobermory.
The funds are to purchase malted barley, yeast and oak casks, and for the use of labour and stills at Tobermory, as well as the later transport of the fine spirit to Customs-approved bonds.
Tobermory today yields Scotch at around £1.72 per litre excluding VAT, while the trade is charging around £2 per litre for large-volume malt fillings.
Despite the closure of several malt distilleries, such as Glenury-Royal, Inverleven, Littlemill and soon Rosebank, the BES directors take the view that five years from now their spirit will be much in demand in popular blends.
Aiming to raise £750,000, The Spirit of 1992 has had approval for BES status from the Inland Revenue as the company will be both manufacturing and trading.
It has announced its intention not to borrow and therefore will not expose investors to levels of high gearing.
It should be seen as a five-year plan because, while Scotch has to be matured by law for a minimum three years, the time balance will help the company to secure a better malt price.
The minimum investment is £1,000 and the firm will try to help investors who wish to sell under five years, though they then lose their tax relief under the BES regulations.
Some past investments in Scotch have exposed small holdings which lacked expert advice.
One of the strengths of this offer is the quality of management.
It includes both the former managing director of the Seagram subsidiary Chival Brothers (which distils Chivas Regal), Harold Currie, and the chairman of Tobermory with 13 years experience in distilling, Stewart Jowett.
Prospectus and application form can be obtained by phoning 0462 456220.
Conal Gregory
Mad cow premium
NO SANE person would have devised the Beef Special Premium Scheme, admits its co-ordinator, Richard Cowan, head of the Ministry of Agriculture's beef policy division in Whitehall.
But free choice does not exist within the control systems applied by the European Commission — and it was Brussels that had dictated the direction of its regulations.
‘We would have been happy to let the variable premium scheme that expired in April 1989 run forever, but the CAP reforms focused on a 30 per cent reduction in cereal prices over three years and the commission decided it was necessary to compensate beef farmers feeding cattle on grass,’ he said.
That meant that the ministry was stuck with the introduction of a complicated two-stage payment dependent on the animal's age.
‘Once we realised the implications of the Cattle Identification Documents (CIDS) necessary to hold the administration of a two-stage payment together we looked hard at a slaughter premium,’ explained Mr Cowan.
‘But this contravened a beef farmer's right to claim the premium subject to a two month retention period and overall stocking limits.
‘And the commission would not agree to postpone payment until slaughter unless we could guarantee that it would be picked up by the holder of the animal when it was ten months old.’
That had stopped the Ministry ‘dead in its tracks’ and it had come to the conclusion that if it denied premium to the rearer of suckled calves it would eventually be challenged by a hill farmer before the European Court.
On-farm inspection, as practised under the old calf subsidy scheme and which was suggested as a workable substitute by both farmers and auctioneers, had been dismissed as impractical.
‘It does not ease the problem of making the age of every male animal available to its buyer and the ministry has neither the cash nor the staff resources to overcome this,’ said Mr Cowan.
‘We did not want the burden of administration falling on the taxpayer so we put it on the prime beneficiary, which is the farmer himself.’
Concentrating all the beef subsidy on the suckler cow was impossible too.
‘I know this is a solution favoured by many farmers but the EC Commission would not allow us to ignore the entitlement of male calves out of dairy cows,’ said the ministry specialist.
‘We know there will be severe practical difficulties but it is up to farmers and auctioneers to make things work.
And if farmers refuse to co-operate, there will be horrendous scenes at store markets.’
Some of the criticism levelled at MAFF had been inaccurate, he claimed.
All EC countries, including Britain, were forced to operate a double payment system with a two month retention period.
The ministry had recruited about 170 extra clerical staff to run the BSPS system — not the 400-500 that some organisations had alleged.
‘We are committed to this scheme.
It cannot be halted.
Thousands of applications are already being processed.
Once the BEEF SA forms were issued there was no going back,’ he added.
Advice on quota question
UNTIL the new United Kingdom regulations on trade and transfer of sheep quota are clarified, Scottish landlords are being advised not to let land.
In the longer term, it is feared that the quota question may seriously undermine Scotland's good landlord-tenant relationship.
Speaking in Aberdeen yesterday at the annual meeting of the Scottish Landowners' Federation's north-east region, the SLF convener, Disney Barlow, said his organisation was getting phone calls every day from people worried about re-letting land.
At present, there was no other option but to advise those members to wait and see.
The SLF has been pushing Government to ensure the interests of landlords are taken care of in the regulations but in the meantime, Mr Barlow said the advice not to relet was the only choice even although it would have a serious effect on entrants wanting to get into let holdings.
Pointing out that the SLF believed the landlord/tenant sector to be an important part of the rural scene in Scotland, Mr Barlow said the quota question was posing a serious threat to that partnership.
Landlords were not seeking any advantage in the regulations but merely wanted to ensure that the rental value of holdings was maintained.
Plea for incentives to quality produce
A MAJOR meat industry figure yesterday endorsed livestock producers' legitimate expectations of premium prices for quality products.
Only 24 hours after the board of Farm Assured Scotch Livestock was polishing its repackaging venture, Richard Canvin, managing director of the Sims Food Group, told a London food conference there had to be incentives to farmers to produce high quality meat.
That in turn was vital to recapture those discerning consumers who had turned away from beef because of its lack of taste.
A high quality product demanding care from conception to retail shelf was necessary.
The Milton Keynes-based group, which kills 4,000 cattle and 25,000 sheep a week in the season, is expected to take an initiative in that area later this year, and Mr Canvin was giving little away in his address to the Safeway-sponsored Strathclyde Food Project seminar.
‘We have a link with some 250 farmers and we are working with them to produce what our customers — the consumers — want at the end of the day.
They get rewarded on the basis of the Europa scale and classification and the fat finish of the animal whether beef or sheep.
‘We have been working with producers over ten years directly — we are very anti-market — and we have a distinct interest in the husbandry and the food and the breeds of the animals.
We need complete control and this means a lot more than the farm assured schemes — although they are a start — and it is something we put a huge amount of work into.’
Also speaking at the conference, Maitland Mackie, chairman of FASL, said there were significant opportunities for regional or speciality food suppliers to make an impact with the multiples.
That had been confirmed by a series of meet-the-buyer seminars from Inverness to Tiverton.
These were helping to break down the barriers to access for those companies, such as small scale, under capitalisation, lack of knowledge of quality assurance and shyness in making approaches to the big operators.
Mr Mackie, who was chairman of the Strathclyde Working Party on regional foods, said those reservations were being overcome.
That had resulted in 150 companies being taken on by five multiples and a 30 per cent increase in product listings.
Sir Alistair Grant, chairman and chief executive of the Argyll Group, confirmed the demand for regional products.
‘All retailers are taking regional products much more seriously.
The improvement in what we do through the scanning data at the checkout and our own in-house distribution means that we can think about smaller quantities in the regions.
‘Secondly, I think we are very sympathetic to regional producers who may be daunted by hygiene standards or how to distribute their products.’
THE vast majority of workers continue to receive pay rises above the inflation rate, despite a doubling in the number of pay freezes over the past year, according to a study published today, writes Keith Aitken.
A leading pay analysis company, Income Data Services, predicts that the incidence of pay freezes lasting a year or more is likely to increase still further and says that pay cuts are also becoming more common, particularly in vulnerable sectors like construction and engineering.
Drawing on a database covering nine million workers, the study finds that the number of pay freezes has risen in the past year from one in 35 settlements to more than one in 20.
Many firms, it says, cushion the blow with new bonus schemes or lump sum payments.
Meanwhile, the Trades Union Congress today accuses the Government of ‘narrow ideological hostility’ to the trade unions' traditional celebration of the May Day public holiday.
The allegation comes in the TUC's response to a Government consultation paper on scrapping the holiday.
Norman Willis, TUC general secretary, said: ‘At a time when unemployment rates are going through the roof, the last thing the Employment Secretary should be spending her time doing is fiddling about with holiday dates.’
Time to explain council costs
THE cost of dismantling the present system of local government and replacing it with single-tier councils is likely to become a vitally important issue now that the Scottish Office has admitted that its consultants, Touche Ross, appear to have got their sums wrong.
When the consultation paper setting out alternative proposals for between 15 and 51 single-tier councils was published last October, Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, was keen to point to the economies that the local government changes could bring.
The consultants estimated that the annual savings could range up to £192 million.
Extra costs would only arise if the plan for as many as 51 councils were adopted.
From today's disclosures, it would appear that the savings that would come from the setting up of a small number of large authorities will be less than was originally suggested.
As a result, the figure of £192 million can now be discounted.
At the other end of the scale, it seems the creation of a large number of smaller authorities would cost less than forecast.
As a result, the range of costings will be narrowed.
Mr Lang's willingness to acknowledge the errors, and the efforts being made to correct these, are to be welcomed.
But the experience is one Mr Lang and his ministerial colleagues could have done without if his plans for a radical shake-up of the local government system are to remain credible.
The doubts that now exist over costings will be seized upon by opponents of reform who continue to argue that the case for change has not been made.
The Government is yet to announce the number of councils it intends to introduce though present thinking favours about 30.
Mr Lang remains convinced that savings are still there to be made even though he appears to accept that these will be less than originally envisaged.
It will be essential for the Scottish Secretary to convince the Treasury that council reform will not lead to extra costs at a time when the Government is anxious to reduce public expenditure and its borrowing debts.
Even if he can convince the Treasury that some savings will accrue, these may not be sufficient to remain a convincing reason for the large-scale council upheaval envisaged.
Other reasons, including greater efficiency, better services and improved local accountability will need to be advanced if local electorates are to be convinced that the scale of change is justified.
While the work carried out by Touche Ross is now open to criticism, in fairness, that firm was asked to carry out the work within an unreasonably short timescale.
But the principle of using consultants for such exercises as local government reform and the future organisation of water services must be questioned.
The costings episode once again highlights the case for an independent commission on council reform.
The Scottish Office is now reassessing the costings but its judgments will hardly be seen as being completely impartial.
Analyst on insider dealing charge
By Gordon Milne
A SENIOR director of Bell Lawrie White, the Edinburgh stockbroker, appears today in the High Court charged with contravening the 1985 insider dealing act.
Thorold Mackie, a small companies' analyst who is highly thought of in the city's financial circles, has been charged with obtaining and misusing price-sensitive information relating to a profits warning by Glasgow-based Shanks & McEwan.
Mr Mackie has been charged with an offence under the 1985 Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act.
The charge alleges that while employed by Bell Lawrie White, he was in possession of unpublished price-sensitive information about the imminent issue of a profits warning from Shanks & McEwan, the waste management group.
It is further alleged that he ‘counselled or procured’ two BLW salesmen to deal in the shares, saving clients more than £1,300,000 in the process.
Mr Mackie, who has the full backing of his firm, is pleading not guilty to the charge.
He is the first investment analyst to be charged with insider dealing, and as a result his trial will be seen as something of a test case in the City, especially as legislation is currently going through Parliament to extend the scope of insider dealing.
If, as planned, the new legislation catches any information that may affect prospects that has not already been made public, analysts could find themselves treading on thin ice.
Almost any conversation with a company would probably put the analysts in possession of inside information.
Mr Mackie is only the second person to stand trial in Scotland charged with insider dealing.
A total of 61 witnesses have been cited, although not all are expected to give oral evidence.
Over the last 12 years, there have been just 28 previous insider dealing trials.
Almost half the defendants have been acquitted, and of those who have been convicted, more than half pleaded guilty.
The first case in Scotland was also Britain's first.
In 1981 John Bryce, a former partner in an Edinburgh firm of investment managers, pleaded guilty and was given an absolute discharge after depositing £1400 compensation.
Lloyd's to appeal ruling LLOYD'S is to appeal the recent judgment of the Commercial Court affecting the solvency treatment of Names' personal stop-loss recoveries.
By appealing, Lloyd's is seeking to achieve equitable treatment for all Names with personal stop-loss recoveries.
It believes that the effect of the judgment would result in considerable disparity in the treatment of different Names' recoveries.
It is also anxious to remove the present lack of clarity as to the practical consequences — and difficulties — of the judgment in the processing of the recoveries affected.
Lloyd's will be seeking an urgent appellate decision in the matter.
Note to Editors:
The losses of many Names on the 1990 and earlier years of account will be relieved by the payment of stop-loss reinsurance recoveries.
These recoveries would, in the normal way, be retained by Names' underwriting agents to be available to discharge Names' liabilities to their policyholders.
Certain names wish to withdraw these funds from Lloyd's, as not being within the terms governing their premium trust funds, in order to use them for their personal benefit.
The effect of the Commercial Court's decision is that whether Names will be permitted to withdraw these funds depends on which of the different legal documents they have entered into.
UNS
Contact: Peter Hill, 071-327 5110, Nick Doak, 071 327 6272, Matt Huber 071-327 6420 or Martin Leach, 071-327 6434, all of Lloyd's of London
Paying the price of not investing in Britain's future What did the Government do with all the money from petroleum revenue tax and privatisation sales, and has it been well-spent?
CLIFFORD GERMAN has his doubts
THE 1993 Budget marks the beginning of the end of an era of income tax cuts financed by North Sea oil revenues and the proceeds of privatising state assets.
A new era of austerity starts in April 1994, and the next 12 months looks like an all-too-brief inter-regnum in which the economy is being given a chance to grow again before the tax blows begin to fall.
Objectively the chances of reaching the Chancellor's 3 per cent growth target in 1994 are mixed at best.
Mortgage interest rates have certainly fallen, but the housing market is relying on the lifting of stamp duty on houses up to £60,000 to spark renewed interest from first-time buyers.
Other forms of credit, personal loans and hire purchase are still expensive, though, and consumers on recent evidence would rather haggle than borrow.
Prices are rising only slowly, and retail sales have begun to rise since Christmas, thanks to heavy price cuts which have produced some irresistible bargains.
Companies are still under heavy pressure to cut their margins and reduce costs, by holding down wages and shedding labour.
But there is a limit to how much further they can go before passing on the additional costs created by the devaluation last September, and inflation is likely to edge higher after next month.
A surge in consumer spending cannot therefore be taken for granted.
Savings have certainly been rebuilt during the recession, and the returns are no longer attractive, but savers are still reluctant to spend while jobs are still under threat.
Personal incomes are also under pressure.
The underlying rate of inflation is expected to range as high as 4 per cent over the next three years, while average pay settlements should be no higher than 1.5 per cent in the public sector, perhaps 2.5 per cent in the private sector.
Personal incomes could become static or even fall in real terms if the squeeze continues, and real personal disposable (after tax) incomes are almost certain to fall when the Chancellor's tax increases on both incomes and spending start to bite in 1994.
For the first time in a decade a Conservative government has resorted to direct tax increases to help it bridge the gap between its spending and its revenues.
Almost two thirds of the £6.75 billion worth of tax increases already pencilled in for 1994-95 will fall on personal incomes, only a third will be fall on spending.
As a result the cost of living will rise, inflation will hover around the 4 per cent mark for much of the next two years, but it will not measure the much larger deflationary effects of the Budget as a whole on incomes and spending power.
It is just as well that the tax price index, introduced by Nigel Lawson in an attempt to distract attention away from the inflationary impact of switching taxation from direct to indirect taxes, has never caught on as an indicator.
The tax price index measures the amount of gross income needed to maintain a level standard of living once taxes, national insurance and prices have been allowed for.
It still exists and it will undoubtedly catch up with the retail price index shortly and go ahead of it from 1994 onwards, as the direct tax burden which is included in the TPI rises faster than the indirect taxes which go into the RPI.
If the squeeze on consumers prevents them from spending more in the next three years, and the government is committed to cutting public sector spending, the best hope of getting the economy growing and refilling the Chancellor's revenue pots seems to lie with exporters.
The pound has been devalued, making exports more profitable and foreign currency earnings more attractive, while foreign suppliers find the UK market tougher and less profitable.
The US market is recovering.
But Japan is flat as a pancake and the European market is still sinking deeper into recession.
If the economy is not growing at an annual rate of 3 per cent by the middle of 1994 as the Chancellor's Budget arithmetic assumes, revenues will be less buoyant and the spending on welfare will be greater than forecast.
In a conventional world, the Chancellor would simply roll his forecasts forward as he has been doing for the past two years now.
But that will no longer be an option in future.
If the recovery fails to materialise, the deficit in 1993-94 could be even greater than the £50 billion forecast, and the Chancellor will either have to slash welfare spending in November or put taxes up even further, risking a vicious circle of rising taxes, depleted spending power and slower growth, or borrow more which inevitably will mean putting interest rates back up.
This is probably not the time, but the Opposition is already asking the question which economic historians will seek to answer — what did we do with all the money obtained from petroleum revenue tax and privatisation sales, and was it well-used?
It has helped to create a new generation of seriously wealthy individuals and the establishment of a tax system geared to entrepreneurs.
It has created a cost-conscious business culture, and rooted out many of the more outrageous make-work practices devised by trade unions in the post-war period.
But it has also begun to create a corporate culture where some companies have become a kind of economic prison where senior management can legally abuse and ill-treat their employees, and silence any protest with the threat of the sack.
Unfortunately it has not paid for the creation of a large modern high-tech manufacturing sector or created permanent jobs in the service sector on anything like the scale required for the future.
It has emphatically not paid for the modernisation of the infrastructure, the renewal of ageing roads and sewers, schools and hospitals.
Instead, anything from £20 billion to £30 billion a year has been spent on benefit for the growing army of unemployed, surely the least satisfactory possible way of spending money which should have been invested.
Stagecoach sets sights on Lothian and London
By Magnus Grimond
STAGECOACH, the Perth-based bus company, will today confirm that London Buses and Lothian Regional Transport are among its key areas of future expansion.
In the pathfinder prospectus for next month's stock market flotation, published today, the directors state that they see ‘the greatest potential for profitable growth’ from privatisation of the 32 remaining municipally-owned bus operations and 10 London bus companies.
Referring to London, the finance director, Derek Scott, said yesterday that Stagecoach was interested in the ‘bread and butter’ daily commuter journeys.
‘People going to work, people going to school, journeys that don't fit into the Underground system.’
Lothian Region's buses were also an area of interest, he said, ‘but one has ask: When is the enabling legislation going to come forward?’
Moves to privatise some of the 31 local government-owned bus companies south of the Border are further advanced, he said.
The offer price for the shares will not be announced until 6 April, with dealings starting on 20th, but the flotation is set to value Stagecoach at more than £100 million, turning the brother and sister team which founded the company into multi-millionaires.
Brian Souter, executive chairman, and Ann Gloag, managing director, will share between £10 million and £20 million, if all goes according to plan, while retaining control more than 50 per cent of the shares.
The company intends to raise £20.6 million from the stock market launch to reduce gearing.
The prospectus shows borrowings of £48.3 million dwarfed shareholders' funds of £19.8 million at the last balance sheet date on 9 January.
The new money will still leave gearing at 60 per cent, but Mr Scott says the company will be happy with that level of debt, given that gearing at other transport groups can be as high as 90 per cent .
Pre-tax profits have grown from £2.27 million in 1990 to £8.24 million in the year to last April.
The company is not making a profit forecast, but profits for the 36 weeks to 9 January have grown to £9.79 million.
The 3.5-year period includes property profits of £2.71 million.
The company, which began in 1980 running two second-hand buses between Dundee and London, owes its phenomenal growth to privatisation.
Since 1987 it has emerged as the number one buyer of privatised bus companies, picking up operators from Inverness to Hampshire.
It is now one of Britain's largest bus groups, with approaching 5 per cent of the market, which rises to between 15 and 20 per cent north of the border.
It has expanded into Africa, Hong Kong and New Zealand, and it is looking closely at the early moves towards privatisation of British Rail.
STEPHEN MANSFIELD
Spotlight on success: Ann Gloag, managing director of Stagecoach, discusses the Perth-based firm's flotation with employees Callum McGregor and Guy Batchelor
House of Fraser buy-out denied
HOUSE of Fraser, the up-market store chain, yesterday strenuously denied speculation over the weekend that it was negotiating a £290 million management buy-out, writes Magnus Grimond.
Responding to an article in yesterday's Observer, a House of Fraser spokesman, Michael Cole, said: ‘There is no management buy-out.
The story is motivated by Mr [Tiny]Rowland and his well-known malice towards us.’
Mr Rowland, chief executive of Lonrho, the conglomerate which owns the Observer, has been behind a long-running campaign against the Al Fayed brothers, whose acquisition of House of Fraser and Harrods, its flagship store, was heavily criticised in a Department of Trade report in 1990.
The Observer story claimed that ‘a leading investment bank’ is attempting to raise funds to back a buy-out led by House of Fraser's finance director, James Walsh.
The sale would allegedly involve 17 stores, but not Harrods, and the suggestion was that it would help House of Fraser reduce current high borrowings.
But Mr Cole denied there were any problems at the group.
‘Trading has been difficult, but we have done well through-out the recession’, he said.
Mr Cole claimed that there were attempts by Mr Rowland at the end of last week to have the Observer story more widely publicised, but these failed.
He added that, also contrary to the report, the Barkers Centre — which houses one of the group's stores and a number of other shops and offices in London's Kensington —‘has not been placed with any estate agent to sell it.’
House of Fraser owns eight stores in Scotland, trading under the Frasers, House of Fraser, Binns and Arnotts names.
Cash machines update
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
THE Bank of Scotland is to update its ‘hole in the wall’ cash dispensers to make them faster and safer.
It has awarded a £3.6 million contract to NCR to supply its fourth-generation ATMs, built at its Dundee factory, over the next nine months.
The new machines, which will be fitted in the bigger branches, will have a number of features aimed at cutting queuing times and making them easier to use.
They include faster transaction times with a special ‘fast cash’ facility, better privacy from a more recessed touchpad, help for the visually impaired and better access for wheelchair users where planning regulations permit.
The machines also hold more cash, making them less likely to run out of money over weekends and at busy periods.
Subsidy form needs your attention now
By Fordyce Maxwell, Agricultural Editor
DO IT now and 15 May.
Those are the key points for farmers to remember when they get their Integrated Administration and Control System forms later this week.
From the European Commission point of view those forms are to cut out fraud and make sure only the genuinely eligible get subsidies.
From a farmer's point of view, to claim arable area subsidy, beef special premium or suckler cow premium, the forms must be filled in correctly and on time.
Penalties for cheating will be heavy.
Penalties for late or inaccurate claims will be heavy.
The net result is that the Scottish Office and the National Farmers' Union of Scotland are trying hard to get the message across — tackle the forms immediately with the 15 May deadline in mind.
In Scotland alone about 53,000 sets of IACS literature is being sent, to everyone who has a farm holding number whatever its size.
Sixty extra Scottish Office staff have been taken on for the agriculture department's area offices, plus a further 30 at its Edinburgh headquarters.
Two teams of computer specialists are now at work, one to try and make sure the department's existing system can cope, the second to have a new computer system at work from 1 January next year.
It's too late to argue now that the forms should have been available earlier.
Delay in getting the small print agreed in Europe is given as the reason.
Scottish Office staff believes it has made the IACS literature terse and ‘user friendly’.
The average farmer should be able to cope with the explanatory booklet, the form to fill in, explanatory notes to help fill it in, and a letter from Sir Hector Monro, Scottish Agriculture Minister.
Sir Hector, who will have his own form to fill in as a farmer in Dumfriesshire, says in the letter: ‘I recognise that many of you will be fed up at the prospect of yet more literature and more form filling.
But it is unavoidable if you want to receive payment.’
The UK, he says, gave full support to the system because it will cut out fraud and allow the EC to get tough with countries who are not operating the common agricultural policy fully or properly.
His advice is to study the first four pages of the explanatory booklet carefully, particularly paragraph six — action to take now.
He adds: ‘My advice is to do it now.
Don't leave it or lose it — the risk of losing subsidies is severe if you do.’
Advice from the NFU is similar.
Read the booklet and notes.
Then read them again.
This year's form will have a bearing on all future claims.
Implicit, if not admitted, is the Scottish Office fear that its staff will be up against it to deal with every form in time.
A snow drift of paper is going to hit it.
It has instructions to help as much as possible, but the final responsibility is with the farmer.
By another EC master stroke, 15 May is a Saturday.
Agriculture department area offices will be opened specially.
But the last thing any farmer should attempt is to take his application form along at midday on 15 May.
Basically the IACS form is for arable area subsidy.
It is also the statement of forage area to calculate stocking density.
Beef premium, suckler cow payment and arable area will be monitored this year.
Next year the Sheep Annual Premium and Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowances will be monitored by it.
The essential details needed are farm holding number, business location, fields and their sizes, what is in them and which schemes the farmer is applying for.
Ordnance survey maps, or professionally drawn and acceptable equivalent, will be needed.
Arable farmers who applied last year for oilseed rape subsidy will already be familiar with the way the map should be completed.
The minimum scale acceptable is 1:10,000.
National grid field reference numbers must be used and areas stated in hectares, not in acres.
Training course for would-be journalists
A ONE-WEEK training course for potential agricultural and horticultural journalists will be held from 26 to 30 April, starting in Nottinghamshire.
Organised by the Guild of Agricultural Journalists and sponsored by John Deere the first two days of lectures and practical work will be at the firm's training centre.
The rest of the week will involve those selected to take part in practical experience on one of a range of specialist media.
Application forms are available from Steve Mitchell, Pharo Communications, National Agricultural Centre, Stoneleigh, Warwickshire CV8 2LG.
Completed applications by 2 April.
Collins to focus on Germans
JOHN COLLINS, one of only two survivors from the Old Firm game which demolished Andy Roxburgh's squad for Wednesday's match with Germany, will put contractual problems aside to concentrate on giving his best for Scotland, writes Hugh Keevins.
Collins ignored the tiredness he felt after scoring one of the goals which defeated Rangers to accompany team-mate Tom Boyd to Scotland's base at Dunkeld last night.
‘I have to be involved with Scotland at every opportunity,’ said Collins, who played against Malta in the last World Cup tie after stating he had been left out on occasions when he felt entitled to inclusion.
Collins, meanwhile, is no closer to agreeing terms with his manager, Liam Brady.
‘Some serious talking will need to be done over the next few weeks.
I do want to be with Celtic next season,’ said Collins.
Andy Payton celebrates with team-mate Stuart Slater after scoring Celtic's second goal during Saturday's Old Firm derby at Parkhead.
Report, Page 24
The gamut of enlightenment from A to B
ANOTHER Budget bites the dust and I am assailed by the sobering realisation that though I've been subjected to a fair number of them now, I haven't really understood any.
The carefree days, when only swingeing increases in the price of the Beano and soor plooms impinged upon the consciousness, have long since passed.
Life is earnest and, as a responsible individual, I should know what is going on.
Sadly, the only conclusion I've been able to arrive at since Mr Lamont did his bit, is that the sooner I become a recluse with a string of racehorses the better and that can't be right.
Something, I am persuaded, is missing.
Ever since my schooldays, I've been aware that, mathematically, I am not quite the full shilling.
There is, as an elderly and respected aunt used to say of people about whom she had reservations, ‘a want there somewhere’.
My ‘want’ first manifested itself in rudimentary arithmetic lessons when problems were posed concerning the respective times taken by A and B to fill baths, one of which had a hole in it.
I can't remember now which one had copped the leaky bath, but then what did it matter?
Nobody in his right mind would try to fill a bath with a hole in it and so, I reasoned in my simple way, let the poor soul get on with it and let's all have a bit of peace.
Unfortunately, this view was not shared by those who, through no fault of their own, had been charged with the task of guiding me through the mists of ignorance to the sunny uplands of clarity and understanding.
For reasons best known to themselves, they attached great importance to the idiot's efforts to fill his useless bath (I think it was B) and it seemed vital to their purpose that I too become involved with the whole farcical business and, what's more, come up with some sort of an answer.
It took a long time and I'm not sure I ever did.
I remember that there was terrible screaming and that blows were delivered, but for the life of me I can't recall ever making sense of the basic problem.
It was around that time that I began to foster the notion that information was being withheld, that somebody was not telling me everything.
Other people were coming up with answers, so what was going on?
What did they know that I didn't?
I became convinced then that there was a conspiracy and this was confirmed in no uncertain manner when later, A and B — what a pair of troupers they were — set off from John o' Groats bound for Land's End with lorries full of rubbish.
Time has obscured the X factor in this one.
Character A — or it might have been B again, for he seemed to be a right prune — had left late or had left early travelling at half the speed of the other.
It was something like that.
Maybe one of the lorries had a hole in it — nothing, it seemed, was too bizarre for the purposes of sound arithmetic.
The big question was: how long did each of them take?
I didn't get near that one either.
This practical ineptitude filtered through to my sporting life by way of golf.
Had I been allowed to puddle around on my own, people today might curl their lips at Faldo's approach.
As it was, someone mentioned the restricted hip-turn and the first of hundreds of perfectly good golf balls whistled away beyond human ken.
I was told to weaken my left-hand grip and the game became a sort of nature ramble.
I corrected it and the hook was so violent that people on adjoining fairways dived for cover.
The square-to-square method put me in bed for a fortnight.
It's late, I know, but Alan Fine might have come up with the answer.
In his book Mind Over Golf (BBC Books, £8.99), he deals with the mental side of the game and features the left and right brains, which is news to those limping along with one.
The ‘left-brainers’— those dominated by the left hemisphere — are neat, organised and conscientious.
The ‘right-brainers’ are free spirits, imaginative and creative.
The trick, suggests Fine, is to let the left brain do the analysing and the right brain carry out the swing.
If I could be absolutely sure that A and B weren't somehow mixed up in it all, I'd be tempted to give it a go.
Missing million
The fall in unemployment, reported today, is to be welcomed.
At this rate it will take until July 2004 before there are no registered unemployed at all!
Perhaps by then the Government may have some strategy that will provide work for the million or so unemployed that it overlooks while compiling the official figures.
Research cash
I am concerned that recent press coverage about public funding for research in Scottish universities misses two vital points.
If Scotland is to maintain the highest level of research capability to match that of universities south of the Border, then research money must follow quality as judged by the same standards throughout the UK (however imperfect these measurements are).
It is the prestige of institutions which brings students from around the world to study in our universities and helps to counteract the brain drain to the south.
Yardsticks are very important and common standards are essential.
How we judge quality is another issue.
What has never been successfully resolved in the UK is how we rate the application of knowledge, the technology rather than the science.
No university under the current system gets central funding for helping the manufacturing base to adopt new technology.
Vigilance is certainly required that funding allocated for the public good should not be siphoned off into private firms.
But the application of knowledge drives a new learning curve and strong arguments can be made for using regional funds to develop new technologies in the interests of local economic growth where both industry and the university can benefit.
There is not a case, however, for spreading central funding between universities more evenly; rather it is for judging all UK universities more broadly on the excellence of both their science and their technology bases.
Furthermore, there may be justification for using additional regional funds to follow excellence in technology development and application.
Budget's fuel tax a suicide note for Scots Tory MPs
Surely we must assume that the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, had the common sense to warn his colleagues in the Cabinet that the fuel tax would be a suicide note for the remaining Tory MPs in Scotland?
Presumably they ignored him and he will be glad to relinquish his bed of nails as Secretary of State.
It is not the only tax that will hit those living north of the Border.
Petrol, already up to 25 per cent dearer here than in England, is a necessity for those of us living in rural communities, with no transport infrastructure, no bus services, and the minimal railway system destined for further destruction.
The taxes on beer and wine will also hit Scotland hardest, with no easy access to spend British money to boost the profits of French supermarkets by buying drink at a fraction of the price.
Cigarettes, too, are cheaper in France.
There was nothing, of course, for Scotland in the way of capital projects; they were all for the south-east, such as the Heathrow and the Channel Tunnel links.
Presumably this will make it easier for voters in the Tory heartlands to shop abroad and avoid duty, though it may not do much for the Conservative vote in Kent.
As for the evil tax on keeping warm, no amount of tinkering with social benefits can justify it for any of us, let alone the poor or the pensioners.
So, farewell from Galloway Mr Lang!
Taxing question of inheritance
REMOVAL of inheritance tax from farm land and buildings may yet be seen as a mixed blessing for the farming industry, particularly by the sons and daughters of farming families.
It could lead to their being faced with even more years as the junior partners in farming enterprises and the possibility of legal wrangling on the death of the parent or parents.
That sting in the tail of the 1992 Budget, which brought in 100 per cent relief from the tax for agricultural purposes, was unveiled at a weekend conference on inheritance and succession run by the Royal Agricultural Society of England and the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors.
And — as the speaker, AR Pardoe of the Cluttons group, said — many farmers show little intention of planning their succession or inheritance tax until after their death, leading to many options for confusion.
At the other end of the spectrum, some farmers are so keen to pass on as much as they can to the next generation they leave themselves and their spouses with no capital or income on which to live.
One way out of those extremes — and all points in between— is to ensure an annual assessment of objectives, particularly at this time in the year with the Budget just past.
That would include making or reviewing a will.
With the previous inheritance provisions, there was some encouragement for parent farmers to sort out inheritance tax provisions and maybe make over some or all of the business and take early retirement.
That has now been removed.
‘I have certainly had it put to me that there is now no positive tax advantage to be had from donating agricultural land early, nor indeed in retiring from the family farming partnership,’ said Mr Pardoe.
‘This, of course, is perfectly true provided these levels of relief last until the parent farmer dies.
I, for one, would not like to guarantee that.’
He also predicted that a major area of concern for the future might be whether the farmhouse attracted 100 per cent property relief.
Bob Naish of the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service, gave warning that the ‘when’ of succession was often a matter of considerable irritation and even aggravation between the parties.
‘With retirement, the timing can be crucial for all sorts of reasons; for tax and pension provision, but also so that the ground rules can be prepared for post-retirement activities.’
Consideration of inheritance was also directly linked to the viability of the farm.
The crucial determinants there are profitability, cash flow and capital base.
Too often when considering issues of succession and inheritance the capital question tended to dominate thoughts and actions while income was the real key to providing answers to potential dilemmas.
That was particularly true now that land values were no longer inflating at the rate of the last decade or so.
He said: ‘If for reasons beyond your control the profit potential of the capital resources cannot match their apparent value there is a good chance that that value will diminish, be it through capital taxes, excessive borrowing or revaluation to realistic levels.
It is better to recognise that situation in good time rather than being caught on the hop.’
As Ian Brown, of Lee Moor Farm in Northumberland, noted: ‘A fact that saddened me lately came from a recent survey which suggested that the average family business — not just farms but all family businesses — lasts only 25 years, which I guess is only a generation.
‘Perhaps with more planning and a little more planning among the living these businesses would last longer.’
As an insurance specialist, Owen Temple, pointed out: ‘There is no preordained day on which the tractor may overturn or multiple sclerosis strike.
There have been many situations where a farm has been lost by an unexpectedly early death or disability.’
Confronted with the question of early death or disablement, most farmers had an idea what they would want to happen to their farms.
But that was often limited by the realities of the situation.
Many farms were saddled with debt and on death an uninsured debt was a further pressure to farm sale.
‘More farmers will become seriously disabled through illness or accident before they retire and will die before they retire.
But few have taken insurance to protect their income in such an event,’ said Mr Temple.
‘Permanent health insurance can provide against that loss of income right up until retirement.
This can be a farm saver.’
Mr Temple also had a word of warning on the use of endowment policies to build up capital.
Their use was often more limited and specialist than was normally recognised, he said.
1992's biggest farm sells to English buyer
THE SALE of the largest single farm offered for sale in Scotland in 1992 has been confirmed by DM Hall and Son, chartered surveyors.
Castles Farm on the north side of Loch Awe, extending to 8,000 acres of some of the wildest, steepest and most challenging farming country imaginable, sold to an  Englishman from Kent just before Christmas on a lock, stock and barrel basis for more than £500,000.
Norman Galbraith of DM Hall's Farm and Estate Sales  Department was delighted with the deal.
‘With an asking price of just £47 per acre we had enormous interest in the property which hit the market just as details of the sheep quota system were emerging in August.
The farm runs nearly 3,000 sheep and we had a great deal of interest represented by 641 enquiries, 46 viewers and ten who were seriously interested.’
The buyer of the estate has now taken over some 2,700 Black Face and North Country Cheviot ewes and is adding a small herd of Charolais cattle.
Caution about sale of ewe premium rights
THE auction of LFA sheep quota by Lawrie & Symington at Lanark last week has confirmed most expectations of market prices but Ministry of Agriculture specialists have given warning that farmers are gambling if they trade before the transfer rules are confirmed some time next month.
They stress that the only farmers who can benefit from the immediate purchase of ewe premium rights are those who have submitted a 1993 claim for more sheep than they have quota and are buying or leasing retrospectively.
Anyone else would be spending money prematurely because the benefits of additional quota would apply to a 1994 claim only.
‘But even farmers who are buying or leasing quota to cover applications they have already made must have the ewes on their farms and have complied with all the conditions of the retention period,’ Whitehall cautioned.
‘And because the transfer rules have still to be approved people who trade quota now are operating completely in the dark as far as ring fences around transfer areas, the siphon or other regulations are concerned.’
Their advice is that it would be wise to wait until all the rules are formalised and to secure a rock-solid conveyance.
However they confirm that farmers who had claimed for more quota than they had ewes would be given ‘around’ two months after the statutory instrument had passed through Parliament to secure their extra rights to ewe premium and to notify the authorities of the transfer.
At this stage it is anticipated that quota trading to secure premium payment on ewes that were  already part of the 1993 claim will take place between 15 April and 15 June — although the dates could be put back and the period might be shortened.
Quota trading to back up claims made in 1994 was not expected to begin until after 15 September.
‘The same principle applies to sellers.
Farmers whose premium rights are the same as the number of ewes in their 1993 claim cannot transfer any quota,’ the ministry added.
Most auction companies appear to be waiting until the transfer legislation is in place before they too offer sheep quota — and they expect most of 1993 trading to concentrate on leasing.
‘We are advising that leasing will be the best option in the first year and our initial impression is that there will be more quota available than sheep that need it,’ said Sandy Wright of Aberdeen & Northern Marts.
‘However, the market will broaden when we move into the 1994 trading year.
At the moment it is confined to people who have more sheep on their claim than quota.’
ANM expected to sell most of its quota by private treaty — with an occasional auction to check that prices were being pitched accurately.
‘But we want all the complications down in black and white before we switch on the green light,’ said Mr Wright.
Quota bargaining likely
FARMERS who regularly lease out milk quota could get even higher prices from dairy companies after the milk board system is dissolved.
Processors have made it clear that they will need to recruit non-producing quota holders so they can hand on production capacity to contracted suppliers who already rely on regular leasing to maintain output.
And if the 1994-95 regulations confirm that Britain will operate a quota pool system centred on individual companies such as Wiseman Dairies or perhaps even Scottish Pride, most non-producers will be able to bargain with the dairies for the highest price.
At present Britain is divided into quota pools based on the milk marketing boards and annual leasing between farmer and farmer is organised by the Ministry of Agriculture.
‘But if they become part of the post-1994 set up, clever non-producers will join the company that pays the best price — and could jump from company to company on a regular basis,’ forecast Nestle's chief milk buyer, John Ross.
‘They will be very popular people — perhaps even more in demand than the producer — and should be able to sign short term contracts that allow them to continually search out the people willing to pay them most money.’
It is possible that non-producers with quota could seek the service of brokers who would keep them up to date with supply and demand trends on the short-term leasing market.
‘For example they could be told that Nestle was offering 11p per litre for a year's lease.
Like other companies we would not be allowed to buy or lease in our own right and so we would have to take on non-producing quota holders to encourage farmers who regularly lease quota themselves to join our supply pool,’ said Mr Ross, whose aim is to secure some 15 per cent of Scottish milk production.
‘Quota brokers will become very busy people.
We anticipate a very fluid quota transfer situation with some leasing contracts as short as three months.
All milk processors will need their share of non-producers on their books to create flexibility and maintain supplies from other farmers.’
Optimistic Argos lifts dividend total
By Richard Shackleton DEPUTY CITY EDITOR
ARGOS, the nationwide catalogue-retailing group which has had a volatile relationship with the City in recent months, regained its status as one of the sector stars yesterday with a better-than-expected 1992 performance and a cautiously optimistic view of the future.
Taxable profits, which slipped from £62.1 million in 1991 to £53 million, would have been higher had the group not set aside £12.7 million against the cost of closing its four Chesterman furniture stores, which suffered operating losses of £6.2 million in the year.
Sales at the Milton Keynes-based group grew for a majority of its products.
Only do-it-ourself and textiles showed a fall-off caused by a reduced textiles range and the decision not to take part in the DIY price war.
Overall turnover rose 8.3 per cent in the 53 weeks to 2 January to top £1 billion for the first time.
Argos opened 19 stores last year, with 25 more planned for 1993.
Like-for-like growth, which excludes the effects of new shelf space, hit 3.1 per cent in the second half.
Jewellery, watches and clocks, as well as the catalogue furniture range, all performed strongly.
The home-delivery operation — Argos Direct — also saw good sales growth for an increased range of products.
The total dividend is raised from 6.4p in 1991 to 7p after a final of 4.8p, though earnings per share dipped from 13.9p to 11.7p.
BZW's Tony Shiret, a retailing analyst, said that Argos's results justified an increase in his estimates for the current year from £73 million to about £80 million before tax, and the shares rose 10p to 315p.
Argos said it would be important over the coming 12 months to contain the additional cost pressures from the pound's devaluation.
Business split over Budget
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
BRITISH businessmen are divided in their reaction to the recent Budget.
In a survey conducted in the middle of March, a greater percentage of financial directors from the country's biggest companies expressed satisfaction with Norman Lamont's measures than did chief executives or financial directors of owner-managed businesses.
The survey, carried out by the accountancy firm, Ernst & Young, questioned 250 chief executives or financial directors of owner-managed businesses with reported 1992 turnovers of between £5 million and £100 million.
It also surveyed 35 financial directors from the UK's top 1,000 companies on their reactions to the Budget measures.
And more of the top 1,000 company financial directors also expressed greater confidence about their own business prospects over the next 12 months as a result of the Budget.
On the other hand, more of the owner-managed businesses said they now had more confidence in the direction of Government policy than the top 1,000 representatives.
But, despite the positive response on overall confidence when questioned about the Chancellor's main measures for business, both financial directors of the top 1,000 and owner-managed directors remained basically neutral.
Russia turns shares bearish
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE threat of political collapse and civil war in Russia caused a wave of falling share prices on almost all leading world markets yesterday.
Only the Tokyo market rallied, as foreign buyers returned after recent worries about the effect of a stronger yen.
The German market fell 2.5 per cent and even the Paris market closed 1.25 per cent down on the day, despite the even-bigger-than-expected swing to the right.
The UK stock market also suffered heavily, with fears over the future of Russia's fledging democracy and the threat of a complete collapse in the economy cited as the biggest single cause.
The FT-SE 100-Share Index had plunged 41 points by late afternoon, before staging a slight recovery to close down 36.2 on the day at 2,863.9.
Even this was attributed to a sense of relief when President Yeltsin took control of the Russian media to strengthen his position.
Events affected blue-chip stocks, including those with international earnings, retailers and even utilities.
Turnover was on the low side at 529 million.
Raw-material prices reflected concern about Russia, with platinum jumping almost $6 to $356 an ounce after a statement by the official Russian export agency threatening to restrict exports because of recent weak demand.
Gold and base metal prices also edged higher.
Currency markets followed the trend, with the dollar opening sharply higher, only to drift back during the afternoon and close just under half a pfennig up at Dm1.6370.
The French franc stood up well to any post-election speculation and gained a little ground against the D-mark.
Sterling ended more than half a cent lower at $1.4890 and a fraction stronger at Dm2.4365, though the increase in the UK's current account deficit with the world outside Europe from £1,060 million in January to £1,334 million in February was a little worse than expected.
The value of exports in the last three months was 13 per cent higher than at the corresponding stage last year, and volume alone was 11 per cent up, while imports were 20 per cent more in value and 15 per cent up by volume.
Building society takeover falls through
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
THE proposed takeover of the Heart of England Building Society by the Bank of Edinburgh has collapsed, as predicted in The Scotsman last week.
Negotiations have been taking place for almost two years and their failure is a big setback to the ambitions of the Edinburgh-based financial institution set up with £26 million in 1991 as a building society acquisition vehicle.
It is understood that the deal had been held up by the Bank of England which had been seeking some form of ‘comfort’ from Bank of Edinburgh's largest minority shareholder, Scottish Amicable, with 39.2 per cent, effectively asking it to stand behind depositors and take a more active role.
It appears that Scottish Amicable was unwilling to provide the comfort sought by the Bank of England, which was, therefore, not prepared to sanction the deal.
A terse statement late in the day from both the Bank of Edinburgh and the Heart of England stated simply that the directors of both had agreed not to proceed further with their merger discussions.
It went on: ‘Both parties regret that this is the case, as a successful outcome would have created a new and unique financial services group.
Unfortunately, the time-scale involved led both parties to conclude that discussions to merge the two organisations should not be continued.’
Russell Frith, finance director of Bank of Edinburgh, said: ‘We have entered into confidentiality agreements and we are unable to comment further.’
But he added: ‘We still believe that the type of scheme proposed, that is, the acquisition of building societies by commercial companies, is quite feasible.’
He also said that all the directors of the Bank of Edinburgh were still in place.
Ken Murray, the man behind the Bank of Edinburgh, was engaged in meetings and unavailable for comment.
But Graeme Knox, managing director of  Scottish Amicable Investment Managers, said that the deal had not been progressing quickly enough.
‘We have a business to run and the Heart of England has a business to run.
I think this is a deal that could have been done; we just weren't getting to the finishing line quickly enough.
As the largest minority shareholder in the Bank of Edinburgh, we were keen to support the venture with the Heart of England,’ he continued.
‘During the last few weeks, we have, therefore, been talking to the board of the Bank of Edinburgh about a number of options which might reduce the protracted time-scales that affected the proposal.
Unfortunately, we were unable to contribute to a resolution of these problems without moving away from the non-participant minority shareholding which has always been central to our involvement in Bank of Edinburgh.’
Mr Knox has consistently denied previous reports that Scottish Amicable was seeking to increase its stake in the Bank of Edinburgh.
On the basis that Scottish Amicable was not prepared to take a majority stake or play a more active role in the Bank of Edinburgh's affairs — which is thought to be what the Bank of England wanted — then this was a circle that was unlikely ever to be squared.
Employment boost for Ayrshire as Volvo opens £6.5m plant
By John Hatfield
SCOTLAND'S vehicle industry received a much needed boost yesterday with the opening of Volvo's new bus assembly hall at Irvine alongside the existing truck-making facilities.
The Swedish multinational has invested £6.5 million in the plant, which will manufacture chassis for the Olympian double-deck and B6 single-deck midi models for both domestic and export markets.
About 70 jobs have already been created, with the potential for 80 more once demand recovers and output reaches its full 1,500-bus capacity.
But Irvine's job boost comes at the expense of Workington, where Volvo's bus operations were located before the transfer to Scotland as part of a rationalisation.
Commenting on the move, Bjorn Larsson, president of Volvo Bus Corporation, said that deregulation, reduced subsidies and increased competition from the opening up of national markets was aggravating the problems caused by recession.
‘Given the depressed state of the UK market, it was absolutely essential that we took this painful action to bring down our break-even point and thereby tailor our company to its potential markets.’
Irvine plans to turn out more than 600 buses this year.
Orders for the Olympian have been received from the independent operator, Stagecoach, while a contract to supply 50 buses to Kowloon Motor Bus company marks Irvine's first foray into overseas markets.
Prospects for the B6 midi bus, a vehicle which plugs the gap between mini-bus and coach, are encouraging; the UK market is forecast to reach 500 units this year.
Volvo expects to produce 300 of those, which would give it roughly the same 60 per cent market share it enjoys in the heavy bus category after its takeover of Leyland Bus in 1988.
Further down the line, Irvine will also manufacture the B10 heavy-duty coach chassis when it is launched commercially in 1994.
Despite the recession, Volvo Bus's performance has been improving; last year, it delivered a record 5,582 chassis and increased its profits by SK220 million (£19 million).
Driving force: Bjorn Larsson, the president of Volvo Bus Corporation, which opened a new bus assembly hall at its Irvine site yesterday Driving force: Bjorn Larsson, the president of Volvo Bus Corporation, which opened a new bus assembly hall at its Irvine site yesterday
Open-cast mines fear being sacrificed to save pits
By Frank Frazer
FIRMS digging open-cast coal are worried that the Government's energy review might put curbs on a profitable business in an attempt to save pit jobs.
The fears were highlighted yesterday by John Chance, who chairs the open-cast coal committee in the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors.
He has written to Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, giving him warning that substantial unemployment could result from artificial constraints on the business.
Mr Heseltine is expected soon to release a white paper on energy policy which could set out plans for saving some of the jobs at pits BC want to close.
But Mr Chance claimed that a sustainable UK coal industry would need the financial support of open-cast mining, which last year earned BC a profit of £171 million and has contributed a total of £3.7 billion over the past 50 years.
According to Mr Chance, the average cost of production of open-cast coal is less than three-quarters that of deep-mined coal, making it fully competitive with coal available on the world market.
He claimed that contractors producing open-cast coal employed about 15,000 people and contributed towards investment of £1 billion in production which met a quarter of UK coal output.
‘This private industry fears that it may be sacrificed to make room for more deep-mined coal production.
The trade and industry select committee has already suggested that open-cast production should be sharply reduced — much to the consternation of British Coal,’ Mr Chance claimed.
He also said that BC would required an even larger subsidy from public funds if open-cast production was cut.
It could also mean having to import larger volumes of special grades of coal those sites produced.
Suggesting that the long-term viability of BC and its privatisation potential could be put at risk by curbs on open-cast operations, Mr Chance added: ‘Mining communities cannot be saved at the expense of the open-cast industry.
Their future is inextricably linked with our successful operations.
We can stand on our own two feet; deep mines cannot do so.’
Britannic life fund soars in value
By Ian Harper
BRITANNIC Assurance — sponsor of the English county cricket championship — yesterday reported lower pre-tax profits of £24.6 million for 1992 and a 13.6 per cent rise in its net dividend, from 29.5p to 33.5p.
The profits compare with £25.4 million for 1991, but analysts pointed out that the 1991 figure included a £4.9 million exceptional transfer resulting from a change in the bonus scales on the company's industrial branch business.
Life business profits rose 11.8 per cent, excluding the exceptional profits, while the general business staged a big recovery, slashing a loss of £1.54 million to one of only £205,000.
The key contributor to life profits came from the 70 per cent rise in single-premium pension transfers to £73.3 million, mainly recession-related transfers from occupational schemes.
Over 1992, the total value of the life fund soared 20 per cent, thanks to the surge in equity prices which followed the pound's departure from the exchange rate mechanism last September.
Britannic boasts one of the strongest free-asset ratios in the life sector.
The shares closed 40p lower at £13.03, but have risen from £11 each since 31 December in anticipation of climbing dividends.
Bunzl's new team does wonders
By Magnus Grimond
NEW management brought in 18 months ago at Bunzl, the plastic bottles to cigarette papers group, wrought wonders for margins last year.
Taxable profits more than doubled to £45.1 million in the 12 months to December as the team, led by Anthony Habgood, the chief executive brought in from Tootal mid-way through 1991, got to grips with loss-makers and revitalised other businesses.
About 1,000 people, or 10 to 15 per cent of the workforce, have left since Mr Habgood's arrival, while Bunzl has come out of a number of low-margin and loss-making businesses.
But overall trading margins shot up from 3.6 per cent to 4.4 per cent last year and Mr Habgood said the results show ‘sound evidence of long-term recovery.’
The figures were at the top end of expectations and Bunzl's shares firmed 2p to 132p.
Brokers now expect the group to make £54 million to £55 million in the current year.
The trend towards low-tar cigarettes saw margins soar 40 per cent to 10.2 per cent in the cigarette-filters division, centred on Filtrona, which supplies filters with activated carbon to remove tar.
Already the world's largest independent manufacturer, Bunzl has been expanding in the US and plans joint venture in India.
There was also a healthy increase in margins at Bunzl's biggest business — distributing disposable paper and plastic products — aided by its departure from paper trading, which also accounted for much of last year's drop in sales.
And though fine-paper profits drooped from £14.2 million to £13 million, they rose at Donald Murray Paper, in Glasgow, which remains ‘the biggest and best of our British companies within the fine-paper group’.
Land bank Wilson Bowden's strength
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
SMALL businesses do not seem to know about the industrial building allowances introduced last November, and the uptake has been very disappointing, David Wilson, chairman of Wilson Bowden, the Midlands house-builder and developer, said yesterday.
Only big companies are looking to acquire premises in the recession, and it will be 12 months after the upturn before confidence returns to the commercial development sector, he said.
But he expects Wilson Bowden to build and sell 1,650 homes this year, an increase of 30 per cent on 1991 and 1992.
Reservations have risen 50 per cent so far this year, with a single downturn the week-end before the Budget, and completions are running 15 per cent ahead.
With the average price likely to reach £80,000, turnover should be well ahead of last year's £127 million — down from £136 million in 1991 — of which £102 million came from houses.
Group profits slumped by 40 per cent to £16.9 million last year, of which houses contributed three-quarters and development, a quarter.
Earnings per share dived from 24.5p to 14.6p, but a final dividend of 6.2p holds the total at 8.7p, and the shares firmed 3p to 384p.
Wilson Bowden's strength is its land bank, which rose from 7,900 to 8,750 plots last year.
It will be gearing up this year, but is unlikely to repeat the 1991 rights issue.
EFM trust holding dividend
EFM Income, Edinburgh Fund Managers' split-capital investment trust, has fallen behind in its third quarter.
For the period 1 May, 1992 to 31 January, 1993, pre-tax profits dropped from £881,000 for the previous comparable period to £629,000.
The fund's dividends are paid quarterly and the third interim dividend is being held at the previous 1.2p, making a same-again 3.6p for the nine months.
Separately yesterday, the Department of Trade and Industry announced that it was not referring the proposed acquisition by EFM Dragon Trust of Drayton Asia Trust.
Returning to the Locust Years Abandonment of the Russian programme of reforms could have serious implications for the West, says GAVIN McCRONE
THE most important news for the economy in the last week or so has not been Mr Lamont's Budget, nor the Government's travails over the Maastricht treaty, but the challenge to President's Yeltsin's Government in Russia.
What is happening in Russia is not simply of political importance, a question of democracy versus a return to an old-guard Communist Government.
The really frightening aspect of what is going on is that the alternative to Mr Yeltsin would seem to be chaos involving a complete economic breakdown, from which only extremists could benefit and all of us would suffer.
Russia's inflation is running at an annual rate of 2,500 per cent.
GDP fell by 9 per cent in 1991 and was expected to fall by a further 14 per cent in 1992, which may well be an underestimate.
The collapse of the command economy has given way to a good deal of racketeering and corruption.
As a result unemployment, never before a serious issue in Russia, is a major concern and a large part of the population is now thought to be below the poverty line.
When one reflects on how unpopular our own Government becomes with a recession which causes GDP to fall by just over 3 per cent from its 1990 peak, it is scarcely surprising that the reform programme in Russia has provoked widespread discontent.
But if the reform programme fails, what is the alternative?
There must be many in Russia now who feel that conditions were better under communism.
Many of those who voted against Mr Yeltsin in Congress last week have probably deceived themselves into thinking that the hands of the clock can be put back.
Mr Khasbulatov, the Congress Speaker, who is Mr Yeltsin's main rival, seems to think in these terms, but more extreme nationalists are waiting in the wings who have argued for the reassertion of Russian power not only in the former Soviet Union but in Eastern Europe as well.
Like Humpty Dumpty it is unlikely that the communist system can be put together again.
Things have gone too far.
But if Mr Yeltsin is ousted, something very nasty could take his place.
Abandonment of the reform programme would probably result in hyperinflation getting completely out of control followed by economic breakdown, default on loans and an attempt at mass emigration by an impoverished population towards Central Europe.
This could have frightening implications, both political and economic, for Germany, which has done more to try to help Russia than any other European state, providing $40 billion in loans, half her external debt, and for the Eastern European countries which are still struggling to convert to a market economy.
Nor would Britain escape.
The one thing that even the anti-Maastricht rebels must realise is that whatever happens to the other countries of the Community affects Britain profoundly.
Destabilisation of the German economy could kill off Europe's hope of getting out of the recession.
An alternative outcome, but one which may well develop from the first, is the emergence of a strong nationalist dictatorship.
Conditions seem uncomfortably ripe for that.
The economic situation in Russia bears many similarities to Germany in the 1920s and we all know what followed in the l930s.
The loss of territorial control, with minority Russian populations in so many of the new countries, must have created a great deal of resentment, again not unlike Germany after World War l.
If that course is followed, we can say goodbye to the peace dividend.
Greatly increased taxes and a major shift back to defence expenditure could be the least of our worries.
Churchill's biographer refers to the years before the Second World War as the locust years.
The years since 1989 seem to have been similarly wasted as a result of an abdication of leadership in the West.
The revolutions in eastern Europe and the fall of communism in Russia presented the west with a rare historical opportunity to build a better and more prosperous world.
We have failed to grasp it and, although some of the eastern European countries now seem to be succeeding in the adaptation to a market economy, many others, including Russia, are likely to fail.
If they do, it may not be long before we have to pay the price.
Of course it was never going to be easy.
An exceptional effort is required and the parlous state of Russia's institutions means that a lot of aid might be wasted.
Not only funds but a proper strategy would be required and a willingness to import Russian and east European goods.
This needs appropriate institutions, similar to Marshall Aid after the war, instead of leaving it to the World Bank and the IMF and various ad hoc advisers.
The irony is that an effective scheme, which resulted in the rebuilding of Russian and eastern European industry with western expertise and equipment could help the West out of its recession as well.
World markets may test French resolve
BOSNIA still tugs at the heart-strings, while events in Russia are potentially stomach-churning, and share prices, from Hong Kong westward round the world, duly fell by up to 2.5 per cent yesterday.
But France still has the power to undermine the economic stability of the European Community.
And despite the even bigger swing to the right-wing coalition in the first round of the elections on Sunday, investors flinched yesterday in anticipation of a move by the markets to test the resolve of the new government which is expected to take power after the second round of voting this coming week-end.
The main concern is whether the new government will flex its muscles and try to tackle the widening economic stagnation and mounting unemployment by abandoning the policy of the franc fort, while the opportunity exists to do so, and blame the outgoing socialist administration.
Certainly, the new  administration would like to lower French interest rates, following the lead given by the Germans last week.
But to do so could be seen as the prelude to a deliberate devaluation, rather than the logical consequence of the German action.
While France stands shoulder to shoulder with Germany, and the two countries together account for half the EC output, the exchange rate mechanism will survive, representing a beacon of hope for federalists who still see a common currency as the bridge across which Europe must pass to a federal future, and a baleful threat for the sovereign Britishers, who see it as a black hole which could draw EC members inexorably into the same destiny.
Even those who are more relaxed about the prospect of a two-speed Europe, with a central core of countries, led by France and Germany and the Benelux states, going ahead to create the framework (while the outer periphery enjoys the freedom to make and break its own exchange-rate and interest-rate policy), recognise that once the core has started to attract countries away from the periphery, the survivors face increasing isolation.
Though they can enjoy the advantages of the single market, they do run the risk of losing the inward investment which has favoured the UK so far.
Even opting out of the social chapter to undercut the core on labour costs will not ultimately compensate for complete isolation.
On that basis, the new French government will have quite a responsibility.
US may move to bail out airlines
THE Clinton administration is considering loan guarantees and tax relief to help shore up the ailing US airline industry, as well as lifting restrictions on foreign ownership, the New York Times reported yesterday.
The new Democratic President is poised to play a far more active role in coming to the aid of the industry, which lost $10 billion in the past three years, than his Republican predecessor, the Times said.
Part of the approach is a 15-member commission authorised by the House of Representatives to come up with recommendations for new airline policies.
Senate approval of the commission is expected shortly.
The government-sponsored loan guarantees could be an alternative for some airlines which have been seeking foreign partners, the Times said.
Such loans would provide lower interest rates for rebuilding or replacing older aircraft by the year 2000, as required by law.
Next year, the airlines will also will be hit by a proposed increase in fuel tax.
In response, some policymakers support relieving carriers from the alternative minimum tax on corporations.
Another change administration officials are looking at is cutting the passenger ticket tax from 8 per cent to 2 per cent to encourage more travel.
Also to be reviewed is the $3 passenger charge imposed by some airports.
In terms of foreign investment in US carriers, the transportation secretary, Federico Pena, has said he favours the current 25 per cent limit on voting stock owned by foreign investors and the 49 per cent limit on their overall investment.
But he would be studying the issue.
— AP
Accountants welcome Budget VAT moves
By Peter Woodifield, BUSINESS EDITOR
THE Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland has welcomed the decision by the Chancellor to ease the penalties on value added tax offences.
Professor Alex McDougall, convener of the institute's VAT sub-committee, said ICAS had been pressing for Customs and Excise and the VAT tribunal to have to power to mitigate penalties.
However, he warned that the factors which will exclude the ability to mitigate penalties could be too widely drawn.
ICAS has also welcomed the Budget proposal to extend capital gains retirement relief by relaxing the existing 25 per cent shareholding condition to a single individual 5 per cent test and by allowing full-time working employees as well as directors to qualify for the relief.
But ICAS has criticised Mr Lamont for failing to take action to allow businesses to claim tax relief for expenses incurred after they have ceased trading.
ICAS called for tax relief to be available for revenue expenditure incurred within years after a company has stopped trading.
Professor Andrew Christie, convener of the taxation practices committee, said a good example of the programme was an architect or builder required to pay professional indemnity insurance long after he or she had retired.
In their case the  statute of limitations only started to apply once an actual fault was discovered, but their PI payments did not qualify for relief because they had stopped working.
Lamont stakes Scots jobs in tax gamble
FRANK FRAZER assesses what impact the Budget changes are likely to have on the North Sea's oil industry
NORMAN LAMONT took a huge gamble with oil jobs in his Budget package of offshore tax changes which caught the North Sea industry off-guard.
Computers have been working overtime at corporate headquarters since last Tuesday's announcement in an attempt to assess the impact on individual project and company cash flow.
Even when answers start to emerge, it will be some time before those who depend on the industry for a livelihood — and that includes at least 100,000 Scots — will know whether or not he has sent the right signals in a climate of fierce international competition for scarce oil industry investment funds.
In effect, the Chancellor did what many oil executives have urged him to do for years when he decided to abolish petroleum revenue tax (PRT) on future projects.
This means that profits on oil income will be treated like gains from any other business by being subject to normal corporation tax.
But the quid pro quo was the loss of the ability to offset exploration drilling costs against PRT liability on producing fields, a concession which reduced the actual cost of sinking a new well to just some 17 per cent of rig charges for companies which had such a tax shelter.
The measure was introduced in 1983 to encourage oil companies to reinvest funds in UK offshore exploration.
In this way, the Government hoped to obtain a more comprehensive picture of total oil and gas potential.
Perhaps those advising Mr Lamont consider the objective has been achieved by the high drilling success rates in recent years and there are enough oil and gas finds to sustain development work for the immediate future.
The inevitable slowing down in drilling which will stem from the withdrawal of the concession is bound to hit jobs at Scottish supply bases sooner rather than later.
But because exploration costs represent barely a fifth the total North Sea spending of about £10 billion, this may not be considered too heavy a price to pay for an attempt to switch activity towards developing some of the finds already made or maximising the returns from fields already in production.
But it is a calculated risk.
For one thing, the reforms — which include cutting the PRT rate on existing fields from 75 to 50 per cent— will not affect companies evenly because of the complex way in which the tax is structured and applied.
In fact, profits that escape the PRT net will still be subject to corporation tax which involves a different set of rules on capital spending.
For that reason, there may be some regret in the industry at the loss of the generous system of allowances that were available under the PRT regime which many companies had learned to live with for want of any better way of taxing oil income.
It was clear from Mr Lamont's comments that he hopes the restructuring of the system will improve the investment climate for larger projects which create the bulk of the jobs in platform yards and oil-related engineering work.
But while there may be a rapid rundown in drilling operations, it will probably take some years for the trickle-down effects to be felt from a spate of new projects spurred by tax changes.
In the short term, Mr Lamont may be the winner by saving on the tax relief that would have been granted if drilling costs were still available for offsetting against PRT.
But he or his successor will have to wait a little longer for the revenue benefits which should flow from the more buoyant climate for project investment he has tried to create.
Stewart forecasts Euro-trading boost
By Graeme Stewart INDUSTRY CORRESPONDENT
SCOTTISH companies should benefit from the decision to host the ninth Europartenariat in Glasgow later this year, Allan Stewart, the Scottish industry minister, said yesterday.
Mr Stewart said events like Europartenariat — a European Community initiative aimed at bringing together over 1,000 companies to form trading links — were important as it could help Scottish companies implement their European strategies by meeting potential business partners.
‘They can make deals with similar companies throughout the community and also attract potential partners from Eastern Europe.
This may involve sales of goods but also other arrangements such as manufacture under licence and technology transfer,’ he said.
Mr Stewart was officially launching Europartenariat, which will take place on 13 and 14 December, with support from Bruce Millan, the European Commissioner.
It was first announced 12 days ago by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, as part of the Government's ‘taking stock’ exercise.
It is predicted to be Scotland's largest-ever European business meeting.
Around 400 of Scotland's best small to medium-size companies and 800 to 1,000 selected European firms will meet on a one-to-one basis at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre to  discuss joint ventures, distribution agreements, technology transfers and other business partnerships.
Glasgow's Lord Provost, Bob Innes, said the event would be a wonderful showcase for Glasgow, its citizens and its business community and would bring substantial economic benefits to the city.
The Europartenariat programme in Scotland will be managed by Scottish Enterprise in partnership with Strathclyde Innovation, Glasgow District Council, Glasgow Development Agency and the other Scottish Enterprise local enterprise companies and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
Also attending the launch ceremony were representatives from the eighth Europartenariat taking place in Lille, France, in June of this year.
Together with Scottish Innovation, which has co-ordinated the attendance of Scottish companies at the previous seven events, they aim to attract a number of Scottish companies interested in forging links with European partners at Lille.
Charlie Woods, director of Scottish Enterprise's Scottish and international operations, said that Scotland's success in attracting the ninth Europartenariat offered a great opportunity for small and medium-size companies to make real progress in realising their ambitions on the European stage.
Laurence McGarry, chairman of Scottish Innovation, said: ‘We have hoped and worked for this for many years and without the support and assistance from a whole range of people, it would not have happened.
Each Europartenariat to date has generated an average of around 3,000 pre-arranged business appointments over a two-day period.
Around 40 per cent of the businesses in each host country have concluded co-operation agreements as a direct result of the event.
Future of Clark in balance
THE board of C&J Clark, makers and retailers of Clark's shoes, were yesterday locked in what looked set to be stormy discussions over its future.
A board meeting was due to decide between three possible bidders for the Somerset-based company, but the sale was likely to face opposition from a substantial minority of directors.
The three offers come from the commodity group Berisford International, FII, a supplier of shoes to Marks & Spencer, and a management group backed by Legal & General, the Prudential and Electra Investment Trust.
A spokesman said the outcome of the meeting would not be revealed publicly until later in the week, after shareholders had been informed.
Accidental change of gear in a driving career
A love of motor cars has transported Donald Heggie from the rally course to the business fast lane of accident repairs.
BILL MILLAR reports
DONALD Heggie was always interested in motor cars.
And he was always competitive.
So it is not surprising that his interest developed from driving them very fast and very skilfully to the point where he now heads a business specialising in accident repairs and coachbuilding with a turnover in the region of £7.5 million.
His relationship with the motor industry probably really came to the attention of the public in 1967 when he entered the world of rally driving in a self-prepared Mini Cooper S. The next year, in a Ford Escort 1600, he took his first Scottish Championship title.
It was the first of many significant wins — he took a second Scottish championship in 1980 — in a driving career which dove-tailed neatly with his growing business.
That started in 1972 in Cupar with three employees.
‘A year after we started off, we purchased some ground and built our first accident repair centre.
I remember it well.
It was put up for £2.20 a square foot.
The price was £12,500 if I recall and it was a wonderful moment when it went up.’
In fact, Heggie's first fully fledged repair centre was modelled on the Thatcham Insurance Repair Centre in the south of England.
Thatcham is funded by the insurance industry as a specialist operation which researches and measures how long all repair jobs should take, something of which most consumers will be unaware.
Colin Mitchell — the Heggie Group's managing director, since his departure last year as managing director of Wm Low Supermarkets — says Thatcham is an organisation which takes every car ever built, knocks hell out of it, then puts it back together again to prove the given number of hours per job.
‘Apply a labour rate and that is the cost of the job.’
He points out that contrary to the view held by many consumers: ‘We are in fact very well policed.’
In that first year, Heggie made £500 profit on a turnover of £50,000.
The business grew steadily.
‘I think the 1970s was a time when people were beginning to take a little bit more pride in their motor cars.
They were cleaned up for the arrival of summer and then it was not unusual if they were repaired before the onslaught of winter.
I saw an interesting industry in its own right which was changing and growing.
‘And anyway, I have a had a love affair with the motor car all of my life,’ says Heggie.
Within two years the Cupar operation had doubled in size.
In the intervening years the group adapted and grew, introducing the idea of a sales operation to liaise with the major insurers who now comprise such a crucial part of Heggie's industry.
It expanded into Kirkcaldy, Dundee and Dunfermline; extended into light commercial repairs, interior fabrication and painting of large commercials; introduced shot blasting and low bake oven systems and brought in a comprehensive computer system.
Autoquote, regarded as a world leader in the field of accident repair software systems, is described as being so comprehensive that if one coughs in one of Heggie's workshops it immediately shows up on one of the system's screens with a cost attached.
The company has moved fully into coachbuilding; turned itself into a PLC and, late last year, opened a £500,000 repair facility in the capital city, having acquired it the previous year.
The long-established Edinburgh firm, Lothian Coachworks, was the Heggie Group's first major acquisition.
‘It had been our ambition for some time to see our dominance in the east of Scotland established without doubt by virtue of a presence in Edinburgh,’ says Heggie.
But if progress in the past couple of decades has appeared hectic, there is plenty to come over the next two.
The company is in the type of industry which is going to need ever more careful management and control.
Consider the environmental implications, if nothing else.
As Mitchell explains: ‘We have to be very conscious of what we do to the environment.
The Environmental Protection Act (EPA), has a whole host of implications right down to the type of paint we can use by 1998.
The EPA relates to the fumes going into the atmosphere.
It relates to the waste going into the skip.
‘It costs us thousands of pounds a year just to register under the EPA.
It is very strict.
Let's say that every Thursday, we say that every skip that leaves here contains metal and rubber and somebody puts paper in there.
We are then in the High Court.
‘That is a slight  exaggeration but it makes a serious point.’
His point, really, is this.
If there are, for example, 11,000 accident repairers in the UK, most of them are likely to be small; one-man operations or not much bigger.
Such businesses are not going to survive in the face of the pressure being applied by insurance companies to have their customers only deal with approved repairers, particularly when it is becoming harder and more expensive to become an approved repairer and then maintain one's company as such.
Only the best operations will survive and prosper in the future for accident repair.
Perhaps, at the age of 21, the Heggie Group, has become a fully-fledged adult business.
It certainly looks that way.
What it will be like at the age of three score and ten remains to be seen.
But if the past points the way to the future, then a healthy and prosperous adulthood seems more than likely.
Pictures: IAN RUTHERFORD Paint job: Ian Dick works in Heggie Group's Cupar centre Repair men: Donald Heggie, left, and managing director, Colin Mitchell, who joined Heggie Group from Wm Low, are on course for continued growth and profit
Co-drivers ready for rapid acceleration
IT'S fair to say that the insurance industry has one of the greatest effects on the success or otherwise of Heggie's business; that and the inability of drivers to drive properly.
‘We are the part that allows them to retain their customers,’ Heggie says.
The insurers now have groups of approved repairers and it is often easier for a customer to use those, than to go off and find their own repairer.
It's why Heggie Group has invested heavily to ensure it stays an approved repairer.
REPAIR work is, of course, limited by geography and a repair centre usually operates within a radius of about 30 miles.
Heggie Group is no different.
‘The ambition is certainly not to go along at the existing size, growing by 5 per cent a year.
This is a perfect time for us to be putting our foot on the accelerator and move ahead,’ says Colin Mitchell.
‘We're placed to do it.’
It's a public secret that the immediate aims of the group are to get into bigger and better premises in Cupar.
On the accident repair side of the business there is no doubt that they also intend to expand and expand rapidly.
‘You can only do business in Aberdeen, Inverness and Stirling by being in Aberdeen, Inverness and Stirling,’ says Mitchell.
The group will be completing an expansion hit list fairly soon and Donald Heggie confirms that the company could cope with opening an accident repair centre — more likely by acquiring one — every two years without being swamped.
Accident repairs comprise around 80 per cent of the business.
But  coachbuilding looks set to increase its share of activity particularly because, unlike accident repair, it is not hindered by geographical limitations, only by lack of skill or ability, and that is not something hindering the Heggie Group judging by its track record.
‘We are confident we have the ability to compete successfully in a far bigger marketplace on the coachbuilding side.’
The group built Medic One for Lothian health Board, the crime caravan for Lothian and Borders Police, the hospitality coach for the Royal bank and a variety of other projects including vehicles for the disabled and elderly amongst others.
The company's ambitions were confirmed with the arrival of the hard-driving Mitchell last year as managing director.
With the growth that seems likely over the next few years one cannot help asking what the future holds.
Will it stay private for example?
‘No thought could be further from my mind,’ says Heggie.
There is much laughter all round.
And no answer.
Scooping the cool pool The soaring popularity of Haagen-Dazs in a market once directed only at children is an advertising triumph.
KAY BLAIR reports
‘Its ‘word of mouth’ share is out of all proportion to its share of what goes into the mouth'
MOMENTS of passion can include ice-cream so long as it is the grown-up variety.
Where once ice-cream was seen as suitable scoff to keep the under-tens quiet, the rise of premium products has cast a completely new light on adult indulgence.
So controversial has some of the advertising become that not long ago, a commercial for New England's Ice Cream based on a spoof scene from the film When Harry Met Sally was thought too blatant for normal TV viewing.
But why should this once lowly dessert have risen to such  epicurean realms?
Much of the reason for the recent surge in popularity of upmarket ice-creams is due to the entrance of a bold newcomer to the market: Haagen-Dazs.
Launched in the UK just three years ago, it now claims a 20 per cent share of the premium sector — and a very distinctive image.
This American brand surfaced in New York in the early 1960s.
The brainchild of Reuben Mattus, whose family had been making ice-cream in the Bronx since the 1920s Haagen-Dazs was planned to be everything that standard ice-creams were not.
It was priced accordingly.
As a name Haagen-Dazs meant nothing but its vaguely Nordic connotations, specialist distribution policy and quirky packaging quickly convinced New Yorkers that this was a cult food worth adding to their repertoire.
In 1990, Haagen-Dazs, now backed by the substantial resources of Grand Metropolitan, opened a shop in London's Leicester Square, in a market where the concept of premium ice-cream products was largely unknown.
This was an industry which, until the advent of the Mars Ice Cream Bar two years  previously , had been traditional and lacklustre.
Consumption per head of ice-cream in the UK was only one-third that of the US.
Ice-cream was looked on mainly as a cheap, default dessert appealing to a cost-conscious market.
As Chris Mole of Coopers & Lybrand says: ‘The competitive structure of the market was ossified.
There was a preponderance of ‘what you can get away with marketing’ as evidence by a mediocre quality standard, relatively few strong brands and a relaxed rate of innovation.’
Mars gave the market a much-needed jolt with the launch of its ice-cream bar and spurred competitors into action.
Other brand extensions, like Bounty, Milky Way and Penguin, expanded the market, while new frozen yoghurts added a health dimension.
The challenge for Haagen-Dazs was to lift market perceptions even further than the existing boutique brands, like New England and Loseley, had been able to do.
The same strategies that Reuben Mattus had used in New York were adopted — high prices, exclusive distribution, good quality controls, selective PR and a distinctive image.
Quite what that image should be was, in 1990, undecided.
‘Who would have believed that Haagen-Dazs could build a market for a product retailing at just under £3 per tub with a name that meant nothing, with understated quirky packaging in a country where a major recession was started to bite?
But the UK had never had a product like this and they needed it,’ says John Bartic, visiting professor at Strathclyde University and joint chief executive of Bartle Bogle Hegarty (BBH), the agency appointed to handle the launch and subsequent roll-out.
A research programme was undertaken to find out just what consumers thought of the product.
Quality was never in doubt but there were some interesting perceptions of Haagen-Dazs.
While existing premium products were considered adult they were, says Bartle, thought to be all about formal occasions, badge values and impressing others.
‘In our view, a lot of this was stiff, limiting and outdated.
Haagen-Dazs was different, seen as spontaneous, informal and casual which did not need overt luxury imagery.
It was considered a secret, almost illicit indulgence — a different kind of eating,’ says Bartle.
So here was a chance to create a new sector with a new kind of indulgence, with a product which had the credentials to exploit this opportunity,’ says Bartle.
Although BBH recognised the potential, the first advertising route was deemed, in hindsight, a ‘completely wrong turn’.
It concentrated on what went into the pot rather than what consumers might experience from it.
The the next advertising route captured the ‘Haagen-Dazs’ moment by conveying sensual intimacy between two people as they shared a pot of Haagen-Dazs.
BBH produced a campaign which broke conventional boundaries and, with it, gained reams of press coverage.
Says Bartle: ‘We demonstrated that you don't need to spend a vast amount of money for advertising to work and be successful.
We spent around £450,000 in 1991 on unconventional but highly selective media.
Haagen-Dazs became brand leader with around one-fifth of the premium sector market and was voted new product of the year by the Marketing Society.’
Cooper & Lybrand's Mr Mole says: ‘Haagen-Dazs has created a so-called super premium sector whose share of ‘word of mouth’ is out of all proportion to its share of what goes into the mouth.’
‘This is known technically as creating brand equity ahead of sales.
‘Haagen-Dazs for me demonstrates one of the rediscovered marketing lessons of recent years, that there are alternatives to the ‘all or nothing’ brand launch.
It follows the golden rule of seeded brands which is to break all the rules of classic brand launches.’
Hot and cold: The adult ice-cream approach has created an entirely new market sector
Working to keep up the family's spirits
LATTER-DAY Highland clearances have wiped most of the old independent whisky families off the map as their distilleries were progressively bought up by English and overseas landlords such as Allied Lyons, Guinness and Pernod Ricard.
But Sandy Grant Gordon remains clan chief of the whisky company set up in 1886 in Dufftown by his great grandfather, William Grant.
That it is still very much a family business is revealed by the manner in which staff refer to their chairman as Mr Sandy.
Slightly quaint-sounding in the age of multinationals, corporate image consultancy and power dressing, it nevertheless conveys a familial sense of respect mixed with affection.
That respect has been earned over the space of a 39- year career with the firm which has seen Grants take its Glenfiddich brand and turn it from a regional tipple in the north-east of Scotland into Britain's and the world's leading single malt.
Indeed, the company is just drawing to the end of a five- year £150 million capital investment programme.
The Grant dynasty is assured, with Mr Sandy having recently handed over the post of managing director to his nephew.
Elsewhere, the company begins to resemble a corporate version of the Broons, with other positions held by Mr Sandy's brother, two cousins, another nephew and his son and daughter.
With such a strength in depth of siblings and relatives in the organisation it may have seemed almost a foregone conclusion that Mr Sandy would follow his father into the business.
However, this had not been his original intention.
After completing his national service in the army he had planned to use his university degree in law and mathematics to embark on a career as a lawyer.
‘I made the decision to come into the business to please my father when he was dying.
I began by learning a bit of the trade and spent a summer up at Glenfiddich helping to put in a new storehouse.
‘There is a tradition in the company that the newest family member to join gets the least exciting part, so I was given Africa.’
Being allocated the entire dark continent as a sales territory for one man is a bit like being asked to cut the grass at Hampden Park single-handedly with a pair of nail scissors.
But Mr Sandy found it a stimulating, not to say exhausting, tour of duty.
On one three-month trip he made a total of 513 calls from Cape Town to Addis Abada.
Rather self-deprecatingly, he reveals that: ‘It became clear to me that my talents did not lie in selling.’
It is a telling admission for Mr Sandy, who  stresses that the sales force is the most vital aspect of any whisky company: ‘Distribution is the biggest single factor dictating how successful you are.
Essentially it is the sales force that matters.
For example, the whole evolution of Bells in Scotland since the war was due to Raymond Miquel's strategy on sales.’
Certainly his spell in Africa coincided with a period of great upheaval in the former empire countries that accounted for much of Grant's small overseas markets at the time.
He was there when MacMillan made his famous ‘Winds of Change’ speech and recalls being on the same Dakota plane to Sierra Leone as the Foreign Secretary, who was on his way to grant the former colony independence.
Even sponsored events became less than straightforward when transplanted to Africa: ‘I remember we organised a golf tournament in Mozambique and the competitors had to take their own grass seed.
The prizes were guarded by a man with an automatic rifle.’
But if the conditions under which the keen golfer had to play his 18 holes lacked the refinement of Gleneagles or the Old Course at St Andrews there were compensations.
Africa proved to be a paradise where Mr Sandy could pursue his favourite hobby of birdwatching: ‘It was a most enjoyable tour from the birdwatching point of view because you can see more species in one day in Africa than you can in a year in Scotland.’
Although a keen hillwalker in Scotland and the Spanish Sierras, he was never tempted to launch an expedition to conquer Kilimanjaro.
However, in a country where the air is as likely to be alive with mosquitoes or tsetse flies as flamingos, Mr Sandy discovered that whisky had additional uses: ‘It appeared that consumption of one's own product was an excellent anaesthetic for all the bugs in the tummy and I was never ill once.’
His responsibilities in Africa ended in 1962 and he moved to take control of the group's European operations which were  beginning to take off.
He offers his own experiences to support Tommy Dewar's maxim that ‘The Scotch whisky distiller is only at home when he is abroad’.
At that time the Grant's biggest market was in Sweden, thanks to partnership with local agents Tegner & Sons which dated back to 1910.
Even today Glenfiddich has an 84 per cent share of the single malt market in Sweden while the William Grant brand has 11 per cent of the blended market.
Mr Sandy recalls that the biggest challenge was just to get the name known in the major markets in Europe: ‘Whether the message coming back was ‘Unbekannt’ or ‘Pas Connu’the gist of it was that we were unknown and if you're trying to sell whiskies people haven't heard of, then you haven't got much to go on.’
Indeed, Grant's malt exports began almost by accident with the first significant shipments  beginning in 1963.
Before then, as Mr Sandy points out, malt's popularity did not extend much beyond the North-east and the western Highlands.
‘People from abroad were visiting the distillery and saying: ‘We like this.
Can we not have some where we are.’
In the past they had been told that there was no market for it, but we decided to supply them.
Through ignorance we did the right thing.’
Since then single malt has been a great success, but Mr Sandy feels that the Treasury is exploiting it: ‘Of course we were glad that the Chancellor decided not to increase excise on whisky, but last week's Budget has not made things right.
Britain is the one country in the world which is a net exporter of spirits but our  competitiveness is not helped by the high level of excise we have to pay.’
Ultimately he believes that harmonisation of duty within the European Community must happen, but he is not sitting on the edge of his seat waiting for it: ‘Politically we understand that uniform EC excise duty will not happen overnight, but alcohol is alcohol and we should be taxing alcohol volume and not the form that it comes in.’
However, while he laments the position, he notes that there is nothing new about the whisky industry's antipathy towards Her Majesty's Customs and Excise.
His Uncle John Grant was lobbying Lloyd George over whisky in 1909.
Despite the strictures imposed and the tough economic climate, William Grant & Sons is constantly investing in the future.
The £150 million expenditure plan has resulted in a new bottling plant at Strathclyde Business Park, a new malt distillery, two new stills at the Girvan distillery, reconstruction of warehouses and investment in stock.
Undaunted by the size of the spending programme, the family steadfastly refuses to relinquish any control through a share flotation.
‘We intend to remain independent and as we control all the shares we are able to do so.’
As to the future, Mr Sandy says that the world is Grant's oyster.
Distribution arrangements are being developed to give the company more control over its network.
He predicts that the Pacific market represents the best opportunity for the Scotch industry in future.
There are also plans to further develop the cereal processing at Girvan — something which Mr Sandy says will occupy him now that his nephew is in place as managing director: ‘It'll keep me out of mischief.’
Glasgow supplies a model of culture Civil servants from the Department of Trade and Industry have been urged to look to the Offshore Supplies Office for a role model.
FRANK FRAZER reports
‘What makes us different is that we are not concerned with a sector of industry.
We are concerned with a market’
AMID continuing controversy over plans to transfer civil service jobs to Scotland, there is cause for celebration in Glasgow over a success story which has shown that distance from Whitehall is no barrier to effective performance.
Walking past the headquarters of the Offshore Supplies Office in Waterloo Street gives little hint of operations which have stretched to every part of the globe for 20 years.
It is that long, this month, since a Government initiative to get British industry more involved in the oil business was launched in the wake of the first North Sea discoveries.
By recruiting a team of specialists able to relate experience of industry to the huge market opportunities, OSO has helped firms to capture the lion's share of a UK market worth more than £10 billion a year and branch into exports of the technology spurred by developments in UK waters.
Successfully managed from headquarters in Glasgow for the past 19 years, Michael Heseltine, the president of the Board of Trade, has decreed that the OSO experience be examined as a role model for restructuring the relationship between his department and industry generally.
As part of the process, OSO officials recently gave other civil servants a presentation on how the organisation is structured and the way it operates.
Administrators responsible for other areas of enterprise in the Department of Trade and Industry were asked to look at how the OSO ‘culture’ could be embraced in formulating wide-ranging plans to enhance Britain's role as a trading nation.
John d'Ancona, who has been OSO's director-general for 12 years, doubts if it will go as far as the creation of a series of OSO clones operating under the DTI umbrella to deal with specific industrial sectors.
But he believes there could be benefits for other DTI units in adopting OSO's integrated approach to industry support.
‘What makes us different is that we are not concerned with a sector of industry.
We are concerned with a market.
We have in our portfolio virtually companies from every sector — major fabricators, large engineering companies, power generators, diving companies, catering companies and service companies of every kind,’ he said.
Perhaps the most remarkable achievement of OSO is not only that it has continued as a headquarters unit functioning from Glasgow for so long, but that it survived the Thatcher era as an interventionist wing of Government intended to nudge work in the direction of British industry.
Its origins were as a ‘nannying’ organisation formed rapidly to ensure that UK companies were aware of the opportunities presented by North Sea developments.
It also had to tackle the challenge of ensuring international oil operators knew of the capabilities of local suppliers.
In the early days of North Sea exploration, it was not unknown for project teams to phone Houston, Texas, for a box of bolts which could have been bought off the shelf at an ironmongers in Aberdeen.
Mr d'Ancona recalls: ‘OSO started with the simple remit of cutting the umbilical cord which linked US oil companies with their established suppliers in the Gulf of Mexico, who were for the most part American.’
In fact, multinational oil companies working in the North Sea had little choice but to be receptive to the attempts to maximise the spin-off for UK industry if they wanted to stay in good standing with the Government when applications were being considered for exploration licences.
OSO had the challenge of ensuring UK firms responded to the opportunities created by the initial surge of activity.
Mr d'Ancona admits: ‘It was probably harder to get British industry to respond to the legitimate requirements of the oil industry than to get the oil industry to make allowance for the legitimate interests of the supply industry.’
Initially, OSO's efforts were helped by a ‘full and fair opportunity’ scheme negotiated with the oil industry which allowed vetting of bids when there was a risk of major contracts going abroad.
Offshore operating companies were also asked to provide quarterly returns which enabled officials to monitor the build up of UK capability in various fields.
This aspect of the work has been phased out over the last few years as the UK content in most projects has risen to more than 70 per cent, leaving OSO to concentrate on its other roles in encouraging research and development into new offshore technology and using UK expertise to gain export orders on the back of North Sea achievements.
Though the unit still has responsibility for keeping ministers informed of developments in the UK oil and gas industry, most of the 86 staff working for OSO now focus on worldwide developments, including opportunities in the former Soviet republics and other areas which were closed markets to British exporters until a few years ago.
Mr d'Ancona says much of the monitoring work done in Glasgow is geared to identifying projects which could yield future orders for supply companies which officials will alert by phone as soon as a trade lead is spotted.
‘We take the view it is better to get a partly complete story with a whisper of opportunity and get it to one or two key companies quickly so they can get out there, rather than sitting back and waiting for a nicely tailored account of what is going on which, by the time we get it to them, will be history rather than opportunity,’ he explains.
The desk studies are augmented by a regular programme of seminars and trade missions which OSO organises to keep the capability of UK industry in focus in leading oil centres around the world.
In particular, missions led by ministers have proved a useful means of opening doors for companies sending representatives.
But Mr d'Ancona points out that missions have to be seen as just the start of the process for companies serious about moving into export markets.
It does not follow that potential customers will automatically beat a path to the door of the firms which return home and make no further efforts to build on contacts.
As part of its operation, OSO also relies on feedback from companies which have gained first-hand experience of trading in specific markets.
‘We find that the pioneering work, the successful exporters, are really a handful of companies, maybe 100 or so right across the spectrum of technology.
You keep meeting the same people in a sector of industry all over the world.’
The people working for OSO have also become well-known faces at leading oil industry events throughout the world.
Many of the present team have been with the organisation at least since 1974 when Mr d'Ancona, an assistant secretary with the Department of Energy at the time, was asked to implement a political decision to transfer the headquarters of the fledgling organisation from London to Glasgow.
Because many of the key officials are settled in the Glasgow area, the Government has resisted pressures to relocate the office again — perhaps to Aberdeen where many of the oil-related firms are based, or even back to London which is a centre for international oil operations.
In using the OSO model to restructure industrial support within the DTI, ministers may be attracted by the benefits of devolving other activities the Glasgow experience has shown can be performed just as effectively out of earshot of Big Ben.
930323 
Setting an example: John d'Ancona believes there could be benefits for other trade units in adopting OSO's integrated approach to industry support
In your editorial today on the Budget (‘Good for firms, bad for people’) you referred to the ‘drastically increased cost of motoring’.
Although the duty increases on petrol are above inflation, they are not out of line in a longer-term perspective, as a simple calculation shows.
In 1983 a gallon of four-star cost around £1.80.
During the last ten years, cumulative price inflation has amounted to approximately 60 per cent, so the equivalent price of petrol today would be £2.90.
Even after Chancellor Norman Lamont's 15p is added, bringing the price to just over £2.50, in real terms petrol is still 14 per cent cheaper than it was ten years ago.
Really, motorists have had quite a ‘holiday’ in recent years.
I'm sure low fuel costs must be a contributor to the increasing urban congestion and pollution.
We tend to assume that everybody has a car these days and will be affected by these increases.
In fact nearly half the households in Britain don't have a car, in Glasgow it is 65 per cent.
These people depend on public transport, and have certainly not experienced a ‘price holiday’.
Rail users have been subjected to annual fare increases well above inflation for several years now, so it is quite justified for motorists to receive some of the same treatment.
I think they have got off quite lightly!
Lamont's car policy a modest step in right direction
The Chancellor of the Exchequer's increase in motoring costs and reduction in company car subsidies are a modest step in the right direction.
However, he will have to take much more radical steps if he is to acquire truly ‘green’ credentials.
Higher taxes on motorists should be only one measure in the context of a wider environment and transport policy.
It is pointless just taking more money from motorists if they are not also given real incentives to reduce their use of cars.
There must be a major shift in Government resources from road to rail.
Major road projects such as the M74 and dualling the A1 should be abandoned, or at least downgraded, and some of the money saved used to improve rail services.
There is, in any event, growing evidence that all other public services are suffering as a result of the concentration of the Scottish Office budget on road building (£500 million on the M74 alone).
The selfish Budget reaction of the AA, RAC and haulage industry is quite disgraceful.
What contribution are they making towards improving the environment?
The many motorists who are concerned about the environment and would like to use public transport more often should resign from the AA and RAC and join the Environmental Transport Association.
The growing trend towards private toll roads and bridges is directly contrary to our environmental needs.
Private toll operators will have a direct incentive to maximise traffic in order to maximise profits, probably at the expense of the railways.
For both environmental and economic reasons we should be taking every possible step to reduce road traffic.
Energy policy
It's too bad that endless repetition does not make a thing true, or nuclear power would be the safe, cheap, people-friendly option that Steuart Campbell fondly imagines (Points of View, today).
And how odd that his distaste for genuinely safe alternatives (wind and wave power) has become a phobia.
The grim vision of ‘green’ folly (‘the land [covered]with wind generators and the sea with wave generators’) is not something to smile at.
Fortunately, it is based on a false premise.
Any society which decides in favour of small-scale, decentralised means of generating power from renewable sources is likely to have made the decision to change its total course.
We conceive of a gentle, non-violent, ecologically sound way of living, with a reducing need for energy, as we transform an economy which is devouring its own natural basis.
Mr Campbell has simply spotted the contradiction in trying to support unrestrained economic growth with ecologically harmless systems for energy.
I hadn't heard of this ‘tide of concern’ that governments might over-react to the threat of global warming.
Is it ‘foolish to make drastic changes in energy policy until it is clear that there is a danger’?
The ‘danger’ is that natural processes are being fundamentally altered by human activities and, once begun, these changes cannot be switched off.
At this level science is not science but a series of best guesses.
How ‘clear’ does the danger have to be, bearing in mind the absence of alternatives?
It's not as if we could all flit to another ‘green’ world.
Tax plan triggers oil fields warning
By Frank Frazer
OFFICIALS of Amerada Hess, the US oil group which has been involved in developing several North Sea projects, warned yesterday that its drilling programme could be cut in half by tax changes proposed in the Budget.
The company is seeking urgent talks with the Government on the proposal to drop petroleum tax relief for drilling costs, citing the example of its small Angus field where profits would fall from £1.90 to 10p per barrel of oil produced if there was no allowance for drilling the cost of the exploration wells.
Though some oil companies with large fields will benefit from the tax changes, Sam Laidlaw, Amerada's managing director, claimed at a press conference in London that the measures could mean a shrinking in the size of the independent oil sector which competes with multinational companies for shares in offshore licences.
‘Those companies that will be most severely affected will be those who have demonstrated the greatest commitment to the future of the UK continental shelf through active participation in licensing rounds,’ he said.
Mr Laidlaw said he hoped there would be an early opportunity for talks with the Government to discuss the very serious implications for exploration activity levels and the future of the industry which has invested more than £120 billion in 170 platforms and 4,000 miles of pipeline to develop offshore discoveries.
While the development of some large oilfields could be helped by the changes, smaller finds could be hit by the cost of drilling rising fourfold through the loss of tax relief.
‘The North Sea of the future will be characterised by smaller fields with more marginal economics.
Without the benefit of exploration and appraisal relief, the cost of the search for these fields will be disproportionately high in comparison to opportunities in the rest of the world.’
He also pointed out that some ‘satellite’ oilfields, which are linked to processing plant on older platforms, could face higher costs through the ending of an allowance on tariff receipts, discouraging the use of existing pipelines and other infrastructure.
As assessments are made of the impact of tax changes on project economics, other oil companies are expected to join Amerada's call for Government consultation with the industry on methods of increasing taxation without affecting incentive for re-investment in the UK.
Pointing out that the Budget changes represented the most fundamental change in oil taxation for ten years, Mr Laidlaw added: ‘Commitments to drill wells under current licences were made on the basis of the existing fiscal regime and the widespread acknowledgement that fiscal stability is essential for the long lead times involved in offshore developments.’
P&O sells industrial services side to Granada for £360m
By Richard Shackleton DEPUTY CITY EDITOR
THE shipping, construction and property giant, P&O, yesterday announced the £360 million cash sale of its industrial services division, which includes Sutcliffe Catering and the Spring Grove laundry business, to Granada Group.
Shares in both companies rose on the news, P&O firming 2p to 603p and Granada gaining 20p to 385p.
Granada's chief executive, Gerry Robinson, who used to run a rival catering company, Compass, said the deal put his television, rental and motorway service station group in a leading position in two major service areas.
The company, which also runs the UK's biggest chain of TV rental shops, as well as the ITV contractor, Granada TV, will pay for the acquisition with £211.6 million from its own resources and the issue of 42.4 million new shares at 350p to raise £148.4 million.
In 1992, Sutcliffe generated operating profits of £29.1 million from sales of £500 million.
Net tangible assets were £49.2 million.
The P&O chairman, Lord Sterling, said the decision to sell Sutcliffe, which was UK-based, had been taken against a background of the need to increase the board's focus on the international nature of the group.
‘This sale gives P&O both greater resources and flexibility for the further development of our international businesses,’ he said.
He was speaking as P&O reported pre-tax profits last year which rose to £270.4 million, from £233 million in 1991.
Earnings per share fell to 32.9p, from 35.2p, but the dividend total is pegged at 30.5p with a final of 17p.
The Sutcliffe sale reduces P&O's gearing from about 80 per cent to 60 per cent.
Lord Sterling said the group's service companies had held up remarkably well in difficult conditions and the cruise division had produced a marked improvement in results.
P&O European Ferries had produced strong results once again from its Scottish and cross-Channel operations.
Lord Sterling has been urging the Government to allow co-operation with other ferry operators in the face of the imminent competition from the Channel Tunnel.
Container operations had been satisfactory, he said, but bulk shipping markets had weakened significantly.
Cruises had continued to perform well.
The Bovis construction division, while depressed in the UK, had continued to benefit from its expansion overseas and now had a worldwide order book of £3.4 billion, despite the international recession.
TSB chief given rough ride
By John Hatfield
TSB, the bank that likes to say yes, found its shareholders in a less than positive frame of mind at its somewhat stormy agm in Glasgow yesterday.
Sir Nicholas Goodison, the group chairman, tried to soften the blow of continuing bad debt provisions by telling shareholders that there were finally some signs of economic recovery after three years thanks to the fall in interest rates and the value of sterling.
‘All in all, we now believe that the corner has indeed been turned, although it would be a brave man who would say so categorically with the UK economy still in such an uncertain state.’
He reassured shareholders that the TSB would in future focus on banking and insurance services for personal and small business customers under the name of TSB, while the troubled Hill Samuel subsidiary would return to traditional merchant banking, concentrating on fee-earning services.
Although Sir Nicholas put a brave face on the massive bad debts provision at Hill Samuel and the management re-organisation, he came under fire from angry shareholders over the £750,000 pay-off to the former chief executive, Don McCrickard, and the performance of the ‘pasty-faced’ board.
Asked whether Mr McCrickard had jumped or had been pushed, Sir Nicholas stressed that the golden handshake was not ‘hush money’, adding that the resignation had been mutually agreed following restructuring talks.
The payment resulted from the fact that his three-year contract had some time to run.
When challenged as to why the ‘pasty-faced’ directors were not more representative of the public, Sir Nicholas replied: ‘If we meet someone outside Scottish and English nationality who meets our requirements they would be welcomed.
So far that has not been so.’
Elsewhere in his address he lamented the drop in property values after the last election which he admitted was ‘particularly annoying’ and not at all expected.
But he believed that the subsequent provisions for bad debts on commercial loans were realistic.
Sir Nicholas drew encouragement from the low level of provisions required on mortgages granted to retail customers which he said underlined the reliability of the TSB's traditional customer base.
Accounting changes and interest flatter Invergordon profits
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
INVERGORDON Distillers provided some distraction yesterday from the current difficulties afflicting the Scotch whisky industry with moderately improved full-year results.
But, though pre-tax profits for the year ending 31 December showed a technical increase of 16.1 per cent from 1991's £28 million, that year's profits figure was arrived at having been restated after an exceptional deduction of £4.2 million.
The figure related to the costs of the previous year's bid defence against the hostile takeover attempt by Whyte & Mackay and had to be taken above the line as a result of the FRS 3 accounting rule.
Accordingly, the 1992 pre-tax profits of £32.5 million were really up only 1 per cent on figures for 1991 which would otherwise have been shown as £32.2 million.
The pre-tax figure was also helped by interest charges, down by 37.8 per cent from £4.5 million to £2.8 million.
Invergordon did not have an easy time of it in 1992, a fact reflected both by turnover, down 8 per cent at £85 million, and operating profits, down 3.8 per cent at £35.3 million.
Though the group's branded business grew, the main problem was a 14 per cent drop in the sale of bulk whisky overseas, partly because the company had been undercut by other suppliers and also because the export market for bulk product cut its stocks in anticipation of price cuts.
While Invergordon had resisted cutting prices towards the end of last year, yesterday, its managing director, Chris Greig, said: ‘We're prepared to face reality now.’
The drop in bulk whisky sales was the reason for an overall fall in export sales of 3 per cent.
But there was a favourable movement in the mix of export business as bottled-in-Scotland volume increased by 12 per cent.
Discounting new distillate sales, about two-thirds of Invergordon's overall output is exported, with one-third going to the home market, where sales grew by 6 per cent as the group consolidated and grew its leading position in own-label Scotch whisky for customers such as Tesco and Safeway.
Although Invergordon had cut back production like most other distillers, Dr Greig stressed that there would be no closures or job losses, though he also said that life was ‘becoming more competitive all the time’.
The chairman, James Millar, said that while Invergordon could not be immune to the volume and margin pressures currently being experienced by the Scotch whisky industry, the group was well placed through the mix of its business to ride out the present difficulties.
Though Invergordon's shares dipped sharply early on in the morning after the figures, by the close of play they had recovered to end only 1p down at 269p.
Scotch on the rocks: Chris Greig is ‘prepared to face reality now’ and cut bulk export prices
Search on for aspiring magnates
A MAJOR drive to generate successful, new Scottish companies began yesterday with the launch of the Business Venture Programme which aims to establish quality businesses, writes Graeme Stewart.
The programme was conceived because Scotland seriously lags behind UK and European competition in the creation of new, fast-growth companies.
The ambitious initiative has a target of 36 businesses still in operation three years after start-up, each with a minimum turnover of £1 million, and at least one third of total output exported.
‘Those lacking in vision — and courage — need not apply,’ Helen Liddell, chief executive of BVP, told 600 business people at the launch in the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall.
She explained that three times a year 30 people, carefully chosen for their capabilities as team players as well as their business skills, will be put on a ‘fast track’ development programme lasting 11 weeks, out of office hours, eating into their weekends and challenging their endurance.
‘For that kind of penance they will pay £550 and know that the hard work is just a beginning.
But the odds are on them walking away with their own business — a team business — at the end of it,’ said Ms Liddell.
The programme is open to people who have been mulling over an idea for some time and experts will give it the commercial analysis it needs and, if it stands up, the business planning and search for funding that it merits.
Or a ready-made team may present itself with a management buy-out, buy-in or acquisition.
For anyone who has yet to come up with an idea, BVP will provide access into the venture portfolio of 140 successful US products, established by companies which have already developed their product and secured a significant market share.
Stuart Gulliver, Chief Executive of Glasgow Development Agency, which is supporting the BVP along with Scottish Enterprise, said the lack of new firms in Scotland had become critical compared to even the rest of the UK, never mind Germany or parts of California.
Expansion paying off at Bowater
THE packaging giant, Bowater, continues to reap the benefit of a sure-footed acquisition strategy, revealing yesterday a 49 per cent annual profits boost, in line with recent forecasts, writes Richard Shackleton.
The total dividend goes up from 10.3p to 11.5p, but it will be paid on 2 April, just before the new 20 per cent tax credit on dividends comes into force, rather than in June, saving the company £940,000, or the equivalent of 0.224p a share.
Pre-tax profits in 1992 climbed 49 per cent to £147.2 million, on turnover boosted by almost 24 per cent to £1.6 billion, as outlined in the recent rights issue document.
A year ago, Bowater called for £333.5 million cash to fund the takeover of a packaging business.
Last month, it announced it was buying Specialty Coatings International, of the US, for £305 million via a £295 million cash call.
Bowater said the deal would improve earnings this year and increase its sales of coated films and papers to £500 million.
Bowater's retiring chairman, Norman Ireland, described the purchase as an ‘exhilarating opportunity’ and said trading in the last four months of 1992 had been good and this had carried on into the first two months of this year.
‘The UK remains steady, but continental Europe has shown some decline,’ he said.
‘The US is performing well and Australia is showing signs of an upturn.
We remain cautious for 1993, but Bowater remains ready to move wherever the upturn in the business is sighted.’
Group earnings per share climbed to 25.2p from 18.5p.
Era falls to £978,000
THE explosive growth in the computer games market, now worth about £500 million a year, made a heavy dent in profits from conventional toys such radio-controlled cars, kits and train sets, causing many casualties.
Era Group, which operates the 70-strong Beatties toyshop chain, increased sales by 3 per cent to £73.3 million last year, but costs rose by 4 per cent and after servicing an unchanged interest charge of £1.9 million, pre-tax profits more than halved to £978,000.
After writing off an £819,000 investment in an unquoted company, there is nothing left for a dividend for the third year running.
Also, £192,000-worth of preference dividends have also been rolled up for future payment.
Era has dipped a toe in the computer games market, but is relying on the trend to computer toys for the whole family recreating a demand for conventional individual toys.
Wolseley eyeing Footsie
WOLSELEY, the West Midlands-based maker and supplier of bathroom furniture, drove sales up 30 per cent to £1,145 million and profits by 41 per cent to £47.6 million before tax in the six months to 31 January, and is now knocking on the door of the FT-SE 100-share Index, writes Clifford German.
But two-thirds of the profits rebound, or £9.3 million, came from Brossette, acquired last year, and the balance from the US, where trading profits rose 33 per cent to £18 million, and from manufacturing, which contributed 17 per cent more at £10.7 million.
The UK building distribution division remained relatively flat.
Net debt has doubled since July to £122 million, of which £44 million is attributable to the inflated value of foreign-currency borrowings, and interest charges doubled to £4.25 million.
But earnings per share still rose 30 per cent to 12.86p, out of which an interim dividend 14.5 per cent higher at 3.55p will be paid.
It has been brought forward to 5 April to allow institutional shareholders to enjoy the 25 per cent grossing-up for the last time.
There has been an upturn in demand on the east coast of the US, but in the UK, bulk building materials and plant hire remain moribund.
Wolseley's shares bounced to 617p before settling back to 604p, up 10p.
Scotch ‘needs youth tonic'
THE Scotch whisky industry was warned yesterday that it must aim its activities at younger drinkers to arrest the decline in sales.
In a report in Retail Business, the Economist Intelligence Unit said that although Scotch remained by far the best-selling spirit, its share of the total spirits market had dropped from 50.5 per cent in 1981 to around 40.6 per cent in 1992.
Lighter spirits such as vodka and white rum had become more popular, the report said, along with a growing array of speciality spirits and spirit-based drinks, all of which were eating into the whisky market.
In order to stem the decline, it was suggested that the trade must change its image and recruit younger drinkers.
Power game to test the nerves
PREVIOUS whisky industry wisdom had it that Whyte & Mackay, largest minority shareholder of Invergordon Distillers since it made its hostile bid, was going to wait for yesterday's results and, if they were  sufficiently poor to drive down the share price, would then pounce for the remaining 8.8 per cent of shares to give it control.
But this became highly unlikely when it was established early in the day that W&M's chairman and chief executive, Michael Lunn, was in Weybridge for the group monthly meeting, and the marketing director, Charles Shaw, was highly likely to head home with a heavy dose of ‘flu.
Finally, in spite of some difficulties, Invergordon had improved its profits.
We have the distinct feeling that W&M had no intention of relaunching its bid yesterday and may not be about to do so for some time, which begs the question: what's the strategy?
W&M would only reiterate that its options remained open while Invergordon would only state there had been no talks with W&M regarding the proposed takeover.
But some factors remain clear.
W&M can afford to wait and see what happens to Invergordon.
The Glasgow distiller, owned by the mighty American Brands, only needs to advance its 41.3 per cent stake to just over 50 per cent.
On the other hand sentiment is changing the way in which hostile takeovers are regarded.
Where once price was all, now predators are not so well thought of.
So laying its hands on that 8+ per cent may not be as straightforward as might once have been thought for W&M.
On balance, it is probably fair to say that the odds have now moved slightly in its favour.
Above all, what is clear is that this has become a poker game only for those with the steadiest of nerves.
UniChem nudging £32m
UNICHEM, the drugs distributor and pharmacy chain, reported further growth in market share last year as it unveiled profits up 49 per cent yesterday, writes Magnus Grimond.
The group said it had continued to expand its stake in a pharmaceuticals market estimated to have increased by 11 to 12 per cent in 1992.
Pre-tax profits soared from £21.4 million to almost £32 million and the company joined Iceland Frozen Foods yesterday in announcing turnover that topped £1 billion for the first time, jumping from £920 million to £1.05 billion.
A final dividend of 3.75p lifts the 1992 total from 5p to 5.65p, and the shares jumped 7.5p to 243.5p.
Much of the boost to profits came from pharmaceutical retailing, which has been built up almost from scratch since the E Moss chain of chemists was bought in 1991.
Helped by a couple of purchases north of the Border, the chain has grown from 130 at the beginning of 1992 to 209 now, with operating profits leaping from just £700,000 in 1991 to £4.9 million last year.
The three Portuguese pharmaceutical wholesalers acquired in the first half of 1992 made their first contribution, but disposing of the nappy-making business cost UniChem £2.4 million below the line.
£34m call as Clyde Petroleum loss leaps
By Frank Frazer
AFTER a pre-tax loss rising last year from £4.7 million to £41.1 million, Clyde Petroleum yesterday asked its shareholders to provide a further £34.1 million through a one-for-four rights issue.
The shares eased 4p to 51p.
Colin Phipps, the chairman, said the extra funds would give flexibility to control peak borrowing during heavy investment in major developments, including the Gryphon field, in the North Sea, for which a production vessel has been bought.
‘Once our new developments come on stream, the group will experience strong cash flow, enabling it both to reduce borrowings and to resume dividend payments,’ he promised.
In addition to paying no dividend for 1992, the company will pay nothing for 1993, though it promises a total of 1.5p for 1994.
The 1991 total was 1.25p.
The loss per share rose last year from 0.4p to 12.4p as turnover dipped from £87.2 million to £83.3 million, in spite of production being maintained at about 24,000 barrels per day, which is forecast to rise by 60 per cent over the next 12 months.
Clyde's oil and gas reserves rose from the equivalent of 122.8 million to 167.9 million barrels last year and it expects to have 90 per cent of them in production by the end of 1994, when output should average 40,000 bpd.
The company has decided to adopt the ‘successful efforts’ method of accounting for oil and gas expenditure used by many other oil companies.
This requires the cost of unsuccessful wells to be written off directly in the profit and loss account, instead of affecting longer-term profitability.
Clyde also said that it did not expect any significant impact from last year's Budget tax changes which restricted tax relief on future exploration spending.
It explained that steps had already been taken to reduce future UK exploration commitments.
Trinity gets £2m Scottish boost
STRONG advertising volumes and strict control over costs last year helped the publishing group, Trinity International, to boost pre-tax profits by 27 per cent.
The company, which publishes the Daily Post and Liverpool Echo, saw its 1992 total leap to £16.9 million, from £13.3 million the year before.
UK operations accounted for more than 86 per cent of profits, almost £14 million.
The figure was swelled by a £2.04 million contribution from Scottish & Universal Newspapers, the string of weeklies bought last year.
And £1.66 million came from the sale of the paper-making and packaging businesses.
Chester-based Trinity saw profits at its North American operations fall to £2.04 million, from £3.3 million before, after a £1.53 million charge for closing two loss-making businesses in Canada.
The company is cautiously optimistic about current trading in the UK and believes action taken in Canada and the upturn in the US should bring about an improvement in its North American fortunes.
Earnings per share climbed from 15.6p to 17.1p and the total dividend is raised from 8.1p to 8.7p after a final of 6p.
Trinity's shares gained 9p to 339p.
Poor trade figures rattle markets
By Clifford German
STERLING wobbled yesterday as markets reacted to Monday's news of a worsening trade deficit with the world outside Europe, and by early afternoon the pound had fallen 2.5 pfennigs to Dm2.4120, only to rally and end the day at Dm2.4229 down just 1.35 pfennigs.
Sterling also rallied from a low of $1.4767 to close at $1.4825, two thirds of a cent lower on the day.
The mark also edged higher against the dollar after the Bundesbank announced it would allow market forces to set the rate for the weekly cash injection today, signalling a potential rise in the ‘repo’ rate.
But many dealers remain convinced that the mark has peaked against both sterling and the dollar.
The FT-SE 100-Share Index was also affected by the poor trade figures and the persistent flow of rights issues, which turned a ten point initial improvement into a 13 point drop by early afternoon.
But it also rallied from a low of 2,851.0 to close just 2.8 down on the day at 2,861.1, with just over 700 million shares changing hands.
Food retailers lost ground after cautious broker forecasts, with Sainsbury down 9p to 506p, Kwik Save 41p lower at 801p and Argyll down 10p at 343p.
Brewers also met downgradings and Bass closed 8p lower at 563p but pharmaceuticals rallied.
Yesterday's results raised More O'Ferrall the outdoor advertising group 12p to 242p, after the group announced an unchanged dividend of 13.2p for the year, in spite of a drop of 13 per cent in profits to £5.04 million and an extraordinary loss of £4.8 million on the sale of the US business.
United Friendly rose 65p to 715p after announcing a review of future distribution policy, leading to hopes of appreciably higher future dividend pay-outs.
Expansion of share shops scheme planned
THE share shop idea used in the last sale of BT shares is to be expanded to promote the share-buying habit, the Government announced yesterday.
More shops will be encouraged in the next BT share sale and it is hoped they will remain in business for future dealing.
‘These plans are designed to further the Government's commitment to wider and deeper share ownership and to a successful sale of BT shares in 1993/4,’ said Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, told a seminar of stockbrokers and other financial intermediaries.
In the last BT sale in December 1991 only eight organisations volunteered to set up shops, which provided low-cost, no-frills share dealing.
For the next sale, a wider range of firms will be eligible to establish shops and applicants using them will have preference in allocations if there is heavy demand.
Mr Dorrell said the arrangements represented an opportunity for participating intermediaries to build lasting relationships with a wider range of investors.
‘I look forward to the branded Share Shop identity enduring beyond the offer and becoming a recognised symbol for accessible and affordable advisory and dealing  services .’
No decisions have yet been announced of how much of the Government's remaining 22% stake in BT will be sold and when, but the earliest timetable would be a sale in the middle of July.
Setback for oil minnow
EDINBURGH Oil & Gas, the Scottish exploration and production minnow, saw its operating profits rise sharply last year, though the headline profits figure dropped dramatically, writes Peter Woodifield.
Turnover at the group, which now has an interest in three onshore fields, rose 4.4 per cent to £1.9 million in the 12 months to 31 December, but operating profits shot up from £2,000 to £32,000.
Pre-tax profits, however, fell from £285,000 to £56,000 as the company saw no repeat of the previous year's big investment gain.
Colin Ross, chairman, said one well, a development of the West Firsby field, had come on stream this month, adding about 60 barrels of oil per day, or 20 per cent, to net output.
Mr Ross, who described 1992 as a year of consolidation, said the company expected to hear in May the results of its first application as an offshore operator after the outcome of the 14th licensing round.
New accounts make Prudential results look rosy
By Ian Harper
THE Prudential — the UK's largest life assurer — yesterday unveiled a 223 per cent leap in pre-tax profits to £406 million for 1992, despite a near-doubling of its general insurance losses.
The shares firmed 3p to 329p.
The huge surge follows the implementation of the FRS3 accounting method, which led to a restatement of the 1991 pre-tax profits to £182 million, from the previous £267 million, as well as earnings per share from 7.5p to 4.7p.
The total dividend is 8.2 per cent up on 1991 at 11.9p.
The year was characterised by a significant rise in life profits and a heavier-than-expected loss on the general reinsurance activities.
Worldwide, life profits rose 15 per cent to £444 million, with the UK contributing £276 million, up 5.7 per cent on 1991.
In the US, the Jackson National Life subsidiary contributed profits of £86 million, a 43 per cent rise on 1991.
However, while worldwide general losses rose from £58 million to £110 million, the UK motor and domestic insurance business increased profits from £2 million to £33 million.
‘A dire result from M&G Reinsurance’ was behind an increase in losses from £60 million to £143 million.
This reflected an underwriting loss of £187 million — £56 million from the two North American Hurricanes, Andrew and Iniki, and £53 million from marine losses.
In contrast, M&G's life operations turned in pre-tax profits of £67 million, up 10 per cent on 1991.
The board said that, on the life side, the Pru, having completed the reorganisation of its direct sales force, was now aiming to capture 10 per cent of the independent adviser market ‘by the end of the decade’.
The Pru's share of this market has increased from 1 per cent three years ago to 5 per cent now.
Heat is off as Stakis bounces back
By John Hatfield
IF Stakis shareholders had come to bury Caesar last year then they were there to praise him at yesterday's annual general meeting in the Normandy Hotel in Renfrew.
The chairman, Sir Lewis Robertson, drew satisfaction from a year which saw the hotels and casinos group improve operating profits by 50 per cent to £20.5 million and convert a £47.4 million pre-tax loss into a small profit.
He was also able to report that under the new chief executive, David Michels, the group had regained control of its runaway balance sheet position by selling its Ashbourne nursing home division, launching a well-received rights issue and restructuring the banking arrangements with a considerable reduction in the number of banks.
‘The stock market has recognised this in its affirmative response to the rights issue and the share price now stands at 53p against the 38p that would have resulted if the market had simply absorbed the rights issue and stood still.’
During his address Sir Lewis took the opportunity to scotch rumours, which appeared in the Independent on Sunday, that he was due to retire.
He also justified the £90,000 initial payment made to Mr Michels: ‘When a plc — and one widely understood to have at least some problems — needs to attract a high-flier from a perfectly secure position with another plc, a joining fee of this sort is not in the least unusual.’
Sir Lewis did not have a completely smooth ride, however.
Calls from the floor for a re-introduction of travel assistance for staff and more provision of facilities for the disabled were dexterously handled, as were queries over the treatment of extraordinary and exceptional items, valuation of properties and directors' remuneration which Sir Lewis said had been put up in line with the rises awarded to employees.
The most telling exchanges came between Sir Lewis and his long-time sparring partner, shareholder James Middlemass.
While their confrontations are now almost a ritual mixture of banter and cross-examination, they did produce the highlight of the meeting.
Having taken Sir Lewis to task over the delay in holding the agm and Mr Michel's joining fee, Mr Middlemass was applauded when he took issue with the extraordinary motion to increase the employees' discount on share options to 20 per cent.
‘It seems to me that when the goodies are being distributed and the cake is being sliced, only crumbs will fall to the shareholders.
Twenty per cent is excessive and tending to abuse.’
However no shareholder rebellion was on the cards given the satisfaction with the group's recent performance and only a handful of investors voted against the proposal.
STAKIS has plans to move one of its Scottish casinos to a city centre ‘greenfield site.’
According to chief executive David Michels, the development is likely to take place in Glasgow although a location in another Scottish city is under consideration.
But he added that the move would not take place until the end of the year at the earliest.
Sir Lewis made reference to the move in his address at the annual general meeting saying that Stakis already had three such ‘above-ground’ casinos and that this format increased revenues.
Mr Michels also confirmed that occupancy rates in Stakis hotels over the last financial year had averaged 65 per cent.
‘That's a lot higher than a lot of our competitors are achieving.’
STEPHEN MANSFIELD Focus of attention: Shareholders keep the Stakis chief executive, David Michels, in sight — even when not inside the meeting
Forestry jobs boost as factory expands
AROUND 150 jobs in the forestry industry are being created in northern Scotland following the decision of four local enterprise companies to join forces and fund a £2.7 million wood processing factory extension near Inverness.
Some of the jobs will be based at the Norbord Industries factory at Morayhill, but the majority will be in the forestry and transport operations of sub-contracting companies throughout the central and northern Highlands, Dr Maurice Cantley, director of industry at HIE, said at a ground-breaking ceremony at the factory.
The project will see a second production line installed, at a cost of £20 million, in a 100,000 sq-ft extension at the HIE-owned plant, where Norbord makes oriented structural board, a plywood substitute used in the construction industry.
The expansion will see the company step up its demand for an additional 200,000 tonnes of commercially-grown timber per year.
The move by the LECs, part of the Highlands and Islands Enterprise network, aims to create new jobs in areas recently worst hit by the downturn in oil fabrication work.
About 50 additional jobs will be created in the Inverness and Nairn Enterprise area, 40 in Ross and Cromarty, 35 in Moray, Badenoch and Strathspey and 25 in Caithness and Sutherland.
In addition, Norbord is to bring together administration, accounting, marketing and group computing departments at Morayhill, supporting sales offices throughout Europe.
The expansion includes fitting the latest pollution control equipment to both the existing and new production lines at a cost of £3.5 million to allow the plant to meet stricter legislation due to be implemented in 1996.
When the project is completed, the company intends to purchase the entire property from the HIE Network over 20 years, providing finance to re-inject into Highlands and Islands development.
Dr Cantley said: ‘The Norbord plant is the largest unit owned by the HIE Network, and the scale of the expansion does not allow the company to fund both the equipment and the building.
Our assistance breaks that barrier while allowing for the funds to come back to the Network when the company steps up production and is earning a return on its investment.
‘This expansion  fulfils our best hopes when the project started up eight years ago.
It is excellent news for the area, building on the success of the business and creating natural resource-based jobs in areas which are all affected by the current decline in oil industry fabrication work,’ said Dr Cantley.
‘In addition, it provides a local market in which we can add value to 200,000 tonnes of commercially-grown pine which would otherwise be sold for processing outside the Highlands.
‘I am particularly pleased that, as part of the development, the Morayhill factory will become a major administrative centre for Norbord, as it is further proof that the advanced telecommunications network in this area enables companies to carry out office functions efficiently and cost-effectively in the Highlands and Islands.’
Buy-outs ‘augur well'
THE number and value of management buy-outs and management buy-ins in 1992 augured well for the future of the market, according to research published yesterday, though the number of transactions increased only very slightly over the total for 1991, writes Bill Millar.
The Centre for Management Buy-out Research said that confidence was returning to the market, though final figures for 1992 indicated only one more MBO in 1992 than in 1991 at 446, and 12 more MBIs, at 134.
In total, the market increased in value in 1992 by 15 per cent over the previous year to £3.26 billion, it said.
Of all merger and acquisition activity, MBOs now accounted for 58 per cent by volume and 36 per cent by value according to the CMBOR.
Buy-outs from receivership featured strongly during the year, while buy-ins from receivership fell.
BBA seeks £126m for continental purchases
By Magnus Grimond
BBA, the automotive parts to aircraft interiors group, yesterday announced it was tapping shareholders for £126 million to pay for expansion in continental Europe.
The company is adding to its electrical engineering business with the purchase of Haefely Holding, of Switzerland, a maker of components for high-voltage electricity transmission, and MWB Vermoegensverwaltungs, of Germany, the world's leading manufacturer of explosion-proof, gas-insulated instrument transformers.
Haefely is to cost 110 million Swiss francs (£49 million), while Dm12 million (£4.9 million) is being paid for MWB.
In addition, BBA will take on debts equalling £16.3 million and £15.9 million, respectively.
BBA said it was making the acquisitions to strengthen its Trench operation, in Canada, the air-cored reactor business acquired with Guthrie Corporation in 1988.
It wanted to create ‘an outstanding electrical power distribution equipment group which will be the leader in each of its chosen products and markets’.
The high-voltage transmission and distribution sector served by all three companies had proved ‘remarkably resilient’ during the world-wide recession, it added.
Haefely raised operating profits from Sfr12.7 million to Sfr17.7 million (£7.9 million) on turnover of SFr152 million (£67.9 million) last year.
MWB made Dm3 million (£1.2 million) on sales of Dm74.3 million (£30.5 million) over the same period.
BBA's board said yesterday that the remainder of the proceeds of the one-for-four rights issue at 142p a share, plus the recently-announced sale of BBA's stake in Pacific BBA, would be used to cut borrowings.
The group's pro forma gearing should then fall from 61 per cent to 21 per cent as at the end of December.
BBA's shares lost 7p to 170p yesterday after the news.
£1.7m deal revives Fife company
By Keith Aitken ECONOMICS EDITOR
A FIFE engineering company which went into receivership in January has been revived through a £1.7 million management buy-out which will save 85 of its 200 jobs.
Barr Thomson Engineering was relaunched yesterday as BTE (Glenrothes), after an 11-week negotiation culminated in an innovative rescue package involving a partnership with a major customer, Tecnomarine Services of Aberdeen, and a consortium of backers from both the public and private sectors.
The backers include the Scottish Office, Fife Regional Council, Glenrothes Development Corporation, the Bank of Scotland and Edinburgh Financial Trust.
The management team, led by the managing director, Peter Dunn, has also invested heavily in the project.
BTE Glenrothes will take over the existing subcontract engineering business.
Barr Thomson blamed the Government's pit closure announcement for its failure.
It had fought aggressively to diversify away from its mining mainstay into new oil and gas-related markets and had reduced its mining dependency from 80 per cent of turnover two years ago to 30 per cent.
Last year it completed a multi-million pound contract to supply seal tubes for the Norwegian Troll gas field, and had hoped to  spread deeper into the offshore sector.
But Barr Thomson Engineering could not escape the knock-on effects of the pit closure announcement and was forced into receivership.
Senior executives were yesterday confident, however, that the future looked secure.
Mr Dunn said the firm hoped to create more jobs in the not too distant future, while Roddy Ross of Tecnomarine said the partnership between the two engineering firms represented a strengthening of relations between them and would work to mutual advantage.
‘The next few months will be extremely difficult but I am confident that our reputation for quality, forged with our customers over the years, will allow us to bounce back quickly and develop rapidly to create more jobs in the not too distant future,’ Mr Dunn said.
Ian Murdoch of the receivers, KPMG Peat Marwick, said: ‘It is always satisfying when a quality company is saved and particularly when it is sold to the management who built it up.’
Manufacturing start-ups at a high
MANUFACTURING industry was responsible for nearly 13 per cent of all start-ups in 1992 at 59,150 — the highest share for the sector since 1980.
This is revealed in the latest figures from Barclays Bank, which said that sterling's 15 per cent devaluation and the 4 per cent fall in interest rates following the UK's withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism in September 1992 had led to a sharp increase in business confidence in manufacturing in the first quarter of 1993.
Questions to be asked about Forestry Commission income
ROBIN CUTLER, director general of the Forestry Commission, will be questioned by Parliament's public accounts committee this morning.
One question is certain to be why commission income of about £70 million a year from timber felling is not more than £80 million.
The ‘missing’ £10 million has been estimated by the independent National Audit Office in a report published earlier this month.
It arrived at that by concluding that almost half the trees are felled more than five years before, or after, their age of theoretical maximum return.
Felling at precisely the right time, possibly a tall order for the commission, the UK's largest timber producer with 900,000 hectares of forest valued at £2.8 billion, could add 15 per cent to timber value, according to the audit office.
That could be seen as a minor complaint when the Forestry Commission's marketing efforts in the past 20 years have attracted investment of more than £1 billion in wood processing.
The commission has also reduced harvesting costs by more than 40 per cent since 1980 by better working systems, more use of contractors and more mechanisation.
But the National Audit Office, using Finnish-based international forestry consultants, overseas visits and information from Canadian forests, concluded that there was still room for improvement.
That was particularly true for deciding the most profitable time to fell trees on the 900,000 hectares, more than 700,000 hectares of that in Scotland.
One problem is that, apart from supplying timber, the commission's forests are used for recreation and conservation.
It claims it is impossible to get maximum returns for timber when trying to meet other objectives.
What happens in practice is that the overall system forecasts which timber is available for harvesting, but local managers adapt those forecasts to help meet other objectives.
An audit office analysis of 2,300 forest areas revealed that 49 per cent of trees were being felled on average more than five years before, or after, their age of theoretical maximum economic return.
Those decisions to alter production plans represented £5.6 million a year forgone, about 8 per cent of the value of timber harvested.
The audit office also found that the Forestry Commission had not been consistently monitoring variations between its overall plan and adapted local programmes.
Estimated cost of those variations was £5.2 million.
Planned increases, with production expected to double to seven million cubic metres of timber by 2010, could make the loss much bigger.
The main problem, according to the audit office, is that there is no clear link between the commission's production plans and actual production, making it impossible to identify the full extent of variations between planned, programmed, and actual forest areas supplying timber.
‘In contrast, overseas forest organisations regard this link as an essential in managing their forests.’
It's a problem the Forestry Commission must tackle to make the most of income from timber, say the audit office.
Robin Cutler: director general of Forestry Commission
Dairy unit venture with a difference
AN INCREASING demand for hypo-allergenic dairy products has led a Tayside woman to take the first tentative steps towards setting up what it is thought would be Britain's only mare milking unit.
Catriona Rowan has carried out initial research, trials and consumer testing and is satisfied the project would be viable running a herd of ten Highland pony mares and followers.
The milk and products could be marketed as a very Scottish speciality food, she said from her home near Kirriemuir.
Recording the lowest fat content of available milks — 0.9 per cent to 1.06 per cent— makes mares' milk particularly attractive to people with eczema, asthma and digestive disorders, she suggested.
She has already tried it successfully on one of her sons whose eczema disappeared while he was taking the product.
Its taste, light, slightly sweet and with no unpleasant or strong odours or flavours, is an added bonus and one which surprises most people who try it.
‘For these reasons I think there is a fairly strong case for marketing it as a health product but it will also probably be considered a luxury,’ Mrs Rowan added.
She is not considering charging anything like the £7 a litre at which the health drink sells in Germany.
Perhaps just slightly more expensive than goats' milk, she said.
Through her keen interest in horses, Mrs Rowan had read many years ago of the Russian and Mongolian mare herds and the tales of the Huns surviving on the milk during their rampaging campaigns.
About 18 months ago, she became aware of the successful development of sales of the product in Germany and Sweden and began her project which now hinges on a decision to be made by Perth and Kinross District council today.
The Rowans plans to run the mares on 112 acres they have bought in Perthshire.
Milkings three times a day would necessitate living nearby and they have applied for permission to build a farmhouse and steadings.
‘This is a very precious project to us and we really could not give it up now.
It just seems right to bring a hobby, my experience and a livelihood together and we are very set on giving it a go,’ Mrs Rowan said.
Cattle control document clarification
FROM 1 April all male cattle more than three months old which have been registered must be accompanied by their relevant Cattle Control Documents when sold by auction.
Trying to clarify confusion which has arisen about the system, the Institute of Auctioneers and Appraisers in Scotland has issued a statement: ‘It should be clearly understood that all registered male animals must have Cattle Control Documents transferred to the new buyer when sold at auction marts.’
Sellers will be responsible for the authenticity of all ear numbers and for ensuring that the identification of these animals is accurately related to the CCDs.
Auctioneers suggest for ease of identification cattle should have a distinguishing mark, or coloured jumbo eartag, which will relate to the official ear number on a small metal tag.
They emphasise that a pre-entry signed document with a list of numbers is not enough.
Scots hit as Keith is forced to pull out
By Elspeth Burnside
COLIN KEITH, a hero of last year's victory, has been forced to pull out of Scotland's team for the defence of the European Championships in Aix-en-Provence from 28 April-1 May.
The 24-year-old has suffered a string of injuries this season, and recent health problems have left him with too little time to regain full fitness.
The loss of the two-time former Scottish champion is a severe blow.
‘Colin is a great team man and his withdrawal is a bit of a disaster for Scotland,’ observed the Scottish number one, Mark Maclean.
At last year's Europeans, Keith was undefeated, his semi-final victory over England's Del Harris, in which he saved five match balls, being one of the most memorable, and important, of his career.
As a result, Derek Ritchie, winner of three world-ranking events and beaten finalist in this season's Scottish Championship, has been elevated to join Maclean and Peter Nicol as a definite selection for the team.
The final two places will be decided by round-robin play-offs involving Alan Thomson, Martin Heath and Dave Gordon to be held at the Stripes Club in London on 4-6 April.
The venue has been selected to tie in with the trio's preparations for the Hi-Tec British Open the following week.
Following his withdrawal from this week's British Players' Championship in Bromley due to a back injury, the British Open has now become the next target for Mark Maclean.
The 29-year-old has been suffering from the problem for several weeks, and has been undergoing regular physiotherapy treatment.
‘I had hoped to make it this week, but it is still a bit sore and, with the British Open in mind, I felt another few days rest would be a safer precaution.’
Meanwhile, Peter Nicol, scored an easy first round victory over England's Darren Bradbury in yesterday's qualifying rounds at at Bromley.
The Inverurie 19-year-old won 15-1, 15-13, 15-6 and now meets Dean Watson for a place in the 16-man main draw.
Bulls still seem set to collect title
By Sandy Sutherland
EDZELL Enforcers will make certain of the Scottish League men's second division title if they beat Stirling at home on Sunday.
However, it will be a week on Sunday before the men's first division title is settled following Livingston Bulls' surprise defeat by Edinburgh Burger Kings at Meadowbank last Friday.
But it would be an even bigger surprise if Bulls were to slip up in their final game against Dunfermline Barr Electrics.
This game should enable them to overtake Kings, who have completed their fixtures, on points difference and retain the men's first division title.
City of Edinburgh have won the women's first division title and Royal Deeside are certain to win the women's second division title, with one game remaining.
Safeway project with sense of local history Denny Macgee visits a superstore with a character of its own
WHEN the first customers step through the main entrance of Safeway's new multi-million pound store at Stewartfield in East Kilbride, the last thing on their minds will be the work which has gone into bringing the building to completion.
Understandably, the main consideration of the consumer will be the range and quality of the merchandise on offer.
However, behind the 30,000 sq ft of merchandising space, which will create 177 part-time and 16 full-time jobs, lies years of planning and a £7 million construction project which has resulted in an undeveloped site being turned into one of the country's most up-to-date retail complexes.
The store, at the heart of the expanding Stewartfield area of East Kilbride, will attract shoppers not only from the immediate area, but from much further afield.
Though Safeway works to a standard layout in its stores, the architects in each of the company's developments work within that to produce a design which incorporates unique features relating to the location of the building.
In the case of the Stewartfield development, Glasgow-based architect Geoffrey Reid came up with a design for a building, which, while functioning as a supermarket, retained a considerable amount of character, using traditional Scottish building materials.
The circular free-standing columns in natural Lambshill heavily grained sandstone at the main entrance, and the wet dash render and reconstituted Cumbrian slate finish on the mansard roof, combine to give the building a traditional Scottish feel.
And, at the main entrance area, hanging heraldic banners depicting famous people and events in the area's history add a unique local touch to the development.
In addition, the terazzo tiles on the floor add to the feeling of general high quality.
As John Sherry of Geoffrey Reid says: ‘We hope we have designed a building which people will actually enjoy visiting, not only because they are there to do their shopping, but because the building itself is worth looking at.’
The construction work began in May last year and the first operation was to level the site, which had a six-metre fall from north to south.
Even at that early stage, however, the work was slightly complicated.
The material taken out of the higher point of the site was deemed unsuitable for use at the lower end.
Because of the heavy clay content of the material, it was considered that it could not be compacted enough for the development.
However, piling operations began almost simultaneously and Alan Muir, construction director of Muir Construction of Inverkeithing, the main contractor, said that though the earth-moving phase at the beginning of the contract went on for four weeks, the piling operation began almost as soon as the firm moved on to the site.
About 200 piles were driven into the ground to a depth of five to six metres until they hit rock.
At parts of the site where the rock was less than one and a half metres deep, in situ concrete was poured directly down onto the rock.
The Newcastle-based steel fabricator and erector contracted to carry out the steelwork went into receivership early in the operation but fortunately Bone, Connel & Baxters of Motherwell was able to take over at short notice and, says Alan Muir, ‘did a great job’.
Because of the difficulties with the  original steel contractor, it was decided to begin laying the floor slab in advance of the steel erection.
Slots were left in the floor slab for the steel frame to be bolted down directly into the foundation and then concreted round.
Muir, whose company has been involved in major retail construction projects throughout Scotland for eight years, said that the method was perhaps rather unorthodox, but was highly successful in keeping the overall contract time up to scratch because of the earlier unforeseen delays caused by the original steel fabricating company going into receivership.
The fact that Muir Construction was the contractor for both the external shell of the building and the interior fitting out of the store proved advantageous and the company was able to start the internal fitting out work early, even though the shell was finished later than was anticipated in the original programme.
As a result, the whole contract was completed on time and opened on schedule this week, less than a year after work on the site began.
The total area of the site which has been developed runs to about 60,000 sq ft.
As well as the 30,000 sq ft of retail space, the complex houses office accommodation and plant room on the first floor above the retail area.
Car parking space for almost 500 vehicles is also provided.
So large is the complex that the high performance pvc roof membrane covering the retail and storage areas, which is masked from general view by the use of a reconstituted Cumbrian slate mansard roof, is actually the size of a football pitch.
An impressive pagoda-style feature towering above the main entrance area allows natural light to flood into the main access area.
A glass canopy also runs round much of the building, giving an additional feeling of light and space to the complex.
930324 
Tax on warmth
Scotland's coal merchants, of whom there are more than 400 active, meeting the needs of customers in all weathers, have learned with great dismay of the proposal to apply VAT to domestic solid fuel.
They are in an excellent position to judge the effect it will have on customers, many of them the least advantaged in our community.
Unlike gas and electricity which have other uses and purposes, solid fuel is predominantly used to provide heating, and VAT is quite simply a tax on warmth.
It affects Scotland particularly badly as, apart from a more rigorous climate, the percentage of homes using solid fuel is higher than in England.
In the country generally, two-thirds of those are in the C2, DE categories, which by any socio-economic definition will be the less prosperous end of the market and less able to cope with rises of 17.5 per cent eventually in the cost of a basic part of the household budget.
Further, there is a certain lack of logic in the proposals as the ostensible objective is the reduction of harmful emissions, but the perceived actual increase on the more efficient, more environmentally friendly smokeless fuels will be, to the householder, much greater.
All sides of the distributive coal trade in Britain renew their plea made on behalf of their customers, to the Chancellor before the budget, not to create hardship by taxing warmth.
This plea is repeated to the Scottish Secretary, who is invited to recognise the special problems in Scotland and reconsider the VAT proposals before they are translated into actual hardship.
In her column today about the Budget's VAT increases, Ruth Wishart commented that the Government had made much of not putting any money on income tax.
Yet personal allowances should have been raised in line with last December's inflation rate of 2.6 per cent, allowing taxpayers to earn at least an extra £90 a year before tax.
This has been taken away from them because the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, chose to freeze allowances in what is a backdoor income tax increase.
In addition, the increase in national insurance contributions is the equivalent of a penny in the pound on income tax.
On a general note, the Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates that the poorest households (with less than £60 a week of disposable income) spend 14 per cent of their income on fuel, compared with 3 per cent by the very rich (over £800 per week).
Misplaced outcry over VAT on fuel
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, is to be congratulated on the pro-health, pro-environment elements in his Budget, particularly the increased taxation of alcohol, tobacco, motor fuel and domestic heating.
He did, however, miss the opportunity to improve our dental and general health and collect another billion or so by placing a heavy excise duty on sugar, chocolate and other confectionery, on which we spend over £4 billion a year.
The outcry against the taxation of domestic heating is misplaced.
Mr Lamont is right to protect the poor and pensioners by the giving of extra welfare benefits.
Preferably, those in need should be given fuel vouchers of value graded according to the climate and the means of heating in their houses.
It is wrong to deal with the needs of the poor by encouraging the general population to a wasteful use of energy supplied at a price too low in relation to its present environmental costs and the  detriment of our descendants from the rapid exhaustion of fossil fuel reserves.
Adequate help for the poor could be contained within the social welfare budget, if more were done to reduce the estimated annual loss of £1.5 billion to benefit cheats.
This includes multiple applications, applications for non-existent children, thefts of giro cheques and benefit books, and unemployment claims by persons in undeclared whole-time or part-time employment.
The huge loss to the Exchequer is only part of the damage caused by such fraud.
The lost £1.5 billion is a subsidy encouraging dishonesty, fraud and crime, recruiting criminals and fraudsters.
An essential requirement for the control of welfare fraud is a system of national identity cards, with sealed-in number, photograph, signature and thumb-print, to be shown when applying for benefit or paid employment.
Central computer recording of transactions would enable automatic screening for multiple and unjustified claims.
Council tax
My potential council tax liability will be well in excess of the household's poll tax demand.
As the most recent poll tax was itself reduced as a result of the raising of VAT by 2.5 per cent, where are benefits that should accrue from what was supposed to be a ‘new’ progressive property tax?
As the value of the house rises, the tax falls as a proportion of the capital value.
This results in a larger tax burden on the properties scale A to E to pay, for a reduced burden on the scales F to H.
There are without doubt residents in higher value properties who lack the funds to meet the more realistic charges that should apply to the F to H bands, but this should not mean that those with adequate funds should escape paying their fair share of the local tax burden.
The existing rebate system is geared to the needs of the most vulnerable in society, but for those at the income margin the full impact of the tax charges are brought to bear at relatively low levels of income.
The fact that the rebate system cannot deal with people on small incomes living in high valued houses should not mean that the tax burden itself needs to be reduced for these high-valued houses.
Some limit must be applied to the council tax levied on any household as a proportion of income, and a figure of say 5 per cent might well be appropriate.
I am most certainly not advocating a local income tax, more an income-related property tax.
The projected scheme of capping, which limits any council tax increase to £180 odd over the poll tax both favours the higher bands and are applied without any regard to need.
The application of bandings and the capping scheme both favour higher value house owners.
The fact that the tax concessions for the poor are means tested, while the concessions for the rich are not, should be unacceptable in a nominally classless society.
BP backs petroleum tax changes
By Frank Frazer
AFTER a week mulling over Budget proposals for offshore tax reform, British Petroleum has given support to the Chancellor's moves to encourage more efficient oil and gas production.
One of the first results could be a speeding-up of drilling at the huge oilfield it recently discovered west of Shetland, according to John Browne, chief executive for worldwide exploration operations.
Though other oil companies have complained that the ending of petroleum revenue tax relief on drilling costs could result in rigs moving overseas, BP takes a more positive view of the package of Budget measures which caught the industry by surprise.
Mr Browne told The Scotsman last night that the ending of PRT on new fields could help in efforts to establish prospects for a commercial development in the area.
He admitted that the ending of PRT rebates might make it more costly to drill wells confirming the size of the field, but added: ‘We look at the production side rather than exploration and we also look at how much it costs the Government.’
If seismic mapping of the new reservoir can be completed in time, BP may send a rig to drill more wells there this summer to establish the production potential for the field, which is thought to have reserves of 250  million to 500 million barrels.
As a member of the UK Offshore Operators Association, BP will make submissions pointing out that the general tenor of the tax changes should also encourage more efficient production from existing oilfields by creating incentives to recover more oil and gas.
This contrasts with the initial reactions from other companies, including the US-owned Amerada Hess, which concentrated more narrowly on the loss of PRT relief on drilling costs.
Mr Browne said recovering more oil from proven fields could be one of the most efficient ways of keeping the North Sea in business.
Though it was too early to say how BP would respond to the opportunities created by the Budget, he said it was looking at several projects for extra investment in North Sea fields already in production.
Scottish firms glow in London firmament
By Peter Woodifield BUSINESS EDITOR
WEIR was the most favourably mentioned of any Scottish-based company in the London national daily and Sunday newspapers last year.
According to Presswatch Annual, which monitors stories in the London papers, Weir had a plus score of 807 points, compared with Marks & Spencer's score of 2,553, the best performance of any company in the UK.
The two privatised Scottish electricity companies also did very well — ScottishPower was the top-ranked electricity company with a score of 709 points, and Scottish Hydro-Electric came second with 508.
These figures compared with a sector average of -90.
Another Scottish company to do well was the Bank of Scotland, which was the UK's best regarded bank with 556 points.
The Royal Bank of Scotland had the worst score of any Scottish company with a negative rating of -218.
However, that figure was in fact far better than it looked as the banks had the worst ranking of any sector, with an average negative rating of -1,357.
Barclays had the worst press of all with a staggering rating of -7,442, followed by National Westminster with -5,833.
The other companies with the worst press were Lonrho, BP, Ratners and British Gas.
The stars, along with Marks & Spencer, were Wellcome, Sainsbury, Glaxo and British Airways.
Overall, across all sectors, the average company received a modest positive score of six points.
According to Presswatch, Scottish companies fared better at the hands of the London press than their English counterparts, with an average score of 198 among the 27 companies monitored.
The best rating of 1,250 was achieved by Argyll, the Safeway supermarket chain run from London, which has its roots in Scotland.
Other highly-regarded Scottish companies were Scottish & Newcastle, second highest rated in the brewing sector, United Biscuits, Low & Bonar, and General Accident which all beat the Scottish average.
Apart from the Royal Bank of Scotland the laggards were Kwik-Fit, Lilley and Scottish Metropolitan.
Grant quits Enterprise board
By Peter Woodifield
PAT Grant, the joint managing director of the Caithness-based freezer manufacturer, Norfrost, has resigned from the board of Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
Mrs Grant has decided to stand down from HIE, where she has been on the board since its inception two years ago, because of increasing work commitments.
Apart from developing Norfrost, which she founded with her husband Alex, Mrs Grant has recently launched a new company, Beauty Through Herbs.
Fraser Morrison, the chairman of HIE, said Mrs Grant had brought astute private sector experience to bear on HIE's development strategies.
‘Her particular interest in industrial development issues has been most useful but I fully appreciate the pressure of her business commitments — and in turn the value to the Highlands’ of her companies' continuing successes.’
Kingfisher tops its forecast and slashes prices at B&Q
By Clifford German
KINGFISHER, the group which owns Woolworth, Comet, Superdrug and B&Q, yesterday launched ‘permanent’ price cuts on 500 of B&Q's product lines, extending the price-cutting policy which began last year with paint.
Before exceptional items, Kingfisher also topped the profits forecast made at the time of its French acquisition, Darty, turning in £234.4 million before tax for the year to the end of January, an increase of 5.7 per cent.
After exceptional provisions of £23.5 million on winding down property development business, however, pre-tax profits, under the new FRS3 formula, fell 7 per cent to £210.9 million.
Turnover rose 4.7 per cent to £3,548 million, operating profits rose 4.4 per cent, and interest charges shrank from £12 million to under £1 million.
Earnings per share rose by 4.7 per cent to 33.1p before exceptionals, and a final dividend lifted by 0.5p to 9p raises the total by 5.4 per cent, from 13p to 13.7p.
Kingfisher's shares firmed 3p to 544p.
Woolworth's sales rose 5.7 per cent and operating profits, by 9 per cent to £77.8 million.
The decision to sell computer games was rewarded by a near-fourfold jump in sales.
Comet continued its comeback, doubling operating profits to £17.7 million and increasing market share to 11 per cent, while closing 70 smaller stores and opening 29 big new sites.
Profits at Superdrug were little changed at £34.8 million, but the move to selling perfumes at discount prices was rewarded with a 2 per cent market share.
B&Q's contribution fell 10 per cent to £81.1 million in very tough trading, but only Chartwell Land, which manages the group's property portfolio, caught a cold, with a small drop in profits to £34.5 million.
It also made a £26 million exceptional write-off, after its decision to pull out of property development and concentrate on running the portfolio.
That consists mainly of recession-resistant retail properties, whose values fell only 5 per cent last year.
Sir Geoff Mulcahy, the chairman and chief executive, sees a few tentative signs that shoppers are slowly emerging from their long hibernation, but they are doing so very warily.
Barclays looks for new chief outside
By Magnus Grimond
THE board of Barclays, Britain's biggest clearing bank, yesterday announced the first moves towards appointing an outside chief executive in a clear response to shareholders' recent criticism of existing top management.
The board revealed it had established a sub-committee ‘to progress the recruitment of a group chief executive from outside the Barclays Group’.
The sub-group is to be chaired by Sir Denys Henderson, the ICI chairman and a non-executive director of Barclays.
Four other non-executive directors, Sir Derek Birkin, chairman of RTZ, Sir Martin Jacomb, a director of the Bank of England, and Sir Nigel Mobbs, the Slough Estates chairman, will also sit on the committee.
The fifth member is to be Sir Peter Middleton, deputy chairman of Barclays.
The group will report directly to the bank's chairman and chief executive, Andrew Buxton, who has recently faced calls from shareholders and others to split his two top management roles in the light of the bank's massive £242 million pre-tax loss last year.
The decision to look outside the bank for a chief executive is likely to assuage some critics of Barclays in the City.
Norrie Morrison, an analyst at the broker Kleinwort Benson, said: ‘I think it will go a long was to reassuring shareholders about corporate governance…
The City will take heart that Barclays is listening to its shareholders.’
Peter Hewitt, director of UK equities at Ivory & Sime, agreed.
‘It is pretty clear they have got the message from institutional shareholders,’ but he warned that it could take years for Barclays to recover from the bad lending made in the late 1980s.
Tom Crombie, chief investment manager at Scottish Equitable, echoed those doubts.
‘Any outside chairman or chief executive would be very sensible for them.
They have a long-term credibility problem — the issue won't go away.’
There was speculation that Barclays may now look to the US for a chief executive, given the limited  availability of suitable candidates on this side of the Atlantic.
Provident buy completed
SCOTTISH Provident yesterday completed the acquisition of the Prolific group of companies from Hafnia, the Danish insurance group.
The deal, first announced last December, increases funds under management at Scottish Provident to more than £4,250 million, up from £3,100 million.
Company formed to run sawmills
A COMPANY has been formed to run two sawmills which have been bought out by management from the previous owners.
The firm, with sawmills at Nairn and Dunkeld, employs 60 people.
The new company is called Tulloch Timber (Nairn), but yesterday the operations director, Tony Mitchell, of Nairn, stressed that it no longer had any connections with the Tulloch Group, from which it had been purchased.
Tulloch Timber intends to retain a traditional operation, competing in the fencing, pallet-wood and mining-timber markets using home-grown softwood.
The Dunkeld mill trades as the Perthshire Timber Company, and its head, Murray Gordon, will be the managing director, with Mr Mitchell the sole other director.
Mr Gordon was the owner of the Dunkeld business before he sold it to the Tulloch Group in 1988.
Dunkeld also has facilities to saw hardwood.
Mr Mitchell said yesterday: ‘We are looking to the future with optimism, hence the investment.’
But he said he could not disclose the terms of the transaction, which became operational on 1 March.
The Inverness-based Tulloch Group is one of the major private sector employers in the Highlands with a staff of around 600 and substantial interests in construction, housebuilding, the motor trade, transport and the oil-related sector.
Markets stuck in doldrums seeking direction
SHARES and sterling were becalmed yesterday as dealers looked to company results to provide a clear lead on the UK economic outlook.
In dull trading, where investors were more inclined to sell stock than buy, the FT-SE 100-Share Index drifted to close 0.5 lower at 2,860.6.
Even an early advance in New York — after news of a higher-than expected 2.2 per cent rise in US durable goods orders in February — made little lasting impression in London.
However 833.5 million shares changed hands as year-end tax loss selling came into play and brokers prepared for the end of the account.
The £111 million placing by Grove Trust of 84 million George Wimpey shares also kept traders busy.
The builder's shares withstood the pressure and only fell 4p to 142p.
In Frankfurt, the Bundesbank held a key money market rate unchanged, calming worries that the bank might be about to abandon its policy of reducing official interest rates gradually.
It allocated securities repurchase funds to commercial banks at a minimum 8.25 per cent, unchanged from the rate at which it had fed funds to the market over the last two weeks.
Some dealers worried the so-called ‘repo’ rate would rise after the Bundesbank asked banks to bid for funds at variable rates rather than the fixed 8.25 per cent set in recent tenders.
Those traders were relieved yesterday to see the Bundesbank had held the 8.25 per cent rate unchanged.
In London, light trading on currency markets saw the pound gain 10 points against a weak dollar to close at 1.4843.
In terms of the German mark it slipped back 0.59 pfennigs to Dm2.4172.
The City's sigh of relief at Barclays' decision to look for an outside candidate to take on the role of chief executive was audible.
The bank firmed 5p to 415p on the news.
Oil group Lasmo was one of the first major companies to report full-year results.
The City was alarmed at the hefty slide into the red and a heavily reduced dividend payout and knocked 19p off the share price to 173p.
On the other hand, Woolworth to Comet group Kingfisher bounced 3p to 544p as it reported profits in line with forecasts.
Analysts were more impressed with chairman and chief executive Sir Geoffrey Mulcahy's guarded optimism that the high street was beginning to see the awakenings of consumer confidence.
Weir's £39.2m defies slump
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
WEIR Group yesterday maintained its proud, ten-years-straight record of increasing earnings every year in the teeth of the recession.
There were, too, distinct signs of an improvement in orders as early as the fourth quarter of 1992, which have continued in the first quarter of 1993, the chairman, Viscount Weir, said in London yesterday.
Pre-tax profits rose 14.5 per cent to £39.2 million, though turnover in the 53 weeks to 1 January, 1993 was almost static at £424.8 million, even after including currency effects, £23 million from Weir Floway, acquired in the US in January last year, and the extra week of business.
But operating profits rose 8 per cent to £30.2 million, and Weir Floway contributed £1.97 million.
Net income on the group's £52.3 million of net cash grew from £2.4 million to £4.1 million, with the help of currency gains and a decision to lock in at fixed rates last July.
Only the contribution from associated companies, including Devonport Management, the three-way consortium which runs Rosyth's rival, and Weir-Houston Engineers, in Aberdeen, faltered last year, falling 26 per cent to £2.98 million.
The decision to keep both yards open instead of concentrating on Devonport's facilities will cut profitability at both, Ron Garrick, chief executive, said yesterday.
The group's engineering products, including the well-known pump division, saw turnover slip 7.5 per cent, though profits rose 20 per cent to £24.45 million.
But turnover in the smaller service division fell 8 per cent and profits were down almost 30 per cent to £6.18 million, reflecting more sluggish demand for spares and service.
Weir did not have the benefit of any of the exceptionally large orders for desalination plant or gas-handling equipment which it won in 1991, but new orders totalled £373 million and are expected to top £400 million in 1993, helped by the weaker pound.
Overseas business accounted for 55 per cent of last year's orders, rising to 75 per cent in the early months of the current year.
Earnings per share rose 10.6 per cent to 35.5p, while a final dividend increased from 7.4p to 8.3p lifts the total by 12.4 per cent, from 10.5p to 11.8p.
Shareholders will also be offered a two-for-one share split, subject to approval at the annual meeting on 28 June.
The shares jumped to 657p at first, but later eased to close only 1p firmer at 649p.
Johnston Press leaps 32% to £9.8m
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
TIGHT controls over costs and the continued development of its acquisitions enabled Johnston Press to announce record profits yesterday.
For the 12 months ending 31 December, 1992, the Edinburgh-based newspaper publisher and printer reported pre-tax profits almost 32 per cent higher than 1991's at nearly £9.8 million, on a turnover lifted by 15.8 per cent to £71.7 million.
The increase in turnover came largely from acquisitions.
Last year, Johnston bought the Sussex newspaper group, Sussex County Press, for £1.4 million, and also the Sussex publisher, TR Beckett, for £13 million.
Johnston's managing director, Iain Bell, said yesterday that the group had seen the recession coming and, having seen it, started putting its house in order around three years ago.
‘There are now over 300 less people working for the group, but of those, there were only 20 redundancies,’ he said.
‘So it's down to a combination of continued good Presbyterian attitudes to housekeeping and our taking advantage of the recession to continue with our policy of expansion and growth.’
The chairman, Fred Johnston, said that newspaper publishing remained the group's main activity, contributing a 20 per cent increase in operating profits at £6.95 million.
Bookbinding and library bookselling also made favourable contributions to profitability.
But commercial printing and typesetting, which, admittedly, comprise only about 2 per cent of turnover, were described as reflecting the weakness of the UK's printing industry and the overcapacity which continued relentlessly to drive down prices, often below break-even point.
Mr Bell said that contract printing in the UK had been ‘an absolute disaster’.
While the group did not have a large commitment to it, there had to be a big question-mark over whether to continue it.
‘We will review the position as and when the climate is right.’
Mr Johnston said it would be foolish to anticipate better advertising volumes for the provincial press in general, at least until the latter part of 1993, but the group's present lower cost base should certainly benefit profits if Britain was eventually to see the type of modest recovery which was beginning to boost the US newspaper industry.
‘Johnston Press has started 1993 encouragingly and the prospects of further progress must be good,’ he added.
The market agreed, marking the shares up 4p at 526p by the close yesterday.
Berisford chosen by Clark
THE commodity group, Berisford International, looked set yesterday to take over C&J Clark, the family-controlled shoemaker that has been wracked by internal feuding.
On Monday Clark's board met to weigh up three rival offers, all believed to be about £150 million.
The board announced yesterday it had chosen Berisford ‘as the party to proceed to the next stage of negotiations’ with a view to making an offer for Clark.
Berisford's path was also smoothed when another contender, Marks & Spencer shoe supplier Fii, said it was pulling out of the bid battle and relisting its shares, which had been suspended pending the outcome.
The third bidder was an investment group said to include Electra, Legal & General and Prudential.
Clarks was founded 167 years ago and now owns the K Shoes and Ravel brands.
In five generations the Clark family has grown to have 1,000 shareholders speaking for 80 per cent of the company.
But family feuding and falling profits led a majority of the board to recommend a sell-out.
Profits of £30 million in 1990 had fallen to £20 million last year.
A substantial minority of shareholders is known to be opposed to a sale, feeling the company is worth at least £200 million.
Berisford formerly owned British Sugar but was forced to sell when it came unstuck with property deals in the US.
Now it aims to rebuild its fortunes through diversification and acquisition.
Halifax hopeful after 1992 surge to £682m
By Ian Harper
The UK's largest building society, the Halifax, yesterday announced an 8.2 per cent rise in pre-tax profits for 1992 to £680 million — despite the ravages of the worst year for the housing market since the Second World War, which forced provisions up two-thirds to £374 million.
The Halifax's chairman, Jon Foulds, while urging caution on prospects for a recovery, said the society stuck by its forecast of a gentle recovery in house prices towards the end of the year.
In Scotland, the regional general manager, Mike Provan, said business levels had held up well, but ‘the biggest single factor now restraining the property market is the fear of unemployment’.
The Halifax's surge contrasts with the 9 per cent profits setback to £564 million at its rival, Abbey National.
Over the year, despite a fall in gross mortgage lending from £9.1 billion to £8.3 billion and a drop in net lending from £3.9 billion to £3.3 billion, the Halifax increased its share of the mortgage market to 18 per cent.
Total assets rose by £4.1 billion to £62 billion, of which £52.2 billion were commercial assets, mainly residential mortgages.
But total provisions for loans and advances climbed from £229 million to £374 million, of which £330 million was on residential property.
But there was a further £75 million charge for suspended interest payments.
At 31 January, 1993, the number of mortgages where payments were 12 months or more in arrears had risen 24 per cent to 22,486, representing 0.51 per cent of mortgage balances.
But Mr Foulds said the number of properties repossessed had halved in 1993 from the previous year's.
Losses at the society's estate agency more than doubled to £14.8 million, though it moved briefly into profit last summer.
In August, Mike Blackburn — currently head of the Leeds Permanent — will succeed as Halifax chief executive.
The move is widely expected to see the society — which is currently a tied agent of Standard Life for the sale of investments — reviewing the options for starting its own life-assurance operation.
Bredero runs into problems
THE difficulties in the UK commercial property sector appeared to have claimed another victim yesterday after Surrey-based Bredero Properties announced it had breached its banking covenants, writes Richard Shackleton.
The shares collapsed 5p to 14p, wiping 26 per cent off the value of the company, 49 per cent controlled by Slough Estates.
The company, which is developing the Paisley and Braehead shopping centres, said falling property values was responsible, but it was now in talks with its banks on renegotiating its outstanding loans.
Last year the company appeared to be overcoming the sector's worst problems after the £58 million sale of its interest in Aberdeen's Bon Accord Centre to Land Securities and the £31 million decision by Coca-Cola to relocate its headquarters to the group's Centre West building in west London.
But an adjustment on the sale of the Aberdeen site and a further loss on the disposal of another site in Southampton pushed interim results for the six months to end-June into losses of £4.43 million.
The Bon Accord sale reduced borrowings from a year-end total of £96 million to £69 million but off-balance sheet loans to investment partnerships in which the group has an interest could inflate this figure considerably.
The analysts say the fall in net assets from their December 1991 total of £82.0 million will have precipitated clauses in the company's loan agreement requiring them to seek renegotiation of terms.
Results for the 12 months to the end of December are expected shortly along with an announcement on the progress of loan renegotiations.
Debt cut behind Barratt advance
By Magnus Grimond
SIR Lawrie Barratt, pulled out of retirement 18 months ago to restore the fortunes of Barratt Developments, has continued to deliver the goods.
Yesterday, the Newcastle-upon-Tyne-based house-builder reported first-half profits nearly doubled, from £2.5 million at £4.8 million, and the restoration of the interim dividend at 1p, after passing it last time.
Earnings per share rose from 1.4p to 2p, though turnover dropped from £209.7 million to £174 million.
The figures are part of Barratt's continuing recovery since it chalked up losses of £106 million for 1990-91, but the stock market was unimpressed and the shares slipped 3p to 133p.
Howard Seymour, of BZW, said the profits came mostly from the write-down of Barratt's land banks, which made up much of the losses 18 months ago.
He remains worried that margin benefits expected for the second half will now be pushed out to next year and has slashed his full-year forecast from £27 million to just £15 million, with £25 million pencilled in for 1993-94.
But Sir Lawrie remained irrepressibly optimistic yesterday.
Unveiling a three-year growth plan to raise sales progressively from an expected 5,000 houses this year to an eventual figure of 8,000, he said reservations were up 15 per cent in the first three months of the year.
‘We feel the market has bottomed out and the affordability factor is very, very favourable.’
The improvement should be sustained and continue into the foreseeable future’, he added.
As part of its expansion, Barratt will open two new subsidiaries a year over the three years of the growth plan, starting in July with one for south London, to be followed by one for the northern part of the capital later.
Profits were boosted by an interest charge slashed from £9.9 million to £4 million as a result of measures to cut debts.
The end-December figure of £81 million represented gearing of 45 per cent.
Barratt sold 2,017 houses at an average price of £75,800 in the half year, down from 2,128 completions at an average of £81,200 the previous year.
Sir Lawrie said the August reintroduction of stamp duty on house purchases depressed the market for three months.
North of the Border, Barratt Construction held its own with a 5 per cent margin on turnover of £20 million, despite ‘very difficult conditions’ for UK contracting.
Californian housebuilding incurred a loss of £2.7 million, but should be in profit by next year, Sir Lawrie said.
Lex Service buys Lucas car centres
LEX Service, the vehicle dealer and automotive components group led by Sir Trevor Chinn, yesterday announced that it has bought the 62 Lucas Autocentres from Lucas Industries for £13 million.
The centres provide servicing, MoT testing and parts replacement for cars of any make, usually more than three years old.
News of the deal accompanied annual results for Lex showing pre-tax profits soaring from only £500,000 last time to £28.3 million on a normalised basis, after big changes in the group.
These included the end of direct involvement in electronic component distribution, the termination of the Volvo distribution contract and the takeover of the Swan National Motor Group, which brought in more than 20 dealerships.
Losses per share of 3.2p in 1991 were transformed into earnings of 18.3p last year and a final dividend of 6.6p lifts the total from 10p to 10.6p.
Lex's shares gained 16p to 335p.
Haymarket's Ti'ko deal fails
A PLANNED 25 jobs are on hold following the failure of the Haymarket Computer Shop in Edinburgh to buy the property assets of Ti'ko, the Broxburn-based computer manufacturer which collapsed last November.
Haymarket's partners, Gerry Parker and Mark Stewart, announced in January they had paid £75,000 for Ti'ko's premises, fixtures and fittings.
This has proved to be over optimistic as Haymarket was forced to withdraw from the purchase after a key investor pulled out.
Haymarket had intended to set up a computer business with over 20 staff to build its own PCs under the brand Eyecon and sell them through a dealer network.
Mr Parker said yesterday he was still looking for a replacement backer.
Edinburgh software house, CEC Systems, bought the other assets in a competitive tender.
Gordon Renton, CEC's managing director, has said he is only interested in the office equipment and will sell off the computer kit.
Ti'ko went into receivership last November.
The receiver, KPMG Peat Marwick, is still scrutinising the company accounts and said the Ti'ko premises had been returned to the lease holder.
A KPMG spokesman said: ‘It's a fairly confused situation.’
In the first three months of last year, Ti'ko was listed as the UK's seventh largest direct selling computer manufacturer with a 5.3 per cent share of the market.
Blenheim booming with jump of 75%
By Richard Shackleton
BLENHEIM Group, the leading exhibitions organiser with a strong City following, yesterday revealed better-than-expected annual results and hinted at better to come.
Pre-tax profits for the 16 months to the end of December — after a change in year-end — soared by 75 per cent to £49.7 million on a comparable basis, just ahead of analysts' estimates.
The shares firmed 3p to 602p.
Neville Buch, the chairman, said 1993 ‘is going to be excellent and we will make further progress in 1994’.
An extraordinary charge of £11.7 million covers the closure of businesses and goodwill write-offs.
A 3p final dividend sees the total jump from 7.8p to 12p, payable from earnings per share up from 24.1p to 36.9p.
Though turnover leapt from £122.2 million to £239.1 million, the UK market is still responding slowly to recovery, its profits almost halving to £4.1 million.
Germany collapsed to £1.4 million, from £3.5 million.
Growth came chiefly from France, where profits soared to £35.4 million, and the US, 50 per cent ahead at £17.3 million.
Mr Buch added: ‘We are hopeful the UK will come through strongly this year and the US is certainly very promising.
France, too, will be good this year.’
Charges drive AMEC even deeper into red
A £16 million provision on the cost of replacing the cladding on the half-finished Trafalgar Place building, in Brighton, added to the woes of AMEC, the international engineering and construction group, last year, writes Clifford German.
A classic case of shooting ourselves in the foot, the chairman, Sir Alan Cockshaw, admitted ruefully yesterday.
Group turnover fell 10 per cent to £2,122 million, while operating profits in UK contracting dropped 11 per cent to £55.1 million.
Within that total, AMEC's work designing and building North Sea oil platforms reached record levels last year.
But overseas activities plunged from a £1 million profit to a £13.7 million loss, the losses on property development and housing grew by 70 per cent to £17.1 million.
Overall operating profits halved to £24.3 million.
A raft of exceptional items also included an £18 million write-down on the investment in Power Corporation, £18 million of reconstruction and redundancy costs, which saw the workforce whittled down from 30,000 to about 25,000, and £63 million of further provisions made on land and property assets.
Together, they swallowed £114.6 million, against £69.4 million in 1991, and the pre-tax losses ballooned from £13.1 million before to £87.5 million in 1992.
The group's cash balances shrank from £77 million to £36.5 million, and a token final dividend of 1p slashes the total to 3p, from 10.25p in 1991.
But the shares reached 86p before closing at 81p, up 5p on the day.
LASMO plans sales as loss soars
By Frank Frazer
AFTER building up its interests with the acquisition of Ultramar, the independent oil group, LASMO, is being forced by financial circumstances to sell off some of its North Sea holdings.
It said yesterday it would start negotiations soon on the sale of its 33.8 per cent stake in Markham gasfield, straddling the boundary between UK and Dutch waters, which came on stream last year.
The company will also offer some adjacent discoveries, for which no supply contracts have yet been arranged, as part of the package intended to improve its financial position in 1993.
Joe Darby, who took over recently as chief executive, admitted that LASMO was disappointed by the 1992 results which included a pre-tax loss of £261 million after exceptional items compared, with profits of £7 million in 1991.
Though turnover rose from £281 million to £621 million, the company was hit by losses on the sale of Ultramar's refining and marketing business and a write-down of asset values based on lower oil price expectations.
It has also made more conservative estimates of reserves in some of its fields, though the impact was reduced by last week's Budget announcement that petroleum revenue tax was being cut from 75 to 50 per cent.
But the overall effects meant that LASMO's loss per share soared from only 2.8p the year before to 52.2p.
A 1p final dividend sees the total slashed 8.5p to 3.3p and the shares dived 19p to 173p.
Mr Darby admitted that the company had faced difficult trading conditions, despite successfully completing integration of Ultramar's oil and gasfield interests and raising about £1 billion from assets sold off already.
He also warned: ‘Certain UK fields, which are scheduled to commence production during 1993, are expected to be completed at considerably higher costs than originally forecast.
As well as resulting in higher unit depletion costs, interest charges will cease to be capitalised when production from those fields begins, with a consequent adverse effect on group profitability.’
The company is also re-examining its UK exploration programme after the Budget move to abolish petroleum revenue tax relief on exploration wells.
‘We will be redirecting our overseas exploration efforts into onshore areas where finding and developing costs are lower than equivalent offshore environments,’ Mr Darby said.
Although no improvement was expected in oil prices in the short term, Mr Darby claimed the company had a strong and diversified portfolio of international exploration opportunities.
‘In addition, we have a number of significant discoveries awaiting development, which will contribute substantially to a rising production and cash flow profile over the next few years,’ he added.
Quality, but still a lack of quantity
IT was hardly a surprise to the City or anyone else yesterday that Weir Group produced another set of excellent results, with the promise of more to come this year.
For the last few years Weir has been one of the most consistent performers of any quoted Scottish company, with a steady improvement in sales and profits.
As company rescues go, it has to be one of the most inspired seen in the past 14 years.
Its secret is quite simple — it has a clear strategy, effectively implemented by a quality management team.
With that background it is equally unsurprising to learn that Weir was the most highly-regarded Scottish company in the London business pages.
What is more encouraging is that in the same survey the Scottish average rating was 198 against a UK average of six.
In other words, those Scottish companies covered are far more highly rated pro-rata.
On the other hand, it is a matter of sadness that of the 466 companies in the survey only 27 were Scottish.
Scottish fund managers have always claimed there is an advantage in not being in London — perhaps it is also true of other sectors.
Weir has not been the only Scottish success story to report this week.
On Tuesday Invergordon Distillers reported a marginal improvement in underlying profits, no mean feat given the difficulties facing the whisky sector.
Yesterday Johnston Press confirmed its reputation as one of the most efficient publishers of weekly newspapers in the UK.
Most of its titles are in the south of England.
Its head office is in Edinburgh.
Over the next few weeks there will be other highly-regarded Scottish companies showing why they have that reputation — for instance, the Bank of Scotland and Scottish & Newcastle, to name but two.
The problem that Scotland somehow has to overcome is that fact that while there is a high degree of quality there remains the worrying lack of quantity.
It is going to take a lot more than the plethora of locally-driven modest venture capital funds to effect any worthwhile change.
Union calls on MPs to save potato scheme
THE convener of the potato committee of the National Farmers' Union of Scotland, James Black, has vowed to continue the fight the stop the Government wrecking the potato marketing scheme.
‘It is difficult to fathom Government's attitude to orderly potato marketing.
They want to destroy a sensible cost-free control system at the same time as they  are introducing elaborate supply controls in all other important sectors of agriculture.
‘We will continue our efforts to stop this unnecessary demolition — in Westminster as the Agriculture Bill goes through the Commons and in Brussels as the EC potato regime is progressed.
‘We call on members of parliament to throw out those parts of the Agriculture Bill which will spell the end of the potato scheme.
The decision rests with them.’
James Black: ‘difficult to fathom Government attitude’
Agency claims surge in farm sales
THERE has been a surge in north-east Scotland farm sales in the first three months of this year, according to Aberdeen and Northern, who claim to be Scotland's largest farm agency.
During what is normally a dead period, the company has sold nine farms since January.
Prices have risen, on average, £100 per acre with some farms making 25 per cent more than the asking price.
The company, which last year sold 45 farms, puts the rise in interest down to a new confidence in farming caused by European Community reform, a drop in interest rates and good prices for beef.
For these same reasons, some farmers who were thinking of selling have changed their minds and fewer farms are for sale.
Hopes grow for lifting of import ban
SCOTTISH beef farmers could be offering live, prime cattle to new customers from a range of European Community countries by the end of the year if their governments could be persuaded to lift their ban on imports of British animals.
Its removal depends on the findings of a two-day symposium on bovine spongiform encephalopathy scheduled to be held in Brussels in September.
Authorities from all parts of the EC will deliver their verdicts on the effectiveness of the Government's slaughter policy.
According to the Ministry of Agriculture, a favourable summary would encourage the Government to ask the EC Commission to change its rules on live cattle trading.
Its specialists are reasonably optimistic.
They point out that the commission's standing veterinary committee has already acknowledged that confirmed BSE slaughterings are rising only slightly instead of doubling — as they would if the feed ban introduced in July 1989 were ineffective.
The Paris-based Office Internationale d'Epizooties (OIE), which represents 120 countries, has accepted the principle that live trading could be resumed provided it were restricted to animals born after the feed ban — and that cattle born from BSE infected dams were excluded.
‘A number of countries have already indicated that they would accept cattle on that basis but at EC level we have to overcome the problem caused by our wish to retain our restriction on the use of specified offals while other member states, even those with recorded incidences of BSE, have no such ban in place,’ a spokesman explained.
‘Live exports will not be resumed within the next few months but we have a case to present, we have started to put it forward and the European Commission is sympathetic.’
The ministry has pointed out that the incidence of the disease in four-year-old cattle is due to banned feed being used after the cut off date on 18 July, 1989.
Of the 1,570 reported cases all but nine are positively linked to feed containing recycled ruminant tissue and seven of those are animals that have proved impossible to trace.
Checks are still being made on the remaining two.
‘The overall incidence profile is exactly what we expected to see.
Our view is that the medicine has been delivered and it is just a matter of sitting it out,’ said an MAFF specialist, John Wilesmith.
‘However, it is clear that 18 July 1989 is not a magic cut-off point.
Compounders still had three to four months stocks of contaminated feed in the chain and this is blurring our results.’
Among the immediate beneficiaries of a green light on young cattle would be pedigree breeders — particularly those from the South-west offering Galloways.
There are also hopes that a live trade in slaughter cattle could be developed with other EC countries over 1994 — just as has already taken place with slaughter lambs to France.
One of the principal destinations is likely to be the Netherlands, where environmental controls on manure threaten to reduce beef cattle numbers by 360,000 head or 28 per cent by 1995.
That raises the possibility that prime cattle auctions could become purchase points for buyers from other EC countries.
Should the export of live slaughter animals be approved it could strengthen primestock prices and offer finishers an opportunity to sell to a wider range of markets.
Sheppard ready to test the water
By Elspeth Burnside
HAVING been laid low with a virus for the past month, Alison Sheppard will make a tentative return to competition in next weekend's West of Scotland Championships before facing world-class competition in the Edinburgh International Meet from 8-10 April.
Sheppard was forced to pull out of the last of the British Grand Prix qualifying meets last month, thus losing her chance to defend the sprint freestyle title at the Superfinal in Cardiff in May, and she has still not returned to full training.
‘She's taken a long time to throw off the illness and is still not fully fit,’ said Sheppard's Milngavie and Bearsden coach, Alex McNeil.
‘But I hope she can get back to full sessions this week to be ready for Edinburgh.’
As a warm-up for the Commonwealth Pool, the 20-year-old double Olympian will take part in a couple of events at Whitehill in next weekend's West Championships.
In Edinburgh, she will face her stiffest competition of the season.
The full list of entries is to be announced on Friday, but organiser Wally Lord has already promised a line-up ‘equal to that at Barcelona last year’.
Sheppard still intends swimming at the Grand Prix Superfinal as a guest competitor as she continues the build-up towards the National Championships in Sheffield in June; a meet which is vital as regards selection for the European Championships, also to be held in Sheffield, in August.
With the final qualifying meet having clashed with a Commonwealth Games get together, Scottish representation at the Superfinal is disappointing.
Angela Pendrich, who will be chasing titles in two categories, is the sole Scot with a realistic title chance.
The 17-year-old from Beckenham is the leading qualifier in the distance freestyle, and has a comfortable 17-point lead over Joanne Cowan, from Portsmouth, to carry over into the Superfinal.
Pendrich has also qualified for the sprint freestyle, but currently lies in eleventh place and has little chance of replacing Sheppard as the new champion.
Gladwell big threat to Gibson
DAVIE GIBSON (GS Modena) sets out in defence of his Scottish Time Trial League title in Gala CC's Tour of the Valleys on Sunday.
The six-event series culminates in the Tour of the Campsies in September.
Gibson was fourth in the Valleys race last year behind Graeme Obree, Martin Williamson and Richard Moore.
Obree and Williamson are not on this year's start sheet so far and Gibson is top seed.
Jim Gladwell (Velo RT) did not compete last year but was winner of the inaugural league in 1991 and, if fit, could win on Sunday.
Also expected to score league points which go down to tenth place, are Pat Hutton and Stuart Smith (both Penicuik RT) and the promoting club's fast junior, Lachie Badenoch.
The course, starting and finishing at Mountbenger, is based on the B709, B7009 with the climb from the Ettrick valley over the Swires to the A708 on the Yarrow valley.
The Glasgow and West of Scotland team just selected to compete in the Girvan three-day race over Easter is: Paul Coats (Cumbernauld CC), Chris Thomson and Steve Russell (VC Astar), Neil Cameron ( Erskine Cc).
Heseltine fuels drive for pits sell-off Frank Frazer on the implications of the coal industry review
PITS which British Coal can no longer operate profitably in a competitive energy market will be offered for sale to other companies as a first step towards full-scale privatisation given impetus by yesterday's white paper reviewing the industry's future.
Although subsidies will be available on sales of extra coal to displace imports by power generators, ministers have firmly rejected curbs on other fuels, including the ‘dash for gas’ by power generators, to shield coal from the effects of competition.
Decisions on pits which will survive will be left to British Coal, which has also been asked to prepare for privatisation as soon as legislation can be put in place.
As part of the process, the company will discuss with interested parties the possibility of selling ‘regional’ coal-mining packages.
The outcome will have no immediate impact on the future of Scotland's only remaining deep mine, at Longannet in Fife, which was not on British Coal's original hitlist of pits for closure.
But the white paper makes clear that expanding its market will depend on success by the Scottish generators in exporting power to England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The policy review sparked by controversy over British Coal's original pit closure plans will be greeted with relief by offshore oil and gas companies that feared thousands of jobs, many of them in Scotland, could be hit by any restrictions placed on using gas in power stations.
But Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, made clear to MPs that the Government did not consider that saving mining jobs should be a factor taken into account in giving consents for gas-fired stations.
The white paper says: ‘As a general rule, matters such as the need for a generating station, its capacity, choice of fuel and type of plant are commercial matters for the applicant for such consent.
Applications for consent will continue to be considered on their merits against this background.’
In his Commons statement, Mr Heseltine also announced the go-ahead for three gas-fired stations which were awaiting approval when the review was ordered, including the PowerGen station at Connah's Quay in north Wales, which will lead to the development of a group of offshore oil and gas finds in Liverpool Bay.
The Government has also rejected calls for older Magnox nuclear power stations to be phased out to support a higher coal burn.
Concluding that there was no economic justification for phasing out the stations before the end of their planned lives, it also told Nuclear Electric that it would be willing to look at plans for capital spending to extend the life of the stations.
As expected, ministers rejected calls for curbing the import of nuclear power from France after receiving legal advice suggesting such actions could contravene the Treaty of Rome.
The outcome of the coal review will be among matters taken into consideration in preparing a national plan for meeting international obligations to limit carbon dioxide emissions.
The white paper points out that a higher coal burn by the electricity supply industry would mean that more stringent measures would be needed to limit emissions by other sectors, including transport.
That led the Government to conclude that environmental concerns were bound to constrain the amount of coal that could be used in the UK in the longer term.
Responding to criticism on the lack of energy policy which led to the fiasco over pit closure proposals last year, the Government said competitive markets ensured the best assess to secure, diverse and sustainable prices of energy at the best prices.
In future, however, energy matters would be kept under review by a new advisory panel of independent experts which would suggest how information should be interpreted on the way in which markets were developing and studies that should be carried out, similar to ones which were commissioned for the coal review.
The Government will also publish an annual energy report to provide information relevant to business and investment decisions, including trends in supply and demand, licensing activity and regulatory developments over the whole energy field.
‘The Government firmly rejects either a return to central planning or handing over policy responsibilities to a body independent of Government,’ the white paper says.
‘It recognises, however, that if markets are to work effectively, they need information which in some cases Government is in a unique position to provide.’
ANDRE CAMARA/Reuter Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, arrives at Westminster yesterday to present his white paper reviewing the coal industry's future
‘Landlordism of the sea’ alleged over lost fishing rights
By Our Parliamentary Correspondent
THE Scottish Office was accused of ‘landlordism of the sea’ yesterday when it agreed to end common fishing rights in part of Loch Crinan.
Ministers won a vote to give a private company, Scallop Kings, exclusive rights to farm shellfish over an area of seabed along the shore south- west of Fort William.
The company would be able to have anyone who takes their produce prosecuted.
Opposition MPs said it could lead to hundreds of job losses for fishermen.
Calum MacDonald (Lab, Western Isles) said: ‘This introduces the principle of private ownership of the seabed and introduces landlordism of the sea.
There is no guarantee for local fishermen that they will have their livelihoods protected and a danger of job losses in the long term.’
One similar order affected a shellfish farm in Loch Moidart a few miles further north, but that was granted to the Government's Sea Fish Industry Authority for research.
John McFall, Labour's Scottish rural affairs spokesman, said: ‘Ministers were not prepared to give a pledge that there would be no further measures of this kind which ban fishermen from pursuing a centuries long tradition.
‘It is sad that the Government was not prepared to consider the needs of ordinary fishermen on the west coast and there is a feeling now that hundreds of jobs could be at risk.’
The Scottish fisheries minister, Sir Hector Monro, defended the decision to grant a so-called ‘several order’ to Scallop Kings.
He told a commons  committee debating the order: ‘It is quite misleading to describe several orders as landlordism of the sea.
‘If  practised properly, shellfish ranching can compliment fishing activity.
In some cases the natural spat fall from cultivated beds will spread beyond the immediate area and benefit the public fishery.’
Ray Michie (Lib Dem, Argyll and Bute) was also strongly against the order, which the Government won by seven votes to four.
Demonstrating fishermen were fiercely criticised yesterday by the fisheries minister, David Curry, who told them not to resume protests against cheap imports.
He said at question time in the Commons that the problem was not imported fish.
‘There is a problem of the landing of small fish, particularly from Scotland, and too much cod on Humberside.
‘I hope the industry will not resume its saga of blockade, demonstration and destruction of fish, particularly as fish prices have firmed quite considerably.
Perhaps it is because the fishermen have been demonstrating so much recently that they have not been catching so much fish.’
Austin Mitchell (Lab, Great Grimsby) said the Government should ‘deal with Russian imports by a dumping ban on a temporary basis, provide financial support, stand up for fishing, instead of blaming the fishermen’.
Calum MacDonald: ‘Private ownership of the seabed’
Budget changes to oil tax condemned
By Joy Copley, Parliamentary Correspondent
THE Government has drilled itself into a well on oil jobs as it ‘scrambles out of a hole on pit closures’, Alex Salmond, the Scottish National Party leader, said yesterday.
Mr Salmond has put down a Commons motion condemning the Budget changes in the oil taxation regime, which he says will cost the industry £500 million more in revenue to the exchequer in the first year.
He said that it had already led to the curtailment of five drilling contracts with thousands of potential job losses.
His motion, which is supported by Malcolm Bruce (Lib Dem, Gordon), criticises the Government's ‘ill conceived’ measures and the unacceptable knock-on effect for jobs in the north-east.
It calls on the Government immediately to withdraw the changes in the Petroleum Revenue Tax.
Mr Salmond said: ‘I find it quite incredible that on the day this bungling Government is desperately trying to scramble out of a hole on pit closures, it is at the same time drilling itself into a well on oil jobs.
‘Having made such a botch-up on coal, it is amazing that the Government have been so bloody-minded as to push on full steam ahead without prior consultation with the industry and regardless of a potentially devastating impact on jobs.’
He wants urgent consultations between the Government and the oil industry to seek ways to ensure that any changes in the tax regime do not hamper exploration and appraisal in the North Sea.
Geoff Robertson and Thomas Burgess (Points of View today) are correct to criticise the Government's decision to levy VAT on domestic fuel bills.
However, far from benefiting from this measure, the people of the south-east of England will also suffer at the hands of Chancellor Norman Lamont through increased fuel bills which many of them will have difficulty in paying as, contrary to popular myth, the south-east does not consist entirely of rich people.
It is not just the great majority of the people of Scotland who have suffered at the hands of Lamont and the Tory Government, but people all over the UK.
There are people who have experienced hardship under Tory policies in Woking and Ramsgate, as well as in Dundee and Glasgow.
Thus, the measures announced in Mr Lamont's budget, of which the VAT imposition on domestic fuel is one of many, amount to yet another attack on the living standards of ordinary people of not only Scotland, but also for the rest of the UK.
Such acts come as no surprise from a Government which has implemented measure after measure in a similar vein since 1979.
Pretensions beyond the talents Peter Woodifield analyses the downfall of Sir Edward du Cann, now declared bankrupt, and who never achieved the status he so desired
SIR Edward du Cann has been walking a financial tightrope for so long that the only surprise is that it has taken him so long finally to fall off.
His money problems have hit the headlines with almost metronomic regularity as one institution after another issued writs to try to ensure payment of unpaid bills.
He even fell into arrears with his mortgage at a time when he was earning £400,000 a year as chairman of Lonrho, and at one stage had a 300-acre farm and farmhouse, next to his magnificent 14th-century manor house in Somerset, repossessed.
Somehow he always managed to play off one creditor against another, claiming he was just awaiting payment for some big deal or other that was in the pipeline.
Only last week the National Rivers Authority sent the bailiffs in over yet another debt — in du Cann's terms, a piddling £425.
Three weeks ago his London flat was repossessed by the National & Provincial Building Society.
It emerged yesterday that he was made bankrupt two weeks ago today for failing to pay his solicitors for work they had done.
Had it not been his solicitors the Inland Revenue would have got him yesterday for unpaid tax bills, but its petition was dismissed automatically once the High Court heard that a bankruptcy order had already been made.
On top of that, nine county court judgments and a High Court judgment have been made against him in the past two years, including £6,227, still unpaid, owed to the Royal Bank of Scotland.
as if that were not enough, the Department of Trade and Industry is still trying to have him disqualified as a company director for his role in the collapse of Homes Assured — a move which forced his resignation from the chairmanship of Lonrho in 1991.
Du Cann's fundamental problem has been that he wanted to be seen as cross between a Tory grandee and country squire.
But he was too smooth, and his charm a little too insincere, to be a real gentleman.
And he never had the means to maintain the lifestyle he decided would provide his entry into the society he craved to belong to.
For someone determined to make money from an early age, it represents quite a failure.
Du Cann was one of a number of Tory ‘knights of the shires’ of the same vintage who made good from very modest beginnings.
He went to Oxford from secondary school but failed his Bar exams, unlike his father and brother.
To make his mark, du Cann went into the City before trying his hand at politics when he was in his thirties in an attempt to gain power and influence, as well as make money.
The trouble is that most people do one once they have achieved the other.
It was perhaps typical of du Cann, who saw himself as an archetypal operator, that he should try to do both simultaneously.
It also explains his failure in that no-one knew which was his real priority.
In politics he had three positions of influence and one achievement.
At 39 he was made chairman of the Conservative Party by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, but was never in favour during the Heath years.
However, he managed to become chairman of the cross-party Public Accounts Committee as well as of the 1922 committee of back-benchers from which position he played a key role in Heath's downfall as part of the Milk Street gang (named after the street of his very minor merchant bank, Keyser Ullmann).
But Mrs Thatcher never rewarded him and the bitterness showed.
Whatever the protestations of loyalty, his colleagues were more interested in spotting which ribs he was sliding his verbal stiletto between.
As might have been expected from his career, he outstayed his welcome and had to be forced to retire from the post — a position previously rewarded with a peerage, but which for him only merited a knighthood.
By common consent Sir Edward was a superb committee man, able to bring agreement from disagreement, when he brought his charm to bear.
Not for nothing was one of his nicknames ‘Oily’.
In City terms he could claim some credit, along with Peter Walker, as the father of modern unit trusts, while he made a personal profit of £1 million from the sale of Cannon Insurance, the UK vehicle of the disgraced Bernie Cornfeld.
But Keyser Ullmann had to be rescued following the failure of a £17 million corporate loan to someone with no references who walked away with the money.
Du Cann was personally criticised by DTI inspectors for being ‘incompetent’.
That judgment hounded him throughout public life and left people with the feeling that there was something not quite right.
But what really did for him was losing a lot of money at Keyser Ullmann in the property crash of 1973.
As a publicly-professed believer in borrowing money, that was bad news from which he never recovered financially.
At the same time, as a director of Lonrho, he was caught up in Sir Edward Heath's famous description of the company as the ‘unacceptable face of capitalism’.
He decided to stay and was rewarded in 1984 with the chairmanship — and the big salary.
His main role was to act as Tiny Rowlands's front man in the increasingly acrimonious dispute with the Department of Trade and the Fayed brothers over the House of Fraser and Harrods.
He did it well, but it did nothing to improve his image within his own party.
From the mid-Eighties, life has essentially been downhill, despite the appearance of wealth and status.
A string of unpaid bills, often owed to local tradesmen who could ill-afford it, numerous writs and a divorce have all contributed to his problems.
But then life is invariably ultimately hard on someone with pretensions beyond their talents and a style best encapsulated in the story told about the boy in his Taunton constituency who asked him what the time was.
‘What time would like it to be, dear boy?’
Advanced dividends piling in
THE trickle of companies bringing forward dividend payments to beat the Chancellor's cut in advance corporation tax grew to a flood yesterday, writes Magnus Grimond.
The new rules reduce the amount of ACT a non-taxpayer can reclaim from the Inland Revenue from 25 to 20 per cent, beginning with dividends paid after 6 April.
As a result, PowerGen yesterday revealed its final dividend ahead of the 4 April year-end.
It will pay a second interim of 7.15p on 31 March, lifting the total for 1992-93 by 13.5 per cent to 10.5p.
Boots is to pay a second interim of 8.8p (7.8p) on 31 March for the year to that day.
Meanwhile, Reuters has brought forward payment of its previously-announced final dividend of 15.9p to 5 April, renaming it a second interim.
Reed International said it would now pay its 7.25p final as a second interim on 5 April, while TT Group's 3.6p final becomes a second interim to be paid on 31 March.
Matthew Clark will now pay its interim of 6.75p on 5 April.
Astra sales send Vauxhall profits roaring 69% ahead
VAUXHALL Motors yesterday reported a 69 per cent leap in pre-tax profits for last year to £223.7 million.
But there was ‘little hope’ of results for 1993 being as good because of worsening market conditions in Europe, the Luton-based car company's chairman, William Ebbert, warned.
Vauxhall is the UK subsidiary of America's General Motors.
But he said 1992 had been ‘an exceptionally good year’ for Vauxhall, with excellent Astra sales playing a prominent part in the results.
Total Astra sales last year were 86,858 — 21.6 per cent up on 1991's.
They helped give Vauxhall its best share of the UK market in 1992 at 16.7 per cent.
Total UK car sales, at 266,072, were 7 per cent up on the 1991 figure.
Mr Ebbert said: ‘While the UK market improved only slightly and there was some softening of continental markets, a combination of record UK market share and increased export business kept our production plants at full stretch.’
He added: ‘Market conditions in Europe are worsening overall and our expectation is that 1993 has little hope of being as productive and profitable for the company as last year.’
Turnover, at £2.998 billion, was the highest in the company's history.
Total domestic and export sales of all Vauxhall vehicles last year rose 10.3 per cent to 402,617.
The 1992 profits were the third-highest in Vauxhall's history and compare with a 1991 pre-tax figure of £132.6 million.
Mr Ebbert warned that the company would have to continue operating at reduced output levels for the immediate future, even though he expected a modest improvement in total UK new car sales this year — a rise of perhaps about 7 per cent to 1.7 million.
Vauxhall's director of manufacturing, John Barber, said yesterday that short-time working at the company's Luton and Ellesmere Port plants would have to continue.
The effect of this at Luton was likely to reduce production there in 1993 to 145,000 units, a drop of about 15 per cent.
At Ellesmere Port, production was likely to be about 10,000 less than the 131,000 in 1992.
Mr Ebbert said later he had ‘no illusions about the harsh realities of the current economic climate’.
The softening of European markets would probably result in total European sales dropping by about one million units to 12.3 million this year.
— PA
Quayle Munro ready for listing
QUAYLE Munro, the small Edinburgh merchant bank, is set to become a quoted company following what it described yesterday as a reverse takeover by East of Scotland Industrial Investments, the unquoted investment group managed by the bank, writes BILL MILLAR.
The new company, which will be called Quayle Munro Holdings, will seek a full stock market listing as soon as the transaction is completed.
Existing Quayle Munro shareholders will have 75 per cent of the new company, after repayment of £10 million of capital to ESII shareholders in a process which addresses the heavy liquidity in ESII's balance sheet.
Irrevocable undertakings and letters of intent have already been received representing 75 per cent of shareholdings.
Ian Jones, who founded Quayle Munro in 1983 with Mike Munro, and who is to become group chief executive of the new company, said the merger provided an exciting opportunity to create a new group which would operate as an integrated investment and merchant banking house concentrating on the provision of corporate finance advisory services and independent advice to listed and unlisted companies.
‘We will be majoring on our role as independent corporate advisers,’ he said.
‘The listing will give us much more flexibility and will also enable us to use the market for capital raising exercises if necessary.’
Quayle Munro has recently undertaken the review for the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, on the options for private sector finance with regard to water and sewerage in Scotland.
David Ross Stewart, the chairman of ESII, said the board had examined a number of options to ensure that shareholders received a payment to reflect the value of the company's liquid assets, while achieving a satisfactory long-term solution in respect of the unquoted portfolio.
The net worth of ESII was said yesterday to be about £17 million of which £11 million of capital would be repaid.
For the year ending 30 September, 1992, Quayle Munro reported pre-tax profits of £510,000.
HAMISH CAMPBELL Stock men: Ian Jones, left, and Mike Munro at their offices in Edinburgh's Charlotte Square
Barclays loses finance director
THE upheaval in the top management of Barclays, Britain's biggest clearing bank, took another turn yesterday with the news that Peter Wood, finance director since 1991, is leaving to join Standard Chartered, writes Magnus Grimond.
The announcement of his departure came just one day after Barclays revealed that it is to look outside the bank for a new chief executive to take over some of the powers presently held by chairman and chief executive, Andrew Buxton.
Barclays' top management has been heavily criticised following massive losses last year, but the bank insisted yesterday that the latest events were not connected with each other.
A spokesman said Mr Wood had opened negotiations with Standard Chartered, a London-based overseas bank, as far back as January, but only told Mr Buxton that he was leaving last Monday.
The spokesman added that the bank's understanding was that Mr Wood wanted to gain wider responsibility within the smaller management team at Standard Chartered, whose chief executive is Malcolm Williamson, an ex-Barclays employee.
Nonetheless, it seems clear that Mr Wood — whose career has been in corporate treasury departments — decided quite early on that he was not in the running for the job of chief executive, given Barclays' desire that someone with all-round banking experience fill the post.
He is to be replaced by Oliver Stocken, finance director of Barclays' investment banking arm, Barclays de Zoete Wedd, since 1991.
180 store jobs saved
SOME 180 jobs were saved yesterday when receivers Price Waterhouse disposed of two further stores in the collapsed McMaster Stores chain, writes John Hatfield.
Bairds of Hamilton and Hourstons of Ayr, which together accounted for more than 50 per cent of group turnover, were sold as going concerns to JT Morgan & Co (Swansea) and its associated company, Omnibreck Holdings, respectively.
Both companies are controlled by the Manchester-based Jebreel family.
Of the other five outlets, the Stirling store, which trades as Mclachlan & Brown, is continuing to trade while the property in Bellshill is under offer.
The freehold store in Banff was sold to MacKays Stores Holdings in February while the Airdrie and Irvine stores have both been closed recently.
Heavy industry fights back
By John Hatfield
SCOTLAND's engineering sector is still resolutely clawing its way out of the recessionary pit, according to the latest quarterly review issued yesterday by Scottish Engineering, the employers' organisation.
Improved order intake and increased capacity usage over the past three months confirmed that the tentative pick-up seen in the previous quarter was not an aberration.
Confidence is now at its highest level since June last year.
The organisation's chief executive, Howard Jordan, was optimistic that the latest figures did not merely represent another false dawn, despite evidence of continuing decline in the heavy  engineering and foundry sectors.
However, Mr Jordan noted that staffing levels would not benefit in the short term as cutbacks continued across the board in all sectors.
‘If we have continued improvement it won't make any immediate difference to employment levels due to slack capacity.
‘Once this picks up there will be a move to increased overtime before any new employees are taken on,’ he said.
In Mr Jordan's view there will be no tightening in the engineering labour market before spring of next year.
While electronics continues to lead the way with a net balance of 22 per cent of companies in the sector recording an improvement in orders and 21 per cent seeing an upturn in export demand, there was general improvement in all but the heavy and foundry sectors.
But this has not been matched by an increased commitment to capital expenditure and Mr Jordan expressed concern that while most member companies had weathered the recession ‘surviving companies are probably not investing sufficiently in keeping up with technological progress’.
Looking ahead, Mr Jordan said that he hoped the Chancellor would at least decide to retain the 40 per cent capital allowance in the autumn budget.
He also called for an early announcement of a balanced energy policy to stimulate the heavy engineering sector.
Big jump in unit sales
THE unit trust industry achieved its best sales for more than five years in February.
They rose to £1.3 billion, from £1.1 billion in January, while net new investment climbed from £509 million in January to £591 million.
All but six of the 23 unit trust sectors saw a net inflow of funds during the month, with the top spots taken by UK Growth, with a rise of £86 million, and the Far East sector, excluding Japan, up by £85 million.
Regulators ‘failed to focus on fraud'
THE Securities and Investments Board should relinquish its ‘command and control’ approach and concentrate on setting the regulatory framework and objectives, an influential report on the costs and effectiveness of UK financial regulation said yesterday, writes Ian Harper.
The report — from the City Research Project, which is chaired by the former chairman of the Securities Association, Stanislas Yassukovich — also says that the UK financial regulatory system has failed to focus adequately on fraud and misappropriation.
But on the question of costs, the report's findings contradict claims that UK regulation is costly in comparison to other countries.
The report's conclusions on the SIB are expected to be echoed in a nearly completed report to the Treasury from the SIB chairman, Andrew Large, which was commissioned in the wake of the Maxwell pensions scandal.
It is understood Mr Large proposes effectively to dismantle the SIB's own role as a self-regulatory organisation by delegating the policing of its 70-odd members — which include the life operations of several banks and building societies — to the proposed new super-regulator, the Personal Investment Authority.
In future, the SIB is expected to regulate firms directly only on a ‘last-resort basis’, and so to focus almost entirely on its primary role as a regulator of regulators.
Such a move would not only end the current problem of regulatory ‘arbitrage’, where firms are able to choose their regulators, but more importantly, lead to greater consistency in training and enforcement standards.
On regulatory costs, the City Research report says UK financial services regulation costs about £93 million a year.
This is equivalent to £308 a head, which compares with £347 a head in the US and £232 a head in France.
On fraud, the report says that the focus of regulation and compensation should be retail investors, as more than three-quarters of compensation payments are made to investors with claims of less than £50,000.
By contrast, the report calls for professional investors to be exposed to the principle of ‘caveat emptor’—‘let the buyer beware’.
Budget tax changes will hit jobs, warn small oil producers
By Frank Frazer
DIVISION in the oil industry on tax changes intensified yesterday when the body representing small independent producers warned that some of its members might withdraw applications for new drilling licences.
The Association of British Independent Oil Companies (BRINDEX) claimed a significant loss of jobs would result from the adjustments which were introduced in the Budget without industry consultation.
The measures, including the abolition of petroleum revenue tax, on new oil and gas projects has been welcomed by British Petroleum which said that the changes should encourage investment in large fields, such as its recent find west of Shetland.
But Malcolm Gourlay, BRINDEX's chairman, said most new fields would be too small to benefit and would not be developed because of the adverse impact of withdrawing PRT relief on the cost of exploration wells.
‘The lack of any consultation on this issue is also a major concern.
Fiscal stability and governmental co-operation have been two features of the tax regime in the past which have encouraged investment in the UK.’
Mr Gourlay said there was also concern about the transitional arrangements which would lead to disparity of treatment between different companies which had not made long-term commitments for rigs which would qualify for tax relief.
‘In many cases there will be commitments in the form of telexes or letters of intent but these are not expected to meet the requirements of the proposed legislation.
We do not believe that the status of firm contracts with third parties should be the sole criterion for obtaining transitional relief,’ he added.
BRINDEX, which represents 19 UK-based oil companies, plans to ask the Treasury to regard commitments to drill under existing licences as qualifying for tax relief.
It also wants the concession extended to any awards under the forthcoming 14th licensing round for which applications were made before the tax changes were announced.
Claiming that the full impact of the transitional proposals had not been fully appreciated, Mr Gourlay said: ‘If these changes are implemented, several of our members will have to reconsider their obligations under existing licences and their applications under the 14th round.’
ABB Vecto Gray, the Aberdeen-based manufacturer of drilling and production equipment added its voice to worries about the Budget.
Its customers were reducing exploration plans considerably in the short-term, it said.
That could only have a detrimental effect on jobs in the company's factories, and it had already started slimming its operations as a result of the significant decline in drilling activity.
CBI growth revision signals recovery, but not quite a boom
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
THE CBI has upped its forecasts for economic growth this year to 1.4 per cent, from 0.7 per cent last November.
Part of the improvement stems from an upturn in the last few months of 1992 which was not evident last November, and part from an increase in North Sea oil, which is responsible for almost half the revision.
Next year's growth forecast has also been revised upwards, but only from 2.3 per cent to 2.4 per cent.
It adds up to a recovery but not a boom, Sudhir Junankar, the deputy director of economic affairs said yesterday.
Manufacturing industry is now expected to grow by 1.6 per cent this year, against only 0.5 per cent last November, but the forecast for 1994 has been revised down to 2.8 per cent from 3.1 per cent.
Fixed investment is expected to be flat this year and up 2.9 per cent next, both a significant improvement on the last forecast, and even consumer spending is now expected to grow by 1.2 per cent this year and 1.9 per cent next, in spite of the threat of tax increases.
Export volumes are expected to grow, but the current account is expected to be slightly larger as the full effects of devaluation work through.
Inflation this year is now expected to be 3.5 per cent, with a similar figure next year, while unemployment is now expected to level off at about 3.1 million this year and next, reflecting the fact that companies have already shed labour faster than in previous cycles.
Company profits are now expected to be level this year compared with a near 2 per cent fall last November, but next year's improvement has been cut from 4.4 per cent to 2.9 per cent.
The main threats to the forecast lie in the outlook for world trade, which has worsened since November as Germany and Japan turn down, the burden of domestic debt continues, and the effects of German policies on the European Community remain adverse.
Welcome assault on public practice?
WELLCOME'S attack on governments that try to prune the inexorable rise in healthcare costs is unlikely to find many sympathisers.
This is a shame.
It deserves support.
It is symptomatic of the band-wagon style of politics rumbling through many western nations that the private sector should be blamed for the short-comings of the public.
In this case the disapproval has been registered with a $100 billion fall in the stockmarket value of healthcare companies since last summer — even as markets have headed towards new records.
If promised reforms of US healthcare live halfway up to some of the lurid stories being bandied around on Wall Street, then the new administration on Pennsylvania Avenue will have missed a trick: almost every job created since the recession began in 1990 has come from this vibrant industry.
In the UK, the healthcare sector has been one of the most successful during a recession that matches the 1930s in depth and duration.
Nowhere has President Clinton been so caustic as in his attacks on the pharmaceutical industry for its alleged fleecing of consumers.
Already he has accused vaccine makers of earning ‘unconscionable’ profits at the expense of America's children.
Those in charge of drawing up a blueprint for health-care reform talk of slapping mandatory controls on all drug prices.
In the UK this is not only absurd but a waste of time.
As a near-monopoly buyer of healthcare products, the National Health Service is in a unique position to impose its own conditions on the pharmaceutical industry.
Yet even the most draconian measures would still have little effect on health-care inflation — because drugs account for just 7 per cent of all spending on patients.
The reformers would do better to look at the health-care regimes they oversee.
In the US, the set-up of health insurance companies that stand between consumers and the services they use encourages the profligate use of resources.
Neither patients or doctors have any incentive to use purchaser power to trim costs.
Second, the drug firms take advantage of federally funded development — through, the National Institutes of Health — without adequately reimbursing the taxpayer.
Third, a federal provision gives tax credits to firms that set up manufacturing operations in US  possessions , most notably Puerto Rico.
Drug makers are by far the largest beneficiaries, which may save them $2 billion a year.
Any proposed reform of any western healthcare system should take as its starting point the efficacy of health-care purchase.
It is hardly the drug companies' fault that the purchasers do not know their strengths — or their minds.
Express titles going strong for United News
By Magnus Grimond
STRONG circulation and a jump in advertising at the Daily and Sunday Express helped boost profits last year for United Newspapers.
Profits before exceptional items leapt from £77.6 million in 1991 to £99.5 million, with profits from national newspapers shooting ahead 36 per cent to £33 million.
Lord Stevens, the chairman, said the Express titles increased their market share of circulation, while advertising volumes rose 7 per cent in the year.
The launch of the tabloid Sunday Express in July ‘proved to be a success’, he added.
Profits more than doubled at pre-tax level, but were complicated by the application of the new accounting rules.
The figures included a £22.7 million one-off gain on the sale of Reuters' shares and Lord Stevens remains cautious about the outlook.
‘There does appear to be an uneven economic recovery in the US, and greater optimism in the UK.
However, it remains to be seen whether such optimism will convert into growth across our markets.’
But given ‘the improvement in the underlying profitability of the group’, a final dividend lifted by 0.5p to 14p raises the total from 21p to 21.5p.
The shares gained 16p to 588p.
Outside national newspapers, United's divisional results were mixed.
Regional newspapers, which include the Yorkshire Post, saw profits edge up from £25.3 million to £26.6 million, despite the continued depressed state of classified advertising revenues.
But the advertising periodicals division was unable to shake off the ill-effects of UK recession.
Profits there sank from £30.1 million to £28.3 million, though there were better results in the US.
Business publishing had a tough year, with further declines in advertising at the Morgan-Grampian subsidiary in the UK and conditions in the US ‘generally difficult’.
Overall profits from magazines and exhibitions still managed a rise from £20.5 million to £22.4 million.
Leaving US spices costs Reckitt & Colman dear
RECKITT & Colman, the household goods, toiletries, food and pharmaceuticals group, was hit by difficult trading conditions in nearly all its leading markets last year, the board said yesterday.
Annual pre-tax profits fell to £181.7 million for the 12 months to 2 January, from £234 million the year before, after the group took a charge for a £47.3 million loss on its withdrawal from the North American spice and seasoning business.
There was also a charge of £9.59 million for trading losses incurred in 1992 before the withdrawal and £9.64 million for reorganisation of acquired businesses.
Trading was tough across the board, but progress was particularly difficult to achieve in Europe as leading economies moved into recession.
Turnover dipped from £1.98 billion to £1.9 billion.
In the household and toiletries division, sales were close to 1991 levels, but food sales fell by 8.1 per cent and operating profits, by 1.3 per cent, reflecting the disposal of the group's food interests in South Africa.
Pharmaceutical sales jumped more than 5 per cent and operating profits rose nearly 4 per cent, with the group's portfolio showing ‘strong resilience’.
The board said there were ‘now signs, particularly in the USA, that an economic recovery may be starting to develop’.
Earnings per share dropped from 37.9p to 25.16p, but a final dividend of 10.25p (9.55p) helps lift the total by 7.3 per cent to 16.2p.
The accounts were prepared in accordance with the new FRS3 reporting standard.
Profits before tax on the same basis of accounting as used previously came in at £248.25 million, against £252.3 million.
— PA
Shortfall in returns at Murray Ventures
By John Hatfield
TOUGH trading conditions for smaller unlisted companies explained Murray Ventures' underperformance of the FT-A All-Share Index at the interim stage.
The £78 million fund, managed by Murray Johnstone, achieved a 10.7 per cent return on net assets, compared with a 22.2 per cent rise in the Index over the same six-month period.
But the trust's average discount to net asset value, at 18-20 per cent, is significantly ahead of its the peer group's average of about 32 per cent .
While the trust's portfolio is balanced evenly between quoted and unquoted investments, the management has adopted a cautious approach to valuing the unlisted holdings.
This has resulted in several of the unlisted equity stakes being valued at a big discount to the quoted investments.
New investment and realisation activity was muted in the first half-year, with the trust investing £2.1 million in the unlisted sector, compared to £3.8 million at this stage the year before.
Among the new investments were stakes in Interactive Media Services, a £12.7 million management buy-out from Brent Walker, and a tableware manufacturer, Poole Pottery, acquired from BTR through a management buy-in.
Murray also announced that it has made a 119 per cent gain on its holding in Yorkshire Food Group, which was floated in March after the first half ended.
Commenting on the performance, Geoff Burns, a director of Murray Johnstone, said: ‘We are pleased with the progress of the unlisted portfolio, with one investment that has just been floated and the prospect of two to come, including Stagecoach in three weeks’ time.
‘Given the general caution and lack of opportunities recently for management buy-outs and buy-ins, we now have £40 million available for investment in small companies, which is currently tied up in blue chips.’
After the devaluation of sterling, equity holdings in continental Europe were sold and the proceeds reinvested in the UK.
While the managers' long-term intention is to have a balance in Europe, Mr Burns believed that with the main continental economies in difficulty, prospects in the short term do not look attractive.
Mr Burns thinks that unbundling of subsidiaries from large corporations such as Hillsdown and BP will provide opportunities in future.
Earnings per share rose from 5p to 6.87p and the trust's interim dividend is held at 3.4p.
Other companies reporting yesterday included:
Thomas Cook: annual pre-tax profits £25.3 million (£8.9 million)— first results since it was acquired by Germany's Westdeutsche Landesbank and LTU group last September.
BUPA: annual pre-tax profits at UK's largest private health organisation £36.5 million (£1.3 million profits).
Total subscriptions £876.2 million (£819 million).
Benefits paid £719.9 million (£717.4 million).
Healthcare fears hit Wellcome's shares
By Richard Shackleton
SHARES in Wellcome collapsed 72p to 818p yesterday after the drug group's Scottish chairman, Sir Alistair Frame, voiced concern at the current healthcare reform agenda.
Speaking after he revealed a 58.5 per cent jump in first-half pre-tax profits, Sir Alistair and his chief executive, John Robb, said the company was operating against the background of countries such as the Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK ‘taking extreme measures against the pharmaceutical industry in an effort to control costs’.
They also warned against the cumulative effect that any US reforms might have on future profitability.
The finance director, John Precious, said he had already pencilled in an unchanged 1993 tax rate of 37 per cent, pegged by existing US proposals on the tax of foreign corporations.
He said Wellcome could not benefit from tax breaks enjoyed by companies that had set up manufacturing facilities in Puerto Rico.
First-half sales grew 11 per cent to £1.025 billion, with prescription medicines accounting for the vast majority after over-the-counter sales were stunted by a ‘poor coughs and colds season’.
Interim profits soared to £324.6 million, from £204.7 million at halfway in 1991, and interim dividend goes up from 4p to 4.8p.
Wellcome's leading drug Zovirax, used in the treatment of herpes, saw sales jump 17 per cent to £369 million, while the AIDS treatment, Retrovir, lifted sales 14 per cent to £131 million.
The pound's devaluation proved an enormous boost.
Sir Alastair said: ‘We estimate that overall, exchange rate movements added 11 per cent to our sales and 19 per cent to our pre-tax profits.’
The group's cash pile grew by £41 million to £451 million in the six months, while capital expenditure climbed to £82 million.
US profits rose spectacularly to £257.2 million, from £195.1 million.
The UK also proved a success story as profits climbed to £149.4 million, from £114.9 million.
The rest of Europe, Asia and Australasia were also ahead.
Earnings per share rose to 23.2p, from 12.6p previously.
SAC produces Euro-gospel
GUESSING the financial pros and cons of the new CAP regime has been a popular pastime at farmers' meetings in recent weeks.
The range of predictions has been infinite, but now the Scottish Agriculture College's economics unit has produced what it reckons to be the approved gospel.
Speaking yesterday in Edinburgh at a press briefing Dr Graham Dalton remarked: ‘We can see the way ahead for the next three years and the overall picture for Scottish farming is reasonably encouraging.
But at the same time farmers would be wise to remember that the reforms are not over yet, and the prices for most products are likely to be much more volatile in future.
That in turn means the industry has to think out its strategy in a logical manner.’
Looking specifically at the arable sector, the SAC's Sandy Ramsay highlighted the effects of the UK's departure from the ERM, saying that it had worked greatly to farmers' advantage.
Mr Ramsay added ‘This year it looks as though cereal prices will be much on a par with last year and on top of that farmers will receive the area compensatory payments.
The basic message however is that farmers with below average yields will be over compensated while specialist arable units will suffer — but only marginally.’
The consequences of successive devaluations of the ‘green’ pound were also referred to by Mr Ramsay, who said ‘With the compensation calculated at 80p per ecu as it was last September a high-yielding arable farm of 1,000 acres would have been over £48,000 worse off between 1993 and 1995 but now, with the rate at 98p per ecu that same farm's cross margin will drop by just under £2,000.
Similarly the same farm size but with relatively low yields will be better off by almost £36,000.’
On the livestock side Stuart Ashworth warned that beef producers should brace themselves for a cut in the Beef Special Premium ‘the base for Scotland is 244,000 male animals but there will be at least 300,000 head this year so we can anticipate a cut of somewhere in the region of 20-25 per cent in BSP payments.
For sheep the outlook appears particularly encouraging.
According to Mr Ashworth ‘it's quite possible that we shall see both higher lamb prices this year and an increase in the Sheep Annual Premium.’
Another topic which has come under the SAC microscope was the absolute necessity of farmers calculating the correct option when claiming the various subsidies.
An example was cited where by cutting back on BSB claims and by adjusting his grain acreage slightly downwards, a farmer could gain very substantially by making his farm eligible for extensification premia through having a lower stocking rate.
Looking at the farm business as a whole, Peter Cook joined his colleagues in saying: ‘Each business is different.
It's impossible to generalise and it's up to each farmer to weigh up the options which suit him best.
There's an awful lot of money waiting to be claimed but making a mistake could be disastrous.’
The SAC has published its findings in a booklet which is available free to subscribers or at a cost of £5 from its offices at West Mains Road, Edinburgh.
Crops drilled in autumn wintered best
AUTUMN-drilled crops in Scotland and the north of England have come through the winter best, according to the Home-Grown Cereals Authority.
Only small areas have had to be re-drilled because of flooding, although that can mean relatively large areas in some localities.
Winter wheats are slightly backward because of cold weather, but the benefit of this has been disease-free crops with good root development.
Oilseed rape is not so good, with many patchy, backward crops.
A little further south, early winter-drilled wheats looks good, but later-drilled crops extremely patchy and winter barley showing signs of disease.
Again, oilseed rape is frequently patchy.
In the English Midlands and south east, winter wheat and oilseed crops were held back by poor autumn seedbeds and waterlogging.
Slugs have also been active and oilseed rape crops are mainly thin and patchy with pigeon damage.
Reports from south-west England are of good winter wheat growth, now showing an increase in disease levels.
Inverleith hit by injury to Hay
INVERLEITH, who are currently fighting to avoid relegation from the Torrie Stockbrokers National Men's Hockey League, yesterday received news they could well have done without.
Andrew Hay, their only current senior internationalist, will play his last game for the club tomorrow because of injury.
Hay has been enduring considerable back pain for a number of years.
The injury has failed to respond to treatment and he has decided to retire.
His enforced absence for the remainder of the season is a cruel blow to the Edinburgh side for they are one of four clubs sitting in the danger zone.
Hay, in his farewell performance, could give them a lifeline were they to beat DW Clydesdale at Meadowbank, but on current form such a prospect appears most unlikely.
The Scotsman Cup on Sunday and the semi-final tie in particular between Grange and Touche Ross will be the focal point of this weekend's programme.
They meet at McDiarmid Park in what promises to be a most enthralling encounter.
Touche Ross, the best young talent in Scotland at the moment, will start favourites, but with the league championship basically now a dream as far as Grange are concerned, this clash will undoubtedly lift them for what promises to be their most important game of the season.
Should they succeed, then it is virtually certain they will become involved in an all-Edinburgh final, for Civil Service who have Jonathan Smyth back after playing in an Irish trial last weekend, appear to have the measure of second division Pender Uddingston at Cramond.
The West coast side have gone off the rails in recent weeks following successive defeats by Western and Hazlehead but as the cup is realistically their last chance of glory this term they will certainly not concede defeat from the want of effort.
In women's hockey, the annual 11-a-side tournament for the District League Cup takes place at Station Park, St Andrews, tomorrow (10am-6pm).
The second spot in division two of the Torrie Stockbrokers National Outdoor League (already won by Grange Western Wanderers), which guarantees a play-off for promotion with the eighth placed Division One side, is being contested by Stepps, Edinburgh University, Hutchesons FP and Burts Melrose, the latter two clashing in Melrose tomorrow (noon), the former two meeting Hyndland A (Helenvale, Glasgow, 12.30pm) and Central Wanders (Cumbernauld, 3.45pm), who are both seeking safety points.
The squad for the defence of the Tyrone Crystal Trophy at the British Universities Sports Federation's annual championship in Jordanstown, Northern Ireland (29-31 March) has been named.
The candidates for eighth place in Division One are Boroughmuir, Heriot Watt SCPE and Western Klick Photopoint A. At home tomorrow to Western Klick Photopoint (Meadowbank, 4pm), Royal High Gymnasts (Cramond, 2.30pm) and Kirkcaldy (Stepps, 2pm), respectively first, third and ninth.