

Golden eagles
I read with dismay the report by Auslan Cramb (11 March) concerning the killing of golden eagles.
The Scottish Landowners' Federation unequivocally condemns the illegal killing of protected birds.
The SLF recommends to its members that in their own interests, and in the interests of their employees, they rebrief their staff on the need to use only legal means of management.
A clause to that effect should also be included in any contract of employment.
We have a draft available on application.
Bird numbers
I would like to reassure Ian McLaren (Points of View, today) that garden birds on the West Coast are thriving.
Despite a resident magpie — this year's nest building has already begun — birds visiting the garden daily include blue tit, great tit, long-tailed tit and coal tit, siskin, greenfinch, sparrows, blackbirds, thrushes, robins and at the last count 11 chaffinches.
Regular visitors include two wood pigeons, seven collar doves, innumerable rooks and jackdaws.
Natural predators, sparrowhawk and kestrel, swoop in on regular raids and the garden is visited by fox and weasel.
My garden could be described as ‘bird friendly’ having ample cover for roosting, plenty of berries and seed heads.
From November to April wild-bird food is available once a day and nuts are suspended in a holder.
Clean drinking water is supplied and this is as important as a varied diet to encourage birds to the garden.
The birds are there, Mr McLaren, if you supply the correct environment.
Ivy benefits
Contrary to popular myth, and the suggestion of your recent correspondent (Points of View, 10 March), ivy is not a menace to trees, and indeed is not a parasite in any sense.
It feeds from its own roots in the ground and a healthy tree will normally be unaffected by it.
In a tree which is already moribund the remaining healthy crown may be suppressed, but the loss of the individual tree is far outweighed by the conservation benefits.
Ivy is an essential component of the best woodland habitats in Britain and often provides the only available evergreen shelter in winter.
Its dense growth provides nesting places for a range of bird life as well as warm cover in winter or roosting small birds.
It is also a winter retreat for butterflies and other insects.
The flowers provide abundant nectar at a time when hardly any other source is available and throughout the autumn the last foraging bees, wasps and a host of flies are attracted to them.
The berries are eaten by most species of the large thrush family, and by many other birds.
So, please think carefully before you take an axe to any ivy and consider the harm that may be done to countless woodland birds and insects.

More magpies
I was interested to read recent letters expressing concern at the absence of small birds.
I too was very worried at the increase in numbers of magpies.
This area of Falkirk has always had a resident population of these handsome but predatory birds.
Very near by is Maggie Woods Loan, which is named after the bird.
I am delighted to report that despite the increase both of magpies and crows last year, I have observed over the winter feeding period the usual mixture of birds.
This included four kinds of tit, three varieties of finch, goldcrest, wren and, of course, the ubiquitous robin, all contributing to a total of approximately 20 species.
I am looking forward to the usual summer visitors.
Playing hard to get
WELL, not everyone is turned on by talking dirty.
The attempt to entice six male sperm whales out of Scapa Flow by playing them some fruity dialogue recorded at a whales' hen night off the Azores has so far failed.
With great foresight, the scientists operating this marine 0898 line had also brought a tape of a large male whale — saying what, we know not — presumably in case these were, well, the sort of lads who don't like girls.
That didn't ring their bells either.
All that emanated from the depths were some huffy clicking noises, which is apparently the sound of a whale not being turned on.
That, and a few water spouts, but then boys will be boys.
The scientists hope to try again today, which shows commendable patience.
Trying to vamp a bunch of vagrant whales in the Pentland Firth in March armed only with a waterproof tannoy and a box of plain-wrapped tapes is not everyone's idea of a good time.
By all accounts, it is not habit-forming, although recordings of ritzy whale chat are apparently popular as an optional extra with those flotation chamber gadgets that the metropolitan smart set use to stave off the ennui of being rich and stupid.
Still, this ploy of trying to shift people with sounds is clearly catching on.
Possibly it has its origins in the ‘white noise’ techniques which the Brits, ever the innovators, pioneered in Northern Ireland in the 1970s (it has always seemed unjust that what was deplored then as a human rights abuse was later marketed under the brand name of acid house).
The most famous example, of course, was when the Americans blasted General Noriega with poorly-reviewed heavy metal albums.
Something of the sort is being tried again at Waco.
Perhaps the boffins in the boats at Scapa ought to swallow their compassion and get equally coercive with the whales.
Instead of towing amplified sweet nothings ahead of the school, they might do better to sit astern with a few well-chosen selections from The Osmonds' Greatest Hits, or Singalongamax.
Well, wouldn't it work for you?