

Algorithms and software tools for ordering clone libraries: application to the mapping of the genome of Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
ABSTRACT
A complete set of software tools to aid the physical mapping of a genome has been developed and successfully applied to the genomic mapping of the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe .
Two approaches were used for ordering single-copy hybridisation probes: one was based on the simulated annealing algorithm to order all probes, and another on inferring the minimum-spanning subset of the probes using a heuristic filtering procedure.
Both algorithms produced almost identical maps, with minor differences in the order of repetitive probes and those having identical hybridisation patterns.
A separate algorithm fitted the clones to the established probe order.
Approaches for handling experimental noise and repetitive elements are discussed.
In addition to these programs and the database management software, tools for visualizing and editing the data are described.
The issues of combining the information from different libraries are addressed.
Also, ways of handling multiple-copy probes and non-hybridisation data are discussed.
INTRODUCTION
Physical mapping of genomes by constucting ordered libraries of overlapping clones is an essential step in the analysis of the information contained in the genomic DNA sequence, since it gives both a high resolution map of the genome and easy access to the cloned DNA for molecular analysis of genes, transcripts and regulatory sequences.
In this paper we describe a suite of programs for building the physical map of a genome, using data of hybridisations of probes onto unordered clone libraries.
These methods were developed to aid the physical mapping of the fission yeast S.pombe (1, 10) but are applicable to other hybridisation data.
A very efficient method for generating the data necessary to order a library is to hybridise DNA probes onto filters where the library has been spotted out in a high density grid (2).
One can identify the clones positive for a probe as darker signals on an autoradiograph of the filter.
Probes with sequences which only occur once will identify clones lying in a contiguous region of the genome, while multiple-copy probes identify a union of sets of overlapping clones (Fig 1).
By applying a sufficiently large number of probes it is possible to order the library into contigs of overlapping clones (3).
The number of hybridisations required to order a library is a function of the insert size of the clones and the depth of coverage of the library.
(4, 5).
Long clones such as yeast artificial chromosomes —YACs (6) and P1s (7) will require fewer hybridisations than cosmid clones to link them, but the resulting map will be coarser than a cosmid map would be.
The frequency of coligation events during the cloning procedure is also important because it is much easier to interpret the results of hybridisations on unfragmented clones.
Because the generation of a clone library is essentially a random sampling of intervals from the genome, even in libraries of high coverage there is a probability that some parts of the genome may not be cloned.
Additionally, some regions of the genome may be hard to clone by virtue of their DNA sequences (8).
The major problems faced in contig assembly are the management and visualisation of very large data sets, the efficient selection of probes to minimise the number of experiments and the resolution of contradictions in the experimental data.
The creation of a physical map can be viewed as finding the most consistent interpretation of the hybridisation data.
There are advantages using a mapping strategy that integrates information from several clone libraries,(YAC, P1 and cosmid in the case of S.pombe ).
The information obtained from ordering one library may be used in ordering the others, provided that some probes are used on more than one library, thereby providing a set of ‘probe-tagged sites’(PTSs)(1).
Other sources of information, such as the genetic map of the organism, are also useful in this respect.
MAPPING S.pombe 
Although the tools described in this paper are quite general, to set the context we give a brief description of the S.pombe libraries and mapping strategy.
S.pombe is a useful test case for prototyping techniques which may be used on larger and more complex genomes.
The genome of is some 14 Mbp long divided into three chromosomes (9).
Probes were hybridised to cosmid, YAC and P1 libraries.
The YAC library comprised 1248 clones with an average insert size of 535 kbp, yielding a coverage of 47 genome equivalents.
For the P1 library there were 3456 clones with average insert size 70kbp, ie 20 genome equivalents.
The cosmid library had an averge insert size of 37 kbp.
The total cosmid library contained about 8500 clones, a coverage of 23, but most hybridisations were done on a sublibrary of 3000 clones ie a coverage of 8.5.
The main types of probe used on each library were:
YAC library: whole cosmids, genetically-mapped markers, YAC-end probes
cosmid library: whole cosmids, whole YACs, genetically-mapped markers, YAC-end probes, P1 end-probes
P1 library: whole cosmids, whole P1s, whole YACs, genetically-mapped markers.
The basic strategy was top-down: first order the YAC library by hybridising cosmids and genetic markers (1), and then order the cosmid library (10), using the cosmids hybridised to the YACs as a high density PTS map.
The other cosmid probes were picked by sampling without replacement.
The P1 library was ordered in parallel and used to bridge any gaps between the cosmid contigs (10).
Although not considered further in this paper, several cosmid pools and oligonucleotides were also hybridised to the cosmid library.
SYSTEM, DATABASE AND SOFTWARE TOOLS
System and database
All the software was written in C and runs on a network of SUN SPARCstation I, II and IPX, running SUNOS 4.1.1 and the OpenWindows window manager, version 3.
The XView toolkit was used for development of the graphics-based applications running under the X Window System.
With the exception of these applications, the programs can be run from Macintosh computers and IBM PC compatibles connected to the network.
The programs and data files have distinctive icons, providing a user-friendly graphical interface when run under OpenWindows.
The hybridisation data were held in a flat file data base, with C programs reponsible for data management and collation.
Hybridisations of probes onto filters were either digitised or automatically image-analysed.
The result of each hybridisation experiment could be input as a list of the filter x-y coordinates of positive clones, or a list of positive microtitre well coordinates or the optical density value of each spot on the filter.
These data were held in separate files, which were converted via a series of filter programs into a canonical file format, listing just the clones positive for a given probe.
After making corrections for the spotting order of the microtitre plates all the data were combined into two files, one listing the probes used and the other listing the hybridisations of all probes to each clone.
These flat files were used as inputs to the contig-building software, together with ancilliary files giving information about the positions of any mapped probes and any contigs that had been determined previously.
Fig 2 shows a flow diagram of the database.
The data from cosmid, P1 and YAC libraries were processed in parallel databases which were combined when required by the analysis programs.
Software tools
The programs and a user-manual (11) are available from the authors and the EMBL software library (Netserv EMBL-Heidelberg.DE).
The majority of the applications access the data through a small library of function calls, so that instead of using the flat files produced by the database they can be interfaced easily to other databases without significant code changes.
Those programs that filter or rearrange the data write output files in the same format as the inputs, so that they may be used as inputs to the other applications.
There are three types of data-file used by the programs; hybridisation data,(the flat files produced by the database), contig data (lists of contigs, ie ordered probes) and map data (a list of probes ordered from the genetic map or from some other map).
Table 1 lists the programs, sorted by function, and input/output.
select is a menu-driven program for choosing subsets of hybridisation data.
A user can perform Boolean operations to include or exclude clones which hybridise to particular probes or classes of probes.
unhit is a non-interactive program for selecting clones and probes, which also gives a list of clones not yet hit by a probe.
This was used to pick further cosmid probes for S.pombe when sampling without replacement.
filter removes clones which are well contaminants, or which hybridise to unrealistically large numbers of probes and thus are very likely to contain highly repetitive elements or vector concatamers.
Figs 3 and 4 were generated by a flexible PostScript generator,show , which can either summarize the entire data-set on a single page, or show it in greater detail spread over several pages.
The display treats the data as a matrix, with clones as rows and probes as columns.
Where a clone and probe hybridise the corresponding row-column intersection is shaded depending on the level of hybridisation.
Annotations or labels may be attached to the clones and probes.
If the data have been ordered into contigs then the positives should occur in overlapping runs (Fig 3), and inconsistencies in the data are immediately apparent by eye because all the hybridisations to each clone are visible, including those which do not fit well with the current order of clones and probes.
This is in contrast with the usual representation of a physical map, where clones are summarised as intervals which have been packed into as few lines as possible (Fig 1).
xvshow is an XView analogue to show , displaying a scrollable portion of the clone-probe matrix on the screen of a workstation running the OpenWindows window manager.
reorder is a tool to reorder a set of clones to a given order of probes.
We describe in the next section methods for building contigs which rely on ordering the probes rather than the clones.
A probe order can then be fed into reorder to generate the clone order, which is later displayed using show .
A user can optionally specify a set of ‘sleeping probes’, which are ignored when ordering the clones but which are output next to the probes used to order the clones.
Consequently one may check the consistency of the contigs found with one set of probes (eg cosmid probes on cosmid filters) against the hybridisations of another set (such as YAC probes on cosmid filters).
xvedit is a contig editor running under XView which allows the user to edit probe orderings, moving, deleting and inserting probes and contigs and fitting the clones to the resulting orders.
It is essentially a graphical interactive version of reorder .
The programs probeorder, barr and costig for ordering the data are described with their algorithms in the next section.
ALGORITHMS FOR ORDERING LIBRARIES
In principle, ordering clones by hybridisation of single-copy probes is trivial, since any pair of clones which share a probe should overlap with the probe.
However, in practice, the high level of experimental ‘noise’ makes such a simple approach untenable because most clones will have false neighbours.
Noise in this context is due to various sources:
random false positives and negatives,
clones containing coligated inserts
clones containing internal deletions
probes containing repetitive elements.
We describe two algorithms which are robust enough to order libraries in the presence of noise.
One is based on distance measures and simulated annealing, the other on the application of heuristic rules to clean the data into a consistent set.
Both methods order probes rather than clones.
Since the number of probes is much less than the library size, it is more efficient to order the probes first and then fit the clones to the probe order automatically.
Also, when comparing two probes we are averaging information over the large number of clones, whereas when comparing two clones we are averaging over the small number of probes, so a probe-probe comparison has a higher information content than a clone-clone comparison.
A consequence of probe ordering is that a contig is defined as a sequence of probes, rather than clones, and a map as a sequence of probe contigs.
This makes for a very compact representation of a map; for example the YAC map in Figure 3 can be completely specified by a file listing the 180 probes in order, with the chromosome/contig breaks marked.
The probe map can easily be edited manually with a text editor to modifiy the positions of misplaced probes using additional information (e.g. genetic map).
All the probe ordering programs produce output files of probe contigs.
Ordering probes using distances
Consider the following simple model: Clones are assumed to be independently and randomly distributed along the genome, and to all have the same length, 1,(in suitable units).
Assume further that the probe lengths are sufficiently small that they may be treated as points in comparison with the clones, and that the probes are all single-copy.
Suppose that two probes a, b are a distance d ab  <1 apart on the genome.
Then the distribution of the number r ab  of clones which hybridise to both probes conditional on n ab  clones hybridising to either probe is binomial B (n ab ,1- d ab  ), since the clones are independent and the probability that a clone hybridises to both probes given that it hybridises to one is 1- d ab  .
Hence the maximum-likelihood estimate of the distance between the probes is
n ab — r ab 
d ∘  ab = (1)
n ab 
The maximum-likelihood estimate is unbiased, with minimum variance, so it is a good estimate to use.
The distance d ∘  ab is ‘short-sighted’, in the sense that if the probes are more than one clone-length apart then the estimated distance is always unity.
If the probes have identical hybridisation patterns then their estimated distance is zero.
The distance is formally the same as that used in (12) to estimate the breakage frequency of markers hybridised with radiation hybrids, and as an estimate of the meiotic recombinant frequency in genetic mapping.
The problem of ordering the probes may be cast into the travelling salesman problem; find that circular ordering of the probes with the minimum total path length (13).
For a permutation π of the probes, the path length is 
We used the simulated annealing algorithm described in (14) to minimise the path length of the probe order.
Our implementation is derived from the C-routines in (15).
It takes an initial order of objects and applies random changes to the order, viz sub-order reversals and sub-order translations (13).
If a change decreases the path length it is always accepted, whilst changes which increase the path length are only accepted with a probability depending in the current annealing temperature and the magnitude of the change.
Since each inter-probe distance need be calculated only once the execution time is dependent primarily on the number of probes, not the number of clones.
The output probe order of the annealing is then broken into a set of probe contigs, with either no or very few clones connecting the last probe of one contig to the first probe of the next.
An adjustable cutoff distance value is used to determine where the contig breaks occur.
Any probes which have been previously mapped provide a means for ordering and orienting these contigs into their correct positions on the genome, for if two contigs contain neighbouring mapped probes then it is likely the contigs should be adjacent, even if there are no hybridisations linking them.
To order the cosmid library of S.pombe , the PTS map established by previously ordering the YAC library was used in this way.
Once the order of probes and contigs is established the clones are fitted to the probe order, using the algorithm described in Section 4.3.
All potentially inconsistent hybridisations, ie any hybridisation linking a clone in one contig to a probe in another are listed.
If, after being ordered using a map, a pair of linked contigs are adjacent then these links are more likely to be genuine.
If a clone has also been used as a probe then the program also checks if the probe and clone are assigned to the same contig.
The algorithm has been implemented in a program called probeorder .
It can be used to order any set of single-copy probes which are all approximately the same size, such as cosmid and marker probes on YAC filters, YAC probes on cosmid filters or cosmid probes on cosmid filters.
In the latter two cases the probe distances should be interpreted just as dissimilarities since the probes cannot be considered as points in comparison with the clones.
However the results obtained from ordering cosmid probes on cosmid filters indicate that the assumption that the probes are points is not critical.
In the case of ordering YAC probes, a modified distance measure was used in which the influence of each cosmid clone c was weighted in proportion to 1/n c  , where n c  is the number of YAC probes positive for that cosmid clone.
This was to downweight the effects of a subset of cosmid clones containing a copy of the rDNA repeat, and which were positive for the majority of YAC probes.
The ordering of YAC probes was harder than for other probes types in that the highly variable length of the YACs meant that some YACs were contained entirely within others, and some YACs were chimeric, requiring some manual adjustment of the order.
The algorithm takes about 50 CPU seconds on a SUN SPARCStation II to order 180 probes and 1150 clones from the S.pombe YAC library, and 247 CPU seconds to order 667 probes and 2837 clones from the S.pombe cosmid library, including the phase of contig ordering and consistency checking.
If the user only wishes to check the consistency of a predetermined set of contigs then a program contigorder may be used instead.
This does not order the probes but instead takes a contig list as input and computes every inconsistent hybridisation (defined as any link between a probe in one contig and a clone in another).
Ordering probes using heuristics
The major obstacle in contig ordering is experimental noise.
In the case of ‘ideal’ noise-free experimental data, various simple algorithms, exploiting graph structures or tree-search techniques, can successfully order the library.
A general outline for any such algorithm will look as follows:
For each probe find all neighbouring probes, ie probes linked by jointly positive clones.
Order all probes relative to their neighbours according to the procedure given in pseudocode in Fig. 5.
In the neighbourhood of a given probe,X , the most distant neighbour can be defined either as that probe whose own neighbourhood shares the smallest number of probes with X , or/and as that probe with the smallest number of clones connecting it with X .
One can define the least distant neighbour of the probe X analogously.
The goto s in the pseudocode can be replaced by a more elegant recursion.
This algorithm will produce a relative order of probes (ie a path in a graph or two deepest branches in a tree) for each group of clones which could be relatively ordered, i. e. for each contig.
The choice between searching for the least or most distant neighbours may depend on the experimental (or even presentational) needs because in the former case the algorithm finds more detailed and possibly informationally redundant order of probes, while in the latter case it finds a minimal set of probes connected by clones spanning large regions of the genome.
Combining both cases may be also useful for checking the consistency of both orders by superimposition and comparison of them.
However, it is easily seen that a single false positive will create a fork in a map (a loop in a graph or a shared branch in a tree).
Realistic experimental noise together with the ‘natural’ forks caused by repetitive sequences will result in unpredictable and far from real maps.
So a stage of initial filtering of the data becomes a prerequisite.
If a fork results from repeats in the genome (and is therefore likely to violate the neighbourhood rules given below), it is reasonable simply to make a break in the contig because it represents a limit of the experimental technique used and other approaches using longer probes or clones may help to close the gap.
In many cases, however, neglecting the data from a probe containing a repeat allows one to find a correct connection to elongate the contig (Fig. 1).
In contrast, random false hybridization signals and non-contiguous clones yield additional false neighbours which can be identified by lower numbers of links with a given probe.
Neglecting of clones producing these links is the simpliest way of resolving the corresponding forks, although a more careful analysis of hybridization data for such probe pairs and clones linking them could help to reduce the level of noise.
With data filtering one pays the price of decreasing the effective library redundancy and increasing the number of hybridisations.
In so far as the goal is to extract a ‘clean’ data set of ordered clones and probes, but which is still large enough to minimize the number of contigs, a high initial redundancy implies that less additional effort is needed to close any remaining gaps when all available probes are used and all contiguous clones are ordered.
The mapping of S.pombe in YAC clones clearly illustrates this principle.
For a detailed theoretical discussion on how the requirement of multiple links in contig construction affects the experimental effort for libraries of a given clone redundancy see (4).
We combined a method for finding probes and clones which may cause map forking with the ordering algorithm of Fig. 5.
A few simple heuristic rules are used to identify ‘suspect’ clones and probes and to find each probe's neighbours simultaneously.
Then the ‘suspects’ are presented to the user who decides upon removing them from the analysis.
After his decision, contigs are built according to Fig 5.
The rules for filtering are as follows:
Considering the clones hit by at most N probes, the number of neighbours for any probe must not exceed 2 (N — 1).
For two probes to be neighbours, the number of clones n positive for both of them must be > 1.
For the S.pombe YAC library the redundancy allowed us to use n = 3.
Thus the process of ordering a library consists of several iterative stages of filtering out clones which connected pairs of probes less then n times.
At each stage only clones hit less then N times are analysed.
If, after filtering the clones, a probe having more than 2 (N — 1) neighbours is found, it is reported as a ‘suspect’ one and the user may remove it from the analysis and repeat the procedure.
During ordering probes, a constraint on the number of neighbours in any one direction (which cannot exceed N -1) is checked.
The algorithm has been implemented in two versions (using least and most distant neighbours).
The least distant neighbour version (costig ) was more applicable to ordering the cosmid library under the scheme of sampling without replacement and has a menu-driven interface allowing, among other options, the output of any single contig specified by a probe belonging to it.
The most distant neighbour version (barr ) was used for ordering the YAC library.
It always produced the minimum set of ordered probes.
The algorithm is fast, taking under a second to order 1150 clones and 180 probes from the S.pombe YAC library and under 3 seconds to order 667 probes and 2837 clones from the S.pombe cosmid library on SUN SPARCStation II.
Fitting clones to a probe order
Once the correct order of probes has been established it is easy to fit the clones to this probe order, using an algorithm which essentially places each clone on that section of the probe order where it has the highest density of positives.
An ordering of N probes imposes a natural integer-valued coordinate system on the genome, in which each probe occupies one of the positions i = 1,2,3 = = N .
It is then sufficient to determine each clone's start and end coordinates, say (s, e ).
Define a match a > 0 and a mismatch b < 0 cost to score the fit f se  (c) of the clone c to the interval (s, e ),
where p i  is the probe occuring at position i and h (c, p ) is an indicator variable indicating whether the clone c and the probe p hybridise.
The values of (s, e ) at which f ∘ (c ) = f se  (c ) is a maximum define the best-fitting range for the clone c .
For fixed s , the f se  (c ) values can be constructed iteratively starting from e = s .
Once f se  (c ) equals zero then there is no need to consider larger values of e .
Figs 3 and 4 were generated by this algorithm, with parameter settings a = 2,b = -3.
The method is fast, taking under a second to fit 1150 clones to 180 probes on a SUN SPARCStation II.
This is the algorithm used by all programs that fit clones to the predetermined order of probes.
EXAMPLE: ORDERING THE YAC MAP OF S.pombe 
The contigs of the cosmid and YAC libraries found by the two methods were essentially identical except for minor differences in order neighbouring probes having very similar or identical hybridisation patterns and which could be easily swapped.
That was a convincing check for consistency of the resulting map.
The map was also verified experimentally by digesting a spanning subset of 40 YACs with NotI (10), and comparing fragment digests with inferred order of YACS from the hybridisation data.
Because simulated annealing is a stochastic algorithm, different runs of probeorder will not necessarily produce the same output probe order.
However, we found in practice that in different runs very similar contigs were generated, the differences between runs being confined to contig breaks and to regions in the probe order where the probes were repetitive.
If there was no map information available then the order and orientation of the contigs was random, but the order of probes within each contig was stable.
In 10 runs on the complete YAC data-set, using a distance cutoff of d = 0.85 to determine contig breaks, the ‘correct’ probe order for both chromosomes I and II was found on two occasions, each time with the same path length of 7381.
The rDNA repeat at the end of chromosome III was always placed incorrectly next to the rDNA repeat at the beginning.
On the other runs the final path length was slightly higher, with the maximum value over all runs of 7392, and with errors in the probe orders being confined to the centromeres of one or both of chromosomes I and II (e.g., one half of chromosome 2 would be joined to chromosome III).
The remainder of the probe order (between the each telomere and the corresponding centromere) was correct in all runs.
It is straightforward to edit the errors manually.
In this dataset the lowest path length found did correspond to the correct order for chromosomes I and II.
However, the fact that the other local minima found by the algorithm were all less than 0.15% greater than this value indicates that the path length would not necessarily have a minimum coinciding with the best probe order in other data sets containing many repeats, a fact illustrated by chromosome III.
Consequently it is always worth considering other local minima found by the annealing process, as these may correspond to better alternative probe orderings.
Also, other measures of pairwise probe distance/similarity may prove to be better-suited to future applications than the maximum-likelihood distance used here.
The order of YAC probes shown in Fig 4 was also produced by probeorder , except that the order of the contigs was rearranged into map order, and the chimeric probes 9d8y and 10d8y (which do not really have a unique position on the genome) have been moved.
The Figure omits the clones and probes spanning the rDNA region, because the majority of these clones also hybridise to over half of of the other YAC probes, and so it is not possible to place these clones and probes at a single position on the map.
To demonstrate the robustness of the heuristic filtering procedure, the map of S.pombe was constructed using barr on the complete YAC data set.
During the iterative runs of the program when the parameter N —the number of hits per clone (see section 4.2) was changed from 2 to 7 and all the ‘suspect’ probes reported by the program were deleted together, not taking into account the information about repetitive probes.
Thus human intervention was excluded in this ‘blind’ approach, to demonstrate possible problems in cases where the there was no genetic or PTS map.
Fig. 3 shows the result superimposed onto the final YAC map of S.pombe .
Clones deleted in the analysis are indicated as grey horizontal lines, with the non-deleted clones shown black.
Similarly, the black vertical lines correspond to the ordered subset of probes, while the lines are omitted for the probes which were filtered out, resulting in white space breaks.
It is easily seen that all the probes producing ‘blocks’ of extra positives outside the main diagonal (like those hitting the centromeric regions of all three chromosomes) are successfully filtered out and most (about 80%) of the coligated clones or those containing repeats are excluded from the analysis.
The remaining subset of the initial ‘raw’ data allows the program to reconstruct the complete maps of the chromosomes I and II as well as most of the chromosome III map.
The wide gap in the chromosome III (accounting for 1Mbp of the rDNA repeat) is in fact not a gap but an undetected overlap of two groups of clones having 5 deleted probes in common.
This is an artifact of this ‘blind’ filtering approach, when information about genetically mapped probes in this region was intentionally ignored and all ‘suspect’probes were deleted together.
Obviously, if probes in this region were deleted one by one, starting from the probes known as repetitive (containing ribosomal DNA or belonging to telomeres in this case), less of them would be deleted and the overlap would be successfully detected.
This example also demonstrates the basic principle of handling the repetitive elements: probes in the region containing this element are deleted one by one until two non-repetitive probes on both sides of the region are found which are connected by a minimum number of clones, linking these probes into a contig.
Thus all the probes producing vertical ‘blocks’ of positives outside the main diagonal in Fig. 3 are removed from the analysis and the resulting contigs can be found successfully.
In the case when a clone length is less than that of a repetitive element (or a total length of a group of adjacent repeats), a break in the contig is inevitable and can only be closed by using longer clones which can bridge the repeat.
Therefore for highly repetitive genomes it is likely that only maps containing clones from libraries of different types, such as cosmids and YACs, can be constructed and an optimal strategy of mapping of different resolutions, based on previously established probe-tagged sites, must be elaborated.
The high repeat frequency of the chromosome III and close resemblance between its telomeric sequences (effectively closing it into a circle), plus the higher number of clones hybridising to probes mapped to other two chromosomes, demonstrate the possible problems with all types of algorithm with more complex genomes.
COMBINING INFORMATION FROM YAC AND COSMID DATA
The hybridisations of YACs on cosmids together with the order of the cosmid probes hybridised to the YAC filters were used to help order the cosmid contigs and check their internal consistency.
The basic idea is that the cosmid probes that make up a contig should hit cosmid clones which are all hit by one or two YACs.
Suppose M probes have been ordered on the YAC map and the probe p m  is positioned at coordinate m on the map (m = 1,2, = = M ).
For a YAC probe y , and any other probe p , that have both been hybridised to the cosmid library, define the association  (y, p ) of y and p as the proportion of cosmid clones positive for probe p which are also positive for probe y .
Then the association of the YAC y to position m is defined as  (y, p m  ).
The region on the map spanned by the YAC should correspond to high  values.
If the YAC y is chimeric then it will have more than one such region.
For a probe q which is not in the YAC map, the association of q to position m is defined as 
The association of the cosmid contig c , containing the set of probes S c  , with position m is defined as 
This method effectively computes a profile for each probe and contig, indicating the most probable region of the contig on the map.
The profile may be thought of as a set of fake hybridisations with the set of M mapped probes and the probe/contig, and consequently may be displayed using show .
The algorithm is implemented in the program yacorder and is used for positioning contigs which do not contain any mapped probes and so cannot be positioned directly.
DISCUSSION
We have learned from our experiences with S.pombe the importance of combining information from different clone libraries, and from genetic or PTS maps.
Relating the libraries by hybridising clones from one library onto another has a twofold advantage —the maps can be unified and probes can be chosen to close gaps as economically as possible.
Whilst computational methods are an essential tool in building maps, if only because of the sheer volume of data, at present human intervention is still needed to resolve inconsistencies.
Using a variety of ordering algorithms which complement one another provides a check that the contigs they produce are not just artifacts.
The ability to display hybridisation data from either the whole dataset or any subset (eg a contig or group of contigs) using show was very useful, particularly in conjunction with reorder .
Examples of its use include checking if gaps in the cosmid map are actually covered by YAC or P1 probes, checking for consistent ordering of different types of probes and even to interpret the hybridisation results of multiple-copy probes.
It was also used to aid selecting cosmid clones which were to be used as probes on the cosmid filters.
The cosmids were picked in batches of about 50 from the set of unhit clones (ie by sampling without replacement), and so to ensure that the cosmids in each batch were from different regions on the genome (and hence to maximize efficiency) the unhit clones were reordered against the ordered YAC probes.
Cosmids were then picked from different locations of the resulting map.
Although the ordering algorithms were developed for hybridisation mapping projects, the software can be used with other types of data which can be interpreted as hybridisation-like events.
For instance, restriction fragments of the clones in the library can play the role of probes, and the presence of a fragment in a clone digest will be equivalent to a positive hybridisation between the corresponding clone and ‘probe’.
Due to errors in determination of fragment lengths and similarities between lengths of fragments in different parts of a genome, this interpretation will be closer to the hybridisation with multiple- copy probes (plus additional ‘noise’ from fragments containing the vector component of a clone).
However, using the information about the clone order from hybridisation data it will be much easier to infer a restriction map of a genome (and verify a hybridisation map in parallel) from these results than to construct the complete two single-digest plus one double-digest map from individual restriction maps of each clone.
A program performing this task is currently under development.
We investigated integrating information about mapped probes directly in the probe ordering.
Given a probe order π, and a subset mapped with suborder π m , then one can compute a similarity measure M π, π m )between the orders.
The function to be minimised by the annealing then becomes P( π);— M (π, π m ).
Suitable candidates for M are a dynamic-programming-type alignment score (16) of π, π m or a simpler and faster scoring scheme based on the numbers of pairs of mapped probes which are adjacent in π m and are separated only by unmapped probes in π.
However, this approach was not as successful as that implemented in probeorder , in that where the map and hybridisation data are in in serious conflict the contigs generated will be a poor compromise between the two.
It is better to generate the contigs according to the hybridisation data and then automatically check them for consistency with the map.
Then the cause of an inconsistency,(perhaps a repetitive probe a mislabelled autoradiograph), can be tracked down.
We cannot as yet simultaneously order probes of markedly different sizes, such as cosmids and YACs (although clones of different sizes are acceptable).
One solution to this problem would be to assign a length to a probe, rather than treating it as a point, so that short probes could be contained within longer ones.
One can define, for some probe order, the consistency measure Σ c f ∘ (c ) for the total fit of all the clones to the probes, where f ∘ (c ) is the fit of the clone c , either as defined above or extended to allow for probes having a length or being repetitive.
A potential criterion for ordering the data would be to choose that order which maximises the consistency, and the simulated annealing algorithm described earlier could be adapted to do this.
Although unnecessary with S.pombe , in cases where there is uncertainty whether probe a is positive for clone c , the hybridisation event may be given a grey-level 0 < h ac  < 1 , with 1 indicating a certain positive and 0 a certain negative.
The inter-probe distance measure can easily be extended to use this information by redefining r ab  = Σ c (h ac  h bc  ) and n ab  = Σ c (h ac  + h bc  )—r ab  .
Similarly, when ordering using heuristics, the number of links between two probes can be weighted according to the grey-levels
In the S.pombe cosmid library, some probes were only hybridised to a subset of 1500 clones, resulting in missing data.
When comparing two probes, one of which has been hybridised to the complete library and the other to a subset, the distance is calculated just using the clones in the subset, as the other clones provide no information about this particular comparison.
This is a consistent way of treating missing values, in that the expected value of the estimated distance is independent of the size of the library, although the standard error is larger with smaller libraries.
When counting the number of links between two probes, missing clones are clearly of no relevance.
Of course, pairs of probes that have been hybridised to mutually disjoint libraries cannot cannot be compared in this way.
In this situation the distance/number of links between the pair could be calculated from the ‘shortest path’ connecting them through a sequence of intermediate linked probes.
The analysis software described in this paper does not order multiple-copy probes.
Although the use of single copy probes is efficient for small genomes like S.pombe , theoretically hybridisation based fingerprinting techniques (3, 17) using multi-locus probes are more attractive for larger genomes.
They generate data at a higher rate (ie yield more positives per hybridisation) and are less sensitive to repetitive sequences (2).
However, hybridisation based fingerprinting requires a high reliability of data acquisition (e.g. during image analysis) and pose considerably more difficult problems for map ordering algorithms.
In contrast to single copy probes, the number of loci and their positions for multi-locus probes are usually unknown.
Algorithms based on ordering clones are an obvious avenue to persue here, provided the clones can be treated as intervals rather than points.
Our current algorithms are based on calculating the likelihood ratio of each pairwise clone overlap, combined with the use of the minimum spanning tree and simulated annealing algorithms to order the clones.
Another approach, based on an extension of the most/least distant neighbour algorithm may be as follows.
Not the individual probes but the longest unique ‘probe patterns’, containing several adjacent probes must be considered as neighbourhood elements for all such probe patterns.
After establishing and connecting the neighbourhoods, all individual probes in a pattern can be ordered easily.
However, a stage of filtering, including a check for the integrity of a probe pattern in the presence of experimental noise requires a more complicated filtering procedure than that used for single-copy probes.
In contrast to filtering the single-copy hybridisation data, false negatives have a higher effect on the correct determination of patterns.
All the programs described in this paper are available from the authors or from the EMBL software server Netserv EMBL-Heidelberg.DE in the compressed tar-file icrfcontig.tar.Z.
Figure 1.
Schematic representation of various hybridisation events.
The genome is indicated by the thick horizontal line and the clones as short thin lines below the genome line Probes are the shaded boxes indicating the regions of the genome spanned by the probes.
The probes r, s are connected by a clone and so would be considered as neighbours.
The probe em r has a repeat between the probes a and b , causing a possible fork in the map.
The clone marked with asterisks * spans a, r, b , so that in this instance it would be possible to remove the probe r without breaking the contig containing a and b .
The probe y is a long probe (such as a YAC), which spans many clones, showing that the clones need not overlap with each other.
Figure 2.
Flow diagram of the database used to hold the hybridisation data.
Data from image-analysed or digitised filters are converted into the same canonical input format consisting of a separate file for each hybridisation, each listing the x-y coordinates of the positives on the filter.
The files are then combined into a flat file containing all the hybridisations.
Figure 3.
The YAC map for S.pombe .
The probes correspond to columns and the clones to rows.
All the data were used by the simulated annealing algorithm, whilst the filtering algorithm filtered out those probes without a vertical black line (as potentially repetitive), and the grey clones (as potentially coligated).
The figure was produced by the show program, with some hand-editing of the PostScript to delete the vertical lines of the omitted probes.
Figure 4.
The S.pombe map generated by show , displaying the fitting cosmid clones to an ordered set of YAC probes.
The grey regions indicate either chromosome breaks or missing data.
Possibly chimeric YACs (eg 9d8y) are indicated by the clusters of positives way from the main diagonal.
Figure 5.
An algorithm for ordering ideal hybridisation data.
Figure 6.
An example output of show , displaying one of the cosmig contigs constructed in the middle of the S.pombe project.
Cosmid clones in this contig were fitted to the order of cosmid probes (vertical lines 1-30) by the program reorder , while 8 other probes were specified as ‘sleeping’ ones (31-33 —oligonucleotide probes, 34-36 —cosmid pools, 37-38 —YAC probes).
Breaks in ‘sleeping’ probe coverage, most clear for YAC probes, correspond to the groups of clones probably belonging to other regions of the genome and are usually hit by only one cosmid probe.
As reorder fits all the library clones into a given probe order, false positives become apparent when comparing results of hybridisations of different types of probes.
Image analysis artifacts result in a higher noise rate for the oligonucleotide probes.
Location of the Bacillus subtilis sbcD gene downstream of addAB , the analogues of E.coli recBC 
RecBCD of Escherichia coli is a multifunctional enzyme with endonuclease, ATP-dependent exonuclease and helicase activities (1).
In Bacillus subtilis an analogue of recBC, addAB , has recently been cloned and sequenced (2).
As yet there is no known counterpart of RecD.
Mutations in Escherichia coli recB or recC genes result in a defect in recombination and DNA repair that can be suppressed by additional mutations in sbcB and either sbcC or sbcD (3, 4).
The sbcB gene product degrades single-stranded DNA from the 3' end (5).
The activities of the sbcC and sbcD gene products have not been determined, but the available evidence suggests that they provide a nuclease that disrupts palindromic DNA (6, 7).
A computer search using E.coli SbcD identified significant homology with ORF3, the product of an open-reading frame immediately downstream of the addAB operon in B.subtilis (2).
ORF3 is a much shorter protein than E.coli SbcD, however we found that insertion of a nucleotide extended the reading frame, and revealed a continuation of homology with E.coli SbcD.
The open-reading frame extends beyond the end of the published sequence.
The two proteins show 29.4% identity and 41.4% similarity over their entire length (Figure 1).
On the basis of this homology we conclude that ORF3 is indeed the Bacillus subtilis counterpart of SbcD.
In addition, several of the regions conserved between the SbcD proteins are also present in T4 gp 47 and T5 gp D12, two phage proteins thought to be exonucleases (8, 9, 10).
The similarities are not strong but suggest that the regions of conservation are functional domains within the proteins.
The location of B.subtilis sbcD beside the genes for AddA and AddB is intriguing considering the link between RecBCD and SbcDC.
Further sequencing should reveal if a B.subtilis analogue of sbcC exists downstream of sbcD as is the case in E.coli .
Figure 1.
Alignment of B.subtilis (Bsu ) ORF3 and E.coli (Eco ) SbcD proteins.
A nucleotide was inserted at position 8359 of the published B.subtilis DNA sequence (2) to permit continuation of the reading frame.
This change results in the insertion of an amino acid (X) at position 201 of the B.subtilis ORF3 protein.
Amino acid identity and similarity (:) are shown between the two sequences.
The following residues are considered similar, I, L, M and V; F, Y and W; A and G; S and T; Q and N; D and E.
On the stability of nucleic acid structures in solution: enthalpy-entropy compensations, internal rotations and reversibility
ABSTRACT
The thermodynamics of self-association (stacking) of free bases and nucleotides, intramolecular stacking in dinucleotides, nearest-neighbour base pair stacking interactions in duplex DNA and RNA, and the formation of hairpin loops illustrate enthalpy/entropy compensations.
Large stacking exothermicities are associated with large negative entropy changes that ensure that ΔG is small, permitting readily reversible associations in solution.
We rationalise enthalpy/entropy compensations with reference to residual motions and torsional vibrations which make a larger entropic contribution to binding when -ΔH ≃ kT (thermal energy at room temperature), than when -ΔH > kT.
We present a factorisation of experimental free energies for helix formation in terms of approximate contributions from the restriction of rotations, hydrophobic interactions, electrostatic interactions due to base stacking, and contributions from hydrogen bonding, and estimate the adverse free energy cost per rotor (mainly entropy) of ordering the phosphate backbone as between 1.9 and 5.4 kJ mol -1 [averaged over 12 rotors per base pair for A-U on A-U stacking (lower limit), and G-C on C-G stacking (upper limit)].
The largest cost is associated with the most exothermic stacking interactions, while the range of values is consistent with earlier conclusions from data on the fusion of hydrocarbon chains (lower value), and with entropy changes in covalent isomerisations of small molecules involving severe restrictions (upper value).
INTRODUCTION
An important feature of most biological associations is their reversibility.
The process of gene expression is dependent upon the localised melting of the DNA double helix to expose the single strand template during transcription.
Experimental data from DNA melting studies show that the free energy increment per base pair added to a DNA double helix increases the helix stability at room temperature by a relatively small increment that is the difference between large and opposing enthalpy and entropy terms.
A key feature in achieving low net stability (small ΔG), and hence readily reversible associations, is the cost in entropy of generating organised structures from flexible molecules.
The development of a model that describes the balance of forces that give rise to a net free energy change per base pair stacking interaction in a DNA duplex (formed from disordered single strands) requires some method of partitioning the individual contributions.
Although a body of thermodynamic data is available in the literature that provides the basis for such a description, physical insight is still lacking.
In particular, the entropic cost of ordering the polynucleotide backbone has yet to be addressed.
In this regard, data on the helix-coil melting transition in single strands of DNA and RNA present an opportunity to study structure formation that benefits from base stacking interactions (analogous to those found in the double stranded helix), but where hydrogen bonds play a minor role in structure stabilisation (and then only involve ribose hydroxyl groups in single stranded RNA).
We investigate whether the adverse entropy changes observed experimentally for the melting of single strands of nucleic acids provide guide-lines for estimating the entropic cost of organising the nucleotide backbone in double helical structures.
Enthalpy/entropy compensation is evident in the formation of many types of nucleic acid structures, and is a ubiquitous phenomenon in molecular recognition [1-5], but its origins and importance are not well-understood.
We highlight a number of examples (from the literature) which point to the important relationship between exothermicities of molecular associations and the entropic benefit of residual motions and vibrations in understanding this phenomenon.
Previously, ‘nearest-neighbour’ parameters for the ten possible unique combinations of base pair stacking interactions [7]have been used successfully to predict the stability and melting temperatures of RNA duplexes of known composition.
Entropy-enthalpy compensations are evident that result in relatively small net free energy changes for the ten combinations despite the large range of stacking exothermicities.
Since exactly the same number of sugar-phosphate bond angles are ordered in forming all ten combinations of base pair from random coil single strands, we conclude that the large difference in the entropy of stacking is derived from the amount of residual torsional motion in the connecting bonds (which allows relative motion between the bases).
Hence, molecular associations that give rise to large exothermicities are also associated with large adverse entropy changes, and the two effects work in a compensatory manner [6].
We present a physical description of the balance of forces stabilising nucleic acid structures in solution (based on experimental data from the literature), and partition the free energy change per base pair interaction into a sum of free energy contributions (equation 1).
It seems worthwhile to attempt such a semi-quantitative approach if only to give rough estimates of the parameters involved.
DISCUSSION
Partitioning free energy contributions: single strand structures formed intramolecularly
Literature data on the thermodynamics of the coil-helix transition for the single stranded poly (C)[8,9]and poly (A)[10-12]RNA sequences, poly (dA) DNA [12]and data on mixed-sequence DNA oligomers [13]are collated in Table 1.
The coil-helix transition for a single base stack in a single strand helix is visualised schematically in Figure 1A.
The free energies of formation per base stack are small and negative at 300 K, reflecting a difference between large and opposing enthalpy and entropy terms.
The homopolymeric RNA and DNA sequences give very similar parameters per stacked base while the mixed sequence DNA oligomers have appreciably smaller enthalpies and entropies.
In all cases enthalpy and entropy compensate each other, resulting in similar net stabilities with ΔG close to zero at 300 K. The coil-helix transition is an intramolecular process; on the one hand it is opposed by the unfavourable free energy change in ordering the nucleotide backbone (largely entropic), which is favourably balanced by the free energy of base stacking interactions (mainly enthalpic).
On this basis we present a series of expressions to describe the partitioning of contributions to the stability of the single strand helix:
where subscript ‘helix’ denotes the experimentally determined parameter for the coil-helix transition per base stack; subscript ‘r’denotes internal rotors; ‘h’, hydrophobic interactions; ‘s’, base stacking interactions; and ‘hb’, hydrogen bonds.
The free energy cost of restricting rotations in the phosphodiester groups and about the glycosidic torsion angle (Figure 2), is predominantly entropic in origin (ΔH r ≃0).
Solvent-transfer models, based upon the solubility of simple hydrocarbons in water [14, 15], indicate that the hydrophobic effect is entropy driven at room temperature (ΔH h ≃0).
Calorimetry measurements by Filiminov & Privalov [16]have indicated that poly (A) RNA melting enthalpy does not depend appreciably on temperature, indicating that ΔC p (change in heat capacity at constant pressure) for melting is small, while similar conclusions are reached by Vesnaver & Breslauer [13]for the melting of two 13-mer DNA single strands of mixed sequence.
Our present understanding of the relationship between ΔC p and the hydrophobic effect [17, 18], leads us to conclude that the latter contributes little to the formation of the single strand helix, and consequently, that water molecules may not be appreciably ordered around the faces of the bases prior to stacking.
Recent studies on the context dependence of hydrogen bond free energies in RNA hairpins, revealed by selective base substitutions, conclude that the ribose hydroxyl contributes relatively little to RNA stability (∼zero at 37°C)[19], and consequently the free energy contribution to the stability of a single stranded RNA structure from hydrogen bonds is also assumed to be approximately zero (contrast base stacking interactions).
This notion is substantiated by a comparison of the thermodynamics for the formation of poly (A) and poly (dA) helices [12], which does not indicate any enhanced stability of the RNA single strand helix as a consequence of the 2'-OH group.
Therefore, we make the approximation that both ΔG h and ΔG hb are close to zero, for formation of single strand helices.
On this basis we can simplify equations (2) and (3), such that the enthalpy of single strand helix formation is largely attributable to base stacking:
and the entropy of helix formation is largely due to the restriction of rotors:
The thermodynamic data for poly (A), poly (C) and poly (dA) indicate that the entropic cost per nucleotide in forming an ordered structure, formally involving six rotors (see Figure 2), has a mean value of -34 (±5) kJ mol -1 (TΔS helix at 300 K, averaged over 9 data sets from references [8-13](Table 1), where the error limits equal the range of reported values), and is closely balanced by a base stacking exothermicity of -37 (±4) kJ mol -1 .
We conclude, from equation (5), that the overall entropy change can be attributed to a mean entropic cost per rotor of ∼6 kJ mol -1 (TΔS at 300 K).
This value bears comparison with the 5-6 kJ mol -1 per rotor deduced by Page & Jencks [20]for freezing rotations in small molecules involved in covalent transformations.
The compensation between entropy and enthalpy that is found when the analysis is extended to the study of mixed sequence DNA and dinucleotides, indicates that the entropic cost of restricting a rotation is less adverse when stacking exothermicities are smaller.
For example, the data of Vesnaver and Breslauer [13]on the thermodynamics of melting of two 13-mer single strand DNA oligomers indicate ΔH helix and TΔS helix values that, in both cases, average close to -10 kJ mol -1 per nucleotide at 300 K. Making the same assumption that ΔS h and ΔS hb contribute little to single strand stability, the adverse entropy change per base stack equates with only ∼2 kJ mol -1 per rotor restricted (TΔS at 300 K).
Thus smaller stacking exothermicities are associated with much less adverse entropy changes (larger residual torsional vibrations) in forming the single-stranded helix.
The data in Figure 3A illustrate thermodynamic parameters for intramolecular base stacking interactions within a series of single stranded dinucleotides [21], where a strong enthalpy/entropy correlation is again observed.
A qualitative interpretation of the fact that mixed sequence single strand oligomers (Table 1) have smaller ΔH and ΔS terms than the oligo or polymeric homo sequences, would appear to reflect a closer analogy in the latter case with the order found in a crystal.
Despite this, the stabilities of the mixed sequences and homo sequences are similar (T m s near to 300 K), although they have quite different ΔH and ΔS values per base stack (Table 1).
In the melting of single stranded momopolymers and oligomers (of A and C), the exothermicity per base stack is -37±4 kJ mol -1 , for the two mixed sequence DNA 13-mers the exothermicity is -9 and -10 kJ mol -1 .
In all these sequences, the exothermicities are balanced by an almost equal TΔS term.
The T m s are similar in all cases, and therefore it is concluded that the exothermicities of their formation would be similar at 0 K. The differences are assumed to lie in the fact that homopolymers behave in a manner analogous to a crystal, with a sudden transformation from a highly ordered state just below the T m to the disordered state just above the T m .
The homo sequences consist of an arrangement of repeating units that pack efficiently (large negative ΔH) and tightly (large negative entropy) in a regular array, such that melting occurs in a cooperative fashion with a large ΔS and a sharper melting transition than for the mixed sequence oligomers.
In contrast, the heteropolymer increases its disorder over a wide temperature range (as the temperature is increased from well below T m to just below T m ) with an associated loss in electrostatic interactions.
Hence, in this case there is a lower measured exothermicity from a structure which is already partially disordered at the lowest temperature from which ΔH is measured.
This latter case is analogous to the melting of a highly impure crystal.
Bimolecular associations of bases and nucleosides without base pairing
A similar compensatory relationship is observed between entropy and enthalpy of self-stacking of free bases and nucleosides in aqueous solution [21], as plotted in Figure 3B.
Here we are concerned with bimolecular associations where adverse entropy changes denote loss of translational (position) and rotational (orientation) motions that occur when two entities come together to form one complex.
No internal rotors are restricted in the stacked dimer, but again we see that large adverse entropies of stacking (greater loss of translational and rotational freedom) are associated with larger stacking exothermicities.
In all of the examples illustrated, free energies of association are close to zero at 300 K, despite the variation in stacking enthalpies of between ca -10 and -27 kJ mol -1 .
Formally, the formation of a ‘rigid’ dimer is associated with an adverse entropy change (TΔS) of ca 50 kJ mol -1 [20, 22], which offsets dimerisation by a factor of ca 10 -9 M -1 in binding constant.
The experimental data indicate that adverse entropy changes fall well short of this value, giving adverse effects on binding constant in the range 10 -2 to 10 -4 M -1 , and illustrate the entropic advantage of a ‘sloppy’ interaction, and the importance of residual motions in these weakly bound complexes [6].
Energy wells
We rationalise enthalpy/entropy compensation with reference to the energy-well diagrams illustrated in Figure 4.
The origin of the phenomenon is to be found in the fact that associated states which lie in deep electrostatic wells have relatively little motion compared to the dissociated states in which the eectrostatic interactions are removed.
Here a deep potential well refers to the situation where electrostatic attractions are large compared with kT [where k is the Boltzmann constant, and T the temperature](Figure 4A).
Conversely, where the exothermicity of the association is small (comparable to, or a few times kT, Figure 4B), then there is much residual motion in the associated state, and the adverse entropy of the association is only a fraction of the formal loss in entropy corresponding to the formation of a rigid complex.
When considering residual motions within ordered single stranded helices, large amplitude torsional vibrations (which allow relative motions between the bases) can offset the formal entropic cost of ‘freezing-out’ rotations.
Enthalpy-entropy compensations: RNA and DNA duplexes, and hairpin loops
Nearest-neighbour parameters for the 10 possible combinations of base pair stacking interactions found in RNA duplexes [7]are presented in Figure 5 as an enthalpy/entropy compensation plot.
Although these parameters are well cited in the prediction of melting temperatures for defined-sequences RNA duplexes, the striking relationship between the enthalpy and entropy of stacking interactions has not previously been highlighted in the manner shown.
The difference in the enthalpy of base pair stacking between the least exothermic (A-U on U-A) and most exothermic interaction (G-C on C-G) within mixed sequences amounts to 35.7 kJ mol -1 , and is rationalised on the basis of the difference in charge distribution within the G-C and A-T base pairs, and consequently the magnitude of dipole-dipole interactions when the base pairs are stacked together [21].
Entropies of stacking are much more adverse for the GC stack than for the AU, such that the difference in free energy of stacking between the two types of interactions is only 11.4 kJ mol -1 despite the much larger difference in exothermicity.
Entropy/enthalpy compensations are strongly evident in the effects of base pair mismatches on DNA duplex stability.
Data reported by Leonard et al.[23], on the stability of structures containing mutagenic lesions, highlight thermodynamic parameters for the coil-helix transition in the set of dodecamer duplexes d(CGCXAATTYGCG) 2 , where X and Y bases are paired to give the Watson-Crick G-C and A-T pairs, but also the m6 G-C pair (where m6 G corresponds to methylation at the purine O6), and G-T and m6 G-T mismatched pairs.
The correlation between the enthalpy and entropy (TΔS at 300K) of transition, plotted in Figure 6, highlights the large difference in stacking enthalpies between G-C and m6 G-T mismatch duplexes of -222 kJ mol -1 .
This difference is substantially offset by a large difference in the entropic cost of base stacking of -176 kJ mol -1 (TΔS at 300K), that results in a net free energy difference of -47 kJ mol -1 —a large difference, but still small compared to the changes in ΔH and TΔS.
The introduction of an unnatural base pair appears to act as a crystal impurity giving a more disordered structure that is stabilised entropically but destabilised enthalpically compared with the sequences with the natural base pairs.
In this vein, stability studies of DNA hairpins with 4 base loops, reported by Antao & Tinoco [24], illustrate enthalpy-entropy compensations within a series of dodecamers (Figure 7); enthalpies of hairpin formation from disordered single strands lie in the range -11.8 to -73.9 kJ mol -1 .
The largest exothermicities are compensated by the most adverse entropy changes that reduce the difference in free energies of formation within the series to only 12.2 kJ mol -1 .
Stability of DNA and RNA duplexes
Thermodynamic measurements reveal that ΔH and ΔS values for the stacking of an A-U base pair on a second A-U within a poly (A+U) double helix are quite similar to those for an A on A interaction in a single strand of DNA or RNA, as evident from a comparison of the data in Table 1 and Table 2 [10, 16, 25-28].
Structural models for poly (A+U) double helices suggest A on A stacking to be the predominant interaction [29], which is consistent with comparable exothermicities for both poly (A) single strand and poly (A+U) helix formation [i.e., the contribution to duplex stability from U-U stacking is small, consistent with the observation that poly (U) is predominantly random coil at room temperature].
A similar conclusion is also reached by Porschke (see data from reference [10]in Tables 1 and 2).
In principal, twice the number of phosphate rotors need to be restricted in forming the duplex than in a single strand helix, although experimentally the adverse entropy change is essentially the same in the two cases.
On the basis of the experimental data it must also be concluded that the adverse entropy contribution to poly (A+U) from U-U stacking is relatively small.
In contrast, the calorimetry data reported by Vesnaver & Breslauer [13](bottom two rows of Table 1) on ‘the contribution of DNA single-strand order to the thermodynamics of duplex formation’ indicate that the formation of a mixed sequence 13-mer DNA duplex, is considerably more exothermic (by a total of 255 kJ mol -1 ) than the sum of the parameters for ordering the single strands alone (total enthalpies of -491 kJ mol -1 for duplex, and -122 and -114 kJ mol -1 for single strands, respectively).
This observation appears to reflect better electrostatic interactions between neighbouring base pairs in the heteroduplex (related to base pair composition and overlap geometries [30]), than can be achieved between bases in the single strands alone (contrast A-U on A-U, versus A on A).
We estimate the free energy (mainly entropic) cost per rotor by considering the partitioning of free energy contributions using equation (1).
A limited amount of data on changes in ΔC p [13, 16, 26, 31]on melting RNA and DNA duplexes equate with small contributions from the hydrophobic effect (ΔG h ) to duplex stability of between 0 and -12 kJ mol -1 per base pair (contrast no observed heat capacity change for single strand melting).
SantaLucia et al.[19]have deduced that hydrogen bonds, involving amino protons and N7 or N3 of purine, each contribute between 1.7 and 3.0 kJ mol -1 to duplex stability (3.4 to 6 kJ mol -1 per A-U or A-T base pair, and 5.1 to 9 kJ mol -1 per G-C base pair).
We make the assumption (equation 4) that the experimental exothermicity provides a measure of the contribution from base pair stacking and equate ΔH helix with ΔH s (i.e., we assume that the exothermicity of hydrogen bond formation in water is small, as supported by hydrogen bond inventories [32], and by the relatively small favourable free energies of these bonds relative to exothermicities of base stacking), and that ΔG s is mainly enthalpic in origin (i.e., ΔG s ≃DH s ).
Any enthalpically adverse van der Waals repulsions, or electrostatic repulsions that are introduced are automatically included in this experimental parameter.
The experimental exothermicity probably reflects a minimum stacking exothermicity for base-base overlap.
In the formation of the double helix, a total of 12 rotors are restricted per base pair stack.
Incorporating the above terms into equation (1) for A-U on U-A stacking, corresponding to the smallest base pair stacking exothermicity (-23 kJ mol -1 ) of all the nearest-neighbour interactions reported by Freier et al.[7](but also minimum negative free energy of -4.5 kJ mol -1 ):
Hence, the average cost per rotor restricted, apportioning the free energy cost of equally between the two strands, is estimated to lie between 1.9 and 3.1 kJ mol -1 .
For the most exothermic base pair stacking interaction (-59.6 kJ mol -1 ), which also corresponds to the largest free energy term (-16.0 kJ mol -1 ), that for G-C on C-G, equation (1) can be written:
which gives an estimated cost per rotor restricted (averaged over 12 rotors per base pair) of between 4.1 and 5.4 kJ mol -1 .
In this case, such a large adverse free energy cost indicates that both strands of the duplex are highly ordered in the double stranded helix, as expressed as a larger adverse entropy, and as a consequence of the larger base pair stacking exothermicity (relative to A-U on U-A stacking).
CONCLUSIONS
Thermodynamic data indicate that single strands of DNA and RNA form single stranded helices in solution that are associated with large adverse entropy changes that can be largely attributed to the cost of ordering the phosphate backbone.
We estimate the adverse free energy of restricting 6 rotors per nucleotide in single strands of DNA and RNA to lie in the range ca 2 to 6 kJ mol -1 per rotor (largely TΔS at 300K).
The largest value (6 kJ mol -1 ) is derived from the most exothermic stacking interaction, whereas in mixed-sequence DNA low exothermicities result in smaller free energy costs consistent with large amounts of entropically favourable residual motion (torsional vibration) in the rotors.
Despite the relatively large range of experimental exothermicities, enthalpy and entropy work in a compensating manner to give free energies for single strand helix formation that are generally close to zero at 300 K. Free energy costs per rotor in double stranded DNA and RNA are consistent with these limiting values; large stacking exothermicities result in a large cost in free energy for restricting a rotation that, in the upper limit (5.4 kJ mol -1 per rotor averaged over 12 rotors for G-C on C-G stacking), bears comparison with the values reported by Page & Jencks [20]for isomerisation reactions in small molecules involving severe restrictions, and at the lower limits (1.9 kJ mol -1 per rotor averaged over 12 rotors for A-U on A-U stacking) with entropy changes in the melting of organic crystals [6]that are held together by weak intermolecular interactions.
Similarly dramatic compensation effects are observed in the effects of mutagenic lesions on DNA stability, and in the formation of DNA hairpin loops, that result in relatively small free energy changes that permit readily reversible associations of nucleic acid structures in solution under physiological conditions.
The universal nature of enthalpy/entropy compensation is manifested in many phenomena as diverse as the sublimation of organic crystals, and agonist/antagonist binding to membrane bound receptors [6].
The data presented here on such relationships in the formation of nucleic acid structures in solution, and the physical description presented, illustrate the fundamental nature of the relationship between electrostatics (enthalpy) and dynamics (entropy).
Figure 6 .
Enthalpy (ΔH) versus entropy (TΔS at 300 K) for the coil-helix transition of the duplexes d(CGCXAATTYGCG) 2 , where the X-Y base pairs correspond to G-C, A-T, G-T, m 6 G-C and m 6 G-T (m 6 G = 6 O-methyldeoxy-guanosine).
Data from Leonard et al.[23]; thermodynamic parameters were determined by changes in UV absorbance from the concentration-dependence of the melting temperature.
Data quoted at pH 7.0 and 1.0 M NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate.
Figure 1 .
Schematic representation of a single strand and double strand melting transition:(A) stacking of an A base on an (A)n single strand helix, and (B) stacking of an (A-U) base pair on an (A-U)n helix.
Figure 2 .
Internal rotations restricted within the ribose-phosphate backbone of a single strand of poly (A).
Figure 3 .
(A) Plot of enthalpy (ΔH stack ) versus entropy (ΔS stack ) of intramolecular stacking in dinucleotides in water at 300 K, R = 0.98; numbering as follows:(1) m 2 6A-p-U (methylation at the 6-amino group of adenine);(2) m 2 6A-p-m 2 6A;(3) A-p-A;(4) A-p-U;(5) m 6 A-p-U;(6) A-p-A;(7) C-p-C.
(B) Enthalpy (ΔH ass ) versus entropy (ΔS ass ) of association (stacking) of free bases and nucleosides in water at 300 K, correlation coefficient R = 0.97; numbering as follows:(1) ribosylpurine;(2) thymidine;(3) uridine;(4) cytidine;(5) purine;(6) 6-methylpurine;(7) deoxyadenosine.
Data from reference [21].
Figure 4 .
Electrostatic energy wells representing stacking interactions with large exothermicities (A) where -ΔH > kT (kT, thermal energy at room temperature), and (B) for stacking interactions of low exothermicity where -ΔH ≃kT.
Energy levels of up to 4kT are illustrated and are estimated (according to a classical Boltzman distribution) to be approximately 10% populated.
Figure 5 .
Enthalpy (ΔH) versus entropy (ΔS) for nearest-neighbour base pair stacking interactions in RNA (measured from changes of UV absorbance on melting); the ten unique combinations of interactions are indicated (data from Freier et al.[7]).
CA (5'-CpA), for example, represents the stacking of a C-G base pair on an A-U base pair.
Figure 7.
Enthalpy (ΔH) versus entropy (ΔS) for the formation of DNA hairpin loops (data from Antao & Tinoco [24]); sequences included in the analysis were GATC(NNNN)GATC (illustrated), GGAG(NNNN)CTCC, and GGAC(NNNN)GTCC.
Thermodynamic parameters were determined from melting profiles observed by changes in UV absorbance in solutions containing 1 M NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate at pH 7.0.
Far upstream regions of class II MHC Ea are necessary for position-independent, copy-dependent expression of Ea transgene
ABSTRACT
The chromatin upstream of the class II MHC Ea gene contains specific, DNase I hypersensitive (DH) sites (groups I-V), overlapping and extending the promoter proximal and distal control regions.
To determine whether the Ea DH groups I-V define a functionally important chromatin domain or locus control region (LCR), we have used wild type Ea d gene constructs to generate transgenic mouse lines from strains that do not express an endogenous Ea gene product.
Constructs contained either DH groups I-V ‘Longs’ or DH groups I-II ‘Shorts’, of the hypersensitive sites defined within 20 kb 5' of Ea.
We show that position-independent, copy number-dependent expression of the Ea d gene occurs only with the Long construct (8/8 transgenic mouse lines, over a range of copy numbers, 1-30 copies); in contrast, the Short constructs are subject to position-dependent effects.
This suggests that the region delineated by Ea DH groups I-II is necessary but not sufficient as an LCR, which requires the presence of the upstream regions containing DH III-V for complete position-independent, copy number-dependent expression.
These results introduce an immunologically-important, putative LCR which can be used to target genes to cells of the B cell lineage, as well as to other class II MHC expressing cells, and highlight the importance of chromatin structure analysis as a means to locate DNA regions of regulatory interest which are dispersed over a large distance.
INTRODUCTION
The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a polymorphic multigene family encoding two classes of cell surface glycoproteins class I and class II, and has been extensively studied in mice and humans.
The mouse class II MHC region contains six genes (Ob-Ab-Aa-Eb1-Eb2-Ea) encoding two cell surface heterodimers (AαAβ and EαEβ) which are expressed on key components of the immune system, including B cells, dendritic cells and can be induced by γ-interferon on other antigen presenting cells, such as macrophages.
This pattern of expression reflects their role in foreign antigen processing and recognition by T cells.
(For reviews and references therein:(1-6)).
The mechanisms underlying the tissue-specific regulation of expression of class II MHC molecules are still not fully understood.
Studies defining the immediate 5' flanking sequences of class II MHC genes and their associated DNA-binding proteins (5-10), as well as transgenic mouse models containing DNA constructs covering the promoter proximal sequences have been examined in detail by other groups (5,11-13,).
However, the influence of more distant cis-acting sequences/regions on class II MHC expression has not yet been characterised.
In other systems, far upstream and/or downstream sequences of tissue-specific genes or gene families have been shown to be involved in position-independent, copy number-dependent expression of associated genes in transgenic mice.
These locus control regions (LCR) were first defined for the β-globin system (14,15) and their ability to orchestrate lineage specific expression of sequences linked in cis has made them key elements in the development of gene therapy technology.
As the class II molecules are pivotal to the immune response, the class II locus may be an important future target for gene therapy.
Therefore, it was important to reexamine the regulation of class II genes in transgenic mouse models, in order to determine whether far upstream regions were required for position-independent, copy number-dependent expression as in documented LCRs.
Such regions of regulatory interest have often been shown to correlate with the presence of DNase I hypersensitivity (DH) sites, as in the case of the β-globin locus, and other developmentally regulated gene families (16,17).
These DH sites represent nucleosome-free regions in chromatin which are accessible to trans-acting proteins.
Such proteins can include those involved in DNA conformational changes (18, for review) or in structure recognition, such as the high mobility group proteins (HMGs)(19-21) as well as, sequence-specific transcriptional regulatory proteins.
In fact, the establishment of a DH site most probably represents one of the earliest steps necessary to commit a gene to be functionally active in a particular cell.
Also, specific DH sites have been used to pinpoint elements, not necessarily sequenced or with a known function, that appear to control the accessibility of chromatin domains to trans-acting regulatory factors, again even before a gene is expressed (22-24).
As the action of an LCR is postulated to be mediated by a variety of transacting factors interacting with promoter/enhancer type sequences, with subsequent effects on chromatin domains (25, and references therein); we would expect chromatin structure analysis (DH sites) to be of particular use in localising regions of regulatory interest.
Following this line of reasoning, we have recently defined a series of DNase I hypersensitive sites flanking the class II MHC locus and have shown that these sites are specific to cell lines which are developmentally programmed to express the class II MHC gene products (i.e. B cell lineage cell lines), or to those actually expressing class II MHC at the cell surface (26).
The DH sites mapping within 20 kb upstream of the Ea gene (Ea DH I-V) were particularly suited to further analysis, as one of the earliest transgenic mouse models of immunologically important genes made use of inbred mouse strains (H-2 b or H-2 s haplotype) which do not express surface I-E due to a specific 650 bp deletion covering part of the Ea promoter and first exon, while Eb expression remained normal (27-29).
In what are now classical studies, when wild-type Ea gene constructs of either the H-2 k or H-2 d haplotype (30-32) were injected into oocytes of the H-2 b /H-2 s strains, appropriately regulated, cell surface expression of the E antigen was seen and E-restricted responses were restored.
We have made use of this model system and measured Ea mRNA abundance, in order to study the functional importance of the Ea upstream regions in transgenic mice.
We discuss whether the regions containing these apparently developmentally programmed patterns of DNase I hypersensitive sites reflect the action of a locus control region (LCR) by conferring tissue-specific, position-independent, copy-dependent expression on a wild-type Ea gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Transgenic mice
Mouse cosmid 32.1 (BALB/c genomic library, H-2 d haplotype (33) was obtained from Dr M.Steinmetz.
The Long construct, containing Ea DHS I-V was a 35 kb Mlu I/Xho I digest of 32.1 (see Figure 1a-c).
The Short construct, containing Ea DHS I-II was a 9kb fragment obtained from restriction enzyme digests using Bgl I (Figure 1d).
DNA subclones and probes used in this work were isolated and subcloned from the appropriate cosmid or plasmid into Bluescript (Stratagene) following established techniques (34).
Oocytes were obtained from C57Bl/6 SJL F1; both these inbred mouse strains, have a deletion covering the promoter and part of the Ea exon 1 and therefore do not express their own endogenous Ea (27-29).
The oocytes were microinjected with the DNA constructs, following established protocols (35).
Offspring were tested for the transgene by PCR on tail-derived DNA.
PCR primers covering the deletion present in promoter of the mutant haplotypes were used (5' primer sequence: 5' AGGACCTGGTTGCAAGGAAC; 3' primer sequence: 5' AGAGTTACATGGTGTCTGCC).
PCR was performed using standard techniques on a PHC1 (Techne Ltd., Cambridge, UK) with a regime of: 30 cycles of 94°C for 0.6 minutes, 55°C for 0.6 minutes, 72°C for 2 minutes, with the final cycle followed by 9.0 minutes at 72°C.
Ea transgenic offspring were backcrossed to C57Bl/6 mice in order to establish inbred lines.
All mice used in these experiments were either first or second backcross.
All transgenic mice transmitted the transgene to their offspring, and all of the lines that were generated, also expressed the transgene.
The following lines (now in their 3rd backcross) are available: Short 1 (200 copies), Long 9 (30 copies), Long 12 (30 copies), Long 7 (12 copies), Long 10 (4 copies).
Two further Ea transgenic mice (Ea-16 and We32-25) were obtained from Drs.
C. Benoist and D. Mathis (30,36).
These contained an Eak construct equivalent to that used for the Ea d Short transgenic construct (Figure 1d).
DNA and RNA analysis
DNA was isolated from cell lines or tissues by established methods (34).
DNA from transgenic mice was digested with restriction enzymes and electrophoresed through agarose gels to determine the integrity of the construct as well as copy number.
Integrity of the construct was determined using Mlu I/Xho I restriction enzyme digests and Kpn I digests.
The Mlu I/Xho I digests were electrophoresed using a Field Inversion Gel Electrophoresis apparatus in order to resolve large DNA fragments, following protocols previously described (37).
The Kpn I digests were electrophoresed on 0.8% agarose gels and Southern blotted to determine copy number (see Figure 2d and figure legend).
Under these conditions we detect a single band (3.6 kb Kpn I fragment) which is equivalent to the two dysfunctional endogenous host Ea genes, or a band at 4.2 kb in BALB/c mice.
In Ea d transgenic mice, two bands are resolved, the endogenous copy plus the transgene, at 4.2 kb.
As such, the endogenous gene was used as a DNA loading reference representing two copies.
Thus by comparing the signal ratio of the Ea endogenous gene to transgene signal, we could directly relate signal to copy number.
Copy number determination used a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA, USA.) permitting linear quantification of signal intensity (38).
RNA was isolated from different tissues following the AGPC technique (39).
RNA was analysed by dot blots using Gene Screen Plus (Du Pont Company, NEN Products Boston, Ma.
USA) with conditions as suggested by the manufacturer.
Probes for the hybridisation were 32 P-labelled by random priming (40).
The relative abundance of β-actin, Ea and Eb RNAs were determined in duplicate in at least three experiments.
β-actin was used to control for RNA loading, and Eb was used as an internal control for the number of class II MHC expressing cells.
Eb RNA expression was assumed to represent two copies of the Eb gene per genome, and was approximately constant as compared to β-actin for all transgenic mouse lines tested.
All mice were normalised to BALB/c expression of Ea and Eb genes, representing two copies per genome, and Ea transgenes are expressed per gene copy per genome.
The probes used for Southern and Northern Blot hybridisation were Ea cDNA (41), Eb cDNA (42), Ea 695 bp (Pst I/Kpn I fragment covering the second exon of Ea d ) and 5'Ea 1.1kb (Sac I/Sal I 1.1 kb fragment isolated from cosmid 32.1)(26) and β-actin cDNA (43).
DNase I hypersensitivity assay
The conditions used for the DNase I hypersensitivity assay were as described (26) using the technique of indirect end labelling (44).
Increasing concentrations of DNase I (Boehringer-Mannheim) were expressed as units per 10 8 nuclei.
Incubations were for 10 minutes at 37°C.
Nuclei were isolated from cell lines or spleen from transgenic animals or inbred mouse strains.
Wehi 231 is a mouse (BALB/c) B cell lymphoma line (45).
The probes used for indirect end labelling were: Ea 695 bp (Figure 4b), and 5'Ea 1.1 kb (Figure 4A)(See Figure 4D for exact location).
RESULTS
Transgenic mice containing Long and Short Ea constructs
The rationale behind these experiments was that, if sequences previously ‘localised’ by the DNase I hypersensitivity (DH) sites were of functional importance, then their presence or absence would have an effect on the regulated expression of the Ea transgene, as shown by position-independent and copy-dependent expression.
Classic work (11-13) had shown that the promoter proximal and B cell control regions (delineated in our work by Ea DH I-II) were essential to tissue specific expression, and it was therefore necessary to include these sequences in both Short and Long constructs (Figure 1) used in the present work.
The Short constructs contain the Ea d gene in addition to 2 kb of 5' Ea sequence and 1.4 kb of 3' Ea sequence isolated as a single Bgl I fragment (Figure 1d).
The Long constructs contain the Ead gene, in addition to 23 kb of 5' Ea sequence and 4.5 kb of 3' Ea sequence (Figure 1c) and was designed to show whether the presence of the upstream regions containing DH groups III-V were of functional importance to position-independent, copy-dependent expression of the Ea transgene.
No additional DNase I hypersensitive sites other than DH sites I-V (Figure 1b) were found in the upstream or downstream regions present in the Long construct (data not shown).
The DNA region upstream of DH site V was present in order to permit the isolation of a single contiguous fragment of DNA by the restriction enzymes Mlu I/Xho I (Figure 1c).
Eight independent Ea d Long (Figure 1c) and two Ea d Short (Figure 1d) transgenic mice lines were generated (see Materials and methods).
All Ea d transgenic mice lines were healthy and transmitted the Ea d transgene to their offspring.
Both Long and Short constructs are expressed in transgenic mice
We analysed ten, newly generated transgenic mouse lines, plus two pre-existing transgenic lines Ea-16 and We32-25 (30,36) for Ea transgene copy number and abundance of Ea RNA in spleen (Figure 2 and Table 1).
Ea transgene copy number (Figure 2D) was determined by Southern blots of DNA derived from transgenic mice spleens, digested with the restriction enzyme Kpn I, and then hybridised using a DNA probe specific for the second exon of Ea.
The signal was quantified by PhosphorImager analysis and copy number normalised to the two endogenous Ea copies/genome present.
The abundance of Ea RNA was determined by dot blot analysis, the signals obtained were quantified by PhosphorImager and normalised for loading using a β-actin cDNA probe.
By comparison to the endogenous Ea gene (C57Bl/6 SJL F1), the transgenic animals have Ea d copy numbers ranging from 1-200 (Figure 2D).
BALB/c spleen RNA was used as an Ea positive control, its expression level being equivalent to two intact copies of the Ea gene.
The ratio of Ea to β-actin was determined for all transgenic mice and compared to that of BALB/c (Figure 2B and 2C; Table 1).
Ea RNA was not present in brain as expected, while a low level was present in liver, corresponding to the presence of Kupfer cells (data not shown).
Eb abundance in the spleen of all transgenic mice was equivalent to that in BALB/c and C57Bl/6 controls (data not shown, Table 1).
The cell surface expression of the Eα d /Eβ b/s heterodimer, remained cnstant over the range of Ea copy-numbers, being equivalent to that seen in the control BALB/c mouse spleen (data not shown).
All of the Ea transgenic mouse strains contained intact copies of the transgene construct, as shown by Southern blot analysis (data not shown, see Materials and methods), and were probably integrated in tandem.
Long but not Short constructs give rise to position-independent, copy number-dependent expression of the Ea transgene
Figure 2A shows both the expression level and the copy number of the Ea transgene on the same bar graph.
Transgenic mice containing the Short construct show position-integration effects at higher copy numbers and are therefore not under complete or appropriate control.
Where the Ea copy number and the abundance level match, position-independent, copy number-dependent expression has been achieved, with the level of expression per gene copy being directly equivalent to that in BALB/c mice.
This is clearly the case for all transgenic mice containing the Long construct, showing a copy number-dependent expression over the range of 1 to 30 copies.
The data shown in Figure 3 indicates the linear nature of this position-independent, copy number-dependent expression in Long transgenics.
The Ea expression level obtained with the Long construct mice approaches the actual ratio of that seen in BALB/c mice of one times the expression level per genomic copy of the Ea d gene.
In contrast, the expression level observed with the Short construct mice deviates markedly from the expected ratio and position effects are present above five copies/genome.
This is not due to a simple depletion of transcription factors as twelve copies of the transgene in Long 7, and 30 copies in Long 12 gave the expected expression ratio.
The Eb/β-actin expression remains relatively constant for all of the transgenics (see Table 1 (Long 11 is the exception, see below) and data not shown).
This indicates that the number of B cells/spleen, as well as B cell viability is unaffected by these high levels of Ea expression.
When the Ea transgene expression was normalised to Eb expression instead of to β-actin alone, the Ea transgene expression was again shown to be position-independent and copy number-dependent for the Long constructs (final column in Table 1, including Long 11).
However, the surface expression of the class II E α/; β heterodimer remains constant irrespective of Ea RNA abundance levels, this is probably due to limiting amounts of Eb RNA (data not shown).
Copy number-dependent DNase I hypersensitive sites are maintained in transgenic mice
If the DH sites of the integrated transgenes were of functional use they should be maintained in an appropriate copy-number dependent fashion in transgenic mice.
Using high copy number Long transgenics, one would expect a copy-dependent signal in the DNase I hypersensitivity assay.
Figure 4A and 4B show DNase I hypersensitive assays performed on BALB/c and transgenic mice spleens as well as a BALB/c B cell line, Wehi 231, using approximately equal number of nuclei (Figure 4C).
PhosphorImager analysis of Southern blots showed that all of the Ea DH sites had been reestablished in the Long 12 mouse (see figure legend to Figure 4C).
DH numbers used refer to the previously described hypersensitivity sites which are present during all stages of B cell development (26).
The map of the region is indicated below the digests (Figure 4D) and shows the DNA probes used as well as the position of the DH sites.
That the upstream hypersensitive sites are reformed appropriately, lends weight to the hypothesis for a functional role of these sites in the expression of the Ea gene.
In addition, the intensity of the sub-bands shown in Figure 4 (A-C) shows that the factors which establish these sites are not limiting.
Further, the presence of these hypersensitive sites is appropriately regulated and these sites are found only in those tissues which normally express class II MHC, as DH sites corresponding to the Ea transgene were not detected in brain tissue isolated from Long 12 transgenics (data not shown).
DISCUSSION
We have shown in this paper that position-independent, copy number-dependent expression of the Ea gene in transgenic mice, requires far upstream regions containing five DNase I Hypersensitive sites (DH I-V).
These DH sites are present upstream of the Ea gene in a variety of transformed cells at different stages of B cell development, but not in non-B cell lines that do not express Class II MHC (26).
These areas of hypersensitivity are now shown to be functionally important in vivo , as they mark regions which comprise a putative locus control region (LCR).
This is the first time that strict position-independent, copy number-dependent expression has been shown for a mouse gene in a transgenic mouse model, and these mice now provide a source of a stably-integrated transgene of immunological importance.
In addition, the use of these hypersensitive sites as markers for regions which are of regulatory importance as well as for use in gene targeting experiments is now possible.
An LCR among the Ea upstream regions?
By definition, any DNA sequence/region that does not permit position-independent, copy number-dependent expression of a linked gene in all transgenic mice, is not an LCR.
We therefore, compared 12 independently derived mouse lines; including 8 Longs, 2 Shorts (Figure 1), as well as the previously described Ea-16 and We32-25 (30,36), analysing their DNA and RNA quantitatively using a PhosphorImager.
In our analysis, copy-dependent expression (Figures 2 and 3) is lost above five copies of Ea in the Short transgenics indicating that the region containing DH I and II (2.0 kb 5' of Ea) does not contain the appropriate elements to isolate the transgene from adverse chromatin effects, or does not contain all of the enhancer elements necessary for position-independent, copy number-dependent expression.
Therefore, the DNA upstream of DH site II is critical, as only the Long transgenics show a strict site-independent integration and copy number-dependent expression of the Ea construct (Figure 3).
The position-dependent effects seen in Short transgenic mice were mentioned previously by other groups who reported that only 3/8 mice containing 2.0 kb 5' of Ea expressed the transgene at all(11).
Such integration effects were also seen using the Short construct plus or minus the X and Y box, as the phenotype of interest (thymic expression) was not seen in all cases (46).
In addition, the exact Ea copy number of the transgenic mice from other groups is not known, and/or the number of mice tested was not large.
However, based on the results reported in this paper, we can say that the position effect seen in the Short transgenic mice, is probably due to the absence of the upstream regions containing DH III-V.
In these cases, this is not due to a limitation of transcriptional factors, since the Long transgenics have a range of copy number and equivalent expression per gene from 1 to 30 copies (Figures 2 and 3).
Further support for the functional importance of the regions containing these DH sites in establishing position-independent integration of the transgene, is reflected in the copy number-dependent reestablishment of the DH sites in the Long 12 transgenics (Figure 4).
This shows that the presence of regulatory factors necessary for the establishment of a stable, open chromatin domain is not limiting.
This also implies that the Eb message or protein is the limiting factor in the expression of the E α/; β heterodimer on the cell surface of these mice.
This was confirmed by the unchanged level of cell surface expression of the E complex in transgenics as compared to BALB/c controls (data not shown,(47)).
Evidence for tissue specific, copy-dependent, position-independent expression has been shown mainly in cross-species transgenics; such as, human β-globin (14,15,48), CD2 (49), α-globin (50), and class I HLA-B7 (51,52) genes as well as for chicken lysozyme (53), although absolute correlation between expression, tissue distribution and copy number has not been seen in all cases.
This latter point, could be due to species differences involving transacting factors regulating appropriate expression, or variations in quantitation techniques and the number of transgenic lines analysed.
The evidence in this paper for the class II MHC Ea gene supports the view that, in principle, all tissue specific genes/multigene families would have a ‘locus control region’ as presently defined.
Whether this includes a combination of enhancer-type elements which overcomes any ‘silencing’ effects of the surrounding chromatin on the integrated transgene, and/or elements which interact with the nuclear matrix directly to isolate the transgene from inactive chromatin (54-56), needs further analysis of potential locus control regions.
The presence of these regulatory regions, stably integrated and of a known copy number among the Ea upstream regions, permits the transgenic mice described here to be used in the following studies.
It is now possible to investigate whether it is ‘just’ extra DNA sequence, with no apparently defined hypersensitive sites, which leads to position-independent expression of the transgene by designing a minimal ‘Long’construct containing only the defined DH sites (experiments in progress).
It is also possible that the upstream DH sites mark the presence of other genes which either, have a direct effect on the expression of Class II MHC or more generally, on commitment to the B cell lineage.
For these studies on early B cell ontogeny, the Long transgenic mice, particularly those with high copy numbers, could be used in recently described stromal/factor-dependent systems which give rise to non-transformed pre B/progenitor B cell lines (57-60).
As the factors associated with the presence of these hypersensitive sites are not limiting, recent advances in in vitro footprinting (61) should permit the dissection of which particular proteins are binding to the DH site sequences indicated in this work.
Additionally, the use of easily visualised reporter genes could be combined with these DH sites in order to visualise earlier stages of commitment, as the pattern of DH sites (Figure 4) precedes the expression of class II MHC in cell lines of the B cell lineage (26).
The reporter gene would then serve as a marker of when the chromatin became ‘open’ to regulatory and transcription factors.
Recent work using lac Z gene constructs has shown that as few as 1/1000 cells (62) can be visualised, which would be a potentially powerful tool in visualising early stages of B cell commitment and differentiation in vivo .
These transgenic mice are also of use in more classical immunological studies.
In previous work, using Ea transgenic mice (Figure 1e,(47,63) or recombinant mice strains (64), the presence of AβEα mixed isotype molecules at the cell surface was shown.
One would assume that such AβEα interchain hybrids would also be present in the higher copy number transgenics reported here.
In addition, the Ea transgene concentration at either message or cytoplasmic protein level, is apparently not toxic to the cell.
This may be due to the complete absence of functional Ea and/or non-polymorphism of the Ea gene product.
In contrast, it has been reported that the products of Aa and Ab transgenes compete with the products of endogenous genes in a way that is detrimental to the immune system (65,66).
This is in contrast to other groups who showed more limited effects on the immune system of the transgenic animals (67,68).
However, an upregulation of E molecules at the cell surface might be expected in mice with high levels of both Eb and Ea transgenes, as had been seen for Ab and Aa transgenes (68).
This may be of use in looking at early events, such as occur during the establishment of tolerance; thereby facilitating the task of looking at low numbers of cells.
DH sites as markers for interesting regions
In the constructs described in this paper, only 2 kb of 23 kb of DNA from the Ea upstream region have been sequenced.
The presence of DH sites provides a convenient ‘marker’ for regions which should be isolated and sequenced for further study.
The fine analysis of the DH sites upstream of the Ea gene has been hampered by the presence of repetitive/unstable sequences making them difficult to subclone, and thereby reduce the upstream regions to an absolute minimum as in the β-Globin LCR studies (14).
Alternatively, it should be possible to disrupt specific DH sites by homologous recombination, as has been recently described for the β-globin LCR (69).
This could be used to define which regions are important for class II MHC Ea/locus expression, and to attempt to generate regulatory mutants that do not express class II MHC genes at all, but leave the locus intact.
Further, the homologies between mouse and human MHC complexes, suggest that equivalent regions may exist far upstream of the human equivalent to Ea (DRa).
Hypersensitive regions have been known to exist immediately upstream of the DRa gene (70), and recently the absence of DH sites in class II deficient, Epstein-Barr virus-transformed cell lines established from patients with Combined Immunodeficiency syndrome have been reported (71).
In summary, in addition to previously described erythroid specific, T cell specific, macrophage specific LCRs, we have provided evidence in this paper for a putative Locus Control Region for the class II MHC, which would allow specific expression of genes to cells of the B cell lineage, as well as to cell types where class II can be expressed.
The transgenic mouse lines also provide a source for future studies on early developmental stages of the immune system.
Finally, we have shown here that DNase I hypersensitivity sites can be used to pinpoint interesting regions of specific importance to the expression of the class II MHC Ea gene, both as composing part of a locus control region, and as possible markers for B cell commitment.
Whether these upstream regions contain other genes, or cis-acting, regulatory elements specific for class II Ea MHC and/or the entire class II MHC locus, they point the way for the analysis of other ‘interesting’ sites in both the mouse and human systems.
Figure 2.
Transgene copy number and expression in Ea transgenic mouse lines.
The bar graph (A ) represents a summary of the copy number and transgene expression.
Solid boxes refer to copy number, and shaded boxes represent transgene expression normalised to BALB/c expression for two copies of endogenous Ea.
Where the bars are of equivalent height, strict position-independent, copy number-dependent expression has been obtained.
Underneath the bar graph are listed the inbred mouse strains or transgenics from which the analysis was made.
The order is preserved in panels (b) -(d).
Panels (B ) and (C ) are duplicate RNA dot blots.
RNA was isolated from spleen and analysed for the expression of Ea (b), RNA loading was assessed by β-actin expression (c).
The ratio was normalised to the ratio Ea/β-actin seen in BALB/c mice.
Panel (D ): copy numbers are determined by scanning on a PhosphorImager as described in Material and Methods.
The Southern blot refers to an autoradiograph of the filter from which the scan was made.
The numbers are determined by dividing the transgene signal by the endogenous signal (equal to two copies per genome), to obtain the number of transgenes integrated per genome.
Figure 4.
Reforming of DNase I hypersensitive sites in Long 12 transgenic mice in a copy number dependent fashion.
DNase I hypersensitivity (DH) analysis was performed on nuclei isolated from Long 12 spleen, a high copy number transgenic mouse, and compared with DH sites present in the control BALB/c spleen and B cell line Wehi 231.
The numbers at the top of the figures refer to the concentration in units of DNase I per 10 8 nuclei as per (26).
The locations of the DH sites are indicated to the right of the figures, and their location on the map of the Ea gene is shown in Panel (d).
Additional sub-bands in the control (0) lane, may be due to polymorphism in the C57Bl/6-SJL background of the Long 12 transgenic.
Panel (A ): Nuclei treated with different concentrations of DNase I were digested with Kpn I, the blot probed with 5' Ea Sac I/Sal I (Sc/S)(see Panel (d) filled box for exact location).
This probe hybridises to a 9.4 kb fragment, the appearance of sub-bands correspond to the previously described DH sites and these are indicated by arrows to the right of the panel.
Their location relative to the Ea gene is shown in (d).
Note that DH III and DH IV are seen in the BALB/c mouse but only upon longer exposures.
This is the effect of a two copy control vs. the 30 copy Long 12 transgenic.
Panel (B ): Nuclei treated with different concentrations of DNase I were digested with Eco RI and the blot probed with Ea 695 (P/K).
This hybridises to an 8.3 kb fragment.
The appearance of sub-bands indicates the presence of DH sites (DH groups I-III are indicated by arrows).
Panel (C ): The blot used in panel (a) was stripped and reprobed with Ea 695 (P/K) and the signal on the filter compared using a PhosphorImager.
Based on this blot, roughly 106 BALB/c nuclei, 0.5 10 6 nuclei for Long 12 and 2 10 6 nuclei were loaded onto the gel.
The letters to the right of the panel, d and b refer to transgene and endogenous haplotypes The DH site labelled here is DH I. Panel (D ): Line drawing of the Ea gene and location of DH groups I-V.
Black boxes refer to location of probes used for indirect end labelling.
Figure 1.
Map of the class II Ea gene and transgene constructs.
The map (a ) shows the cosmid 32.1 (33) containing the Ea d gene used in this study.
Filled boxes indicate exons.
The letters X, Y and W refer to control elements present in the upstream region of Ea and previously described as proximal promoter (through to -200 bp from the cap site) region and B cell control region (-1kb through to -2kb) respectively (5).
The arrowed solid bar refers to a deletion of 650 bp covering the promoter region and the signal sequence present in the b and s haplotype (28).
Sizes are in kilobase (kb).
The arrows underneath the line drawing (b ) refer to the locations of the DNase I hypersensitivity sites present in the upstream region of Ea: DH I (-100 bp), DH II (-1.2kb), DH III (-3.4 kb), DH IV (-5.4 kb) and DH V (-8.4 kb)(26).
The large arrows refer to the central location of DH sites and the smaller arrows refer to minor DH sites.
No additional B cell hypersensitive sites were found in the region upstream of Ea DH V. ‘Long’(c ) and ‘Short’(d ) refers to the constructs isolated from cosmid 32.1 using the indicated restriction enzyme digests.
‘Long’ constructs contain 25 kb of 5' Ea sequence and 4.5 kb of 3' Ea sequence.
‘Short’ constructs contain 2kb of 5' Ea sequence and 1.4 kb of 3' sequence.
Other Ea transgenic mice reported in the literature, contained constructs which were either of similar sizes to the constructs used in the present study:(31) d haplotype (c);(12, 30,) k haplotype (d) and (11, 13) d haplotype (d).
Construct (e ) refers to the extent of the construct used by (32) d haplotype; this is also similar to a slightly longer construct reported in (30) k haplotype.
These are included for comparison as they were not tested for precise position-independent and copy-number dependent expression.
Figure 3.
Ea transgene copy number vs.
Ea expression plot.
Copy numbers of Ea genes are plotted on the x-axis and Ea expression is plotted on the y-axis.
A linear relation is obtained with all of the ‘Long’ transgenics (filled circles).
In contrast, ‘Short’ transgenics (open circles) deviate from the linear above 5 copies.
Copy numbers and Ea expression levels were determined in at least 3 experiments.
A single filled circle was used to represent the two Long transgenics containing one copy of the Ea transgene for the purpose of clarity.