

Exon-enriched probe derived from a human chromosome 21 YAC by exon-amplification
Isolation of genes from yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) has become a challenging task for integrating physical and transcriptional maps.
Hybridisation-based procedures involving cDNAs are unreliable as they are dependent on the presence and relative abundance of the transcripts in the corresponding libraries.
Exon amplification methods offer an alternative strategy by making possible the selective amplification of functional exons from cloned genomic DNA.
The exon-amplification system using the pSPL1 vector works efficiently from either phages or cosmids (1).
We aimed to test this system on a YAC containing a known coding sequence as a test case.
In this paper, we describe the amplification of specific exons from a YAC (B19C12) containing the human proto-oncogene ERG , localised in 21q22.2 (2).
We also show the utilisation of the complex exon-enriched PCR product as a probe onto a gridded cosmid library of chromosome 21.
YAC B19C12 (150 Kb) has been isolated from the host yeast by PFGE in LMP agarose (Seaplaque GTG) and double digested with 90 units of Bgl II and Bam HI.
After purification with Geneclean (BIO 101), the DNA (20 µl) was cloned into the pSPL1 vector at the Bam HI site and transformed into the DH5α bacterial strain by electroporation.
Plasmid DNA was prepared by alkaline lysis, purified with Qiagen column (Diagen) and used to transfect COS-7 cells for eukaryotic expression.
Cytoplasmic RNA isolation, first strand cDNA synthesis and PCR amplification were carried out as previously described (1).
The primary amplification products obtained with the primers SA4 and SD2 (1) were analysed by electrophoresis and showed a smear containing discrete bands above the 380 bp vector product (data not shown).
The gel was alkali blotted onto Hybond N+ membrane (Amersham) and hybridised with the ERG cDNA probe (3).
The presence of exon(s) of the ERG gene is shown in Figure 1; after deduction of the flanking vector sequences, the specific hybridisation signal at 520 bp corresponds to exon(s) of around 140 bp.
The complex PCR smear above the vector band was gel purified, treated with Geneclean and labeled by random hexamer priming (4) with 50 µCi each of [α- 32 P]dCTP and [α- 32 P]dATP.
Prehybridisations and hybridisations were performed [in 5 SSC, 1 Denhardt's, 0.05 M Sodium Phosphate, 10% Dextran, 50% formamide]with 0.05 mg/ml of sheared human placental DNA (Sigma) for 12 hours at 42°C.
The filters were washed to 2 SSC, 0.1% SDS at 65°C and autoradiographies were for 2 days.
Figure 2a shows successive hybridisation of a human genomic Southern blot with ERG cDNA and the complex PCR product.
The hybridisation patterns are different except for the Eco RI fragment of 6.5 kb detected by both probes.
This might be due at least in part to the inability of the pSPL1 system to trap the terminal exons.
Moreover, the ERG gene is alternatively spliced in vivo (3), and some splice sites might be not activated in the COS-7 cells.
Figure 2b illustrates that the exon-enriched probe detects conserved sequences in different species.
In summary, our observations are consistent with the presence of at least one exon of the proto-oncogene ERG in the complex PCR probe and suggest also that we have trapped exons from one or more other genes.
A flow sorted human chromosome 21 cosmid library containing 9,000 clones has been arrayed at high density onto nylon filters (5) and used as a reference library using the ICRF reference library database (RLDB),(6).
Hybridisation of the exon-enriched probe to this library is illustrated on Figure 3.
Among 16 positive signals, we have detected an ERG cosmid confirmed by hybridisation with the cDNA probe (data not shown and RLDB).
Another cosmid has been co-identified by ICRF-YAC 900H04158 (450 kb) containing the D21S55 sequence; this YAC also detected an ERG cosmid (RLDB).
Nine of the positive cosmids have been previously identified by the irradiation hybrid IRH 282 spanning most of the 21q arm (J.Kumlien, personal communication).
Five cosmids, which correspond to very strong signals, have been found positive for minisatellites or CpG rich trinucleotide repeats and are likely to be nonspecific.
This pattern can be explained either by an artefact arising with short PCR probes detecting clusters of short repeats or by a low abundance of the ERG product among other repeat products containing CpG trinucleotides.
The weak positives are unidentified cosmids so far and may contain coding sequences.
Subcloning exon-amplification products obtained from a 140 kb mouse YAC has allowed the isolation of at least four clones detecting conserved sequences (7).
We demonstrate here that exon amplification may be used as a quick procedure to derive exon-enriched probes from a YAC without nested second round PCR or a further subcloning step (1).
The complex PCR probe originating from the B19C12 150 kb YAC allowed the detection of the ERG gene; however, the application of this procedure to YACs of the order of one megabase might have some limitations due to the very high complexity of the PCR products.
Direct screening of cosmid libraries with YACs is feasible (8), but the procedure is not exhaustive.
In contrast, generation of exon-enriched probes from YACs will be of great interest to identify new genes located in regions of medical importance.
The isolation of one exon is theoretically sufficient to screen cosmid and cDNA libraries for further analysis of the corresponding gene.
Figure 1.
Southern blot of the primary PCR product using the SA4/SD2 primers hybridised with the ERG cDNA probe.
Lane 1 corresponds to a cosmid from human chromosome 6 and serves as a control.
Lane 2 corresponds to the YAC B19C12.
Figure 2.
A. Southern blot from Eco RI digested blood human DNA hybridised with 1)ERG cDNA and 2) exon-enriched probe.
Arrows indicate the size of fragments in kilobases.
B. Zooblot from different vertebrates hybridised with the exon-enriched probe.
Lanes 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 contain Eco RI digests of goat, porc, bovine and Xenopus DNAs.
Arrows indicate the size of fragments in kilobases.
Figure 3.
Hybridisation of the cosmid library representing a 4 fold coverage of human chromosome 21 with the exon-enriched probe.
The ERG positive cosmid (A: ICRF c102G0256) is indicated by a wide arrow: small arrows indicate cosmids containing potential coding sequences (B: positive with YAC 900H04158).
Non specific signals are indicated by the letter C.