

Functional analysis of the human neurofilament light chain gene promoter
ABSTRACT
We have carried out a structural and functional analysis on the human NF-L (H-NF-L) gene.
It contains a methylation-free island, spanning the 5' flanking sequences and the first exon and a number of neuronal-specific DNase I hypersensitive sites have been identified in the upstream region as well as within the body of the gene.
Analysis in cell lines and transgenic mice using a combination of these sites has revealed the presence of a conserved element(s) between -300bp and -190bp which is required for neuronal-specific expression.
INTRODUCTION
Neurofilaments (NFs) are neuron-specific intermediate filaments that are composed of three proteins with apparent molecular weights of 68000 (NF-L), 145000 (NF-M), and 200000 (NF-H) as determined by SDS-gel electrophoresis (for review, see 1).
Expression of NFs occurs as early as 9-10 days of gestation in the mouse central and peripheral nervous system and coincides with the appearance of postmitotic neurons (2).
The genes are differentially regulated during development; for example, NF-L and NF-M genes are expressed early in the embryo, with a progressive increase during development, while the NF-H mRNA accumulates to significant levels only post-natally (3).
Analysis of their expression in pheochromocytoma PC 12 cells which mimicks neuronal development has shown that the NF-L and NF-M genes are at least in part controlled at the level of transcription, whereas the induction of NF-H by nerve growth factor is controlled post-transcriptionally (4,5).
Sequence analysis of a genomic clone of the human NF-L gene has shown that a 6.5kb EcoRI fragment contains all of the coding sequence and one of the polyadenylation sites (6).
This fragment also contains 2.3kb of 5' flanking sequence.
The human NF-L promoter has a typical TATA box 30bp upstream of the cap site and a potential Sp1 binding site at -110bp, relative to the cap site.
The promoter and the first exon are very GC-rich especially in the region from -300bp and +200bp from the cap site (64%).
This is a typical feature of methylation-free islands, which are present at the 5' end of a large number of genes (7,8).
We report here the characterization of the promoter of the human NF-L gene.
We show that the gene has a number of neuronal-specific DNase I hypersensitive sites in the 5' flanking sequence and within the body of the gene.
To assess the role of some of these hypersensitive sites, the expression of a number of deletion constructs have been analysed both in cells and transgenic mice.
These experiments demonstrate the presence of a brain-specific element(s) between -300bp and -190bp relative to the cap site which is conserved between the human and mouse genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Constructs
The human NF-L constructs are cloned into pUC19 unless otherwise stated.
The promoter deletions are as follows: The -2300bp construct contains 2300bp 5' upstream sequence and is identical to the sequenced 6.5kb EcoRI fragment (6).
The -300bp construct is deleted to a BamHI site which is -300bp from the cap site and extends downstream as far as the RI site in the last exon (IV).
The -300 Sal construct contains the same -300bp promoter deletion, but extends to a SalI site which is 3.1kb downstream of the RI site in exon IV.
The -300 Sal 5'ESV and -300 Sal 3'ESV constructs contain a 220bp NcoI-PvuII fragment from the SV40 enhancer which was modified by addition of linkers to either a BamHI fragment or a SalI fragment and placed at the 5' and 3' end of the -300 Sal construct, respectively.
The -190bp, -90bp and -70bp deletion mutants contain 190bp, 90bp and 70bp promoter fragments, respectively linked to the rest of the gene and were generated using restriction enzyme sites ApaI, BssHII and NaeI, respectively.
These were also modified by linker addition so as to contain a BamHI recognition sequence.
The -55bp deletion mutant contains 55bp of promoter fragment and was generated by Bal31 digestion of the -300bp construct.
The construct lacking the first intron hypersensitive sites was prepared by deleting a 1kb BalI-StuI fragment from the first intron of the -300bp construct.
The human Thy-1 gene used for C1300 transfections was a kind gift of Dr.E.Spanopoulou and the human β-globin construct used as cotranfection control in the HeLa transfections was as described (9).
DNase I hypersensitive site mapping
DNase I sensitivity assays were carried out as described by Enver et al.
(10) with the modification described by Grosveld et al.
(11).
DNA was prepared from DNase I-treated nuclei using the procedure of Luster and Ravetch (12).
The probes used for Southern analysis of this DNA are described in the corresponding figure legends.
Cell culture and transfections and RNA analysis
HeLa and C1300 cells (13) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and were grown in α-MEM supplemented with 10% foetal calf serum.
Gene transfer was performed by calcium phosphate co-precipitation (14,15).
30µg of supercoiled DNA were used per 90mm plate (10 6 cells).
The calcium phosphate-DNA was left on the cells for 12-16 hours then the medium was changed and the cells harvested 48 hours after transfection for RNA preparation.
RNA extraction of the transfected cells was performed in 3M lithium chloride, 6M urea including a 5 minute sonication step (41).
DNA S1 probes were end labelled at one end with T4 polynucleotide kinase (Boehringer Mannheim) and γ 32 p-ATP (3000 cu/mmole, New England Nuclear) or fill-in with reverse transcriptase (Super RT, Anglia-Biotec) and the appropriate α 32 p-labelled deoxynucleotide triphosphate (6000 ci/mmole, New England Nuclear).
Restriction fragments used as probes are described in the corresponding figure legends.
Hybridisation and S1 protection reactions were carried out as described previously (16,17, also see below).
Transgenic mice: DNA and RNA analysis
DNA fragments containing human NF-L gene were isolated free from vector sequences by preparative agarose gel electrophoresis and injected into pronuclei of fertilized oocytes from (CBA C57BL/10) F1 mice at a concentration of 1-2 µg/ml of TE buffer (10mM Tris (pH7.5), 0.2mM EDTA).
Eggs surviving microinjection were transfered into oviducts of recipient pseudopregnant females (18).
In all the analyses the presence of human NF-L DNA in the offspring of the founder mice was determined by Southern blot analysis (19) of DNA extracted from the tails or in the case of younger mice either placenta or liver.
Hybridisation with a 2.2kb SstI probe, spanning exon one through three of the NF-L gene, was used for detection of the human signal.
The copy number of the transgene was estimated in the offspring by comparison to the 2 copy signal obtained from human placental DNA.
For expression analyses, transgenic lines were established and total RNA was prepared from various tissues, including brain kidney, liver, lung, spleen, thymus and testis or ovaries (41) and subjected to S1 nuclease protection assay.
Mixed probes (a 350bp RsaI 5' human NF-L and a 270bp XmaI 5' mouse NF-H) were used to detect correctly initiated transcripts from the transgene as well as the endogenous mouse NF-H RNA.
Hybridization was performed at 60°C in 80% formamide and the samples were digested at 37°C for 2 hours using 100u of S1 nuclease.
SKNSH RNA was used as the positive control to detect the human NF-L protected fragment of 121 nucleotides (nt).
To control for possible differences in the brain RNA levels, a 5' end-labelled mouse NF-H (m-NF-H) probe was used which gives a protected fragment of 160nt.
RESULTS
Chromatin structure of the human NF-L gene
The presence of a methylation-free island in the human NF-L gene expected on the basis of high GC content was confirmed by Southern blot analysis.
The DNA was digested with the methylation-sensitive enzyme Hpa-II to show that the presence of unmethylated CpG dinucleotides from -1.7kb to +1.5kb relative to the cap site in all tissues examined including germ-line (data not shown).
We next localised all of the DNase I-hypersensitive sites within a 6.5kb EcoR I fragment containing the human NF-L gene and 2.3kb of 5' flanking region.
Since there are large populations of non-neuronal cells in brain tissue, we used a neuronal cell line to determine the position of these sites.
Nuclei were prepared from an NF-L expressing (SKNSH) and non-expressing (HeLa and K562) human cell lines and subjected to limited DNaseI digestion.
DNA was isolated, digested with various restriction enzymes, subjected to Southern blotting and hybridised to several probes spanning the entire NF-L gene.
When EcoRI-digested DNA was hybridised with the 3' 4.5kb EcoRI-BamHI probe A (figure 1, left panels), several hypersensitive sites (HS3-6) were observed in DNA isolated from the SKNSH cells, but none with the non-neuronal HeLa (data not shown) or K562 DNA.
As a control the K562 blot was also probed with a β-globin probe to show the presence of the locus activating region hypersensitive sites (data not shown, 42).
When hybridised with a probe from the 5' end of the EcoRI fragment (probe B), the positions of the three promter hypersensitive sites were mapped to -1.1kb (HS1), -900bp (HS2) and -250bp (HS3)(figure 1, middle).
Hybridisation of SstI digested DNA with the 450bp SstI-XhoI probe C (figure 1, right) further resolved the strongest hypersensitive site (HS5) into two subsites, HS5A and HS5B, which are 100bp apart and are situated in the first intron around position +3600bp (relative to the cap site).
The two weaker sites (HS4 and HS6) were mapped to be at +3400bp, in the first exon and at +5000bp, in the second intron.
The positions of the six nerve-specific hypersensitive sites are summarised in figure 1.
Transient transfections in HeLa cells
Based on the location of DNase I hypersensitivity sites and sequence homology to the promoter of the mouse NF-L gene (20) a number of deletions of the human NF-L gene were cloned in pUC and tested by transfection in HeLa cells (figure 2).
As a control the gene with the -300bp deletion was also cloned upstream and downstream of SV40 enhancer to drive expression in HeLa cells (-300Sal in pBSV, -300 Sal 5'ESV and 3'ESV, respectively).
All NF-L plasmids were cotransfected with a human β-globin gene (9) to control for transfection effeciency.
The results show that the NF-L gene is expressed at low levels in this transient assay system unless driven by the SV40 enhancer.
Nevertheless, the activity of the promoter in the absence of a SV40 enhancer is sufficiently high to observe that activity is only increased two to three fold when the promoter is deleted from -300 to -190bp.
Further deletions which leave less than 90bp of the promoter result in a very low level of expression, suggesting the presence of a basic promoter element between -90 and -70 which is required for expression in this heterologous cell type.
Although we have not rigorously confirmed this, preliminary footprinting experiments (data not shown) indicate that this region may contain a protein binding site present in HeLa cells, but not SKNSH cells.
More importantly, we conclude from this experiment that deletions of the promoter regions (-2.3kb to -300bp) which contain neuronal-specific hypersensitive sites either have no effect or appear to increase rather than decrease expression in HeLa cells.
Transient expression in C1300 cells
To be able to analyse the promoter deletion constructs in neuronal cells, we tested a number of cell lines for their transfection efficiency.
Six NF positive cell lines were used: PC12 (21), SKNSH (22), B104 (23), C1300 (13) SMS-KCNR and SMS-KAN (24) of which C1300 gave the highest transfection efficiency and this cell line was therefore used for the analysis of the NF-L mutant constructs.
The human Thy-1 gene which is expressed in neuronal cells in vivo(25) was used as a control.
Fig. 3 shows that the deletion of the upstream promoter (-2300bp to -300bp) enhances the expression of NF-L when compared to the Thy-1 control.
A similar result has been reported by Shneidman et al.
(26).
A further deletion to -190bp leads to a strong decrease in NF-L expression, indicating the presence of a neuron-specific positive element.
Further deletion to -90 and/ or -55 leads to a further small decrease in activity.
Interestingly even the -55bp promoter construct retains a low level of transcriptional activity.
Expression analysis in transgenic mice
Because the effects observed in the C1300 cells were small we decided to analyse the effect of the promoter deletions which had the most pronounced effects in cell culture in transgenic mice.
The first construct that we microinjected contained 2.3kb of 5' flanking sequence linked to the rest of the HNF-L gene.
It therefore contained the promoter hypersensitive sites (HS1, HS2, and HS3) as well as the downstream hypersensitive sites.
A total of eight transgenic lines with varying transgene copy numbers were generated (data not shown).
We examined the expression pattern of the transgene in four adult lines that contained the highest copy numbers (see figure 4).
SKNSH RNA was used as the positive control to detect the human NF-L protected fragment.
The highest level of transgene expression occurs in the brain, indicating that the regulatory sequences that direct tissue-specific expression are present on this fragment (Figure 4).
In only one transgenic line (-2.3 line 13), there is ectopic expression of the transgene in the thymus indicating that the gene is sensitive to position effects (figure 4).
A similar result has been reported for mice bearing a transgene of 2.3kb of the 5' flanking sequences linked to a CAT gene (27).
To check for a developmental role for these hypersensitive sites, the presence of the transgene was tested in newborn mice and where it was shown to be expressed (data not shown).
We next generated transgenic mice for a deletion containing only 55bp of the promoter linked to the rest of the gene.
This construct therefore lacked the first three hypersensitive sites (HS1, HS2 and HS3) but contained all the downstream HS sites.
A total of five transgenic lines were analysed (figure 5).
It is clear that -55bp H-NF-L construct is not expressed in the brain or any other tissues examined even when it is present in multiple copies (mouse *1 carries 5 copies, data not shown).
We then tested four transgenic mice containing the -300bp promoter which contains HS3, but not HS1 and HS2 (figure 5).
This construct is expressed in a tissue-specific manner in all mice examined, with the exception of mouse 13 which shows ectopic expression in the kidney and thymus.
This result demonstrates that HS1 and HS2 are not essential for neural specific expression of the HNF-L gene.
We also tested the methylation pattern of expressing (-300bp promoter deletion) and non-expressing (-55bp promoter deletion) transgenes and found that both transgene were unmethylated to the same extent (data not shown).
This indicates that the transcriptional activity of the transgenic mice is not reflected in the methylation state of the transgenes.
It also suggests that a much smaller region (about half of the normal size) of the methylation-free island of the human NF-L gene can still remain an island.
We also examined the expression of -300bp deletion construct in younger mice using the NF-H gene as a control.
The latter gene is only expressed post-natally (3) and serves as a late developmental marker.
Newborn mice from transgenic line 6 were examined for HNF-L expression by S1 nuclease protection assay and were shown to express the transgene in brain (figure 5).
The lower intensity signal of the control mouse NF-H gene relative to that of the NF-L transgene when compared to the two month old mice is consistant with the known early expression of NF-L during development.
This result therefore argues against a developmental role for hypersensitive sites HS1 and HS2.
To further determine the location of the neuronal tissue specific element in the -300 promoter HNF-L promoter, we examined (on the basis of the C1300 cell transfection experiments) the expression of a 5' deletion containing 190bp of upstream sequence linked to the rest of the gene.
We obtained three transgenic mice.
Only two of these mice expressed the transgene in the brain, but at very reduced levels relative to those observed for the -300bp mice (figure 6).
Ectopic HNF-L expression was also detected in both mice.
We therefore conclude that an element important for neuronal-specific expression has been lost by this deletion and as a consequence that the transgene is more sensitive to position-effects.
However, the gene is still expressed at a low level further emphasizing that the region between -190bp and -55bp is important for basal expression.
It is clear from the results with the -300bp promoter this residual promoter fragment is sufficient to allow the HNF-L gene to be expressed in a developmentally specific manner (figure 5).
However, we had previously shown that a 2.3kb HNF-L promoter fragment linked to the Thy-1 gene was not expressed early in development, but rather mimicked the expression pattern of the Thy-1 gene (28).
This suggested that either the NF-L gene carries a developmental specific element in the gene or that a known brain-specific element (in the first intron) of the Thy-1 gene has a dominant effect.
The obvious candidate for such an intragenic NF-L element would be the strong hypersensitive sites HS5A and B. We therefore analysed the expression pattern of a human NF-L gene construct containing 300bp upstream promoter sequence linked to the rest of the gene but lacking the first intron strong hypersensitive sites (HS5A and HS5B)(see figure 2).
Two transgenic mice were obtained of which only the one carrying two copies of the gene could be established as a line.
This line was bred and total brain RNA was analysed from a two month old transgenic mouse and 9 day embryos by S1 nuclease protection (figure 7).
The developmental role for the first intron was assayed by the ratio of HNF-L transgene RNA to endogenous NF-H RNA.
The two 9 day embryos which carried the transgene both expressed the HNF-L transgene, but not the NF-H endogenous gene whereas the two month old animal expresses both genes (figure 7).
We therefore conclude that hypersensitive sites HS5A and HS5B are not required for the correct developmental expression of the gene.
DISCUSSION
It has been shown for the murine NF-L gene, that 1.5kb of the sequence upstream of the transcriptional start site is sufficient to yield brain-specific expression of the homologous gene (29) as well as heterologous genes (30) in transgenic mice.
Further promoter deletions have not been analysed for the murine NF-L gene to permit a functional comparison to be made of the minimal regulatory sequences that are needed for neuronal-specific expression in human and mouse genes.
Using large fragments of flanking sequences, brain-specific expression has been observed for a number of neuronal-specific genes in transgenic mice (31,32,33,34,28), including the HF-H gene (35).
However in only one case has a functional element been defined to a very small region.
Analysis of neural-specific SCG10 promoter sequences fused to a marker gene in transgenic mice (36) as well as cell lines (37) has identified a silencer element in the 5' flanking sequences.
It has been proposed that neuronal specificity of the SCG10 gene is achieved through selective repression in non-neuronal tissues (36), making this an alternative mechanism for gene activation in the nervous system.
We have studied the possible in vivo role of the hypersensitive sites of the human NF-L gene by analysing the expression pattern of a series of deletion constructs in transgenic mice and cultured cells.
Murine NF-L, NF-M and NF-H genes as well as the chicken NF-M gene have recently been shown to be expressed after transfection in non-neuronal cells (38,26,39).
Using transient transfections, negative regulatory regions were found between -325 and -925 in the mouse NF-L gene as well as upstream regions of the murine NF-M and NF-H genes that suppressed transcription in both neuronal and non-neuronal cells (26).
Since these elements behave similarly in all cell types, their importance in regulating NF expression remains unclear.
We have also observed an increase in expression upon deleting from -2300bp to -300bp in our transient assays in C1300 cells.
In agreement with the above mentioned data this effect is also observed in HeLa cells.
Although the expression level in the transgenic mice cannot be strictly quantitated as a function of copy number, the average expression per copy of the transgene is higher with the -300bp promoter than with the -2300bp promoter.
This result agrees with that obtained in the transfections and we conclude that the upstream region plays a negative regulatory role.
It is not clear however whether it has a neuronal-specific regulatory role, because the data obtained in non neuronal cells were obtained by transient transfections in cells that do not show any hypersensitive sites in this region of the promoter of the endogenous NF-L gene.
When the human NF-L promoter is deleted from -300bp to -190bp there is a clear negative effect on neuronal expression of the gene both in transgenic mice and the cell cultures.
Sequence comparison reveals a high degree of homology between the mouse and the human NF-L gene in the region between -300bp and -190bp (over 65%, figure 8).
We have carried out preliminary experiments on the biochemical characterization of the promoter region and footprint data show that potential neuron cell specific factor binding sites are centered around -230bp and -285bp (data not shown).
A further deletion which leaves only a 55bp promoter including a TATA box was still expressed, albeit at low levels in C1300 cells.
However, the -55bp promoter is not expressed in transgenic mice indicating that there are no downstream elements capable of driving minimal expression.
It is clear that HS5A and HS5B are not required for the tissue-specific or temporal regulation of the gene contrary to what has been suggested previously (28) because the -300bp promoter when linked to a gene which lacks HS5A and HS5B is still expressed correctly.
It is therefore not clear what role if any is played by the downstream sequences which contain HS4, 5 and 6.
Of course the possibility remains that the sites HS5A and 5B do fulfill an as yet unclear function and that the other hypersensitive sites still present in this construct may functionally substitute for the deleted sites, reflecting a level of redundancy in the NF-L regulatory sequences.
Figure 1.
DNaseI hypersensitive site mapping of the human NF-L gene.
Left panel: Nuclei from K562 cells were isolated and treated with 20µg/ml of DNaseI for increasing lengths of time (t) from 0 to 20 minutes at 37 (indicated by a gradient above each panel).
DNA was digested with EcoRI, run on a 1% agarose gel, blotted and probed with a 4.5kb BamHI-EcoRI (BHI-RI) probe A to detect the presence of hypersensitive sites (HS) in the gene.
0 indicates no DNase treatment.
The size of marker fragments is indicated on the left in kilobases.
Left S-KN-SH: An EcoRI (RI) blot of a series of DNaseI-digested nuclei from S-KN-SH cells was probed with probe A of the human NF-L gene.
Treatment was as above.
Hypersensitive sites are indicated on the right.
Middle S-KN-SH: Reprobe of the SKNSH panel with a 1.4kb RI-BHI probe B to detect 5' end HS sites.
The HS5 label indicated on the right is leftover signal from the previous panel.
Right S-KN-SH: SKNSH DNA was restricted with SstI run on a 1.5% agarose gel.
A 450bp SstI-XhoI probe C was used to detect the first intron HS sites 5A and 5B.
The size markers are shown on the right hand side.
Bottom panel: the map of the human NF-L gene and the position of the HS sites 1-6.
The fragments used as probes (A-C) are drawn with respect to their position in the NF-L gene.
Figure 2.
Expression analysis of Human NF-L promoter deletions in transiently transfected HeLa cells.
Upper panel: The various human NF-L promoter deletions were co-transfected with a human β-globin gene in a pBSV-based vector (9) by the calcium phosphate precipitation method into HeLa cells.
The cells were harvested after 48 hours, total RNA prepared and expression analysed by S1 nuclease protection as follows: Between 50-100µg of RNA was hybridised to a mixture of two end-labelled probes, a 2.5kb EcoRI-XmaI 5' human NF-L probe, and a 750bp EcoRI-MspI third exon β-globin probe at 54°C for 16 hours, followed by digestion with 100u of S1 nuclease at 25°C for 2 hours.
The samples were then fractionated on a 6% denaturing polyacrylamide gel.
SKNSH RNA was included as the positive control for the human NF-L protected fragment of 154 nucleotides (nt), while RNA from HeLa cells transfected with the β-globin gene alone was used as the positive control for the β-globin 212 nt signal, both indicated by arrows.
As negative control, RNA from untransfected HeLa cells (mock) was used.
Lower panel: Maps of the wild type human NF-L gene from the EcoRI (RI) site which is 2300bp upstream of the startsite, to a SalI site which is 3.1kb downstream of the RI site in exon 4 as well as the promoter deletions used in this study (see also Materials and Methods).
Figure 3.
Expression analysis of human NF-L promoter deletions in transiently transfected C1300 cells.
Human NF-L deletion constructs (see figure 2) were co-transfected with a human Thy-1 construct into mouse C1300 neuroblastoma cells by the calcium phosphate precipitation method.
The cells were harvested after 48 hours and total RNA was analysed by an S1 nuclease protection assay as follows: 50µg of RNA was hybridised to a mixture of the following probes: i) a 980bp BstEII-ApaI endlabelled 3' human Thy-1 (h-Thy1) probe spanning exon III and IV and ii) a 350bp RsaI end-labelled 5' human NF-L probe.
Hybridisation was carried out at 54°C in 80% formamide after which the products were digested at 25°C for 2 hours using 100u of S1 nuclease and analysed by fractionation on a denaturing polyacrylamide gel.
Protected fragments of 121nt for the human NF-L gene and 320nt for the human Thy1 gene are indicated by arrows.
The uppermost arrow indicates the position of rehybridised 350bp human NF-L input probe.
Transfer RNA (tRNA), C1300 and HeLa RNA were used for negative controls.
A construct lacking a promoter (-20bp) was used as negative control.
GRK is a kidney tumour derived cell line expressing human Thy-1 RNA (40) and RNA prepared from this line was used as a positive control for the human Thy 1 mRNA protected fragment.
The marker (M) is end-labelled HinfI digested pBR322.
Figure 4.
Analysis of a -2300bp human NF-L promoter deletion in adult transgenic mouse lines.
Various lines of transgenic mice bearing the -2300 bp human NF-l promoter deletion construct were established as described in Materials and Methods.
Total RNA was prepared from various tissues of two month old offspring from transgenic mice lines 6, 13, 1 and 14, as well as an aged-matched non-transgenic (N-Tg) mouse.
40 µg of RNA was hybridised with a mixture of two probes:i) a 350bp RsaI end-labelled 5' human NF-L (HNF-L) to detect the transgene and ii) a 270bp XmaI end-labelled 5' mouse NF-H (MNF-H) probe to correct for possible differences in the mRNA levels.
The specific activity of the MNF-H was twice that of the HNF-L probe.
Hybridisation was performed at 60°C in 80% formamide and the samples were digested at 37°C for 2 hours after which the protected fragments were fractionated by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Protected bands of 160 nucleotides for the endogenous mNF-H and 121 nucleotides for the transgene.
SKNSH RNA was used as the positive control for the transgene signal.
Abbreviations: brain (B), kidney (K), liver (L), spleen (S), ovaries (O), testes (Te), and thymus (T).
Figure 5.
Expression analysis of -300bp and -55bp human NF-L promoter deletions in transgenic mice.
Left panel: Transgenic lines were established for both the -300 and -55 human NF-L promoter deletions.
Total RNA was prepared from several tissues of five transgenic mouse lines 1, 7, 8, 9 and 16 carrying the -55bp promoter deletion as well as four transgenic mouse lines 6, 12, 13, and 20 carrying the -300bp deletion.
RNA was hybridised to mixed probes for S1 nuclease protection assay as described for figure 4.
Positions of protected bands of 160nt for the mouse NF-H (mNF-H) and 121nt for the transgene (HNF-L) as well as the reannealed input probes are indicated by arrows.
Non-transgenic brain RNA (nTgB) was used as a positive control for the endogenous mNF-H signal and negative control for transgene expression while SKNSH RNA as positive control for the human NF-L protected fragment and negative control for the mNF-H protected fragment.
TgB is brain RNA from a transgenic line (-2.3 line 6) containing the -2300bp construct (figure 3) and serves as a positive control for endogenous and transgene signals.
Abbreviations: brain (B), kidney (K), liver (L), spleen (S), testes (Te), thymus (T).
Extreme right: S1 nuclease protection was performed on RNA isolated from various tissues of a two month old transgenic mouse (-300 deletion line 6) and its newborn offspring (a, b and c) as described in figure 4.
Control tracks are as described for left panel except that the transgenic brain (TgB) RNA positive control is derived from transgenic line 13 carrying the -300bp construct (see left panel).
In addition the transfer RNA (tRNA) track serves as a control for nonspecific probe digestion products.
Newborn mice b and c carry the transgene, but mouse a does not contain the transgene (data not shown) and therefore serves as an additional negative control for transgene expression.
nTg RNA from various tissues of an age-matched non-transgenic newborn mouse was also analysed.
Abbreviations: brain (B), liver (L).
The figures on the right side of the figure are size markers (M) of pBR322 digested with HinfI and end-labelled.
Figure 6.
Analysis of -190bp human NF-L promoter deletion in transgenic mice.
Three transgenic lines of mice bearing the -190 human NF-l promoter deletion (lines 1, 6 and 18) were established and the expression of the transgene in these lines was examined as described in figure 5.
To compare expression levels, brain RNA from transgenic line 6 (designated Tg-300 B) carrying the -300bp deletion (see figure 5) was included in the analysis.
Other controls include RNA isolated from tissues of an age-matched non-transgenic mouse brain RNA designated nTgB.
Input indicates reannealed probe.
Abbreviations: brain (B), kidney (K), liver (L), spleen (S), thymus (Th), testes (Te), lung (L).
Figure 7.
Analysis of -300bp human NF-L promoter deletion lacking the first intron hypersensitive sites (HS5A and HS5B) in adult and embryonic stage trangenic mice.
A transgenic mouse line bearing a construct consisting of the -300 NF-L promoter deletion as well as an internal Bal1-Stu1 first intron deletion was established.
A total of 8 nine day (E9) embryo offspring from a mating between a transgenic heterozygote and wild type mouse were dissected and RNA was prepared from the head regions.
Transgenic embryos (1 and 3) were identified by Southern blot analysis of placental DNA (not shown) and the transgene expression in transgenic (1,3) as well as non-transgenic (2, 4-8) E9 brain was analysed by an S1 nuclease protection assay.
Brain RNA from a two-month old transgenic adult carrying the same construct (adult Tg) was also analysed in order to compare the ratio of the NF-L transgene expression to that of the endogenous NF-H.
As a positive control for endogenous mNF-H expression as well as a negative control for transgene expression RNA from the -55 deletion line 16 (see figure 5) designated -55bp Tg was analysed in parallel.
The transfer RNA (tRNA) track served as a control for nonspecific probe digestion products.
Figure 8.
Comparison of human and mouse NF-L promoter regions.
The sequence of the human NF-l promoter in the region of -300 to -180 was compared to the homologous region in the mouse gene.
Dashes indicate identity of bases at that position.
Isolation of telomeric DNA from the filamentous fungus Podospora anserinaand construction of a self-replicating linear plasmid showing high transformation frequency
ABSTRACT
It has been previously shown that linear plasmids bearing Tetrahymena telomeric sequences are able to replicate autonomously in the filamentous fungus Podospora anserina (1).
However, autonomous replication occurs in only 50-70% of the transformants, suggesting a defect in the recognition of the Tetrahymena telomeric template by the putative P. anserina telomerase so that only a fraction of entering DNA is stabilized into linear extrachromosomal molecules.
We have cloned DNA sequences added to the Tetrahymena (T 2 G 4 )n ends of the linear plasmid.
Nucleotide sequencing showed that these sequences are exclusively composed of T 2 AG 3 repeat units.
Hybridization experiments of Bal 31 treated DNA showed that T 2 AG 3 repeats are confined within 200 bp in chromosomal P. anserina telomeres.
A new plasmid has been constructed so that after linearization, the terminal sequences contain T 2 AG 3 repeats.
This linear molecule transforms P. anserina with a high frequency (up to 1.75 10 4 transformants/µg), autonomous replication occurs in 100% of the transformants and the plasmid copy number is about 2-3 per nucleus.
These results underscore the importance of the telomeric repeat nucleotide sequence for efficient recognition as functional telomeric DNA in vivo and provide the first step toward the development of an artificial chromosome cloning system for filamentous fungi.
INTRODUCTION
Telomeres are the specialized structures that form the termini of linear eukaryotic chromosomes.
They are responsible for the complete replication of the extreme ends of chromosomal molecules and contribute to chromosome stability in protecting them from exonucleolytic degradation and end to end fusion events (2).
Telomeric DNAs have been isolated from numerous evolutionary distant species ranging from yeast to human.
Telomere function seems to be fully defined within a few hundred base pairs in ciliates or yeasts and thousands base pairs in vertebrates.
The overall structure of all known eukaryotic telomeres consists of tandemly repeated short sequences of G- and C- rich complementary strands with an orientation specificity so that the G rich telomeric DNA runs 5' to 3' towards the terminus of a chromosome (3).
Telomeric DNA sequences can be composed of precise repeats such as T 2 G 4 in Tetrahymena (4) and T 4 G 4 in Oxytricha (5).
In other species such as S.cerevisiae (6),S.pombe (7) or Dictyostelium (8), the repeated units were found to be more heterogeneous.
In ciliates and humans, at least, the 3' end of the G rich strand is elongated by a ribonucleoprotein called telomerase (9, 10, 11, 12, 13).
The conservation of the overall telomere structure among widely divergent eukaryotes is reflected in the observation that telomeric sequences from ciliates (6, 14), fission yeast (15) or humans (16, 17) can function as telomeres on linear plasmids in S.cerevisiae .
However, heterologous telomeric DNAs exhibit a broad spectrum of activity in their ability to be recognized as functional telomeres in vivo .
For instance, it has been reported (15) that after propagation in S.cerevisiae,YAC vectors are rarely replicated as linear minichromosomes when transferred into S. pombe cells.
In roughly all the transformants, minichromosomes have undergone rearrangements such as circularization events often accompanied by deletions of internal sequences.
In the same way, it has been reported that transformation of S.pombe cells with a linear plasmid bearing Tetrahymena telomeric sequences gives rise to only a very small fraction of transformants containing a plasmid with the correct structure (7).
These observations suggest that neither S.cerevisiae nor Tetrahymena telomeric repeats are fully functional in S.pombe .
Similar features can be observed with the fate of linear plasmids bearing Tetrahymena telomeres in P. anserina : autonomous linear replication occurs in only 50-70% of the transformants, the remaining resulting from integration events into chromosomal DNA (1).
As circular plasmids seem unable to replicate autonomously in P. anserina (18), transformation can only be achieved either by self replication of linear molecules or by integration in chromosomal DNA.
The most likely explanation for the observed high number of integrative transformants is that Tetrahymena telomeric sequences are not perfectly recognized as telomeric templates in P. anserina .
Therefore, a competition takes place between mechanisms involved in telomere recognition/elongation and those involved in recombination events giving rise to the final ratio of the two classes of transformants.
This interpretation was supported by the observation that after propagation in P. anserina , the linear plasmid does not integrate anymore into chromosomal DNA when reintroduced in P. anserina protoplasts (18).
Therefore, the addition of P. anserina telomere-like sequences onto Tetrahymena templates seems to fully inhibit recombination between the transforming plasmid and chromosomal DNA.
Taken together, these observations have led us to investigate what could be the effect of homologous telomeric sequences on P. anserina linear vectors.
We have cloned P. anserina telomeric repeats and shown that a sequence containing homologous telomeric repeats fully prevents integration of the transforming vector into chromosomal DNA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Strains
The characteristics of P. anserina were reviewed by Esser (19).
The isolation and characterization of a ura5-6 mutant deficient for OMPppase activity have been described elsewhere (20).
The bacterial strain Escherichia coli DH5α (F -endA1 hsdR17 supE44 thi-1 recA1 gyrA96 relA1 (φ80d lacZΔ M15 ); Bethesda Research Laboratories) was used for bacterial transformation and plasmid propagation.
Bacterial plasmids used in this study were constructed by standard recombinant DNA techniques.
Plasmids
The pPYACRC5 vector was contructed as follow: The 1.55 kbp Eco RI fragment carrying the P. anserina ura5 gene (21) was blunt ended with the klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I and cloned into the filled-in Sal I site of pYAC4 (22).
The resulting plasmid was named pPYAC4.
The final construction, pPYACRC5, was created by replacing the Bam HI- Sma I fragment containing TRP1 ,ARS1 and CEN4 in pPYAC4 with the BamHI -Sma I fragment carrying TRP1 ,ARS1 ,CEN4 and the cloning sites from pYAC-RC (23).
The DNA fragment containing Tetrahymena telomeric repeats in pPYACRC5 was deleted by digestion with Xho I followed by religation to create the plasmid pPRC5.
The pPATRC5 plasmid was constructed as follows.
The plasmid pHUTEL-2-end (24) was digested with Eco RI and Hae III.
The Eco RI- Hae III fragment of 0.5 kbp was cloned into the Eco RI- Sma I sites of pGEM7 creating the plasmid pEND2.
The 0.5 kbp Hind III- Xho I fragment containing the human telomeric repeats (HTEL) was ligated to the 1.3 kbp Sal I fragment containing the kanamycin resistance gene (kan r ) from pUC4KN (a derivative of pUC4K (25, 26) in which Not I sites have been inserted into the polylinker flanking the gene).
The ligated fragments were inserted in one step into the Hind III site of the plasmid p220.2 (27) to create p220.2TC.
This plasmid contains a ‘telomeric cassette’ of two 0.5 kbp telomeric DNA fragments in opposing orientations flanking the kan r gene which acts as a stuffer fragment and selectable marker.
The entire ‘telomeric cassette’ has been removed by Asu II digestion and inserted into the Cla I site of pPRC5 to create pPATRC5.
Transformation of P. anserinaand determination of the mitotic stability of the transformants
Protoplasts from the ura5-6 strain were prepared and transformed as previously described (28, 29).
The transformants selected on minimal medium were grown for 4 days on solid medium with uridine (100 mg/liter).
From each transformant, small pieces of mycelium were picked at the thallus periphery and grown on minimal medium with or without uridine.
The number of nuclei in each mycelial fragment was not known precisely but was higher than 1,000.
If no regeneration of mycelium was observed on the minimal medium without uridine, it was concluded that the nuclei had lost the ura +  transforming gene during growth on non-selective medium.
DNA isolation and Southern blotting
Genomic DNA of P.anserina was isolated from the mycelium.
The mycelium was lyophilized, ground, and lysed in 100 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 9.0) -10 mM EDTA-1% sarcosyl-200 µg/ml proteinase K for 2 h at 65°C.
After centrifugation (10,000 g, 10 min), the supernatant was extracted twice with phenol, once with chloroform, and nucleic acids were precipitated with ethanol.
The DNA fiber was collected, washed several times with 70% ethanol, and dissolved in 10 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0) -1 mM EDTA.
Digestions with restriction enzymes were performed overnight under the conditions recommended by the supplier (Bethesda Research Laboratories).
DNA samples were electrophoresed on agarose gels and transferred to nylon membranes (Hybond N+, Amersham).
Filters were prehybridized at 65°C for 1 h in 5 SSC (1 SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 15 mM sodium citrate) -40 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0) -5 Denhardt's solution-0.5% SDS-100 µg of denatured salmon sperm DNA per ml.
Double-strand DNA fragments were labeled with (α- 32 P) dCTP (Amersham) using a Random Primed Labeling kit (Boehringer Mannheim).
Hybridizations were carried out at 42°C for 16 h in 50% formamide-5 SSC-40 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0) -5 Denhardt's solution-0.5% SDS-100 µg of denatured salmon sperm DNA per ml.
The filters were then washed twice at 65°C in 0.1 SSC-0.1% SDS for 30 min and subjected to autoradiography at -80°C with an intensifying screen.
The synthetic probe (T 2 AG 3 )4 was produced on an Applied Biosystem DNA synthesizer and labeled at the 5' end with (γ 32 P) ATP by using T4 polynucleotide kinase under the conditions recommended by the enzyme supplier (Bethesda Research Laboratories).
Hybridizations were performed at 52°C for 16 h in 5 SSC-40 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0) -5 Denhardt's solution-0.5% SDS-100 µg of denatured salmon sperm DNA per ml.
Filters were washed twice with 2 SSC-0.1% SDS at 65°C and subjected to autoradiography.
Bal31digestion
Genomic DNA from the ura5-6 strain (480 µg) was mixed with 60 ng of Hind III digested λ DNA in 2.4 ml of 1 Bal 31 buffer (20 mM Tris hydrochloride pH 7.2-600 mM NaCl-12.5 mM MgCl 2 -12.5 mM CaCl 2 -1 mM EDTA) and equilibrated at 30°C for 10 min.
After addition of 24 U of Bal 31 (Boehringer Mannheim), 400 µl samples were removed at 0.5, 2, 7.5, 15, and 60 min.
Reactions were terminated by adding EDTA to a final concentration of 50 mM and quick freezing.
DNA samples were phenol extracted and precipitated with ethanol.
Cloning and sequencing of P. anserina telomeric repeats
The cloning procedure of Wang and Zakian (30) was followed.
Total DNA prepared from a transformant containing the pPYACRC5 linear plasmid was digested with Cla I and extracted with phenol-chloroform.
The digested DNA (5 µg) was treated with T4 DNA polymerase (final concentration, 67 mU/ml) at 15°C for 15 min in the presence of a high concentration of the four deoxynucleotides (final concentration of each deoxynucleotide, 100 µM), extracted with phenol-chloroform, precipitated with ethanol, and self-ligated with T4 ligase at a low DNA concentration (10 ng/µl) to circularize plasmid DNA.
The ligation products were concentrated by ethanol precipitation and used to transform E.coli DH5α competent cells (Bethesda Research Laboratories) to ampicillin resistance.
Sequencing was performed on double strand plasmid DNA by Sanger's method (31) using the synthetic primer shown in Fig. 1.
RESULTS
Cloning of P. anserinatelomeric DNA
In order to obtain a YAC library of P. anserina chromosomal DNA we have constructed a modified YAC vector by the addition of the P. anserina ura5 gene (21) to the pYACRC vector (23).
The resulting plasmid, pPYACRC5 (Fig. 1), carries all sequences from pYACRC and is able to transform yeast AB1380 spheroplasts as other YAC vectors.
Transformation of the P. anserina ura5-6 strain either with the previously described pPATura1 linear vector (1) or with BamH I cut pPYACRC5 gives rise to similar results: transformation frequency is in the range of 200-1000 transformants/µg of DNA, 50-70% of the transformants are highly unstable through vegetative growth and the linear plasmid is transmitted with a very low frequency through meiosis.
This suggests that the yeast sequences ARS1 and CEN4 are not functional in P. anserina .
Fig. 2 shows molecular analysis of unstable P. anserina transformants carrying the pPYACRC5 linear plasmid.
Total DNA was cut with Pst I, run on an agarose gel and probed with radiolabeled pBR322.
This probe detect weakly the 1.8 kbp fragment which contains only 30% of pBR322 sequences.
However, the hybridization pattern is in good agreement with the Pst I restriction map of the linear plasmid shown in Fig. 1B.
But the comparison of restriction patterns between plasmid DNA extracted from E.coli (Fig. 2, lane 2 and 6) and plasmid DNA in P. anserina transformants (Fig. 2, lanes 3 to 5) reveals that the linear plasmid has been modified during propagation in P. anserina .
Internal Pst I fragments detected by the probe have exactly the same mobility as in the control lane whereas terminal fragments migrate slightly slower.
As it has been previously shown in S.cerevisiae (6) and S.pombe (7) one might expect that Tetrahymena telomeric sequences have been healed in vivo by addition of host specific telomeric sequences.
It can be estimated from this experiment that at least 100 to 150 bp of DNA have been added to the ends of the linear plasmid.
This is in agrement with the 200 bp increase of telomeric ends we previously reported for the linear vector (1).
To isolate these sequences we used the enzyme T 4 DNA polymerase which has been shown to enable the isolation of telomeres with virtually no loss of telomeric DNA (30).
Genmic DNA from an unstable transformant was digested with Cla I which cuts only once in the plasmid (Fig. 1), treated with T 4 DNA polymerase and self ligated to circularize plasmid DNA.
Transformation of highly competent E.coli cells with the ligation mixture gave rise to one Ap R clone.
Restriction analysis of the rescued plasmid revealed that it had the expected structure.
The fragment containing putative P. anserina telomeric DNA was sequenced by using the synthetic primer shown in Fig. 1B.
Close to the primer, the sequence starts with a 25 units track of the repeat T 2 AG 3 , followed by the Tetrahymena T 2 G 4 telomeric sequence.
Thus, the in vivo processing of Tetrahymena telomeric templates consists of the addition of a homogeneous track of the repeated sequence T 2 AG 3 .
Restriction analysis of the rescued plasmid showed that the Xho I- Sal I fragment containing telomeric repeats is 800 bp in length.
Assuming that the Xho I- BamH I fragment containing Tetrahymena telomeric repeats is 700 bp in pPYACRC5, about 50 bp of Tetrahymena DNA have been removed by the healing process.
T 2 AG 3 repeats are the component of chromosomal P. anserina telomeres
To demonstrate that chromosomal P. anserina telomeres are also composed of T 2 AG 3 repeats we set up hybridization experiments using the synthetic probe (T 2 AG 3 )4 .
Genomic DNA from the ura5-6 strain was digested with different restriction enzymes, run on an agarose gel and probed with the radiolabeled oligonucleotide (T 2 AG 3 )4 (Fig. 3).
Several genomic DNA fragments hybridize with the probe at high stringency, demonstrating that some chromosomal DNA fragments do contain T 2 AG 3 sequences.
In the Hind III digested DNA, eight bands can be discerned with some bands being doublets or triplets.
It can be estimated that at least twelve DNA fragments are detected by the probe.
Assuming that P. anserina genome contains seven chromosomes (32, 33), this result is in good agreement with the expected number of telomeres.
The considerable variation in the intensities of the fragments detected may also traduce some variation in the number of telomeric repeats present at each chromosome end.
This can be observed particularly for some of the small fragments which give a very weak signal suggesting they contain very few repeats.
In addition, the bands detected are rather broad and heterogenous especially for the smallest fragments from Mbo I or Alu I digests.
This may reflect some heterogeneity in size as generally observed for DNA fragments ending with telomeres (34).
Most of the fragments detected by the (T 2 AG 3 )4 oligonucleotide are very small in the Mbo I and Alu I digested DNAs suggesting that the telomeric repeats can be as short as 300 bp or even shorter.
In order to demonstrate that T 2 AG 3 sequences have a telomeric location, we showed that the DNA fragments detected by the probe are lost after brief digestion of intact DNA with the Bal 31 exonuclease (Fig.4).
After 7.5 min of Bal 31 treatment, all the DNA fragments homologous to the (T 2 AG 3 )4 probe are completely deleted whereas the same blot probed with the ura5 gene shows that internal chromosomal sequences remain undigested even after 60 min of Bal 31 treatment.
As Hind III digested λ DNA was added to P. anserina genomic DNA before Bal 31 treatment, the kinetic of exonuclease activity could be easily assessed by probing the same blot with λ DNA (data not shown).
About 200 bp were removed after 7.5 min of digestion, suggesting that T 2 AG 3 repeats are confined within the terminal 200 bp of P. anserina chromosomes.
Because Bal 31 can remove telomeric repeats very quickly, this value may be largely underestimated, but it is in agreement with the small size observed above for some of the telomeric fragments.
These results demonstrate that P. anserina telomeres are composed of short tracks of T 2 AG 3 repeats and therefore, confirm the expected telomeric nature of DNA sequences added to the termini of linear plasmids after replication in P. anserina .
Figure 1.
(A)Map of the pPYACRC5 vector.
SUP4 ,TRP1 ,HIS3 are yeast genes.
ARS1 and CEN4 are sequences from yeast's chromosome IV:ARS1 is an autonomous replication sequence while CEN4 provides centromere function.
The TEL sequences are derived from the termini of Tetrahymena macronuclear rDNA molecules.
The ura5 gene is from P. anserina. pBR322 derived sequences are shown as thin lines.
(B)nucleotide sequence of the pPYACRC5 polylinker.
The shaded box corresponds to the nucleotide sequence of the primer used for sequencing.
(C)Pst I restriction map of Bam HI linearized pPYACRC5.
The sizes (kbp) are indicated from the left end of the linear molecule.
Restrictions sites are: B,Bam HI; P,Pst I; Sm,Sma I; X,Xho I.
Figure 2.
Southern blot analysis of the linear plasmid after propagation in P. anserina transformants.
DNA samples were electrophoresed on a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred to nylon membrane, and probed with a mixture of 32 P-labeled pBR322 DNA (2.5 ng/ml; 10 9 cpm/µg) and 32 P-labeled λ DNA (0.5 ng/ml; 10 8 cpm/µg).
Lane 1,Hind III digested λ DNA (0.2 µg); lane 2 and 6,Bam HI- Pst I digested pPYACRC5 DNA (0.5 ng),(lane 6 corresponds to a 10 times shorter exposure to autoradiography); lanes 3 to 5,PstI digested DNA (1 µg) from three unstable pPYACRC5 transformants.
Numbers to the left refer to DNA size standards (kilobases).
Figure 3.
Southern blot analysis of P. anserina genomic DNA with the telomeric probe (T 2 AG 3 )4 .
Genomic DNA (10 µg) from the ura5-6 strain was digested with different restriction enzymes, electrophoresed on a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred to nylon membrane, and probed with 32 P-labeled (T 2 AG 3 )4 .
Numbers to the left refer to DNA size standards (base pairs).
Figure 4.
(T 2 AG 3 )4 hybridization of Bal 31-treated P. anserina DNA.
Genomic DNA from the ura5-6 strain was treated with Bal 31 nuclease for 0 (lane 1), 0.5 (lane 2), 2 (lane 3), 7.5 (lane 4), 15 (lane 5), or 60 min (lane 6) and subsequently digested with Sal I. (A)DNA samples (10 µg) were electrophoresed on a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred to nylon membrane, and hybridized with 32 P-labeled (T 2 AG 3 )4 .
(B)The membrane shown in (A) was reprobed with the 32 P-labeled 1.55 kbp Eco RI fragment containing the ura5 gene.
Size (kilobases) and position of detected fragments are indicated to the left of each panel.
Figure 5.
Maps of the linear vectors with different ends.
The symbols used are as in Fig.1.
In pYACRC5, the ends are Tetrahymena telomeres.
In pPRC5, the telomeres have been deleted.
pPATRC5 contains human telomeres (HTEL) with T 2 AG 3 telomeric repeats, separated by the kanamycin resistance gene (kan r ).
Restriction sites are: B,Bam HI; C,Cla I; E,Eco RI; X,Xho I.
Figure 6.
Southern blot analysis of DNA from P. anserina transformants.
Total DNA (1 µg) was electrophoresed on a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred to nylon membrane, and hybridized with a mixture of 32 P-labeled pBR322 DNA (2.5 ng/ml; 10 9 cpm/µg) and 32 P-labeled λ DNA (0.5 ng/ml; 10 8 cpm/µg).
Lane 1 and 14,Hind III digested λ DNA (0.2 µg); lane 2, DNA from the ura5-6 strain; lanes 3 to 5, DNA from three unstable pPYACRC5 transformants; lanes 6 to 13, DNA from eight pPATRC5 transformants.
Numbers to the left refer to DNA size standards (kilobases).
The position of the ethidium bromide stained genomic DNA is indicated by the arrow.
Figure 7.
Determination of the plasmid copy number in pPYARC5 and pPATCR5 transformants.
(A)Location of Sal I sites (S) in the linear plasmids and in the DNA region encompassing the chromosomal ura5 gene.
Thin lines represent the expected size of the DNA fragments detected by the ura5 probe.
The symbols used in the drawing are as in Fig. 1 and 5.
(B)Southern blot analysis of DNA from pPYACRC5 and pPATRC5 transformants.
Total DNA (1 µg) was digested with Sal I, electrophoresed on a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred to nylon membrane, and probed with a mixture of the 32 P-labeled 1.55 kbp Eco RI fragment carrying the ura5 gene (2.5 ng/ml; 10 9 cpm/µg) and 32 P-labeled λ DNA (0.5 ng/ml; 10 8 cpm/µg).
Lanes 1 and 9,Hind III digested λ DNA (0.2 µg); lane 2, DNA from the ura5 recipient strain; lanes 3 to 5, DNA from three unstable pPYACRC5 transformants; lanes 6 to 8, DNA from three pPATRC5 transformants.
The autoradiogram was exposed for 72 h.
Relative intensities were determined by using a scanning densitometer on X-ray films exposed for 2, 16 and 48 h.
Numbers to the left refer to DNA size standards (kilobases).
The DNA binding domain of the Varicella-zoster virus gene 62 protein interacts with multiple sequences which are similar to the binding site of the related protein of herpes simplex virus type 1
ABSTRACT
Varicella-zoster virus gene 62 encodes a protein with predicted Mr of 140,000D (VZV 140k) that shares extensive predicted amino acid sequence homology with the major immediate early (IE) transcriptional regulator protein of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) Vmw175.
The integrity of highly conserved region 2 is essential for the DNA binding and transcriptional regulatory functions of Vmw175.
Similarly, an insertion mutation in region 2 (codons 468-641) of 140k eliminates the transcriptional repression and activation functions of this protein.
We have expressed a fragment of 140k which encompasses region 2 as a non-fusion polypeptide in bacteria.
This 140k DNA binding domain peptide (codons 417-646) binds to numerous DNA sequences throughout the VZV gene 62 promoter region.
It induces multiple regions of protection from DNase I digestion, flanked by sites of DNase I hypersensitivity.
Several of the sites recognized can be considered to be divergent forms of the consensus sequence which is recognized by Vmw175.
However, by use of a panel of mutagenized probe fragments, we found that the 140k DNA binding domain was less sequence-specific than Vmw175 in its interactions with DNA.
Consistent with this, the homologous Vmw175 DNA binding domain, and also intact Vmw175, recognize the gene 62 binding sites much less efficiently than the 140k DNA binding domain.
Also in contrast to the situation with Vmw175, the140k DNA binding domain failed to induce DNA bending when occupying the binding sites in its own promoter.
Deletion analysis has mapped the minimal DNA binding domain of the VZV 140k protein, as measured in gel retardation analysis, to lie within residues 472 to 633.
The differences in binding characteristics of the DNA binding domains of the homologous VZV 140k and HSV-1 Vmw175 IE proteins may account for the subtle differences in their regulatory activities in transfection assays and during virus growth in tissue culture.
INTRODUCTION
Expression of many herpesvirus genes is coordinately regulated and sequentially ordered in a cascade fashion.
Gene regulation during herpes simplex type 1 (HSV-1) infection in tissue culture has been most extensively analyzed.
HSV-1 genes are classified as immediate-early (IE), early or late, depending on their kinetics of expression and response to inhibitors of macromolecular synthesis (1,2).
The five IE genes are transcribed at the onset of infection in the absence of de-novo protein synthesis and at least some of the IE polypeptides are required for the normal regulation of the later classes of genes (for reviews see 3-5).
Of the five IE gene products, Vmw175 (expressed from gene IE-3) is perhaps the most important since its inactivation results in failure to transcribe early and late genes and an apparent over-expression of the IE genes (6,7).
Thus Vmw175 is directly or indirectly required for the normal expression of all other HSV-1 genes.
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), another member of the neurotropic alphaherpesvirinae subfamily, is genetically closely related to HSV-1 (8,9).
However, in contrast to HSV-1, the knowledge of gene regulation during VZV infection is still rudimentary.
The major reason for this is the poor growth of VZV in the available tissue culture systems which produce predominantly cell associated virus with low titer stocks.
Four VZV IE products have been detected in infected cells by cycloheximide reversal experiments (10).
The gene product of VZV genes 62 and 71 (the identical gene is present in both copies of the short repeat regions (Figure 1A)) has a predicted Mr of 140,000D (VZV 140k) and shares considerable predicted amino acid identity with HSV-1 Vmw175.
For several reasons 140k is believed to be the functional counterpart of Vmw175; HSV-1 mutants with lesions in Vmw175 can be complemented by either transfected plasmids or transformed cell lines which express VZV 140k (11,12) and moreover a recombinant HSV-1 virus (HSV-140) with both copies of the Vmw175 coding sequences replaced by the homologous gene 71 ORF is viable in tissue culture (13).
In transfection assays at least, the VZV 140k protein functions as a powerful transcriptional activator of viral and selected cellular gene expression (14-16) and autoregulates its own gene 62 promoter (17).
The predicted primary sequence of 140k can be divided into five regions on the basis of similarity to the corresponding Vmw175 protein (18).
The integrity of highly conserved region 2 is required for the transactivation and repression phenotypes of Vmw175 (19,20) and an insertion mutation in 140k region 2 inhibits these same functions (17) suggesting that VZV 140k and HSV-1 Vmw175 regulate gene expression by related mechanisms.
However the two proteins are not entirely interchangeable for autoregulation as Vmw175 can substitute for 140k in the downregulation of the VZV gene 62 promoter in transient transfection assays whereas the 140k protein does not repress the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter in the reciprocal experiment (17).
In the case of Vmw175, its autoregulatory function is mediated at least in part by the formation of a complex between Vmw175 and a specific sequence fitting the Vmw175 binding consensus ATCGTnnnnnYSG (21,22 and references therein) found at the cap site of the IE-3 promoter (23).
This complex is presumed to downregulate transcription either by sterically blocking the movement of RNA polymerase II or by displacing an essential transcriptional factor such as TFIID.
The DNA binding domain of Vmw175 has been mapped by a variety of different techniques to a region encompassing the C-terminal protion of region 1 and the whole of region 2 (19,20,24,25).
This domain of Vmw175 has been expressed as a stable, functionally separable domain in bacteria (25,21), exists as a dimer in solution (21) and binds DNA with a specificity similar to that of the intact protein (25,21).
Both intact Vmw175 and its isolated DNA binding domain bend DNA when occupying the IE-3 promoter binding site (26).
The biological significance of this DNA bending is unclear but it may be relevant to the mechanism of autoregulation by Vmw175.
The corresponding DNA binding domain of VZV 140k has been expressed as a trpE fusion polypeptide in bacteria (encompassing codons 417 to 647)(27) and binds to sequences in the vicinities of both cap sites proposed for its own gene 62 promoter (28,12).
Degenerate versions of the HSV-1 Vmw175 binding consensus are contained within these recognized sequences.
In addition, the same group demonstrated that the DNA binding domain fusion polypeptide of the homologous IE180 protein of pseudorabies virus (PRV) interacted with its promoter in a similar manner (27).
These findings suggest that the formation of a specific complex between an IE protein and its own gene promoter may be a common mechanism used by alphaherpesvirinae to autoregulate transcription of an essential IE gene.
We sought to investigate whether differences in the behaviour of 140k and Vmw175 in autoregulation assays could be explained by variations in their DNA binding specificities.
We have expressed the region 2 domain of 140k as a non-fusion protein in E.coli (codons 417 to 646) and analyzed its activities in DNA binding experiments in comparison with the corresponding Vmw175 DNA binding domain.
Our results confirm those of Wu and Wilcox (27) and extend them to identify in more detail the sites that are bound by the VZV 140k DNA binding domain.
A mutational analysis indicated that the VZV 140k DNA binding domain was less specific in its DNA binding requirements than that of Vmw175, and failed to bend DNA at its binding sites.
These differences in DNA binding properties may be relevant to the slight differences in their biological properties.
In addition, we have defined the limits of the VZV 140k DNA binding domain to residues 472-633 using a deletion analysis.
This is significantly smaller than the minimal DNA binding domain of HSV-1 Vmw175 (21,25).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plasmids, bacteria and bacteriophage
Plasmid pV17 is a derivative of p140 (a plasmid including the entire VZV gene 62, see ref 28) with a 12 bp EcoRI linker oligonucleotide inserted at codon 418.
Plasmid p585T7a was derived from the T7 expression vector p585.4 (21) by removal of the EcoRI site (by cutting, Klenow filling-in of 5' overhangs followed by religation) prior to co-ligation of an NcoI-EcoRI adaptor oligonucleotide (21) and the EcoRI-HindIII multiple cloning region (mcr) fragment of PUC19 between the NcoI and HindIII sites of p585.4 at the initiation of translation.
In addition, the SphI-PvuII fragment of the vector was removed by cutting with SphI and PvuII, Klenow end-filling, followed by blunt-end ligation, to increase the number of restriction enzyme sites available for cloning in the p585T7a vector.
All plasmids were constructed and maintained in E.coli strain ΔH5.
For the expression experiments, plasmids were transformed into E.coli strain BL21 (DE3) pLysS (29).
Bacteriophage M13 containing wild type and mutant forms of the HSV-1 IE-3 cap site region (21) were transfected into E.coli strain JM101.
The JM101 host bacterium was used for all subsequent growth and maintenance of M13 bacteriophage.
Preparation of intact Vmw175 protein
Crude nuclear extracts containing HSV-1 Vmw175 protein were prepared from HeLa cells transfected with the plasmid p175 as previously described (30).
Construction of the 140k DNA binding domain expression plasmids
Plasmid p585T7aVT2 was constructed by cutting the plasmid pV17 with BstEII, filling-in of the 5' overhang with Klenow, before cutting again with EcoRI.
The resulting EcoRI-BstEII fragment (containing the 140k codons 417 to 646) was isolated and inserted between the adaptor EcoRI site and the SmaI site of the vector p585T7a.
The NcoI-EcoRI adaptor oligonucleotides had been synthesized so as to maintain the 140k peptide reading frame (which is initiated at the ATG of the NcoI site).
BamHI digestion, followed by isolation and religation of the plasmid construct removed DNA sequences between the BamHI site of the mcr and the BamHI site in the translational termination region.
The sequences at the 5' and 3' ends of the insertion were confirmed by direct plasmid sequencing.
Plasmid p585T7aVT2 encodes a 257 residue peptide, designated VT2, consisting of 4 amino acids derived from the amino-terminal junction region sequence (MAEF); the VZV 140k residues 417 to 646; 3 residues from the mcr (QGI) to its carboxy-terminal side; followed by 20 residues encoded by vector DNA 3' to the BamHI site.
Plasmid p585T7aVT2X was derived from p585T7aVT2 by insertion of an XbaI linker oligonucleotide containing stop codons in all three reading frames into the BamHI site of p585T7aVT2 —this removed 19 vector encoded residues from the distal end of the expressed protein that are present in the VT2 polypeptide.
The 238 residue expression product of plasmid p585T7aVT2X is designated VT2X.
Plasmids expressing 140k DNA binding domain deletion polypeptides were constructed using appropriate restriction enzyme sites (as indicated in Figure 8A) for cloning into the mcr of plasmid p585T7a.
The cloning proceedures ensured that all constructs were in frame with the ATG translation initiation codon of the vector.
The predicted 5' and 3' boundaries of the expression regions were confirmed by direct plasmid DNA sequencing.
Expression and partial purification of the 140k DNA binding domains
T7 expression plasmids were transformed into E.coli host strain BL21 (DE3) pLysS and maintained as glycerol stocks.
Bacterial colonies from freshly streaked plates containing ampicillin at 100µg/ml and chloramphenicol at 25µg/ml were innoculated into YT-broth containing the above concentrations of antibiotics, and grown shaking at 37°C until the OD 450 was 0.5.
IPTG was then added to a final concentration of 0.1mM and induction followed at 26°C for a further 2 hours.
Bacteria were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 1% culture volume of resuspension buffer (50mM Hepes pH 7.2, 100mM NaCl, 6mM CHAPS, 1mM PMSF and 0.1mM DTT) and frozen at -20°C.
Thawed bacteria were disrupted by sonication for 4 10 secs. at 80-90 W (using a Dawe soniprobe Type7532A) on ice prior to addition of DNase I (to 24µg/ml); RNase A (to 100µg/ml) and MgCl 2 (to 6mM).
After 30 mins incubation at 4°C, NaCl was added to 1M final concentration followed by addition of polymin P to 0.2%.
The resulting suspensions were centrifuged at 15K for 15 mins. in the Sorvall SS34 rotor.
Supernatants were made up to 35% saturation with ammonium sulphate and the precipitated protein pellets dissolved in 0.2% original culture volume of resuspension buffer.
These solutions were clarified by centrifugation and the supernatants containing the partially purified extracts stored at -20°C.
A partially purified extract of the HSV-1 Vmw175 DNA binding domain peptide I9X (31) prepared by this method was kindly provided by K. E. Allen.
Polyacrylamide gel analysis of expressed proteins
E.coli BL21 bacterial extracts containing the induced viral proteins were analyzed by electrophoresis through a 12.5% SDS polyacrylamide gel using the Biorad miniprotean II kit and visualized by staining with Coomassie blue.
Preparation of probes for DNA binding analyses
End-labelled restriction fragment probes used for DNA binding analyses on the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter and the VZV gene 62 promoter regions were prepared as follows:-The UP6 probe, including the gene 62 mRNA start site at nucleotide -287 proposed by Felser (12) was isolated as a SalI-RsaI fragment, spanning nucleotides -409 to -188 of the gene 62 promoter, from the plasmid p140 (28).
The BT probe, spanning the mRNA start site at nucleotide +1 located experimentally by McKee (28) was isolated as a XhoI-BglII fragment encompassing residues -130 to +57 of the gene 62 promoter from the plasmid p140BT, a derivative of p140 with a BglII site inserted at nucleotide +57 (28).
The IE-3 probes contained a strong Vmw175 binding site (23) located at the cap site of the HSV-1 IE-3 gene and were isolated as either an AvaI-BamHI fragment (coordinates -18 to +27) or as an EcoRI-BamHI fragment (coordinates -108 to +27) from the plasmid pIE-3CAT (20).
The probes were constructed by initially cutting the plasmids with either SalI, XhoI or BamHI respectively, end-labelling with Klenow and αgrS]grT]32 P dATP, followed by digestion with the second enzyme as appropriate.
The labelled fragments were eluted from acrylamide gels and purified by ethanol precipitation.
A specific oligonucleotide probe (UP6 oligo) was synthesized corresponding to the region of the gene 62 promoter spanning the proposed mRNA start site at -287, by annealing complementary single stranded 35mer oligonucleotides carrying sequences derived from -311 to -283 of the gene 62 promoter flanked by non-gene 62 sequences giving rise to 5' AvaI and 3' BamHI sticky ends.
Klenow ed-filling, in the presence of α 32 P dATP yielded the end-labelled UP6 oligo probe.
Comparative gel retardation analysis of the IE-3 consensus binding site containing single point mutations used probes prepared by the ‘prime cut’ method (32) taking measures to obtain sets of probes of equal specific activity.
In each series of probe preparations, a wild type control was prepared in an identical manner at the same time.
DNA bending analysis of the gene 62 promoter sites used derivatives of the plasmid pBEND2 (33) which includes a tandemly repeated sequence (containing 17 different restriction sites) with unique XbaI and SalI cloning sites between the two repeats.
Plasmids pBENDU and pBENDP were constructed by insertion of the gene 62 promoter UP6 oligo (including gene 62 bases -311 to -283) and an RsaI-RsaI gene 62 promoter fragment (-23 to +50) respectively into the SalI site of pBEND2 by blunt end ligation following Klenow end-filling of any 5' overhangs.
The direct repeats in these pBEND plasmids, contain amongst others, BglII, XhoI and BamHI sites; cutting with any of these enzymes produced DNA fragments of 184 bp from pBENDU and 218 bp from pBENDP.
These fragments were Klenow end-labelled and isolated as before to produce two groups of three probes with 140k binding sites in circularly permuted positions with respect to their ends.
Gel retardation assays
Appropriate amounts of partially purified DNA binding domain peptides or nuclear extracts were incubated on ice with 0.1ng of end-labelled DNA fragment probes or freshly made ‘prime cut’ probes in buffer giving final concentrations of 10mM Tris.HCl pH8.0, 1mM EDTA, 100mM NaCl, 1µg polydI.polydC, 0.1% NP40 and 50µg/ml BSA.
After incubation for 20 mins, 0.2 volumes of loading buffer (10mM Tris.HCl pH8.0, 1mM EDTA, 10mM mercaptoethanol, 0.1% CHAPS, 50% glycerol and 0.25mg/ml bromophenol blue) was added to each incubation mix.
Samples were applied to a non-denaturing 4% polyacrylamide gel with 0.5 TBE running buffer and run at 150V at 4°C for 3 hrs.
Complexes and unbound probe were detected by autoradiography of dried gels.
Where appropriate, the extent of binding was determined by scintillation counting of dried gel slices corresponding to the positions of free and bound probe previously located by autoradiography.
To allow for background values contributed by complexes with E.coli proteins (which were visually undetectable), dried gel slices from control lanes were also cut out and counted.
These values, which were negligable, were subtracted from the sample counts, to allow calculation of the percentage of total probe bound.
DNase I footprinting assays
Site specific protection of DNA fragments from partial DNase I digestion by the 140k VT2 and Vmw175 I9X DNA binding domain peptides was determined by modification of the method of Galas and Schmitz (34).
DNA binding reactions contained 4ng of target DNA labelled with 32 P at one 5' end and suitable amounts of bacterial extracts, incubated in buffer giving final concentrations of 10mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 10mM mercaptoethanol, 0.1% CHAPS and 100mM NaCl.
After a 20 minute incubation at 22°C, MgCl 2 (to 10mM), CaCl 2 (to 2mM) and 0.0625 units of DNase I were added, mixed and incubated for a further 60 seconds, after which time 20µg of proteinase K in 100µl of a buffer containing 1% SDS, 100µg/ml tRNA, 200mM NaCl, 20mM EDTA was added and the reaction incubated at 50°C for a further 20 mins.
The DNA was then extracted by phenol, chloroform and ethanol precipitation and resuspended in formamide dye mix (1mg/ml xylene cyanol, 1mg/ml bromophenol blue and 10mM EDTA in deionized formamide).
In addition, a G+A Maxam-Gilbert sequencing reaction (35) was carried out on 4ng of the particular end-labelled probe used in each DNase I footprinting experiment to provide a sequencing ladder for orientation of the footprint.
Samples were applied to 8% polyacrylamide/8M urea sequencing gels for BT and UP6 probes and 12% polyacrylamide/8M urea gels for the shorter HSV-1 IE-3 AvaI-BamHI probe, and electrophoresed at 40W for 2-3 hrs. as required.
Gels were dried prior to visualization of DNase I protection patterns by autoradiography.
RESULTS
Cloning and expression of the DNA binding domain of 140k in a T7 expression vector and its subsequent partial purification
Gene 62, encoding the 140k protein, lies in the left repeat bounding the short unique segment of the VZV genome (Figure 1); an identical copy (gene 71) lies in the opposite orientation in the terminal short repeat.
The DNA binding domain of the homologous protein of HSV-1, Vmw175, has been expressed in isolation and found to have a similar binding specificity to that of the intact protein (21,25,31).
Our intention was to express the equivalent region of the homologous VZV IE protein 140k, encompassing its DNA binding domain, in order to study its DNA binding characteristics for comparison with those of the HSV-1 Vmw175 DNA binding domain.
Wu and Wilcox (27) had previously expressed in E.coli the 140k codons 417 to 647, preceeded by 323 codons derived from the trpE ORF, and had found that this fusion peptide bound DNA in a sequence-specific manner.
We chose to express a similar region of 140k as a non-fusion polypeptide to eliminate the possible influence of a large stretch of non-homologous E.coli coding region on the properties of the fusion protein.
Our non-fusion polypeptide spanned VZV 140k codons 417 to 646 and mainly consisted of the highly conserved region 2, designated on the basis of homology between the HSV-1 Vmw175 and the VZV 140k proteins (18).
The C-terminal portion of region 1, poorly conserved in the related IE proteins of the α-herpesviruses, was also included in our expressed peptide; the role played by these additional residues is not fully understood but deletion analysis on the 140k DNA binding domain found them to be necessary for the production of a clear DNase I footprint but not for binding in gel retardation assays (see below).
The DNA binding domain of 140k was cloned into the T7 expression vector p585T7a, as described in detail in the materials and methods section.
The resulting plasmids p585T7aVT2 and p585T7aVT2X both contained the gene 62 coding region for 140k residues 417-646 inclusive, differing from each other only by the extent of vector coding sequences to the 3' of this gene 62 region.
The expressed polypeptides will be referred to as VT2 and VT2X respectively.
Both of these 140k DNA binding domain peptides were expressed to high levels and were clearly visible on SDS-PAGE gels stained with Coomassie blue (Figure 2).
The VT2X version of VT2 was constructed due to the finding that ‘X’ versions of the HSV-1 Vmw175 DNA binding domain peptides were generally more stable than the non-X versions (31).
The VT2X polypeptide was expressed at slightly higher levels and had an increased DNA binding affinity as compared to the VT2 version (data not shown); otherwise these two proteins could be considered identical.
Partially purified extracts of bacterially expressed VT2 and VT2X were obtained by ammonium sulphate precipitation (Figure 2) and were used for all subsequent DNA binding analyses.
The 140k DNA binding domain specifically recognizes multiple gene 62 promoter sequences in DNase I footprinting assays
Initial experiments using the VT2X peptide with the UP6 probe (described in materials and methods) indicated the formation of defined DNA:protein complexes.
With increasing amounts of protein, higher order complexes containing more than one VT2X peptide were observed (results not shown, but see Figure 5).
We investigated the interaction of VT2 on a number of different probes by DNase I footprinting.
Typical results (Figure 4) indicated that VT2 bound (with apparently similar affinity) to several sites within the gene 62 promoter region (summarized in Figure 3), and that many of these sites contained sequences similar to the HSV-1 Vmw175 binding site consensus (Figure 3).
Characteristically these sites were flanked by regions of DNase I hypersensitivity (Figure 4).
The 140k DNA binding domain recognizes the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter Vmw175 binding site in gel retardation and footprinting analyses
Several of the VT2 binding sites, as identified by the DNase I footprinting analysis on the gene 62 promoter, showed sequence homology to the HSV-1 Vmw175 DNA binding consensus ATCGTnnnnnYSG (21).
This had been noted previously (27) but in view of the observation that VZV 140k did not repress the HSV-1 promoter (17) we decided to investigate the relationship between VT2 and Vmw175 binding sites in detail.
Firstly we confirmed that the VZV DNA binding domain could interact with the Vmw175 binding site in the IE-3 promoter.
Incubation of the VT2X peptide with an IE-3 probe (coordinates -108 to +27) gave specific protein:DNA complexes (Figure 5A, lane 2) and again additional multiple complexes arose on titration of the VT2X peptide (data not shown) as noted earlier with the gene 62 promoter probes.
Lesser exposures of the gel in Figure 5A show three such multiple VT2X complexes on the IE-3 probe (lane 2).
A high-resolution DNase I footprinting analysis on the AvaI-BamHI HSV-1 IE-3 fragment probe (-18 to +27) provided verification that the 140k DNA binding domain specifically recognized the HSV-1 IE-3 Vmw175 consensus binding site.
The VT2 peptide protected, albeit faintly, both halves of this bipartite Vmw175 consensus site (21) from DNase I digestion (Figure 5B).
DNase I hypersensitivity was again induced at the edges of the protected sequences as the amount of VT2 extract present increased.
The footprint produced at this site by the VZV 140k VT2 DNA binding domain differed in several respects to that produced by protein I9X, the corresponding domain of Vmw175 (Figure 5C).
VT2 induced greater DNase I hypersensitivity at the 5' side of the binding site but less complete protection within the binding site itself.
Strikingly VT2 induced hypersensitivity in the central section of the binding site while I9X completely protected this region.
Therefore although both proteins bind to the same site, the details of their structural interactions must differ.
The 140k DNA binding domain exhibits reduced binding specificity for an HSV-1 Vmw175 consensus binding site, as compared to the corresponding domain of Vmw175
Having established that the 140k DNA binding domain recognized the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter binding site, we decided to compare the binding specificities of the HSV-1 Vmw175 and VZV 140k proteins.
Our intention was to identify differences in the binding specificities of these two homologous IE proteins that might account for their opposing functional effects on the IE-3 promoter seen in transfection assays (17).
An extensive mutagenesis of the IE-3 binding site had been performed previously for an analysis of the sequence requirements for Vmw175 binding (21).
We utilized the progeny M13 phage resulting from this study to isolate ‘prime cut’ AvaI-BamHI IE-3 fragment (-18 to +27) probes, containing single point mutations at all positions throughout this IE-3 consensus binding site.
The probes were used in gel retardation experiments with the VT2 bacterial extract to determine the VT2 binding specificity for the IE-3 binding site.
The percentage efficiency of VT2 binding to each mutant probe was determined with respect to binding to the wild-type probe.
The results are summarized in histogram form in the bottom section of Figure 6 with the previously determined binding profile for the Vmw175 DNA binding domain peptide I9X (21,31) shown above.
It is apparent that the 140k DNA binding domain has an overall reduced binding specificity for this IE-3 consensus binding site compared to that of the Vmw175 DNA binding domain and appears to be virtually insensitive to point mutations in the 3' portion of the bipartite sequence.
Both intact HSV-1 Vmw175 and its isolated DNA binding domain have very low affinities for the VZV gene 62 promoter VT2 binding sites
We had demonstrated that the 140k DNA binding domain specifically recognized the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter binding site and were interested to determine whether the HSV-1 Vmw175 DNA binding domain would interact with the 140k binding sites identified in the VZV gene 62 promoter.
Approximately equivalent amounts of VT2X and the corresponding Vmw175 DNA binding domain peptide I9X (31) were incubated with IE-3 promoter and gene 62 promoter probes and the resultant complexes analyzed by gel retardation assays.
We found that complexes specific to I9X were undetectable with the UP6 oligo probe (Figure 5A, lane 8) which spans the gene 62 promoter U site (strongly protected by VT2 in DNase I footprinting).
I9X incubation with the BT probe, which includes the 140k binding sites P1-P5, also gave no obvious specific complexes (Figure 5A, lane 13).
On repetition of this analysis with greater amounts of I9X extract, faint protein:DNA complexes were detected with the gene 62 promoter BT probe (data not shown).
To verify that the binding results obtained for I9X reflect the situation with intact Vmw175, nuclear extracts from HeLa cells, transfected either with or without plasmid p175 (30) were also incubated with the same probes as above.
The only protein:DNA complex specific to intact Vmw175 produced in this gel retardation analysis was with the HSV-1 IE-3 probe (seen in lane 5 of Figure 5A, marked by the horizontal arrow), the complexes obtained with the UP6 oligo and BT gene 62 promoter probes being identical for nuclear extracts with or without Vmw175 (Figure 5A, lanes 10 and 9, 15 and 14 respectively).
We conclude that intact HSV-1 Vmw175 and its isolated DNA binding domain both have greatly reduced affinities for the VT2 binding sites in the VZV gene 62 promoter, compared to the binding observed with the VZV 140k DNA binding domain.
So although several of the VT2 binding sites in the gene 62 promoter show sequence similarity to the Vmw175 binding consensus, the degree of homology of the sites is insufficient to allow recognition of these gene 62 promoter sites by the comparatively specific Vmw175 protein.
These results are in agreement with those obtained from the above specificity comparison between VZV VT2 and HSV-1 I9X DNA binding domain peptides, which found VT2 to be generally less sequence-specific than the Vmw175 DNA binding domain.
In addition, HSV-1 I9X protection of the strong VT2 binding site U in the VZV gene 62 promoter was undetectable using DNase I footprinting analysis of the UP6 fragment probe (data not shown).
Binding of the 140k DNA binding domain does not induce DNA bending at its gene 62 promoter binding sites
The isolated DNA binding domain of HSV-1 Vmw175 causes a significant DNA bend in the immediate vicinity of the Vmw175 binding sequence spanning the HSV-1 IE-3 mRNA start site (26).
This may play a role in the autoregulatory function of Vmw175.
Since we had found that the 140k DNA binding domain recognizes sites bearing similarity to the Vmw175 consensus binding sequence, and moreover, specifically recognizes this IE-3 promoter binding site, it was of interest to determine whether VT2 binding would induce a similar conformational change on the DNA at its binding sites in the vicinities of both proposed gene 62 mRNA start sites.
The method used to detect DNA bending depends on the principle that a bend near the end of a restriction fragment causes a less pronounced reduction in electrophoretic mobility as compared to a bend in the middle.
In order to test for VT2 induced DNA bending, we cloned regions of the gene 62 promoter, spanning the U site and also the P4/P5 140k binding sites (identified by the DNase I footprinting analysis) into the pBEND2 plasmid (33).
Probe fragments derived from the resultant pBENDU and pBENDP plasmids, by cutting with either BglII, XhoI or BamHI, contained respectively a single or pair of VT2 binding sites at circularly permuted positions within each set of three probes (Figure 7B).
The VT2 DNA binding domain peptide VT2 was incubated with each of the probes and the resulting complexes separated on polyacrylamide gels.
An example of a typical bending analysis is shown in Figure 7A; there is no significant difference in mobility of the primary protein:DNA complex within each set of three probes derived from either the pBENDU or pBENDP plasmids.
Thus the 140k DNA binding domain does not appear to induce DNA bending at the VT2 binding sites in the vicinities of the proposed gene 62 mRNA start sites.
The DNA binding activity of VZV 140k resides within residues 472 to 633 as determined by gel retardation analysis
VZV 140k DNA binding domain deletion polypeptides were expressed to high levels in E.coli and partially purified as described for the VT2 polypeptide.
Details of the expressed regions are given in Figure 8A.
The DNA binding ability of each deletion polypeptide was assayed by gel retardation analysis, an example of which is shown in Figure 8B.
Polypeptides VT1 to VT5 gave well defined protein:DNA complexes while VT7 (residues 472-594) and VT11 (residues 504-646) failed to bind to the DNA probe (Figure 8B, lanes 7 and 8 respectively) even at greatly increased protein concentrations (data not shown).
From this deletion analysis we conclude that the minimal DNA binding domain of the 140k protein lies within residues 472 to 633.
The VT2 peptide was selected for all of the above DNA binding analyses for several reasons.
The longer VT1 peptide was less stable than VT2 and tended to degrade in the bacterial extracts.
The shorter peptides VT4 and VT5 gave good DNA binding in gel retardation assays, but, for reasons unknown, failed to yield DNase I footprints at the VT2 binding sites described above.
Despite this lack of footprinting, the specificity of binding of the shorter VT4 peptide was very similar to that shown in Figure 6B using VT2 (data not shown).
Although the VT3 peptide bound to DNA in both types of assays, it is interesting that the mobility of the VT3 complex is greater than expected (Figure 8B, lane 4).
It is possible that the deletion is encroaching upon an important part of the protein and altering the conformation of the complex.
DISCUSSION
The results in this paper demonstrate that a portion of the VZV 140k protein comprising the C-terminal portion of region 1 and all of the conserved region 2 can be expressed in isolation in E.coli as a non-fusion DNA binding domain peptide that interacts with multiple sequences in the VZV gene 62 promoter.
Several of these sequences are similar to the HSV-1 Vmw175 binding consensus, although numerous differences in binding characteristics between the homologous VZV 140k and HSV-1 Vmw175 DNA binding domain peptides have been identified.
The possible functional implications of these observations are considered below.
We chose to utilize the isolated DNA binding domain of the VZV 140k protein for these analyses due to the difficulties encountered in a previous attempt to detect sequence-specific DNA binding by the intact 140k polypeptide (39).
The sequence-specific DNA binding function of HSV-1 Vmw175 resides in a discrete domain of the polypeptide comprising mainly the highly conserved region 2 sequences.
This Vmw175 domain, when expressed in bacteria or liberated from the intact protein by proteolytic cleavage, is able to bind DNA with a very similar affinity and specificity to the intact polypeptide (25,21,24).
Therefore it is reasonable to assume that the binding properties of the 140k DNA binding domain presented here reflect those of the full 140k polypeptide.
Autoregulation of the HSV-1 IE-3 gene requires (at least in transfection assays) interaction of Vmw175 with a specific binding site in the IE-3 promoter (36).
Similarly the 140k DNA binding domain specifically recognizes its own gene 62 promoter and by analogy to the situation with Vmw175, this interaction is implicated in the autoregulatory function of 140k.
The ability to bind multiple sites in the gene 62 promoter had been recognized previously by Wu and Wilcox (27) using a 140k region 2 domain fusion protein; our analyses utilizing a non-fusion 140k DNA binding domain polypeptide (VT2) confirm and extend this observation.
The VT2 peptide exhibits slightly differing affinities for the numerous binding sites in the gene 62 promoter, but preferential binding to any single site was not apparent.
Binding to multiple sites is unlikely to be a feature specific to the autoregulatory function of 140k, since DNase I footprinting analysis of the HSV-1 glycoprotein gD promoter, which is activated by 140k in transfection assays (15), identifies multiple sites of VT2 protection and extensive DNase I hypersensitivity (data not shown).
In addition, the homologous IE protein of PRV (IE180) binds multiple sequences with limited homology in the AdML and hsp70 promoters and such binding is necessary for the activation of these promoters by the PRV IE180 protein (37).
No obvious 140k binding consensus could be derived from the gene 62 promoter binding sites, although several of the more strongly protected sequences contain homologies to the 5' portion of the Vmw175 binding consensus (21, 22).
Interestingly two such sites are located in the immediate vicinities of both the transcription initiation site at +1 and the proposed transcription initiation site further upstream at -287.
A thorough mutational analysis of the gene 62 promoter would be necessary to determine whether these, or any other specific binding sites, are required for the downregulation of this promoter by the 140k protein.
Our examination of the specificity of VT2 for a Vmw175 consensus binding site found that sequences in the 3' portion of the consensus site were unimportant for VT2 binding.
It is possible that the VT2 binding sites may have their own distinct 3' sequence, but none is apparent for the sites identified in this study.
The results presented here show the 140k DNA binding domain has a lower DNA binding specificity compared to the equivalent domain of Vmw175.
This is reflected in the high number and the variety of the sequences protected by VT2 in the gene 62 (Figure 3) and HSV-1 gD promoters and also the high level of non-specific binding to the pBEND2 probe (Figure 7A, lane 8).
This low specificity of DNA binding might perhaps explain the promiscuous transactivating phenotype of 140k in transfection assays (15,16).
It can be predicted from the low binding specificity of the 140k DNA binding domain, that the intact 140k protein would have a low promoter selectivity; 140k could perhaps function by activating sub-optimally utilized RNA polymerase II promoters in a similar manner to that previously suggested for the homologous PRV IE180 protein (38).
The 140k protein is also a more potent transactivator than Vmw175 in transfection assays (15,16).
This is not merely a function of the relative strengths of the HSV-1 IE-3 and VZV gene 62 promoters (39) but could be attributable to either the relative strengths of their activating domains (unknown at present) or alternatively multiple 140k interactions with the promoter may have an additive effect, enhancing the efficiency of activation.
Our results suggest that DNA binding to a sequence over the transcription initiation site is not sufficient for autoregulation as protein VT2 specifically interacts with the HSV-1 IE-3 consensus site yet evidence from transfection assays (17) and also the recombinant HSV-140 virus (13) suggests that intact 140k fails to repress this IE-3 promoter.
In addition, although Vmw175 is equally as effective as 140k in the downregulation of the gene 62 promoter in transfection assays (17), intact Vmw175 and also its isolated DNA binding domain displayed greatly reduced affinities for the binding sites therein, compared to the 140k DNA binding domain.
Slight differences between the sequences of the specific binding sites found in the region of the IE-3 and gene 62 mRNA start sites may account for this functional inconsistency.
Alternatively the precise positioning of the IE-3 site with respect to the mRNA start site may not be correct for downregulation of this promoter by the 140k protein, as a close correlation has been observed between Vmw175 mediated autorepression and the stereo-specific or distance-dependent placement of the IE-3 binding site and the TATA box (discussion of reference 40).
It seems that the mechanism of autoregulation of the gene 62 promoter is more complicated than DNA binding alone and is likely to involve interactions with other proteins.
Of possible functional significance are the alterations of DNA conformation induced by binding of the VT2 peptide, made apparent by the strong sites of DNase I hypersensitivity in the gene 62 promoter (Figure 4).
The purified DNA binding domain of Vmw175 significantly bends the DNA at its binding sites (26), whereas VT2 induced bending was not detected in a corresponding analysis.
This lack of DNA bending at individual VT2 binding sites and also the extensive nature of the hypersensitivity pattern suggest that the conformational effects may extend along the whole promoter, induced by multiple VT2 peptides binding to numerous sites.
If this transpires to be the case for binding of the intact 140k protein during VZV infection, numerous possible functional implications of such a broad-ranging conformational effect can be envisaged, including modification of the interactions of transcription factors with DNA or with other proteins, or clearing the promoter of non-specific DNA binding proteins.
Despite the equivalent roles played by the HSV-1 Vmw175 and VZV 140k proteins in their respective viruses and the high level of sequence homology between their DNA binding domains, numerous differences in their DNA binding characteristics are apparent and are likely to have an important bearing on their activities during infection.
Figure 1.
A. The structure of the VZV genome with the repeated sequences shown as boxes and the positions of the ORF 62 and ORF 71 marked in the short repeats.
B. Expansion of the 140k coding region (1310 amino acid residues in length).
C. The location of the region of 140k encompassing its DNA binding domain, this VT2 region includes 51 residues from the C-terminal portion of non-conserved region 1, the whole of region 2 (codons 468-641) and 5 residues from region 3.
D. The 140k DNA binding domain inserted into the T7 expression vector p585T7a to give plasmid p585T7aVT2.
Only positions of restriction sites altered during the construction of the p585T7a vector and also sites relevant to the subcloning of the 140k VT2 region are indicated.
The location of the T7 transcriptional initiation and termination signals are marked by open boxes containing arrows to indicate the direction of expression.
The black box represents the NcoI-EcoRI oligonucleotide adaptor inserted to maintain the 140k reading frame and to facilitate the insertion of the EcoRI-BstEII gene 62 fragment from plasmid pV17 into the vector p585T7a.
The shaded box represents the 140k coding region (codons 417-646).
Figure 2.
Expression of the 140k DNA binding domain in E.coli.
Bacteria were grown, expression from the T7 plasmids induced and crude extracts were prepared by ammonium sulphate precipitation and analyzed on 12.5% SDS PAGE.
BL21 is an extract prepared from induced bacteria without an expression plasmid, VT2 and VT2X indicate extracts prepared from bacteria carrying plasmids p585T7aVT2 and p585T7aVT2X respectively.
Lanes 1,4,7 —lysed bacteria after harvesting; lanes 2,5,8 —post polymin P precipitation supernatants; lanes 3,6,9 —crude extracts after 35% ammonium sulphate precipitation.
The amount of extract in each lane corresponds to that produced from 3ml of induced bacterial culture.
Lane 10-molecular weight standards; BSA, 66kD; albumin, 45kD; glutataldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, 35kD; trypsinogen, 24kD; trypsin inhibitor, 20.1kD; lactalbumin, 14.2 kD.
The positions of VT2 (28.5kD) and VT2X (26.4kD) peptides are marked by arrows.
Figure 3.
Schematic diagram of the gene 62 promoter region.
Numbers on the top scale indicate nucleotide positions corresponding to the gene 62 promoter.
The locations of both proposed mRNA start sites are shown by bent arrows.
A TATA box homology TTTTAA is centered at nucleotide -28.
A sequence at -261 to -249 contains both octamer and TAATGARAT motifs (28).
The proposed start site at -287 also has a TATA box homology (TATAT) centered at nucleotide -306.
Expansions of the gene 62 promoter sequences (coding strand) specifically protected from DNase I digestion by the 140k DNA binding domain peptide VT2 are also given.
These sequences are labelled U, P1 to P5 and obvious homologies to the motif found in the 5' portion of the HSV-1 Vmw175 binding consensus are underlined, the arrow indicating a motif in the opposite orientation on the non-coding strand.
The bottom section shows the relative positions of the probe fragments derived from the gene 62 promoter and the restriction sites used for their isolation.
In the case of the UP6 oligo, the numbers refer to the region of the gene 62 promoter included in the oligonucleotide probe sequence.
Figure 4.
DNase I footprints on the VZV gene 62 promoter.
DNase I footprinting assays were performed with 5' end-labelled DNA fragments and bacterial extracts.
Target DNAs derived from the gene 62 promoter region were (A) UP6 fragment (bp -409 to -188) and (B) BT fragment (bp -120 to +57), in both cases the non-coding strand was labelled.
Arrows indicate the proposed transcriptional initiation sites at nucleotide -287 in (A) and at +1 in (B).
Brackets representing regions of protection from DNase I digestion are labelled U (-302 to -280), P1 (-107 to -97), P2 (-81 to -74), P3 (-52 to -47), P4 (+6 to +18) and P5 (+27 to +46).
Tracks labelled G+A,— and con contain Maxam and Gilbert sequencing reaction, no extract and induced bacterial extract carrying the p585T7a vector respectively.
Tracks labelled VT2 contain bacterial VT2 extract.
Triangles represent progressively increasing amounts of extract in the lanes covered by the triangle, the amounts of control extract corresponding to the same range of amounts of the VT2 extract used.
Figure 5.
A. Gel retardation analysis of HSV-1 IE-3 and VZV gene 62 promoter regions.
Target DNAs; lanes 1-5 contain HSV-1 IE-3 promoter EcoRI-BamHI fragment probe (-108 to +27), lanes 6-10 contain UP6 oligo probe including gene 62 promoter sequences from -311 to -283, lanes 11-15 contain the gene 62 promoter XhoI-BglII fragment BT probe (-130 to +57).
These target DNAs were incubated with approximately equivalent amounts of VZV VT2X or HSV-1 I9X bacterial extracts, or equivalent amounts of HeLa nuclear extracts with or without intact Vmw175.
Prolonged autoradiographic exposure of the gel (as shown here) was necessary to visualize the complex between the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter and intact Vmw175 (lane 5) marked by an arrow to the left hand side of panel A. Panels B. and C. show DNase I footprinting analyses of the HSV-1 IE-3 promoter AvaI-BamHI fragment (-18 to +27), but only nucleotides -15 to +15 are shown.
In both panels; lane 1 contains a G+A Maxam and Gilbert sequencing reaction and lane 2 contains no extract.
In B.; lane 3 contains an extract from bacteria containing plasmid p585T7a; lanes 4-8 contain increasing amounts of bacterial VZV VT2 extract.
In C.; lanes 3-5 contain increasing amounts of bacterial HSV-1 I9X extract.
An expansion of the sequence of the IE-3 promoter Vmw175 consensus binding site is shown and the direction and position of transcription initiation is marked by the arrow.
Figure 6.
Comparison of the effect of point mutations in the HSV-1 IE-3 consensus binding site on the binding efficiencies of I9X and VT2.
The sequence in the region of the IE-3 Vmw175 binding site is shown in large type at the bottom of both panels.
The vertical bars above each base represent the percentage efficiency of binding when that base was mutated to the one shown in smaller type below (compared to binding efficiency to the wild type probe).
Data used to produce the I9X binding profile was abstracted from reference 21.
Analysis of VT2 binding efficiency was carried out with sets of mutagenized probe fragments produced on two separate occasions and gave highly reproducible results.
Values used to produce the VT2 binding profile represent averages of the results provided by these two analyses.
Figure 7.
The circular permutation gel retardation assay with the VT2 peptide.
A. Circular permutation gel retardation assay with the gene 62 promoter U and P4/P5 binding sites.
Lane 1 contains free probe while lane 8 contains probe derived from the plasmid pBEND2 by BamHI digestion.
Probes in lanes 1,2,3 and 4 (which include site U) were derived from the plasmid pBENDU by cutting with the relevant enzymes indicated above each lane.
Similarly for probes in lanes 5,6 and 7 (which include sites P4 and P5) were derived from plasmid pBENDP.
Incubation mixes for lanes 2-8 contained sufficient VT2 extract to produce only primary complexes and the amount of non-specific inhibitor (polydI:polydC) was increased to 4µg per reaction to reduce the extent of non-specific VT2 binding to the non-gene 62 promoter derived probe regions.
Non-specific DNA binding still occurred, represented by the faint complex seen in lane 8 containing the pBEND2 probe with no introduced VT2 binding site, but this non-specific binding complex is a minor species compared to the specific primary complexes apparent in lanes 2-7.
B. Schematic showing a binding site containing fragment (depicted by the box) inserted between the pBEND2 derived tandemly repeated sequence.
BglII, XhoI and BamHI restriction sites are at equivalent positions in each of the repeats as shown.
Single enzyme digestions yield fragments of identical lengths but with the position of the binding site circularly permuted with respect to the ends of the probes.
Figure 8.
A. Schematic diagram of the deletion constructs of the VZV 140k DNA binding domain.
The expressed regions of the 140k protein (labelled VT1-VT5, VT7 and VT11) are indicated by horizontal lines.
The numbers of the 140k residues at the amino- and carboxy-terminal ends of each deletion polypeptide are given and the corresponding restriction sites used for the isolation and cloning of gene 62 sequences into the T7 expression vectors are shown above.
The gene 62 fragment used in the construction of the plasmid expressing VT5 was isolated from plasmid pV18 (39) which is a derivative of p140 (28) with a 12bp EcoRI linker oligonucleotide inserted at codon 472.
The remaining gene 62 fragments were all isolated from plasmid pV17 (refer to materials and methods).
The ability of each deletion polypeptide to bind to DNA (+) or not (-) in gel retardation analyses is summarized on the right hand side of panel A. B. Gel retardation experiment with the 140k DNA binding domain deletion polypeptides.
Partially purified bacterial extracts of each deletion polypeptide were incubated with the HSV-1 IE3 promoter AvaI-BamHI fragment probe and resultant complexes analyzed by electrophoresis.
Similar results were obtained with VZV gene 62 promoter fragment probes.
The particular deletion polypeptide extract present in each incubation is indicated for lanes 2-8, BL21 indicates an extract from bacteria carrying plasmid p585T7a.