

The Great Boom, 1950–1974
8
The Golden Years
The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails presents itself as an ‘immense accumulation of commodities’.
Those opening words from Marx's Capital could have been written about the long postwar boom, the most striking feature of which was a quite breathtaking growth in production.
By 1973 output in the advanced capitalist countries (ACCs) was 180 per cent higher than in 1950 — almost three times as great.
More was produced in that quarter century than in the previous three quarters, and many times more than in any comparable period in human history (table 8.1).
Table 8.1
Long-term growth, 1820–1973 (average annual percentage growth rates )
With growth on that scale, output doubles every sixteen years.
If these rates were maintained then, with population growing at the rate of 1 per cent a year, each generation could expect to be roughly twice as well off as its parents and four times as well off as its grandparents.
Moreover, figures of this sort understate the pace of development.
Being purely quantitative measures, they fail to illuminate qualitative advances.
People not only had more than their forebears; they also had revolutionary new products.
By 1969 millions of people were able to watch on colour TV as the first human set foot on the moon.
The fifties and sixties were capitalism's golden age.
As a British prime minister remarked at the time, people had never had it so good.
Workers and means of production
The increase in output was out of all proportion to the growth of employment.
The number of people classified as in civilian employment rose by only 29 per cent between 1952 and 1973.
So most of the extra production represented an increase in output per worker.
Annual productivity doubled, a growth rate of 3.3 per cent a year.
(See figure 8.1.)
Figure 8.1
ACC production, capital stock, productivity and employment, 1952 70 (index numbers, 1952 = 100, log scale).
Longer working hours do not account for the increase, because on the whole the ‘normal’ working week was reduced and holidays grew longer The number of married women employed on a part-time basis also grew rapidly The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, expanded from the OEEC) has suggested that hours of work decreased by about 0.3 per cent a year during the 1950s, and by 0.8 per cent a year during the 1960s.
Overall, therefore, hourly productivity probably rose significantly faster than yearly productivity, though measuring hours of work is difficult, especially in the self-employed sector.
The main cause of spiralling productivity was a phenomenal increase in the quantity and quality of means of production.
The stock of these means of production was 2½ times as great in 1973 as it was in 1952.
Since employment  growth was relatively modest, the mass of means of production per worker more than doubled over the period.
It was as though each worker was confronted by two machines where one had stood before.
The machines changed as well.
Technological advances meant that the new generations of machinery embodied important innovations.
By the end of the boom the machines confronting the average worker not only were more numerous than before but also bore little resemblance to those in use two decades previously.
These developments were accompanied by changes in work practices, shaped partly by the nature of the new machinery and partly by struggle on the factory floor.
Since such changes are inherently unquantifiable, it is impossible to say whether or not people were generally working harder by the end of the boom.
But there is no doubt that most were working differently, and that changes in the labour process were part and parcel of the explosion in productive potential.
Profits
A dissection of the relationship between employment, means of production and output does not, of course, explain the boom in any other than a purely statistical sense.
Since the production of more goods and services is never an end in itself under capitalism but always a means to making profit, any attempt at an explanation of the boom must centre around the returns capitalists received on their outlays.
In Part I we examined in detail the ways in which the conditions for profitable production were reconstituted in the aftermath of the war.
How did the rate of profit fare during the boom itself?
To answer this question we have constructed figures for the advanced capitalist countries' rate of profit (a weighted average of the best estimates available for the seven biggest capitalist countries).
As described in the Appendix, we have done this both for the corporate business sector as a whole and for the crucial, and sensitive, manufacturing sector.
Profitability displays no trend between the mid-fifties and the mid-sixties, although it dipped in the recession of the late fifties (figure 8.2).
From the mid-sixties onwards it moves into decline.
This latter fall is discussed at length in later chapters.
Here the focus is on how profitability was maintained until then.
Profit shares and rates
We shall examine the development of the rate of profit in terms of two statistical components.
One is the share of profits in the value of output.
The other is the ratio of output to capital.
Figure 8.2
ACC profit rates, 1955–70 (percentage)
Changes in the profit share register relative changes in the costs of employing labour (wages inclusive of all taxes on labour incomes and employment) and the value of output produced.
If real product wages rise more slowly than productivity then the profit share rises.
If the growth of labour costs exceeds that of productivity, the profit share is squeezed.
There was virtually no change in the profit share between the mid-fifties and mid-sixties.
In other words, the real cost of employing labour rose at the same rate as productivity — over 3 per cent a year (figure 8.3).
Since the rate of profit is the percentage return on capital employed, a constant profit share maintains a constant profit rate only if the ratio of output to capital remains constant.
This ratio in turn depends on the relative rate of growth of capital employed and of output produced.
We have already seen that both the quantity of means of production in use and the output produced by their operation grew enormously.
In manufacturing and business, the two grew very closely in parallel until the mid-sixties, so that the ratio of output to capital remained fairly constant (figure 8.4).
Production and realization
Thus far, the account remains a statistical description of certain features of the boom.
To get beyond this, and to try to understand the processes involved, we return to the basic requirements for profitable production.
We have already argued that a period of sustained expansion can occur only if potential profitability can be maintained, that is, if an adequate balance between productivity and real wages can be sustained.
But capitalists also need expanding markets if they are to sell their produce and thus realize their potential profitability in the form of money profits.
The crucial question about the success of the golden years is thus: how did accumulation succeed in maintaining adequate production and realization conditions for so long?
Figure 8.3
ACC business productivity and product wages, 1955–70 (index numbers, 1955 = 100, log scale).
Figure 8.4
ACC business capital per worker and output-capital ratio, 1955–70 (index numbers, 1955 = 100, log scale).
Wages
Wages are a major component of costs for any individual capitalist and are the dominating one for the system as a whole.
Their development is thus crucial to potential profitability.
They are also the largest single source of income, and so spending from wage packets is a key source of markets.
In other words, wages are also crucial to demand.
So an examination of their role and development in the boom provides an obvious starting point.
We have already seen that real wage costs rose roughly in line with productivity at over 3 per cent a year — an extremely rapid rate by historical standards.
It might seem at first sight that this pace was unambiguously beneficial to demand (being crucial to market growth) and equally unambiguously detrimental to profitability (being the only thing preventing a phenomenal profits bonanza).
But rising wages played a more complex role.
If accumulation is rapid then large numbers of workers must regularly be available to operate newly installed machinery.
Some of these workers were provided by growth in the labour force, the rundown of unemployment and a reduction in the numbers of people on family farms (chapter 11).
But these sources were quite inadequate.
The boom would have run out of steam very quickly indeed if capitalists had been forced to find extra employees to operate all the new machines.
Much more important was the transfer of workers from old machines to new ones.
If means of production remain in use for 20 years (a reasonable figure) then the scrapping of old ones releases some 5 per cent of the work force to work with new equipment every year.
This figure exceeds the annual growth in the labour force during the boom by a factor of more than four.
Wage rises are the main immediate cause of scrapping.
The criterion for capitalists to scrap old equipment is not whether the machine is physically serviceable — most machinery is withdrawn from use well before it has worn out — but whether it can any longer be operated profitably And the key factor which renders unprofitable the operation of older vintages of machinery is a rise in wage costs.
Thus, paradoxical as it may seem, the rapid growth of means of production during the boom depended upon much scrapping of means of production.
If this scrapping had not occurred then capitalists would have been unable to find  workers to operate new machines and would have been forced to cut back accumulation sharply.
The rise in wages was therefore not basically damaging to profitability.
Given labour constraints, it was essential to the pace of accumulation and hence to the rate of growth of productivity.
The growth in average productivity resulted from a combination of two processes: the rapid installation of new, high-productivity machinery and the fast scrapping of old, low-productivity machines.
If wages had not risen, most of this scrapping would not have happened and productivity would have grown much less quickly than it did.
Rising wages were important for markets primarily because workers' additional spending accounted for the bulk of the growth in consumption expenditure.
Rising spending on consumer goods in turn allowed the industries producing them to grow more or less in line with those producing means of production.
Indeed, an important element of the boom was the mass production of durable goods and the improvement of the technologies required to produce them.
This growth of consumption was essential to stability.
If real wages had remained constant between 1955 and 1970, with productivity growth unaffected, then the share of profits would have doubled to around one-half of the value of output.
With consumption growing at only about 1 per cent a year (the rate of growth of the labour force), the system would have become one in which machines were being installed at hectic rates in order to produce other machines.
The example is absurd because, apart from anything else, workers would not have been available to operate the new machines.
The process could never have gone that far.
But that is precisely the point: the boom would have been pulled up sharply if consumption had not grown fast enough, and rising wages were essential to that growth.
The phenomenal Japanese expansion of the late 1950s, in which production outstripped consumption and accumulation accelerated enormously, was altogether exceptional and only temporarily sustainable.
In the advanced capitalist countries as a whole the share of consumption declined far less than it did in Japan in those exceptional years — between 1952 and 1973 it only slid down from 62.9 per cent of GDP to 59.5 per cent.
The part financed out of wages (and the incomes of the self-employed corresponding to the average wage) fell by rather more than this (figure 8.5).
Consumption financed from government transfers (pensions etc.) rose from 5 per cent of GDP in 1952 to 10 per cent in 1973, and it was partly to pay for this that the average proportion of incomes taken by direct taxation rose from 16 per cent in 1952 to 22 per cent in 1973.
Despite this increased taxation, despite a rise in the proportion of incomes saved from 6 per cent to 11 per cent and despite a probable slight rise in the share of total incomes in the form of rent, dividends and interest and high self-employment earnings, consumption out of wages still constituted some 45 per cent of GDP in 1970.
If wages per head had not increased, the share of GDP accounted for by consumption out of wage earnings would have fallen from 52  per cent in 1952 to 31 per cent in 1970; this would have required an inconceivable rise in other types of spending (by capitalists and government) if the increase in production was to be sold.
Figure 8.5
ACC consumption, 1952–70 (percentage of GDP).
Regardless of their importance in sustaining accumulation by providing a growing market for consumer goods, wages must be regarded as a basically passive element in the process of realization.
The development of wages is largely a product of the process of accumulation itself.
A capitalist boom requires potential profits to be realized.
Workers' spending as a whole provides the demand which realizes the profits of capitalists producing consumer goods.
But the pay of their employees is an expense which reduces profits, not a source of demand which realizes them.
Only the spending of workers employed elsewhere realizes profits in the consumer goods industries.
These workers will only be employed if there is demand for the products they make — for export, from the government or from the employers themselves.
So the realization of all the potential profits ultimately depends on sufficient spending by the employers (on investment or consumption), by the government or by those purchasing exports.
Why wages rose
It is one thing to describe the key role played by rising labour costs and another to explain why they rose.
But the functions provide clues to the mechanisms.
On the production side, labour constraints in the context of rapid accumulation will tend to pull up wages as capitalists compete for workers.
Those with new, more productive equipment are prepared to pay higher wages to attract labour  than are those with older machinery because the former can operate profitably at higher wage levels than the latter.
And they may need to pay more if enough workers are to be available — unless sufficient old machines are forced out of operation there will be a shortage of workers to operate the new.
On the demand side, firms with new capacity will tend to cut prices in an attempt to win markets from their rivals with older equipment.
Productivity gains on the new equipment allow such cuts without a fall in profits.
The effect is for labour costs to rise relative to the price of the product.
Real wage rises were thus a product of the competitive process whereby more efficient firms drove out weaker rivals to obtain both labour and markets, which less efficient producers would otherwise have hung on to.
A question which arises from this analysis is whether competition for labour or for markets was the more fundamental in pulling up wages.
Real wages vary according to the net outcome of competition in the labour market, which determines changes in money wages, and competition in the product markets, which determines price changes.
At any point in time a shortage of either labour or markets is likely to be the dominant factor constraining accumulation at the existing real wage level.
It then makes sense to ascribe the subsequent rise in real wages primarily to whichever of the two markets sees the more intense competition.
In a number of countries a distinct shift took place during the course of the boom.
Labour markets tightened noticeably as reserves of unemployed labour and underemployment on family farms were progressively exhausted (this development is discussed in later chapters).
As a broad generalization, it is thus reasonable to say that the role of tight labour markets in driving up real wages eclipsed that of competition in product markets as the boom progressed.
But that is a generalization.
There was considerable variation between countries and between industries.
Emphasizing the role of competition between firms in raising real wages may appear to fly in the face of the everyday reality of pay negotiations.
But in the golden years institutionalized pay bargaining constituted one of the transmission mechanisms through which the requirements of accumulation, and the competitive struggles bred by them, generated the necessary real wage increases.
Negotiations over pay are about changes in money wages.
What happens to real wages depends on changes in both money wages and prices.
Unions do not negotiate with employers about the prices of the products they produce.
So they can only raise real wages if product markets are tight enough to prevent the employers from passing all money wage increases on in higher prices.
And the tightness of product markets is out of union control.
The need for a certain amount of scrapping if accumulation is to proceed smoothly determines a necessary rise in product wages.
If collective bargaining yields less than the required rise then firms will not be able to find enough workers to operate all newly installed machines and will have to pay above the  settlement.
This will result in a further rise in wages.
If negotiations yield more than the required rise then too much scrapping may result, generating unemployment.
This did not happen significantly during the boom; the trend was for unemployment to fall.
Alternatively, firms will pass on the ‘excess’ component of the settlement in higher prices, and real wages will rise by less than expected.
This was a factor in the development of inflation from around the mid-1960s.
Exports
If wages cannot realize the potential profits, this leaves sales of exports, and spending by the government or the employers themselves, as sources of demand.
The advanced capitalist bloc could have realized profits by running a positive trade balance with the rest of the world (i.e. the less developed countries and the Eastern bloc).
By selling more outside the advanced bloc than was bought in, capitalists could have increased their assets (in the form of third world factories, gold or financial assets) without accumulating means of production at home.
Exports to less developed countries rose from $20 billion in 1958 (the earliest year for which data are available) to $42 billion in 1970, and those to centrally planned economies from $2 billion $8 billion.
The 1970 total represents only 2½ per cent of OECD GDP, a slightly smaller proportion than in 1958.
And most of the money coming in was offset by spending on imports into the bloc.
The export surplus of the industrial countries in 1970, for example, was only $9 billion.
This represented less than ½ per cent of OECD output, or 3 per cent of investment.
So it was of trivial significance as a means of realizing surplus.
Government spending
Civil spending on goods and services (health, education and so on) increased by 50 per cent more than total output, and grants to persons (e.g. pensions) grew.
twice as fast.
Both rose by some 4 per cent of GDP.
More than half of this increase was offset by a declining share of military expenditure.
The share of government investment was fairly steady (figure 8.6).
The effect was a more rapid rise in government spending than in output.
The impact of an increased share of government expenditure depends on the way it is financed.
If the money is borrowed, then capitalists can accumulate without investing in means of production.
They stock up on financial assets such as government bonds, and the government realizes profits by spending its borrowings on buying commodities.
Demand rises and, providing higher real wages do not cut into profits, the economy expands, justifying higher investment.
This Keynesian process of governments pumping up demand for  commodities has disadvantages: government interest payments grow and attempts to finance them by taxation tend eventually to threaten profits.
But these problems are not immediately apparent, and so need not inhibit accumulation for some time.
Figure 8.6
ACC components of government spending.
1952–70 (percentage of GDP).
In any case, this was not, by and large, the way state spending was financed in the boom.
Total government deficits fluctuated between 1 per cent of output in the recession years of 1958 and 1967 and minus 1 per cent in the boom years of 1955, 1960 and 1969.
Despite rising interest rates, debt interest rose only from 2¼ per cent of personal income in 1952 to 2½ per cent in 1973.
So, contrary to those who ascribe great importance to Keynesian policies, the boom was in no sense based on government deficits.
The overwhelming bulk of state spending, then, was financed by taxation.
So increases in state spending were largely offset by corresponding reductions by taxpayers.
With workers' real gross incomes determined primarily by accumulation, higher taxes bit into take-home pay.
But the balanced-budget method of financing extra expenditure by higher taxation is still expansionary to the limited extent that tax bills are met by reduced saving rather than by cutbacks in spending.
So increased state spending did increase demand.
Without it, even higher investment would have been needed to achieve the same growth of demand.
Investment
Since the level of investment measures the level of demand for means of production, the growth in the investment level measures the direct contribution  of accumulation to the growth in markets.
(Clearly there is also an indirect contribution via the resulting growth in wages.) 1958 was the only year in which the level of investment fell, and the average growth rate over any five-year period was always at least 4 per cent per annum.
The growing level of investment prevented a fall in the rate of growth of output despite a tendency in the decade from the mid-fifties for the share of workers' savings to rise — a development which restrained consumption growth.
Output would have slowed had the investment share not risen.
As it was, improved profitability and fulfilled expectations of rising sales led to an expansion of investment.
The rate of accumulation increased, rather than the growth of output slackening.
The rise in the investment share resulted partly from an increase in the weight of the high accumulators — Germany and especially Japan.
Most of the rise was in the form of manufacturing and other business investment (figure 8.7).
In 1961, 78 per cent of corporate business investment was financed by retained earnings.
The remainder, equivalent to 2.8 per cent of GDP, was paid for by borrowing from the personal sector (i.e. workers' savings and rentier incomes).
By 1973 this self-financing ratio had fallen to 64 per cent, and 5.6 per cent of GDP was borrowed by firms to cover the shortfall.
This offset the tendency towards stagnation generated by increased workers' savings.
So accumulation played the decisive role in maintaining favourable demand conditions.
The boom in accumulation was essentially self-sustaining.
It simultaneously increased the surplus produced by the working class and ensured that this surplus found a market, generating steadily rising profits for the employers.
Figure 8.7
ACC components of investment, 1952–70 (percentage of GDP)
The Japanese economic miracle
The boom was most powerful in Japan, and the period 1955–61 was decisive.
Over those years accumulation built up the phenomenal momentum which it was to sustain through the sixties.
This period — the most glittering episode of the golden years — illustrates the fundamental dynamics of the boom particularly well because it shows them in operation in top gear and with enormous effect.
We left Japan under the screws of the deflationary Dodge stabilization plan (chapter 6).
The Korean boom pulled the economy out of stagnation.
Exports trebled between 1949 and 1952, and the share of profits doubled.
The expansion allowed employers to reap the benefits of the deflation-induced rationalization.
But the expansion was pulled up sharply by a balance of payments crisis.
Imports rose by one-third while exports stagnated.
The problem was Japanese capital's competitive weakness.
The government's Economic Survey of Japan for 1952 noted that the products of heavy industry were typically 30–40 per cent more expensive than in other countries, because of high materials costs and low productivity.
It also reported that ‘equipment is often old-fashioned, decrepit and inefficient and will not easily permit standardization and mass production’(p. 114).
Modernization of the industrial structure had hardly begun.
Only 7 per cent of machine tools were less than five years old, and under one-third less than ten.
The government responded to the payments crisis with a credit squeeze.
This prompted further rationalization.
By 1955 export prices were down to world levels, a development which must have accelerated the scrapping of old plant.
And while investment stopped growing, it remained at quite a high level.
The accumulation rate remained about 4 per cent, implying substantial further modernization.
By the mid-1950s productivity in steel was around half the US level.
But wages were still only around one-fifth of US rates.
So Japanese wage costs per unit of output were less than half of those in the United States, and below European levels.
Productivity in cotton-spinning was almost equal to the US level, and much higher than that in Europe.
Without this productivity increase exports could not have expanded fast enough to balance the additional imports required to sustain the 1955–61 expansion.
Over those six years non-agricultural business investment tripled, boosting the rate of accumulation from around 4 per cent a year to 10 per cent.
Business investment grew to absorb about one-quarter of GDP.
Production of investment goods trebled, while consumption (public and private) rose by less than 50 per cent.
The rate of accumulation in those branches most closely tied to investment (machinery, metals, construction) reached 25–35 per cent per year, implying a doubling of the capital stock every three years or less.
No industrialized country had ever achieved such a burst of accumulation before.
Myth has it that the accumulation was financed by frugal Japanese workers.
Their savings were indeed high by Western standards (largely because of poor government welfare provision and high and escalating housing costs), and they rose over the period from 9 to 16 per cent of their income.
But as a share of GDP, workers' savings rose by only 3 per cent while investment leaped up by 13 per cent.
The rise in the share of fixed investment, from 19 per cent of GDP in 1955 to 33 per cent in 1961, was paralleled by one in the share of (pre-tax) gross profit incomes, up from 31 to 39 per cent.
This latter rise generated much of the necessary finance.
The share of profits was able to rise quickly because real wages did not need to grow in line with productivity.
Rapid accumulation maintained expanding markets — much extra output consisted of means of production bought by capitalists — so that demand shortage did not pull down prices and hence push up real wages.
Since labour reserves were adequate, there was no need, either, for an acceleration of wages and faster scrapping in order to release workers for employment on new machines.
Employment rose by about one-tenth.
Employment in industry and services, which gained 2½ million workers from agriculture, grew by only around one-quarter, which seems modest in relation to the increase in the capital stock.
But the extra workers imparted a decisive flexibility to accumulation.
Employment in construction rose by two-thirds over the six years, increasing its share of nonagricultural employment by more than half a million.
Employment in electrical machinery trebled, again increasing its share by half a million.
Such employment leaps in particular industries could not have occurred in a tight labour market with slow labour-force growth.
The labour market tightened considerably over six years.
The unemployment rate and the ratio of job-seekers to vacancies both fell precipitately.
By 1961 they had reached levels which were to persist, with minor ups and downs, for the remainder of the decade.
Labour turnover rose, as did voluntary quits.
Annual money wage increases rose to about twice those of the mid-fifties, and product wages (real wages in terms of the product) accelerated as well.
The upswing of accumulation partially absorbed the huge pool of labour in backward sectors (including ex-agricultural workers drawn into service industries in the early fifties).
As the labour market tightened, faster product wage growth limited the expansion of the backward sector, and thereby ensured an elastic labour supply for the dynamic modern sectors.
This effect was accentuated by a squeezing of differentials, especially in large manufacturing firms.
Product wages probably accelerated only about half as much in the largest firms as in the smallest, thus facilitating the expansion of the former as the latter were knocked out.
These developments prevented newly accumulated means of production from being starved of labour.
They ensured that few of the extra workers entering the market were trapped in small-scale operations and provided an elasticity of labour supply essential to very rapid accumulation in advanced  sectors.
In 1955 one-third of manufacturing workers were employed in enterprises with less than 20 workers.
By 1961 the proportion had fallen to one-quarter.
The number of manufacturing plants with more than 30 workers had risen by two-thirds.
Small-scale industry constituted a huge ‘tail’ of ancient means of production which could be scrapped without jeopardizing profits in modern enterprises.
So the rise in product wages was both the clearest expression of tightening labour markets and the mechanism which prevented it from inhibiting accumulation.
New techniques of production were introduced at an accelerating rate.
Initially, the rapid run-down of agriculture allowed employment to rise in line with the capital stock.
But as accumulation accelerated, capital intensity increased.
The rate of introduction of new techniques from overseas trebled in 1960.
By the next year more than half of manufacturing production used foreign technology.
The proportion was higher in the fastest growing sectors, such as electrical machinery, transport equipment and iron and steel.
By the end of the six years Japan possessed a younger stock of machine tools than the United Kingdom or the United States: 40 per cent was less than five years old.
Productivity had more than doubled in the chemicals, transport equipment and electrical machinery industries.
Fast productivity growth in the sectors producing means of production ensured a rapid reduction in the real cost of capital goods.
This offset the effect of rising mechanization on capital costs, and, combined with a rise in capacity utilization, pushed the output-capital ratio up.
So the profit rate rose faster than the share.
The pre-tax rate of profit for business rose from about 17 per cent in 1955 to 24 per cent in 1961.
In sum, accelerating accumulation pushed up employment quite rapidly, but not as fast as the stock of capital rose, since mechanization proceeded apace (figure 8.8).
Ample labour supplies permitted the operation of new machines without the need for product wages to rise as fast as productivity.
The situation was also eased by rapid mechanization (figure 8.9).
Capitalists realized the rising share of profits by increasing investment at a faster rate than production (figure 8.10).
Since productivity rose faster than mechanization, the output-capital ratio rose, boosting the profit rate still further.
By the end of the period, however, the tighter labour market forced product wages to rise as fast as productivity to ensure sufficient scrapping to provide labour to operate newly installed equipment.
The share and rate of profit and the accumulation rate more or less stabilized at the very high levels established over the previous six years.
The speed and economic mechanics of this burst of accumulation were dazzling.
But it is important not to become so mesmerized by them as to lose sight of the underlying social processes.
The extra output was produced on the shop floor.
Here the employers consolidated an industrial relations system which ensured maximum control.
Relatively strong private sector unions were picked off one by one.
The resulting disputes were bitter.
But by the close of  the decade militant trade unionism had been literally eradicated in the private sector.
Figure 8.8
Japanese business capital stock, capital per worker and employment, 1955–61 (index numbers, 1955 = 100, log scale).
At Nissan, management felt especially threatened by a shopfloor system whereby each group of 10 workers elected delegates to a shop committee.
‘While the committees normally held meetings in working hours with management's permission, when disputes arose, chairmen frequently convened unauthorized meetings and excluded staff representatives if they disagreed with the positions of the union leadership’(Cusumano, 1985, p. 148).
These committees assumed the authority to grant or refuse overtime requests.
In the summer of 1953 the union carried out strikes and go-slows in support of a wage claim, but were locked out.
The management had the financial support of the Industrial Bank of Japan, the Employers Federation ensured that Nissan's subcontractors would receive alternative orders, and its rivals guaranteed that they would not steal its markets while the firm was out of production.
After the management fired the union leadership, initially 86 per cent of workers voted to go on with the strike, but eventually they were cajoled into a ‘second union’ started by white collar staff who wanted to cooperate with the company (and many of whom were to receive rapid promotions from the grateful management — see also chapter 16).
A year later a major steel plant announced the dismissal of 901 of its 3700 workers:
The unions demanded the cancellation of the dismissal decision on condition that the workers would accept a proportionate wage cut.
With the company rejecting this request, the workers have gone on strike…while the strike has been in full swing a second union has been organized by 800 workers under the auspices of Zenro [right-wing union federation]with a new slogan of ‘immediate acceptance of dismissals and reopening of production’.
Under police guard the members of the new union tried to break through the picket line formed by the first union, with fierce clashes taking place…
(Oriental Economist, November 1954).
The workers were defeated after a six-month struggle.
Most of the dismissals went through.
Figure 8.9
Japanese business productivity and product wages, 1955–61 (index numbers, 1955 = 100, log scale).
Figure 8.10
Japanese business investment and profits, 1955–61 (percentage).
In 1958 Oji Paper, one of the biggest paper-makers, demanded an end to the closed shop.
Oji workers were among the highest paid in Japan.
They had previously won compensation of 1 million yen each for eight former employees dismissed in the ‘red purge’ and had set them up in business near the company's housing project.
After a 145-day strike, with much violence on the picket line, a settlement was reached.
Leaders of the ‘first’ union were subsequently sacked for alleged harassment of members of the newly formed ‘second union’.
Workers deserted the first union in droves.
These struggles culminated in a dispute at the Miike Coal Mines, owned by Mitsui Mining, the biggest mining firm in Japan.
The company tried to sack 1300 workers, including 300 union leaders, for ‘sabotage’.
The Oriental Economist — whose sympathies mirror those of its occidental namesake explained the situation:
The mechanization of the mine has already been carried to an admirable point…
Nevertheless the per worker per month production of the mine is a lowly 14 tons in comparison with the usual 20 tons.
Why?
The answer is too obvious to miss.
The majority of the workers there work only two or three hours a day…
The union's control of its workers is literally fabulous…
No one can break into the miners' housing area without ‘security clearance’ at the gate by the union guards…the orders from management are completely disregarded and the directions from union leaders are kept to the letter…
(January 1960).
The union took selective strike action.
Management responded with a lockout.
Picketing was violent.
At its peak, 100,000 policemen confronted an equal number of union supporters, mobilized by the militant federation Sohyo.
One striker was killed and 1000 were injured.
But, with unions in all other coal companies, and in Mitsui's other mines, accepting management plans, the Miike workers were isolated.
Finally they had to accept the dismissals.
The struggle was seen as a trial of strength, and the employers' victory as decisive.
No major strike has occurred in large-scale private industry since.
Aggressive tactics by management and state support are not the only explanation for the employers' victory.
The trade union movement was immature.
Its roots among workers were shallow and the tactics of its leadership  weak.
The ease with which management could organize ‘second unions’ cannot be explained simply by intimidation, important though that was.
The wages system furnished employers with an important weapon.
Once the unions were in retreat, management increasingly used those elements of the pay packet based on age and ability to undermine them further.
Workers feared that opposition to the employer would lose them the ability bonus, which was increasingly determined by cooperativeness rather than skill.
If they were sacked they stood to lose old-age and long-service premiums.
These features of the wages system were strengthened (‘lifetime employment’, ‘seniority wages’) as the anti-union offensive gathered strength through the fifties.
By 1955, 39 per cent of pay was determined by ‘ability’(up from 26 per cent in 1947).
The wages system also helped to create a climate favourable for introducing ‘second unions’ through weakening worker solidarity.
An American observer noted in 1958:
In some cases companies introduced job classification and revised their wage structures based on job evaluations…
However in many cases it is doubtful whether these are anything other than the traditional wage system in a new disguise — for ‘merit’, ‘loyalty’ and ‘cooperation’, which are often tied to length of service have been used as major criteria for wage increases granted in this fashion…managements have not proceeded hastily towards full-blown wage rationalization because of their own concern with preserving worker identification with the enterprise…
Management has not been insistent on displacing the permanent/temporary worker system with job seniority procedures (i.e. first in/first out) because of its own sense of paternalistic responsibility and because of the flexibility of operations afforded by the employment of temporary workers.
(Levine, 1958, pp. 117–19).
In 1958 workers aged 20 to 25 earned less than half as much as those between 40 and 50 years old, as compared with around 60 per cent in the interwar period and in 1948.
Older workers, anxious to protect their ability bonuses, often supported the ‘second union’.
The successful introduction of these pro-management ‘second unions’ was as fundamental to Japan's subsequent economic success as the phenomenal accumulation rate.
9
A New, Managed Capitalism?
The astonishing economic achievements of the golden years led many to conclude that capitalism had undergone a qualitative transformation — that the bad old days of slumps and class antagonisms had been transcended for ever.
The most important expression of this view was the development in many countries of a broad political consensus, embracing the major parties of both left and right, and subscribed to by trade unions and employers' associations.
Its central feature was acceptance of the so-called mixed economy — that is, a capitalist framework within which state enterprise was tolerated and the government held responsible for managing the economy.
Broadly speaking, workers obtained certain rights and material benefits.
The most important rights were those to free trade unions and certain forms of representation.
The most important benefits were adequate job provision, regular pay rises and state welfare services.
In return, they did not question capitalist ownership or control.
Employers were prepared to tolerate these rights and provisions in return for a profitable economic environment.
Acceptance by the left of the basic parameters of the mixed economy was exemplified by Antony Crosland's book The Future of Socialism, published in 1956.
He argued:
Traditionally, or at least since Marx, socialist thought has been dominated by the economic problems posed by capitalism, poverty, mass unemployment, squalor, instability and even the possibility of the collapse of the whole system…
Capitalism has been reformed almost out of all recognition.
Despite occasional minor recessions and balance of payments crises, full employment and at least a tolerable degree of stability are likely to be maintained.
Automation can be expected steadily to solve any remaining problems of under production.
Looking ahead our present rate of growth will give us a national output three times as high in fifty years
(p. 517).
He also predicted that ‘any government which tampered with the basic framework of the full-employment welfare state would meet with a sharp reversal at the polls’(p. 61).
Three years earlier, Churchill had signalled a  similar acceptance on the part of the Tories when he said, ‘Party differences are now in practice mainly those of emphasis’(quoted Gilmour, 1977, p. 20).
The necessary analytic underpinning for the consensus was the belief that the state could manipulate the economy to achieve these goals, most importantly that it could always change spending to ensure full employment.
In later chapters we show that this was unrealistic as a long-term perspective — that the processes which maintained the boom inevitably also undermined it.
Here we look at some examples of attempts to reshape features of the economy within the parameters of the consensus.
The welfare state
The ultimate principle of the welfare state is well summarized by a French resistance declaration demanding ‘a complete plan of social security, designed to secure the means of existence for all French men and women wherever they are incapable of providing such means for themselves by working’(quoted Saint-Jours, 1982, p. 122).
The United Kingdom Beveridge report echoed the theme in more prosaic language: ‘Social insurance should aim at guaranteeing the minimum income needed for subsistence’(quoted Rimlinger, 1971, p. 149).
The principle is no invention of the 1940s, and the practice no innovation of the 1950s.
Large-scale social insurance — covering sickness, accidents and old-age pensions — was introduced in Germany in the 1880s following the Kaiser's announcement, inspired by Bismarck, that ‘the cure of social ills must be sought not exclusively in the repression of Social Democratic excess, but simultaneously in the positive advancement of the welfare of the working masses’(quoted Rimlinger, 1971, p. 114).
The first state-run programme of unemployment insurance was introduced in the United Kingdom by the Liberal government in 1911, with flat rates of benefit and contributions by employers, employees and the state.
A small non-contributory pension came in 1908 and health insurance in 1911.
After the First World War the coverage of unemployment insurance was extended and a contributory pension scheme was introduced.
In 1930 a scheme for social insurance was implemented in France, covering pensions, sickness and a system of family allowances.
Although not new, the welfare state did expand enormously in the postwar period.
The share of gross domestic product absorbed by government civil spending (a rather broader category than welfare spending, though debt interest and subsidies have been omitted) rose from 15 per cent in 1952 to 24 per cent in 1973.
This huge expansion was by no means carried out solely by governments of the left.
In the seven major countries the only periods of majority left governments between 1950 and 1973 were those of Wilson in the United  Kingdom (1964–70) and Brandt in Germany (1970–3), yet spending on welfare rose under Macmillan, Adenauer, de Gaulle, under both Nixon and Kennedy, as well as under a succession of Italian and to some extent even Japanese prime ministers of the right.
The expansion of welfare spending was noticeably faster in the sixties than the fifties — especially in Europe.
But, although this undoubtedly reflected increased working-class pressure as full employment was achieved, or approached (chapters 11 and 12), such pressure drew a response from right-wing governments as well as from those of the left elected as a direct result of it.
The welfare systems introduced in the immediate postwar years built on previous achievements.
Existing prewar schemes were generally restored or consolidated.
Even the United Kingdom Beveridge scheme had only a minor effect on unemployment insurance.
In the United States unemployment insurance, accident compensation and public assistance underwent no major changes.
The continuity with prewar schemes created important international diversities.
Thus the British scheme was based on flat-rate contributions and benefits, while the European and American ones varied with earnings.
But gaps in previous schemes were often plugged by incorporating innovations from abroad.
Family allowances, introduced in Britain in the Beveridge scheme, had been in operation in France since 1932.
(They were not reintroduced into Germany until 1954 because of their associations with Nazi population policy.)
Coverage was often broadened.
Schemes which had been confined to industrial workers before the war were typically extended to include the self-employed, farm workers and domestic servants.
In many cases, reduced contributions qualifications meant that more people became eligible for benefit.
(In the United States in the late 1940s, only one-fifth of the over-65s were insured or receiving pensions.)
Unemployment insurance in Europe generally became both more generous and easier to obtain.
Comparing the situation in 1975 with the year of introduction (generally prewar), on average the ratio of benefits to earnings had risen slightly, the duration of benefits had doubled to nearly a year, the delay before eligibility to benefit had halved (to two days), and the period of disqualification (on account of dismissal for misconduct, for example) had halved to about three weeks.
The one really radical innovation was the replacement in Britain of sickness insurance by the National Health Service (NHS), free as of right without means test or contribution (although prescription charges were introduced in 1950).
But this was unique in terms of universal supply based on need.
Elsewhere, earnings-related insurance, plus ‘social aid’ at a distinctly lower level for those not covered, continued prewar traditions.
An important development in the fifties was the linking of benefits to rising living standards.
This was most explicitly promulgated in the German pension reform of 1957, which Adenauer forced through to great electoral benefit, in  the teeth of strong opposition from the central bank and the employers.
But benefits were regularly revised upwards to similar effect elsewhere.
The same German reform reinforced the ‘insurance’ principle behind pensions, by tying them more closely to past contributions.
This eliminated the minimum pension level which had survived since Bismarck, and substantially widened differentials.
The British Labour Party also proposed replacing flat-rate contributions and benefits by a scheme aimed at raising pensions to a level equivalent to half of earnings.
A scheme of this sort was finally implemented in the seventies.
There was also a trend towards adding an earnings-related supplement to previously flat-rate unemployment benefits (for example, the United Kingdom) or moving to entirely earnings-related payments (Germany).
Pensions give some indication of the level of benefits by the early seventies.
For a married couple they were reckoned to be between 50 and 60 per cent of post-tax earnings in France, Germany and the United States, about one-third in Britain and Italy, and probably barely one-fifth in Japan.
For unemployment pay and sickness benefit the ratio averaged one-half higher.
Did the postwar development of the welfare state remould capitalism to give it a more human face, or were the changes largely cosmetic?
The answer is complex.
The new measures did bring about a large flow of resources to the disadvantaged.
By the early 1970s a typical continental European country was devoting a little over 20 per cent of GDP to social expenditure, the United States and United Kingdom 17–18 per cent, and Japan 10 per cent .
The extension of coverage, plugging of gaps, index-linking and softening of contribution eligibility criteria, brought enormous gains to many people.
Wider coverage accounts for well over half of the increase in the proportion of output devoted to welfare provision during the 1960s.
Cash benefits also rose faster than inflation, growing in line with average incomes (table 9.1).
But there were also important limitations.
The welfare state never came close to eliminating poverty.
On the basis of standardized poverty figures (a percentage of national earnings based on the average of national official poverty standards), in the early 1970s 3 per cent of the German population lived in poverty, 7½ per cent of the British, 13 per cent of the US, and 16 per cent of the French.
A crucial question about the growth of the welfare state is whether it undermined employers' control over labour by reducing the compulsion to work.
Two cases should be distinguished.
The one dear to the heart of the popular press is the possibility of individuals opting out of the labour market altogether to ‘sponge’ off the state.
By depriving employers of potential labour, this could force up wages.
The rise in real levels of social assistance which occurred in the boom could have made such opting out more feasible, even if the social assistance rates did not rise relative to earnings (which they generally did not — child benefit in particular fell substantially relative to average incomes).
Relaxation in eligibility criteria would also reduce the pressure on  able-bodied recipients to look for work.
However, the rise in pensions relative to incomes which occurred in most countries also increased the cost of not working — for the farsighted, at least— since pensions were generally linked to contributions from pay.
In fact, ‘social aid’(transfers to people not eligible for pensions, unemployment benefit and so forth) constituted only 5 per cent of all money spent on transfers in the early 1970s.
In the two countries where it was more important, the United States and United Kingdom, the proportion of transfers going to social aid hardly increased during the 1960s.
The low level of social assistance and the stigma attached to receiving it make it implausible that significant ‘scrounging’ took place.
Table 9.1
Growth of ACC welfare spending in the 1960s
However, the development of welfare benefits may well have reduced dependence on any particular employer.
Unemployment benefits on average rose in line with pre-tax incomes during the sixties.
But since the tax burden on earnings rose, there was probably some small rise in the net amount received while out of work, relative to pay received while working.
The benefits sometimes received by strikers' families also rose in absolute terms.
Health expenses were covered for those not in work.
So the financial hardships imposed by temporary unemployment or strikes fell.
This helped give workers the confidence to stand up to their employers — to quit or strike or be sacked seemed less daunting.
These developments should not be seen in isolation.
They reinforced others.
The most important factor reducing fear of the sack was the reduction in unemployment, which increased the chances of getting another job quickly.
Higher living standards enabled many workers to save a little, providing additional insurance against the financial costs of the sack, of quitting or of  striking.
The important rise in some countries in the proportion of families with two adults working acted in the same direction.
The tax burden imposed on workers to pay for welfare services opened up a gap between the cost of labour to the employer (the wage gross of employers' and employees' social security contributions and of income tax) and what the worker received (the wage net of all these deductions).
As the tax burden edged up, so did the gap widen between the sum that a pay settlement gave workers and what it cost employers.
Unions bargaining with individual employers, or at industry level, sought to maximize the return to their members for working, welfare benefits being unaffected by the negotiations.
So the rising tax ‘wedge’ heightened conflict over wages.
So, while growth of the welfare state hardly loosened the compulsion on workers to work, it did undermine dependence on any particular employer and provided an additional source of conflict, in the course of which such greater independence could be exercised.
German codetermination
The right of workers to organized representation was another important feature of the consensus.
This usually took the form of institutionalized collective bargaining between trade unions and employers.
But in Germany it also involved the apparently more advanced form of ‘codetermination’, which aroused considerable interest.
This interest stems in part from Germany's outstanding economic record in the boom.
Did codetermination contribute to its ‘economic miracle’?
But there is also another reason for the interest.
From the mid-1970s, left parties came increasingly to adopt a more radical approach to the consensus (chapter 18).
One feature of this shift was an emphasis on industrial democracy, which drew heavily on principles of codetermination.
Codetermination — the right of workers to help direct the firms they work in was a major preoccupation of German trade unions in the years after the war (chapter 6).
At first they regarded it as a prerequisite for the socialization of large-scale heavy industry.
Then, as the German economy was firmly steered towards a reconstructed capitalism, codetermination was presented as a substitute for socialization — an alternative way of assuring that big  business would never again play the political role it had in the thirties.
Codetermination received enormous support.
In 1950 and 1951 well over 90 per cent of metal workers and miners voted in favour of strike action to secure a special codetermination law for their industries.
The system involved workers electing half of the members of supervisory boards, with the shareholders electing the rest and appointing a ‘neutral’ chair.
The workers could also veto (in effect, nominate) the labour director, responsible broadly for personnel questions.
Outside the steel and coal  industries, workers could elect one-third of the supervisory board.
In all industries works councils, elected by the employees, had the right to ‘codetermine’ some issues (working hours, holidays, implementation of pay scales), to veto others (hirings, job classification, transfers), to be consulted over yet others (mass redundancies, individual dismissals) and to receive economic information (profits, production, investment).
But workers' influence has been more constrained than these provisions might suggest.
The labour director in steel and coal firms is a member of the management board which controls the day-to-day operations of the firm (the other members being the production and business managers).
His or her mandate generally covers most of the issues over which the works council has codetermination rights but excludes questions of incentives and job evaluation.
These labour directors may well have initiated enlightened personnel policies, but that is a long way from real worker representation in the overall direction of the firm:
The labour director is charged in law with carrying out his function in the best interests of the firm as a whole.
Since he is chosen by workers he is theoretically subject to extensive loyalty conflict.
Most labour directors have resolved this conflict by operating as responsible managers rather than as worker agents per se.
They have been most successful when they have been able to win the trust and acceptance of the other management board members.
When they have not been able to do so they have been isolated and their influence has been drastically reduced ’
(Adams and Rummel, 1977, p. 12).
The worker members of the supervisory board are elected partly by the works council and partly by the trade unions.
Outside steel and coal, minority representation means that the committees are usually balanced to favour the employer, and information is restricted.
The general consensus is that worker influence on these boards has been limited.
Furthermore, minimal communication between the board members and the workers seems to take place, with board members legally bound to secrecy over ‘sensitive’ company matters.
So it would be hard, if not impossible, for worker representatives to mobilize the work force against the employers.
Nor can the works councils do so.
Failure to agree over ‘social matters’ in which they have codetermination rights, such as holiday schedules or welfare provision, results in arbitration.
Disagreements over the important personnel issues of hiring, firing, classification or redeployment are resolved in the Labour Court.
Works councils have to be consulted over mass lay-offs but have no right to call strikes.
Certain weaknesses are clear.
Workers' representatives are often removed from the shop floor, which cannot mandate them.
Their access to information is limited and their right to use it even more so, as are their areas of influence and the sanctions they can use.
Nor does codetermination appear to have done much to improve work conditions.
‘Exhausting physical effort, excessive heat, hazardous safety and  health conditions have been far less points of attention (and redress) than in the American steel industry, and at least straight-time workers endure a high measure of personal…coercion (speed-up in one word) by supervision’(Herding, 1972, pp. 329–30).
This despite the fact that, as the same author notes, in codetermination plants ‘work crews in the key operations enjoy a high degree of autonomy in setting their own pace, breaks, etc.’(p. 330).
One survey reported that workers regard works councils as a part of management.
But workers participate heavily in elections.
Turnouts of 80 per cent are typical.
Pressure for increased influence resulted in a 1972 Act which extended codetermination rights in a number of personnel matters, such as employment contracts and training.
A 1976 Act extended a weakened form of parity codetermination to all firms with more than 2000 employees.
It is weaker than in steel and coal because one of the worker nominees must be a senior executive and the chair, a shareholder nominee, has two votes.
The employers clearly had strong reservations.
They went to court and tried, unsuccessfully, to have the 1976 Act declared unconstitutional.
However limited, codetermination does serve to remind employers both of the days when their prerogatives were generally and seriously challenged and of the fact that such a situation could recur.
French economic planning
The characteristic attitude in large-scale economic management, both inside government and in the private sector, which has made itself increasingly felt during the post-war period, is the pursuit of intellectual coherence.
Its most obvious manifestation is in long-range national planning…
Economic planning is the most characteristic expression of the new capitalism
(Shonfield, 1965, pp. 67, 121).
This view from the author of Modern Capitalism — at the time probably the most influential interpretation of postwar trends in the advanced countries — was fully in line with the consensus.
If governments were to manage the new capitalism then economic planning was clearly of the essence.
Shonfield singled out France as the innovator in the field.
So what was French planning?
Most governments manipulated tax rates and government expenditure to influence the overall level of spending in the economy.
But this Keynesian demand management could not dispel much of the economic uncertainty faced by business.
Keynes himself had argued for ‘the collection and dissemination on a great scale of data relating to the business situation including full publicity, by law if necessary, of all business facts which it is useful to know.
These measures would involve society in exercising directive intelligence through some appropriate organ of action over many of the intricacies of private business, yet it would leave private initiative and enterprise unhindered’(quoted Estrin and Holmes, 1983, p. 8).
Precisely this kind of  ‘generalized market research’ lay at the heart of French planning.
Its consistency and coherence were supposed to encourage a common view about the future to which firms would respond with bold investment plans — nudged, if necessary, by government tax and credit policies.
The process evolved from the Monnet Plan for the reconstruction of six basic sectors, formulated at the end of 1945 to persuade the US government that the French were sufficiently serious about modernization to justify a loan (chapter 4).
Modernization Commissions, the basic planning units, brought together civil servants and managers (the trade unionists involved have never played a major role) to thrash out targets for output and investment.
This process continued to form the basis for planning.
But hit-and-miss targets were increasingly replaced by sophisticated forecasts for individual industries' markets based on aims for the overall growth of the economy and its division into private consumption, government spending and so forth.
The Monnet Plan itself undoubtedly facilitated the reconstruction of the basic sectors.
The Americans were persuaded to allow the ‘counterpart funds’ to Marshall Aid to be used for these purposes, and their backing helped Monnet to protect the investment targets from the deflationary policies of the time.
The fact that three of the six sectors were nationalized — coal, electricity and railways — helped.
Their own programmes were incorporated in the plan, which must have reduced scepticism and helped in obtaining priority finance.
The impact on the private sector — the real test — is harder to assess.
Proposals for ‘state contracts with trade associations, groups of concerns or, in exceptional cases, individual enterprises’(Kuisel, 1981, p. 234) or even the nationalization of recalcitrant firms were never implemented.
Nor could they have been after business regained its initiative in 1947.
Controls over foreign exchange, credits and scarce materials could hardly force anybody to expand.
Yet, one member of Monnet's team remembered that plan as having ‘ably manoeuvred a reluctant steel industry to modernize’(Kuisel, 1981, p. 245).
Jacques Delors, later to be minister of finance in Mitterrand's socialist government, records that when Monnet first gathered the steel masters together and demanded the reconstitution of prewar production capacity within four years, ‘Two or more cases of heart seizure reportedly ensued’(Delors, 1978, p. 15).
Nevertheless, the target was reached only a year late.
When in 1951 he demanded another 40 per cent expansion, ‘that did not work at all, since these steel masters had been so nourished on Malthusianism that their dominant fear was over-production.
In this case, the planning response was not simply financial incentives, but direct intervention to change the steel cartel itself…
If you reproduce this anecdote some ten or twenty times in different industries, you begin to explain the role of the Plan during this first period’(Delors, 1978).
Judging the effect of subsequent plans on the private sector becomes even harder as the number of commissions, and the equations in the planning models, grow.
The evidence shows that firms took notice of the plan, at least by the 1960s.
In 1967, 79 per cent of firms knew the plan's forecasts for the economy as a whole and 50 per cent(85 per cent of those with more than 5000 employees) knew of the production and investment forecasts for their industry group; 24 per cent (51 per cent of the biggest) said that the plan forecasts affected their investment decisions.
There seems to be a consensus that the plan did encourage accumulation, at least up to the late sixties.
‘According to the witnesses we have consulted, it seems likely that the growth expectations set forth in the Second National Plan (1954–57) were in contradiction to the conventional wisdom at the beginning of the 1950s, which expected that only low rates of growth were possible…
The picture of a growing economy provided by the Plan, in which production was sure of finding sales, probably played a significant part in the resumption of growth after 1952’(Carré et al., 1976, p. 471).
A sophisticated statistical evaluation suggested that in the late fifties and early sixties the plan provided better pictures of the evolution of the economy than would have been derived simply by extrapolating past trends.
But it seems likely that the importance of the plan in creating a ‘growth climate’ diminished as the experience of rapid growth meant that business came to expect it anyway.
This in itself, however, would be success of a sort.
Even if the Plan's effect on the level of accumulation was bound to diminish, it could still have significantly influenced its pattern.
At least until the early 1970s, however, the government made no systematic attempt to shape the pattern of industry.
The Fifth National Plan's objective of greater concentration to achieve two or three dominant firms —‘national champions’— in each sector, for example, was entirely non-selective.
The government did not choose the firms; it simply changed legal and tax rules to help mergers.
Mechanisms for selective intervention were available.
The planners could determine the availability of finance: ‘Every single externally financed project was therefore meant to be scrutinized for conformity with the targets and if the projects passed this test the Commission would see to it that sufficient tax and credit incentives would be made available’(Estrin and Holmes, 1983, p. 179).
But, since there was no overall industrial strategy, it is hardly surprising that the finance tended to be granted almost automatically.
What of the pattern of investment within each industry?
According to one observer: ‘There is in general no noticeable discrepancy between the target of the branch and the sum of the targets of the individual companies’(quoted Cohen, 1969, p. 68).
This means that ‘The French system of detailed target planning involves…the toleration of agreements between firms to fix the share each will take of the planned expansion’(Cohen, 1969, pp. 71–2).
During the 1950s and 1960s, Plan forecasts for business investment were always well below the outcome.
Between 1965 and 1970, for example, business investment grew by 8.5 per cent a year, while only 5.8 per cent a year had been expected.
The discrepancy was systematically much larger than that for  production growth.
This suggests that firms may have formally agreed to share out capacity growth, but then invested to increase their share.
Such investment over and above plan targets must have speeded up modernization.
All in all, planning may have temporarily acted as a catalyst in launching French capital on its dynamic growth path.
It certainly did not create the potential for that path, which was provided by the backward state of French industry, the strong position of the employers and favourable external circumstances (chapters 2, 4 and 6).
It probably played only a small role in maintaining accumulation once that got going.
And planning certainly proved incapable of maintaining accumulation once conditions became unfavourable.
In the seventies, growth faltered in France as elsewhere.
The credibility of the plan was undermined by its increasing unrealism, the clear political motivation behind its projections and the resort by governments to orthodox deflationary policies.
By 1979 only 9 per cent of employers regarded the Plan as very important.
Even recession-hit industries wanted less planning rather than more.
In France, as elsewhere, capital preferred to ditch the consensus in favour of more traditional capitalist virtues.
But the trade unions strongly criticized the erosion of planning and ‘regretted the lack of any attempt to articulate real priorities other than the need to submit to world market forces’(Estrin and Holmes, 1983, p. 116).
This survey reported a ‘nostalgia’ among socialists for the Fourth National Plan of the early sixties.
When elected in 1981, the Mitterrand government harked back to the legacy of planning in the first postwar decades (chapter 18).
Japanese industrial policy
The lack of an industrial policy is generally regarded as a weakness of French planning.
Japan is often cited as the prime example of a successful industrial policy playing a key role in the dynamism of accumulation.
Was Japan's industrial structure successfully orchestrated by the bureaucrats of its Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)?
General measures to stimulate accumulation in Japan differed little in kind or degree from those employed elsewhere.
The government provided investment finance directly through such institutions as the Japan Development Bank.
But even at their early fifties peak, these funds constituted only 7 per cent of industrial finance (12 per cent of that raised outside the firm).
By the second half of the fifties the proportion had declined to 4 per cent.
The government also provided a multitude of tax concessions which at their 1955 peak probably reduced average corporation-tax liability by one-fifth, falling to around 12 per cent in the early sixties.
Many were fairly standard provisions for bad debts, and so forth.
The more innovative included accelerated depreciation on ‘special machinery’, ‘special repairs’(to heavy plant), research and development, exemption from tax on income from sales of ‘important new products’, exemption from customs duty on ‘important equipment’ and exemption of certain exports from income tax.
But they reduced tax payments by only 6 per cent during the years 1959 to 1963.
Such aggregate figures could be misleading, however.
Both government lending and tax concessions were highly selective, being steered towards particular industries.
Government favour also helped firms secure loans from private banks.
Tariffs and prohibition of foreign firms from setting up in Japan were further important weapons.
The Japanese government decided on a number of occasions to foster particular industries, using a large armoury of policies.
A few case studies illustrate the process.
It was clear after the war that Japan could no longer rely on textile exports for most of its foreign exchange earnings (chapter 2).
So it adopted a policy of fostering basic ‘heavy industries’(steel, chemicals, shipbuilding).
After 1947 a policy of ‘planned shipbuilding’ operated.
Every year the government announced the total tonnage to be built of each type of ship and selected which shipbuilders and (domestic) owners should be involved.
A high percentage of the funds required (80 per cent or more in the early fifties) was supplied cheaply by the Japan Development Bank.
The interest rate subsidy sometimes involved deferral of repayment for 15 years.
Cheap loans to finance exports were ‘perhaps the most significant assistance to shipbuilding’(Magaziner and Hout, 1980, p. 69).
The companies also profited from a bizarre system whereby shipbuilders who exported were given import quotas for raw sugar, which could be sold at a hefty profit.
The result was Japan's first ‘miracle’ industry.
By the early seventies Japanese yards were launching over half the world's ships.
Steel, also designated as a key recovery sector immediately after the war, was a key input into major export industries such as ships (and in turn the development of huge ore-carrying ships allowed the Japanese steel industry to overcome a major disadvantage in transport costs for materials).
In the 1950s the industry expanded under two five-year ‘rationalization plans’ developed by the industry together with MITI.
Steel benefited from major government loans, accounting for half its borrowing during the first five-year plan.
Ten per cent of its finances still came from government sources in the early sixties.
It also received a host of tax concessions.
The government has been continuously involved in the process of capacity expansion:
Representatives of the privately owned steel producing firms gather under the umbrella of the Japan Iron and Steel Federation to present and discuss tentative investment plans for the coming year.
(Often these representatives, usually managing directors, are MITI alumni.)
The producers' plans are evaluated in relation to the demand outlook for the industry and the existing pattern of market shares.
After these meetings and informal discussions among these managers and the officials of the Iron and Steel Section of MlTl's Heavy Industries Bureau, the  presidents of the steel companies try to reach a consensus on the rate and timing of the major investments of individual producers.
MITI participates ex officio in these meetings…
After consensus has been reached, MITI issues a report recommending a course of action to the industry…
It has been said that no application from a major firm for a capacity increment has ever been flatly rejected, although some have been delayed.
This, of course, is the mechanism of the consensus process: the expanding firm is persuaded either to delay its application or to accept a delayed approval.
When this persuasion fails, consensus is frustrated.
(Magaziner and Hout, 1980, p. 48).
Strikingly, MITI frequently tried to slow down the rate of accumulation to avoid overcapacity, a problem exacerbated by the increasing size of new plants which reduced the number to be built each year.
In 1965, Sumitomo, which has tried to remain independent of MITI's ‘administrative guidance’, broke with an industry decision to delay all new investment in rolling facilities.
MITI disciplined it by limiting its allocation of imported coking coal.
In 1967 ‘eight steel makers sought approval to begin building new furnaces, but according to MITI's projections only two were needed.
Five received approval, one with a year's delay’(Kaplan, 1975, p. 148?.
This prompted MITI to seek mergers.
But the resultant creation of Japan Steel ‘only served to consolidate two conservative producers.
The impact on the other producers, at least Sumitomo and Kawasaki, who did not oppose the merger, may have been counter-productive in stimulating continued aggressive expansion’(Kaplan, 1975, p. 151).
The value of government support to the industry cannot be measured in terms of cash expenditures.
By the judicious application of support in the areas where it could be most effective, government has done a great deal for the industry.
Selective measures — help through the insurance of debt for building greenfield plants, assistance in procuring raw materials and forming anti-recession cartels have provided support without extinguishing competition or stifling initiative in individual companies.
Even capacity expansion co-operation has been carried out in such a way as to allow substantial continued internal competition and even greater market share changes than occurred in the United States.
The actual flow of funds from government to the industry represented by loans, grants and tax allowances has been minimal, at least since the late 1950s.
Per ton of steel, such assistance has been substantially less than that supplied by many European governments (often to subsidize the losses of uncompetitive plants) '
(Magaziner and Hout, 1980, p. 54).
Steel was certainly another Japanese success story.
By 1977 Japan had 25 blast-furnaces in operation with a capacity of over 2 million tons.
The EEC had seven and the United States none.
In the early 1950s the Japanese motor industry consisted of a handful of clapped-out truck producers, rescued from bankruptcy by the Korean war.
The Japanese central bank originally favoured car imports.
But MITI argued that a  domestic industry should be nurtured because of its critical importance, and won.
The government's key role in the early days was to protect the industry.
Foreign investment was more or less prohibited (it had to contribute to the development of the domestic industry).
Quotas at first restricted imports to $½ million a year.
In the mid-1960s quotas were replaced by prohibitively high tariffs.
Import of foreign technology was encouraged, with the stipulation that 90 per cent of licensed parts be produced domestically within five years.
Nissan was the only major producer to enter into a licensing agreement (with Austin).
Toyota developed its own system of organizing work (see chapter 15).
The industry benefited from access to Japan Development Bank loans, and various tax concessions.
But MITI ‘played little or no role in the investment policies or technological development activities of the producers’(Kaplan, 1975, p. 116).
MITI helped to promote streamlining in the parts industries over the years 1956 to 1966, aimed at modernization and rationalization of the number of suppliers.
But it failed comprehensively to push through various plans for mergers between the assemblers.
Instead of merging with each other, or one of the bigger concerns, in the early seventies three of the smaller firms signed affiliation agreements with the American Big Three as MITI opposition was overcome by political pressure for foreign capital liberalization.
Today Japan is the biggest car exporter in the world.
Finally, there is the computer industry, which ‘MITI has unequivocably dominated’(Kaplan, 1975, p. 78).
IBM was granted the right to manufacture in Japan in 1960 in return for licensing basic patents to Japanese manufacturers, and most major Japanese companies entered technical assistance agreements with big American manufacturers.
By the mid-1960s MITI recognized the importance of the industry by increasing loans and subsidies and embarking on a series of attempts to rationalize the industry and/or organize cooperative ventures.
The culmination was the Very Large-Scale Integration project involving MITI's electronics research institute, the state and telecommunications laboratory and five major computer manufacturers.
MITI's attempts at consolidation failed to overcome the firms' competitive attitude (indicating limitations to MITI's ‘dominance’).
As well as assisting technology development, MITI organized a leasing corporation to lease only Japanese computers on competitive terms to those available abroad.
The industry was protected until the early 1970s by the rule that foreign machines (including IBM machines produced in Japan) could only be purchased if a suitable Japanese model was not available.
While Japanese computers were hardly a factor in the boom years, they were to become a major force in the 1980s.
It is difficult to draw a neat conclusion.
MITI clearly pushed strongly to develop certain key industries.
It provided finance, ensured protection and, on occasion, encouraged technological development.
In a few cases, such as steel, it effectively  coordinated expansion plans.
On the other hand MITI seems to have been rather unsuccessful in securing rationalization through mergers.
MITI sometimes held back accumulation in  the steel industry.
In the other cases it played a facilitating rather than a decisive role.
Moreover, the case studies reported, where MITI was highly influential, were not entirely typical: ‘Some of the rapidly expanding ‘new’ industries, the products of which have been increasingly exported all over the world — such as motor cycles, bearings (especially miniature bearings), transistor radios, TV sets, tape recorders, pianos and zippers — received relatively little government assistance even in their infancy periods.
By and large these industries were able to stand up by themselves, with little government protection or planning' (Komiya, 1975, pp. 219–20).
Clearly, industrial policy cannot fully explain the extraordinary dynamism of Japanese accumulation.
Other factors were at work (Chapter 8).
Conclusions
The boom saw the generalization and expansion of state welfare provisions, unprecedented attempts by governments to plan for economic growth and shape industrial structures, and some experiments in worker involvement in the direction of enterprises.
The most important point to recognize, however, is that these developments did not substantially undermine the essential relationships underpinning capitalist economies.
Despite the increased strength of labour, as reflected in welfare provisions and moves towards ‘industrial democracy’, workers were still obliged to sell their labour power to employers whose freedom of action they might be able to limit, but certainly not control.
Despite the growing importance of state intervention through macroeconomic planning and industrial policies, the essential decisions about investment were still taken by the controllers of private capital, on the basis of private profitability.
Perhaps the most important aspect of attempts to manage the ‘mixed economy’ during the golden years was that people believed they could work.
This helped maintain confidence, which in turn helped maintain accumulation.
Accumulation generated jobs, regular increases in living standards, resources for welfare and profits.
These in turn reproduced the consensus.
When the boom conditions began to disintegrate, the economic logic of capitalist production reasserted itself in a very brutal fashion (chapter 14).
But the development of state intervention in the course of the boom had an important effect on reactions to growing economic difficulties.
Many on the right blamed the breakdown of the boom precisely on government interference (chapter 17).
The left, by contrast, saw the greater worker and state involvement in the economy as a pointer to how the crisis could be resolved in the interests of working people (chapter 18).
In this way the patterns set in the boom left their imprint firmly on the years of mass unemployment which followed.
10
The Eclipse of US Domination
Our discussion of the dynamics of the boom in chapter 8 focused on the advanced capitalist countries as a group.
Of course the boom was very uneven between countries; the wave of accumulation in Japan was more powerful than elsewhere.
By far the most important aspect of this uneven development was the undermining of the economic dominance of the United States.
This chapter discusses some aspects and implications of this process.
Table 10.1
Weight of the US economy.
1950–70 (percentages)
At the beginning of the boom the economic might of the United States was overwhelming (table 10.1 and figure 10.1).
In 1952 nearly 60 per cent of the production of the ACCs was located there, produced by around 33 per cent of the total number of workers operating over half of the business capital stock.
Careful studies of the total level of output per head of the population in 1950 suggested that, taking the United States as 100, the United Kingdom scored  55, France 46, Germany 37 and Italy 25.
In coal mining US productivity was somewhere between four and five times greater than that in either the United Kingdom or Germany and about seven times as great as in France.
In manufacturing the USA was over twice as productive per worker as Britain and over three times as productive as Germany; the differential was much greater in relation to Japan.
In 1950 the USA produced seven times as many manufactures as Germany and over 20 times as many as Japan; in 1953 it exported five times as many manufactures as Germany and 17 times as many as Japan.
In 1957 only seven non-US firms were in the biggest 50 in the world.
Figure 10.1
Shares of ACC production, 1952–70 (percentage).
The dominance of US business was more overwhelming in the early fifties than the statistics for exports suggest.
US exports were still constrained in Europe and Japan by a welter of trade and monetary restrictions, directed specifically at US products.
Although the dismantling of these restrictions was a United States priority, enshrined in the IMF and GATT agreements, the debacles of the 1940s over premature opening up of trade and payments (chapter 4) dictated a more measured pace for liberalization linked to the export capacity of Europe and Japan.
With free trade and payments in the early fifties, the United States would have tended to secure a far greater share of world trade.
Balance could only have been achieved by further devaluation of European currencies against the dollar.
The growth of trade
The years of the boom saw a phenomenal explosion of trade.
Between 1951–3 and 1969–71 the volume of world trade in manufactures grew by 349 per cent whereas the volume of output grew by 194 per cent.
The ACCs expanded their exports of manufacturing by 480 per cent between 1950 and 1971.
By far the fastest growing part of that enormous growth was in the form of trade between the various advanced countries (table 10.2); their exports to the underdeveloped countries and the Eastern bloc grew far more slowly.
Table 10.2
Exports of manufactures, 1950–71 ($ billion, 1955 prices)
Table 10.3
Import penetration by manufactures, 1913–71 (percentages)
The effect of this explosion of trade between the advanced countries was to increase sharply the proportion of imported manufactured goods consumed inside these countries.
Within Europe in particular, ‘import penetration’ rose far above the levels of the early fifties, which in turn were similar to the very low levels of the interwar period (table 10.3).
The levels reached by 1971 exceeded even the considerable levels achieved before the First World War.
In the United States, however, the rise in import penetration, all of which occurred in the 1960s, represented the first serious incursion this century by imported manufactured goods.
Only Japan, of the major exporters, remained virtually impervious to import penetration — all the phenomenal growth of manufactured  exports being devoted to paying for the soaring import bill for materials (chapter 12)
For the industrial countries as a whole, around half the increase in imported manufactures between the years 1950 and 1963 represented greater import penetration of the domestic market and half reflected a larger market; between 1963 and 1971, when trade between the advanced countries grew by 156 per cent, almost two-thirds of the increase represented imports taking a greater share of the domestic market.
A major development encouraging trade between the advanced countries was tariff cuts.
The reduction of tariff barriers after the formation of the EEC in 1958 increased trade by the order of 25–35 per cent.
Within EFTA (the free trade zone formed by seven of the non-EEC European countries, including at that time the United Kingdom) lower barriers resulted in extra imports of around 10–15 per cent for the countries concerned.
The Kennedy round of cuts in the later sixties saw the average level of tariffs on manufactures falling by one-third, and by half on machinery and vehicles.
Very high rates of tariff covering about 7 per cent of goods in the United States and United Kingdom almost disappeared, and the proportion of trade (excluding agriculture and fuels) which attracted tariffs of 15 per cent or less rose from 54 per cent to 85 per cent in the USA, from 37 per cent to 85 per cent in the United Kingdom and from 71 per cent to 97 per cent for the EEC.
Additional imports generated may have been around 15 per cent for the United Kingdom, rather less for the EEC but a good deal more for the United States.
Some of the rise in import penetration would undoubtedly have occurred anyway, especially in the fifties when non-tariff restrictions were dismantled and firms took advantage of falling transport costs and rapid growth of demand to break into new markets.
But still tariff cuts in the sixties were certainly an important influence on the trade during the period.
Only the Japanese market remained more or less impenetrable.
International oligopoly
This great expansion of trade and competition between the advanced capitalist countries outweighed the trend within each country or bloc towards more monopolization.
The data are patchy, but indicate a steady, if unspectacular, rise in concentration.
Data for the USA, EEC and Japan all point to an increase in the share of manufacturing output accounted for by the largest firms (figure 10.2).
Whatever impact this increased monopolization had in reducing the degree of competition in domestic markets was swamped in most instances by the greater challenge from imports.
Indeed, much of the merger movement within countries was a reaction to the strengthening of overseas competition.
Figure 10.2
Share of manufacturing output produced by top firms, 1960, 1970 (percentage).
US business slips back
The United States orchestrated the great increase in trade in order to take advantage of its overwhelming postwar strength.
Yet it was US business, together with its partner in decline, the United Kingdom, which of all the major ACCs gained least from the boom in trade (figure 10.3 and table 10.4).
Table 10.4
Growth of export volumes, 1953–71 (average annual percentage growth rates)
The fundamental problem faced by US business was that rivals in Europe and Japan were accumulating capital at a far faster rate (figure 10.4) and were doing so on the basis of far lower wage costs (table 10.5).
Between 1955 and 1970 the capital stock in US manufacturing rose by 74 per cent; in the major European countries the rise was 115 per cent , and in Japan it was some 500 per cent .
Taking into account the rise in employment, the rise in capital stock per head (an index of increased mechanization) was 51 per cent in the United States, 90 per cent in Europe, and 202 per cent in Japan (figure 10.5).
New investment per employed worker in US manufacturing in 1955 was running at about 1.6 times the European level, and nearly five times that of Japan; by 1970 US manufacturing was investing about the same per worker as European industry and one-third less than Japanese.
In the United States average productivity rose by about one-third between 1955 and 1970, in Japan it rose by five times and in Europe it doubled.
But even this productivity explosion did not bring the average level of European and Japanese manufacturing productivity up to that of the United States (figure 10.6).
The estimates in table 10.1 suggest that even in 1970 US manufacturing was still about twice as productive as its rivals.
But the crucial point is that old plants in the USA, and in some industries not only the old plants, were increasingly faced with the challenge of new plants in Europe and Japan with techniques and labour productivity approaching US levels, but with far lower wage costs.
In 1960 hourly manufacturing labour costs, including social security contributions, were around three times as high in the USA as in Europe, and ten times as high as in Japan.
Even the far faster growth of money wages outside the USA in the years up to 1970 left capital in Europe and Japan with a huge advantage in terms of labour costs (table 10.5).
Figure 10.3
Shares of ACC exports of manufactures, 1953–71 (percentage).
Figure 10.4
Business capital stock, 1952–70 ($ billion, 1980 prices, log scale).
Figure 10.5
Manufacturing capital per worker, 1952–70 ($ thousand, per head, 1980 prices, log scale).
Table 10.5
Hourly labour costs in manufacturing, 1960–70 (percentage of US level)
Figure 10.6
Relative manufacturing productivity, 1952–70 (percentage of US level).
Low accumulation at home
The low rate of accumulation in the United States is undoubtedly a crucial symptom of the declining relative strength of US business.
But the explanation can hardly lie in low profits.
In manufacturing industry where the US decline was sharpest, the rate of profit (before taxation) seems to have been significantly higher than in the rest of the ACCs (28 per cent over the years 1955–70 as against 23 per cent elsewhere).
While high US labour costs and productivity appear to have had roughly offsetting effects, leaving the share of profits similar in the United States to elsewhere, the output-capital ratio was much higher in the USA, suggesting very efficient organization of production (including shift-working).
Taxation appears to have taken a higher fraction of profits in the United States than in some other countries (around one-half in the USA in 1960 as against about one-third in Japan).
This did not reflect higher state spending.
Over the period 1952–70 government spending on civil and military programmes comprised 26 per cent of GDP in both the United States and the rest of the major ACCs.
Certainly the weight of military spending was much greater (9.4 per cent of GDP as against 3.9 per cent), but this was balanced by lower spending on civil programmes, especially social security transfers, which took 8.6 per cent of GDP in other countries and only 5.
I per cent in the USA.
Whatever disadvantages US capital faced in terms of policing the ‘free world’ were more or less offset by lower state spending on welfare.
In any case, shortage of profits is quite implausible as an explanatory factor.
Companies in the countries which were accumulating rapidly were investing much more than their retained profits — borrowing the rest from the banks or money market.
Thus Japanese companies in the early sixties were financing more than 40 per cent of their investment by tapping external sources of funds; French firms borrowed one-third of the funds they needed and German firms probably did the same.
But US companies only ploughed back into new investment a sum equal to their profits.
They undoubtedly could have borrowed more and expanded their capital stock faster.
If they had done so, the economy would have retained a much fuller utilization of capacity, which in turn would have increased the companies' profits (from 1957 to 1963 the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing averaged only 80.5 per cent, nearly 12 per cent less than the peak achieved in 1966).
So why did US companies fail to invest at a higher rate?
Perhaps part of the answer lies in the fact that much of the new technology which had been developed before and during the war had already been incorporated into the capital stock.
The existing technology may not have offered sufficient new opportunities, in contrast to Europe and Japan where the combination of backward technology and low wages offered great scope for profitable modernization.
But even if the relative lack of profitable investment opportunities goes some way to explaining the poor investment rate, then if US business had felt itself under more pressure, it might have made greater efforts to improve technology.
In the early sixties, the United States was spending roughly 2¾ per cent of GDP on research and development (R and D) as compared with 1.5–2 per cent in continental Europe and Japan.
But about half of US R and D was financed by the federal government, 80 per cent of which went for space and military purposes.
Indeed it was precisely the industries which most benefited from this R and D (aerospace, electronics) which maintained their world lead most effectively.
Other sectors such as steel and cars were more complacent.
All this suggests that lack of competitive pressure felt by US business played an important role in the loss of its pre-eminent position The structure of domestic industry was probably dominated by fewer firms than in Japan or the EEC taken as a whole.
But this is a crude indicator, at best, for how business  behaves.
Industries dominated by very few giant firms may be ferociously competitive; these few firms may invest at very high rates, as in Japan.
The comparative stability of the oligopolistic structure in the United States may well have bred a complacency which Japanese and German capitalists, faced with rebuilding their position on world markets almost from scratch, could never afford.
Once US firms followed a path of low accumulation, there was a strong tendency for them to stay on it.
Wages were only pulled up slowly, implying weak pressure to scrap old plant and replace it with new.
By contrast, rapid accumulation, such as occurred in Japan, forces its logic on each individual firm.
In that situation failure to accumulate in the face of rapidly rising real wage costs spells disaster.
US business appears to have been locked into a pattern of low accumulation from which it proved difficult to escape even when the rising tide of competition began, in the sixties, to have a noticeable effect in the domestic US market.
Investment abroad
However sluggish it was in its domestic investment, US business did respond to the possibilities for profitable investment in Europe by a wave of overseas investment.
The total book value of US direct investment overseas rose from $12 billion in 1950 to $78 billion in 1970.
Manufacturing investment in Europe, to gain access to the cheaper labour and to escape the external tariff after the formation of the EEC in 1958, grew fastest, rising from $1 billion in 1950 to $14 billion in 1970.
Three aspects of this ‘American Challenge’, as it was called, need emphasizing.
First, it never represented a major investment outlet for US business as a whole.
Taking the years 1956–70, if all (net) US direct investment overseas had instead been invested in the United States, gross private investment there would have increased only by around 4 per cent.
Second, this investment abroad was not financed out of domestic profits; over the same period US business received profits from its past investment overseas equivalent to around 1¼ times as much as it was sending overseas.
While switching towards Europe (where 31 per cent of US direct investment was located in 1970 as compared to 15 per cent in 1955) from Latin America (where the share fell from 38 per cent to 19 per cent) and from mining and petroleum to manufacturing (32 per cent in 1950, 41 per cent in 1970), on average US overseas investment more than financed itself.
Third, while of modest significance for US business as a whole, overseas investment was much more important for the giant multinational enterprises.
Over the period 1957–65 for US manufacturing, extra sales by overseas subsidiaries counted for an estimated 13 per cent of the total increase in production (additional exports accounted for only a trivial 2 per cent).
For a sample of giant US firms, increased production by their subsidiaries overseas  represented 29 per cent of additional sales.
By 1966, 20 per cent of their total sales was accounted for by overseas subsidiaries.
In 1972 an estimated 22.5 per cent of US multinationals' production took place overseas.
In that year petroleum, office and photographic equipment multinationals (mainly American) reported overseas production ratios of 58 per cent, 41 per cent and 37 per cent respectively.
The fact that they tapped in to the rapidly expanding European market undoubtedly helped the giant US firms to offset some of the effects of slow domestic growth.
Nevertheless, they still grew substantially more slowly than their rivals from the EEC and Japan, even in the crucial high-research-intensity sectors (table 10.6).
This eroded the extent to which the giant US firms towered over the rest.
In 1957, 74 out of the top 100 firms were from the United States; in 1972 the figure was 53.
The sales of the largest 100 US firms were nearly double the sales of the largest 100 non-US firm in 1962; in 1972 they were only 40 per cent more.
Since the US firms were usually the largest, their slower growth of sales led to a reduced concentration in the industries concerned — measured by the sales of the top three firms as a proportion of the top 20.
In 11 out of 16 industries the concentration ratio declined, reflecting the greater degree of competition as European and Japanese firms began to match US firms for size.
To take the case of cars, in 1962 the big three US producers accounted for 67.5 per cent of the sales of the top 20 producers; in 1972 the share was 58.1 per cent.
In 1957 the biggest three US car firms sold 11.6 times as much as their three biggest rivals; in 1972 the difference was 4.2 times.
In iron and steel the ratio fell from 4.7 times to 0.9.
As the case of cars suggests, the giant US firms, although squeezed, were by no means throttled.
As late as 1977 the biggest five firms in aerospace, office equipment (including computers), scientific and photographic equipment were still American, as were the biggest four in paper and wood, the biggest three in vehicles, the biggest two in electronics and rubber, and three out of the biggest five in petroleum, industrial equipment and food.
Table 10.6
Growth of sales of giant firms, 1962–72 (percentage by which growth of EEC and Japanese firms exceeded that of US)
The boom, Bretton Woods and the dollar
The decline of the position of US capital was one of the most important developments of the boom.
Just as the enthronement of the dollar at the centre of the world's monetary system symbolized US dominance at the end of the war, so the weakening of the dollar was to symbolize the erosion of that power.
The international financial system established, essentially by the United States, at Bretton Woods in 1944 (chapter 3) was not fully implemented immediately.
Indeed, it was not until the late 1950s that full convertibility for trade purposes of most European currencies was achieved.
Only then were businesses in Europe entirely free to use their domestic currencies to buy dollars in order to pay for imports; and controls on capital movements remained widespread.
Nevertheless, the progressively more complete operation of the system of pegged exchange rates between convertible currencies undoubtedly assisted the massive expansion of trade which occurred.
The heyday of the Bretton Woods system was short-lived, however.
As the 1960s rolled on, fundamental weaknesses of the system were revealed, centring on the contradictory role of the dollar.
Various attempts to patch up the system failed, and the final crisis phase of the boom (chapter 13) saw enormous financial turbulence and the abandonment of the Bretton Woods framework.
The general interest of US business and finance in the postwar period, perceived as such from 1947 onwards at least, was that the capitalist world as a whole should expand rapidly, with as open access as possible for US commodities and capital.
Inasmuch as the Bretton Woods system contributed both as a framework for the expansion of the other capitalist countries and as a mechanism for granting US exports and capital access as soon as practicable, it can only be counted as a success.
But a more subtle question concerns the terms on which the United States gained this access.
The very operation of the system, while putting the dollar in a privileged position in certain respects, made it progressively more difficult for US business to take full advantage of the opportunities on offer.
The dollar was the lynchpin of the Bretton Woods system.
Not only were the values of other currencies effectively pegged to the dollar (formally speaking, to gold) but dollars had to make up the greater part of the other countries' official holdings of reserves.
This is because production of gold, at the fixed price of $35 an ounce, was insufficient to provide for both its industrial and monetary uses.
But perhaps more importantly, other countries found dollars not just as good as gold, but better than gold, since they could earn interest on their dollar holdings.
In the 1950s about three-fifths of total gold production found its way into official reserves.
But this represented an increase in the stock of gold held as reserves of only 17 per cent.
Over the same period the value of trade in goods and services, which these reserves were supposed to support, more than doubled.
In the 1960s, out of a higher total level of gold production (which  peaked in 1965) much less than 10 per cent reached the reserves, constituting an increase of a mere 3 per cent.
In the 1950s most of the additional reserves which countries accumulated to support their burgeoning trade had to consist of dollars; in the 1960s gold's contribution was negligible.
US gains
This situation, in which other countries were relying on the United States to provide them with the dollars needed to boost their reserves, seemed to leave the USA in a highly privileged position, for the only way that other countries could accumulate reserves was if the USA provided them, by spending abroad more than it received.
This is just what the United States did.
Its overall deficit was not the result of a trade deficit (merchandise trade showed a surplus of $70 billion over the years 1950–67).
Receipts of interest and dividends netted a further $60 billion.
But government expenditure abroad (on loans, grants and for military purposes) together with the outflow of capital exceeded these credit items and resulted in $30 billion of gold or dollars flowing into foreign central banks.
Up to the late 1950s this inflow of dollars was generally welcome as it relieved the earlier shortages.
However, the combination of rising amounts of dollars held abroad (dollar liabilities) and falling US gold stocks ($7½ billion over the eight years) meant that by 1968 the US gold stock could hardly have repaid 40 per cent of the dollars held abroad in reserves.
As this ratio fell, the convertibility of dollars into gold became more and more fragile until it finally snapped (table 10.7).
Before considering how events developed, it is important to clarify in whose interests the system had been operating.
At first sight, it seems clear that the United States was gaining.
Could it not buy up businesses abroad ($45 billion over the whole period 1950–67), make loans and grants to foreign governments ($50 billion) or finance military expenditure abroad ($44 billion) simply by printing money?
Was it not buying businesses and influence abroad with worthless pieces of paper?
Such a description, attractive to critics of the United States from de Gaulle leftwards, is an oversimplification.
First of all, the US deficit was not financed literally with paper dollars; foreign central banks which received dollars invested in the New York money market at the going rate of interest.
This meant that the USA was actually borrowing overseas, although admittedly paying rather a low rate of interest in real terms (after allowing for inflation, the real rate of interest on US Treasury bills was 1½per cent per annum over the years 1960–6).
The United States, or to be more precise, US capital, was clearly gaining if it could borrow at 1½ per cent and invest in setting up or buying businesses in Europe, which would earn a much greater rate of profit.
But the reason that US business was investing so much in Europe and elsewhere was not that the United States could run a balance of payments deficit financed by borrowing from central banks overseas.
Their investments were based on their  monopolistic position in world markets, their competitive edge in terms of know-how, manufacturing techniques and products, which made investment to capture overseas markets attractive.
If the United States had not been able to run a deficit to finance the investment abroad, one response could have been a lower value of the dollar, more competitive exports and a sufficient trade surplus to finance the overseas investment.
As their resistance to a dollar devaluation against their currencies showed, European and Japanese capital stood to lose more if the United States financed its capital outflow through a trade surplus.
The real objection to the United States was in relation to US activities abroad rather than to their financing.
In short, claims that the United States was abusing its financial position were a way of claiming that US competition was ‘unfair’ rather than just effective.
Table 10.7
US balance of payments, 1950–67 ($ billion)
The real European complaint was that US financial power attracted funds to New York and that US industrial power was strong enough to allow it to organize successfully a large volume of production overseas.
What prevented French or German firms borrowing on similar terms in Europe or the United States to those faced by US firms, and using the money to buy up firms in  Europe or indeed the United States, was their financial and industrial weakness, not the state of Europe's balance of payments.
The charge that the USA was abusing, rather than simply using, its position, only had weight to the extent that the United States was putting pressure on central banks abroad not to convert more of their dollars into gold.
Such pressure began in a mild way in 1960 after some speculative activity in the gold market occurred, based on dawning fears that the dollar might not for ever be ‘as good as gold’(i.e. fixed in terms of gold).
The United States responded by informally requesting her partners to use restraint in exercising their right to convert dollars into gold.
In the next year the United States and other major countries founded the ‘Gold Pool’ under which they would all, not just the USA, supply gold to stabilize the private gold market.
As the gold backing for the dollar crumbled in the 1960s, the United States increased its pressure on central banks not to join private speculators in demanding gold; in 1967 West Germany issued a formal declaration undertaking not to ‘cash in’ its dollars for gold, and most other countries, with the notable exception of France, apparently made unofficial statements to the same effect.
Finally, in 1968, as the private speculative pressure mounted, the Gold Pool was dissolved (in reality it had been drained).
The private market for gold was allowed to find its own level.
Formally the United States still maintained the myth that it would convert official holdings of dollars into gold at the old price of $35, while informing other central banks that if they attempted to take advantage of this offer at all it would instantly be withdrawn.
Despite all this pressure to sustain the position of the dollar, it seems that the extent to which the USA was gaining by its ability to finance a deficit was limited.
Such gains should show up in receipts of profits from the investments made abroad.
But between 1960 and 1967 the amount of interest, profits and dividends received from abroad (net of payments) increased only from $3.4 to $5.3 billion.
Most of this increase in any case represented the returns on the investments which the United States had ‘earned’ by investing the surplus earned from exports exceeding imports.
The part of the increase due to its ‘privileged’ position of being able to borrow cheaply and invest profitably abroad must have been rather small, let alone the part which could be in any way attributed to direct pressure on foreign central banks to provide this finance.
Costs of maintaining the dollar
Furthermore, there were very considerable costs to the USA involved in maintaining the value of the dollar, not against gold, but against other currencies.
In the 1960s the US balance on merchandise trade failed to grow, and then sank to virtually nothing in 1968, while the amount US business was investing abroad was rising steadily.
In terms of relative costs, US  competitiveness hardly changed over the sixties.
But as European and Japanese business turned their attention to the US market their relatively low wage costs allowed them to make substantial inroads.
At the same time these low wage costs and the expanding European market encouraged a growing level of US foreign investment.
The United States began to buy more consumer goods from abroad than it exported in 1959; by 1969 the deficit was $4 billion; in 1968 the balance on cars became negative.
Only in capital goods and chemicals was there a growing balance — the combined surplus rising from $5 to $11 billion between 1959 and 1969.
A lower exchange rate would have tended to enhance the competitiveness and profitability of US exports and import substitutes.
Workers' real wages would have been reduced, provided money wages did not rise.
The billion-dollar question was whether a devaluation of the dollar would jeopardize New York's position as a financial centre.
Certainly it was regarded as worthwhile to protect the dollar by limiting capital outflows.
In 1963 an interest equalization tax was imposed to reduce purchases of foreign bonds and shares; in 1965 US bank lending to foreigners was curtailed.
In 1968 US multinationals were required to raise the funds abroad to finance their overseas investments.
How long the dollar could be defended and to what extent it was actually in the interests of US capital to do so were resolved by the crisis which followed.
This radically changed both the function of the US dollar in the international monetary system, and its relationship with other currencies.
International monetary reform
Some rather fundamental reform of the international monetary system would have been inevitable even without the deterioration in the US balance of payments at the end of the 1960s.
The basic contradiction was that the very process by which the rest of the world obtained international liquidity (piling up dollars) undermined the status of that liquidity (by reducing the gold backing of the dollar).
Barring central banks from cashing in dollars for gold prevented the stocks in Fort Knox from declining, but left growing dollar liabilities.
All the ingenious forms of longer-term borrowing undertaken by the United States from overseas monetary authorities merely changed the form of these liabilities, and could only be a stop-gap.
The only way that the gold backing of the dollar could be increased would be by an increase in the price of gold.
At a stroke the gold reserves in Fort Knox would be worth more dollars, thus improving backing for the dollar; gold reserves for other central banks would be worth more, encouraging them to accumulate further interest-earning dollar reserves; gold production would be stimulated and private demand reduced (as industry tried to economize and speculators took their profits), allowing countries to absorb additional gold into their reserves.
The immediate costs to the United States would have been political, the main gainers being the major gold producers — South Africa and the USSR and those who had previously speculated against the dollar by demanding gold.
More fundamentally there was no guarantee that a once-and-for-all increase in the price of gold (a doubling was frequently suggested) would suffice.
If the only problem was that the price of gold, fixed prewar at $35 an ounce, had to be adjusted for the wartime inflation in order to secure an adequate supply, then perhaps doubling the gold price would do the trick.
Certainly US inflation subsequently had been extremely low; between 1952 and 1967 the US wholesale price index rose at only 0.8 per cent a year.
With other currencies fixed to the dollar, this limited the inflation rates elsewhere, the average price of the exports of OECD countries rising by only 0.9 per cent a year.
So the insufficiency of gold reserves resulted from higher volume of trade, not higher prices.
But by the end of the sixties, the US boom, associated first with Keynesian measures and then with the Vietnam war, was seriously threatening US price stability.
Between 1967 and 1970 US wholesale prices rose by 3.3 per cent a year.
Continuation of inflation at this kind of rate would cause the whole problem to recur in that the value of gold stocks, at the new fixed price, would be regarded as insufficient in relation to the rising value of trade, and speculation on a further gold price rise, against the dollar, would redouble (as it would have been proved so profitable the first time).
Only a return to US price stability would allow a once-and-for-all rise in the gold price to work, and there was nothing in the act of raising the price of gold which would make that more likely (indeed, the improved gold backing for the dollar would relax such pressure as there was on the US government to maintain price stability in order to defend the dollar).
Otherwise an increase in the price of gold seemed to guarantee a continued subservience for the position of the dollar in the international monetary system: always under threat of further humiliation by falling in value in relation to gold.
It was for these reasons that the United States in the late 1960s consistently opposed an increase in the official price of gold.
It is highly likely that there was no possible adjustment to the gold price in the 1960s which would have ensured an adequate flow of gold into the reserves of the USA and other countries.
The balance between industrial demand, speculation and monetary needs could probably never have been achieved in the inflationary context of the time.
At the other extreme from attempting to stabilize the monetary system by an appropriate use of the price mechanism (the price of gold) there arose a multitude of plans for the conscious creation of international money which would certainly supplement, and perhaps do away with, the role of gold and even dollars as part of international reserves.
The US government began to look favourably on such plans in the mid-sixties, presumably out of a realization that something more permanent than arm-twisting had to be done to protect the gold in Fort Knox.
The system of special drawing rights (SDRs), agreed in 1968 and implemented in 1970, gave countries credits in the books of the IMF, fixed in value to gold and earning an interest rate of 1½per cent, which they could use to settle balance of payments deficits.
This ‘paper gold’ was intended to take the heat off the dollar by  increasing what was in effect the gold content of reserves.
The supply of SDRs to be made available would not be disturbed by the vagaries of industrial demand, Russian gold sales or speculation.
The initial allocations ($9½ billion spread over three years) were expected to provide for a reasonable growth of reserves in the context of a staunching of the flow of dollars.
It seemed to be a triumph for international cooperation and reason.
As we shall see, this triumph was short-lived (chapter 12).
In the turmoil that ensued, it became apparent that US capital, while weakened, was by no means incapable of defending its interests.
11
Overaccumulation
The decline of the United States was not the only problem generated by the boom.
The sheer pace of accumulation was itself a mixed blessing.
It propelled capitalism up the longest and steepest economic incline in history, but at a cost.
Towards the end, the engine of growth was overheating badly and the ride was increasingly bumpy.
Overaccumulation had set in.
The basic idea of overaccumulation is that capitalism sometimes generates a higher rate of accumulation than can be sustained, and thus the rate of accumulation has eventually to fall.
Towards the end of the postwar boom, an imbalance between accumulation and the labour supply led to increasingly severe labour shortage.
The excess demand for labour generated a faster scrapping of old equipment.
Real wages were pulled up and older machines rendered unprofitable, allowing a faster transfer of workers to the new machines.
This could in principle have occurred smoothly: as profitability slid down, accumulation could have declined gently to a sustainable rate.
But the capitalist system has no mechanism guaranteeing a smooth transition in such circumstances.
In the late sixties the initial effect of overaccumulation was a period of feverish growth, with rapidly rising wages and prices and an enthusiasm for get-rich-quick schemes.
These temporarily masked, but could not suppress, the deterioration in profitability.
Confidence was undermined, investment collapsed and a spectacular crash occurred.
Overaccumulation gave rise, not to a mild decline in the growth rate, but to a classic capitalist crisis.
This chapter and the following two examine this process.
This one focuses on underlying developments in accumulation.
The next two give a more blow-by-blow account of mounting economic difficulties.
Development of the working class
One way in which rapid accumulation undermines the conditions for its own existence is by creating a mass proletariat.
Capitalism's hunger for additional workers creates a larger and larger class of waged workers.
Their economic  conditions are essentially similar — in that they are deprived of the wherewithal to produce on their own account and so must work under others for wages and their interests are ultimately antagonistic to those of their employers.
Total employment rose, in line with population growth, by 30 per cent between 1950 and 1970.
This would in itself have increased the size of the working class by almost a third.
As it was, the proletariat grew considerably faster than total employment.
While civilian employment in the ACCs rose by 46 million, the number of self-employed and ‘family workers’ fell by 20 million.
In 1954, 31 per cent of those officially classified as in work were in this category.
By 1973 the proportion had fallen to 17 per cent.
Outside agriculture the number of self-employed actually grew by 1 million, while falling substantially as a proportion of total employment.
The growth of services, with many opportunities for small businesses, was the main reason for the growth in absolute numbers.
In industry the self-employed were generally slowly squeezed by the superior performance of big business, although 15 per cent of those engaged in manufacturing in Italy and Japan were still self-employed in 1970.
So the story behind the statistical shift from self-employment to wage labour is one of an exodus from the land.
For the individuals concerned the trek was often one away from the dreary world of the family farm towards the bright lights of the big city.
For society as a whole it was a process of massive proletarianization.
A number of factors made this development possible.
One was underemployment in the countryside.
Many farms had more family workers than could be fully employed, and so migration to the cities could occur without loss of food output.
In Japan, the United States, France and Germany the number of unpaid family workers fell by nearly 12 million, or 70 per cent.
Mechanization in the countryside also reduced labour requirements.
This was achieved partly through capitalist agriculture driving out family farms.
The number of self-employed farmers in the United States, Japan, France and Germany fell by about 6 million, or 50 per cent.
Reduced underemployment, mechanization (spurred on in part by the exodus of family workers) and improved methods of cultivation allowed agricultural output to grow significantly and employment to fall substantially.
Productivity grew faster in agriculture than in industry, both overall (table 11.1) and within every major country except Japan.
These developments within agriculture reflected the growth in demand for labour in other sectors.
This proceeded at a faster pace in services than in industry.
The annual average percentage growth rates of employment in the ACCs from 1955 to 1968 were (OECD, 1970):
Agriculture
-3.8 per cent Industry
1.5 per cent Services
2.0 per cent Total
1.0 per cent Table 11.1
ACC sector growth rates, 1955–68 (average annual percentage growth rates)
The pattern of demand — including the rise in the share of investment (chapter 8)— ensured that industrial production rose more quickly than the output of services.
Nevertheless, employment grew faster in services as productivity rose more slowly (although the measurement of output and hence productivity in many services is difficult).
Some of the growth in service employment was in state provision outside the market, notably in the form of the welfare state (chapter 9).
State employment rose from some 11½ per cent of total employment in 1960 to some 14½ per cent in 1974.
(Nationalized industry employees are excluded; they produce commodities for the market and contribute directly to the pool of profits.)
Some privately employed labour also works for non-profit-making bodies.
In Japan, where state welfare provision is poor, this constitutes some 2 per cent of employment.
None of these jobs represents work for capitalists.
But they are wage labour, and those performing them are a part of the working class.
The switch to waged work of previously independent producers also increased union membership.
In the ACCs membership grew from about 49 million in 1952 to 62 million in 1970.
But the proportion of wage and salary earners in unions declined from 37 per cent in 1952 to 31 per cent in the late sixties.
Much of the explanation for this lies in two interrelated trends: towards more white-collar jobs and towards more service jobs, both traditionally weakly organized.
In both Britain and Germany the number of manual workers stayed virtually constant over the boom while white-collar employment rose by 50 per cent in the United Kingdom and doubled in Germany.
Since unionization levels among white-collar workers are about half those for blue-collar in both countries, this shift worked to pull down the average level of unionization even though more white-collar workers started to join unions.
Overall membership figures are crude indicators of the development of unionization.
They lump together the British miners, the American teamsters and Japanese ‘company’ unions.
But, for Europe at least, certain generalizations can be made.
They include the increasing importance of white-collar and public sector unions and the cementing, in the context of continuous growth in living standards, of the power of national trade union bureaucracies.
These developments were to influence the form of workers' struggles once full employment was achieved (chapter 12).
The late 1960s: the problem of full employment
By the mid-sixties the enormous growth of waged jobs had effectively created full employment.
The measured unemployment rate for the advanced capitalist countries had fallen below 3 per cent.
It then fluctuated around that level until 1973, although rising quite sharply in the 1971–2 recession (chapter 12).
In full employment lay both the historic achievement of the boom and its undoing.
The difficulties raised by full employment manifested themselves most obviously in accelerating inflation.
A less noticeable but ultimately more crucial problem was a general decline in profitability.
But perhaps the most fundamental difficulty was a threat to capitalist control on the shop floor.
The Polish economist Kalecki, whose work had in other ways anticipated that of Keynes, had predicted just such a development a quarter of a century earlier:
The maintenance of full employment would cause social and political changes which would give a new impetus to the opposition of the business leaders.
Under a regime of permanent full employment, ‘the sack’ would cease to play its role as a disciplinary measure…‘discipline in the factories’and ‘political stability’are more appreciated by business leaders than profits.
Their class instinct tells them that lasting full employment is unsound from their point of view and that unemployment is an integral part of the normal capitalist system.
(Kalecki, 1971, pp. 140–1).
Tight labour markets
Measured in terms of unemployment rates, the intensity of demand for labour appears to have subsided a little by 1970.
But unemployment can be an unreliable indicator of the tightness of labour markets.
Patterns of registration shift as regulations change, or as previously ‘marginalized’ groups, such as married women, become consolidated into the labour force.
Rapid changes in the pattern of demand for labour (across regions or industries) can also leave a residual of ‘structural’ unemployment in a context of intense labour shortage.
The speed of the upswing in 1972–3 generated bottlenecks and labour market ‘mismatches’.
An alternative indicator of demand for labour is employers' notification of vacancies.
Although open to misinterpretation, this at least in principle shows the extent to which employers were hunting for workers.
Vacancy figures show intensity of demand reaching a peak in Germany in 1970 and in Japan in 1973 (figure 11.1).
In the United Kingdom, vacancy figures show extremely tight labour markets in the early seventies.
Figure 11.1
Job vacancies, 1965–75 (thousands).
Accumulation and the demand for labour
The very high level of demand for labour was maintained throughout the late sixties and early seventies by the trend of capital accumulation.
The accumulation rate for the ACCs peaked in 1970–1 at just over 5½ per cent— an increase of over 1 percentage point relative to the early sixties.
In Europe the rate of accumulation peaked first in the early 1960s, then a decade later at a slightly lower level.
In the United States it peaked around 1966, but was still much higher in the early seventies than in the early sixties.
In Japan the accumulation rate peaked at the end of the sixties and the increasing weight of the Japanese capital stock also contributed to the upward trend in the ACC accumulation rate over the 1960s as a whole (figures 11.2 and 11.3).
The impact of accumulation on demand for labour depends on its form as well as its extent.
If accumulation in the boom had been based on an unchanged mass of machinery per worker then an extension of the capital stock would have required an equivalent increase in workers employed.
But new means of production systematically embodied a higher degree of mechanization than their predecessors (chapter 8).
So the rate of growth of employment was much less than the rate of accumulation (figure 11.3).
But in the absence of an increase in the speed of mechanization in the early seventies, the peak rates of accumulation achieved at that time generated peak intensities of demand for labour.
Since labour supply did not increase to meet this demand, the growth of civilian employment was only marginally higher in the late sixties and early seventies than in the first half of the sixties (table 11.2).
Table 11.2
Civil employment, 1960–73 (average annual percentage growth rates)
Figure 11.2
Business accumulation, 1960–73 (percentage growth rates.
between the beginning and end of the year, of gross fixed capital stock).
For the capitalist countries as a whole, about half of the 1 .7 per cent per year growth of the non-agricultural labour force between 1968 and 1973 resulted from a combination of a declining agricultural labour force and increasing female participation in non-agricultural labour (table 11.3).
Immigration was much less important — contributing 0.1 per cent to the growth of the labour force each year.
Given declining male participation rates (particularly because of earlier retirement and extended education), employment would have grown only half as fast without these sources of additional labour.
Labour shortage would have been more intense.
Labour shortage could also have been relieved by longer hours of work.
In fact, average hours worked per year generally fell faster in the early 1970s, according to the rather sketchy data available, as workers used their stronger bargaining position in tight labour markets to reduce time spent at work.
However, shorter hours also reflected the growth of part-time work as more married women entered the labour force.
Table 11.3
Sources of labour, 1968–73 (average annual percentage growth rates)
Figure 11.3
ACC business accumulation and employment, 1962–71 (percentage growth rate of five-year moving average centred on specified year — thus figures for 1962 include changes in 1960 and 1961, and figures for 1971 include changes in 1972 and 1973).
The profits squeeze
An increasing imbalance between accumulation and supplies of additional labour requires the faster scrapping of old plant to speed up the transfer of workers to new means of production.
With little additional labour available, employers compete fiercely for labour to operate newly installed machinery.
A faster increase in money wages results.
Inflation may accelerate as well, but, if faster scrapping is to occur, not as fast as money wages.
For it is the increase in product wages (the real cost to the employer of hiring workers) which makes the old machinery unprofitable and permits labour to be transferred to the new.
This faster scrapping, and the faster growth of product wages which causes it, are signs that the rate of accumulation is excessive in relation to the available labour supply.
A further sign of overaccumulation is a squeeze of profits.
Between 1965 and 1973 the share of profits in business output fell by about one-eighth (table 11.4).
All the blocs experienced the squeeze, though with varying intensity.
In Europe the profit share fell in the early sixties and again in the early seventies.
A sharp decline began in the United States after 1965.
In Japan profitability plummeted after 1970.
Although the squeeze on profits occurred during very different time periods, the falls were quite similar: profit shares declined to around 80 per cent of peak levels almost everywhere.
Table 11.4
Profit shares.
1960–73 (percentages)
In each bloc the decline in profit shares started at about the time that the accumulation rate peaked.
This is no coincidence: accelerated accumulation, combined with labour shortage, was the basic cause of the profits squeeze.
It was not the only influence at work, however.
The behaviour of both productivity and product wages do not conform precisely to the simplest description of overaccumulation.
Productivity and product wages determine the course of the profit share and an account of their movements is given in the next  two sections.
Tracing the course of the profits squeeze is inevitably rather complicated and speculative because the various influences cannot be quantified.
Productivity growth
Faster scrapping of old plant as a result of insufficient labour should increase the rate of growth of labour productivity.
With a faster rate of transfer of workers from old machines to new ones, the proportion of more modern, higher-productivity machines in use rises.
Yet faster productivity growth did not occur in the early seventies.
Despite a faster rate of accumulation in relation to the labour force (reflected in the capital-labour ratio growing 1 per cent per year faster), the growth of productivity was around 1 per cent slower in the early 1970s compared to the early 1960s (figure 11.4).
The decline took place in the United States and Japan.
In manufacturing industry, productivity growth slipped back in the early 1970s in Europe and Japan (table 11.5).
Table 11.5
Productivity and capital per worker, 1960–73 (average annual percentage growth rates)
Figure 11.4
ACC business productivity and mechanization, 1962–71 (percentage growth rate of five-year moving average centred on specified year — see figure 11.3).
Three factors probably contributed to the decline in productivity growth.
The argument that faster scrapping leads to a faster growth of productivity assumes that mechanization — the installation of new machines — continues to yield the same increases in productivity.
If mechanization was to yield less productivity gains however, then average productivity growth would slip back despite faster scrapping.
It is plausible to suppose that the most productive increases in mechanization in Europe and Japan occurred in the fifties and sixties.
A laggard in the technological race may take shortcuts to ‘catch up’.
Productivity growth would then decline as the frontier set by the United States was approached.
But this cannot fully explain the slowdown.
Europe and Japan still lagged far behind in the late sixties and seventies.
In 1970 productivity in European manufacturing seems to have been around or perhaps a little over one-half of the US level, while in Japan it was only about 40 per cent of the US level.
Moreover, catching up cannot explain the slowdown in US productivity which occurred outside the manufacturing sector and which can only partly be explained by the less intense expansion once the excess capacity of the early 1960s had been used up.
Productivity growth does not depend solely on equipment — whether or not new, high-productivity machines replace old, low-productivity ones.
Productivity on the whole range of plant, old and new, may be improved as experience in operating it breeds better methods of organization.
Conceivably such gains were tailing off by the late sixties.
Productivity is also affected by the extent to  which the employers can maintain or increase the intensity of labour — the proportion of the working day during which the worker is literally working and the speed of that work.
Faster production lines and increased labour ‘flexibility’(so that workers carry out a wider range of tasks) raise productivity on the whole range of plant.
Tight labour markets and increased union strength at the end of the sixties may well have made it more difficult for employers to increase work intensity and carry out schemes of reorganization.
This probably contributed to the slower growth in labour productivity at that time.
Two industries are particularly interesting in this respect — the car industry, which is the obvious archetype of ‘Fordist’ methods of work organization, and mining, always a barometer of class conflict.
In both cases productivity growth slowed down in most countries, often sharply, in the late 1960s or early 1970s.
Product wages
As we have seen, a faster increase in product wages is the basic factor which forces a faster rate of scrapping when there is a growing discrepancy between accumulation and the available labour supply.
The growth rate of product wages did peak in 1969, just when accumulation was reaching its peak, and it grew a little faster (about ½ per cent per year) between 1968 and 1973 than over the period 1960–8.
This fairly small increase in product wage growth underestimates the increased pressures to scrap (and thus the extent of overaccumulation) for two reasons.
A slowdown in the productivity gains on all plants (old and new)— gains which could be obtained from reorganization and more intensive work — meant that a given growth of product wages already implied faster scrapping.
Some old plants which would otherwise have remained profitable as a result of faster or more effective working would have become unprofitable as a result of these productivity gains not being achieved.
Secondly, the rising cost of raw materials (chapter 12) tended to increase scrapping by making old plants unprofitable even in the absence of a faster growth of product wages.
The case of the United States illustrates this.
Between 1960 and 1968 materials prices rose about ½ per cent per year and final goods prices by about 1 per cent.
Between 1968 and 1973, by contrast, final goods prices rose by 4½ per cent per year while materials prices shot up by 11 ½ per cent per year.
The effect of this rapid increase in the cost of materials, relative to the price at which final output was sold, was to make some old plants less profitable.
Overaccumulation meant there was insufficient labour to keep old plants going, so they had to be scrapped.
Faster materials price increases meant that this required only a small acceleration in product wage growth (figure 11.5).
Figure 11.5
ACC business productivity and product wages, 1962–71 (percentage growth rate of five-year moving average centred on specified year see figure 11.3).
International competition
as if all these factors, and their relationships, were not complex enough, there is another influence on the profit share which must be mentioned.
Increased international competition almost certainly contributed to holding down profit margins.
More trade and investment flows, based on the tendency towards an equalization of productivity levels, must have decreased the extent of monopoly power exercised by domestic producers.
It certainly contributed to holding down inflation, so that the money wages generated by the high demand for labour were easily translated into product wage increases and the necessary scrapping rates achieved.
The increased general level of international competition, which may have eroded profit margins in all the countries concerned, must be distinguished from sudden shifts in the relative competitiveness of individual countries.
Such shifts may drastically worsen the profitability of the country suffering reduced competitiveness.
An extreme example was the sharp decline in competitiveness of Japanese industry between 1970 and 1973 when a rising yen pushed up Japanese relative labour costs by one-third.
This may have played some role in the big decline in the profitability of Japanese industry over the same period as Japanese exporters were forced to accept lower profit margins, but there will have been some compensating improvement in the profitability of import-competing industries in the United  States and Europe as Japanese exporters found themselves obliged to raise their prices to recoup some of the cost increases.
Even in this period in Japan, however, it is highly unlikely that the exchange rate movement was the dominating factor in declining profitability.
For profitability appears to have fallen just as fast outside manufacturing, where the pressure of international competition must have been negligible.
Forces working to equalize profit rates could hardly have transmitted the effects of international competition to these insulated sectors in such a short space of time.
Labour shortage, by contrast, affected all sectors and is a much more plausible explanation for the profits squeeze.
Falling output-capital ratio
The rate of profit depends on the output-capital ratio as well as on the share of profits (chapter 8).
A faster rate of scrapping would tend to reduce the measured output-capital ratio.
Some part of the scrapped capital stock would still count in the statistics, since these are based on the assumption of a constant scrapping rate (a constant economic life).
During the periods when the profit share declined, a definite fall in the output-capital ratio occurred.
The fall in the output-capital ratio was around 5–10 per cent in both business and manufacturing for the ACCs as a whole (table 11.6).
For the individual blocs the falling output-capital ratios were rather greater (10–20 per cent) and thus contributed significantly to falls in profitability.
Table 11.6
Output-capital ratios, 1960–73
If faster scrapping was properly taken into account in the capital stock statistics it would show up in a higher figure for depreciation (and thus a lower profit share) rather than a falling output-capital ratio.
But it seems likely that influences other than faster scrapping also contributed to the decline in the measured ratio of output to capital.
All the factors discussed above which  reduced the growth rate of labour productivity contributed to the fall.
In addition, the relative price of capital goods stopped declining.
In the early 1970s the price of investment goods rose slightly faster than the price of output, whereas in the 1960s the price of output had risen about 1 per cent faster than the price of investment goods.
The explanation for the changed pattern of relative prices is not clear.
Possibly the productivity slowdown was particularly marked in investment goods sectors (the US construction industry is an example frequently cited).
In addition, the very high demand in the early seventies may well have pushed up investment goods prices especially fast.
It is certainly the case that the rapid increase in materials prices would tend to push up investment goods prices (which include an imported materials element) faster than output prices (which are defined to exclude the impact of import prices).
Finally, some part of the fall in the output-capital ratio in the United States after 1966 must have reflected the decreasing capacity utilization.
While it is impossible to measure precisely the influence of these factors, they all probably contributed to the falling output-capital ratio and the consequent decline in the profit rate.
Figure 11.6
Business profit rates, 1960–73 (percentage).
Falling rate of profit
Declining profit shares and falling output-capital ratios combined to push down the rate of profit (figures 11.6 and 11.7).
Between 1968 and 1973 the profit rate  for the ACCs as a whole fell in the business and manufacturing sectors by one-fifth.
By 1973 the profit rate in business and manufacturing had fallen from its previous peak in each major bloc by about one-third.
The fall began in Europe in 1960, in the United States in the mid-1960s, and in Japan in 1970 (table 11.7).
Figure 11.7
Manufacturing profit rates.
1960–73 (percentage).
Table 11.7
Profit rates, 1960–73 (percentages)
It is clear from our discussion of the profit share and the output-capital ratio that the profit rate was subject to a large number of influences.
Decreasing productivity gains from mechanization, difficulties in obtaining more productive  work organization and increased work intensity, the pressure of rising materials prices on costs, the pressure of international competition on prices, and especially fast increases in investment goods prices probably all played some part.
Lower capacity utilization was also important for explaining the fall in the profit rate in the United States, though this is only a partial explanation.
Despite the complex set of influences, we would emphasize the high rate of accumulation as the most fundamental factor behind the decline in profitability.
The intense demand for labour which it generated both tended to depress the profit rate directly by dragging up product wages and provided the backdrop to other contributory factors such as difficulties of work organization and wages explosions (chapter 12).
It was also partly in response to the effects of overaccumulation that deflationary policies led to decreased capacity utilization in the United States.
Finally, the uneven pattern of accumulation between sectors (investment goods and consumer goods), between commodities (basic materials and others) and between countries (leading to heightened international competition) also helped to depress profitability.
Whatever weight one attaches to each of these factors, the extent and pattern of accumulation undeniably drove down the rate of profit in the years before 1973.
Post-tax profits
Although it is the profit rate before taxation which reflects the underlying economic forces of capital accumulation, labour supply and competitiveness, it is the profit rate after taxation which is of most direct concern to employers when they make investment decisions.
Governments could have offset declining profitability by cutting taxes on profits or by increasing the generosity of tax allowances given for investment.
Calculation of the impact of taxation on the profitability of new investment is extremely complex, but a detailed international study provides some valuable information on the levels and trends of corporate taxation in various countries (table 11.8).
Table 11.8
Tax rates on new manufacturing investment, 1960–70
Table 11.8 (and other partial data for France and Italy) suggest that in general the burden of company taxation was not much reduced in the 1960s, so that the fall in profitability applied post-tax as well as pre-tax.
The exception is the UK where taxation on corporate profits began to decline in the 1950s.
By  1970 the generosity of tax concessions for new investment was such that they wiped out the effect of corporation tax and rendered the post-tax rate of profit virtually as high as the pre-tax rate.
Accelerating inflation partially offset this trend in the early seventies as companies were being taxed on the inflated values of their stocks of materials and semi-finished goods, but the Labour Government of 1974–9 retrospectively removed taxation from increased stock values.
In the UK, then, the impact of declining profitability was substantially cushioned by tax concessions for companies.
This meant a shift in the burden of taxation towards workers, reducing the extent to which their take home pay benefited from their stronger bargaining position.
Did workers gain?
At first sight it might seem that workers clearly gained from the onset of overaccumulation.
Full employment meant a more or less guaranteed job, shorter working hours, and perhaps reduced intensity of work and improved working conditions.
Finally, the faster growth of product wages would seem to imply faster growth of living standards.
But the issue is more complex.
Whether or not accelerated product wages lead to a faster increase in living standards depends on how the prices of the goods that workers consume move relative to those that they produce, and on any changes in the proportion of their incomes that workers pay in taxation which are not reflected in increased benefits or social services.
For the ACCs as a whole real take-home pay rose by nearly 1 per cent per year faster in the early 1970s than in the 1960s, despite the slowdown in productivity growth (table 11.9).
The rising share of wages and more slowly growing tax burdens provide the explanation.
There were rather diverse trends in the three blocs.
In Europe workers also gained from a slower growth, relative to prices in general, of consumer prices; this may in part have reflected pressure on governments to increase subsidies or hold down nationalized industries prices.
Japan provides the most dramatic case of a rising wage share maintaining the growth of take-home pay despite a major decline in productivity growth.
In the USA a rising wage share after 1966 prevented total stagnation of take-home pay as productivity slowed, consumer prices rose relatively fast and taxes were increased.
Workers' living standards also depend on government services.
Spending on these rose steadily in the sixties.
There was a sharp twist towards civil spending.
Military spending was drastically reduced in the United States, allowing a very rapid rise in civil expenditure.
In Japan civil spending also increased sharply.
In Europe, where the share of civil spending had risen steadily throughout the sixties, the pace was not maintained (Table 11.10).
Of the 2½ percentage points increase in the share of civil spending in total production about half is accounted for by services (health and education) and half by transfers.
Practically all the higher share of spending is accounted for by increases in the relative cost of providing them.
So the ‘quantity’ of services provided (measured, for example, by the number of workers employed in providing them) rose no faster than output as a whole.
The rise in the share of transfers (pensions, dole, etc.) also probably took the form (as it did over the period as a whole; see chapter 9) of an extension of coverage of schemes rather than of a growth in real value in excess of productivity.
But the substantial cut in military spending which allowed accelerated expansion of welfare services without a correspondingly faster rise in the burden of taxation represented a gain for workers.
It was another product of pressure for improved conditions.
Table 11.9
Business productivity, the wage share and real wages, 1960–73 (average annual percentage growth rates)
Table 11.10
Public expenditure.
1960–73 (percentage of GDP)
Therefore, in the early 1970s the working class made substantial gains in take-home pay and public services, as well as in high employment, cuts in hours and probably improved conditions of work.
For the moment, capital was bearing the costs of overaccumulation.
Inflation
Thus far the discussion has been conducted entirely in ‘real’ terms: the shares of incomes going to profits and wages, productivity, hours of work, and so on.
The only prices discussed have been relative: investment goods in relation to consumer goods, imports relative to exports and so forth.
Changes in the overall price level have been ignored.
Adjustment to full employment could in principle occur without any tendency towards inflation.
Competition for labour would pull up money wages more rapidly.
Higher inflation would enable old capital to stay competitive, but profitable capacity would then exceed market demand.
So competition for markets from the cheaper products made on newly installed machinery would hold price increases down to the existing rate.
The faster growth of money wages would mean a faster growth of product wages.
Older vintages would be scrapped more quickly, making space for the new in both labour and product markets.
Faster growth of product wages would mean faster growth of real wages.
Consumption would rise as a share of production, and profits and investment decline.
Steady extension of credit would allow the expanded production to be sold without any change in the rate of inflation.
But this is not what happened in the early seventies.
Inflation rose steadily from the mid-1960s.
In 1965 consumer prices rose on average by 3 per cent a year in the ACCs.
By 1973 the average annual inflation rate had risen to 7.8 per cent.
Prices accelerated for a number of interrelated reasons.
Trade unions, strengthened by high demand for labour, secured money wage increases which, given the existing inflation rate, exceeded those required to generate sufficient extra scrapping.
On occasions, wage pressure exploded in very sharp increases, especially where it had previously been compressed by incomes policies.
Such wage increases tended to reduce profitability.
This happened directly when employers were unable to raise prices sufficiently to offset ‘excessive’ wage increases because of growing international competition and fixed exchange rates.
But international competition was not always binding.
Governments sometimes responded by promptly devaluing the currency to offset the cost disadvantage of the wage increases.
Even where prices could be raised to offset the wage increases, aggregate profits would still fall eventually if credit was not extended fast enough to allow the sale of the same volume of commodities at the higher price level.
So governments faced strong pressure to offset the adverse effects of wage explosions on profitability by facilitating a rapid expansion of credit.
When they acquiesced, the result was higher inflation.
Capitalists were also unwilling to accept the decline in accumulation implied by the falling rate of profit.
Access to credit enabled capitalists to maintain the rate of accumulation by increasing the proportion of funds borrowed (largely workers' savings).
In Germany and the United States in particular, business borrowing was higher in the early seventies than in the early and mid-sixties.
Business borrowing in Japan and France also peaked in 1973 (table 11.11).
This additional borrowing, being routed in part through the banking system, ensured a faster growth of the money supply.
The investment financed by this borrowing stoked up demand for commodities, permitting sales to be maintained at higher and higher prices.
Governments were not responsible for this expansion of credit in the sense of running larger deficits and printing money to finance them.
There was no  upward trend in government borrowing (table 11.12).
On average the advanced countries were in rough budget balance.
But governments failed to prevent the expansion of credit.
They allowed the banking system to respond to demands from capitalists for credit at rates of interest which failed to keep up with inflation (that is, at declining ‘real’ interest rates).
This helped to maintain the return on shareholders' investment.
Even though investments earned less overall, by financing an increasing proportion through borrowing at declining real interest rates, capitalists helped maintain the profitability of shareholders' funds.
In the United Kingdom, for example, between 1965 and 1973, the fall in the pre-tax rate of profit to shareholders was one-seventh, while the return on all capital employed fell by more than one-quarter.
With inflation eroding the purchasing power of accumulated savings, workers were obliged to save more of their incomes if they were to rebuild the value of past savings.
So the extra credit funnelled through the banks was ultimately provided by workers.
Table 11.11
Business borrowing  as a percentage of fixed investment, 1962–73
Table 11.12
Government surpluses, 1965–73 (percentages of GDP)
In the fifties and early sixties the cost of imports had risen much more slowly than prices inside the advanced countries.
But in the early seventies the cost of imported raw materials accelerated rapidly (chapter 12).
With workers attempting to increase their real incomes by militant wage bargaining, and capitalists attempting to maintain accumulation through extended borrowing, these higher materials costs could not be absorbed without a struggle.
Employers passed the burden on to workers via higher prices.
Workers responded with higher wage demands.
Governments permitted the credit expansion required to finance the higher price level.
Part of the burden was thereby eventually eliminated as the prices of advanced countries' exports to the primary producers rose — reducing the deterioration in the terms of trade.
The rest was shunted back and forth between capitalists and workers as wages chased prices and vice versa.
The net result was further inflation.
Figure 11.8
Overaccumulation.
Governments' credit policies were not constrained by international monetary considerations.
The relative decline of US capital (chapter 10) was reflected in large balance of payments deficits as US goods became less and less competitive and war expenditures in Vietnam climbed.
These deficits, combined with substantial outflows of capital, provided the other advanced countries with additional dollar reserves.
So their credit policies were not generally held back by balance of payments considerations.
And when the external account did pose a problem, governments often devalued rather than pursuing deflationary policies to the extent that would have been necessary.
The floating of the pound in 1972 symbolized this turnaround in favour of sustaining expansion regardless of the inflationary cost.
The acceleration of US inflation relaxed the constraint on price rises, previously provided by the linking of other currencies to the dollar.
And where internal inflationary pressures were stronger than in the United States, devaluation was used to push the constraint aside.
Countries with lower inflation rates resisted revaluation as this would reduce export profitability.
So they tended to have chronic balance of payments surpluses, which stoked up inflationary pressure by maintaining high demand for goods.
This came both from abroad and from borrowers at home, who could easily obtain credit from the banking system which was flooded with foreign cash.
The United States had provided a reasonably stable inflationary ceiling up to the mid-sixties.
In the late sixties it furnished a steadily rising floor.
The process of overaccumulation described in this chapter is complex.
Figure 11.8 summarizes the various forces at work.
The story of the unfolding and intertwining of these forces and of their interaction with other, less fundamental, developments is the subject of the next chapter.
12
Overheating
In the late 1960s most economic commentators believed that the long boom was permanent.
Keynesianism seemed to have banished mass unemployment for ever and wage rises seemed as natural and regular as the tides.
In the mid-1970s, by contrast, the mood became one of gloom and despondency.
This chapter and the next tell the story of the series of ‘shocks’ that undermined the earlier complacency.
Strike waves and wage explosions
A wave of strikes swept across Europe between 1968 and 1970.
The May 1968 events in France triggered a three-week general strike.
Next year Germany and the Netherlands were drenched by waves of wildcat strikes, and Italy sweated through a Hot Autumn of industrial unrest.
In the United Kingdom the Wilson government's incomes policy broke down in 1969–70 in a ‘winter of discontent’.
The strikers won big wage increases, around twice those of the preceding years (table 12.1).
These gains were all spearheaded by settlements negotiated to conclude key strikes: the Grenelle agreements of May and June 1968 in France, the agreement between IG Metall and the iron and steel producers in September 1969 in Germany, the metal-working agreements of December 1969 in Italy, and the public sector settlements of winter 1969–70 in the United Kingdom.
The phenomenon was confined to Europe.
The United States and Canada did experience more industrial unrest in the early seventies than in the fifties and sixties, and money wages rose faster.
But the shift began earlier and was far more gradual.
The number of strikes in Japan did not noticeably increase:
Within Europe the experience was remarkably uniform.
The strike waves took place at around the same time and all won major wage increases.
Many strikes were headed by groups of workers who had previously been fairly quiescent.
Many were in white-collar jobs, often in the public sector.
Often the  workers were unorganized, or organized only weakly.
The strikes were sparked off by the rank and file, most were unofficial, and often they were resisted at the outset by national trade union leaderships.
So they should be seen essentially as a unified development.
Table 12.1
The European wage explosions, 1965–70
They also marked a watershed in industrial relations, showing clearly that the consensus had failed to unite divergent class interests.
Since 1968–70 there have been more strikes than in the fifties and sixties, and more of them have been unofficial.
The wage explosions also had an immediate economic impact: by jacking up costs they squeezed profits further and boosted inflation.
So the industrial turbulence of these years is important.
But why did it happen?
At first glance it looks like a straightforward consequence of overaccumulation (chapter 11).
Europe as a whole was booming by the late sixties.
As we saw, labour markets were tight.
Accumulation could be maintained only if wages rose and scrapping accelerated.
Otherwise there would be a shortage of workers to operate newly installed machines.
So faster wage rises were needed if the system was to function smoothly.
The effective full employment also provided the mechanism to push up wages.
By tilting bargaining power towards labour, it encouraged big pay claims.
Capitalists resisted, which was an instinctive response, but also a rational one.
Real wages had to rise somewhere if less efficient plant was to be scrapped and the labour shortage contained.
But it was clearly to any one firm's  advantage if somewhere was elsewhere.
Workers backed up their claims with strike action.
And they won, because employers could not find substitute labour and because, with demand for commodities high, they lost heavily from any interruptions of production.
Capitalists were forced to concede the wage rises which for the system as a whole were needed to sustain accumulation.
Actually the situation was more complicated.
The money wage increases which workers won exceeded those required to generate enough scrapping to ease labour shortage.
The result was not only an increase in real wages but also a higher rate of inflation.
And the strike waves did not all occur in particularly tight labour markets.
Those in Germany, Italy and some smaller countries did, but those in France and the United Kingdom did not.
The wage explosions were certainly a product of overaccumulation in a general sense: more or less full, and rapidly expanding, employment during much of the long boom was a necessary backdrop.
It bred a new generation of workers with no memory of mass unemployment.
But to go beyond this general observation we must examine the pattern of accumulation since the late fifties.
Europe underwent a sustained boom from the mid-fifties through to the early sixties.
Prices and wages accelerated upwards and wage explosions occurred in Germany in 1961–2 and in Italy and France in 1962–3.
Balance of payments difficulties followed in Italy in 1963, France in 1964–5 and Germany in 965–6.
The profit share fell sharply from 1960.
As we argued in the previous chapter, this profits squeeze fundamentally reflected overaccumulation.
Labour markets became very tight and money wages rose rapidly.
Firms were unable to pass these increases on fully in prices because of international competition.
The US economy was stagnant with fairly stable prices, and its export prices dominated those for world manufacturing.
The formation of the EEC in 1958 also saw substantial tariff reductions by member countries which increased competitive pressure on their industries.
The fact that unemployment did not result prior to deflationary policies suggests that real wage rises did not  exceed those required to adjust scrapping to the pace of accumulation and labour supply.
Governments responded to the profits squeeze and loss of competitiveness by deflation and incomes policies.
The Bank of Italy clamped down on monetary policy in 1963, generating a major recession in 1964–5.
Unemployment jumped from a low of 2.7 per cent to a high of 4.3 per cent in 1966.
In France, Debré's 1963 Stabilization Plan embodied deflation.
Unemployment rose slowly from 1.4 per cent in 1961–3 to 2.7 per cent in 1968.
The Bundesbank tightened monetary policy sharply in 1965.
By mid-1966 unemployment in Germany exceeded vacancies for the first time since 1959.
Deflation in the United Kingdom began with the ‘July measures’ of 1966 aimed at staving off a devaluation of sterling.
Unemployment rose from 2.3 per cent in 1965 to 3.8 per cent in 1967.
The French government tried to negotiate a voluntary incomes policy with the unions in 1964.
When this ‘dialogue of the deaf’ broke down the authorities  imposed limits on the public sector.
In Germany the unions cooperated with the ‘concerted action’ programme initiated when the SPD entered the government in 1966.
This involved long-term contracts and ceilings on increases.
The Italian government did not attempt an incomes policy, but it did persuade the metal workers, whose settlement traditionally sets the pace for other sectors, to postpone the renegotiation of their three-year contract from 1965 to 1966.
The British Labour government introduced a statutory incomes policy in 1966.
A six-month freeze was followed by six months of ‘severe restraint’.
Further stages operated until 1969.
Incomes policies are often presented as a preferable alternative to deflation since inflation can be reduced without higher unemployment.
But the real success of either policy depends, from the employers' perspective, on the extent to which real wages are held down and the potential profitability improved.
Holding down money wage increases can reduce both inflation and real wage rises, as lower cost increases enable employers to raise profit margins where competition is weak.
But in reality the two approaches more often go together.
Incomes policies aim to persuade workers to accept lower money wage increases; deflation aims to weaken their bargaining position, and so offer them no choice.
The threat of deflation as the only alternative to incomes policy is also more powerful when supported by a taste of the deflationary medicine.
Employers also launched an offensive on working practices and plant-level bargaining machinery.
In Germany and Italy this shows clearly in cuts in plant-level wage supplements.
In France it seems mainly to have taken the form of rationalization during a major merger boom.
In Italy it also involved a major intensification of work.
In the United Kingdom it took the form of productivity deals aimed at eroding shopfloor control over working practices.
These developments occurred against the background of a temporary relaxation of international competition.
The US economy had moved into the Vietnam boom and its export prices had begun to rise significantly.
This helped European capital to hold down real wages by raising prices.
The policies were successful.
The fall in both the share and rate of profit was reversed in 1966.
Profitability then rose until 1969.
But resentment built up among workers.
Deflation, incomes policies and attacks on plant bonuses held down wages.
Incomes policies eroded differentials, and trade union action was limited by long-term contracts.
The employers' offensive worsened job conditions and hamstrung plant-level union representatives.
The strike waves were the delayed expression of this resentment.
In Germany and Italy better conditions for a fight back were provided by a tightening of labour markets in the boom of the late sixties.
But British and French workers did not have to wait for an economic upturn.
The students' revolt provided the catalyst in France.
The French working class also has a tradition of sudden quasi-general strikes.
It struck in this way in 1953 and in 1936.
Finally the workers who had suffered most were in the public  sector, where incomes policy had held wage growth well below that of elsewhere.
Most of the early strikers were state employees.
Public sector workers played a similar role in the United Kingdom.
Incomes policy had been applied more rigorously in the state sector there too, and the winter of 1969–70 saw the novel spectacle of group after group of public sector workers rejecting settlements negotiated by their leaderships.
The strength and traditions of the British labour movement are the other key factors.
Shop stewards would lead unofficial disputes even in a downturn, confident that management would not dare attempt victimization.
The attacks of the mid-sixties also explain the wildcat nature of the strikes.
Many trade union leaderships had become enmeshed in participation in incomes policies and arrangements for long-term contracts.
The employers' offensive was also, almost by definition, at plant level.
It was to be expected that resistance would begin here too.
There is also a rough correlation between the groups most hit by the austerity measures and those in the vanguard of the strikes.
Public sector workers in France and the United Kingdom have already been mentioned.
The other prominent group in the United Kingdom was motor industry workers, who had also borne the brunt of the attack on shopfloor organization and working practices.
In Italy unskilled migrant workers from the centre and south both suffered most and fought back most tenaciously.
The wage explosions were the price of industrial peace.
In France, they also bought political stability.
We have so far stressed the similarity of strike waves.
But it is worth looking at two major examples in more detail to get a flavour of those heady days.
Italy's Hot Autumn
Italy is particularly interesting.
The Hot Autumn marked a greater shift in the balance of power between labour and capital than occurred elsewhere.
Before 1968 Italian unions were very weak.
Their membership was low and they had failed to organize the immigrants from the centre and south who increasingly provided the majority of semi-skilled and unskilled labour in the industrial north.
The unions had almost no influence on the factory floor and were ineffective in collective bargaining.
They were divided politically into communist (CGIL) and non-communist (CSIL) federations .
But since the beginning of the seventies the semi-skilled became highly organized.
Shopfloor bargaining became standard in large plants and effective national negotiations became the norm.
The two federations have worked together fairly closely.
The Hot Autumn also marks a greater turning point in economic performance than occurred elsewhere.
Only the United Kingdom economy performed as badly during the seventies and it has always been near the bottom  of the league.
Italy, on the other hand, underwent an ‘economic miracle’ during the fifties and sixties.
The shift in the balance of forces reflected in the wage explosion of 1968–70 was almost certainly the chief factor behind Italy's worse performance in the 1970s.
Indeed, the story of Italian economic policy in the seventies is largely one of attempts to adapt to or reverse this shift.
The Italian labour movement suffered enormous defeats in the late forties (chapter 6) and the trade unions remained ineffective throughout the fifties.
Membership figures are unreliable but suggest that no more than 10–15 per cent of the work force was unionized.
More reliable data for the metal workers, the most powerful sector, show only 20–25 per cent unionization.
Almost all negotiations were at industry or national level, and ineffective.
Agreements on conditions at work were either disregarded by employers (for example the 1950 national agreement on dismissals) or used to undermine links between trade union representatives and employees (for example the 1953 National Agreement on Works Councils which made these, and not union structures, the official plant representatives for employees).
Industrial agreements on minimum wages were imposed by employers' confederations, dominated by small firms, which set them ‘at rates which employers could afford to pay’(Kendall, 1975 p. 164).
Fiat allocated housing to employees on the basis of ‘managerial judgements of the worker's union affiliation, politics and docility…
[For]some time Fiat systematically transferred all known members of FIOM, its CGIL metal workers union, to a particular plant which was shortly afterwards shut down…
If there are Communists in a man's family, he is not hired…
There are no doubt exceptions, but some such policy is commonly found throughout Italian industry’(Edelman and Fleming, quoted Flanagan, et al., 1983, p. 512).
Tough measures were encouraged by the United States, which threatened to withdraw contracts from companies with CGIL majorities on works councils.
It is hardly surprising that real wages rose less rapidly than productivity and hence that profitability and competitiveness improved.
Nor is it surprising that the accumulation of capital was accompanied by an accumulation of employee grievances.
An opportunity for some of this pressure to vent itself was provided in the early sixties.
Italy shared in the European boom of the period and the consequent general tightening of labour markets.
In the key northern industrial region of Lombardy official unemployment fell to 1.7 per cent in 1962 and 1963.
This strengthened labour's hand.
Workers could now press for improvements.
The government could have clamped down at an early stage with tough deflationary policies.
But it pursued accommodating policies at first and did not deflate until 1964.
The  Christian Democrats wanted an alliance with the Socialists.
They had consistently failed to push through reforms when governing alone.
They were also losing votes to the left: in 1948 the Christian Democrats received 49 per cent of the votes while the Communists and Socialists together polled 31 per cent; by 1963 the Christian Democrats' share had fallen to 38 per cent and the  Socialists and Communists' had risen to 39 per cent .
Finally, the Socialists had become more acceptable to the Christian Democrats because they had begun to distance themselves from the Communists after 1956.
The Socialists' price for the deal was a redistribution to labour.
The Christian Democrats paid up by accommodating the wage explosions.
The governor of the Bank of Italy — a Christian Democrat and strong supporter of rapprochement with the Socialists — relaxed monetary policy during the strike wave to ‘permit’ the wage rises of 1962 and 1963.
The big wage increases were led — not for the last time — by the metal workers, who concluded a new agreement late in 1962.
Manufacturing money wages skyrocketed, with national rates rising by 10.7 per cent in 1962 and 14.7 per cent in 1963, accompanied by significant wage drift.
Since manufacturing productivity rose by only 2.9 per cent a year between 1962 and 1964, this implied some combination of higher inflation and lower profitability.
With world manufacturing prices growing at less than 1 per cent a year, international competition prevented much passing on of higher unit labour costs.
So labour's share in the value of manufacturing output rose from 72 per cent in 1960 to 80 per cent in 1964.
Profits and international competitiveness suffered accordingly.
Neither the government nor the employers were prepared to accept redistribution on this scale.
Both tried to reverse it.
The government deflated sharply in 1964 and unemployment began to rise steeply, reaching 5.4 per cent in 1965.
This severely weakened the unions.
Nationally, this can be seen most clearly in the poor settlement achieved by the metal workers.
Their three-year agreement was due for renegotiation in 1965.
But the employers persuaded them to hold off until 1966, when they settled for a mere 5 per cent rise over the three years to 1969.
National no-strike agreements were also concluded for continuous process industries.
Weakness at plant level was reflected in sharply negative wage drift in 1964 and 1965.
Employers also took the opportunity to launch an assault on working practices.
If one reads the union press; if one follows case histories of individual factories, one obtains the impression of a general intensification of the work process, which came in different ways and used different methods: reduction in labour-time on a particular machine operation; supervision of an increased number of machines; increased assembly line speeds; spread of incentive payments systems; increase in heavy and onerous work loads.
(M. Salvati, quoted Flanagan et al., 1983, p. 519).
These policies achieved quite a lot: ‘By 1966 businesses had begun to reestablish profits through policies which aimed at reducing unit costs.
The method most frequently applied was an increase in assembly line speeds unaccompanied in general by a proportional increase in wages.
Similar changes were observed in almost all the factories studied’(M. Salvati, quoted Flanagan et al., 1983, p. 519).
Unit labour costs fell by 2.3 per cent in 1965 and 1.9 per cent in 1966.
Labour's share of manufacturing output fell from 80 per cent in 1964 to 76 per cent in 1968.
International competitiveness rose: between 1961 and 1963 Italian export prices rose by 1.2 per cent relative to the EEC export price index; between 1964 and 1968 they fell by 5.4 per cent.
The key role played by intensification is indicated by the sharp increase in manufacturing productivity achieved during the downturn.
Between 1962 and 1964 output per head rose by 5.8 per cent; between 1965 and 1967 it rose by 19.6 per cent , despite a lower rate of accumulation in the latter period.
This improvement in Italian business performance was once again only achieved at the expense of a powerful buildup of shopfloor grievances.
As the general secretary of the CISL put it, ‘In the years 1965–66, especially, a process of rationalization in the industries caused serious tensions to arise and was the cause of a new awareness of the problems of working life, this process having taken the form of a balance of forces highly unfavourable to the worker’(Reggio, quoted Flanagan et al., 1983, p. 520).
These grievances were to find expression in the strike wave that occurred once economic conditions improved.
This happened in 1968.
Italy shared in the general European boom of the late sixties and, as labour markets tightened, the balance of industrial power tilted towards the workers.
Resistance began in spring 1968 but developed only slowly.
Commentators spoke of Italy's ‘creeping May’.
It was to take a year and a half to build up the momentum for the Hot Autumn.
A milestone on the way was the onset at Pirelli in the summer of 1968 of an avalanche of wildcat strikes.
Another was a dispute at Fiat in spring 1969.
A number of important changes took place over the 18 months.
One concerns the workers taking part.
Grievances were felt particularly strongly by migrant workers who bore the brunt of the hardship because they were almost completely unorganized.
They also suffered most from the centre-left government's failure to push through reforms — in particular, its failure to modernize the badly overstretched social infrastructure in the northern cities to which the migrants had flocked.
At the beginning the immigrants' lack of experience and poor organization hampered mobilization, and so other workers struck first.
The spring 1968 strikes mainly involved older, skilled workers.
The Pirelli strike was started by printers, and the Fiat dispute was led by skilled, indigenous northern workers.
The young migrants first became heavily involved in the winter of 1968–9.
Student activists and dissident trade union officials initially played an important role, formulating and popularizing demands.
But by the autumn of 1969 the migrants dominated events.
Workers also developed new tactics.
At first, industrial action took the form of short strikes — the unions' traditional weapon since the early fifties (although by the spring of 1968 the level of picketing and violence was unusually high).
Later more imaginative tactics were adopted to try to achieve maximum disruption for a small loss of earnings.
All-out strikes gave way to ‘spot strikes’, ‘rolling strikes’ and ‘go slows’.
Favourites were ‘confetti strikes’, where  different workers struck for a set period at a time determined by the last digit or colour of their registration cards.
Picketing gave way to marches through factories, when workers would chase blacklegs and occasionally kidnap managers.
Public sector workers tried to hit at the state with minimum disruption of services to consumers.
So ticket collectors would strike while train drivers worked normally.
Workers' relationships with the trade unions also changed.
The unions were initially caught on the hop, because the disputes arose on the shop floor where few if any formal union representatives worked.
The strike committees which mushroomed from the summer of 1968 did so outside whatever trade union structures existed (although individual union activists played a key role).
The trade unions did not respond to events in a unified way until the summer of 1969.
When they did, they centred their national claims around the four basic demands coming from the shop floor.
These were for higher wages, reduced differentials, greater workplace control and more shopfloor participation in bargaining.
They also worked hard to channel shopfloor activity through new plant-level union structures.
They demanded, and often won, access to factories for trade union officials.
Workers would sometimes carry the officials, who had previously been barred from entry, shoulder-high through the gates.
The unions then organized massive workplace meetings to discuss national claims — something unknown since the immediate postwar period.
Two or three thousand such meetings were held.
The metal workers' agreement of December 1969 was the key breakthrough on pay and conditions.
It included a flat-rate increase of 65 lire an hour (nearly 10 per cent of average hourly earnings), a progressive reduction in weekly working hours to 40 by 1972, equal treatment of blue- and white-collar workers when sick, and overtime limits with compensation for lost earnings.
It required, for the first time, shopfloor ratification.
It also broke the dam for other sectors.
Another crucial agreement was the 1970 Workers' Charter.
This removed all obstacles to union activity at plant level and granted time and facilities.
It formed the basis for the development of plant-level bargaining in the big factories, which was to characterize the Italian economy throughout the seventies.
May 1968
Unlike the steady build-up in Italy, the French general strike of May-June 1968 was wholly unexpected.
On 22 March 1968 students at Nanterre University formed the Mouvement du 22 Mars during an occupation over the state of higher education.
This new organization united the previously fragmented student left.
On 2 May the dean closed Nanterre indefinitely, saying, ‘There is a strange climate in the  faculty…a very real war psychosis’(quoted Posner, 1970, p. 64).
Communist Party leader Marchais denounced the students in these words, ‘The pseudo-revolutionaries of Nanterre and anywhere else labour in vain, they will change nothing of historical reality’(quoted Posner, 1970).
The authorities evidently felt less sanguine.
They ordered 500 riot police (CRS) to surround the building.
Next day the rector of the Sorbonne summoned police to a student protest against the closure of Nanterre.
The CRS fired tear-gas canisters and arrested 600 students.
The Sorbonne and science faculty were closed.
The National Union of University Teachers called a protest strike.
On 6 May the CRS broke up a 60,000-strong demonstration by students and teachers in Paris.
Over 700 demonstrators received treatment in hospital.
Students erected barricades and strikes began to spread throughout the universities and high schools.
The second largest trade union federation, the CFDT, supported the students.
The largest, Communist Party federation, the CGT, did not.
The next day the Communist Party denounced the demonstration as the act of pampered adventurists.
On 8 May a student demonstration in Marseilles was attended by a large number of workers.
The next day the CGT in Dijon supported a student demonstration, against the instructions of head office.
On Friday 10 May students occupied the Latin quarter of Paris and built 60 barricades, which were violently attacked by the CRS.
Twenty of the thirty Paris lycées were now on strike, and over 350 were occupied nationwide.
The trade union federations called a general strike for 13 May to protest at government repression.
The strike was a major success.
Demonstrations were the largest since the war.
The CGT failed in its attempt to separate worker and student contingents.
The CRS withdrew from the Sorbonne, and students occupied the building, decking it out with red flags and a barrier proclaiming ‘Labourers and workers are invited to come and discuss their common problems with the university students’.
It became the headquarters and shop window of the movement.
Students' action committees began coordinating demonstrations and contacting workers' organizations.
Immediate relations were established with workers at Renault, Citroën, Air-France, Rhône-Poulenc and the Paris metro.
On 14 May workers at Sud-Aviation in Nantes locked the director in his office and occupied the plant.
Broadcasting workers voted to strike in protest at media coverage of events.
By the end of the day almost all universities were occupied or on strike, as were many hospitals.
On 15 May CFDT leaders shared a platform with students at Sorbonne.
Prime minister Georges Pompidou said that ‘groups of enragés [roughly ‘rabid extremists’— the term used to describe the extreme left in the French revolution of 1789]are encouraging the spread of disorder with the aim of destroying society…’.
Students adopted the slogan, ‘Nous sommes de plus en plus enragés’.
By then all the Renault plants had been occupied and students  and workers held joint meetings to plan future action at Renault and Sud-Aviation.
The CGT was rapidly losing control of even its most loyal factories.
By 17 May all air traffic had been halted and the Post Office workers had struck.
Many occupied factories were organizing crèches and discussions for local residents.
In the Loire-Atlantique region distribution had broken down entirely.
Students, workers and peasants formed a joint committee to organize supplies.
The police trade union warned that its members were close to striking.
Students set out on a ‘Long March’ across Paris from the Sorbonne to the Renault works.
Despite CGT opposition they were warmly received.
By the next day the railways were paralysed and Paris bus stations, metro lines and post offices had been occupied.
The actors' trade union demanded the right to decide democratically on what plays to perform.
French film makers broke up the Cannes festival in solidarity.
Radio journalists took control of news bulletins.
The CFDT called for democratization of industry.
The government set up Committees for the Defence of the Republic.
Extreme right-wing groups offered support in exchange for the release of imprisoned right-winger, General Salan.
A public opinion poll showed 55 per cent support for the students and 60 per cent for a ‘new society’.
On 19 May Socialist Party leader Mendès-France demanded the resignation of the government.
De Gaulle announced, ‘Les réformes oui, le chienlit [untranslatable army vulgarity]non!’
Students adopted the slogan, ‘Le chienlit, c'est lui!’
Strikes now covered all transport, nationalized industries, metals, banking and public services.
Next day all mines and ports closed, Michelin and Peugeot workers struck and the non-union work force at Citroën occupied the plant.
CGT secretary Séguy announced that he was not concerned with such ‘vacuous ideas as workers’ control, reform of society and other inventions'.
Rather, ‘going the whole hog means a general rise in wages, guaranteed employment, an earlier retirement age, reduction in working hours without loss of pay, and defence and extension of such trade union rights in the factory’.
But the CGT technicians' section came out in support of the students for workers' control.
By 21 May 10 million workers were on strike.
The employers association headquarters was occupied.
Young magistrates formed a union and voted to establish an independent judicial system.
The government withdrew facilities for independent radio stations.
On 24 May police stations were sacked and the stock exchange was set alight.
Police attacked bystanders and Red Cross workers.
The largest peasant demonstrations in French history took place.
Workers at the right-wing newspaper Le Figaro refused to print an article by sociologist Raymond Aron unless he had ‘more respect for the facts’.
Next day the government began negotiations with trade union leaders.
The Socialist Party's François Mitterrand demanded elections.
On 26 May the left made big gains in local elections in Dijon.
On 27 May the government, the employers and the CFDT and CGT  concluded the ‘Grenelle agreements’, embodying a 10 per cent across-the-board wage rise, an increase in the minimum wage, a small cut in working hours and a marginal extension of trade union rights.
Up and down the country factory meetings debated the agreements and rejected them overwhelmingly.
The Loire-Atlantique CGT left the federation, declaring that ‘the struggle is not economic but political’.
The CFDT then refused to sign the agreements and called for intensification of the strike movement.
The government halted the distribution of petrol and the Committees for the Defence of the Republic began distributing arms.
De Gaulle left the country for Baden-Baden to consult with French army commander General Massau, who agreed, in return for the release of General Salan, that the army would support any legal government but would not intervene openly unless the Communist Party called for insurrection.
In reporting what little was known about these discussions at the time, the Economist warned of ‘the danger that some as yet unknown army officer, drumming his fingers in some provincial headquarters, will decide that enough is enough’(1 June 1968).
Meanwhile the communists refused to support the left's call for a transitional government headed by Mendès-France on the grounds that he was too closely associated with the new movement.
The national news agency and the major publishing houses struck.
The strike movement had reached its peak.
On 30 May pro-Gaullists were supplied with petrol for carefully organized massive demonstrations (1 million in Paris alone).
Slogans included ‘Cohn-Bendit [a German Jewish student leader]to Dachau’.
Right-wing groups fired on left-wing demonstrators.
De Gaulle dissolved the National Assembly, announced elections for 23 June and 30 June and formed a new government of similar complexion to the old.
Negotiations began in most factories.
The CGT promised to respect any agreements reached.
A despondent Renault worker remarked, ‘It seems to me that we came very close to something new.’
Close, but not quite close enough.
On 7 June the CRS occupied the Renault plant at Flins after pitched battle.
Two days later the exiled leader of the extreme French settlers in Algeria, George Bidault, returned to France.
Many foreign students and workers were deported.
On 11 June two workers were killed at Peugeot and a student at Melun.
Several left-wing organizations were banned.
On 15 June Salan was released.
On 16 June the CRS took the Sorbonne.
Next day Renault returned to work.
On 20 June Peugeot went back and the first sackings of trade union leaders occurred.
On 23 June the Gaullists took a big lead in the first round of the elections.
One million workers were still on strike.
On 30 June the Gaullists completed their election victory.
France had returned to work and to bourgeois normality.
The underlying cause of the French general strike was the same as that of the other strike waves.
France, like Italy and Germany, had experienced a wage explosion in the European boom of the early sixties.
In 1962 and 1963 private sector wages rose by 10.8 and 11.1 per cent respectively and those in the public  sector by 17.0 and 14.6 per cent.
With prices rising by only 4.8 per cent in each year, this implied considerable real wage increases and a sharp fall in profitability.
Since French prices were rising considerably more rapidly than those in the United States and Germany, it also implied a loss of competitiveness.
The 1963 Stabilization Plan was designed to restore profits and competitiveness.
These policies were incorporated into the Fifth Plan, formulated in 1964 and 1965, which aimed at an annual rate of growth of profits of 8.6 per cent between 1964 and 1970.
Planned wage growth was restricted to 3.3 per cent a year.
After abortive negotiations on a voluntary incomes policy between October 1963 and January 1964, the government adopted four major policies towards this end.
One was deflation.
Registered unemployment rose from 1.4 per cent in 1961–3 to 2.7 per cent in 1968.
Another policy was control of public sector wages.
The Toutée procedure, adopted in May 1964, fixed an aggregate figure for wage increases in particular sectors, leaving the distribution of the overall increase to be negotiated between unions and management.
A third device was the use of ‘contract programme’ agreements negotiated with major companies.
These covered pricing policy and the principle was that companies were allowed to raise prices sufficiently to rebuild profit margins, providing they gave certain guarantees on employment, exports, investment and wages.
The agreements were confidential and their content unknown to the work force.
By 1969 some 85 per cent of industry was covered by them.
The final policy was the encouragement of a major merger drive to promote rationalization.
This was part of de Gaulle's attempt to modernize an industrially backward France —‘to make her marry her century’, as he put it.
The policies were fairly successful.
The rate of growth of real wages in the private sector fell to 3.9 per cent a year in 1965 and 1966, and 3.4 per cent in 1967.
Public sector wages were squeezed tighter still, and in four years fell 9 per cent behind the private sector.
The annual value of mergers more than trebled from a fairly stable trend in 1966 and 1967.
French inflation slowed to a rate comparable with that in Germany and the United States.
Deflation hit productivity growth which slowed down somewhat.
The share of profits in both manufacturing and business showed little change, despite lower capacity utilization.
As in most deflationary periods, profitability did not rise immediately.
But the potential for profitable production did improve, as the post-May 1968 expansion demonstrated.
This modest success was bought at the expense of mounting employee grievances.
These included the slow growth of real earnings overall and, for public sector workers, the deterioration in their position compared to the private sector.
The dislocations resulting from rationalization were also important.
A government report, issued shortly after the May events, summarized their causes as: ‘a failure to comprehend the resistance to change, to prepare the groundwork for unprecedented dislocation resulting from  mergers, combinations, business failures and dismissals, which accompanies modernization.
The changes on the labour market had come with greater rapidity than anticipated, too much reliance had been placed on the automatic adjustments, the mobility, of the market mechanism’(quoted Flanagan et al., 1983, p. 605).
In this sense May 1968 was the price de Gaulle paid for his attempt at a shotgun wedding between French industry and the twentieth century.
Two main differences, besides the obvious ones of speed, scale and aspirations, distinguish the French strike waves from the Italian.
One is the fact that, while in Italy a tightening of the labour market played a key role, in France the strike occurred in the context of the highest levels of unemployment and excess capacity since 1960.
The other difference is that the Hot Autumn significantly altered both industrial relations and economic performance in Italy, whereas the altogether more dramatic French experience brought no comparable long-term changes.
The students' revolt was clearly important to the timing of events in France.
This was closely linked to the accumulated grievances of the workers, being also largely a product of de Gaulle's modernization strategy.
In the fifties university student numbers had risen from 135,000 in 1949 to 220,000 in 1960.
In the sixties the pace accelerated: 520,000 enrolled in the autumn of 1967.
This growth far outstripped the provision of facilities.
In the academic year 1967–8 there were 30,000 too many students in Paris alone.
The government's response was a plan to replace the baccalauréat system, which guaranteed places to those obtaining certain qualifications, with one of competitive selection.
The occupation at Nanterre which gave birth to the 22 Mars movement was to protest against this proposal.
The government's repressive response played a role in building sympathy for the students.
Workers would probably have been less inclined to support them if their protests had met with reasoned discussion rather than tear gas.
Finally, the structure and traditions of the French labour movement were important.
Collective bargaining hardly existed under de Gaulle.
Union membership fell rapidly to around half of the immediate postwar level.
In 1968 only around 15 per cent of the work force was unionized.
This did not reflect a few well-organized sectors and a larger number of unorganized ones as was the case in the United States, for example, where the average level of unionization was similar.
In the private sector printing was the only heavily unionized industry.
Unionization was high in the public sector but union activity was restricted to dealing with individual grievances and the empty version of wage bargaining embodied in the Toutée procedures.
So employers and the government could virtually ignore trade unions if they wished.
Under de Gaulle they opted almost unanimously to do so.
The low level of unionization did not simply reflect apathy or a lack of militancy.
All companies with more than 50 employees were required by law to have enterprise committees elected annually by the work force (their function  being largely consultative, with some responsibility for health and safety).
In 1967 and 1968 turnout for these elections was around 75 per cent, with 80–90 per cent of the vote going to union candidates.
But the low level of unionization did influence the form of industrial struggle.
It meant that major strikes almost invariably began from the bottom up and were largely outside the control of the unions.
As one commentator put it, the unions ‘functioned as skilled surfboard riders’.
Strikes were often imitative, a few key factories providing a ‘signal’.
In 1968 that initiating role was played largely by the Renault and Sud-Aviation plants.
The chief reason why the May events failed to transform the industrial relations structure — let alone society as a whole — is the behaviour of the CGT and the Communist Party.
The CGT was far and away the most powerful union federation.
It had around three times the membership of the CFDT and received about half of the votes cast in enterprise committee elections.
The Communist Party was a major force in French politics.
We have already seen the role that these organizations played at key stages of the struggle.
The Economist described the situation vividly: ‘Whenever one hears somebody on the French radio vituperating against ‘adventurers’ one can be sure that M. Cohn-Bendit or some other leftist student is the target.
But one cannot guess the political colour of the speaker.
It might be a Gaullist or it might be a Communist.
On the other hand, if somebody talks about revolution, structural changes or socialist society, one is safe in assuming he is not a Communist' (25 May 1968).
It also provided an astute analysis:
A revolution set alight by students, snuffed out by communists
A modern revolution requires the coincidence of a revolutionary situation and a party or organization ready to seize power.
As France comes virtually to a halt, the situation might look revolutionary.
But the party which has always claimed the revolutionary role now shows no signs of fulfilling it.
The Communists have climbed on the bandwagon, but only to put the brakes on.
This is not because they want to preserve General de Gaulle's regime.
It is because they are using a revolutionary weapon — general and unlimited strikes — in order to achieve a parliamentary aim, the formation of a popular front government
(Economist, 25 May 1968).
No one can be certain what would have happened if the Communist Party had tried to lead a revolution in May 1968.
Indeed such a question is virtually meaningless.
The Communist Party's behaviour was no sudden aberration.
Its attempts to strangle the revolutionary movement at birth during May 1968 were consistent with the approach taken over the previous 30 years, including the immediate postwar period (part I).
Two things are clear, however.
Its strategy was an abject failure on its own terms, for the Gaullists romped home in the June elections.
Secondly, by denouncing the CFDT's demands for industrial democracy and restricting negotiations to the traditional issues of pay and  hours, the CGT ensured that the May events would have little impact on the future structure of industrial relations.
Clampdown and the 1970–1 recession
For the ACCs as a whole, both monetary and fiscal policy swung sharply towards restriction between 1968 and 1969.
This picture is dominated by developments in the United States, but a definite shift towards restriction is observable elsewhere, prompted by the acceleration of prices noted above and by growing economic and social unrest.
The effect of this shift was a highly synchronized but relatively mild recession.
Idle capacity rose by about 3 percentage points between the second halves of 1969 and 1971; rather more in the United States and Japan and considerably less in Europe.
From peak to trough, registered unemployment rose from 3.5 per cent to 6.0 per cent in the United States and from 1.8 per cent to 3.0 per cent in Europe.
Inflation peaked at 5.8 per cent in the United States in 1970.
As a result of the recession and price controls it fell to a trough of 3.3 per cent in 1972.
In the wake of the wage explosions inflation rose more in Europe.
It reached 6.5 per cent in 1971 and thereafter hardly fell back.
Policy-makers felt general disappointment with the stubbornness of prices in the face of rising unemployment.
The term ‘stagflation’ became common parlance and increasing doubts were expressed about the effectiveness of Keynesian ‘fine tuning’.
The break-up of Bretton Woods
We left the fortunes of the international financial system and of the dollar with the 1968 decision — implemented in 1970 — to issue special drawing rights (SDRs) on the IMF (chapter 10).
This might have shored up the dollar for a time had the US balance of payments improved as expected.
But it did not.
The current account deteriorated as the trade balance shrank; business investment overseas doubled between 1965 and 1970.
The situation was concealed in 1968 and 1969 as short-term capital was attracted to US banks by high interest rates: $12 billion flowed in during those two years, more than covering the long-term capital outflow.
Simultaneously, foreign central banks' dollar holdings fell.
But this policy was drastically reversed in 1970 when monetary policy became extremely permissive.
The US money supply was allowed to grow at 10 per cent per year or more for the next four years, having been virtually unchanged in 1969.
Predictably, the $12 billion ‘hot money’ left US banks as interest rates fell.
Added to an already heavy outflow of long-term capital, the flight of dollars became a rout.
In 1970 foreign central banks acquired $17 billion and the  United States lost $2½ billion of reserves.
Reserve backing for the dollar deteriorated more in 1970 than during the previous decade.
In May 1971 the publication of figures showing a marked worsening of the US current account coincided with a further reduction in interest rates.
Money flowed out of the United States into almost all OECD countries, but especially those with strong currencies — Germany, Switzerland, Austria and the Netherlands.
Germany alone received $9 billion in 1970 and $4 billion in the first five months of 1971.
The countries receiving the dollars were largely powerless to do anything about it, despite their fears that credit would expand and inflation rise.
The sums involved made it difficult to prevent the inflows from boosting the money supply by selling bonds, and in any case, if this were attempted it would only prevent interest rates from falling and keep the currency attractive to those anxious to get out of dollars.
Initially many central banks made the best of a bad job by loaning the dollars to borrowers in Europe via the so-called Euromarkets, where a premium over US interest rates could be obtained.
This stimulated the growth of these ‘offshore’ markets for dollar loans.
The funds were often borrowed by speculators who then reinvested them in strong currencies in the expectation of revaluations, a hideous spiral by which central banks were providing funds to speculators who stood to make a profit from them if the currency was revalued.
In March 1971 central banks agreed to freeze the deposit of reserves on the Euromarkets.
But speculative pressure continued and high demand for Eurodollar loans pushed interest rates on the market well above the usual 0.5 per cent premium on US rates.
This in turn led to further withdrawals of dollars from the United States for deposit on the Euromarkets.
Between April and June 1971 speculation against the dollar ran at an annual rate of $14 billion.
A number of foreign exchange markets closed temporarily and hasty exchange-rate adjustments were made, with strong currencies being revalued or, as in the case of the Deutschmark, floated.
This proved to be only a warm-up.
Action began in earnest in the summer.
United States trade figures for the second quarter of 1971 showed a deficit for the first time.
Between July and September hot money flowed out of the dollar at an annual rate of $35 billion.
During the first two weeks of August non-US central banks began welshing heavily on their agreement not to convert dollar reserves into gold, and US gold reserves fell alarmingly.
President Nixon, whose grasp of such matters was immortalized on tape in ‘Well, I don't give a [expletive deleted]about the lira’(quoted Williamson, 1977, p. 175), responded on 15 August 1971 by suspending indefinitely the convertibility of the dollar into gold.
He also introduced a 10 per cent surcharge on imports.
For the next four months all major currencies floated.
After some hard bargaining, in December 1971 the major OECD countries signed the Smithsonian Agreement which established a new system of fixed exchange rates.
The United States accepted a cosmetic increase in the price of  gold following European insistence that it must be seen to devalue.
But nobody seriously proposed the convertibility of the dollar into gold.
Indeed, it was out of the question given the dollar's enfeebled position.
The events of that year, combining as they did an enormous outflow of dollars (the overall deficit for 1971 of $30 billion exceeded by 70 per cent the cumulative total for the previous ten years) with considerable ‘cashing in’ of dollars for gold in the weeks preceding the suspension of convertibility, reduced massively the extent of potential gold backing for the dollar.
At the beginning of 1971 US gold reserves had been sufficient to cover 32 per cent of foreign dollar holdings.
Twelve months later they could cover only 18 per cent.
The further diminution of the role of gold amounted, then, to little more than a recognition of the existing situation.
The main benefit to the United States of the Smithsonian Agreement lay in the new exchange rates which embodied a 9 per cent devaluation of the dollar in relation to other currencies compared with the pre-August rates and thus increased US competitiveness.
This devaluation was much smaller, though, than the United States had wanted.
During the negotiations the United States indicated that it was seeking a rate for the dollar that would yield a $13 billion boost to the US current account.
This would give a current account surplus of $9 billion a year, enough to finance a capital outflow of $6 billion a year and to improve confidence in the dollar by reducing liabilities to central banks by $3 billion a year.
The United States continued with its permissive monetary policies and dollar outflows began to mount again in the second half of 1972.
The crunch came early in the next year.
The events of 1971 assume the proportions of a small-town poker game in comparison to the speculation of February and March 1973.
In February the Smithsonian Agreement was seriously breached when the yen was floated (sterling had already been floated in June 1972).
The dollar was also devalued by a further 10 per cent in recognition that the Smithsonian Agreement, hailed by Nixon as ‘the most significant monetary agreement in the history of the modern world’(quoted Gilbert, 1980, p. 164), was insufficient to restore US competitiveness.
This had been demonstrated by the rise in US imports of manufactured goods, which rocketed by 27 per cent in 1972 following a 20 per cent rise in 1971: ‘it was evident that industry abroad was making major adjustments and marketing efforts to enlarge its share of the US market’(Gilbert, 1980, p. 105).
Even this further devaluation failed to restore confidence as the US treasury secretary announced that the United States would not intervene to support the dollar and intended to remove all controls on capital exports.
On the single day of 1 March 1973, Germany absorbed $2.7 billion, and in the first quarter of 1973 as a whole the US reserve position deteriorated by $10 billion.
On 19 March the major central banks renounced the commitment to maintain their exchange rates within a band of + 2.25 per cent with respect to the dollar.
This constituted the formal abandonment of the second and, since  the suspension of dollar/gold convertibility in 1971, the only remaining basic principle of the Bretton Woods system which was thus now dead.
Dollar devaluation
The determination of the US authorities to secure a substantial devaluation of the dollar against other currencies and consequent improvement of the US trade balance is beyond doubt.
Whether their monetary policy from as early as 1970 was designed to force such a devaluation is another question.
On the one hand, driving interest rates down would predictably lead to a dollar outflow.
It has been argued that the form the expansion took-monetary expansion rather than tax cuts — is proof of this intention.
On the other hand, the United States carried out a series of crisis measures apparently aimed at shoring up the dollar.
In the last week before convertibility was suspended in 1971, $2 billion was borrowed by the United States from other central banks to try to hold the line.
The United States certainly pursued a policy of ‘benign neglect’ towards the dollar, expanding the economy for domestic reasons with little regard to the effect on the exchange rate.
By early 1973 it was clear that they would do little or nothing to protect the exchange rate from the impact of domestic policies, and indeed increasingly resented the attempts of European and Japanese central banks to prevent the dollar rate from finding its own level.
Such a position would be quite incomprehensible if the main thrust of US policy was an attempt to run as large as possible a balance of payments deficit (on current and long-term capital account) in order to grab real resources from the rest of the world in exchange for paper dollars.
On the contrary, given the heavy and increasing rate of capital exports, which was a major priority for many of the dominating US multinationals, it was far better from the United States' point of view that these capital exports should be mainly financed by a current account surplus rather than by endless piling up of US liabilities abroad to foreign central banks.
The return paid on these liabilities was certainly low (the short-term interest rate in real terms averaged 0.4 per cent over the years 1968–74).
But the onslaught of European and Japanese competition made it far more important to attempt to maintain the position of domestic manufacturing industry with a lower exchange rate.
This would help domestic industry to maintain both its market share and its profitability, as European and Japanese firms would be obliged to increase their dollar prices to compensate for a fall in the dollar against their currencies.
Indeed, the huge capital exports by US business provided a ‘justification’ for the United States running a current account surplus and were used as such during the Smithsonian discussions over the size of adjustment of the exchange rate.
This argument was to be repeated in succeeding years during discussions over reform of the international monetary system, in which the United States consistently held that balance of payments targets should be defined in terms of current and capital account combined.
So the United States ‘needed’ a current account surplus to finance its capital exports.
The United States could, and did, also claim that it actually required a greater surplus than this so that it could begin to chip away at the huge ‘overhang’ of dollar liabilities with a view to restoring convertibility of the dollar to the SDR (special drawing rights) once confidence had been restored.
The basic negotiating position of the United States, presented to the IMF in November 1972, was that countries should peg their currencies to the SDR, but that they would be obliged to devalue or revalue if their reserves fell below or rose above certain predefined warning levels.
This was directly aimed at the ‘surplus countries’, especially Japan and Germany, and was an attempt to bind them into a system where they could not pile up persistent surpluses.
The surplus countries
The ‘reserve indicator plan’, as it was called, described above was never a very serious possibility.
Under it, major changes in reserves would have created an overwhelming presumption that a change in the exchange rate was around the corner, and thus encouraged speculation on what was in effect a certain bet.
But the significant point is that it underlines the United States' determination to prevent the persistent undervaluation of the mark or the yen.
Such a concern is explained by the fact that these countries had repeatedly demonstrated their willingness to go to enormous lengths (in effect taxing imports of capital, encouraging exports of capital and, even in the case of Japan, organizing plans for importing huge stockpiles of raw materials) in order to prevent an upward movement of their currencies.
If these countries felt they were being exploited by having to run a surplus and thus provide finance for the US deficit, such behaviour would be quite incomprehensible.
On the contrary, their exporting sectors, extremely powerful in both countries, had a very strong interest in maintaining the exchange rate at a low level in order to generate the maximum possible export surplus.
This was not primarily due to some old-fashioned desire to pile up reserves, however comforting that might be for central bankers and useful when it came to securing influence by making loans to weaker countries.
The fundamental concern was rather their export sectors' immediate interest in sales of, and profits on, exports.
Revaluation, while cutting the cost of living for workers as the price of imported goods fell, would reduce their ability to compete profitably abroad, especially in the American market if the revaluation was with respect to the dollar.
Although the Europeans and Japanese firmly resisted the reserve indicator plan, which would apply heavy pressure on surplus countries, they insisted that the United States should in effect reinstitute convertibility.
‘From the US standpoint, the demand for dollar convertibility was simply the demand for an exchange value guarantee on the fiduciary instruments [dollars]that financed  their deficits, while surplus countries retained their freedom to allow their surpluses to pile up’(Gilbert, 1980, p. 185).
What they were not prepared to countenance was that ‘the United States should redeem its unwanted dollars in goods, by undervaluing the dollar and thereby running a large and persistent export surplus: such a treatment was wholly unacceptable to export interests in Europe which would suffer the increased US competition’(Tew, 1977, p. 192).
Precisely the same fear of revaluation underlay the continual reluctance of the German and Japanese authorities to see their currencies held as reserves by other countries.
Quite simply, such an additional demand for the currencies concerned would help keep them at a higher level, with a consequent reduction in their export surpluses.
Whatever prestige and influence might be gained by being a reserve currency was wholly insufficient to compensate for export profits being lost by overvaluation.
US competitiveness and payments
The successive downward movements in the relative value of the dollar brought a marked improvement in US competitiveness.
The dollar fell by 24 per cent against the yen and Deutschmark between 1970 and 1973; against currencies on average (weighted by their importance in US trade) the fall was 15 per cent.
Moreover, since unit costs actually rose less in the United States than in competing countries over the same period, the improvement in US cost competitiveness was actually 27 per cent on average.
In dollar terms, unit labour costs in manufacturing rose in the USA by 6 per cent, in Japan by 72 per cent and in Germany by 64 per cent .
This improvement in competitiveness undoubtedly contributed to arresting the deterioration in the US balance of payments.
For several years after 1972 the level of net imports of consumer goods stabilized.
Net exports of capital goods doubled between 1972 and 1974 (assisted by strong demand from the oil producers).
As demand for food rose, the United States suddenly became a major exporter of agricultural goods, the surplus on that account rising from $1½ billion in 1972 to $10½ billion in 1974.
A large surplus would have resulted but for the $20 billion rise in the cost of oil imports as the OPEC price increases coincided with — indeed, were encouraged by — rising US oil imports (chapter 13).
Even though the current account was back in surplus in 1974, it was not nearly enough to cover the outflow of capital, and the result was that dollar liabilities rose by nearly $9 billion.
The story of the US balance of payments during the break-up of the old international monetary system is summarized in table 12.2.
Despite the huge amount of interest received (nearly $9 billion a year), there was on average over the period hardly any current account surplus.
To the long-term capital outflow of $42 billion had to be added a new element, a short-term capital outflow of $22 billion, as foreign firms and individuals either withdrew their cash from US banks or increased their borrowing from them.
The total outflow of some $60 billion was financed by increases in the reserves held by the central banks of the industrial countries.
Table 12.2
US balance of payments, 1968–74 ($ billion)
Of course, no foreign central bank was compelled to hold a single additional dollar — indeed, they could have unloaded part of their existing holdings.
When they could not get gold for their dollars after 1971 (the US gold stock fell by only $2½ billion over the whole period), they only acquired these dollars because they were prepared to sell their own currencies in order to prevent them rising further.
The reason why they maintained these holdings in dollars, rather than selling them for some other currency, was that dollar investments in New York remained attractive despite the decline in the relative value of the dollar in the early seventies.
In 1974 the reserves of the industrialized countries stopped growing, while simultaneously the reserves of the OPEC producers shot up by $31 billion.
Most of these reserves were held in the Eurodollar market, which meant that rather than deposit them in New York the central banks of the oil producers deposited them in banks outside the United States.
Many of these were the overseas branches of US banks which made a healthy margin in acting as the go-betweens between the OPEC members, who wanted to lend dollars, and the countries with balance of payments deficits which wanted to borrow them.
US capital undoubtedly benefited from its ability to borrow via foreign central banks' holdings of dollar securities.
Between 1967 and 1974 net US  receipts of profits and interest rose from $5.3 billion to $15.5 billion.
In contrast to the preceding period, none of this rise can be attributed to the investment of current account surpluses.
A substantial part of the increase certainly represented increased profits in money terms on the existing stock of US industrial investment abroad.
But a substantial part must also have resulted from the new investment overseas which was now being wholly financed by borrowing overseas at a very low real rate of interest.
Shorn of all element of compulsion, now that the United States was no longer even pretending that the dollar was convertible into gold, the rise in official holdings of dollars showed that dollars were the best asset to hold.
The United States was reaping the benefit of its industrial and financial might without having to resort to any crude use of political power.
When the issue of international monetary reform had been seriously debated in 1972 the United States started from the position that ‘the system should neither bar nor encourage official holdings of foreign exchange’, suggesting that ‘the United States still thought of the SDR as providing a substitute for gold rather than for the dollar’(Williamson, 1977, p. 176).
Although the United States accepted the case for the dollar eventually being convertible into SDRs, in its view this had to result from the dollar being sufficiently competitive to generate enough capital and current account surpluses over a period to make convertibility a reality.
The European (and Japanese) unwillingness to accept this is shown at a theoretical level by their refusal to accept proposals which would have required revaluations, and in practice by their preparedness to pile up dollar reserves.
The Europeans suggested that the IMF should convert their existing dollar holdings into SDRs.
This would protect the holdings against a future decline of the dollar, but at the cost of pushing the risk on to the United States if it were required to compensate the IMF (which would take over these dollar holdings) for any losses.
This was simply keeping their cake (dollars earned by running of vast surpluses through refusal to revalue) and eating it (obliging the United States to guarantee the value of the assets they accumulated via these surpluses).
There has never been any reason why the United States should accept this type of proposal.
Limiting the size of US deficits by forcing revaluations (as in the US proposals for a ‘reserve indicator plan’ in the context of fixed exchange rates) or making official statements that the dollar is too high (the ‘open-mouth policy’, subsequently implemented on occasion under floating exchange rates) is quite consistent with the dollar maintaining an international role.
Such a role, which inevitably involves the dollar's use as a reserve currency, is the product of US industrial and financial power, and was hardly eroded by the end of dollar convertibility and of the fixed exchange rate system.
The 1972–3 mini-boom
1972 and early 1973 was a period of very rapid growth throughout the world capitalist system.
Between the first halves of 1972 and 1973 output rose by 7 per cent and industrial production by 10 per cent.
This ‘mini-boom’ had three distinctive features, which culminated in an unprecedented rise in commodity prices:
It was highly synchronized, occurring in all major capitalist countries it about the same time.
It was very rapid.
Although the level of capacity utilization reached at the height of the upswing was lower than in the previous boom (and so the extent of ‘overheating’, as conventionally measured was less), the rate of expansion was faster than at any time since 1958–9.
Moreover, capacity utilization was considerably lower when the previous upswing had begun than it was at the start of the mini-boom of 1972–3.
It had a greater impact on prices than previous upswings of comparable magnitude.
Inflation for the system as a whole, which had fallen to 4 per cent a year in the first half of 1972, rose to an annual rate of 7 per cent in the first half of 1973.
The reasons for these characteristics are complex and interrelated.
The synchronization happened when most governments simultaneously moved from a tight monetary and fiscal stance to expansion.
US fiscal policy was expansionary in 1970 — it gave some tax relief and additional transfer payments to households — but this stimulus was subsequently eroded by rising tax bills.
Elsewhere fiscal policy was generally expansionary in 1971 and 1972.
This was enormously reinforced by monetary developments.
The opening years of the 1970s were a period of easy money.
In the ACCs, the money supply began to accelerate at the beginning of 1970.
It grew by 12 per cent in 1971 and slightly more in 1972.
Short-term interest rates halved between early 1970 and early 1972.
The expansionary policy of nearly all governments resulted from three main factors.
First, the synchronized nature of the 1970–1 recession meant that governments found themselves simultaneously at a similar, recessionary phase of the cycle.
Traditional Keynesian fine-tuning criteria for output and employment thus suggested expansionary policies for each country at around the same time.
Second, the enormous increase in international liquidity generated by the exodus from the dollar (see above) meant that the countries which still had weak payments balances could borrow easily.
Finally, an unusually large number of major elections took place in 1972.
There was a presidential election in the United States, and elections for the principal legislative assemblies in Canada, Germany, Italy and Japan.
Taken together, these economies produce about 70 per cent of OECD output.
Electoral considerations prompted ‘give-away’ budgets and hence expansionary policies.
The speed of the upswing was largely the result of the scale of monetary and fiscal stimulus given to the system as a whole.
This, in turn, was chiefly the result of two main factors.
First, the high degree of synchronization.
The fact that other economies are expanding adds an external stimulus to any internal impetus provided by reflation.
The degree of reflation ‘required’ will therefore tend to be overestimated by governments in a synchronized upswing, if they rely on past experience derived from periods of less international synchronization of business cycles.
Second, the exodus from the dollar created more expansionary monetary conditions than would otherwise have been adopted by some governments.
Here we can distinguish two broad groups of countries.
One consists of those for whom the expansionary repercussions on domestic liquidity of balance of payments surpluses, resulting from dollar inflows, did not exceed the degree of stimulus felt desirable.
The United Kingdom, Italy and, initially, France, fall into this category.
For these countries, the scale of expansion was not affected by the dollar crisis (although the form may have been — the ‘automatic’ nature of the monetary expansion generated by dollar inflows may have bred a more monetary, and less fiscal, policy mixture than would otherwise have been adopted, and thus contributed to the easy money regime).
The other group consists of countries for whom the deterioration of the US payments balance and the inflow of speculative funds generated a faster rate of monetary expansion, and lower interest rates, than would have been adopted on purely domestic criteria.
In Japan expansionary monetary policies were adopted in 1972 to offset the expected deflationary impact of the Smithsonian yen revaluation and, later, to reduce the still large payments surplus achieved under the short-lived Smithsonian regime.
In Germany the maintenance of a fixed, and clearly unsustainable, exchange rate in the face of massive speculative inflows rendered domestic monetary management virtually impossible from the late 1960s to March 1973 when the Deutschmark was floated.
The rapid acceleration of prices was the result of the interaction of a number of developments.
In contrast to the last fillip to inflation in Europe provided by the wage explosions at the close of the sixties, this price acceleration clearly began in goods, rather than labour, markets.
Indeed, wages only began to catch up and threaten a widening wage/price spiral in 1973.
The very speed of the upswing helped to push up prices because bottlenecks developed, the prices of those goods rose and ‘feed-through’ effects followed.
But the major inflationary impetus was provided by the conjunction of two factors.
First, low profits (and their failure to rise during a rapid upswing) led to and combined with poor business confidence.
Firms reacted to the expansion of demand by raising prices, as well as expanding output, in order to try and raise profit margins.
Because low profits also militated against the use of available  funds for productive investment, investors were encouraged to search for short-term speculative ‘killings’.
Second, the existence of very slack monetary conditions (mainly because of the dollar crisis discussed above) led to negative real rates of interest.
In principle, this made profitable the speculative holding of stocks of goods whose price rose only at the average rate.
More significantly, in practice it encouraged speculation in the more traditional sense — on assets whose prices were expected to rise by considerably more than the overall price level (and would indeed do so if enough speculators made similar judgements).
Initially, this speculative money found its way into fairly traditional havens.
The London gold price rose two and a half times between early 1972 and the middle of 1973.
New house prices rose by around 50 per cent in the United Kingdom between early 1972 and early 1973.
The price of developed building land in Germany rose by more than one-third between 1970 and 1972.
If speculation had been restricted to these traditional fields then the effect on the overall price level would probably have been relatively insignificant, since the feed-through effects to other goods would have been modest.
But it was not.
The prices of another, broader category of goods began to rise faster than the general price level and attracted enormous sums of speculative funds.
The result was the commodities boom and a major upward twist to inflation.
The commodities boom
Prices on the major US and UK commodity exchanges began to rise very rapidly in 1972 and maintained the pace through 1973.
In 1973 and 1974 this price rise fed through to contracts between major producers and users.
The magnitude of the increase was very similar, with both types of prices more or less doubling relative to the prices of manufactures.
No rises of this scale had previously been recorded in peacetime.
There are a number of reasons why primary product prices should have begun to rise in real terms around this time.
On the supply side, there had been underinvestment in many areas of primary production for some years.
This was the result of the expectations of inadequate and wavering returns, because of gently deteriorating terms of trade between primary products and manufactures, and fear of investing in politically volatile, or potentially volatile, Third World countries.
There had also been a long-term rundown of producer stock levels, especially of US grain buffer stocks.
Finally, specific short-term shortages arose in the early 1970s, the most important being the 1972 crop failures (when grain output was down 3 per cent on the previous year, against a trend growth rate of 3 per cent a year).
Anchovies — an important source of protein for animal feed — also mysteriously disappeared from the Peruvian coast around this time.
On the demand side, the effects of the rapidity of the synchronized upswing were reinforced by the materials processing sector responding less rapidly than others.
User stock levels were also historically low as a result of steady  improvements in stock control techniques and expectations of relative price falls (as a result of the previous trend deterioration in the terms of trade for primary products).
Finally, materials stockpiling was encouraged by the Japanese government in 1972–3 in an attempt to hold down the yen exchange rate.
Taken together, these factors were sufficient to generate commodity price rises considerably in excess of the general rate of inflation.
This attracted speculative funds.
Many commodity markets are institutionally well suited to speculation, having developed facilities for buying crops before they are harvested (futures markets) for small down-payments (margin trading).
This speculation pushed prices up further.
There is no way to measure the significance of speculation in the commodities boom.
But it must have been considerable.
The scale of price rises is quite out of line with that which could plausibly be required to balance ‘real’ supply and demand; and quite out of line with previous responses to fluctuations in industrial production.
We know that speculation was rife in this period, for example in currencies, gold and real estate, and a number of highly publicized incidents took place in commodities markets.
The tendency of official commentators, such as the OECD, to play down the role of speculation is totally unconvincing.
The above discussion does not distinguish between different primary products or markets.
This reflects the fact that the commodities boom was highly generalized, and therefore unlikely to have been a freak coincidence of very different developments in different markets.
But it is nevertheless worth looking at one market in some detail — that for grains.
This market is quantitatively the most important (after oil, which is discussed separately in chapter 13), and is well documented.
Moreover, it was the acceleration of food prices — largely as a result of developments in the grain market — which, of any (non-oil) commodity price rise had the greatest overall effect on inflation.
The grain market
Grain is big business, in more senses than one.
In 1975 around 160 million tons were traded internationally for about $50 billion.
Before the war the volume of grain exported seldom exceeded 30 million tons a year.
So growth of trade had been rapid.
Production for the international market is concentrated in the most powerful capitalist state: the United States accounts for around 50 per cent of world grain exports.
Finally, the trade is dominated by a handful of the world's largest — and most secretive — multinationals: Cargill, Continental, Louis Dreyfus, Bunge and Andre.
Frank Church, chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on multinational corporations, has said of these companies, ‘No one knows how they operate, what their profits are, what they pay in taxes and what effect they have on our foreign policy — or much of anything else about them’(quoted Morgan, 1979, p. ix).
Cargill boasts in its company brochure that ‘some of our best customers have never heard of us’(Morgan, 1979, p. 4).
During the Second World War, the United States operated a ‘bare-shelves’ policy towards grain stocks, fearing a repeat of the price crash which followed the First World War.
But this approach was rapidly changed in the reconstruction period.
Enormous bonuses and premiums were offered to farmers.
Between 1945 and 1949 the United States provided one-half of world wheat exports.
Nevertheless persistent surpluses became a problem from 1948 onwards.
The strength of the farm lobby prompted the US administration to operate a price support system.
Internationally it entered into a de facto cartel agreement with Canada, whereby export prices were kept low enough to discourage new producers.
In the 1950s, the main way of disposing of the surpluses was as ‘aid’.
Public Law 480, passed in 1954, gave governments cheap credit when they bought US grain, initially repayable in domestic currencies.
(The United States built up huge rupee balances which it eventually wrote off.)
At first, one-quarter of US wheat exports and one-fifth of rice were financed under PL480.
By 1959 four-fifths of wheat and nine-tenths of soya bean oil exports were paid for in this way.
In the 1960s policy moved away from PL480 towards boosting commercial exports.
The United States broke the unofficial cartel with Canada and tried to shoulder her out of markets.
From 1964 onwards US wheat prices were subsidized enough to undercut all comers on world markets.
In the late 1960s almost all major exporters began to cut back production, apparently believing that surpluses would otherwise become unsustainable.
World food output had grown steadily in the fifties and sixties (except in 1965 and 1967, after Indian droughts).
Prices were stable and stocks mounting.
The prospects for the ‘green revolution’ appeared good.
There was talk of India soon becoming a grain exporter and she discontinued PL480 shipments in 1971 because of shortage of storage capacity.
So the four big wheat producers (United States, Canada, Australia and Argentina) all offered large subsidies in return for acreage reductions.
Their combined wheat production fell from 80 million tons in 1968 to 60 million in 1970.
In 1971, however, the USSR indicated to the United States that it was interested in regular grain purchases.
The United States responded enthusiastically, offering credit (which the Russians had not asked for) and 14 million tons were sold, initially at heavy cost to US taxpayers who subsidized the export price.
Between 1971 and 1975 the global grain trade grew by nearly 50 per cent in volume, most of the increase coming from the United States.
Their farm exports rose in value from $7.6 billion in 1971 to $17.6 billion in 1973, and grain stocks fell from 23.5 million tons in the middle of 1972 to 7 million tons one year later.
The price rises wiped out the need for farm subsidies.
The companies did particularly well.
Cargill's after-tax profits rose from $19.4 million in fiscal year 1971–2 to $150 million in fiscal year 1972–3.
Dreyfus  paid its top trader a ‘special bonus’ of $1.2 million and two underlings $0.75 million each.
The only losers in the United States were workers faced with higher food prices.
End of an era
The mini-boom marked the end of an era.
It was the last upswing before the onset of slump, stagnation and mass unemployment.
So we shall briefly stand back and assess its significance.
Many of its effects are fairly obvious and generally acknowledged.
Most commentators agree that the rapid price acceleration played an important role in generating high inflationary expectations, which remained remarkably resilient even under later conditions of mass unemployment.
It generated further disillusionment with fine tuning and, indeed, with Keynesianism in general.
This contributed towards the shift in policies of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The easy money regime focused attention on monetary policy and contributed to the significance accorded to the money supply in later years.
And high demand for basic inputs including oil provided an important condition for the 1973–4 oil crisis (chapter 13).
Conventional discussion of the breakup of the boom and its underlying causes are generally inadequate.
The most influential view is that expressed by a report for the OECD, which sees the intensifying economic difficulties of these years as resulting from ‘an unusual bunching of unfortunate disturbances unlikely to be repeated on the same scale, the impact of which was compounded by some avoidable errors in economic policy’(McCracken, 1977, p. 14).
The ‘unfortunate disturbances’ are the breakup of the Bretton Woods system and the commodities boom, while the ‘errors in economic policy’refer primarily to the ‘all systems go’monetary policy which so many countries adopted in 1971 and which ‘was the most important mishap in recent economic policy history’(McCracken, 1977, p. 51).
This account is at best naive and at worst apologetic for the behaviour of the Organization's largest member — the United States.
For the ‘unfortunate disturbances’ were in no sense ‘random shocks’and the easy money regime was only in part a policy preference.
The break-up of the Bretton Woods system, at the time and in the form in which it occurred, to a large degree forced an easy money regime on the rest of the system, and thereby fuelled the speculation that in turn fuelled the commodities boom.
The commodities boom also affected the major capitalist powers in different ways.
Commodity exporters, including the United States, benefited from the boom.
Major importers, most notably Japan, were worst hit.
The most obvious manifestation of this was a substantial reduction in the US payments deficit, a corresponding reduction in the Japanese surplus, and an increase in the deficit of a number of European countries.
As the next chapter shows, the subsequent oil price rises were also to hit Germany and Japan much more heavily than the United States.
13
Oil and the Crash of 1974
The mini-boom of 1972–3 proved to be the final and most feverish phase of the long postwar boom.
The ‘oil crisis’ of winter 1973–4 and an international crash in the summer of 1974 brought the golden years to an abrupt and painful halt.
The oil crisis
In October 1973 war broke out in the Middle East.
The conflict bred solidarity among Arab oil states and gave a new impetus to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), a cartel of the major non-US oil producers which had previously been rendered ineffective by internal divisions.
In an attempt to reduce support for Israel, OPEC announced a 10 per cent across-the-board cut in oil exports (later briefly raised to 25 per cent) and a selective embargo, directed chiefly at the United States.
The oil companies dutifully followed OPEC instructions to the letter.
When they were told to cut production, they did so without quibble.
When Aramco was told to cut production by 10 per cent and then, on top of that, shut in liftings equivalent to that which had been produced for ultimate sale to the USA in pre-embargo months, the company dutifully cut production back 23 per cent below September levels.
When the Saudis insisted that Aramco impose tight control over the destination of its oil, the company got tanker captains to sign affidavits as to their destination and arranged to receive cabled acknowledgements of each ship's eventual arrival at the approved port or terminal.
(Turner, 1983, pp. 135–6).
Exxon even acceded to a Saudi request to provide information on their supplies to US military bases worldwide.
The selective embargo, however, proved ineffective because the companies transhipped oil from one destination to another, spreading the cutbacks equally.
Despite widespread fears to the contrary (see below), the cutback in supplies of some 5 million barrels a day, or 9 per cent of non-Eastern bloc output, caused  few lasting problems.
But its effect on spot oil prices — which skyrocketed — was used by the producers to justify a general price rise.
OPEC succeeded in imposing and maintaining a major increase: oil prices quadrupled during the winter of 1973–4, raising the oil producers' annual revenue by around $64 billion.
This price rise occurred in the context of restrictive policies, rapidly decelerating output and double-digit inflation.
Restrictive policies were introduced in all major countries in 1973 in response to the price acceleration of the mini-boom and the large wage claims that were beginning to be submitted in its wake.
The measures were largely monetary: the annual rate of growth of the ACCs' money supply fell from 14 per cent at the end of 1972 to 8 per cent at the end of 1973; short-term interest rates rose from 4 per cent in early 1972 to 10 per cent in mid-1973.
Fiscal policy also moved towards restriction, with the important exception of the United States: in Europe and Japan, policy became more restrictive to the tune of around 1½per cent of GDP.
ACC real GDP growth fell from an annual rate of 8 per cent in the first half of 1973 to one of 3 per cent in the second half of the year (though the latter figure was reduced by output losses resulting from the oil embargo).
Unemployment began to rise in the autumn of 1973.
Materials and food prices began to drift downwards from the summer of 1973.
But world inflation rose to an annual rate of 10 per cent in the second half of the year as previous materials price rises fed through to final goods markets.
The oil price rise worsened profitability and reduced demand.
It raised input costs, thereby tending to reduce profitability and intensifying the pressure on industry to raise prices (much fixed capital could no longer be operated profitably at existing output prices).
It also transferred, at a stroke, 1½ per cent of world purchasing power to OPEC.
The recipients did not, and in the short run simply could not, spend the majority of their extra revenue.
So world demand fell.
These pressures were intensified by the introduction of yet more restrictive policies: monetary conditions were further tightened in most economies in the spring of 1974.
Nevertheless, inflation rose for some months, and production continued to grow in all major economies except the United States during the first half of 1974.
In part this resulted from increased opportunities for exporting to the periphery.
The commodities boom had increased many less developed countries' (LDC) export earnings, and imports rose with some lag.
A number of non-oil-producing LDCs borrowed unspent OPEC reserves, channelled through the ACCs' banks.
The oil price rise reactivated the boom in commodity prices and boosted inflation, which reached an annual rate of 15 per cent in the spring of 1974.
Many accounts of the 1970s present the oil crisis as the key development.
OPEC is often cast as a super-villain, holding the world economy to ransom for political motives and disrupting an otherwise smooth pattern of growth.
It is  true that the oil crisis dealt an important blow to the functioning of the system and had a major impact on the form and timing of the crisis — constituting a trigger for the crash which separates the period of overheating from the subsequent one of mass unemployment and stagnation.
But this picture is nevertheless misleading in two important ways.
First, it seriously underplays the extent to which the system was in severe difficulties before the oil price rise.
The basic problems — overaccumulation in relation to the labour supply and sharp decline in profitability — preceded the oil crisis and would not have evaporated in its absence.
Nor is there any reason to assume that the system would have adjusted smoothly to the onset of overaccumulation had the oil crisis not occurred.
The feverish character of the mini-boom hardly augured smooth adjustment.
Second, it ignores the extent to which the oil crisis had its roots in previous developments.
The Middle East war which prompted the actions of OPEC was, of course, itself a product of the economic and political history of postwar capitalism.
But there are more direct economic connections.
For one thing, it is doubtful if OPEC could have successfully imposed the price increase at the time it did in the absence of the high levels of demand that accompanied the mini-boom.
In addition, the dollar devaluations worked to encourage a price rise, because most oil was priced in dollars which were being eroded in value.
Furthermore, OPEC would almost certainly have been unable to sustain massively higher prices in the context of the subsequent crash had US policy towards oil imports not changed dramatically in the seventies.
Throughout the sixties the United States limited imports of oil and petroleum products by law (the legislation was enacted in 1959 to bolster the dollar).
Until 1970 the United States was 90 per cent self-sufficient in energy.
The policy was then radically reversed.
In 1971 price controls on domestic production were imposed and the legislation limiting imports was repealed.
Oil imports soared in 1972.
In August 1973 a two-tier pricing system was introduced: the price of oil from wells already functioning in 1972 was fixed at a maximum of $4.35 per barrel; oil from wells begun in 1973 or later and oil imports were exempted from the price ceiling.
Following the OPEC price rise, the oil companies preferred not to work pre-1973 wells very intensely.
This preference was reinforced by the announcement that the controls were temporary.
In 1976 the imposition of price controls on natural gas led to further substitution of oil imports for domestic energy sources.
The net result was that the United States moved during the 1970s from being 90 per cent self-sufficient in energy to importing 50 per cent of its needs.
By the end of the decade it was importing 8–9 million barrels per day, or about 30 per cent of OPEC output.
This cost some $40 billion a year before the 1979 oil price rises.
Although the United States is the single largest exporter to OPEC (supplying about 15 per cent of its foreign purchases), its deficit with those countries largely accounted for its overall trade deficit in the second half of the seventies.
Finally, the price rise was a product of the boom in a more general and fundamental sense.
The tremendous increase in oil consumption which accompanied the great burst of accumulation threatened to deplete reserves: by the early seventies considerable disquiet was expressed about the possibility of the ‘depletion horizon’ of known reserves being reduced below the conventional level of 25 years' supply.
These worries were reinforced by the influential Club of Rome's 1972 report Limits to Growth, which popularized the notion that the world was running out of essential materials and fuels, including oil.
BP's exploration manager argued that oil production would peak in the early 1980s and that demand would outstrip supply by 1978.
Within the industry it became a commonplace to point out that the discovery of ‘a Libya a year’ would be required to maintain the depletion horizon.
A major price adjustment was needed to encourage both energy-saving and exploration.
The above account of the effects of the oil price rise applies to the system as a whole.
But the impact varied considerably across industries and countries.
The most important division between industries is that between the oil companies and the rest.
Whereas the bulk of industry faced higher costs and a squeeze on profits, the oil majors had a profit bonanza.
Returns on their operations rose from $3.9 billion in 1972 to $12.1 billion in 1974.
Those on investments in OPEC increased from $2.6 billion to $6.1 billion over the same period.
Chase Manhattan estimated that the worldwide rate of profit for leading oil companies rose from 9.7 per cent in 1972 to 19.2 per cent in 1974 and 24.0 per cent in 1979.
When viewed in the context of other changes in the industry, however, the oil price rise appears more of a mixed blessing for the seven major oil companies.
The rise of OPEC brought changes in ownership and operation as well as in price.
Direct exports by OPEC national oil companies rose from a negligible proportion of production within the area to some 50–55 per cent over the course of the 1970s.
Host government ownership of oil production in OPEC rose from some 2 per cent in 1970 to 60 per cent in 1974 and 80–90 per cent in 1980.
By the end of the decade the majors had secure ownership rights to crude oil only within the OECD area.
Despite the boost given by the price rise to exploration and production, OECD oil output rose only from 5 million barrels a day in 1973 to 6.3 million in 1980, providing only 35 per cent of the seven majors' refining needs.
Furthermore, OECD governments also began to demand an ownership stake in production.
The share of world refining accounted for by the majors fell from 51 per cent in 1973 to 38 per cent in 1980.
The differing impact of the price rise on consumer countries is exemplified by comparing Japan with the United States.
Japan is almost entirely dependent on oil imports for all its basic energy requirements, having no fossil fuel deposits.
So the oil price rise enormously increased its import bill.
The additional exports required to earn the extra  foreign exchange constituted a drain from domestic incomes.
Since this deduction would have to come from either wages or profits, it worked to intensify distributional struggle and to reduce the rate of accumulation.
In addition, the larger cost in foreign exchange worked to increase balance of payments constraints and hence to reduce the room for manoeuvre over domestic economic policies.
For Japan, then, the ‘oil shock’ was a major blow without mitigating benefits.
The United States fared differently.
For a start, the oil companies are predominantly US-owned.
Furthermore, the USA's large oil reserves allowed it, unlike its major rivals Germany and Japan, to be self-sufficient in oil.
In addition, the two-tier pricing system allowed US domestic industry to purchase oil well below world market prices (some 40 per cent below in the first half of 1979).
This obviously gave it a competitive advantage.
Finally, in a longer-term perspective, the United States possesses enormous energy reserves in the form of shale oil and bituminous schists.
The development of these was not remotely economically viable at pre-1974 oil prices.
The 1979 round of oil price rises made extraction more or less economically feasible.
Shale extraction could make the United States self-sufficient in oil for the foreseeable future, thus eliminating dependence on foreign supplies, which has increasingly worried the Pentagon.
So, while the oil crisis caused major difficulties for the system as a whole, its impact — like that of the commodities boom and the dollar crisis — was uneven.
The United States suffered less than its major rivals.
The crash
A major crash began in the summer of 1974.
ACC industrial production fell by 10 per cent between July 1974 and April 1975.
In the first half of 1975, ACC output was 3½ per cent down on the level of a year earlier, and international trade was 13 per cent lower.
For 1975 as a whole, output was marginally lower than in 1973 (1½ per cent lower in the United States and some 1½ per cent higher in Japan).
The previous worst postwar two-year period ended in 1958, with output 4½ per cent higher than in 1956.
The crash of 1974 was far and away the biggest since 1929.
Most economic crashes are kicked off by a collapse in investment, especially in inventories, and this one was no exception.
So any explanation of why it started must focus on the collapse in investment.
In the long run, investment is closely tied to profits.
So the underlying cause of the fall in investment is the decline in profitability.
But that does not explain the precise timing.
Profits had been falling for some years; investment collapsed suddenly in summer 1974.
Capitalists invest because they hope to make profits.
So the level of investment depends on expectations about future profitability.
These expectations will usually be heavily influenced by past profits, but they are not the only  consideration.
A host of factors shape capitalists' confidence in the future.
The loss of confidence in the mid-1970s is usually put down solely to the oil crisis.
Although this was an important factor, accounts which focus on it too narrowly are unsatisfactory.
Confidence is in one sense a delicate psychological state.
Once it has been shattered, it is hard to re-establish, as we tried to show when discussing the origins of the boom.
But confidence, like trust, is also fairly robust.
Once firmly established, it tends to justify itself, as we tried to show in the section on the strength of the boom.
It then takes a major blow to fracture it.
The oil crisis alone could not have shattered the confidence which capitalists felt during most of the golden years.
The blow was so crippling because confidence had already taken quite a few knocks.
And even then, it did not produce an immediate crash.
Over the previous few years capitalists had been hit by the European wage explosions and a general worsening of industrial relations.
They had experienced the break-up of the Bretton Woods system and increasing international financial uncertainty.
Inflation had accelerated and commodity prices had gone through the roof.
Profitability had fallen by one-third and the fast and highly synchronized boom of the previous couple of years had failed to restore it.
Worsening expectations had not yet led to a collapse in investment, however.
They had brought a modest decline in the face of extreme boom conditions, but no collapse.
Their most obvious effect had been a massive increase in speculation as more capitalists tried to make money by wheeling and dealing rather than by productive investment: hence the huge foreign exchange dealings and the booms in share prices, gold, land, real estate and commodities.
The acceleration of inflation, the soft monetary stance of the authorities and the commodities boom all worked to boost stockbuilding.
The oil crisis undermined confidence further.
Initially, worries centred on securing supplies in the face of the cutback and selective embargo.
Most governments, having projected a fall in supplies of around one-fifth for 1974, rushed through emergency legislation to economize on the use of oil.
In December 1973 the oil companies claimed that OPEC had cut supplies by 17½ per cent.
There was a run on all major stock exchanges.
Prices on Wall Street fell by 5 per cent a week in November.
The gold price soared again, shooting up by nearly one-fifth in the first week of 1974.
The Economist commented, ‘For years the gold enthusiasts have been regarded as barbarians.
Now that it is fashionable to talk of the imminent collapse of civilization, their day has come on Wall Street’(16 February 1974).
It described the mood in Japan as one of ‘considerable panic’.
From January 1974 the oil once more began to flow freely.
There was a mild stockbuilding boom, probably to make up for dislocations over the winter, and commodity prices took off again.
Worries now shifted to the higher prices and to what became known as the ‘recycling problem’.
It was clear that OPEC would be unable to spend much of its new revenues and would lend massively on international financial markets.
Many countries would also need to borrow heavily to pay for oil imports.
The problem was that OPEC was likely to lend mainly in US markets whereas the potential borrowers were concentrated in Europe and the Third World.
There was widespread scepticism about whether private financial institutions could successfully channel funds from lenders to borrowers, and general agreement that the IMF should play a major role.
Italy soon found difficulties in borrowing, as the Economist described:
Another sign of possible 1929-style international financial crisis is upon us.
Eurobankers are beginning to be chary of lending to the nationalized industries and state authorities of even big countries in balance of payments deficits.
Italy seems to be coming close to that point of no return; it is rapidly exhausting its reserves of international goodwill as well as its reserves of foreign currency.
Where Italy is being given a cold shoulder today, could other deficit countries with particular political problems — a Mitterrand France, a Wilson Britain, a post-Franco Spain, a Denmark with a parliament of all-sorts — be jilted tomorrow?
(20 April 1974).
The chances of the IMF organizing a major recycling programme were poor.
At the time of the Smithsonian Agreement the Group of Ten — the leading central bankers — had announced that discussions would begin promptly on a new long-term monetary reform.
After US obstruction, a Committee of the Board of Governors of the IMF was eventually set up for this purpose late in 1972.
It had 20 members.
British finance minister Barber remarked that reaching an agreement would only be twice as difficult in the new forum as in the old.
Little was achieved.
Revelations of the Watergate affair, which dominated the world's media in spring 1974, did not help.
The country with the largest single vote in the IMF, the largest recipient of OPEC funds and the key issuer of international money was being run by a president whose attentions were more and more focused on saving his own skin.
Meanwhile doubts about the private banks' ability to cope caused mounting worries.
While recycling dominated economic discussions, developments elsewhere were hardly comforting.
Output was decelerating, inflation rising, and governments everywhere (except the United Kingdom) deflating sharply.
Commodity prices tumbled in May 1974, led by copper and given a push by official Japanese encouragement to firms to sell stocks to improve liquidity.
A crash in share prices, which was to prove greater than that of 1929, was well underway: between September 1973 and September 1974 they were to fall by between 23 per cent in Japan and 55 per cent in the United Kingdom.
With consumer prices rising by some 15 per cent over the period, the fall in the real value of the shares was considerably greater.
Real share prices in the United Kingdom fell to the level of the wartime blitz.
The international banking system began to crack.
On 26 June Germany's largest private bank, the Herstatt, collapsed as a result of speculative foreign exchange losses.
US banks, which also lost heavily, were furious with the Bundesbank for refusing to compensate them.
The German commercial and central banks refused to bail out Herstatt and many depositors lost money.
The ramifications were enormous.
The international banking community was so nervous that for a while no forward foreign exchange markets operated properly anywhere.
The lion's share of all foreign exchange dealing was restricted to a few New York banks, who refused to deal with many smaller banks and with most French and Italian ones.
The volume of foreign exchange transactions plummeted (figure 13.1).
Money was moved out of small banks all over the world.
The Economist's assessment of the mood six weeks later was that ‘the first whiff of even a false rumour is liable to cause a run’(3 August 1974).
But by then the crash had already started.
It is hard to explain why confidence broke precisely when it did.
Searching for the elusive final straw is not a very fruitful activity.
So it would be a mistake to place too much emphasis on any one event, such as the Herstatt collapse.
All that can sensibly be said is that, given everything capitalism had gone through over the previous few years, a collapse of confidence was to be expected at some point.
Figure 13.1
World foreign exchange trading volume, 1970–9 ($ billion per day).
The resulting slump left a considerable proportion of productive capacity idle.
By the autumn of 1975 around 11 per cent of fixed capital was gathering dust.
Registered unemployment in the ACCs rose from around 8 million at the  end of the mini-boom to about 15 million in the spring of 1975.
Even this increase is a severe underestimate of real job loss: participation rates fell sharply, underemployment rose and the number of migrant workers in Europe fell by over a million.
Two other developments generated concern at the time.
One was the maintenance of high inflation rates despite the collapse of output.
Minerals and metals prices fell by 30 per cent between May 1974 and the end of the year.
Food prices fell by 33 per cent between November 1974 and June 1975.
But, while inflation slowed from the summer of 1974, prices as a whole continued to rise at an annual rate of 10 per cent during the depths of the slump.
Inflationary expectations and processes had become extremely stubborn.
The other development which caused consternation was the beginning of large public sector deficits.
Government revenues fell as the slump reduced taxation yields, while public spending rose as unemployment benefit payments rocketed.
If governments had not run such deficits then the slump would have been far deeper, since the deficits worked partially to offset the collapse in demand which resulted from the big increase in OPEC savings and fall in investment.
Nevertheless, obsession with the size of public sector borrowing requirements began at this time.
The most important effect of the crash, however, received less attention at the time — a further collapse in profits.
In the two years 1974 and 1975 the profit rate fell by as much as in the previous five (table 13.1).
By 1975 it was only 60 per cent of the 1968 level.
The fall was significantly smaller in the United States, where capital was hit less hard by the oil price rise.
In manufacturing industry by 1975 the profit rate had fallen to only half of its 1968 level (table 13.2).
Table 13.1
Business profit rates, 1968–75 (percentages)
Table 13.2
Manufacturing profit rates, 1968–75 (percentages)
The large increase in the price of oil — an important input into production and the sharpness of the subsequent crash made inevitable an immediate fall in the rate of profit.
The worsening of the terms of trade for the ACCs, largely as a result of the oil price rise, reduced the resources available for profits and wages by around ½ per cent of output per year.
The crash also brought a slight decline in productivity.
A prerequisite for the profit share being maintained was a fall in real wages of about 1 per cent a year between 1973 and 1975.
In the event, high inflation and sharply rising unemployment worked to halve the rate of growth of real wages in comparison to the previous five-year period (the effect was particularly marked in the manufacturing sector in Europe and Japan).
But real wages were not cut.
So the profit share fell.
The crash also pushed down the output-capital ratio, by an average of one tenth, as excess capacity mounted.
The combined result was a sharp decline in the profit rate.
This further sharp decline in profitability, following on that of earlier years, and taking profits to levels well below those which had come to be expected during the boom, is the key to the sustained sluggishness of accumulation in the latter half of the 1970s and the early 1980s.
This sluggishness is in turn the key to the mounting unemployment of those years.