

NEWS…
IMPLEMENTATION…
NEWS
Yeo refuses to chart levels of unmet need
EXCLUSIVE BY POLLY NEATE AND MARK IVORY
Junior health minister Tim Yeo has ruled out formal monitoring of unmet need under the community care reforms, flying in the face of advice form the all-party Commons Health Committee.
In an exclusive interview with Community Care , Yeo said the DoH would rely on local authority feedback and community care plans to indicate levels of unmet need.
But he insisted there would be ‘considerable’ monitoring of other aspects of community care including assessments, where the DoH will be keeping watch on eligibility criteria for services.
Yeo refused to rule out further statutory directions from the government if monitoring revealed a need for them.
‘We will be doing very considerable monitoring about the implementation of the policy generally’, he said.
‘It will look at the way the assessment process is working, and that would certainly uncover if there are wide variations in the eligibility criteria being used by different authorities’.
Yeo's undertaking is unlikely to satisfy the Health Committee, which last week called for monitoring of resources and the ‘outcome for local authorities and users of services’.
In its report on community care funding, the committee expressed grave concerns about the ability of SSDs to record unmet need without opening themselves up to judicial review.
‘It will be difficult to judge in the future whether resources are adequate unless we have a clear indication of the level of need — both met and unmet’, the report says.
Clear guidance should be ‘issued urgently’ to replace the existing ‘unhelpful’guidelines and, if necessary, legislation should be introduced so that unmet need could be safely recorded.
Yeo told Community Care that ‘thematic monitoring’ of SSDs would start around the middle of the year, looking at how effectively money is being spent, user choice, and development of the independent sector and domiciliary services.
The minister gave the first indication that the support force may continue in a reduced form to oversee implementation of the six new key tasks.
‘We should be able to call on individuals or groups from the support force, who might undertake a short-term assignment helping a particular authority with a particular issue’.
Calling for improvements in the way community care plans are produced, he said every local authority would be visited by the SSI, and in some cases the Audit Commission, to see the progress of the reforms.
Yeo also turned down the Health committee's call for a DoH contingency fund, which would underwrite SSDs faced with unexpected demand.
‘We don't think it would be either necessary or right to keep back a reserve of money’, he said.
The complete interview with Tim Yeo will appear in next week's Community Care .
Cleveland SSD has become the latest department to face a judicial review from private care home owners angry about their contracts.
Judicial reviews are also threatened in Oldham and the London Borough of Croydon, although an action in Cheshire appeared to have been resolved this week.
See News Focus, page 6; Comment, page 13; and ‘All systems go’, pages 18–21.
Negative outlook
Nearly 90 per cent of the population is unaware of the implications of the Community Care Act, according to a poll published this week.
ADSW warning
‘Scottish Office proposals to give elderly people choice over residential accommodation could pose problems for clients’, social work directors have warned.
Under a draft direction from the Scottish Office, SWDs will have a duty to ensure clients are offered a place of their choice.
but at a meeting with the Scottish Office, the ADSW claimed some of the proposals ran counter to tight assessments.
Clients could also run out of money and be forced to move to other homes.
WORKERS GIVE THEIR PERSONAL VIEWS
We asked a random sample of social workers around the country ‘What do you think 1 April will mean for you and your clients?’
Judy Jones, team leader, mental health, Brent SSD:‘It's an exciting, engaging time for professionals; it sharpens practice to have gone through it.
However, we've still got a long way to go on working together with the health service’.
Marion Dawkings, senior social worker, physical disability, Wakefield SSD:‘In some ways I don't change think there will be much change, but the process will be more cumbersome with client and carer choice more limited’.
Dathy Boorman, care manager, elderly services, Kent SSD:‘It will mean an increased workload for care managers with greater expectations of them.
There will be closer liaison with other agencies, but difficulties will inevitably surface from differing viewpoints.
On the plus side it gives an opportunity to monitor good practice, which will hopefully lead to improved standards’.
George Walsh, care manager, mental health, Surrey SSD:‘Legislation has put into law what is good practice.
It makes us more accountable and more focused, but very little will change immediately.
I think legislation is merely catching up on some policies.
It does give clients a stronger voice’.
Alison Mitchell, senior social worker, adult services, Staffordshire SSD:‘It will help both the client and their carer to make real choices to meet their respective needs’.
Hazel Nicholson, care manager, mental health, Oxfordshire SSD:‘1 April will mean a more formal stage in an already developing, positive but challenging process.
Our clients will be largely unaware of the significant changes; they already have a care manager to co-ordinate their care, but they will benefit more as the system develops’.
Meg Niven, social worker, services for the profoundly deaf, Dorset SSD:‘I'm certain it will herald a real opportunity for my client group.
Now they can, literally, get their voices heard by participating in, and influencing, community care plans’.
‘Exciting, engaging time’: Judy Jones, team leader at the Central Middlesex hospital
Drugs cash plea fails
A last ditch effort to persuade Virginia Bottomley to reverse her decision not to ringfence funds for drug and alcohol support has failed.
Last week the directors of two London boroughs facing a huge burden through the loss of funding met with the Health Secretary's special policy adviser.
But the meeting, described as ‘wary’, produced the standard response: the government would be monitoring the situation for three months.
Many drug and alcohol charities are convinced they will have to close hostels and cut staff because of the lack of guaranteed funds and the concentration of demand in many urban areas.
Alcohol Concern predicts half of all residential rehabilitation services will close within the first four months of April.
By the end of 1993 the charity estimates more than 1,300 beds for drug and alcohol users will be lost because of cash shortfalls.
‘It takes years to establish these sort of services’, said a spokesperson for one of the boroughs.
‘It is far better to preserve what's there’.
The Commons Health Committee report last week advised the government to provide ringfenced funding for 1993–4, especially for inner cities.
Alcohol Recovery Project had attempted to make Bottomley reverse her decision in court by seeking an order for consultation.
But Lord Justice Watkins said: ‘The only place where the decision can now be reversed is in Parliament’.
Care staff told to get tough BY BOB CERVI
Social workers are to be told by the DoH to get tough with troublesome young people in children's homes.
New guidelines on restraining young people, due next week, will call on social services to put more emphasis on control and discipline in children's homes, and less on therapy.
This will significantly change the draft guidelines issued last September which stated that children intending to abscond from residential care should be physically prevented from leaving only if they were in ‘immediate danger’.
Many professionals said this failed to plug a gap in the Children Act.
The revised guidelines are expected to avoid giving care workers specific advice on how to physically restrain absconders.
Instead, they are likely to suggest that some methods of discipline can be used to help prevent a young person absconding from care so long as this does them no harm.
The DoH has taken six months to revise the guidelines because of the initial controversy over the draft, followed by the publicity surrounding juvenile crime and new plans from the Home Office to set up ‘secure training units’ for 12- to 15-year old offenders.
Following Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke's recent comments that social workers are ‘not succeeding’ in disciplining ‘delinquents’in their care, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley called on social services to ‘play their part in instilling discipline’.
‘We may have gone too far in stressing the rights of children at the expense of upholding the responsibilities of parents and professionals in supervising them’, she said.
Masud Hoghughi, director of Aycliffe children's home and an outspoken critic of the earlier draft guidance, said there was no need for specific advice on restraint, beyond identifying the limits.
‘This leaves it open for staff to use their ingenuity, good sense, and professionalism’.
Hoghughi said the traditional psychotherapeutic approach in children's homes had proved ‘positively damaging’ for disordered young people, who needed clear authority.
Stephen Campbell, from the Association of County Councils, agreed that child care workers needed more means to prevent young people in care ‘going out the door’.
‘The key to it is to develop a parental relationship’, he said.
However, some professionals may criticise the new guidelines for undermining the Children Act's principles on young people's rights, opening the door to abuses such as pin-down.
Youth hardship rockets
Government figures have provided alarming new evidence about the extent of poverty among young people, with the numbers receiving severe hardship payments increasing seven-fold since 1989.
Statistics from the Severe Hardship Claims Unit, published for the first time this week, reveal successful claims rose dramatically from 10,669 in 1989 to 77,906 in 1992.
During this period the government consistently denied the existence of poverty among 16- and 17-year olds, the target group for SHP, and said those who were unable to find jobs were guaranteed Youth Training places.
But the figures, which have only emerged thanks to a report from the voluntary sector, show the government has failed to guarantee youth training places.
The report, published this week by Barnardo's and Youthaid on behalf of the Coalition on Young People and Social Security, says young people who cannot find jobs or Youth Training places should automatically qualify for income support.
‘We are no longer talking about a safety net for just a few young people’, said Roger Singleton, Barnardo's senior director.
‘There is a gaping hole in the Youth Training guarantee, and thousands of young people are falling through it into poverty, homelessness and crime’.
According to the report, monthly applications for SHP have risen from 1,400 to 7,700 in four years.
It claims more than three-quarters of 16- and 17-year-olds receive no income at all.
Most claims for SHP are still made in Scotland and the north-east of England, but the sharpest increases have been in the south-east and south-west, where claims have risen ten-fold or more.
Health and safety 
SSDs could face intensified pressure on their budgets as a result of new health and safety regulations, Clywyd director John Jevons has warned.
The directives were brought in at the beginning of the year in response to EC directives.
Jevons told last Friday's Assembly of Welsh Counties social development committee at Caernarfon that the regulations would add nearly £2 million to his own department's bill.
Recruitment hit 
The three-year inquiry into Fife's child care policies is hindering the SWD's efforts to recruit social workers, director Allan Bowman admitted last week.
He told the social work committee that Sheriff Kearney's report, published last October, had affected Fife's ability to compete in the jobs market.
Child care was continuing to have recruitment problems, particularly in care management and assessment, with a 16 percent vacancy level.
‘However, staff continue to make every effort to maintain child protection’, he said.
Diagnosis ruling 
Social workers and doctors who wrongly diagnose sex abuse cases cannot be sued for their mistakes, the High Court ruled last week.
The judge rejected a claim for compensation for psychological damage by a mother and her daughter, who was believed to have been abused by the mother's boyfriend.
It is not known if they will appeal.
Difficult children 
The Young Minds Information Service was launched last week, aiming to make it easier for families with troubled children or  adolescents to gain access to counselling and other professional help.
The service is available nationally, and a separate telephone consultation service is being pilot tested in the Yorkshire region, initially.
More information from Michelle Groves,.
CCETSW approves 
A further education college is the first to be registered by CCETSW for providing vocational education and training in social care.
The social care programme at Thomas Danby College in Leeds was first set up in 1978.
NALGO members rally for action 
NALGO is claiming national support for its day of action last Thursday protesting against the 1.5 per cent pay squeeze and job cuts.
‘The action was well-supported by members, including many social workers’, said a NALGO spokeswoman.
Three branches went out on strike in South Tyneside, Walsall, and Hackney.
Only ‘life and limb’ cover was provided on the day.
Other areas organised rallies, petitions, and lobbying of management.
But the Local Government Management Board denied the action had much effect.
‘Only parts of three authorities went on strike’, said a spokesman from the board.
‘Support appears to have been pretty thin on the ground’.
NALGO is now planning a wage claim which will ignore the government's 1.5 per cent ceiling, to be presented in mid-April.
Further industrial action could follow.
Social Fund cash missing 
Striking out: NALGO members opposed to the pay squeeze came to London for a rally
Benefits Agency head Michael Bichard has denied reports that more than £2o million has gone missing from the Social Fund.
A report from the National Audit Office last week revealed that £21.3 million in Social Fund loans had been ‘incorrectly transferred’ from a computer system which had broken down.
The mistakes occurred over a ‘considerable period’ when responsibility for individual loans was transferred between benefit offices because recipients had moved to new addresses.
Receiving offices had failed to register loans on the computer.
The revelation comes as the Social Security Consortium prepares to issue a campaigning leaflet calling for reform of the fund.
The Benefits Agency is trying to play down the NAO findings, putting them down to administrative delays rather than errors.
Bichard said a new automatic computer transfer system would soon be introduced.
An audit office spokesman said: ‘The Benefits Agency is quite confident it will track down most of the money.
We're saying there's a risk they might not get some of it back’.
Ministers urged not to curb homes benefit BY BOB CERVI
Social security ministers are to face strong pressure to review community care regulations which will restrict benefits to elderly people in residential care.
Home owners and charities say the rules could lead to administrative chaos, and local authorities fear they will have to pick up most of the tab.
The regulations, which will affect new care home residents after April, mean those residents who go in to hospital for treatment will receive the new ‘residential allowance’ for only six days.
At present, equivalent income support is paid by the DSS for up to 13 weeks for residents entering hospital, and up to six weeks for other absences from the home such as holidays.
The residential allowance, to be paid by the Benefits Agency as a contribution towards the housing needs of elderly people in residential care, will be a £45 a week flat rate for all homes, or £50 in London.
The DSS said last week local authorities would be expected to negotiate with home owners on how to make up the gap in funding for residents who have to be away from the home for more than six days.
A spokeswoman said the social security transfers to SSDs. totalling £399 million, had taken into account the six-day limit.
But Ian Cartwright, Doncaster director and chairman of the ADSS disabilities committee, said: ‘I don't see how it could be included in the transfers because most residents will be away from their homes for about two to three weeks.
Residential homes will face losing some of their fees and we will have to compensate for this out of our transferred funds’.
Eunice Paxman, chairwoman of the National Care Homes Association, predicted that some SSD contracts with residential homes would be placed under further strain and may have to be renegotiated.
And The Spastics Society warned the regulations could cause chaos because each resident's order book would have to be returned to the Benefits Agency for every absence in excess of six days, which would occur frequently.
James Churchill, from the Association for Residential Care, criticised ministers for having rejected the Social Security Advisory Committee's recommendation last year that the six-day limit be extended to 14 days to cover for holidays.
‘As a concession, ministers should increase the payment period to at least four weeks to reduce the number of times that the restriction is triggered by absences’, he said.
Churchill said he was planning to bring together a large number of organisations to form a delegation to press the DSS to review the restriction.
The ADSS is also writing to ministers to seek an urgent meeting.
SSI study slams juvenile policies 
A fragmented approach to young people on remand is resulting in high costs and inconsistent outcomes, says a new study from the SSI.
The study, which looked at three SSDs in the north-west of England, was initiated after departments expressed concerns about their ability to cope with new remand arrangements under the Criminal Justice Act.
In three years juvenile remands to prison will end in favour of community alternatives.
According to the SSI ‘significant differences’ between local agencies on remand policy continue to exist.
It calls for more policy agreements between agencies and a clearer statement of them from senior managers.
The SSI found that information on juveniles was often insufficiently shared with the courts, leading to unnecessary remands to local authority accommodation.
Underfunding creates Scottish Office backlash
The Scottish Office has come under fire for failing to increase capital spending on social work.
Last week Scottish Secretary Ian Lang announced spending on social work projects would be £22.8 million next year, with provisional figures of £23 million for 194–5 and 1995–6.
CoSLA condemned the allocations as ‘wholly inadequate’, saying the figures amounted to less than half the local authority bids for social work.
The ADSW described the figures as ‘disappointing’ and called on the Scottish Office to increase future capital allocations.
If we are going to maintain high quality residential care and develop day care as an alternative to residential care, we need to replace and refurbish existing stock’, said president Ian Gilmour.
‘Arm's length inspection units have revealed significant implications in terms of capital for repairs and refurbishment to ensure that proper standards, including health and safety, are met.
Short term capital should be made available to meet those recommendations’.
A new trust fund has been launched to help social workers and other professionals train in psychodynamic learning and personal development.
The Sutherland Trust, which commemorates former Tavistock Clinic director Jock Sutherland, has been set up in association with the Scottish Institute of Human Relations.
Further information from the SIHR,.
HOME COMFORT: Kent's social services vice-chairman Stuart Cox meets Beattie Cuckoo (centre), a resident at the Dene Holm, launched last week as one of the county's new Linked Service Centres, aimed at providing a range of services to keep elderly people in their own homes.
Also pictured (right) is the centre's manager, Jillian Crowther
SSD pressured foster parents BY BOB CERVI
Sheffield social services should not have pressured a foster couple into accepting difficult children, a jury said last week as it cleared the couple on charges of cruelty.
At the end of the 19-day trial at Sheffield Crown Court, the jury criticised the SSD for placing the couple in the ‘predicament’ of being accused of abusing children in their care.
Eric and Marie Hanby, aged 60 and 61, were acquitted on 11 charges of cruelly ill-treating children over a 24-year period, 1967–1991.
The judge, who criticised the police for the way they conducted their inquiry, read out a note from the jury: ‘We believe Sheffield social services department are partly to blame for Mr and Mrs Hanby being placed in the predicament they are in today’.
‘Knowing the condition of Mrs Hanby after her illness in the 1970s, they placed more pressure on them, by placing more children with a difficult upbringing in the hands of the Hanbys’.
SSD director Martin Manby later said: ‘With the benefit of hindsight — and the jury were referring to events in the 1970s — a thorough review of the foster home following Mrs Hanby's illness would have been appropriate’.
Manby said it was the primary responsibility of the SSD and police to investigate fully such allegations.
During the trial the court had heard from a succession of alleged victims, all now adults, who claimed they had been ill-treated by the Hanbys.
The couple denied the allegations, and the court heard they were once praised by social services for their fostering work.
The police investigation was sparked off in 1991 when a Sheffield woman made a detailed statement to police alleging abuse by the Hanbys while she was in their care as a child.
After last week's acquittal, the head of South Yorkshire CID, Chief Superintendent Mick Burdis, said the force was right to go to court.
‘I am disappointed for the complainants in this case, among them disturbed people who had the courage to came forward to the police’, he said.
Book details 
Manby: SSD responsibility to investigate
The books on user involvement by Suzy Croft and Peter Beresford covered in 11 March issue are Getting Involved , available from Open Services Project,, price £5.95, and Citizen Involvement: A Practical Guide for Change , price £9.50 published by Macmillan.
New AIDS unit 
The DoH is part-funding a mother and child AIDS unit in the London's East End due to open in September.
The unit, costing £3.3 million, is the first purpose-built facility of its kind and provides a creche, playroom, lounges, garden and kitchen facilities as well as counselling rooms.
SSD attacks 
More than two-thirds of all council staff in Bexley who suffered violent attacks over a three month period worked in social services.
A survey of attacks between October and December last year revealed that 18 of 27 incidents were on residential social workers and care assistants.
On one occasion a pregnant worker was struck in the stomach.
Pack correction 
The Targets for Change pack referred to in last week's practice focus on the Wigan Juvenile Justice Centre is produced by Nottingham Probation Service not the SSD.
It is available from Pete Loewenstein, Information officer,.
Grant boost 
The DoH has boosted its grant aid to voluntary organisations dealing with mental illness by 10 per cent.
The increase was announced by Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley last week at the launch of a campaign aimed at reversing the Drug research 
Lothian SWD is to join forces with the education department, health board and police to commission a five-month research study into the use of drugs.
The project will look at recreational drug use and examine the implications for agencies working with young people.
Court's ruling on children in need
Children will not be classed as ‘in priority need’ by local authorities if their parents have become ‘intentionally homeless’, the Lords ruled last week.
In two test cases involving boys under the age of five, application to be housed had been made in the name of child after the parents had been refused accommodation.
The parents of one boy, Moses Bentum of Bexley, south London were rejected because, according to the council, they had made themselves homeless by defaulting on the mortgage payments.
In a second case the single mother of four-year-old Graham Garlick was refused on the same grounds, because she had been evicted by Greater Manchester council for rent arrears of £150.
In his summing up Lord Griffiths said that if a family had lost its right to priority treatment through intentional homelessness, the parents could not achieve the same result ‘through the back door’ by applying in the name of a dependent child.
Budget tax anger
Anti-poverty campaigners have been angered by the Chancellor's budget decision to tax domestic fuel.
With one survey showing the poorest 10 per cent of households would lose 3 per cent of their income, the Child Poverty Action Group said the budget had ‘tilted the tax burden even further towards the poor’.
VAT on power will be imposed at 8 per cent next year and 17.5 per cent in 1995.
Income support will be uprated by an unspecified amount but campaigners say this will do nothing to help other poor families.
The Association of London Authorities said the extra VAT would have a ‘devastating effect’ on poorer families.
Chairman Steve Bullock said: ‘It is the elderly, the very young and the sick who will suffer most’.
For voluntary organisations the budget was more of a mixed blessing.
The National Council for Voluntary Organisations said that, on balance, charities and trusts would lose out.
NCVO estimated the 12 per cent tax on the national lottery would cost charities £36 million a year.
But it said gift aid and income tax relief would raise income by £30 million.
DoH spotlights need of homeless young people BY SUSAN CLARK
The DoH is threatening to pull in leaders of local authorities which are identified as failing to provide services for homeless 16- and 17-year-olds.
Speaking at a Children Act conference last week, organised by Centrepoint Soho and attended by the Princess of Wales, junior health minister Tim Yeo warned the DoH would start ‘chasing the laggards’.
‘We may have to decide upon additional action’, said Yeo.
‘We may produce guidance to local authorities or call them in for private chats’.
But he maintained the government would not be providing extra money for SSDs to help establish a provision system for these young people, who are technically still children.
Radiance Strathdee, the author of research carried out for Centrepoint, said this was not enough: ‘There is a need for the government to get round the table with local authorities, not to lay down guidance, but to look at strategies to set about moving the impasse which exists’.
Yeo did announce a further three years funding worth £440,000 for First Key, the charity which advises councils on aftercare services for young people.
But his claim the government had increased the provision for the Children Act in local authorities' budgets by 14 per cent was greeted with derision from the floor.
Peter Challis, chairman of the Association of London Authorities housing committee, stressed that local authorities were having their overall budgets cut, affecting the budgets of the SSDs and housing authorities.
Strathdee's report for Centrepoint showed that over half the 32 London boroughs she researched had no procedures in place to assess homeless young people despite the statutory obligation placed on them under Section 20 of the Children Act.
One in three of all 16- and 17-year-olds sleeping rough were care leavers.
‘The majority of local authorities won't even publicise that they have a duty to provide because they were frightened it would result in a huge increase in demand they would be unable to cope with’, she said.
Centrepoint is demanding a coordinated strategy which will provide nationwide support and housing for all young homeless people.
She added: ‘Even if we don't take an altruistic approach its clear failure to act now is merely building up a very expensive problem for the future’.
Among the report's recommendations are that the DoH, DoE, and charities set up a special unit to facilitate local provision for homeless youngsters.
Centrepoint director Nick Hardwick said he was optimistic.
Councils must regard young people leaving care as vulnerable and in priority need of housing.
Shelter in Scotland has urged.
Shelter's research has found up to half of all homeless young people in Scotland had been in care, but only 34 per cent of district councils categorise them as vulnerable.
‘It is difficult for young people who have spent large periods of their lives in an institution, and do not have supportive and stable families to help them, to make the transition to independent living’, said Shelter (Scotland) director Amy Isaac.
Report from Shelter,:.
Strathdee: A need to look at strategies
Disability take-up proves disappointing
Social security minister Nicholas Scott has admitted he was ‘disappointed’ with take-up of the disability working allowance.
‘About 2,500 people receive disability working allowance and I am anxious that it is increased as quickly as possible’, he said, and admitted that claimants may have confused DWA with disability living allowance and claimed the wrong one.
Scott said £1.9 million had been spent advertising DWA, compared with £6.4 million for DLA.
In a separate Commons debate on the Disability (Grants) Bill, which brings in the two new independent living funds, Scott was asked whether local authorities could provide cash for clients to buy their own care.
Scott replied: ‘I do not know what the future may hold, but authorities have no power to provide cash now’.
ILF research published this week shows community care packages for severely disabled people cost on average £200 a week less than local authority residential care.
A survey of 1,500 ILF clients by health economist Victoria Phillips found community care cost an average of £228 a week, compared with more than £44 for residential care.
MPs have criticised severe delays experienced by nearly 500,000 people claiming disability benefits last year.
The Commons public accounts committee, in its twenty-seventh report published last week, says a backlog of 400,000 uncleared claims for DLA and attendance allowance had built up by June last year.
At full stretch
FUNDING THE REFORMS
MPs are questioning many aspects of government policy on the reforms, says Mark Ivory
The latest community care report from the Parliamentary Health Committee reads like a compendium of all the anxieties voiced in recent months.
Essentially the message is that nobody knows how far community care can be made to stretch without snapping under the strain.
But committee members are clear about one thing: the DoH has often not been helpful in clarifying the situation for local authorities.
Guidance on assessments is a case in point.
The report describes the guidance as ‘unhelpful’, as it has left SSDs wondering whether recording unmet need will plunge them into costly judicial reviews.
It calls for clear guidance to be ‘issued urgently’ by the DoH and, if necessary, legislation to ensure there are ‘no inhibitions on the ability of social services departments and health authorities to make a full assessment of unmet needs’.
Given the inability of the government and local authorities to agree on funding for community care, the report, not surprisingly, puts great emphasis on monitoring the progress of the reforms.
Records of assessed need will form a large part of the monitoring process but this wide-ranging report makes it clear that there are several other factors to watch.
Among these are the gap between income support and residential home fees for existing residents, SSD purchasing, and the adequacy of funding generally.
As the Health Committee reflects many of the concerns raised by the local authority associations, the Association of Metropolitan Authorities was naturally jubilant.
AMA social services committee chairman Toby Harris said it confirmed the DoH viewed the changes through rose-tinted spectacles.
‘Not surprisingly, the committee was not impressed with the DoH's response to local authorities’ concerns’, Harris said.
‘We welcome its recommendation that the government should undertake an extensive programme of monitoring ‘ton ensure that local authorities have the necessary resources to fulfil their new responsibilities’.
The report questions government calculations for community care funding, particularly the £140 million for infrastructure.
It is especially scathing about Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley's comment that SSDs should pay for all contingencies unless ‘unforeseeable and significant’.
‘We do not see how the department could describe the full implications of the new system of funding community care as being either foreseeable or insignificant’, it says, calling on the DoH to prepare for contingency spending.
On the requirement to spend 85 per cent of the DSS transfer money on the independent sector, the committee expresses concern that it will discourage SSDs from using their own residential care.
From the point of view of one committee member, York MP Hugh Bayley, this section turned out to be unexpectedly significant.
Shortly before the report was launched North Yorkshire social services committee decided to consult on a proposal to close six elderly people's homes.
‘If they close, 60 vulnerable people will be forced out of their own homes and away from their friends’, Bayley says.
‘Community care should be about caring for people, not pushing them around’.
Community Care: Funding from April 1993, HMSO, £12.15.
Moving pictures DoH POLICY
SSDs have been given another set of community care priorities.
Bob Cervi looks at the issues worrying ministers
Social workers may be forgiven for feeling the DoH is continually shifting the goal posts on community care implementation.
Last week's government circular on the reforms was the third in the past year, and each one has set new priorities for staff.
But the circulars reflect the changing picture on the ground, revealed in the national monitoring exercises conducted by the SSI and health regions.
The first circular, in March 1992, sent jointly by the chief inspector of the SSI and the deputy head of the NHS, set out the eight implementation ‘key tasks’, which have become the foundation stones for the changes.
The follow-up in September sounded alarms specifically over hospital discharges and long-term nursing care, and the DoH set SSDs a 31 December deadline to agree continuing care strategies with health authorities.
The  latest circular provides a new set of priorities raised by the most recent round of monitoring in January.
The findings pointed to a lack of training for social services staff and suggested senior SSD managers had not been providing workers or users with information about the changes.
These findings echo feelings among social workers and care managers at the coalface, as picked up by BASW and NALGO.
Workers generally appear to be anxious about poor organisation, management, and resourcing for community care.
‘What's needed for an effective and sensitive service is for staff to be treated better’, said BASW general secretary David Jones.
‘Staff are told it has to be user-led and then that it has to be rationed and controlled’.
But these concerns perhaps reflect that the last two of the eight key tasks — on staff training and informing users — have been given a low priority in some areas.
This is not surprising, considering senior managers' minds have been focused on assessments and discharge arrangements.
Another ‘new’ priority in the latest circular is continuing care.
Even though all authorities met the 31 December deadline, good intentions on effective hospital discharges must still be proved.
Last Year's agreements, says the circular, ‘must be translated into operational details’, monitored and if necessary refined.
The DoH is clearly still worried about possible breakdowns in the agreements and potential hospital bed-blocking, a concern shared by many professional groups.
The circular states: ‘A change of this significance is likely to encounter some difficulties during the early stages of implementation’.
But it adds: ‘Recourse to formal dispute arrangements should be regarded as a rare and serious event’.
A third priority raised is contracting with the independent sector.
The government wants SSDs to boost the provision of private and voluntary domiciliary care services.
But the main problems appear to be with residential home owners, who have threatened legal action over allegedly unfair contracts drawn by some SSDs.
It is unclear whether any more such circulars will be forthcoming post-April, since the DoH has still not clarified precisely what monitoring it will be carrying out.
Social services directors say they are suffering from ‘guidance fatigue’, but it is unlikely ministers will ease off when expectations of the reforms remain so high.
PRACTICE ROCUS
ADOPTION
Making families
Workers in Kent help severely emotionally damaged children to find placements with adoptive families.
Gerry Tissier reports on one voluntary project which offers therapeutic help
In the art therapy room, the children's models scream out their distress in battered and broken lumps of clay.
Such painful work is a key element of the Catholic Children's Society's Familymakers project in Gravesend, Kent.
Since 1981, it has offered a range of therapeutic techniques to prepare severely emotionally damaged children for adoption or long-term fostering.
Such children will have passed along a string of carers and may have been physically and sexually abused.
Attempts at reuniting them with their birth parents will have failed.
They are among the most difficult to place.
But Familymakers believes with proper emotional support most of them could and should settle into a new family.
It tailors its therapeutic help to meet each child's needs and brings together residential and field workers to smooth their path out of care.
For many, it is their last hope.
The project runs two adjoining homes which care for up to nine children each.
It accepts those between five and 12 years old and without serious physical disability.
It aims to place nearly all the children with permanent family, though workers may decide some are too damaged or too old and would be better off with foster parents.
John Elliffee is Familymakers' project leader.
He said the children's history of abuse and separation made it hard for them to trust anyone.
‘One nine-year-old had 53 moves before coming here.
The capacity of these children to form relationships is very limited.
A minority are unable to make any attachments at all and may need time in a therapeutic community’, Elliffe said.
The project puts great emphasis on effective case planning and joint working with local authorities.
Before accepting a child, the project scrutinises relevant files held by the placing authority.
It then assigns a key worker to discuss the move with the child and his or her social worker and carers.
The project insists the child's birth parents are informed, where possible.
The child is introduced to the home through a special welcoming video and a story book describing life at Familymakers.
The child then visits the home and stays overnight once before moving in.
For three months after admission, the child's needs are evaluated.
Residential care manager Peter Plant said a detailed picture of the child is built up.
‘We read all the files and interview as many of the child's previous carers as we can.
We chart each separation and see how it affected child.
We look at behaviour and routines at bedtimes, mealtimes’.
After evaluation, the child's key worker draws up a ‘renurturing’ programme to promote attachment or work on grief or identity.
Through the programme, children learn to explore their lives and express feelings.
Plant said many are stuck at an early stage of development.
‘We try to compensate for missed experiences and help them behave in age-appropriate ways.
We provide rich sensory experiences — wrapping them in soft towels, letting them squelch in mud or helping them identify different tastes or the sound and smells of the countryside.
The project's residential workers are not qualified therapists, though many have received external training on short courses.
They are also supported by psychiatric, social work and child care consultants, with further therapeutic care provided by a qualified art therapist.
The project tries to  meet the needs of black children by recruiting workers from the child's cultural community.
After a year or two the child's family placement worker will begin the search for a new family.
This starts with an advertisement, written with the child's help.
Family placement manager Ellie Bensted said workers tried to be imaginative.
‘If a girl is interested in horses, we advertise in horse magazines’.
Interested families are then assessed for suitability.
The project considers parenting skills and the ability to stick things out, especially during the difficult first months.
It also looks for what Bensted called ‘the unknown x-factor’ which makes the placement work.
Once a family is selected, the introductions begin.
The children are encouraged to learn about their new families.
The parents go on a three-day course to learn how to manage the child's behaviour which may, for example, become highly sexualised or aggressive.
The project prides itself on the intensive post-placement support offered to the children by their old key workers, and to the family by the family placement worker.
Visits are frequent and families are encouraged to go on training courses.
The project runs a well-attended post-placement group where families discuss issues ranging from sexuality to peer relationships.
It is also developing a respite care service.
Elliffe said fewer than one in three of the placements were disrupted which is better than the national average, and the project is placing children local authorities cannot place.
‘This is cost-effective for authorities in the long-term and stops children in care drifting into lock-up establishments’.
He believes a key to the projects' success lies in the continuity it brings to children's lives.
‘For example, we stress the importance of contact with the birth family, even after adoption.
And, because we are seen as neutral we often get the families’ co-operation where local authorities cannot.
It's all about helping children to integrate past, present and future’.
Kent's practice: Project members (from left) Ellie Bensted, John Elliffe and Peter Plant
A determination to alter attitudes
The daughter opened the door and her first words were: ‘She's lying, I didn't hit her’.
Ginny Jenkins was stunned; after all it was 1974 and people wouldn't, or couldn't, believe elder abuse existed.
Today the situation isn't much better: it is estimated 250,000 elderly people are suffering serious abuse.
Yet Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley denies it happens.
Now Jenkins, with support from Age Concern, is spearheading a new organisation, Action On Elder Abuse, which aims to force the issue into the public domain.
‘When something's wrong, abuse is not automatically on the checklist the same way that child abuse is’, said Jenkins.
‘But it is just as common and we intend to make everyone realise it’.
Jenkins has been in the job for about ten days, so she can be forgiven for forgetting a lot of names, but she does have a long history of dealing with elderly people.
For more than 20 years she worked as a physio-therapist in the elderly care sector.
She then moved into psychiatry, setting up physical exercise units for elderly people before ending up, six years ago, as a senior adviser in the Disability Living Foundation.
Her knowledge of the profoundly difficult balancing act of dealing with elder abuse is evident.
‘We are here to protect the elderly.
But at the same time we must preserve the rights of the voluntary carers, and any guidelines must avoid being too prescriptive’, she says.
‘First, we have to define abuse, so we can differentiate between the criminal abuser, who must be removed as a carer, and the voluntary carer who, through frustration and lack of support, starts to abuse’.
The timing of the organisation's birth couldn't be better.
‘The introduction of the Community Care Act will increase the incidents of elder abuse’, warned Jenkins.
‘We're very concerned; carers will be under immense stress because of inadequate support and relief, while the elderly are at much greater risk of being alone in the community’.
Action on Elder Abuse will be there to support all those involved.
Eventually an information network will be developed, with a signpost helpline.
But it's still early days.
At the moment the organisation has just four main objectives which will be moulded into something concrete.
They are defining what abuse is, raising awareness of abuse, minimising incidents through education and training and lastly, filling the vacuum of information and research on the topic.
Jenkins intends to survey all health authorities and SSDs to discover which has a policy on elder abuse and which actually has a nominated person to deal with complaints.
From the information gathered, she will then write guidance policy for the different departments.
‘We can use this guidance to alter attitudes’, she said.
Jenkins: Forcing elder abuse into the public domain
Grampian director Mary Hartnoll has been appointed director of social work for Strathclyde, taking over from Fred Edwards who retires at Easter.
Hartnoll, 53, has been Grampian's director since 1978 and ADSW secretary for five years.
Before that she was a divisional director in Berkshire and assistant director in Reading County Borough.
She began her career as a child care officer in Dorset after gaining her social work qualification at Liverpool University.
She beat five other contenders: Strathclyde deputes Ian Gilmour and Bob Winter; Tayside's Peter Bates; Avon's Richard Evans, and Dudley's Michael Ransome.
Strathclyde's senior depute, Chris Jay, withdrew earlier this week.
Linda Ward and Averil Osborn feature in recent changes which have recently been announced by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's community care and disability research programme.
Ward, who is based at the Norah Fry Research Centre in Bristol, will be taking up[ a new part-time role as the foundation's programme adviser on disability.
She well be reviewing the foundation's programme over the last few years with the aim of identifying any gaps or areas where new initiatives might be needed.
Ward will also continue to oversee some learning difficulties projects supported by the foundation.
Her place as secretary of the community care and disability committee is taken by Osborn.
Osborn joins the foundation from Age Concern Scotland where she was previously senior assistant director active in policy and development work, primarily in the community care field.
POLITICS
BUDGET
Case for concern
Norman Lamont's final spring budget — before it is rescheduled to later in the year — billed as a budget for recovery included any number of business incentives and tax concessions.
It also continued the shift towards indirect taxation, most notably imposing VAT on domestic fuel.
This has upset poverty and disability campaigners.
On one hand, the Chancellor increased the number of people paying the reduced 20 per cent rate of income tax.
But because of the parlous state of the National Insurance Fund (largely caused by unemployment), NI contributions for employees will increase.
Described by the Tory Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler as ‘this backdoor stealth tax’ it cancels out the benefits for many people of the lower rate of income tax.
And freezing personal tax allowances means more people will have to pay tax.
The result of these changes in direct taxation, VAT, and higher excise duties on drink and tobacco is regressive, particularly for lower income households which the Low Pay Unit estimates will lose £5 a week on average.
Lamont's announcement of help for 100,000 unemployed people also raised half a cheer at most.
The Chancellor has raised an extra £6.5 billion in revenue in 1994–95, when the VAT and certain other changes take effect, and £10.5 billion in 1995–96.
From this, VAT on domestic fuel and power will raise £2.3 billion.
The exchequer gains a further £2.2 billion from the NI increases, but the National Insurance Fund will still be £2.8 billion in debt.
This gives one clue to the likely aims of the public spending review announced recently by Michael Portillo, Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
The fund pays for unemployment, sickness and invalidity benefits, maternity allowance, widow's pension and allowance, as well as retirement pensions.
If the Treasury intends to claw back £2.8 billion there will have to be a total saving of over 7 per cent on these pensions and benefits.
While the chancellor avoided a specific commitment to cut the current £50 billion public spending borrowing requirement by more than the £10 billion in the budget, he has clearly indicated that further progress will be made.
This intention underlies the announcement last month of the public spending review.
In a few months Michael Portillo is likely to announce initial plans to distinguish ‘essential costs’ and ‘avoidable spending’in four departments — Health, Education, the Home Office, and Social Security — which account for £110 billion of public spending.
Specific proposals will no doubt be contained in the first joint spending and budget announcement in late autumn.
NI benefits are expected to be a target for cost cutting but the review is expected to be very wide ranging.
Some commentators suggest that it represents a key political platform for the government in coming years.
Labour has claimed ministers such as Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley, Portillo, and Michael Howard, who were associated with the Thatcherite ‘no turning back’ group, have gained wider political support by using the review to reinvigorate Conservative thinking about privatisation and ‘marketisation’.
Labour has gained little in its attempts to attack the public spending review.
Portillo has countered Labour's shadow chief secretary, Harriet Harman's complaints with some gusto, by quoting John Smith's words when announcing Labour's commission on social justice.
‘We should be prepared to re-examine everything, I've not ruled anything out of court.
We haven't looked at any of this (tax benefits, rights) since Beveridge’.
For the moment, Labour's front bench gives the impression of being bereft of counter arguments.
Fran Bennett, CPAG director, suggests both major parties are softening up the public for more means-testing and fewer rights to universal benefits.
However their approaches are very different.
The government's review is internal, even secretive, though the usual think-tanks, and campaigners like MP David Willetts are likely to be used.
On the other hand Labour's commission will start to develop proposals only after a broad social and economic ‘audit’ of the population has been carried out this year.
At this stage it's difficult to know how the parties' proposals may differ.
For example, the Labour Party's commission appears to have accepted MP Frank Field's view that the universal state pension could be changed to take account of the growth in occupational and private pensions.
The government review is likely to follow the same path.
But as Bennett points out, the government will probably go further in the direction of privatisation — some leading Tories are canvassing the idea of actual or quasi privatisation of certain benefits.
And after a number of false dawns, it seems the private insurance industry will shortly be able to offer some sort of long term care insurance product — if it succeeds conventional health and social services could be put out to tender, and perhaps turned into a commercial operation.
Bennett suggests that whatever precise outcome of the review, ‘the climate of debate can be changed a lot before you actually do anything about it and that's what will happen before the next election’.
On present trends both major political parties appear to be moving towards more means-testing, weeding out claimants and clients, and lifting the more affluent out of the welfare state.
In so doing, politicians seem intent on marginalising the Beveridge inheritance and reinforcing social divisions.
As we approach the millennium the only certainty is change, and lots of it.
SHOULD WE NOW BAN PARENTS
Before being offered my current job in a family centre, I applied for dozens, and I know at least two rejections were based on the fact that I am a man.
Yet every child care establishment I have worked in I have been of benefit to children, especially boys, who have had insufficient experience of a positive role model.
I therefore cannot tell you how annoyed I was to read Ken Pringle's article ‘Gender politics’(4 March).
His suggestions can only reinforce the anti-male sexism inherent in some areas of child care work.
It is easy for him in his academic ivory tower to slam the door in the faces of most men, who, like most women, are good, nurturing, sensitive people.
Could he perhaps tell me whether, in the light of statistics regarding child abuse in the home, parents, too, should be banned?
TREAT CAUSES NOT SYMPTOMS
Keith Pringle's attempt to provide debate about the role of men in caring for damaged and vulnerable children (‘Gender politics’, 4 March) raised a number of interesting issues.
Leaving aside his rather literal interpretation of child sexual abuse statistics, sexual abuse cannot be viewed as a discrete phenomenon but must be placed on a continuum of abusive behaviour perpetrated by men and women.
If we are serious in our intent to protect the children we care for then we must attempt to ‘treat’ the root cause of abuse rather than the symptoms, as Mr Pringle appears to suggest.
In our work, we often come across abused children, and adults, who seem to exist in some kind of nether world, unable to express fear, anger or love and who forever, unable to have satisfying relationships, feel alone — disconnected from themselves and others around them.
We, in residential work, often appear to recreate this ambivalent split in our feelings, consequence that we are unable to feel what we feel.
This lack of insight and concomitant lack of empathy often leads us to replace feelings with action — sometimes abusive action.
We need to recognise that feelings are never good or bad, only that they are difficult to understand and can seem irrational at times.
We need to create an atmosphere in residential work where it is OK for workers, male and female, to feel — to feel fear, anger, love and sexual arousal.
All we can ever really offer our clients, child or adult, is the opportunity to enter into a relationship with us.
This relationship, if it is to be helpful, must be informed, on our part, by an appropriate purpose, knowledge, self-awareness and clear, consistent boundaries.
The relationships through which we work are no less real than those we engage in outside work, and it seems inevitable that they will raise the gamut of feelings, some of which, some men and women will be unable to resist acting out.
DISCIPLINE PROTECTS THE PUBLIC
In the same issue as you lament the trials of staff facing disciplinary procedures (leading article and ‘Guilty until proven innocent’, 4 March), you publish another article which tells us: ‘sexual abuse of children by care staff seems disturbingly common’(Gender politics’).
Quite.
I qualified in 1979 and have worked as a social worker and latterly as a team manager in various London boroughs.
My experience in 14 years of practice is that it is virtually impossible to instigate disciplinary procedures such as the protection afforded workers by their trades union agreements.
Yet I have witnessed practice which is grossly incompetent on occasions and every team can identify workers who should never have qualified.
Given that most social work courses give a pass rate of 99 per cent it is hardly surprising that less-than-adequate workers are sometimes unleashed on the public.
Social workers are highly critical of other professions' seeming unaccountability, most notably doctors and police officers, but are notoriously unwilling to look at their own.
Many child abuse inquiries have identified poor management and lack of resources as contributing factors, but they have also highlighted, at times incomprehensible failures in practice.
When all else fails, disciplinary procedures instigated properly and fairly are one of the few protections the public has.
EVIDENCE NEEDED
Norman Warner's statements on recruitment agencies give no substantiated examples (‘Stuck in the middle’ 25 February).
If there is evidence of professional negligence in recruitment agencies, this should be shared.
There is no evidence agency staff are less capable than permanent staff.
Does it make a difference from where staff are supplied if they do a good job?
MACHINES PLEASE
Keith Pringle's article (‘Gender politics’ 4 March) was a good wind-up and you were surely right to advance its 1 April publication deadline.
But it doesn't go far enough.
Seventy-seven percent of care sector sexual abusers may be male, but are human.
Let's have social workers replaced by machines immediately and solve the problem once an for all.
GENDER MIX AND ROLE MODELS
Keith Pringle (‘Gender politics' 4 March) asserts that because of male socialisation and the fact that 77 per cent of abusers are thought to be male, all men may have some potential to commit sexual abuse.
He advocates ways of limiting men's role in child welfare services, and says men should practice nurturing each other.
Finally he hints that perhaps lesbian females are the safest carers.
Has he ever worked in a residential setting?
His ideas would cause chaos.
Ironically all those stereotypes of male/female roles emerge triumphant — women do the caring and men get relegated perhaps to what few manual jobs might be around.
I have worked in an adolescent unit.
A good balance of male/female workers creates a healthy balance of ideas and personality.
Males taking on all roles in the home creates healthy role models.
Ideas from groups like Voice for Young People in Care are appropriate.
Young people in care, through having a volunteer or worker not attached to the unit can have space and a safe environment to air concerns.
WHO CARES WHEN FAMILIES SUFFER
So far as the families of those involved in disciplinary proceedings are concerned, we do not even count as worth a thought (‘Guilty until proven innocent’, 4 March).
Partners can be accused of anything and the department sets into motion as if he or she is guilty.
Families have the worry of trying to keep things together and trying to be supportive in a tense situation.
We found there were no friends among colleagues and no one to talk it out with.
My husband wasn't suspended but went through a disciplinary hearing and things were dealt with there, or so we thought.
Three years later we are awaiting reports from a panel of councillors after a lengthy hearing under the Citizen's Charter because of the clients making an accusation against me.
They had earlier sent me anonymous letters, I had phone calls from them and our son had trouble at school with their son.
The health of my husband, my son and myself has suffered (my husband was on sick leave for two months), and the tension in our home has been extreme at times.
We have received a little help, but far too late.
NAME & ADDRESS SUPPLIED
PRE-TRIAL LOCK UP, PERHAPS
Revelations that the Home Office estimates that as many as 70 per cent of all offences may be committed by people awaiting trial must have shocked the nation.
However it is difficult to understand how the government arrives at a post-trial solution to a pre-trial problem; unless it is their intention to lock youngsters up for three years in the new approved schools without trial.
Had the Home Office research shown that the majority of offences within reported crime were thought to be committed by people on probation, under SSD supervision, or on community programmes, one could have understood a post-trial response.
But even then research into the old approved schools showed children who experienced them had a reconviction rate 49 per cent higher than would otherwise have been expected from their characteristics and records.
Given this scenario one would have thought that it was clear for all to see that what is required are urgent steps to reduce the time, and opportunity for offending, between being apprehended for an offence and having that offence dealt with by the courts.
DON'T FORGET THE USERS
Phyllida Parsloe and Olive Stevenson make many important points in their article ‘Powerhouse for change’(18 February).
However, I searched for any mention of the role users could play.
Unless users are involved in helping to define what it means to work in an empowering way, in the training which enables this to happen and in other ways in the planning, delivery and evaluation of services, it will be another case of users being ‘done to’ by professionals.
Any limited success our user network has had has needed to be given the resources to organise independently, and the commitment of senior management to support user involvement.
Richard Gutch (Letters, 18 February) asks if Arthritis Care is the only organisation to welcome users as lay inspectors by inspection units as another opportunity for user involvement.
The answer is ‘no’.
In our network's submission on the consultation document we welcomed the opportunity for user expertise to be used in this way if properly supported and paid for.
Whether such expertise is ‘lay’ is debatable!
A needy policy
So now it is official.
Tim Yeo, the junior health minister, has revealed to Community Care the limits of DoH monitoring of the reforms after 1 April (News, page 1).
Although a lot has been ruled in, a great deal has been ruled out.
Ministers clearly recognise there is widespread concern about the outcome of the new assessment process, the wide variations appearing in eligibility criteria, and about the contracts being drawn up with the independent sector.
Mr Yeo says the DoH will be ‘keeping an eye’ on these issues through further monitoring of the reforms after the spring.
This is his idea of ‘considerable monitoring’.
As such, it is woefully inadequate.
The health committee's report last week on community care puts its finger on the problem when it points to a ‘paradox’ or ‘tension’in government policy over assessments of need and cash limits.
Downward pressure on SSD budgets will inevitably conflict with increasing demand, it says.
This is why it is crucial ministers confront this conflict, get a grip on it, and ensure that users are not short-changed by the policy.
Mr Yeo confirms the DoH will not be monitoring identified needs for which no service is available.
His apparent reluctance, in his interview with this magazine, to refer to the concept of ‘unmet need’ betrays the sort of double-speak which has characterised much of the government's community care rhetoric.
The health committee, representing all parties, rightly insists the DoH be prepared to respond to shortfalls in funding, widely believed to be a £135 million deficit, and should have contingency funding available to respond to any crises.
Mr Yeo insists no such contingency measures are needed.
It is astonishing that health ministersn now grappling with the financial disasters of the NHS internal market further down the line, should be so complacent in the early stages of their much-vaunted mixed economy of care.
Mr Yeo does not rule out further ‘statutory directions’ for authorities if the monitoring shows the need.
But local authority associations, professional bodies and voluntary groups must not become scapegoats for government complacency and inaction.
Social workers and their managers are clearly ready to knuckle down to the task of making the policy work for users.
Health ministers must be honest and responsible enough to confront problems and chip in with extra funds where ministers.
RACE: COMMUNITY CARE
BLACK LIVES, WHITE PERSPECTIVES A new charter aims to make social services pay proper regard to the needs of black communities.
Kendra Sone looks at what needs to be done.
Last spring, when local authorities were rushing to finish community care plans, a report came out which showed they might mean nothing to many people.
It revealed most black and ethnic minority households interviewed in south east Hampshire had not heard of the local council's SSD.
And more than one-third of those who had, did not know what services were on offer.
The survey, Equal Voice, carried out by Portsmouth University's social services research and information unit, showed how black communities still had difficulty gaining access to social services and how their needs went unmet.
Two recent pieces of radical legislation make councils' obligations clear.
The Children Act demands service providers are sensitive to a child's race and culture while the NHS and Community care Act says local authorities must take the needs of black and minority ethnic groups into account when producing community care plans.
Now a new charter by the National Association of Race Equality Advisers aims to ensure these obligations are fulfilled and transform ministers' rhetoric into reality.
The Black Community Care Charter was produced to ‘remind institutions of their responsibilities from a black perspective’.
The association also wants to inform users and carers of their rights under the Community Care Act.
NAREA hopes SSDs and health authorities will take up the charter and incorporate it into working practices.
Its chairperson, Anstey Rice, says the association was determined not to let the chance pass by to get things right: ‘SSDs and health authorities take a mono-cultural approach to service development and provision.
The charter shows how people can be treated as individuals’.
The charter focuses on the SSDs' key tasks: assessment; designing care packages; developing contracting and purchasing; quality assurance; and complaints and inspection.
A check list for each category shows how providers can carry out their duties with proper regard to black communities’ needs.
Involving the voluntary sector is fundamental to the Community Care Act.
The charter says SSDs must involve black voluntary organisations when constructing care packages and consider them as ‘an option for meeting unmet needs’.
According to Rice, local authorities are neglecting, or sometimes exploiting, these groups.
‘Many voluntary organisations are providing care but leaving themselves out of pocket.
Church groups are providing services for congregations with little help from social services or health professionals’.
LOCAL NEEDS
The Equal Voice survey showed lack of confidence and language difficulties stopped many respondents using social services.
Some saw the SSD as a ‘white’ organisation, irrelevant to their needs.
Rice argues users have more confidence in services provided by voluntary groups in their communities and that these should be a part of community care.
‘Voluntary groups are providing the services already and there's no reason they should not continue to do so on behalf of the SSD, he says.
Like most voluntary sector services, those for the black community have sprung up in response to local needs.
‘Black users who have difficulty gaining access to statutory services go to the groups they know’, says Barry Mussenden of the Black Community care Alliance, a forum for voluntary sector providers.
The contracting culture should mean greater opportunities for voluntary sector providers, but Mussenden identifies problems.
The services offered are often generic and when it comes to competing for work from the SSD, ‘being a Jack of all trades doesn't fit easily into the contracting culture’.
Also, many voluntary groups have campaigning roots and tendering for contracts can go against their original aims and objectives, says Mussenden.
Rashpal Kaur Singh, chief race and equality officer for Birmingham, helped produce the charter.
She says it is up to local authorities to ensure voluntary groups do not miss out.
‘If the groups don't have the training facilities and infrastructure to enable them to tender for contracts, then local authorities have a clear responsibility to give information and provide training so they can’.
Rice says this philosophy should be extended to include the appointment of care managers.
The charter says these positions should be filled by people who reflect the population in terms of race, gender, sexuality, and disability.
‘SSD's can't use the old excuse that there aren't enough skilled and competent people from ethnic minority communities’, he says.
‘They need to develop support networks which allow people to take these jobs without feeling it's an achievement just to get through the day’.
The charter says quality standards must be explicit and measurable and ‘not set in such a way as to make black voluntary organisations unable to tender for contracts’.
But dipping a toe into the contracting pond can be problematic.
Rice says: ‘It's unfair to say to a small black voluntary group with little finance that it should have a certain number of staff; many are new to developing management committees and constitutions.
When organisations lack the finance or expertise, training and support should be provided’.
The charter says to monitor service provision properly, local authority inspection units should consult individuals and organisations within the black community.
This service should be paid for.
Rice explains: ‘We want health  departments and SSDs to realise they have abused the good will of community groups by getting information and interpreters for nothing’.
Singh says local authorities must understand why the black community is missing out and ‘recognise and understand the existence and manifestations of racism’ before they can talk to users effectively.
Authorities have had varying degrees of success consulting with black and minority ethnic groups over care plans.
Southwoark SSD has tried to involve users and voluntary sector providers at the earliest stage.
Last September the council established a black and ethnic minorities working group which is nominating representatives to sit on Soputhwark's joint community care planning groups.
There is one planning group for each client category.
The SSD has also recruited tow officers charged with planning and development for children and adults from ethnic minorities.
Planning manager for adult services Pam Wright recognises voluntary groups are having difficulty getting to grips with the new order.
‘It's not surprising it's often difficult for them to develop a strategy which extends outside their individual project.
They need time to move away from focusing on grass-roots provision’, she says.
The SSD's officers are looking at ways to help groups work with the changes.
Alongside the race equality unit, Southwark SSD has worked hard to build up a representative mailing list of funded and unfunded bodies, says Wright.
Wright says: ‘Some communities are much better represented by articulate voluntary groups than others.
For example, the SSD doesn't fund any voluntary groups for the African community and it is less accessible for us’.
The Equal Voice study found lack of knowledge about what was available contributed to the low take-up of services by the black community.
The study says contact with communities and information gathering would improve if authorities developed a comprehensive system for ‘ethnic record-keeping and monitoring’.
The system would help councils determine the number of service users within black communities and how effectively services are being provided to them.
The report says SSDs should monitor and record religion, language, and diet as well as ethnic origin.
In this way, services could be accurately targeted and ‘under-representation of over-representation of black communities amongst the various client groups can be identified’.
SSDs will inevitably have problems meeting their obligations in a time of ever-tightening budgets.
The Black Community Care Charter says: ‘Clearly the allocation of resources for community care is not equitable across the different communities’.
‘Black and minority ethnic communities suffer from a services and resources deficit which urgently needs to be addressed’.
But one-off grants are no answer, says Singh.
‘SSDs need only to look at the legislation to see they should be meeting the needs of the black community through mainstream budgets’.
‘Black community’ is used here to define ‘black and minority ethnic communities’.
POLICY: HIV/AIDS
EROSION PROCESS
How committed is the government to HIV/AIDS services?
Joy Francis reveals some SSDs have severe reservations about how their funding is being whittled away
Cuts of £2.9 million to the specific grant for the development of AIDS services may seriously restrict SSDs' ability to respond to HIV/AIDS cases from next week.
With the surprising increase in specific grants for health, and reports of 116 new AIDS cases in the UK this January, concern is being expressed that the government is downgrading its commitment to AIDS.
In addition, the DoH AIDS Support Grant circular outlines more explicit conditions of eligibility for grant aid, aimed at targeting the money at authorities with the most pressing needs.
SSDs are expected to show active signs of working with the voluntary sector, health authorities, families, gay men, and ethnic groups.
They must also show their HIV/AIDS services are fully integrated into their community care plans.
A DoH spokeswoman is confident that last year's 50 per cent increase will help accommodate this year's shortfall.
She points to the additional 1.9 per cent which is being offered for growth and argues the more explicit guidelines are there to ‘make sure we are getting value for money’.
She disagrees with the implication that the DoH has cast a more favourable glance over the needs of health authorities and is adamant they are judged along the same lines as SSDs.
Some SSDs would find it hard to agree.
Many, financially stretched with community care implementation, find it hard to locate the 30 per cent needed to qualify for the 7- per cent grant.
Lisa Power, HIV officer for the Association of London Authorities reveals SSDs have to produce a separate supporting statement if they want more money for growth.
She feels SSDs which have not applied before, or do not have a clear commitment to HIV/AIDS, will ‘have their work cut out for them’.
‘A number of SSDs haven't done much work with the voluntary sector, and some were not planning to do work with ethnic groups, families, or gay men.
Some have fought shy of working with gay men, which is inappropriate as a large percentage of cases involve gay men’.
Power is worried the money will not grow to match developments, as many HIV sufferers travel to London regularly for checkups at specialist hospital units.
‘They are not using the services in their own authorities so SSDs are misled into believing there isn't a demand for services.
But the problem will be more noticeable when they are too ill to travel and demand services like occupational therapists from their own authorities.
This hasn't shown up as a past need’.
As a former category A authority, Westminster SSD is one of five the DoH categorised as having a high incidence of HIV.
Last year it bid for and received £940,000.
Even though its former A status can be seen as a plus, Ray Boyce, business manager for HIV and drugs, deplores the decrease.
He feels the cuts will inevitably impact on service delivery.
Though he welcomes the DoH stress on closer working with the voluntary sector and gay men, Boyce is disappointed the circular does not mention the decrease and its possible implications.
‘Even though we are expecting an inflationary increase of 1.9 per cent, our costs have gone up by between 6 per cent and 7 percent.
Despite the fact that the DoH expects our contribution to the voluntary sector to stay at about 20 per cent, we will still have some problems keeping the voluntary sector's involvement at the same level as last year’.
The voluntary sector's involvement is extensive.
Westminster has 17 service level agreements with voluntary organisations and all report an increase in activity.
There has also been an increase in the prevalence of HIV in Westminster.
In 1991, more than 500 people approached the SSD.
The figure for 1992 has more than doubled to 1,100.
This doesn't include the work done with 30 HIV-positive children.
Preventive work with gay men (80 per cent of the HIV unit's client workload), ethnic groups, and school children are Boyce's priority.
‘A lot of teenagers are leaving school without any sex education, especially gay men.
In Westminster we have a large African community and a lot of them are refugees.
With unsubstantiated and irresponsible rumours that AIDS comes from Africa, it is important to work with black organisations around prevention’, Boyce says.
He argues that apart from receiving a higher grant, health authorities are not scrutinised to the same degree as SSds and believes they mismanage the money.
‘A lot of the money is directed into other areas that might be vaguely HIV-related.
In the health authorities we have read reports that say they have misused the money.
With SSDs, every penny we want to spend is examined by the auditors and they check to see whether our activity is HIV-related’.
Les Woods, HIV management adviser at the Local Government Management Board agrees.
He wants ‘the same degree of explicitness with health authorities that SSDs are expected to adhere to’.
Woods argues that the cuts have come when SSDs are facing a growing number of families affected by HIV which will prove expensive.
And with the concentration of funding on areas of high prevalence, he feels former low incidence C authorities will be most vulnerable.
The debate among SSDs is whether to put money into prevention or care.
This is the stumbling block for former C authorities.
if they cannot show a high prevalence of HIV, they will not get the money they need to concentrate on the important job of prevention.
This is the dilemma facing Buckinghamshire.
Reluctant to give out any figures indicating levels of incidence, Nigel  Carter, head of direct services, acknowledges it is quite low.
But he adds, ‘there is an increase in the number of cases coming to our attention’.
Carter says budget constraints mean it is quite a battle to put up the all-important 30 per cent, but he hopes to get more than the £16,870 received last year.
‘We hope the DoH recognises we have been conservative with our bids in the past and will take this and our supporting statement into account as we feel there will be a demand for growth’.
The AIDS Support Grant has been beneficial to Buckinghamshire SSD and its close relationship with the health authority.
It has enabled joint training of staff to deal with the prominent client groups: gay men, drug users, and people who have contracted HIV through contaminated blood.
But its relationship with the voluntary sector, though mainly collaborative, is under threat.
Carter says: ‘We are considering an increase in demand from voluntary organisations, but this will be difficult to meet’.
Bromley SSD is behind with its HIV work.
Its bid for 1992–3 was late, so it didn't benefit from the 50 per cent increase, and there is great pressure to meet the standards required for grant status.
Geoff Wildinson, assistant director for filed work, recognises the SSD is in for a tough time.
‘Our services are pretty thin on the ground in this area.
We are looking to develop this more.
We want to pursue a more in-house policy with the health authority and create an HIV co-ordinator post and put money aside for domiciliary care’.
Wilkinson is aware that many of Bromley's residents go to central London for testing, so it wants to create a more local service with the help of the health authority's clinics.
He claims the incidence of HIV is small, and is confident the new health authority monitoring system will be more specific about the numbers and groups to target.
Many SSDs are already looking to 1995 and the likelihood of no AIDS Support Grant funding.
But Les Woods of the LGMB feels the buck stops with SSDs.
‘There is still a degree of complacency and speculation about HIV from managers.
All I can say is that it will, and can, benefit other work which covers issues of confidentiality and of course good practice.
All of us have to get more involved’.
IMPLEMENTATION: 12
APRIL 93
ALL SYSTEMS GO
One week from today it will be all systems go for community care implementation.
But some would say the whole edifice — a major restructuring and new culture for SSDs — has been build on a shoe-string.
On these four pages, we examine key financial controversies in community care.
Will SSDs run out of money as the financial year progresses, as has been seen with the NHS reforms?
How will the adequacy of community care funding be monitored?
What perverse incentives still remain to keep people in institutions?
Will the ‘needs-led approach’ survive in SSDs which cap the cost of packages of care?
Do devolved budgets really promote greater client choice?
And what will happen to the ‘care gap’— the shortfall between income support levels and the real cost of residential care?
Community Care investigates what the fierce financial arguments really mean on the ground
For the doom-and-gloomers who have always predicted the community care reforms would lead to chaos in social services, nothing can have been more reassuring than events in the health service so far this year.
In many areas hospitals have declared themselves on ‘Yellow Alert’.
Having reached the limits of the contractual arrangements with local purchasing consortia (DHA's) there's simply no more money from that quarter to pay for non-emergency treatment or operations.
Could the same happen here in social services?
The short answer is ‘Yes’, although most authorities will try to head off catastrophe by pacing their expenditure using intensive monitoring as their guide.
This will be done on a month-by-month comparison with the previous year, and by smaller-scale dipstick sampling of expenditure based on studying samples of local budget trends.
The difficulty with this has been the lack of confidence in building budget forecasts for 1993–4 out of not very precise market-mapping exercises done with only 1992–3 figures.
As Oxfordshire director Ian White puts it, there is a ‘data vacuum’ when it comes to matching the discharge rates from local hospitals to nursing homes to the available DSS payments to individuals who receive benefit.
Endemic to that problem, even if there had been some certainty about previous spends, is the unpredictability about future trends: ten unforeseen multi-handicapped users can throw budgets completely out of kilter.
Other indicators of expenditure which will be monitored — though the extent of monitoring will vary between authorities — will be the rate and volume of contributions from relatives and charities, and the cost of placements in residential homes.
Here there will be a multiplicity of arrangements with the private sector ranging from guaranteeing the same price as the 1992–3 DSS spend, to tighter downward pressure on prices exerted through tendering, to authorities where little or no control over placement costs will be exercised at all.
Each authority will be responding to its local conditions, the numbers of SSD homes it has kept in reserve to manage the market, the extent to which it has created quasi-independent trusts, and the number of private beds in its locality.
It is quite clear that in securing contracts with the private sector, and getting a good price, some authorities have been quicker off the mark than others, leaving the remainder at the mercy of spot prices and the sort of fee-hiking that can result.
It is equally clear that some directors have privately expressed fears that, given the crudeness with which the 1993–4 budget trends will have been constructed, severe cash shortages could affect them by September.
But there are some levers SSDs might pull to stave off the worst:
wiser departments will ‘let the handbrake off slowly’.
Expect cautious underspending in the first six months while trends are analysed;
slowing down the devolution of budgets.
Authorities on the cutting edge of independent care management will have to intensify their monitoring of assessment costs in order to get quick handle on their care managers' expenditure.
Even so, tensions between central cash limiting and independent care management could lead to swifter tinkering with eligibility criteria than you would expect;
some authorities will have set aside some growth money to prepare for autumn shortages.
But contingency budgeting is a luxury many cannot afford.
There will be other forms of contingency strategy, where home care spending — perhaps up to one-third of the overall allocation — is deliberately held back until the residential and nursing home spend settles down into a recognisable pattern.
Only then will the extra community care money be released — provided the forecast expenditure on institutional care is reasonably on course.
If it isn't?
Bang goes community care for another year;
where all else fails, contingencies are eaten up and the coffers are bare, doomsday would see other budgets being raided and Peter's services being run down to help pay for Paul.
Drastic alterations might be made to eligibility criteria, assessments either not carried out or not acted upon, and the sight of all those solicitors that the SSI is so worried about sharpening their quills and dusting off their judicial review procedures.
In short, there is the spectre of a ‘Yellow Alert’ every bit as embarrassing to social services, and harrowing for users, as the same NHS plight was to patients.
Although community care year one is meant to be ‘steady state’, there are bound to be plenty of bumps along the way before it gives way to the managerially more predictable, through financially harsher, 1994–5.
WELL THERE GOES THE LAST OF THE MEALS ON WHEELS.
WHICH DEPARTMENT SHALL WE EAT INTO FIRST?
BEWARE!
CARE CHASM
The first year of the funding transfer is sure to reveal to true size of the ‘care gap’.
Local authority associations say the transfer money is likely to be more than £100 million short of what is needed.
Before the transfer, the shortfall was met by charities or relatives who topped up income support payments from their own pockets.
Now doubts have been raised over how much local authorities can rely on these payments to continue indefinitely
Charities have already threatened to withdraw millions of pounds in top-up payments for new clients moving into residential care.
The Association of Charity Officers says its members don't want to get locked into paying fees for care which should be paid for by local authorities.
Top-ups paid by charities are essentially grants awarded to a charity's beneficiaries and not to local authorities.
They are reviewed regularly and financial pressures are forcing many charities to tighten their qualifying criteria.
ACO says charities can't afford to fill the care gap when they have huge deficits.
The Carers National Association is concerned about what will happen to those people whose relatives can no longer afford to meet the cost of the top-up payments.
It fears that local authorities will want to move residents to somewhere cheaper and that they will have little choice but to comply.
ADSS secretary John Ransford agrees that the situation is unclear.
If residents are settled then local authorities will do their best to keep them in the home of their choice he says.
But if a situation changes and top-up payments cease then a thorough reassessment may reveal that a clients needs have changed.
The government says local authorities can narrow the care gap by pushing down prices in the independent sector.
Ransford says this is unlikely to work in areas where demand outstrips supply.
ACO is also sceptical about local authorities' abilities to push down the costs.
Proper care cannot be provided on the cheap, it says, so good homes will close.
Research is urgently needed into the true costs of running a home to registration standards, it says.
PERVERSE INCENTIVES
Key areas where ‘perverse incentives’ are most likely to pressurise NHS and SSDs after April are best indicated by the Institute of Health Services Managers' evidence to Parliament, where it complained that there was no satisfactory delineation of social care from health care.
‘Until this issue is resolved…at the individual level there is concern that charges could be used to limit demand for services and may lead to major problems of access to services between authorities, with health authorities perhaps having to provide services in inappropriate settings…’
This is NHS-speak for ‘if district nursing is part of your community care plan we'll have to pay for it, so where's the dosh?’
As the NHS did not get a ‘grant’ for community care, the temptation will be to concentrate on what goes on inside brick walls and let the rest go hang.
Social workers might be tempted to favour ‘free’ community nursing services, knowing that domiciliary care services will be a charge to the SSD and to the user.
And there will be less obvious incentives: the connections between members of the medical professions and nursing homes, to take but one highly emotive example.
Will this be another undue pressure put on the assessment procedures?
Knowing where assessment procedures might buckle is one thing.
Straightening them out is another.
Constant vigilance to match appropriate services to needs, assessed along tight guidelines, is one way to avoid temptation.
But where that fails most areas will have grievance procedures within the assessment format, leading ultimately director level if agreement cannot be reached though the point where the SSD pulls rank as lead agent is not defined.
Beyond that, tight local monitoring should eventually throw up patterns where inappropriate services are being disproportionately delivered.
But nothing would settle the issue more abruptly than a DoH response to a challenge issued by Pam Charlwood who, when Institute of Health Services Management director, demanded the government ‘sort out the differences between social and health care’.
THE ABSOLUTE LIMIT
APRIL 93
AS PROMISED, I'VE BROUGHT THE MEALS ON WHEELS, THE HOME HELP, THE DISTRICT NURSE AND TRANSPORT.
UNFORTUNATELY BECAUSE OF THE CAPPING, THEY'VE COME TO TAKE YOU INTO CARE!
There was outrage when it emerged recently that home care support for severely disabled users of the new Independent Living (1993) Fund would be capped at £500.
Clients with greater needs than this, the DSS said, would be ‘expected to go into residential care or a nursing home’.
Pauline Thompson, director of the Disablement Income Group, responded that people with severe disabilities would have to be dragged screaming into care.
Now, as 1 April approaches, there are fears care managers may face the same appalling dilemma with other client groups.
ash-strapped local authorities may have to set limits, either formal or informal, on the amount they can spend to keep groups like elderly people and people with learning difficulties in their own homes.
Age Concern is so worried about the impact of cash restraints on assessments, it has asked its 1,000-plus member groups to monitor the situation.
‘We are fearful that older people who want to remain at home may not have the choice because the cost may be more than local authorities can afford’, says divisional director Evelyn MeEwen.
‘Anecdotally, we know this has been discussed in some authorities’.
Age Concern wrote in December to social security minister Nicholas Scott expressing anger severely disabled people over 65 were ineligible for the 1993 Fund.
Scott's reply last month did not reassure: ‘The highest priority for independent living must be given to that group of people for whom the usual pattern is to live and work in the community.
For older people residential care is sadly, often a necessity’.
McEwen says Scott has betrayed a double standard in the government's community care policy.
‘In terms of older people this letter is anti-community care.
For older people he is implicitly saying that the usual pattern is to go into residential care’.
Robin SeQueira, Dorset director and ADSS junior vice-president, says cash constraints may force some local authorities to cap the cost of caring for people, either in residential care or in their own homes.
‘The effect of this will fall much more on less mainstream client groups, by which I mean drug and alcohol misusers, and highly physically disabled people’.
Se Queira describes the ‘64,000 dollar question’: whether some clients could be forced to accept residential care even though they expressed an overwhelming desire to stay in their own homes.
‘Care managers have a very tough job and there will be some decisions they will have to refer up the management hierarchy.
There will be many more dilemmas about capping which will challenge the custom and practice of local authorities’.
Durham director Peter Kemp says that, though he would be reluctant to put a ceiling on costs, resources would inevitably be a factor.
‘We have to make sure we do not starve of help clients with a lower level of need because people with a higher level of need are getting the resources’.
Many SSDs will not discuss capping because they cannot.
Knowsley SSD research and development officer Joe Blott referred to community care as the ‘great unknown’, and like many of his colleagues elsewhere he is reserving judgement until the financial implications of the policy have had a chance to play themselves out in practice.
Budgets will be devolved to team managers but for the present the department lacks the confidence.
‘We will obviously monitor everything that goes on over the next 12 months’, he says ‘We can only hope that when we do our assessments of need we can support that need with the finances we've been given.
But I'd say funding is tight’.
If cost-caps are applied across the board then the potential for judicial reviews is unlimited.
The one group capped by the government, severely disabled people, is all the more angry that they will be unable to resort to the judicial review system.
Jane Campbell, a member of the Independent Living Support Group in the London Borough of Kingston upon Thames says she wants to raise the injustice of the £500 limit in another forum.
‘We're thinking of taking it to the European Court of Human Rights’, she says.
‘How would you feel about imprisonment?
I'd rather cut my throat than go into an institution’.
FALLING SHADES
It was the AMA's Peter Westland who, at a private King's fund College seminar on phase two of community care implementation last April, called on Wordsworth to help express his fears about care management's impact on service users.
Transferring budgets to the front line, he warned, would mean ‘shades of the prison house begin to fall’, on elderly people and other community care users.
Slicing already inadequate budgets down to the lowest possible level would reduce care managers' ability to respond flexibly to user need at the very point at which they were supposed to be maximising choice.
Other commentators claim it would also minimise the range across which budgets could be manipulated and resources deployed when unanticipated, expensive referrals are picked up.
Even when devolved to team manager level, teams can ‘go broke’ and a certain amount of chaos ensues.
Although the Hervert Laming letter of 13 December 1992 created its own furore about what should be written down, senior managers had already been debating for six months about whether care managers should bluff users and relatives about the money available for them.
This debate was an earlier version of the ‘don't write it down because of the danger of judicial review’ scenario: ‘Don't let care managers tell users and families how much the SSD can afford, because they might get away with paying less’.
As one director put it at the time: ‘I will not allow my social workers, one of whose core values is honesty, to go into people's houses and behave in a fundamentally deceitful way’.
There would be a double irony if, within a team or area budget, further cash were available, but care managers themselves had been bluffed in turn into thinking that it was't.
Yet the paradox gets deeper if devolving budgets to the front-line is seen as the very key by which the golden doorway to needs-led rather than service-led care packages is to be opened.
One factor which will help stop Westland's prison house shades from falling to dramatically onto users is that most authorities will move only cautiously towards a care management budgeting system, given the uncertainties which surround overall budgets for next year.
There is a need to ensure organisational change doesn't outpace ‘cultural’ change: that devolution doesn't proceed until experience in managing budgets is complemented by experience in discussion financial issues honestly with users and providers.
SHORT OF CASH
Local authority associations say the total community care funding is £135 million short.
The distribution formula has been criticised, because 50 percent allocated according to numbers of private residential beds does not focus money on deprived inner cities.
The decision not to ring-fence DSS money for drug and alcohol services is said to threaten hundreds of projects.
The rule that 85 per cent of the DSS transfer be spent in the independent sector is feared to protect private residential homes instead of developing services.
Poverty may mean very stringent criteria of eligibility for services, ADSS senior vice-president Denise Platt has said.
And how will we know community care is working, when unmet need need not be measured?
Surely all this calls for monitoring how the funding works nationally.
The ACC, AMA, and LGMB are commissioning some, but the DoH is not.
‘I think that's an attitude they won't be able to maintain’, says the ACC's Stephen Campbell.
The funding will only be visible for three years, as it gradually merges into the personal social services element of the revenue support grant.
Each year's increase in DSS transfer will follow the algebra formula, while the previous year's transfer is given according to SSAs.
Both Campbell and the AMA's Guy Robertson believe the government will stick to the next three years' funding pledges.
But it will not mean much to ask whether the promised community care funding has been delivered intact.
If social services funding shrinks, that shrinking pool (the RSG) will include most of the community care money.
Campbell thinks the unmet need controversy is a bit of a red herring here.
‘Even with the most comprehensive measurement of need, if an authority is charged-capped it has to reduce spending somehow by law’.
Robertson labels the government decision not to monitor ‘irresponsible’.
LEGISLATION: CHILD ABUSE
A PAINFUL SILENCE
In a Well-publicised case, the parents of a baby who died refused to believe evidence in court, and there was no conviction.
Suzy Braye, Michael Preston-Shoot, and Martin Wasik explain the legal and practice implications
The complex relationship between law and social work is well illustrated in child protection.
Everyone who acts on society's behalf in this field struggles with the often competing imperatives of welfare and justice: how to protect children while respecting family autonomy; how to keep children safe while ensuring a fair hearing for parents; and how to intervene therapeutically without prejudicing legal evidence.
When children die, allegedly at the hands of parents or those responsible for their care, society expects responsibility to be allocated, and penalties paid.
But criminal prosecution requires proof beyond reasonable doubt that the person charged committed the offence.
The recent withdrawal of charges against the parents of Kim Griffin highlights the problem of obtaining proof when parents exercise their right to silence and offer no explanation of how the child was injured.
To understand why the law cannot force a conviction in these circumstances, it is necessary to distinguish between two situations.
In the first, it can be proved that both A and B were with the child when the injury was caused.
Here there may be no need to establish exactly who inflicted it.
Both can be implicated in the crime and convicted.
Thus in Marsh and Another v Hodgson (1974) Grim LR 35 both parents were present when their daughter suffered extensive injuries and, although they remained silent under questioning and neither gave evidence at trial, both were convicted.
The facts must show, however, that whether A or B committed the final act, the other must have assisted, encouraged or, at least, failed to take necessary steps to prevent what happened.
THREATENED
It cannot simply be assumed that a parent who is present at the injury of their child has condoned it.
For example, a woman in an abusive relationship might be too frightened of her partner to intervene, and may have been threatened to prevent her telling the police or the court what happened.
In the second situation, A and B are charged with the offence in circumstances where one or other of them acting alone must have done it, since there is no evidence they acted together.
This might arise where, during one hour in which the child died, each parent was alone with the child for half the time.
If both remain silent, or each accuses the other, it is impossible in law to obtain a conviction against either.
The prosecution cannot prove the case beyond reasonable doubt against either one of them.
It is not enough if the evidence looks stronger against one than the other, if the case cannot be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Some critics might favour the pragmatic solution of convicting both, to ensure that the guilty party does not escape justice.
Juries have sometimes done so, only for the convictions to be quashed on appeal.
The law sees the case as no different in principle from dealing with a murder in a street by prosecuting everyone who lives in that street, on the basis that one of them must have done it.
The law was clearly stated in the leading case of Lane and Lane (1986) 82 Cr App R 5.
A child was fatally injured at some time between noon and 8.30 pm.
Both parents were present and absent for some of this time.
One or other of them was with the child at all times.
Both parents remained silent under questioning and, that being the whole of the evidence, neither could be convicted.
The recent case of Kim Griffin was similar, but the Crown Prosecution Service declined to initiate a prosecution which would have been doomed to failure.
Some changes to the evidential rules have been suggested to make conviction easier.
Judge Fallon, for one, has suggested that the normal rules on burden of proof might be amended.
If the burden was placed on the parents to prove they did not do the deed, their failure to convince the jury of this would result in their conviction.
This would force them to testify, but would make this area of the law anomalous.
A more general proposal is that the court should infer guilt from a person's refusal to answer polite questions about what happened, or their decision not to testify.
Such solutions are drastic, and could lead to the wrongful conviction of someone in an oppressive relationship who would have to incriminate a feared partner in order to clear herself, or someone who did not have the capacity to understand the need to offer evidence of their innocence.
Despite these dangers, the right to silence has already been removed in all criminal trials in Northern Ireland.
Changes to English law may be recommended by the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice.
This might well help bring perpetrators of abuse to justice, and help protect any future children in a family, but these benefits must be weighed against the risks to vulnerable and suggestible suspects.
Meanwhile, those engaged in child protection must consider the implications of the current position.
Criminal prosecution, requiring proof beyond reasonable doubt, is one legal  contribution to child protection.
When children may need ongoing protection, there is also the possibility of civil proceedings under the Children Act 1989, where the burden of proof is the less exacting balance of probabilities.
Social work and other professions make major contributions to decision-making in this context: knowledge of child development and patterns of parenting, of indicators of risk and harm, of the impact of economic and social oppression on family distress; skills of systematic assessment, investigative interviewing, therapeutic intervention, advocacy and social action.
Failure to establish guilt in the criminal court does not preclude consideration of a child's need for protection in which the child's welfare will be paramount.
Most importantly, section 98 of the Children Act withdraws the right to silence in proceedings for care, supervision or child protection under the Act, but disqualifies any admission made here from being used as evidence in criminal prosecution.
However, social workers may be called upon to give evidence in a criminal court about matters emerging from their involvement with parents during an abuse investigation.
So information obtained in the pursuit of welfare, with which a parent may wish to co-operate, may be used in the context of justice, where a parent may wish to dispute the facts and their interpretation.
Working in partnership with parents means being open about this possibility.
PATTERNS OF POWER
Social workers' contribution to the legal process is both appropriate and vital.
In the scenarios above, establishing who was where at the time of the alleged abuse makes the difference between conviction and no conviction.
Detailed records about what social workers have established may be highly relevant here.
Workers may also have vital evidence to give about the interpretation of a parent's silence or refusal to give information.
Patterns of power and oppression in families, and between families and their wider community, may result in silence because of violence or threats, or through mistrust of a justice system dominated by white male norms and values.
Similarly, social workers can help ensure that where provision is available for protecting someone's rights in the justice system,(for example, appropriate adult provision) the need for it is recognised and met.
Finally, it is important to guard against over-reliance on legal solutions to problems which have complex causes.
When a tragedy occurs, and society has to confront its ragged edges, there is a temptation to tidy them away by amending the law — yet legal mandates create conflicts and dilemmas of their own.
The law in practice is not a universal panacea.
It tells us what may be done, but not when or how.
The law remains silent on major professional imperatives such as empowering people who experience oppression, and the resource requirements of meeting identified need.
Ultimately, effective child protection is dependent on political will to support both parents and professionals with the resources they need to meet their responsibilities for children's welfare.
Then justice may be seen to be done.
Suzy Braye is lecturer in social work and Michael Preston-Shoot is senior lecturer in social work, University of Manchester.
Martin Wasik is professor of law, University of Manchester 
CHILD ABUSE: INTERVIEWING
CANDID CAMERAS
The Memorandum of Good Practice on videotaping children's disclosures is still fraught with difficulties in practice.
Polly Neate reports on calls for more monitoring of its implementation
By all accounts, progress on implementing the Memorandum of Good Practice varies dramatically.
In some SSDs, relations with the police are dire, joint training is in tatters, and little is being done to build social workers' confidence and skills are growing, and successful prosecutions have been achieved using the memorandum.
Between these two extremes are many shades of grey with responsibilities split in various ways between SSDs and the police.
The Criminal Justice Act 1991 allows child witnesses in court to give their evidence-in-chief of video, though they must still be cross-examined ‘live’.
In practice, making these tapes is a minefield, and many believe, a moral minefield too.
The memorandum is designed to guide social workers, police and children through the difficult stage between local authority child protection and care systems and the criminal justice system and court process.
As the memorandum was written, serious concerns arose about whether the child's interests would paramount.
The two aims of this key part of the child protection process are to minimise children's trauma and help recovery, and to tighten the net around abusers.
They fit uneasily — tight monitoring is vital to see how the balance is struck.
The Home Office has commissioned research from Professor Graham Davies of Leicester University who says it focuses on four key areas: observing how tapes are used in court and how children stand up under cross-examination; tracking how many tapes are made and how many end up in court; discovering the views of lawyers, judges, social workers, police who use the tapes; and judging the memorandum's influence over how recordings are made and questions asked.
Davies adds: ‘One function of our research will be to highlight good practice where it exists.
The memorandum is useful but it may not be the last word.
The Home Office will want to gather as much evidence of good practice as possible’.
‘We are in a whole new ball park.
We have thought of videotaped interviews as a record of a therapeutic interaction.
Now they are becoming legal forms of evidence this raises a lot of new issues’.
The research will cover areas with different practices and varying degrees of success in joint working.
It is a two-year project which started when the Act was implemented last October and its results will provide crucial information for child protection professionals and the criminal justice system.
But it may be a lot more useful for the latter than the former.
It was not conceived to address many of the concerns uppermost in social workers' minds.
From the first suspicion or disclosure of abuse to the criminal trial of the alleged perpetrator, children pass through a spectrum of services and professionals.
The videotaping of the child's statement comes at a crucial point in that process but for the child it is only one part of it.
Davies' research will analyse that part of the child's journey through the system which begins when the decision to make a video has been taken.
It will not examine the interface between videos conducted under the memorandum and the rest of the child protection process.
It will not look at how the decision to make the video is taken or how it fits in with other services the child receives from the SSD, NSPCC, and others.
Many people believe additional research is needed to look at this earlier part of the process.
Corinne Wattam, NSPCC research fellow at Lancaster University, who evaluated pilots of the memorandum last year, is one.
She says there is an urgent need to monitor the process which leads to the decision to videotape.
The timing of the videotaped interview is a key concern.
Wattam says: ‘One of the problems identified early on is that, with the impetus on doing the interview as soon as possible, you have got a thrust of criminal justice criteria at the beginning of the investigation’.
Wattam says the stress on early interviewing is challenged by the research evidence.
She explains: ‘Children aren't ready to tell somebody straight away.
They need time to build up trust and tell their story.
This approach doesn't accommodate that’.
Would the outcome be better if practitioners compromised and made the tape early, making a second tape if further evidence emerged later during therapy?
Or should they negotiate for the video to be made later?
Wattam says: ‘This dilemma is not addressed or resolved.
It's left to practitioners to deal with’.
A DoH source describes cases where a decision is taken not to record an interview because the child's lack of English, learning difficulty, or age mean workers believe the evidence may not stand up under cross examination.
It is important to know how often these children are filtered out.
Chris Hanvey is divisional director of Leeds SSD and Area Child Protection Committee chairperson.
He says social workers want to know how children will be affected if the main focus of the activity is to ensure a particular type of interview.
He echoes Wattam's concerns: ‘There's a tremendous amount of anxiety about how effective this is going to be and how such an important change can be introduced without monitoring.
It would help us to implement this if we knew our concerns were going to be addressed with research’.
Implementation of this part of the Criminal Justice Act is not only a challenge to joint working at a local level, it also straddles two central government departments.
It is not surprising that the Home Office has commissioned research which focuses on the criminal justice process rather than wider child care concerns.
But perhaps what is surprising is that the DoH will not research the concerns raised by senior child protection professionals.
The DoH has begun a programme of child protection inspections which will cover interviews with children, but nothing specific on the memorandum is planned.
It has turned down NSPCC approaches for funding for research saying Home Office research is sufficient.
Investigative child protection interviews are one of the most challenging areas of social work practice.
When similar legislation was introduced in Canada, where the population is smaller, millions of dollars were invested in a four-year research programme.
A video on handling children as witnesses was sent to every crown attorney.
Financial investment and co-ordination on practice have been generally much greater in Canada.
A recent study tour found the use of video and screens had reduced as children were better empowered.
Opposite are a list of rules for investigative interviews produced by Professor John Yuille for use in Canada.
They can be displayed to help both child and interviewer.
COMMUNITY CARE THE INDEPENDENT OF SOCIAL WORK
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S BUREAU
The powerful voice of the child
INTERVIEW RULES FOR CHILD PROTECTION
1
If I misunderstand something you say please tell me.
I want to know.
I want to get it right.
2
If you do not understand something I say, please tell me and I will try again.
3
If you ever feel uncomfortable, please tell me or show me the stop sigh.
4
Even if you think I already know something, please tell me anyway.
5
If you are not sure about an answer, please do not guess, tell me you are not sure before you say it.
6
Please remember when you are describing something that I was not there when it happened.
The more you can tell me about what happened, the more I will understand what happened.
7
Please remember that I will not get angry or upset with you.
8
Only talk about things that are true and really happened.
The stop sign: a raised hand, meaning you don't want to talk about this any more.
PRACTICE: RACE
WESTMINSTER'S BRIDGE
London's China Town has presented Westminster SSD with particular problems.
Gerry Tissier visits a landmark project and meets members of the Kiu Wah team
It is not exactly in the commercial heart of London's China Town, but it is simple enough to find.
From the oriental gateways of Gerrard Street signposts mark out a short walk past the plethora of sex shops to Berwick Street where, on the corner, the Man Fu Kung fast food restaurant signals the last outpost of Chinese Soho.
Opposite, at the entrance to a classic sixties-style office block, a notice in Cantonese announces the ‘Kiu Wah’ project.
Kiu Wah, which means building bridges, is the name of Westminster SSD's first project geared to the Chinese community.
Officially launched in January, it aims to facilitate access to the council's community services.
A team of six social workers, all with Chinese-British backgrounds, offers free and confidential support to vulnerable members of the community.
The force behind Kiu Wah is team leader Christine Mak.
When she joined Westminster seven years ago she was the SSD's only Cantonese-speaking social worker.
At the time, the department was only getting one or two referrals from Chinese people every year.
But she dealt with about 20 in her first few months.
Kiu Wah, in its first six months, has received 86 referrals.
‘We mostly get problems from elderly people to do with finance, homelessness and disability.
Recession has hit China Town and many people over 50 have lost their jobs.
They may have worked years for long hours in restaurants.
They've been left with no job, no family support and with long-term illnesses.
We try to help them rebuild their lives’.
More than 5,00 Chinese people live in Westminster, London's biggest community.
Nearly all have come from Hong Kong, and their numbers are expected to double in 1997 when the colony is returned to China.
Most speak Cantonese, with a little Mandarin and Hakka also spoken.
The team provides for all three dialects.
Mak says the Chinese population is often thought of as a ‘silent community’ which looks after its own.
But, she says, traditions are breaking down, leaving many Chinese people isolate.
Many are unfamiliar with, and suspicious of, statutory bodies, and limited command of English discourages them from using social service.
When the team carried out a survey of clients' needs, the most common request was for translating and interpreting services.
The project, which costs more than £120,000 a year to run, is funded for three years using section 11 money, with three-quarters provided by the Home Office, and the remainder by the SSD.
In the long-term, the team hopes to make it self-financing.
That could involve approaching the private sector, and selling services to other boroughs.
Head of assessment, Vivienne Lukey, who manages the project, believes the project provides value for money.
‘A six-strong team providing a service to all groups and accessibly based where the demand is greatest is cost-effective.
It offers a greater choice of workers while linking in with other areas.
‘We see the team as offering a front door into a range of services.
If clients are better able to use another office, the team will direct them to it rather than act as key workers.
It will also facilitate access to services in the housing department, hospitals and elsewhere’.
For the present, the team is concentrating on discovering the community's needs and translating information on available services.
However, it has a three-year plan to develop services, many of which fall under the Community Care and Children Acts.
Mak says: ‘We aim to set up a domiciliary and respite care scheme and provide a home help service.
Later, we'll look into day care facilities for disabled people.
We're also in a better position to negotiate individual care packages for Chinese people.
And, under the Children Act, we'll look at facilities for families with under-fives’.
A steering group of representatives from different departmental divisions, local health authorities, and Chinese voluntary groups has been set up.
This will help ensure services remain integrated.
The team is keen to develop services in partnership with the voluntary sector, though Mak worries about conflicting responsibilities and competition on service provision.
Her fear may be ill-founded.
Sukman Hui, director of Soho's Chinese Community Centre, says local groups welcome the team and will work out the best ways of cooperating.
‘My real worry is that it will be overburdened with all the problems there are in the community’.
However, team members seem unperturbed by the prospect.
Mak sees it as part of her job to raise the expectations of the community, while Lukey says: ‘Not only do we hope to discover unmet needs, but we want to generate more demand.
We've already identified a need for a home care service which we aim to meet.
The main thing is to encourage people to come forward for services and feel confident about using them’.
The team aims to advise the SSD on its service delivery and information provision to Chinese people.
There is one plan to link staff in with workers from voluntary agencies, and another to train social workers to work with interpreters, gain confidence in working with the Chinese community and respond better to its problems.
Mak says: ‘An English speaker can make mistakes in dealing with Chinese clients.
For example, Chinese families have a different way of disciplining their children.
The respect the male authority figure and will all protect him.
During counselling we tend to talk about physical symptoms.
You need people who are sensitive to and understand these differences.
We understand the culture intimately and know how to handle embarrassing situations’.
Project Kiu Wah (from left): Keith Hong, Mary Lo, Christine Mak, Wendy Sung, Susana Chung, and Kai Man Mg
OFFLOAD
WHEN ESSEX MAN MEETS THE BEAST OF BOLSOVER
The charismatic former director of Essex social services, Maurice Hawker, writes to reassure readers, following our exclusive report (25 February) that Tony Newton, former Social Security Minister and Essex MP, turned up at his farewell party and wished him a happy retirement on behalf of the government.
With such a wish we advised Maurice to look several ways every time he left the house.
But he now writes to say that Newton also likened him to Dennis Skinner MP.
‘More than one person at the event was surprised at the comment but it provides a neat balance to the government's best wishes for my retirement’, he says.
Can i now walk out of my front door safely with head held high, please?’ he asks.
Incidentally it has now been revealed that at his farewell party, Berkshire director Anne Parker described him as ‘round and cuddly’.
Your readers now have lots of choice.
You could, of course, settle for a round, cuddly, Dennis Skinner-type Maurice, full of government best wishes’.
However, I seem to remember Mad Carew aptly described him once as a ‘block of flats’.
Cheers Maurice.
Happy retirement.
A NEW MEANING TO PATCHWORK
If, in the 1980s a social worker or manager said they were ‘working on the patch’, everyone would murmur reverentially: ‘Alas, Professor Hadley, I knew him well’, or: ‘I worked for East Sussex once’.
But these days in Staffordshire the phrase, ‘I'm on the patch’ evokes a strangled cry of: ‘I think I have some leave owing’.
The reason is that hardened Staffordshire smokers (and they come no harder) have taken to the Nicotine patch and are driving their colleagues mad with frozen smiles and cries of: ‘I'm all right— I've gone 73-and-a-quarter hours without one’.
For those of you having withdrawal symptoms from patch-based working, consider only how lucky you are not to be on the other kind of patch.
GOVERNMENT GUIDANCE GOES AWRY
The government's new arrangements for replacing the nice, simple Independent Living Fund are so complex that one could be forgiven for feeling a little bit confused.
Even the DSS and DoH are confused.
In their recent social services letter they announce that the new 1993 fund will consider applications only from people who have not first been in touch with their SSDs.
In fact the opposite is true: only applications made through SSDs will be considered.
Guy Robertson, eagle-eyed social services officer at the Association of Metropolitan authorities, asked the DSS if it would be correcting its mistake.
‘No we won't’, it replied.
Robertson says: ‘They know they've issued something completely contrary to the actual situation, yet they're not going to issue a correction.
Were glad the guidance has finally arrived, however we feel it's a pity it could not have been more accurate’.
A BART'S REMEDY FOR AWKWARDNESS
As the heat is on for community care implementation and tempers among your workmates may be beginning to fray a little at the edges, welcome news has arrived courtesy of Bart's Conferences.
In a joint venture with Barts NHS Trust, it is organising a course on ‘Coping with awkward colleagues’.
(Perhaps ministers trying to close Barts following the Tomlinson report?)
The seminar will: explore the reasons for ‘people being difficult’; make you understand how to develop rapport; develop your skills in handling disagreements.
‘Practical work will involve analysing a case study and developing a ‘behavioural’ plan to deal with difficult people’.
So who whould apply?
Any senior manager who recognises that difficult people constitute the most difficult part of their working life.
For your diaries, it is next Tuesday, 6 April in Leeds.
Rign Bart's conferences on  for details.
Price £193.88 including VAT (although it adds helpfully that VAT is fully reclaimable by health authorities).
POLICY GOES THE FULL CIRCLE
Following last week's journey back in time, history repeats itself again.
From the Guide to the Social Services Yearbook 1952 comes a useful section on protection of, and offences by, juveniles.
Under ‘Remand homes’ it says every county and borough must arrange for some special remand home to be used ‘for children and young persons only, and to which older persons are not to be sent’.
It continues: ‘Any child or young person who has been arrested by the police and is not sent home on bail is to be consigned to this remand home whilst awaiting trial’.
So that's where Kenneth Clarke got his policy from.
ACCOUNTING TIME
The 20th anniversary of the launch of charity United Response took place amid much champagne and canapés at the Imperial War Museum, hosted by its president Martyn Lewis (he of the BBC's Nine O'Clock News fame).
As this was taking place amid the John Birt Productions Ltd furore over tax and Armani suits, he mentioned United Response's first accounts.
‘And we have invited an inspector from the Inland Revenue to check them if necessary’, he added.
Hollow laughter ensued.
THE WAY WE WERE
Community care 29 March 1978
Five deputy directors are on the short-list for the director's job at Essex, in succession to Walter boyce.
They are Mr Boyce's present deputy, Maurice Hawker; Brian Calver from Hertfordshire; Bill Ritchie from Westminster; RJ Willis from Coventry and Brian Lillington from Surrey.
The interviews will take place on April 6. —news pages 