

Thanks for the gift of life…
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
A MAN said a silent prayer of thanks yesterday on the third anniversary of his heart transplant for the anonymous donor who gave him his life.
Paddy Brownrigg, 61, also enjoyed his favourite pint of Guinness at his local pub the Star Inn, Roby Mill, Upholland, to mark the occasion.
The former RAF engineer, of Eskdale, Skelmersdale, has come a long way since 1982 when he suffered a serious heart attack and his health then gradually deteriorated to the point where surgeons at Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, eventually decided that a heart transplant was Mr Brownrigg's only chance.
After an agonising 10-month wait, a suitable donor organ was found and in November 1989, he became the hospital's 61st heart transplant patient.
‘Apart from my arthritis, I'm now a new man as far as the old ticker is concerned,’ he said.
‘You could say that the engine is wonderful but the chassis is a bit rusty.’
Mr Brownrigg, who enjoys cooking for his wife Patricia and admits to being a house-husband, paid tribute to the nurses and surgeons who looked after him.
He said: ‘I wouldn't be here today if it wasn't for their dedication, and the anonymous heart donor who I'll be saying a little prayer for.’
Wythenshawe Hospital's new Heart-Start Appeal is currently redoubling its efforts to raise £1m towards the cost of another heart transplant centre which will open today.
New man Paddy Brownrigg
Children sell toys to help starving
PUPILS at a Birkenhead primary school have been busy raising cash for starving children.
They took their toys to The Priory Church of England School and sold them to each other to help the starving in Somalia.
Many of the pupils come from households where money is tight due to the recession.
Teacher Shirley Bradburn, who organised the toy sale, said: ‘There is high unemployment and social deprivation in the area, but our children realised how lucky they are in comparison with the starving children of Africa.
‘I am very proud of the effort they have made and the sum raised.’
The pennies which changed hands raised a total of £85 which will be presented the British Red Cross at school assembly today.
Head teacher Sheila Davies commented: ‘As a church school we teach the children to appreciate what they have, and point out there are a lot of people in the world who are worse off.
‘We do something like this every year between harvest time and Christmas.
Last year we send money to Romania.
‘The children brought in dolls, teddy bears, books, games and construction toys and we arranged them in the school hall for the sale.
‘We told them the money would go to other children who don't have any toys and, worse than that, don't have any food or anywhere to live.’
Kayleigh Grice and Amy Jones sold their toys Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
SHOPPERS CHEER AS MINERS TAKE TO STREET AGAINST JOBS AXE
Angry pitmen on march
By Jill Shaw Daily Post Correspondent
A MINING town came to a standstill as thousands of pitmen and their supporters marched in protest at plans to close a colliery and sack 730 miners.
Shoppers in St Helens cheered and applauded as more than 3,000 protesters, many of them waving banners and placards, marched through the town centre in a bid to save the doomed Parkside Colliery, on Saturday.
The pit at Newton-le-Willows is the Lancashire coalfield's only remaining mine.
It is one of 10 collieries where coal production has stopped after the Government and British Coal said they were uneconomic and could not be saved.
A brass band from Point of Ayr Colliery, which has been given a temporary reprieve from closure after being included in a 90-day pit review, headed the rally.
Speaking at the event, organised by Lancashire NUM and North-West TUC, were Lancashire miners' leader Roy Jackson and the two St Helens MPs, John Evans and Gerry Bermingham.
They addressed campaigners at an indoor rally at Queens Park Sports Centre, Boundary Road.
James Caunce, Mayor of St Helens, said: ‘I joined the march because my father and grandfather were both miners and we need to fight to preserve Parkside and all those men's jobs.
‘There was a very emotional atmosphere and the town was at a virtual standstill.
‘We went right through the town centre and all the people doing their Saturday shopping stood and clapped and shouted messages of support as we went by.’
The St Helens rally was one of a series of events planned in the North West until the 90-day statutory consultation period over the future of 31 pits ends in January.
On November 17, the TUC is organising a regional day of action, and on November 25 a torchlight procession will be held through Bootle to the expanding coal terminal at Gladstone Dock.
Imports of subsidised coal have been blamed for the closure of Parkside.
The marchers take their message to town
A protester spells out the message
Drama as soap star plays an arresting part
By Jill Shaw Daily Post Correspondent
BROOKSIDE actor Dean Sullivan who plays roguish Jimmy Corkhill stepped into a real-life drama when he made a citizen's arrest after a valuable painting was damaged at an art gallery.
Dean, whose TV character is often on the wrong side of the law, gave chase to three people who allegedly smashed a £500 painting.
The trio are said to have run off after punching the glass-framed painting, House and the Vessel by Canadian artist Elaine Kowalsky, who is exhibiting her work in Liverpool for the first time, at a private viewing at the Merkmal Gallery, Faulkner Street, Toxteth.
The Merseyside soap opera star, an avid modern art collector, set off in pursuit, overpowered the two men and one woman and frogmarched them to Hope Street police station after making a citizen's arrest.
Mr Sullivan said: ‘The gallery owner, Martin Ainscough, is a good friend of mine and I always go to the private viewings because I am a big modern art collector.
‘It is the first time this artist has shown her work in this city and there were about 40 people there, sipping wine.
‘We heard the noise of glass falling to the floor and I saw this group of three heading straight for the door.
‘One of the men had blood on his hand.
‘I chased after them, caught up with them and I managed to get hold of the three of them.
‘I said ‘I'm making a citizen's arrest’ and, with the help of Martin and another guy, Peter Ryan, I took them round the corner to Hope Street police station.’
Elaine Kowalsky, whose damaged painting needed professional repair, said: ‘I am really quite upset about it.’
Mr Ainscough, the gallery owner, said:’ Nothing like this has happened here before.
We were lucky Dean was around.’
A police spokesman last night confirmed that one person was arrested for criminal damage after the incident on Friday night, but had not yet been charged.
Unscripted performance Dean Sullivan
Students creating new park garden
STUDENTS are making a sunken garden in Birkenhead Park, the world's oldest public park.
It is part of a community project being run by Birkenhead Sixth Form College.
The students are working under the guidance of park rangers.
The sunken garden is just one of a range of projects being undertaken by 60 students and seven college staff in order to forge stronger links between the college and the community.
In addition to environmental work, 11 students are attending Bidston Village Primary School every week to assist teachers in classroom work.
Student Keith Marsh is particularly interested in science and has organised a trip for pupils to use the college laboratories while Clare Phillips is helping in the primary school library.
Sheelagh Mullany, a business studies teacher, is using school computers to teach word-processing to a group of parents.
The sound of music also features in the college community programme, with 50 local residents regularly attending the Thursday night recitals of the college Glee Club.
Sisters a driving force in the great charity wine run
By Jill Shaw Daily Post Correspondent
SISTERS Joyce Anderson and Jean Tebble are revving up for the start of one of the biggest fund-raising drives to be organised on Merseyside.
The two mothers are among a group of 80 competitors under starters orders for the launch next weekend of the Merseyside Challenge Beaujolais ‘92 run.
The pair are to leave their families at their Wirral homes and motor hundreds of miles in a race to bring back the first bottles of Beaujolais to Liverpool.
Dozens of business-people and personalities from the region have entered the challenge which aims to raise thousands of pounds for cancer care organisation, Macmillan Nurses.
Contestants will line up at the Blundellsands Hotel, Crosby, at 8am on Sunday and will then parade through the city centre before setting off on their cross-Channel jaunt.
The stunt has been partially sponsored by Whitbread and Laurentian Life and among organisations taking part will be Merseyside Police and the Liverpool Playhouse.
They have been challenged to complete their journey to and from Beaune, France, by the shortest possible route.
Joyce Anderson, of Thornton Hough, said: ‘We are not really in a race against time, the winners will be the party who come back with the fewest miles on their clock.
‘I will be driving and my sister will be navigating, because she is the better map reader.
We have already mapped out our route but we don't want to give anything away to the others.’
Churchgoers knit blankets for refugees
MEMBERS of St Paul's Church, Kelsall, are making blankets to help refugee groups.
The members would like six-inch knitted squares or six-inch wide strips measuring six or four feet.
The knitting can be taken to the church.
Environment Network
VALE Royal Environment Network, formed a few months ago from conservation groups in the area, meets this evening in Northwich Memorial Hall at 7.30pm.
Among those represented will be Vale Royal Conservation Volunteers and Friends of the Earth.
British Legion meeting
THE annual meeting of Hampton and District Royal British Legion Club is being held this evening at the New Inn, Hampton, starting 8pm.
Members' crafty move
FOUR members of Saughall Church Women's Fellowship will demonstrate crafts this evening and members will then be asked to make items for sale at the Church Christmas fair on November 28.
Church talk
THE Saxon Crosses and St Mary's Church at Sandbach, will be discussed this evening by Frodsham and District Local History Group and an audio/visual presentation will be given by guest speaker John Minshull at the meeting in Castle Park Arts Centre, starting 7.45pm.
Book fair
THE annual three-day book fair starts today at Waverton Primary School.
Jumble sale
JUMBLE can help raise money for Chester's Dee Banks School mini-bus appeal fund and organisers of a sale, on Friday, are appealing for items to sell.
Volunteer call
VOLUNTEERS are required by the Tarporley branch of the British Heart Foundation and anyone interested in joining should phone Phyl Campbell-Smith on 0829 260284.
Bird watch
MEMBERS of Ellesmere Port Budgerigar and Foreign Bird Society will see a video by the Australian Finch Society at their meeting this evening in the Labour Hall in Heathfield Road, starting at 7.45pm.
Sixth form college poised to ‘optout’
WIRRAL'S only sixth form college is going independent next spring.
Birkenhead Sixth Form College, along with similar colleges across the country, will be incorporated on April 1 1993.
This follows the recent Further and Higher Education Act, under which the college will receive its future funding from a central national agency.
The college opened with 480 students in 1988.
Numbers have risen to 775.
This year 38pc of students at the college's six ‘partner’ high schools in Birkenhead have elected to continue their education at the college.
The college also caters for students from other parts of Wirral.
Education Secretary John Patten has appointed a new governing body to take responsibility for the college.
It will be headed by chairman Gordon Williams, a retired headmaster and schools inspector.
The college has built up strong links with local industry and this will be reflected on the board.
Governors will include Bob Harcourt, managing director of UML, the Port Sunlight-based Unilever services company, Dr D. Robb, deputy director of the Unilever Research Laboratory at Port Sunlight and Brian Corfe, chairman, Tysons Construction.
Mr Williams, a former Wirral councillor said: ‘The college has been highly successful so far and we have a strong and supportive new governing body to cope with the much increased responsibilities that come with independence.’
Roger Cracknell, college principal, said: ‘The change in status will bring a flexibility to be welcomed.
‘A delegated budget will give the opportunity to respond rather more accurately to perceived needs.
‘As we move into independence, we will be conscious of the help and support we have had from the LEA.
They have done well for us, and are currently funding building work for students with disabilities.’
Two die as car overturns in crash horror
TWO men died of horrific injuries after their car overturned and ploughed into a lamp-post yesterday.
A third man, a back-seat passenger, escaped with minor injuries but was treated for shock.
Police were last night waiting to examine the wreckage of the car, a Vauxhall Cavalier, as they tried to establish the cause of the accident.
Emergency services were called to the scene of the collision in Haswell Drive at its junction with Poole Hey, Stockbridge Village, Merseyside, at 3.35am.
The three men were taken to Whiston Hospital, but the driver and front-seat passenger were declared dead on arrival.
Police were last night refusing to release the names of the dead pair, who were aged 19 and 20, because relatives had not been informed.
One of the dead men and the survivor were from Stockbridge Village, while the third was from Wallasey, Wirral.
A spokesman for Merseyside police said last night: ‘We do not yet know what happened.
We know the car was travelling along Haswell Drive, but we have no idea what happened after that.
‘We don't know whether the driver just lost control of the car.
‘There is no suggestion that the car was stolen.
‘There are 1,001 possibilities as to why this accident happened and it would be pure speculation to say at this stage what could have caused it.
‘We will be examining the car and the scene of the accident to try and find out what happened.
‘We don't know where the men had been or where they were going or whether they had been drinking or not.
‘Our investigation into the cause of the accident is ongoing.’
Police are appealing for witnesses to the accident to come forward and help them with their inquiries.
Century of shipping
AN EXHIBITION celebrating 100 years of shipping came to Merseyside at the weekend.
The display features a time-tunnel showing the changes which have taken place in the Royal DutchShell group's shipping arm over the last century.
Also featured are pictures of oil tankers from 1892 onwards and original artefacts from the vessels and interactive displays.
The exhibition at the Albert Dock's Grand Hall runs until November 14 and is open between 10.30am and 5.30pm.
Admission is free.
Transports of delight
LOCOMOTIVE and ship enthusiasts are getting ready for Swan Movie Makers' 12th annual Transport Cavalcade film show at Bebington Civic Centre on Wednesday night.
The autumn show by the Bebington amateur filmmaking group has become a traditional date for transport buffs.
This year's films will include footage of the refitting and return to the Mersey of the tug Applegarth, which sank in the late 50s.
There will also be footage of the Runcorn-Widnes transporter bridge before it closed in the early sixties and shots of the construction of the new Birkenhead tramway earlier this year.
Pony is left for patients she loved
A nurse's final gift to cheer dying children
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
A NURSE who died of cancer has bequeathed her pony for the use of the terminally ill children she devoted her life to.
Carole Labno's pet Shetland pony was presented on Saturday to the Claire House appeal, which is raising funds to build a hospice for sick and dying children.
The proposed hospice will serve children from Merseyside, North Wales and the Isle of Man.
Mrs Labno, mother of two sons, who lived in Moreton, Wirral, had hoped to work at the hospice.
But she died in August at the age of 43 after a brave fight against cancer.
She had worked as a children's nurse in Wirral hospitals for 20 years before taking a post with the local social services department, assisting young families in need.
She left instructions that her two-year-old pony, called Baby, should go to Claire House to bring pleasure to the young people who will one day be staying there.
Her parents, John and Eileen Webster, who also live in Moreton, have now officially handed Baby over to the charity.
The Claire House appeal was launched in February, named in memory of nine-year-old Claire Cain who died in 1989 from a tumour behind her nose and eye.
Since then campaign organiser Ann Robarts and her team have raised more than £100,000 towards the building's £1m construction costs and the £650,000 which will be needed to cover its running costs for the first year.
They hope to build eight single bedrooms with flats for families and a possible leisure complex with a swimming pool and whirlpool.
But plans to build the hospice on a site in Upton, Wirral, were blocked after people living near the proposed development claimed the centre would cause too much disturbance and a colony of protected bats would be driven away.
Sites for the hospice are now being considered in Flint, Crosby and Liverpool.
The donated pony will be cared for until the hospice becomes operational.
Appeal organiser Steve Robarts, from Hoylake, commented: ‘This is a lovely gesture.
We are touched.
‘It had been Carole's dream to come and work with us, but sadly that dream was smashed.’
Mr Webster said his daughter had often spoken of her ambition.
‘Carole firmly believed God had chosen her to work at Claire House looking after sick and dying children.
‘When she realised she faced death she said to me: ‘God wants me up there to look after the children’.’
Baby, Carole Labno's Shetland pony, with some of those behind the Claire House appeal
The great Chinese takeaway
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A HUGE furnace from a once-mighty steel factory is this morning lying in four pieces on a Mersey dockside.
The massive structure has been dismantled to allow to be shipped out to China where it will be rebuilt.
A dawn convoy of four trucks lugged the furnace from Brymbo, Wrexham, on the first leg of a journey which will end in Shanghai.
A Special Movement Order had to be obtained from the Department of Transport before permission to carry out the operation involving the 25ft-wide loads could be obtained.
The convoy's route took it along the M53 motorway through Cheshire and Wirral to Birkenhead's East Float Dock.
A Merseyside Police spokesman said the operation had passed off without major incident.
But as the furnace awaited shipment from Birkenhead last night, a fierce row erupted in Clwyd, amid claims that 80 Chinese workers will be brought in dismantle more parts of the redundant steelworks.
A former union official at the steelworks claimed he had been told the Chinese workers would be brought in to dismantle the £50m new mill, built in 1979 to process Brymbo's steel.
Coun Arnold Griffiths said Brymbo men, axed when the steelworks was shut down in 1990, were promised the dismantling work.
Coun Griffiths, former Brymbo steelworks convenor, said: ‘It is very sad to see a profitable works shipped off to China.
‘But it is even more galling when there is the prospect that foreigners may come in and do the work of dismantling it.’
A representative of United Engineering Steels, which still owns the Brymbo site and the new mill, last night confirmed the Chinese wanted to buy the mill, though he was unable to say who would be dismantling it.
Three thousand tonnes of equipment from the steel works, which closed two years ago with the loss of 1,200 jobs, has been bought by the Chinese and is to be shipped out of Birkenhead docks to Shanghai.
From there, it will be transported 1,000 miles overland to Chengdu, at the foot of the Tibetan Mountains, where it will reassembled at the site of a tube-making company.
CHESHIRES FIRE BACK AT ATTACKERS
A soldier of the Cheshire Regiment keeps a look-out for guerrillas after his patrol came under fire during their relief mission in Bosnia.
The Cheshires, part of a UN relief team, were forced to return fire to cover their withdrawal after the attack on a Serb held route to a northern town.
One of the team's Land Rovers was left with a bullet hole to its wheel-arch, right
Full story Page 15
Steelworks ‘takeaway’ hits the road for China
A HUGE furnace from a once-mighty steel factory is this morning lying in four pieces on a Mersey dockside.
The massive structure has been dismantled to allow to be shipped out to China where it will be rebuilt.
A dawn convoy of four trucks lugged the furnace from Brymbo, Wrexham, on the first leg of a journey which will end in Shanghai.
A Special Movement Order had to be obtained from the Department of Transport before permission to carry out the operation involving the 25ft-wide loads could be obtained.
The convoy's route took it along the M53 motorway through Cheshire and Wirral to Birkenhead's East Float Dock.
A Merseyside Police spokesman said the operation had passed off without major incident.
But as the furnace awaited shipment from Birkenhead last night, a fierce row erupted in Clwyd, amid claims that 80 Chinese workers will be brought in dismantle more parts of the redundant steelworks.
A former union official at the steelworks claimed he had been told the Chinese workers would be brought in to dismantle the £50m new mill, built in 1979 to process Brymbo's steel.
Coun Arnold Griffiths said Brymbo men, axed when the steelworks was shut down in 1990, were promised the dismantling work.
Coun Griffiths, former Brymbo steelworks convenor, said: ‘It is very sad to see a profitable works shipped off to China.
‘But it is even more galling when there is the prospect that foreigners may come in and do the work of dismantling it.’
Three thousand tonnes of equipment from the steel works, which closed two years ago with the loss of 1,200 jobs, have been bought by the Chinese and is to be shipped out of Birkenhead docks to Shanghai.
A man with a mission who offers change
BRITAIN'S education system is embarking upon a ground-breaking journey, brushing aside many long-held doctrines and beliefs as it goes.
The sweeping changes some of which are not supported by the Daily Post survey are by common consent the vision of one man, Secretary of State for Education John Patten.
Unlike previous education secretaries, he has built on recent changes and amassed a far wider range of powers before setting his plans in motion.
Mr Patten calls this ‘having his hands on all the levers.’
Mr Patten was asked to contribute to the education debate within the pages of today's Daily Post, both as a parent and a politician.
He refused.
His department said the Secretary of State intended to publish a a national league table of school results within the next two weeks and he would issue a statement then.
The Daily Post asked Mr Patten to comment on parents' and teachers' misgivings on examination league tables but, according to the department, he did not want to pre-empt his prepared formal announcement.
Mr Patten is on record as saying that teachers have experienced too many changes in a short time and perhaps deserve a period of stability.
But, he adds, he is unable to promise them respite.
He has set his mind against a Maoist-style continuous revolution but says there are more changes and further fine tuning in the pipeline.
Confimation of this came last week when the longest-ever Education Bill was set before Parliament.
It promised a 25-year blueprint and pledged greater choice for parents and pupils.
Apart from encouraging schools to opt out of council control, the Bill calls for more to specialise in key subjects such as technology, languages and the arts.
Schools which Mr Patten's Department for Education label as bad will be taken over by ‘hit squads’.
It also promises a new funding body as more schools chose to opt out.
The Bill is based on proposals in the Education White Paper Choice and Diversity, published in June which, according to Mr Patten, builds on the success achieved by schools which have already opted out.
So far, 313 of the 23,000 schools in England and Wales have quit council control just under 1.5pc with a further 159 having voted to make the switch in the future.
Pointing the way ahead John Patten
Heroes' roll of honour found in scrapyard
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
A STOLEN brass plaque bearing the names of men who lost their lives during World War I has been found.
The heavy plaque was stolen from the war memorial in King's Gardens, Bootle, four weeks ago.
Members of the Royal British Legion and Sefton Borough Council officers worked together to replace the plaque and the names of 120 men in time for Remembrance Sunday.
Alas, they failed to make a complete list and about 60 names of the fallen were left off the temporary plaque.
Detectives had alerted scrap metal merchants in the area to the theft of the original and on Saturday the five-foot high plaque, worth £2,000, was handed in.
However, it was badly-damaged, bent and covered in paint.
Det Con Dave Stanmore of Bootle CID said: ‘It was a despicable crime which caused a lot of distress to the families of servicemen who died during the war.
‘It's some consolation that it has been found but it's a shame it couldn't be retrieved in time for Remembrance Sunday.
‘Now it has been found, the council will be able to reproduce a new list with the full set of servicemen's names.’
Terry Clarke, branch secretary of the Netherton and Sefton British Legion Club, said: ‘I'm really pleased that it has been found.
‘Now we'll be able to get back to normal and replace the plaque, although we'll have to make sure it's bolted down so no one does this sort of thing in the future.
‘I can't begin to say what I think about these people who stole the plaque and the names of the servicemen which had been there for forty-eight years.’
Remembrance Sunday round-up page 4
Five-year scheme set to bring help Capital's homeless
HOUSING minister Sir George Young will today be urged to adopt a five-year plan to help London's homeless.
At a special meeting with the minister, an all-party delegation from the capital's boroughs will press for urgent action.
The Association of London Authorities wants a long-term Government-funded programme to provide accommodation for homeless single people.
This would mean local authorities working together with private and voluntary sectors to provide homes and hostels.
It is estimated more than 2,000 people now sleep on London's streets and another 50,000 in various forms of temporary accommodation.
ALA housing chairman Pete Challis said he would seek an assurance the Government will renew the Rough Sleeper's initiative, the scheme to provide 15,000 hostel bed spaces, when it expires next year.
The group will also recommend improved access to private rented accommodation through rent deposit schemes.
Sir George Young
Super Van Basten in four-goal blast
MARCO VAN BASTEN scored four times as unbeaten AC Milan routed Napoli 5-1 to stay two points clear at the top of Italy's Serie A.
Roberto Baggio also hit four as Juventus hammered Udinese 5-1, while second-placed Torino notched a 2-1 away win at Paul Gascoigne's Lazio.
Third-placed Inter Milan were held to a goalless draw at home to Sampdoria, squandering their chance of victory when Sosa missed a penalty.
Bruno Giorgi quit as manager of struggling Genoa following their 3-2 home defeat by Cagliari.
Deportivo Coruna clung to top spot in the Spanish first division with a late equaliser to earn a 1-1 draw at Albacete after Real Madrid and Barcelona edged closer with home wins.
Real kept their 100 per cent home record with a 3-1 victory over Espanol.
Barcelona came back from European Cup despair to score a 2-1 win over Atletico Bilbao at the Nou Camp on Saturday.
Barcelona's goals came from Jose Bakero and Bulgarian Hristo Stoichkov.
Atletico scored through an own goal from Juan Carlos.
Former Argentine captain Diego Maradona scored his second goal for Sevilla with a 20th-minute penalty in a 32 home win over Rayo Vallecano.
More ambushes feared as Cheshires fight back
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
CHESHIRE soldiers were forced to shoot their way out of an ambush when they came under mortar and machine-gun fire.
It is the first time UN forces have returned fire in Bosnia and there are fears of further attacks.
The Cheshires unleashed between 20 and 30 rounds of rifle fire to cover their withdrawal after they came under attack.
The patrol of four unarmoured Land Rovers had been testing the safety of a Serb-held route to the northern town of Tuzla.
The ambush happened near the village of Ribnica.
It is unclear if any casualties were inflicted as the British troops opened fire.
After the incident, the Cheshires' commanding officer, Lt Col Bob Stewart, said he was very sad that his men had had to resort to force but he totally backed their decision to do so.
He said the captain who had been in command of the patrol had been correct to order his men to fire and doing so had probably saved their lives.
The patrol of four Land Rovers, carrying 12 men from the Cheshires and the Royal Engineers, came under fire at around 10am on Saturday.
When they turned round to try to withdraw, the road was raked with machine gun fire, mortar shells and automatic rifle fire.
However, the Cheshires' experience in Northern Ireland means they are skilled in anti-ambush techniques.
As the Cheshires sped away, soldiers in one of the Land Rovers leaped out at a road block to take up positions in a ditch and provide covering fire with their SA80 automatic rifles.
One of the Land Rovers was pierced by a single bullet and a mortar fragment but no one on the patrol was injured, despite the fact their attackers had loosed off 200-300 rounds at them.
The white-painted Land Rovers had clear UN marking and the attack has given rise to fears that Serb forces have targeted British troops.
The Cheshires, though officially on UN duty and so neutral, have been welcomed by the Bosnians as ‘rescuing heroes.’
Lt Col Stewart has been reporting to the UN on some of the dreadful conditions suffered by refugees at the front-line town of Maglaj, where he said the situation was ‘disgraceful.’
The 45 Warrior armoured fighting vehicles to be used for convoy protection by the Cheshires are due to arrive in Bosnia any day now.
This will give the Cheshires a good deal more protection and pack a much more powerful punch should they be attacked again.
One of the Cheshires at the ready for further attacks
Soldiers inspect bullet holes after the ambush
Robbers attack schoolboy
A SCHOOLBOY was pinned against a wall and robbed of cash by a four-man gang after his pockets were searched.
The 11-year-old was attacked as he walked alone through Windsor Street car park in Birkenhead on Saturday evening.
He was approached by the gang who first asked him for change.
One of the group then grabbed the boy and flung him against a wall.
They then went through his pockets, took the money and escaped with £27, leaving the boy shocked but otherwise unhurt.
Any witnesses to the incident are asked to contact Birkenhead CID.
Soccer visit
THE Gambia's national youth football team is on a 12 day tour of the UK.
It will be training with staff from Cheshure County Council's youth football development scheme at RAF Sealand today and the Kings School, Chester, tomorrow.
Parents split on sweeping school reforms
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
Survey in detail Pages 12,13
GOVERNMENT claims to have wide support for its education revolution are challenged today in a Daily Post survey.
It shows that parents are split on the cornerstone policy of publishing ‘raw’ examination league tables a course Whitehall is determined to pursue.
The findings coincide with exclusive publication in this newspaper of the first-ever comprehensive study of GCSE performance in Merseyside and Cheshire.
Two weeks before the Department of Education publishes its nationwide league tables of school results, the Daily Post has compiled its own figures, with half of all schools in the region agreeing to participate.
However, two local authorities instructed schools not to tell us their results.
Our figures show widespread differences of results between schools in the area.
But, acknowledging that these are not the only yardstick of schools' performance, the Daily Post has opted not to rank the schools in a league table format.
While we were compiling the figures, we also asked parents and teachers a range of questions on attitudes to change on the education system.
Many of them are unhappy about current proposals.
On the other hand, the research showed strong support among parents for assessment tests for youngsters, especially at age 11.
Our survey found that while parents are demanding more control over schools, enthusiasm diminishes when asked to give up time to become governors or attend parent teachers events.
Parents are also totally against shutting schools which are seen to be unsuccessful an integral point of Education Secretary John Patten's new Bill.
There are divisions too on schools opting out of local authority control and on the National Curriculum.
The Daily Post survey was carried out by independent market researchers and involved more than 400 parents and teachers.
Every secondary school state, trust and private in Merseyside, West Lancashire and Cheshire was invited to give details of its 1992 GCSE performance.
Tom Jones
LIVERPOOL EMPIRE
Review by Penny Kiley
HE'S cheekier than the Chippendales, more passionate than Prince.
But is it really sex appeal that has kept Tom Jones a star for so long?
The success of his stage performance rests on well-worn talents: the voice; the body; and the ability to send himself up.
The most important element is, though, the one most often overlooked: the man is obviously a music fan.
How many fifty-somethings would search out an almost incomprehensible hit single by a teenybop dance-pop group and make it his own?
Tom's latest acquisition is EMF's Unbelievable and he makes the song as much his own as he did a few years ago with Prince's Kiss.
Another new one is Marc Cohn's Walking In Memphis.
In the hands of its writer, it is no more than a dreary bit of singer-songwriter earnestness.
In the hands of Tom Jones it is full of drama and humour.
It also fits him well because it pays tribute to the musical influences which play such a large part in his current show.
The show had hits in plenty, from the early days, It's Not Unusual, Delilah and Green Green Grass Of Home, to more recent times, A Boy From Nowhere and Kiss.
Yet the balance of material was towards other people's songs.
Some things don't change: the ritual screams; the garments and flowers thrown on to the stage; and the suggestiveness.
Tom Jones and his audience can, between them, make almost any song appear raunchy.
What does change is the choice of songs and the balance of styles.
It is proof enough that Tom Jones is not going to take the easy path that most of his generation would choose.
And it makes you realise that, though he may be famous for having an eye for the ladies, he also has an ear for a good song.
Royals to part ‘within weeks’
A FORMAL statement on the breakdown of the marriage between the Prince and Princess of Wales is expected within weeks, it is claimed today.
Separate living arrangements for the couple are under negotiation, according to a newspaper report.
And, although a divorce is not being considered, there will be no further attempts at reconciliation.
The newspaper quoted unnamed friends ruling that out as a result of new revelations in the latest edition of Andrew Morton's book, Diana Her True Story.
The prince, who returns tomorrow from a week-long trip to the Far East which has been dogged by press reports about the state of his marriage, is said to be the one who will move out.
Dogs set to steal the show
NEVER work with children or animals because they are notorious scene-stealers is an old acting adage.
But the cast of Wallasey Operatic Society's production of the musical Annie, to be presented from November 24-28 at the Floral Pavilion, New Brighton, will have no choice.
The story calls for two dogs.
So Emma, a Tibetan Lhasa Apso, and Oscar, a Tibetan terrier, both owned by Gordon and Janis McLeod, of Liscard, will make their local debuts.
The story is about an orphan and an American billionaire.
Annie is played by Leannne Campbell, 11, from Walton, Liverpool, who is a pupil at the city's Elliott Clarke stage school.
Other orphans are played by nine children aged 7-13 from Liverpool and Wirral.
The American tycoon is played by Merseyside actor and singer Alan Birley.
Leanne Campbell, who plays the part of Annie, with Emma the dog Picture: BOB BIRD
Father and son in sea drama
A FATHER and son on a fishing trip were guided to safety yesterday after losing their compass overboard.
Terry and Ian Whelan were six miles out to sea off Southport's coast when they dropped the compass.
Southport Boat Club contacted Crosby coastguard when the fishing boat, Foxy Lady, was late returning.
The RNLI's lifeboat at Lytham St Anne's was launched along with Southport's independent lifeboat.
Intermittent radio failure on board the boat also hampered the rescue mission.
The vessel was eventually located after Mr Whelan, 44, and his 15-year-old son, from Preston, set off a flare.
They were escorted to Ainsdale beach where they landed at 3pm, five-and-half hours after launching.
Tories bid to defer review
CONSERVATIVES on Cheshire County Council want to defer a review of the council stock of smallholdings for at least 18 months.
However, Labour councillors want a review to begin next year.
Tory smallholdings spokesman Coun Michael Hedley said: ‘We agree the county council should keep the future of the estate under consideration but now is not the time for change.’
The Conservative group believes the review should take place when the property market has picked up and any sale of smallholdings will get a better price.
Coun Hedley added: ‘It is likely that any upturn is 18 to 24 months away and any decisions on the future of the estate should be deferred until the position is clearer.’
Treasure tracked down
A NATIONAL treasure has been tracked down to a German museum after it was allegedly stolen by a man using a metal detector.
The British Museum wants to recover for the nation the 2,000-year-old bronze Roman plaque which fetched £26,000 at auction after its removal one night from land in North Yorkshire.
Police later arrested a man in Lancashire.
Sgt Geoff Harney, of Wigton, led an inquiry after the plaque had been taken.
The relic was sold by auctioneers Christie's in London in July 1992.
Christie's described the plaque of the Emperor Claudius as unique.
Police chief says new gipsy laws won't work
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
CHESHIRE'S chief constable claims that planned new laws to cover travelling people are unworkable.
David Graham has listed a catalogue of objections to proposed changes to the Caravan Sites Act.
Mr Graham's letter to Cheshire County Council's environment services committee will be discussed at a meeting on Thursday.
In the letter, Mr Graham said the consultation paper on the planned changes to the law made ‘a fundamental mistake’ in trying to compare problems created by travellers with those caused by traditional gipsies.
Mr Graham added: ‘A further distinction is that gipsy camps, at the extreme, may consist of between 200-300 persons, whereas new age travellers’ camps can account for up to 25,000.’
Mr Graham said gipsies tended to travel around looking for work, while the travellers ‘appear to consider work as a low priority, if indeed any consideration is given at all to working.’
He added: ‘A further distinction is that the new age traveller tends to seek a high level of musical enjoyment, enhanced by stimulants such as alcohol, soft drugs or designer drugs.’
Enforcement of any new laws would fall to the police and require large numbers of officers to be on standby, said Mr Graham.
Removing caravans would make people homeless and there would be menageries of animals needing food and shelter.
There would also be action against the authorities by travellers for assault and damage to property.
‘I believe any effective legislation must be enforceable and must reach those persons against whom the legislation was initially directed,’ he wrote.
Far East heroes honoured
A SOMBRE Prince of Wales yesterday laid a wreath and saluted the Cenotaph at a Remembrance Sunday service in Hong Kong.
Prince Charles, in white naval uniform, joined Governor Chris Patten, Commonwealth representatives, servicemen and veterans at the service near the colony's highest building, the 72storey Bank of China.
They stood for two minutes in silence, signalled by the firing of a gun from the Royal Navy base, HMS Tamar.
The Last Post was sounded by buglers of the First Battalion, Royal Regiment of Wales.
Hong Kong fell to the Japanese on Christmas Day 1941 after a 17-day assault.
A garrison of fewer than 10,000 men had held out against massive Japanese land and air forces and more than 3,000 died in the defence and subsequent occupation.
After yesterday's service, the Prince talked to veterans introduced by Jack Edwards, 74, a former warrant officer with the Royal Corps of Signals, who was captured by the Japanese in Singapore and forced to work in the copper mines of Taiwan.
Prince Charles returns home early today.
Prince Charles lays a wreath in Hong Kong
Britain fights nuclear waste dumping ban
Danes' bid to prevent pollution of oceans
By Amanda Brown Daily Post Correspondent
THE Government is to fight a move to introduce a permanent international ban on the dumping of radioactive waste at sea.
The dispute comes at the opening today of the London Dumping Convention.
Britain has the support of other nuclear states including the US, Japan and France in opposing a Danish proposal to turn the current 10-year-old moratorium on sea dumping of radioactive waste into a permanent ban.
Britain and France need to decommission old nuclear submarines and power stations in the next two decades.
They retained the right to dump low and intermediate radioactive waste in the north-east Atlantic after 2007 at last September's meeting in Paris of the Convention on Marine Pollution.
That convention needed a consensus, while the London Dumping Convention adopts its resolutions by a two-thirds majority.
The Danish proposal is expected to be backed by at least 42 of the 69 countries which make up the Convention.
According to Greenpeace, resumption of radioactive dumping could result in up to 2.7m tonnes of structural radioactive decommissioning waste from current nuclear programmes in western Europe, up to the year 2100.
‘The vast majority of countries reject the demands of nuclear states to use the oceans as their private dumping grounds,’ Greenpeace nuclear campaigner Pete Roche said.
‘A worldwide permanent ban under the LDC is the best way to convince the nuclear states that they must actively and seriously seek land-based solutions, and implement them now,’ A spokesman for the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Foods said: ‘The LDC is doing a detailed study of the dumping of radioactive waste at sea and we hope to report some time next year.
‘We are not dumping at present but we wish to keep our options open.
And for some low levels of radioactive waste, it is the only option.’
Turning the league tables
IN compiling its own comparison table of schools within the region, the Daily Post has followed the lead of many education experts in not publishing raw examination results, pitting one school against another.
Instead, the table, right, lists results in order of school size a form suggested by many of our respondents.
Most educationalists accept examination results as a performance indicator but believe they are too crude to be meaningful and should be seen alongside a number of other factors combined with visits to the school by parents.
Most teachers and headteachers welcome some sort of value added comparison i.e. the value added to a pupil's educational achievements after entering the school.
This is seen as a better guide to a school's and pupils' performance, particularly where there is a wide difference in social and ethnic backgrounds.
Like any statistical analysis, tables cannot take into account the unquantifiable added values of which schools tend to be most proud those not reliant on examination results.
The table published alongside shows results from almost half the schools in the Daily Post's English circulation area.
It would have been a more complete list had Wirral and St Helens authorities not instructed their schools to ignore our request for information although some Wirral schools did reply.
Knowsley Metropolitan Borough supplied all its schools returns.
The Daily Post's table of GCSE examination results is not a league table in the accepted sense.
Instead, it ranks 82 North West schools solely in order of size.
Police clamp on speeding motorists
Danger drivers curb
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
DANGEROUS drivers are facing massive fines and imprisonment after police launched a crackdown.
Motorists who drive too close to the car in front of them at high speed are being targeted by Cheshire police.
Unmarked police cars will be patrolling the county's roads and using video equipment to catch the culprits.
If their driving is hazardous enough they can be charged with dangerous driving and tried before magistrates or even a crown court.
The maximum fine a court can impose is £5,000, and prison terms, as well as disqualification from driving, are also available to the courts.
The campaign was launched because studies have revealed that 60pc of accidents causing injuries involve a combination of driving too close and misjudging speed and distance.
With winter closing in and rain, spray and fog worsening road conditions, police are urging drivers to maintain a safe distance.
A police spokesman explained a simple way drivers can make sure they are the correct distance away from the vehicle in front.
‘Remember the two second rule.
Watch the vehicle in front pass a point, for example a bridge shadow, lamp post or sign, then say ‘one thousand and one, one thousand and two’.’
‘If you are past the mark, you are less than two seconds behind, and too close.’
In poor road conditions, police advise motorists to double the safe gap so they are four seconds behind the vehicle in front.
‘MoT’ tests for baby buggies
FREE ‘MoT’ tests for pushchairs is being offered by trading standards watchdogs later this week.
The tests offer for pushchairs and baby buggies comes from Cheshire's trading standards service as part of National Consumer Week.
Department head Roger Manley, said: ‘Today's lightweight buggies offer many benefits for ease and convenience- but they're often subject to hard wear and tear.’
The tests will be carried out at Queen's Park High School, Handbridge, Chester, between 9am and 3pm this Saturday.
Wallaby hops off to lost weekend
By Brian Unwin Daily Post Correspondent
WALLY the wandering wallaby was last night keeping many hops ahead of his worried owner and police after being unable to resist the call of the wild.
The 2ft high kangaroo-type creature was feeling a bit down-under with having only one lady friend for company in his compound at Acorn Nurseries at Lanchester, Co Durham.
So, when he popped into his food store and found a door at the other end was open to the outside world with one bound he was free.
Nursery owner Paul Hutchinson has been able to keep track of Wally's progress through reports to police from startled motorists who spotted him hopping along roads in the area.
He was seen twice near the village of Langley Park on Saturday night, and yesterday a woman noticed him on the busy A167 dual carriageway on the outskirts of Durham City about 10 miles from Lanchester.
‘The trouble is there is just one female wallaby in his compound so it may be he has followed his natural instinct to go in search of more,’ Mr Hutchinson said after a day-long search.
‘I just hope we can catch up with him before he gets knocked down by a car or finds his way off the roads into open countryside or woodland where it will be harder to find him.’
Mr Hutchinson, who said wallabies would be able to live in the wild in Britain on their diet of grass and fruit, appealed to anyone seeing Wally to call him on 0207521133.
A police spokesman said: ‘If Mr Hutchinson succeeds in recovering his pet, we suggest he follows the advice of the old Rolf Harris song and ties his wallaby down, sport.’
Enniskillen relives its agony
FIVE years on, they gathered in Enniskillen yesterday to remember one of the IRA's most hideous atrocities the Remembrance Sunday bombing.
Eleven died and 63 were injured when the IRA blasted the Act of Remembrance at the Fermanagh lakeland town cenotaph on November 8, 1987.
None of the bereaved stood on the spot where their relatives died.
A hoarding shields the still-ruined building where the bomb exploded.
But around the cenotaph they gathered.
Gordon Wilson, whose words of forgiveness to the terrorists who killed his daughter Marie echoed around the world, was there.
So too was Noreen Hill, who returned to the town for the day.
Her husband Ronnie, once headmaster at the local grammar school, is still in a coma after the bombing.
She bought a nursing home 100 miles away at Holywood, Co Down, so she could care for him herself.
Keith Gault, whose father Samuel was killed, laid the wreath on behalf of the eight bereaved families.
Its tribute said ‘In Remembrance’.
Northern Ireland Security Minister Michael Mates laid a wreath on behalf of the Government.
A major security operation was mounted around Enniskillen.
Police patrolled the streets and troops set up a road block and checked all vehicles entering or leaving.
To Mr Wilson, 65, there were no fears.
‘If I should die by an IRA bomb, that wouldn't worry me.
I would be joining Marie sooner rather than later.’
Gordon and Jean Wilson
The scene of the IRA bomb attack
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
Saddest export a convoy of lorries begins the long journey to China and, inset, the furnace as it used to be at the height of production Picture: VIC CLEVELEY
THE furnace which powered the last bastion of North Wales's once-mighty steel industry was last night on its way to China.
A dawn convoy of four trucks lugged the dismantled furnace from Brymbo, on the first leg of a journey which will take it to Shanghai.
And as the furnace awaited shipment from Birkenhead last night, a fierce row erupted in Clwyd, amid claims that 80 Chinese workers will be brought in to dismantle more parts of the redundant steelworks.
A former union official at the steelworks claimed he had been told the Chinese workers would be brought in to dismantle the £50m mill, built in 1979 to process Brymbo's steel.
Coun Arnold Griffiths said Brymbo men, axed when the steelworks was shut down in 1990, were promised the dismantling work.
Coun Griffiths, former Brymbo steelworks convenor, said: ‘It is very sad to see a profitable works shipped off to China.
‘But it is even more galling when there is the prospect that foreigners may come in and do the work of dismantling it.
‘We were told when the works closed that unemployed Brymbo steelworkers would be first in line for this work.’
A representative of United Engineering Steels, which still owns the Brymbo site and the new mill, last night confirmed the Chinese wanted to buy the mill, though he was unable to say who would be dismantling it.
There were two or three interested parties, including the Chinese, he said.
‘Nothing is signed and sealed yet.
It is up for sale and the Chinese have been here for a fortnight having a look around it.
‘Presumably if they buy it, their agents will invite bids from companies for its dismantling,’ he said.
Three thousand tonnes of equipment from the steelworks, which closed with the loss of 1,200 jobs, has been bought by the Chinese and is to be shipped out of Birkenhead docks to Shanghai.
From there, it will be transported 1,000 miles overland to Chengdu, at the foot of the Tibetan Mountains, where it will be re-assembled at the site of a tube-making company.
A convoy of four low-loaders carrying the dismantled D furnace and accompanied by a police escort set out from Brymbo for the docks yesterday.
Kevin Jones, site manager for Wrexham-based RMG Engineering, said his firm had spent five months dismantling parts of the plant and in all 173 heavy loads destined for China would be moved from the doomed steelworks over the next two weeks.
Coun Griffiths said: ‘D furnace was one of the 10 best in the world.
If the Chinese think it is worth going to all the trouble and expense of shipping this equipment 12,000 miles around the world, how is it that British industry can not make it pay?’
The spokesman for United Engineering Steels said Irish firm Malone Parkinson Project Design had bought the furnaces and associated equipment and sold it on to the Chinese.
In 1989, the giant Bidston steel mill, in Wirral, was dismantled piece-by-piece and rebuilt as the Zhang Jia Gang municipal steel mill in China's Jiangsu Province.
EVERY ONCE in a while Tranmere produce a performance which makes nonsense of their reputation for being uneasy travellers.
They did it at Derby County a year ago and turned up another at Filbert Street on Saturday.
It was the classic away display, full of the sort of qualities managers and coaches like to rattle on about in training all week: Tranmere were disciplined, organised and sharp.
They looked a class act and for once came away with a result to match.
Leicester, one of the better teams in the division, made only one significant mistake and were mugged of the points by resourceful opponents who did not make any.
Tranmere looked most likely to earn the draw their approach was designed to secure as a bottom line when defender Richard Smith put his first foot wrong of the afternoon in the 82nd minute.
He failed to control the ball when intercepting a pass from Chris Malkin 30 yards from goal and Pat Nevin nipped in and slipped away to guide a shot inside goalkeeper Kevin Poole and the near post.
Engine
High quality opportunism like that is what Tranmere paid Everton £300,000 for but, until he scored, the travelling fans were entitled to question Nevin's eagerness to involve himself in the game.
Such a suggestion could never be made about Steve Mungall, who seeks out the heart of the action with such relish that you wonder how his 34-year-old legs can keep carrying him forward like a 24-year-old.
Mungall is having a wonderful season.
At each stage of Tranmere's rise up the Football League these past years you have asked the question: ‘Will Steve Mungall be able to cope at this level?’
At each level, Mungall responds by looking a better player than he was a year before.
On Saturday, Mungall was obliged to take a midfield role in a last minute reshuffle caused when another veteran, Neil McNab, fell ill.
Mungall responded by making himself the engine which drove Tranmere's counter attacks and pulled against the weight of Leicester's pressure.
The Filbert Street fans are not entirely happy despite Leicester's healthy position in the table.
They are quick to rally behind the team in a tight stadium which generates a potent atmosphere but also quick to register their displeasure with the dealings of Brian Little, a flamboyant, long-haired winger in his playing days but a cautious, grey-haired manager today.
At the final whistle, there were strains of ‘what a load of rubbish’, which Leicester certainly were not, but the disappointment of last season's failed promotion bid has left a wound clearly not yet healed.
With Mark Hughes stepping into the centre-back role, Tranmere defended as well as they have all season, restricting Leicester to a smattering of half chances.
Tranmere, though attacking much less often, had the clearer openings.
John Aldridge, making a smart run and well-timed header at the near post, had to applaud Poole's reflexes after the goalkeeper turned his effort onto the bar.
Ludicrous
Much later, Nevin, geed up by his goal, danced past two tackles along the byline and pulled back a cross which Aldridge just failed to reach.
Three Tranmere players, Ged Brannan, Hughes and John Morrissey, were cautioned by fussy referee Alf Buksh.
The London official's slave-ish adherence to the letter of the rule book led him to supply the most ludicrous caution of the season.
I'll swear Leicester defender Nicky Platnauer's only act was to throw a dead ball back for Dave Higgins to place for a free-kick.
Yet Mr Buksh took offence.
What was the offence?
Cooperation unbecoming of a professional footballer?
LEICESTER: Poole, Mills, Platnauer, Smith, Walsh, Hill, Oldfield, Thompson, Davison (Ormandroyd, 64), Lowe, Gee (Grayson, 64).
TRANMERE: Nixon, Higgins, Brannan, Irons, Mungall, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Malkin, Hughes, Nevin.
Subs (not used): Cooper, McGreal.
Referee: Alf Buksh (London)
Attendance: 13,538.
Cautious King: page 30
TV apology over claim that minister was late at Cenotaph
A nation pays its tribute to fallen
By James Hardy Daily Post Correspondent
THE nation remembered those who gave their lives in times of conflict yesterday, as thousands gathered at Rememberance Services around the country.
At the traditional service in Whitehall, the Queen laid a wreath at the Cenotaph flanked by representatives of the armed forces.
Surrounded by a guard of honour, the Queen placed her poppy wreath on the steps of the memorial after the traditional two-minute silence.
She was followed by the Duke of Edinburgh, the Duke of York, Prince Michael of Kent, the Prime Minister and leaders of the other main political parties.
The Princess of Wales, her face almost lost beneath a huge black velvet hat, looked on from a balcony at the nearby Foreign Office where she stood silently with the Queen Mother and the Princess Royal.
The Royal Family led the massed veterans and onlookers in singing O God Our Help In Ages Past to the accompaniment of the bands of the Guards Division.
Royal Marine buglers marked the end of the silence by sounding the Last Post.
After the wreath-laying, the Royal Family returned inside the Foreign Office as 10,500 members of the Royal British Legion marched past the Cenotaph.
The Princess of Wales later laid a wreath at the Welsh Guards memorial in London to honour members of the regiment who died in the world wars and other conflicts.
Serving and former guardsmen stood to attention as Princess Diana, dressed in black, took the wreath from two old soldiers and placed it at the foot of the memorial in Horseguards Parade.
She then stood sombrely facing the memorial while the regimental band played Land of My Fathers.
The regiment suffered one of the worst tragedies of the Falklands conflict when 51 guardsmen died in the attack on the landing ship Sir Galahad.
The Prince of Wales, who was in Hong Kong yesterday, is colonel of the regiment, and the Queen is colonel-in-chief.
In Liverpool, crowds gathered before St George's Hall to honour the dead amongst the massed standards of the British Legion and other associations.
Across the Mersey, Wirral's civic heads congregated in Wallasey for the wreath-laying ceremony.
Meanwhile Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke last night received an apology from ITN for claiming that he had been late for yesterday's wreath-laying ceremony at the Cenotaph.
Mr Clarke is understood to have been extremely angry about the report which said he was ‘clearly late and somewhat out of place.’
He was seen emerging from the Foreign Office a short distance behind the Queen after his ministerial colleagues had taken up their positions beside the Cenotaph.
But a Home Office spokesman said: ‘Kenneth Clarke firmly denies the suggestion that he was late.
‘The Home Secretary always escorts the Queen to the door and could not possibly have been at the Cenotaph before her.’
ITN later acknowledged its mistake.
In its 6.30 pm news, ITN said: ‘In our earlier bulletin we suggested that the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, had arrived late for the Remembrance Day ceremony.
We were mistaken and we apologise to Mr Clarke.’
Standards lowered, old soldiers say a prayer for lost comrades at the Liverpool service
Councillor Kate Wood lays the first wreath at Wallasey
DEAD WOMAN'S MOTHER SPEAKS OUT AFTER THREE-YEAR WAIT
Victim's family attacks delay over murder trial
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
THE mother of North Wales schoolteacher Fiona Jones yesterday broke her silence to condemn a three-year delay in bringing her French killer to trial.
Now the family are appealing for help to put pressure on the French legal system to end their agonising ordeal.
Fiona disappeared in August 1989 while on a first wedding anniversary holiday in France with her then husband, Mark Jones, who has since remarried.
They had been staying at a 16th century chateau near Compeigne.
Her body was found the next February and a man, hospital radiographer Frederic Blancke, was charged with murder.
But, though in custody, he has still not been tried because of delays in the French legal system.
The family has been told of delay after delay.
Until recently they had believed the trial would be held sometime in next month.
But last week they were told the trial would again be delayed, possibly as late as May next year.
Blancke is to fight the murder charge, claiming the killing was not premeditated.
The family, which lives in Old Colwyn, had refrained from making any comment on the delays, hoping that patience would pay off.
But yesterday, Fiona's mother, Pat Cottrill, broke her silence.
‘I am very, very annoyed but what can we do?
We are dealing with the French legal system.
‘It angers me to think he is still on remand.’
The family have previously written to former Home Secretary Kenneth Baker asking for information, but were left none the wiser.
The pain of losing a daughter in such circumstances did not diminish with time, Mrs Cottrill admitted.
‘It is there every day, all the time, it does not go away.
‘Fiona was our only daughter, she was a super daughter.’
Mrs Cottrill intends to contact Clwyd North West MP Rod Richards and North Wales Euro MP Joe Wilson, in the hope that they can help.
The family's legal representative in France is French Advocate, Philip Ginestet.
He told the Daily Post that it was likely there would not be a court hearing until May.
He explained the delay was down to the French court system being ‘overburdened’.
Faces of sorrow grieving parents Bruce and Pat Cottrill at their daughter's funeral
Fiona Jones killed
Mark Jones husband
Police scheme to aid ‘young citizens’
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
SCHOOLCHILDREN are to be taught how to cope with dangerous situations through a new scheme launched by Cheshire Police.
The Junior Citizen Scheme aims to help children cope with the possible hazards of everyday life.
‘Children may be thrust into a potentially dangerous situation through innocence, chance or youthful mischievousness,’ said Police Press Officer, Jacqui Hanson.
‘This new scheme devised by the Cheshire Constabulary Community Affairs Department, in conjunction with other agencies, aims to educate children to deal more confidently and effectively with dangerous situations.’
The Junior Citizen Scheme will involve children aged between nine and 11.
The scheme operates by using a number of set scenarios which pose problems or dangers to children, and will include coping with strangers, fires in the home and dangerous situations outside the home.
‘The children work in small groups of five to six under close supervision, tackling each of the sets in a session,’ Ms Hanson said.
‘At the end of the session the whole class is debriefed so that important points can be clarified and re-emphasised.’
The scheme will be run by the police, fire brigade, Manweb, Gas Board, Chester College, Crewe Environmental Health Department, British Waterways and the British Transport Police.
Woman, 27, on murder charge
A WOMAN, aged 27, will appear before magistrates at Wrexham today charged with murder.
The charge follows the discovery of 28year-old Nicholas James Brock collapsed in his upstairs flat at Weale Court, Hightown, Wrexham, on Saturday.
Mr Brock was taken to hospital by ambulance.
He was pronounced dead on arrival at Wrexham Maelor Hospital.
Stunned
A post mortem examination was carried out on Mr Brock and South Clwyd coroner John Hughes was informed.
Neighbours at the block of flats, owned by Wales and West Housing Association, last night said they were stunned by the tragedy.
They said Mr Brock had been recently made redundant by a firm at Malpas.
Detective Chief Inspector Colin Edwards, head of Wrexham CID, said: ‘A woman has been charged with murder and will appear before Wrexham magistrates.’
The upstairs flat where the man died
Guitarist strikes a festival chord
AS WIRRAL'S two week International Guitar Festival of Great Britain gets under way today it is good to report that at least one local musician features in the line-up.
His publicists claim Martin Pleass, 23, is the only ‘born, bred and living on’ Wirral guitarist in the event.
He appears on Tuesday next week at Turleys Wine Bar, Birkenhead.
He has been making his living from music for the last three years.
And although this work has seen him working all over Britain, Ireland, Europe and the US, he thinks it is time for a change.
‘I want to direct my efforts more towards my own original songs and material,’ he says.
So he is doing more solo work, as in his festival date, and featuring his own numbers like My Turn Now and The Company of Fools.
Pleass has recently been working on a demo tape with producer Mike Moran.
The festival opens tonight at Birkenhead Town Hall, with the flamenco group Jaleo from Seville.
Martin Pleass more solo work
BRITON Ian Spiro was yesterday named as a suspect by Californian police hunting the killer of his wife and three children.
He is thought to be armed with a handgun.
The 46-year-old businessman has been missing since the bodies of his family were found at their luxury home in San Diego on Thursday.
At first, police were not sure if he was also a victim or on the run from hitmen.
But after a detailed examination of the house they said he was suspected of the shootings.
Gail Spiro, 41, and her children Sara, 16, Adam, 14, and Deana, 11, were shot through the head as they slept in their beds.
Neighbours on the exclusive housing estate in Rancho Sante Fe home to millionaires and film stars found the bodies.
Spiro is believed to have driven off in a four-wheel-drive vehicle.
The family lived in France, Canada and Britain before moving to their £3,000-a-month home in Rancho Sante Fe in September.
Scotland Yard denied that there was a police guard on the London home of Spiro's ex-wife, Jennifer.
She and her daughters, Samantha, 22, and Gina, 20, were reportedly ‘bewildered’ by the killings.
A friend said: ‘Jenny and Ian separated in 1974 and divorced in 1978.
‘There has been no contact between them since then, apart from a limited contact with the children a short time ago.’
Spiro was believed to have telephoned his daughters to ask how they were.
He is also reported to have told British journalists he would be in London in November.
Detectives in California are also probing the business affairs of the 6ft 2in tall commodities broker and his background.
Spiro at one time had extensive dealings in the Middle East and, according to reports, may have been used as a go-between for the CIA and MI6 during the hostage negotiations in the Lebanon.
A Sunday newspaper said Spiro had claimed to have paid money to Terry Waite's kidnappers on behalf of the British Government.
Mr Waite, who was involved in negotiations to win the freedom of captives in Lebanon, was himself held for nearly five years.
The former Church of England envoy said: ‘I had contact with hundreds of people prior to my first face-to-face meeting with the kidnappers in Beirut.
‘Many contacts preferred to remain anonymous.
Most adopted a false identity.
Some were helpful.
The vast majority were not.
‘Even if I could identify these contacts I would not because of the obvious dangers.’
Mr Waite added: ‘Because of the volatile complexity of the situation it is hardly surprising that rumours continue to circulate regarding individuals who were alleged to be connected with the hostages.
‘The situation was and continues to be highly dangerous.
Half-informed speculation can only increase the danger for others.’
A Foreign Office spokesman said there had been no deals with terrorists.
Suspect Ian Spiro with his wife, Gail, before the shootings
The house of death in Rancho Santa Fe
Firemen find three stabbed to death
THREE generations of a family found murdered in the kitchen of a terraced house had been the victims of a horrendous and frenzied attack, police said yesterday.
The murdered family was named as grandmother Gurmej Kaur Bahia, 60, stabbed 16 times; her daughter Surinder Kaur Dhandwar, 28, stabbed 46 times and Surinder's son Avtar Singh Dhandwar, 4, stabbed 11 times.
The crime was discovered by firemen called to a blaze at a house in Bowden Road, Smethwick, West Midlands.
Mrs Bahia lived in a neighbouring house.
Detectives believe the klller may have tried to burn the bodies in an attempt to hide the evidence.
The alarm was raised by a neighbour who spotted the fire on Saturday evening, then heard an explosion.
Last night, a 21-year-old woman was helping police with their inquiries.
Hugh and I, by Branagh…
WHATEVER else you think of Kenneth Branagh, you must admit that he gets around.
His latest film Peter's Friends is due out this week with Branagh serving as producer, director and star.
And when I was offered a publicity interview who should turn up but Mr Branagh.
It was a lot of work for one man, he told me, which is why the name Hugh Cruttwell always turns up on the credits of his movies.
Cruttwell, it seems, was one of his old mentors from RADA days and has had a variety of film titles, on this occasion ‘production consultant.’
‘His main job is to watch my performances because that's difficult for me when directing,’ explained Branagh.
In one scene of this comedy about university revue artists meeting in acrimony ten years later and which also features comedienne Rita Rudner, Branagh as a once-promising writer reduced to penning an American TV sitcom for his wife had to become drunk at a New Year's Party.
After watching his performance, Cruttwell told him it was ‘absolutely Yah.
You were terrible, not convincing and didn't look remotely drunk.’
Stung, Branagh resisted the criticism only to be told: ‘It's what you pay me for do it again.’
Branagh admitted: ‘He has a truth meter.’
Incidentally, in the completed and highly recommended movie Branagh does look totally out of his skull in that scene.
Kenneth Branagh with Rita Rudner
Anfield's mystery man still puzzle to friend and foe alike
RONNY ROSENTHAL remains a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma.
The phrase was coined by Sir Winston Churchill to describe Russia's unpredictability and can be equally applied in a footballing context to Liverpool's Israeli striker.
Middlesbrough's shambolic defenders failed to come up with the answers to the riddles posed by Rosenthal's direct running.
Electrifying
And Rosenthal's style is, you suspect, as much of a mystery to his team-mates as opponents unfortunate enough to catch him when he's running hot.
Enigmatic?
Certainly.
Life's never dull when Ronny's around.
If Graeme Souness is going a bit thin on top, it is probably the result of watching Rosenthal on one of those days and he certainly has them when he seems incapable of getting anything right.
Who will ever forget that miss at Villa Park?
Then he can play like a dream, electrifying Anfield with that direct, no-nonsense running style which strikes fear into defenders.
Ian Rush, who enjoyed Rosenthal's attacking company after his frustrating lone furrow against Spartak Moscow, summed up the case for the Israeli's defence when he said: ‘Sometimes I don't think Ronny knows what he's doing so defenders certainly aren't going to know.’
Rosenthal is the ugly duckling to Rush's swan, a blurred flurry of arms and legs, a turbocharged footballing windmill.
He was the focal point of a vibrant Liverpool first half performance which went some way towards lifting the cloak of despondency draped over Anfield by Spartak's superiority on Wednesday.
Dominate
Liverpool's tactical and technical limitations were exposed by the newly-crowned Russian champions, and while it is easy to be wise after the event, Rosenthal could just have been the man to produce that little something out of the ordinary if he had been used from the start against Spartak.
Middlesbrough are no Spartak, and were no match for Souness's side, who shook off any possible European hangover to dominate from the first whistle.
Jon Gittens was the main victim of Rosenthal's latest attempt to convince Souness he is worth a place in Liverpool's starting line-up.
His eighth minute back-pass fell fatally short of the courageous Stephen Pears in the Middlesbrough goal, but it still took an exceptional finish from Rosenthal to find the net from an awkward angle.
His second, seven minutes before half-time, was even better, running straight at the hapless Gittens before seeing the whites of Pears' eyes and drilling an explosive left foot drive high into the net.
Jimmy Phillips gave Middlesbrough brief hope of a revival from the penalty spot two minutes later after Mike Hooper hauled down John Hendrie, but Steve McManaman restored respectability to the scoreline when he turned home Liverpool's third on the stroke of half time from Don Hutchison's raking pass.
Liverpool's midweek exertions caught up with them in a low-key second period, but there was still time for Ian Rush to pass the latest in a seemingly endless list of personal landmarks.
His last-minute header from Paul Stewart's cross was his 200th league goal in England and his first Premier League goal at Anfield.
It was a satisfactory end to a highly satisfactory Liverpool performances.
Ronny will be on international duty when Liverpool play Sheffield United on Wednesday and Anfield will be a duller place for his enforced absence.
LIVERPOOL (4-4-2): Hooper, Marsh, Burrows, Nicol, Piechnik, Hutchison, McManaman, Redknapp, Rush, Rosenthal, Stewart.
Substitutes: Jones, Tanner, James.
MIDDLESBROUGH (4-4-2): Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Kernaghan (Morris 14 mins), Whyte, Gittens, Mustoe, Falconer, Wilkinson, Proctor (Slaven 75 mins), Hendrie.
Substitute: Ironside.
REFEREE: Mr. D. Gallagher.
ATTENDANCE: 34,974.
Cannon shot sparks off a Saints spree
Bass NW Counties
St Helens T 5 Darwen 1
A LOW-KEY first half witnessed few chances until Cannon opened the scoring in the 35th minute with a cross-shot but Darwen equalised after the break through Pilkington.
McClatchey restored St Helens' lead with a stunning volley and Pennington helped himself to a fine hat-trick.
Castleton Gab 0 Formby 1
FORMBY always looked the better side but had to wait until the 85th minute before they gained their just reward, Paul Proctor scoring.
Oldham T 2 Ellesmere Pt 1
OLDHAM just about had the edge early on but Port took the lead in the 39th minute when Jamie Williams volleyed home from a corner.
Oldham equalised through David Betts and Micky Bartholomew grabbed their winner soon after half-time.
Stantondale 4 W'houghton 2
STANTONDALE were two up in the first quarter of an hour through Graham Dodd and man of the match Paul Diamond before Carl Thomasson reduced the lead shortly before half-time.
Stantondale's second half scorers were Diamond and Mark Wilson (penalty), with Neil Maudsley replying.
Maghull 3 Atherton Colls 0
NICK HOGAN put Maghull ahead in the second minute and Lee Cooper increased their lead 60 seconds later.
Hogan got a third in the sixth minute with a crisp drive.
Tourist, 13 trapped
A TEENAGE tourist from the US had to be freed by firemen yesterday.
The 13-year-old boy's left leg had become stuck fast in railings near Conwy Road Bridge.
A fire crew from the town's station were called to the scene and they managed to free him within minutes.
The boy is on holiday with his parents from Salt Lake City, Utah.
The family, not named, was in Conwy on a day trip.
To free the boy, firemen first cut away part of his jeans.
Then they greased his leg before easing it out from between the railings.
Despite his ordeal, the boy was unhurt and was able to walk away.
He and his parents then continued their day trip.
Thorny question for riddler Rosy
A rising Welsh designer who is glued to work!
STAGE designer Paul Andrews was glued to his work when we spoke yesterday literally.
The 23-year-old was working on designs for two Theatr Clywd, Mold, productions and was just sticking together his model box when I telephoned.
‘I'll keep this in my hand while we speak,’ he explained.
The two shows Sheridan's The Rivals and Shakespeare's All's Well That's Ends Well mark another milestone along Andrews' fast-moving career.
And they prove that the Mold theatre has been quick off the mark to snap up an astonishing new Welsh talent.
Last year, Newport-born Andrews was graduating from Wimbledon College of Art.
This week, his first professional work goes on display at Manchester's Opera House with his £300,000 designs for the Birmingham Royal Ballet's Romeo and Juliet.
The catalyst had been the choreographer Sir Kenneth MacMillan who presented Paul with the dream commission after seeing his student work in a degree show.
‘I was told he was interested so I wrote to him asking for advice on my career.
I wasn't quite certain what I wanted to do.’
Sir Kenneth invited him round for tea and by the time he had left Andrews had been given the huge task of designing a fulllength ballet involving set changes and 300 costumes.
‘Until then the most I had done was two or three costumes at a budget of £50.
I don't know why Sir Kenneth chose me he must have been mad.’
Lacking a studio, Andrews was offered one at Covent Garden where he worked closely with Sir Kenneth, who died last week and gained vast practical experience in designing.
Andrews' ballet designs, created over eight months of intensive work, were much praised when premiered in Birmingham in June.
Talented Welsh stage designer Paul Andrews
Flynn hails his heroes
WREXHAM can look forward to next Saturday's FA Cup first round match at Crewe with some confidence after extending their unbeaten away run to six games at Lincoln City at the weekend.
The home side's run of four straight wins in which they scored 10 goals counted for nothing as Brian Flynn's men put up the shutters to keep a clean sheet for the fourth time this season.
And the Robins' boss was delighted with the performance, claiming that, although they did not win the game, they came out on top tactically.
‘Defensively, it was a brilliant performance,’ he said afterwards.
‘We altered our tactics to keep two men wide and one up the middle, and with Mel Pejic behind the back four we restricted them to very few chances.
‘We always had to be aware where their main dangers were coming from and defensively we did that.
‘Mark Morris had to make a good save late on from a snapshot by a defender, but Gary Bennett also had a chance to win the game for us at the end.’
Match report -P29
JUMPING FOR JOY: It's that winning feeling for Pat Nevin after his goal had earned Tranmere victory against Leicester on Saturday.
The tricky winger's 82nd minute strike, left, capped a classic away display by Rovers at Filbert Street.
‘Mash’ team ready
AS concern mounts for the safety of British troops in strife-torn Bosnia, the force's ‘Mash’ medical support team is ready for action.
The 26-strong team has quickly set up an operating theatre, resuscitation area, X-ray department and a ward in two rooms in the British base a former school at Vitez.
Despite the relatively primitive surroundings, the team is delighted to have somewhere warm and dry to perform life-saving operations.
Captain Kevin Griffin, from Derby, who heads the team pulled from Aldershot-based 22 Field Hospital, said: ‘Everything is ready to go.’
He added: ‘This is very similar to the way we worked in the Falklands.’
Frontline first aid will be provided by the Cheshire Regiment's seven-strong medical team under the command of its Medical Officer, Captain Mark Weir, a qualified doctor.
Capt Weir, 27, originally from Glasgow, said: ‘Sometimes we will actually accompany the convoys.
At other times we will be called out to the scene.
‘Our aim will be to give immediate first aid and any life-saving procedures such as clearing airways.’
If the case is serious, the injured soldier will be rushed back to the Mash unit in the Vitez school, where gallons of blood have been brought in from Britain.
Master Ray
RAY WILKINS and Queen's Park Rangers are determined not to be shouldered out of the Premier League title race.
After last week's defeat by Aston Villa, doubts were raised about Rangers' ability to stay the pace.
But Wilkins, at 36 playing better than ever, was instrumental in the club's 2-0 win at Wimbledon and said:’ We were committed and in the end we came through.’
College comedy hunt
NEW listeners and new comedy writing talent that's what BBC Radio 4 tells me it hopes to gain from a three-day stay at Liverpool University this week.
The Radio 4 roadshow is aimed directly at students, many of whom, admits the Beeb, think of the network as middle-aged, highbrow and rather stuffy.
However, research has shown that many students first discover Radio 4 when at college without a TV set.
The roadshow, starting on Wednesday, will include visits from The Archers team; a demonstration of how on radio ‘even the most boring university lecturer can be made to sound interesting’; and recordings of the comedy show Lionel Nimrod's Inexplicable World and Any Questions.
There will also be a comedy writing workshop.
‘The idea is to inspire the next generation of comedians to think of radio first and launch their careers with us,’ said a spokesman.
IAN RUSH last night lamented the loss of Ronny Rosenthal, Liverpool's two-goal hero in the 4-1 win against Middlesbrough, for Wednesday's Coca-Cola Cup clash against Sheffield United at Anfield.
Rosenthal has returned to Israel for a World Cup qualifying game against Sweden and will miss the third round replay, a blow to Liverpool after Saturday's display.
Rush scored his 200th league goal in England to set the seal on Liverpool's win and then admitted he prefers the presence of a strike partner to the lone attacker role employed against Spartak.
He said: ‘Ronny played very well and it is disappointing he won't be around against Sheffield United.
‘He scored two great goals which settled the side down.
He frightens defenders by running straight at them.’
Rosenthal's unpredictable style gave Rush more room for manoeuvre and he said: ‘I always enjoy having someone playing alongside me up front because it makes life easier.’
On with the dance
FIFTEEN youth dance companies, including one from Germany and one from Ireland, will congregate on Merseyside this week for a European Dance Festival.
The festival is part of John Major's European Arts Festival but the Merseyside Youth Dance Forum hopes the dance festival will be the first of many.
Showbiz honours unsung heroes
SHOWBIZ stars last night honoured six unsung heroes for their behind-the-scenes work for the disabled and disadvantaged.
The six received their awards from the Celebrities Guild of Great Britain at London's Royal Garden Hotel.
Stars such as Anita Dobson, Patricia Routledge, Wayne Sleep, Thora Hird, Bob Holness and Susan Hampshire joined in the celebrations, which radio personality David Jacobs hosted.
All six had conquered hardships of their own to help those in need and Celebrities Guild founder Ella Glazer said: ‘They're all remarkable people and it's a pleasure for us to reward them for work which might otherwise go unmarked.’
The six winners were: Jack Vander-Molen, from Hendon, north London; Sally Trench from Wendlebury, Oxfordshire; Dr Solly Arnowsky, from north London; Hilary Willmer, from Leeds; Adele Drake, from Ripon, North Yorkshire; and Leslie Alderman, from Bath, Bradfordon-Avon.
This is the 10th year the Celebrities Guild has presented its Unsung Heroes Awards to people who help the disadvantaged for no personal reward.
Forest flyer puts Blues in cup mood
Happy Howie sees silver lining
HOWARD KENDALL is ready to keep faith with the men who have put fresh life into Everton's fading season.
Kendall looks likely to say ‘same again’ when it comes to team selection for tomorrow night's testing Coca-Cola Cup third round replay against Wimbledon at Selhurst Park.
He is expected to give a vote of confidence to the players who battled to produce a priceless victory in the relegation clash at Nottingham Forest on Saturday.
Paul Rideout's first league goal for Everton was also the first by one of the club's strikers at The City Ground for almost 23 years -and brought their first league win at Nottingham Forest for more than 10 years.
Kendall, who confirmed that Sunderland had made an inquiry for Tony Cottee, was delighted that his side's performance spared Everton the potential embarrassment of replacing Forest at the foot of the Premier League table.
He said: ‘It was a battling performance, which it had to be on the day.
Brian Clough had used some unkind words to describe his side on the morning of the match, but on Saturday's evidence we beat a good side.
‘Our first-half performance was disappointing in that we couldn't hold the ball up front.
It was coming straight back at us and putting us under extra pressure.
‘We improved in the second half and I was very pleased with our teamwork, with everybody pulling for each other.
‘Paul Rideout scored an excellent goal, which will give his confidence a real lift.’
Ian Snodin, playing his first game in central midfield after four injury-troubled years, was an outstanding figure for Everton, Kendall saying: ‘Ian did very well for us.’
Kendall also revealed struggling Sunderland had made a move for Cottee, who is available, but it is unlikely to result in the striker moving to Roker Park.
Sunderland are starved of cash and will probably be unable to meet the financial requirements of both Everton and the player.
Match report -P34
Report by PHILIP McNULTY
GRAEME SOUNESS wants Liverpool's fit-again England star John Barnes to make his comeback in front of the watching nation in a fortnight.
Barnes played his first game since rupturing an achilles tendon on England duty five months ago when he completed 45 minutes for Liverpool's A-team against Tranmere Rovers at Melwood on Saturday.
Pressure
And Souness believes that should be a prelude to a return to senior action as a substitute in the televised game against Queen's Park Rangers at Loftus Road on November 23.
Souness, who is also set to tie up the deal for Norway defender Stig Inge Bjornebye, said after Saturday's 4-1 Anfield triumph against Middlesbrough: ‘He played 45 minutes and came through without any problems.
I hope John Barnes sees his target as the QPR game.
‘We have a break of almost a fortnight after the Sheffield United game on Wednesday.
‘I hope John will work exceptionally hard and get himself on the bench for the QPR game.
‘John was put in a corner recently and asked about his fitness and said he thought he would be back in November.
I felt that was a bit early, but all credit to him because he's worked so hard.
‘I tried to take some pressure off him by saying if we saw him before Christmas it would be a bonus.
‘But he's done well and hopefully he now sees it the same as we do and we will see him on the bench in our next league game.’
Speculation
Barnes's England teammate Mark Wright is once more at the centre of transfer speculation, with new Premier League leaders Arsenal now in the frame.
Wright was absent on Saturday, but Souness now seems to prefer the central defensive pairing of Steve Nicol and Torben Piechnik.
The Liverpool boss is hopeful that Wright, who has a foot injury, will be fit for Wednesday night's cup replay against Sheffield United.
Michael Thomas is battling to overcome a sore achilles tendon.
Match report -P35
Tranmere Extra
Prenton supremo keeps his feet on the ground
by Peter Jardine
JOHN KING steered Tranmere to a new high on Saturday but revealed ‘I'm still not looking at the league table.’
Pat Nevin's fifth goal for Rovers earned them three crucial points at Leicester City.
And the victory elevated Tranmere to third place in the first division behind Kevin Keegan's Newcastle and Swindon.
‘I honestly haven't studied the table too much,’ said King yesterday.
‘After the match, the chairman came in and showed me the other results and the league placings.
‘He said ‘it's not bad, is it’, but I have seen it before at different levels and I am not looking at it too much at this stage.
I still say Easter is the time to be in the top three.
Salute
‘But we cleared a tough hurdle on Saturday.
People ask if we are good enough and Leicester away is an acid test.’
King saluted goalscorer Nevin, who seems to be competing with fellow winger John Morrissey to see who can score more goals.
‘We need everyone to chip in with goals and Pat took his chance well.
I thought we edged the first half and although they edged the second, we had the better chances.’
Rovers were forced into a pre-match reshuffle as Neil McNab went down with a stomach bug.
He should be fit to travel to Italy on Tuesday for the Anglo-Italian tie with AC Reggiana.
‘It is nice to be going over there in this position.
Hopefully we can do ourselves and English football proud with a good performance,’ King added.
Nevin said: ‘Some people have put a question mark over our away form but we haven't always got what we deserved so to beat a side of Leicester's calibre is very heartening.
Cover
‘Our defence was brilliant and hopefully we can be as professional in the future.’
King will take a squad of 16 to Italy tomorrow.
Welsh under-21 goalkeeper Danny Coyne is being included as cover for Eric Nixon.
However, it's not all good news for Pat Nevin, for his football world will turn upside down today when he is left out of Scotland's World Cup squad to face Italy at Ibrox on November 18.
I understand Scotland coach Andy Roxburgh will call up only 16 players and that will leave Nevin in the cold.
Meanwhile, Tranmere coach Ray Mathias is a target for managerless Preston North End.
The Deepdale club have Mathias on a shortlist with caretaker manager Sam Allardyce, ex-Cambridge boss John Beck and Chris Nicholl.
A decision is expected today.
Briton hunted after family is massacred
By Shenai Raif
BRITON Ian Spiro was yesterday named as a suspect by Californian police hunting the killer of his wife and three children.
He is thought to be armed with a handgun.
The 46-year-old businessman has been missing since the bodies of his family were found at their luxury home in San Diego on Thursday.
At first, police were not sure if he was also a victim or on the run from hitmen.
But after a detailed examination of the house they said he was suspected of the shootings.
Gail Spiro, 41, and her children Sara, 16, Adam, 14, and Deana, 11, were shot through the head as they slept in their beds.
Neighbours on the exclusive housing estate in Rancho Sante Fe home to millionaires and film stars found the bodies.
Spiro is believed to have driven off in a four-wheel-drive vehicle.
The family lived in France, Canada and Britain before moving to their £3,000-a-month home in Rancho Sante Fe in September.
Scotland Yard denied that there was a police guard on the London home of Spiro's ex-wife, Jennifer.
She and her daughters, Samantha, 22, and Gina, 20, were reportedly ‘bewildered’ by the killings.
A friend said: ‘Jenny and Ian separated in 1974 and divorced in 1978.
‘There has been no contact between them since then, apart from a limited contact with the children a short time ago.’
Spiro was believed to have telephoned his daughters to ask how they were.
He is also reported to have told British journalists he would be in London in November.
Detectives in California are also probing the business affairs of the 6ft 2in tall commodities broker and his background.
Spiro at one time had extensive dealings in the Middle East and, according to reports, may have been used as a go-between for the CIA and MI6 during the hostage negotiations in the Lebanon.
A Sunday newspaper said Spiro had claimed to have paid money to Terry Waite's kidnappers on behalf of the British Government.
Mr Waite, who was involved in negotiations to win the freedom of captives in Lebanon, was himself held for nearly five years.
The former Church of England envoy said: ‘I had contact with hundreds of people prior to my first face-to-face meeting with the kidnappers in Beirut.
‘Many contacts preferred to remain anonymous.
Most adopted a false identity.
Some were helpful.
The vast majority were not.
‘Even if I could identify these contacts I would not because of the obvious dangers.’
Mr Waite added: ‘Because of the volatile complexity of the situation it is hardly surprising that rumours continue to circulate regarding individuals who were alleged to be connected with the hostages.
‘The situation was and continues to be highly dangerous.
Half-informed speculation can only increase the danger for others.’
A Foreign Office spokesman said there had been no deals with terrorists.
Suspect Ian Spiro with his wife, Gail, before the shootings
The house of death in Rancho Santa Fe
Kev for Cambridge?
KEVIN RATCLIFFE is to be interviewed for the vacant manager's job at Cambridge United.
Everton's most successful captain has had to put his career on hold after failing to find a suitable club following a spell in the Scottish Premier League with Dundee earlier this season.
Ratcliffe has been linked with managerial vacancies at Chester City, Preston North End and Cambridge United.
He revealed to the Daily Post recently that he was ready and willing to take on a player-manager's role.
And now Cambridge United, who recently sacked controversial manager John Beck, have made the first move.
I understand Ratcliffe will meet the Cambridge board within the next 10 days to discuss the job of player-manager.
Ratcliffe has a rival in former Plymouth Argyle manager David Kemp, who is also a strong candidate.
Runcorn 2 Kettering Town 2
POLICEMAN Mick Gallagher rescued Runcorn in the nick of time after the home challenge appeared to be tailing off.
The promising centre back, recruited from West Cheshire League Merseyside Police, headed an equaliser in the fourth minute of stoppage time.
Runcorn had fallen behind in the 19th minute but were unlucky to go in only level at the break through Steve Shaughnessy's brilliantly taken equaliser -a flashing near post header from a cross by right back Jamie Bates.
Runcorn's Justin Wall had rattled the post before Phil Brown punished a debut slip by defender Andy Taylor to set up a close range opener for David Riley.
After supplying his sixth goal of the season, Shaughnessy forced Beasley into a full length save yet Runcorn completely lost their way in the second half.
Selected
Gallagher spared the Linnets from their 10th defeat of the season with his first Runcorn goal from beneath the bar.
Merseyside duo Jamie Cassidy (Liverpool) and David Thompson (Wirral) have been picked for the first England boys under 15s national trial at the Lilleshall Sports Centre next weekend.
Mother's brutal murder ‘a loyalist punishment’
By Ian Graham Daily Post Correspondent
A LOYALIST paramilitary punishment squad is believed to be behind the vicious murder of a woman who was battered to death in her Belfast home.
Police said yesterday there appeared to be no sectarian motive for the killing.
Protestant Donna Elizabeth Wilson, 30, died on Saturday night when a gang of up to 10 men burst into her flat in the Annadale area of south Belfast, wielding baseball bats and pickaxe handles.
She was a divorcee with three children.
It is understood some of her attackers sat on her to pin her to the floor while others battered her round the head with baseball bats.
Three men who were visiting her in the flat were also attacked and beaten.
The men were taken to hospital but none was in a serious condition.
The mob smashed up Ms Wilson's first-floor home before leaving, after what police described as a ‘particularly brutal’ murder.
She had lived in the flat for about six months and, according to neighbours, there had been a number of disturbances to which police had been called.
Neighbour Eleanor Kane said: ‘I didn't know the young woman but the police have been to the flat a few times.’
Two weeks ago, a television was thrown out of the flat window and there had also been fights.
It is understood Northern Ireland's public housing body, the Housing Executive, was planning to move Ms Wilson to a home in a different location.
The killing caused widespread revulsion and Nancy Gray, chairwoman of the Families Against Intimidation organisation, called on the local community to hand over those responsible to the police.
‘These people are animals and they have no part to play in our community.
I appeal to everybody in the Annadale flats to stand together against these thugs there can be no justification for this murder.’
No organisation has admitted responsibility for the killing.
Meanwhile, two men were recovering in hospital in Belfast after being shot in the loyalist Shankill Road area during the night.
The men, aged 21 and 25, were each injured in both legs in what appears to have been another loyalist paramilitary attack.
In south Armagh, police recovered a man's body from a road-side ditch.
The RUC said foul play was not suspected.
Gunners boss keeps his sights on future
JUST WHAT Arsenal might have achieved in Europe this season must remain a matter for speculation, but as they sit on top of the Premier League today manager George Graham insists on thinking ahead rather than looking back.
Even a 17-match unbeaten run to finish last season was insufficient to qualify the Gunners for the UEFA Cup and, last week, Sheffield Wednesday, Liverpool and Leeds United all followed Manchester United out of Europe.
After Arsenal had demolished Coventry City 3-0 at Highbury to take top place for the first time since they won the Championship in May 1991, Graham said: ‘It is no good looking back.
It is a negative attitude.
‘I don't know how we would have done.
But I know it is sad that all our clubs are out of Europe now and it will probably be a long time before we can hope to dominate abroad as we once did.
‘Now we've got to get on with the job at Arsenal and try to get back.
I'm very pleased with how we've reacted to our bad start to the season.’
The Gunners are now 12 points ahead of struggling Leeds and after six league wins in a row it is little wonder the bookmakers have again cut their odds as title favourites to just 5-4.
Surprisingly it was the first time that Arsenal's all-star attack had scored three goals in a game this season as they wrecked Coventry's unbeaten away record with superb strikes from Alan Smith, Ian Wright and Kevin Campbell.
Blackburn striker Alan Shearer believes that Rovers are now paying for their flying start to the Premier League campaign.
Shearer, still top scorer in the division despite Rovers' four consecutive league games without a goal, said after Saturday's 2-0 home defeat by Tottenham: ‘We are suffering from our good start to the season.
Sides are coming here to block us and Spurs did it very well.’
Commenting on his current drought he said: ‘I'm not worried about it.
I have made my point by getting 16 up to now and they will come again.’
Blackburn manager Kenny Dalglish, whose team conceded top spot to Arsenal, said: ‘We can do better than that.
Alan Shearer and Mike Newell were up against five at the front and it was very difficult for them.’
Bombshell
David Howells scored his first goal of the season to give Spurs a 67th minute lead and Teddy Sheringham made it 2-0 from the penalty spot eight minutes from time.
BIRMINGHAM CITY manager Terry Cooper yesterday claimed that chairman Samesh Kumar kept him in the dark about the club being put up for sale.
Cooper, who is also a director of the first division club, only learned from a journalist that the receiver had been called in.
Cooper said: ‘It came as a complete bombshell.
The Kumars own 84 percent of the club so it's up to them how they run it.’
Pony a gift of love for sick children
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
A NURSE who died of cancer has bequeathed her pony for the use of the terminally ill children she devoted her life to.
Carole Labno's pet Shetland pony was presented to the Claire House appeal, which is raising £1.5m to build a hospice for sick and dying children.
Fundraisers are looking at sites in North Wales to house the proposed hospice, which will serve children from the area as well as Merseyside and the Isle of Man.
Mrs Labno, mother of two sons, who lived in Moreton, Wirral, had hoped to work at the hospice.
But she died in August at the age of 43 after a brave fight against cancer.
The Claire House appeal was launched in February after nine-year-old Claire Cain died from a tumour behind her nose and eye.
Wirral Borough Council refused planning permission to build the hospice after local protesters claimed it would cause too much disturbance and disrupt a bat colony.
Now a site in Flint, Clwyd, is being considered among others by appeal organisers Steve and Ann Robarts.
Mrs Labno left instructions that her two-year-old pony, called Baby, should go to Claire House -which will house eight single bedrooms, family flats and a possible leisure complex with a swimming pool and whirlpool.
The pony will be cared for until the hospice becomes operational.
Saviour Snodin
He may be our missing spark claims Rideout
Report by OLIVER HOLT
EVERTON match-winner Paul Rideout singled out comeback star Ian Snodin as the man who could spark an Everton revival after the Goodison side snatched three points at Nottingham Forest for the first time in ten years.
Rideout a £500,000 early season signing from Rangers notched his first Premier League goal with a soaring header to seal a 1-0 win and move Everton out of the bottom three.
But he gave the lion's share of the credit for the victory to Snodin, playing his first full 90 minutes for two and a half years after a series of hamstring and knee injuries put his career in doubt.
Snodin provided an authority in central midfield that has been lacking since the departure of Peter Reid and Rideout said: ‘Ian Snodin made the difference with a little bit of class.
‘Barry Horne worked very hard alongside him and that allowed Ian to do the ball work.
He has got tremendous vision and in midfield he can express himself that bit more than he could at right back.
‘Some of the balls he played were magnificent and that is something we have probably been missing a little bit this season.
He could be the player to get us back on track.
‘He has shown a lot of guts to get back after so long.
He has shown the character and hopefully he is back to stay.’
Snodin admitted he was ‘shattered’ at the end of his third appearance of the season.
Revelling
‘I found the last 20 minutes extremely hard but the lads gave me every encouragement and I am delighted,’ he said.
‘It is four years since my last midfield appearance because Colin Harvey moved be back to right back and then the injuries began.
‘I am happy to play anywhere now.
Wherever I play, I seem to be confident in myself and I am revelling in my return to fitness.
‘It is obviously disastrous for a club the size of Everton to be in the position they are in, but this could be the springboard.
If we get past Wimbledon in the Coca-Cola replay, it could be lift-off.’
Goals drought hurts title bid
Frustrated Fergie
Report by ERIC BROWN
NORWEGIAN international Tore Dahlum could be just the first addition to Manchester United's staff as manager Alex Ferguson seeks a goalscoring hero to revive their Premier League title prospects.
Slipping
Dahlum, currently on a month's loan at Old Trafford, could clinch a contract with an impressive reserve performance against Sheffield United this week.
His club Rosenborg want £500,000 but Ferguson regards Dahlum as two or three months away from becoming the finished Premier League article.
Ferguson cannot afford to wait if United are to end their long wait for the League title this season.
United could miss out again following their slip to 10th after four games without scoring.
Ferguson has already been linked with Spartak Moscow striker Valeri Karpin, who scored twice against Liverpool in their Cup Winners' Cup first leg meeting.
He admits he is seeking a striker and could fund any deal with the £800,000 United want for midfielder Neil Webb, if Nottingham Forest and Manchester City follow up their interest.
‘I believe there is money available,’ said Ferguson.
‘The goalscoring situation is uppermost in our minds and we may have to do something about that.
We may have to look at a few options but there are not many.
‘Dahlum can strike a ball well with either foot and could develop into something decent, but not for two or three months.’
United managed only one credible scoring effort in the 1-0 defeat away to Aston Villa which left them eight points adrift of Arsenal.
Hunt
But Ferguson insists it is not too late for United to get back in the hunt.
‘The way things are working out you only have to win four or five games and everything is back in the melting pot,’ he said.
‘It's happened with Arsenal.
We shall have Bryan Robson and Lee Sharpe mush fitter in a few weeks when they have had more games.’
Both are likely to turn out when United face Brondby in an Old Trafford friendly on Wednesday as part of the deal which brought goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel to the club.
ASTON VILLA'S central defender Paul McGrath is considering hanging up his boots at the end of the season.
McGrath admitted that his long-term knee problems, which have resulted in eight operations, are finally beginning to catch up with him.
The ex-Manchester United star admitted: ‘I'd rather quit at the top than drop to a lower level.
‘The right knee is especially bad.
It gives me the most pain and is like a burning sensation.’
NEIL WEBB…his sale will help raise cash
‘WHERE'S MY BABY?’
CRIES HEARTBROKEN MOTHER
Girls skip to their death in car smash
By Daily Post Correspondent
TWO little girls died after an horrific accident in front of their mothers when they were struck by a car which mounted the pavement.
The tragedy happened shortly before 5pm on Saturday in Herberts Park Road, Darlaston, Walsall, West Midlands, as Nadine Groom, 8, and her friend Deanne Harlow, 7, skipped ahead of their mothers.
The girls were hit by a BMW car.
Witnesses said one of the distraught mothers cried out: ‘Where's my baby, where's my baby?’
Nadine was killed instantly and Deanne died in Walsall Manor Hospital hospital after a four-hour battle to save her life.
Yesterday, the 20-year-old driver was helping police with their inquiries.
He suffered minor injuries and was taken to hospital in Walsall but was later transferred to the Wolverhampton Royal Hospital for his own protection.
Police officers stayed in the area, said to be a ‘tightknit community’, because feelings were running so high.
Inspector Nigel Rock of Walsall police said a reconstruction of the accident would be staged to try to discover the cause of the ‘absolute tragedy’.
He said: ‘We know the car rounded the bend and somehow went out of control, mounting the pavement and striking the girls.’
Friends Deanne Harlow, left, and Nadine Groom killed
Flowers mark the spot where the youngsters were hit
Welsh Aids sufferers forced to flee homes
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
PEOPLE suffering from HIV and Aids have been forced to leave their communities because of a lack of understanding, says a health promotion adviser.
In one instance a gay couple were driven from their home in Clwyd and forced to change their names to avoid being shunned by neighbours.
And in another case a man was banned from using his local swimming bath in Gwynedd because he was HIV-positive.
Now Gwynedd Health Authority's health promotion adviser, Melfyn Thomas, is urging people to face up to the challenge of accepting people affected by HIV and Aids.
And Michael Blackburn, acting secretary of Aids Care North West, said people needed to be educated to realise the disease was not ‘a scourge from God.’
Mr Thomas's call comes in the weeks running up to World Aids Day on December 1.
He said: ‘In the past, Gwynedd communities may have perceived HIV and Aids to be a problem for others, for large urban populations or overseas communities.
‘Statistics may have compounded this perception.
We must acknowledge that people affected by the virus have felt it necessary to leave their communities here in Gwynedd to seek diagnosis, support and care elsewhere.’
Mr Blackburn said people with the disease often felt it necessary to leave their communities because the illness was associated with illicit behaviour.
‘I do know in one particular instance of a gay couple from Clwyd who moved to a different area and changed their names because one of the men became infected.
‘People found out about it and became extremely unpleasant towards them, calling them names in the street.’
In 1986 Aids sufferer Martin Roberts, of Criccieth, Gwynedd, was banned from public swimming pools by the Sports Council of Wales and Arfon and Anglesey councils after he appeared on television talking about his condition.
Following protests the ban was lifted on Mr Roberts, who used to work for Gwynedd Health Authority.
Mr Thomas added: ‘This year we have the opportunity to examine ourselves, our communities and our attitudes.
Although not confronted regularly by Aids we can no longer pretend that it does not affect us.’
Mr Blackburn said: ‘The only thing we can do is educate people so they realise HIV and Aids are not a scourge from God but an illness.’
World Aids Day will be marked on December 1 and a multi-disciplinary group is in the process of arranging a range of activities for the week November 30 to December 5.
Hit-man Dalien is Taylor target
DALIAN ATKINSON could be the next target as England manager Graham Taylor looks for a hit-man.
Taylor saw for himself on Saturday how the 24-year-old Aston Villa flyer has matured into a player of genuine international potential.
Atkinson provided the winner against Manchester United with his 10th goal of the season and his sixth in eight games.
But Taylor will have noted that there is much more to Atkinson's game now than the blistering pace which launched him into league football with Ipswich Town six years ago.
Shrewsbury-born Atkinson revealed his passing ability by picking out Dean Saunders with a ball threaded 25 yards through the United defence.
His speed of thought presented as much of a threat to United as his speed off the mark.
And he has out-scored Les Ferdinand of Queens Park Rangers, who is in Taylor's squad for the World Cup qualifier with Turkey.
‘Dalian took his goal brilliantly,’ said Villa chief Ron Atkinson, who bought the England ‘B’man for Sheffield Wednesday as well as his current club.
‘Dalian is excellent in one-on-one situations as the first goal showed,’ said Atkinson.
‘He had another chance but perhaps got a bit too tight on the goalkeeper with that one.’
Sheff Utd 1 Sheff Wed 1
ENGLAND striker David Hirst staged a last ditch smash-and-grab to salvage some pride for Wednesday in the Sheffield derby at Bramall Lane.
Wednesday, beaten twice by Dave Bassett's outfit last season, were heading for a hat-trick of disasters until Hirst struck six minutes from time.
Adrian Littlejohn had given United side a 61st minute lead to make up for two earlier misses from Brian Deane as the home side took a grip on the game.
But Hirst provided the perfect answer, running on to a Chris Waddle through-ball to lash the ball into the roof of the net.
THE PROFESSIONALS
Magnificent Mungall tops show of quality
HIGH-FLYING Tranmere jet off to Italy for their midweek European tie perched on their loftiest ever league placing of second in division one.
Of course, anyone forecasting such a scenario just five short years ago would have been certified completely insane.
But a first victory at Filbert Street ensured another landmark in the amazing rise and rise of Rovers.
And the success story is set to continue into the Premier League if John King's team produce more performances like the one which saw off promotion rivals Leicester.
Quality late strike
A superb all-round team display nullified the Midlanders and as they tired, Tranmere struck late with a quality goal to take the points.
It was the kind of professionalism that wins trophies — tight at the back, industrious in midfield and dangerous up front.
Eric Nixon did not have a genuine save to make all afternoon as the Rovers rearguard excelled.
Mark Hughes slotted in comfortably at centre-back, although he picked up a booking and went close to receiving a red card.
Dave Higgins also looked at home in an unfamiliar right-back berth.
But it was in midfield where Tranmere really shone and leading the way was veteran Steve Mungall.
Standing in for late cry-off Neil McNab, Mungy, now 34, played out of his skin and earned high praise from his boss.
‘Mungall was exceptional.
He worked up and down and made runs which a 20-year-old wouldn't have managed,’ said John King.
The versatile Scot, who joined Rovers on a free from Motherwell in the 70s, is a perfect example of footballing life beyond 30.
If he had been pensioned off then, he would have missed out on all Rovers' glory days of promotion, Wembley and Europe.
The way things are going for him right now, he would grab a hat-trick if he played up front.
Tribute
King also saluted his rock solid back four, saying: ‘There was some very good defending.
We played as a team and got our just deserts.’
Ironically, Nevin had been Tranmere's only slight disappointment up until producing a clinical finish to punish defender Richard Smith's miscued header eight minutes from time.
McNab is expected to recover from a stomach bug in time for Wednesday's game in Italy and with fellow midfielder Dave Martindale shaking off ‘flu, Rovers’ squad is beginning to bulge.
One thing is for sure— Steve Mungall is still very much a part of it.
HOTSHOT…
Pat Nevin latches onto a miscued header to smash home the Tranmere winner and, inset, leaps sky high in celebration
HEADING HIGH…
Ged Brannan joins the Rovers attack.
Pictures by Lloyd Wright
A NORTH Wales MP has accused Labour supporters of ‘behaving like spoilt children’ and of not living in the real world.
Rod Richards, the Tory MP for Clwyd North West, was speaking at an impromptu Press conference called during a constituency surgery at Rhyl which had been picketed by a small group of demonstrators objecting to his stance over the issue of pit closures.
MP Rod Richards
STAR VIEW
by Pat Nevin
I FELT confident as I went through.
It was the first one-on-one I have had this season.
I have been practising quite a lot in training.
If it comes off once a season it is worth it.
It certainly paid off this time.
Leicester were very strong but perhaps they ran themselves too hard too early.
They were at least as good as Newcastle.
We have been lacking a wee bit of professionalism recently.
But our defence was brilliant very strong because Leicester are a good, sharp attacking force.
I thought our defence handled them extremely well.
And with Everton and Chelsea also winning, the only disappointment is that Celtic lost to Rangers.
John King makes a late shuffle after Neil McNab goes down with a stomach upset.
Steve Mungall is moved forward into midfield and plays a blinder.
A superb bullet header by John Aldridge from Dave Higgins' right wing cross is just touched over by keeper Kevin Poole after eight minutes.
Kenny Irons hacks clear in the 39th minute after Eric Nixon at full stretch fails to hold a low cross with one hand.
Hughes is beaten on the left touchline but Rovers defenders charge down David Lowe's shot.
Boos ring out as Leicester boss Brian Little brings on Ian Ormondroyd and Simon Grayson for Bobby Davison and Phil Gee.
Ormondroyd flashes a shot just wide almost immediately.
Referee Alf Buksh ignores the crowd's calls for Hughes to be sent off after a 69th minute foul.
The crucial moment after 82 minutes as defender Richard Smith fails to head clear Chris Malkin's volleyed pass forward.
The ball drops for Pat Nevin to run through and fire expertly past the keeper low into the left corner.
Nevin makes a great run to the byline but his flick-back is missed in a goalmouth scramble by Malkin and John Aldridge before the keeper falls on the ball.
Petition goes to Parliament
A PETITION calling on the Government to reverse its pits closure programme will be handed in to Shadow Trade and Industry spokesman Robin Cook in Parliament today.
Thousands of people across the country have signed the plea which has the full backing of the Opposition.
Among the 31 pits on British Coal's hit list is Point of Ayr, near Prestatyn, where the jobs of 478 are on the line.
Wrexham's Labour MP, Dr John Marek, received part of the petition containing over 1,000 signatures at the weekend and will pass it on to Mr Cook in the Commons.
He said: ‘People were queueing to sign it.
That is a measure of the support for the miners and the desire for the country to keep a certain degree of energy self-sufficiency once oil and gas reserves are gone.
‘This national petition calls on the Government to save the British coal industry.
‘It rejects the dramatic programme of pit closures with the loss of 30,000 miners’ jobs and many more in associated industries, deplores the fact that abandonment of deep mined coal reserves will leave Britain dependant on imported coal, and protests at the electricity price rise to consumers which will result.’
Mr Marek receives the petition from Amy Jones, 9, watched by Wrexham Labour
Party members who collected the signatures Picture: VIC CLEVELEY
Springbok let-off
ENGLAND B were left to reflect on what might have been after missing a couple of vital tackles in their 20-16 defeat at the hands of South Africa at Bristol.
‘We could have won,’ lamented England B captain Stuart Barnes.
‘But you simply cannot make tackling errors at crucial times and expect to win.’
England's juniors, though, could at least console themselves that they had participated in one of the most enthralling matches played on English soil in recent years.
And there was consolation for No 8 Ben Clarke, who has been selected for England.
Pits protesters are branded ‘spoilt children’
Tory MP's fury as surgery is picketed
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
A NORTH Wales MP has accused Labour supporters of ‘behaving like spoilt children’ and of not living in the real world.
Rod Richards, the Tory Member for Clwyd North West, was speaking at an impromptu Press conference called during a constituency surgery at Rhyl which had been picketed by a small group of demonstrators objecting to his stance over the issue of pit closures.
The handful of supporters of the group known as Welsh Resistance Clwyd said he should join other local MPs in the campaign to save Point of Ayr colliery.
Mr Richards, who met two of the demonstrators, said he had not supported the closures but voted for the Government motion for a review of the threatened pits.
He told the Press that publicity surrounding the demonstration had obviously kept some constituents away because he usually met as many as 15 in Rhyl.
On Saturday he had just three visitors.
‘It is very sad because one of the main concerns these days is the delay in disability living allowances.
Nobody has come to see me today about that and I think it is disgraceful that the surgery has been disrupted,’ he said.
Referring to the Rhyl Labour Party campaign to persuade the public to send preprinted ‘Deeds Not Words’ postcards to him at the House of Commons, Mr Richards said: ‘Anybody who thinks that sending postcards and petitions is going to change the price of bread is not living in the real world.’
He accused the Labour Party of ‘using the closure of pits as a political football’ and added: ‘It is a totally serious business, particularly for this area.’
One of the protesters, Point of Ayr miner Mark Begley from Prestatyn, said he and his colleagues were angry at Mr Richards' unwillingness to join the campaign.
Meanwhile, Delyn MP David Hanson has called on British Coal to withdraw the advance redundancy notices sent out to workers at the 31 pits listed for closure.
‘I find it disgraceful that before the review of the mining industry is even properly under way the Coal Board has issued these notices,’ he said.
‘I feel this is undermining the review process and is treating with utter contempt the views of the vast majority of the people of this country who wish to see the pits remain open,’ he added.
Rod Richards
Road victim
A MAN seriously injured in a collision with a bus was last night fighting for life in Wrexham Maelor hospital.
Andrew Mark Jones was hit by the single decker in Crane Street, Cefn Mawr, near Wrexham, Clwyd, at 11pm on Saturday.
Mr Jones is thought to be aged 19 and to live locally.
TWO YEARS to the day since Howard Kendall tied the knot with Everton for a second time, a forgotten child of his first managerial union with the Goodison club shone when he needed him most.
Ian Snodin played in the closing stages of the 1986-87 title-winning season.
He filled the central midfield vacancy created by the injury to Paul Bracewell, but never quite reproduced the form he showed as captain of Leeds.
When Kendall left, Colin Harvey moved him to right-back after a season.
He performed so well, he forced himself into the England squad before a torn hamstring heralded the beginning of a prolonged injury nightmare.
Inspiration
Four hamstring operations and two bouts of knee surgery later, Ian Snodin is back and back in central midfield.
He was preferred there to John Ebbrell who played in an unfamiliar left-sided role and the ploy paid off.
‘It must be his first win bonus for 2 years,’ Kendall said after the match.
It was Everton's first win bonus at the City Ground since Steve McMahon scored in a 1-0 win in 1982.
In only his second start of the season, Snodin provided the spark of midfield inspiration and stong running that Everton have been desperately searching for all season.
He brought a touch of class and poise to the game, acting as the perfect foil for Barry Horne's hard work, prompting and cajoling, growing more dominant as the match progressed.
It wasn't easy either.
In the first half, Everton were overrun by a pumped-up Forest side desperate to drag themselves off the bottom of the Premier League and give the lie to whispers that Cloughie's powers are in decline.
Republic of Ireland international Roy Keane released from his defensive shackles and restored to his favourite midfield role surged forward time and again into dangerous situations.
His best chance came in the 10th minute when Woan's slightly over-hit cross allowed Southall to save with his legs as Keane closed in.
Everton's goal was under siege.
Gemmill had a 21st minute goal disallowed for pushing and two minutes later, Icelandic star Toddy Orlygsson headed wide when Woan's delicate chip left the goal at his mercy.
For all the talk of Forest missing Des Walker, Cloughie's big blunder seems to have been selling Teddy Sheringham to Spurs without first finding a suitable replacement.
Threatening
Nigel Clough comes too deep, Lee Glover is no target man and most of the threatening situations are created by Pearce and Keane.
Everton stayed calm, Keown, Ablett and Jackson made a series of crucial tackles, clearances and interceptions and the visitors weathered the storm.
After Clough headed wide from a curling Orlygsson cross five minutes after the interval, Everton scored with their first attack of the second half.
Horne hit a fine pass wide to Harper whose pinpoint cross was powered home by the soaring Rideout from 15 yards.
The 52nd-minute header was his first Premier League goal and the blue hordes massed in the new Bridgford End stand, that looks from the outside like a poor man's Pompidou Centre, went wild.
Forest heads went down and Snodin and Horne snuffed out Keane and Gemmill.
Horne should have increased Everton's lead when Ebbrell's ball put him through in the 62nd minute but he delayed too long.
Substitute Warzycha even summoned the courage for a nose to nose confrontation with Pearce a bit like George Formby taking on Mike Tyson, that one before more Everton misses allowed Forest to mount a furious late rally.
Tiler shot high and wide from six yards out in the 75th minute after Jackson headed off the line from Glover's fierce shot, and Southall made a near miraculous one-handed save from Woan in the dying seconds.
Three precious points to lift Everton clear of the bottom three and on the day John Barnes began his return in the Liverpool A team a performance from Goodison's 29-year-old comeback kid to raise hopes that this second marriage might yet have a happy ending.
BOOKED: Horne for Everton NOTTINGHAM FOREST (4:4:2): Crossley, Laws, Pearce, Chettle, Tiler, Keane, Orlygsson, Gemmill, Clough, Glover, Woan.
Subs: Bannister, Marriott, Crosby.
EVERTON (4:4:2): Southall, Jackson, Ablett, Snodin, Watson, Keown, Harper (Warzycha 66mind), Beardsley, Rideout, Horne, Ebbrell.
Subs: Kearton, Barlow.
ATTENDANCE: 20,941 REFEREE: S.J. Lodge
Low water
WATCHDOGS have reached an agreement with Welsh Water which is to peg price rises for two years.
Welsh Water will maintain increases in charges to 5pc above inflation 1.5pc lower than the Government's permitted level.
Besieged PM under fire again
By Chris Moncrieff Press Association
THE Prime Minister today faces the prospect of yet another week of political turmoil, with right-wing Tory backbenchers demanding wholesale Cabinet changes and Labour threatening all-out war over public spending cuts.
There is no let-up for John Major after the Government's nail-biting three-vote victory over Maastricht last week rescued him from almost certain resignation.
And he has been warned that Labour will ‘explode’ if invalidity benefits are hit by Chancellor Norman Lamont's autumn statement on Thursday.
This is already being openly described as the most stringent exercise in public spending constraints for decades.
But more immediately on his doorstep is continuing unrest among backbenchers who so nearly brought about his downfall last Wednesday.
The outspoken John Carlisle, MP for Luton North, and one of the Government's fiercest critics from the Right, bluntly told the Prime Minister he should dispense with the services of Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley and Citizen's Charter Minister William Waldegrave.
He told BBC Radio 4's The World This Weekend: ‘We are unhappy with people like William Waldegrave and Virginia Bottomley.
They do not actually reflect the true nature of what Conservatives want.’
Mr Carlisle, a prominent member of the 92 Group of right-of-centre MPs, also warned Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke to ‘rein in his pro-Europe and left-wing tendencies.’
He said: ‘Part of the problems that we had last week was that the Cabinet was out of touch with backbench feelings…and not only our feelings but those in the constituencies.
‘We have a centre-left Cabinet and a centre-right Parliamentary party therefore I think the Prime Minister should have an early opportunity to redress that balance and have a Cabinet more representative of popular and party opinion.’
He said he thought that under the current situation Right-wing Ministers like Michael Howard, Peter Lilley and Michael Portillo were consistently being out-voted.
The Left-wing bias of the Cabinet had enabled Mr Major to ‘railroad through’ his proposals on Maastricht which nearly led to the Government's defeat.
However, the Right-wingers' claims were dismissed by Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind as ‘the stuff of tittle-tattle’.
‘Their views should be given weight only when they are clearly representative of opinion in the Parliamentary party or the Conservative Party as a whole,’ he said on the same programme.
Meanwhile, the Chancellor was bracing himself for a furious political storm when he unveils his autumn package on Thursday, including a mystery ‘fiscal package’ ministers are remaining tight-lipped about.
French threaten tariffs ‘revenge’
FRANCE yesterday said it would plan for possible European Community retaliation against Washington if the US imposed its threatened tariffs on some European luxury products.
The French stance emerged after the EC's chief trade negotiator affirmed his belief that Europe and the US could work out the dispute over farm subsidies and avert full-scale trade war.
The acting US Secretary of State said the EC needed to ‘get its act together’ over the stalled ‘Uruguay Round’of talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Speaking to BBC radio, Lawrence Eagleburger said the US had done what it could for an agreement on farm subsidies, which had derailed the talks.
He also criticised the EC Commission's French president Jacques Delors, who on Saturday blamed the Americans for the failure to agree.
‘It's totally untrue,’ Eagleburger told the BBC.
‘Apparently Mr Delors pulled the rug out from under the EC negotiator (Ray MacSharry) and those are the words of the EC negotiator who then resigned,’ Eagleburger said.
EC commissioner Frans Andriessen, the EC's chief negotiator, has said he has no immediate plans to meet US negotiators but developments could come today after a meeting of EC foreign ministers in Brussels.
Andriessen said he was optimistic an agreement could be reached by the December 6 deadline set by Washington for its imposition of 200pc tariffs on some European products.
France, Europe's biggest agricultural producer, has opposed efforts to cut farm subsidies as deeply as demanded by the US.
Dominique Strauss-Kahn, France's trade minister, said his government would not act for a month but could demand retaliatory measures if the US acted.
In an interview in the weekly Journal du Dimanche, Strauss-Kahn said France would ask the EC to start drawing up a list of potential US targets today.
HIGH-RIDING Swansea swept into an eighth minute lead against a Chester side looking to continue their recent revival.
A long clearance by keeper Freestone was headed on by West and Cullen set up the chance for PASCOE who, in plenty of space on edge of the area, rifled home a shot.
Thompson took a fine ball from Pugh after 12 minutes and again raced clear but Swansea's defence snuffed out the danger.
Pugh, Chester's two-goal hero in the 3-3 midweek draw at Rotherham, set up another chance for the home side.
He crossed from the left and when Freestone failed to cut out the ball Ryan pounced to crack in a shot.
Exposed
Ford came to Swansea's rescue by the blocking the effort but the ball again went out to Pugh and this time his cross was met by Barrow who headed wide.
A quick break by Swansea after 17 minutes again exposed the Chester defence.
West's cross was met by skipper Cornforth and he chested the ball down before shooting wide.
Pascoe stepped over the ball to allow West a shooting chance and when his drive was blocked Legg pounced only to see his shot cleared by Preece.
Chester stormed back to stun Swansea with two goals in five minutes.
Refereee Kevin Breen ordered a Chester free kick to be retaken after 35 minutes when Coughlin failed to retreat 10 yards.
The offence earned the Swansea player a booking and Chester skipper LIGHTFOOT drove the retaken free kick into the net.
Five minutes later another Thompson throw-in was headed on by Garnett and PUGH hooked the ball in.
Swansea substitute Jenkins replaced Ford three minutes before half-time.
Half-time: Chester 2, Swansea 1
Search for missing PC
A SEARCH was continuing last night for a policeman missing since Friday, as fears mounted for his safety.
PC James Connolly, 37, had been on long-term sick-leave for several months with depression and police are worried for his safety.
PC Connolly, from Airdrie, Strathclyde, is married with two young children.
Ghost forces family to leave home
By Jane Croft
A FAMILY have been driven out of their Liverpool home by what they claim is a poltergeist.
Alison Santos of Madryn Street, Toxteth, and her family are living with a neighbour because they are too terrified to go back to their home.
Alison says the poltergeist has tried to smother her boyfriend in their terraced house.
Alison, 26, who has two children — Tracey, 3, and Antony, 15 months — said: ‘We have been driven out of the house by this evil spirit.
We are provisionally moving into a hostel for the homeless.
‘The poltergeist has tried to smother my boyfriend and we once found the baby's cot turned upside down with the baby on the floor.
‘I am normally sceptical about ghosts, but I would tell people who doubt us — wait until it happens to you.’
Antony Santos, 27, said: ‘Some nights I feel a cold presence and can feel it trying to smother me.’
Alison believes that an exorcism is their only hope.
Father Tony Wright of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Catholic Church, High Park Street in Liverpool, said: ‘My experience is that there is some kind of spiritual presence there.’
World pays tribute to Czech leader Dubcek
By Daily Post Correspondent
TRIBUTES to the late Alexander Dubcek, symbol of Czechoslovakia's resistance to Soviet military might, poured in from leaders across the world yesterday after his death on Saturday.
Leader of the ‘Prague Spring’ reform movement that was crushed by Soviet tanks in 1968, Dubcek was 70 when he died in Prague, and had been in intensive care after his car plunged off a road in heavy rain on September 1.
Perhaps the final irony was that Dubcek, himself a thorn in the side of Soviet authoritarianism, passed away on the 75th anniversary of Russia's October Revolution.
Among those leading the tributes yesterday were the Soviet Union's final president, Mikhail Gorbachev and US President-elect Bill Clinton.
Gorbachev paid warm tribute to Dubcek, saying his Czechoslovak reforms should have served as a model to the Communist world.
‘If we had all followed the path that Czechoslovakia began, avoiding distortions and extremes, I think we would be different, the world would be different, and it wouldn't be so hard to implement these changes now,’ Mr Gorbachev said.
In Little Rock, Arkansas, Clinton said he was glad Dubcek had lived to see the emergence of democracy in eastern Europe.
‘My prayers are with his family, friends, the people of his country and all those who admired him,’ he said.
A fervent supporter of a united Czechoslovakia, Dubcek died seven weeks before the 74-year-old Czechoslovak federation splits into independent Czech and Slovak republics.
He had repeatedly exhorted his compatriots to stay united.
But Dubcek was not as popular at home where some still blamed him for not standing up to the Warsaw Pact in 1968 and therefore being responsible for a 23year military occupation by Soviet forces.
Yesterday in Czechoslovakia, at a weekly television panel which brings journalists and politicians together, the death of the reformist former Communist party chief was mentioned unemotionally in passing.
But former Czechoslovak President Vaclev Havel said Dubcek's death had moved him deeply.
‘I knew him as a hard-working, modest, and honest politician,’ he said.
There was no official word on where and when Dubcek would be buried and it was not clear whether one of the country's best-known modern politicians would receive a state funeral.
Michal Kovac, the chairman of the Czechoslovak federal assembly (parliament), said he would discuss the possibility of a state funeral with Premier Jan Strasky.
Alexander Dubcek addresses more than 300,000 demonstrators in Wenceslas Square, Prague, three years ago
Symbol of hope to West
ALEXANDER Dubcek won world fame as a symbol of hope when he headed the illfated ‘Prague Spring’ reform that was crushed by Soviet tanks in August 1968.
The invasion forces, sent to end what the reformers had dubbed as an attempt to introduce ‘Socialism with a human face,’ captured Dubcek, manacled him and flew him to Moscow.
He returned a few days later a broken man.
Dubcek sobbed when he told his stunned nation in an emotional radio address that he and fellow leaders of the Prague Spring had had to bow to overwhelming military force.
His life symbolised doomed ideals and failed aspirations.
The death of the former war hero came less than two months before the federated Czechoslovakia he had believed in was to split.
‘It's been a hard life,’ Dubcek once said, ‘but you cannot suppress an idea.’
The leader with the sad smile slid into 20 years of disgrace before returning to the political stage with the fall of communism in late 1989.
For more than two years, he was chairman of the Czechoslovak parliament, overseeing the slow and often painful march to democracy.
In June 1992, Dubcek was re-elected to parliament as the country headed towards splitting into its two constituent parts.
The silver-haired Dubcek was one of the few figures of authority in Slovakia.
He remained a firm federalist, an unequivocal advocate of the Czech and Slovak republics staying together.
As chairman of the Slovak Social Democratic Party in Czechoslovakia's eastern region, he never tired of fighting for a common state of Czechs and Slovaks.
But even he had to bow to reality when Czechoslovakia's two largest parties failed to agree on retaining a common state.
On September 1, 1992, Dubcek's chauffeur-driven limousine crashed in heavy rain on a motorway some 60 miles southeast of Prague.
He suffered spinal and chest injuries.
Kidney failure set in and it was that, along with heart and lung failure, which eventually killed him.
Alexander Dubcek
Brilliant Dragons notch up record win
Deeside Dragons 31 Humberside Cobras 2
by Andy Morris
DEESIDE Dragons went goal crazy in the British Ice Hockey Conference as they preserved their perfect home start and created a new club record.
The Queensferry side blitzed the Cobras with 16 goals in the last period to notch their highest total since the club reformed last year.
Former youth player Jason Titmuss grabbed star billing with nine goals, including the first after just two minutes which started the avalanche.
Titmuss, who only returned to the club this season after spending last year with the Telford Tigers, blitzed four goals inside 14 minutes of the opening period.
The 18-year-old took advantage of good work by Alan Steele to score the fifth with just 10 minutes gone, and notched the other three early goals unassisted.
Shadows
Cobras were punished for foul play when Deeside scored two of their eight first period goals through power-plays.
Alan Steele signalled there was to be no let-up in the pressure when he rattled in the ninth goal 30 seconds into the second period, and though the visitors replied with two goals they were still chasing shadows.
Manager Bryn Roberts saw his decision to re-sign Gary Shaw pay off when he put the club into double figures, assisted by Peter Founds, who came into his own later in the game.
After Paul Barry struck probably the goal of the game from distance to make it 14-2 with almost half of the match left, 15-year-old former youth team player Founds stepped into the limelight with three goals and six assists.
The third period saw even more frantic goalscoring as Titmuss scored four times and captain Parry twice, Brian Jackson finishing things off just before time with an unassisted goal his third of the game to cause a result which will shock rival teams in the league.
Crowds rally for the miners
THOUSANDS marched through St Helens in a ‘Coal Not Dole’ rally today.
Their protest was part of the bid to win a last-minute reprieve for Parkside, Lancashire's last remaining mine.
The colliery which employs 730 men at Newton-le-Willows, is one of the ten the government claims must be closed because they are uneconomic.
North West TUC and Lancashire NUM members headed the rally.
A torchlight procession will be held through Bootle to the coal terminal at Gladstone Dock on November 25.
Nelson's triumph
AZUMAH NELSON of Ghana retained his WBC super-feather title in Lake Tahoe, Nevada on Saturday but challenger Calvin Grove confounded the experts by lasting the full 12 rounds.
Grove, a 15-1 longshot, was dropped to the canvas in the first round by a crunching left hook but got up, and danced and jabbed his way to the distance against the hard-hitting Nelson.
Nelson was so impressed he immediately offered Grove a re-match.
Kohl is pelted at anti-Nazi demo
A DEMONSTRATION to mark Germany's condemnation of neo-Nazi violence was disrupted yesterday.
Young Left-wingers threw eggs and stones at Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Richard von Weizsaecker, who were taking part in the Berlin rally.
A TV news report said police had to whisk Chancellor Kohl off a platform to safety.
TV film showed President von Weizsaecker being protected by police carrying riots shields as he began to address the rally of 300,000 people.
The day had been planned as a display of condemnation of the recent wave of neo-Nazi attacks on foreigners and Holocaust memorials.
But President Weizsaecker had to deliver his speech amid a chorus of boos and whistles, most of the noise coming from young Leftwingers.
Riot police, some swinging batons, moved into the crowd repeatedly.
Hans-Jochen Vogel, a former head of the Social Democratic Party, had to be rescued by police from an angry crowd directly in front of the podium.
Mr Vogel did not appear to have been hurt.
Fighting then broke out between police and demonstrators, many of whom screamed ‘hypocrites’ at a stage on which Chancellor Kohl and his cabinet were seated.
Hundreds of riot police then charged repeatedly at scores of Left-wingers and pushed them back from the podium so that President Weizsaecker could begin his speech.
Many Left-wingers are angry at Chancellor Kohl for his plan to restrict the right to political asylum enshrined in Germany's constitution.
The Chancellor's move is an effort to counter neo-Nazi attacks on immigrants.
His government blames the upsurge of violence on the record inflow of immigrants this year.
But the Left claims that the Chancellor is simply pandering to the far-Right by tampering with the asylum laws.
Strippers held in raid
TWO male strippers and a clubgoer were arrested in a swoop by police at a Liverpool nightclub.
The three were arrested as they took part in a show on stage at Reflections club, Temple Lane, off Dale Street.
It happened after the two strippers invited a man in the audience to join them on stage.
They were bailed to appear before Liverpool magistrates next month, when they will face charges of gross indecency.
Coun Jean Davies
Newboy Mick on target to save Linnets
AN injury time goal from Mick Gallagher earned Runcorn a 2-2 GMV Conference draw with Kettering Town at Canal Street and ended the Linnets' run of four consecutive defeats.
Central defender Gallagher, a recent signing from West Cheshire League soccer, capped an outstanding performance with his first goal for his new club and left sidelined player boss John Carroll with an unenviable selection problem.
Carroll, whose continuing achilles injury has resulted in Gallagher stepping in as his deputy in recent games, admitted: ‘Mick was brilliant, and if he carries on like that I might not be able to get my place back.’
Kettering took the lead on 19 minutes through David Riley before Steve Shaughnessy put Runcorn level by the interval with his sixth goal of the season.
Frank Murphy added Kettering's second on the hour.
After the game, Carroll and club chairman David Robinson met Runcorn fans to discuss the club's recent problems.
Important
Said Mr Robinson: ‘Several views were aired and it is now important that we all try to push in the same direction to the benefit of the club.’
Leek Town 1 Southport 0: The Sandgrounders' 20 match unbeaten run came to an end as they failed to score in the HFS League for the first time this season.
But Southport still had the chances to have recorded their seventh straight away League win, manager Brian Kettle insisting: ‘We dominated so much I thought we were the home side.
‘Territorially and possession wise, we had 90 per cent of the game.’
Martyn Smith scored the all important goal midway through the first half.
Marine 2 Gainsborough Trinity 1: Brian Ross netted twice to take his total to five in three games as the Mariners renewed their HFS title challenge.
But Marine had to battle all the way against a Gainsborough side that won praise from College Road boss Roly Howard.
‘They are one of the few teams that have come here and attacked us and they did a good job,’ he said.
‘They are certainly in a false position.’
Gary Hurlstone scored for the visitors.
Warrington Town 4 Alfreton Town 2: Gavin McDonald was on target twice as Warrington returned to winning form to move into seventh place in the HFS first division.
Joey Dunn and Liam Watson, with his 17th goal of the season, also netted, with Keith Edwards and David Kind replying.
‘We played some lovely football at times,’ said Warrington boss Derek Brownbill.
Call for drilling ban
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
COMPANIES seeking to prospect for oil and gas off the Aberconwy coast should be barred from drilling within three miles of environmesntally sensitive areas, a councillor said yesterday.
Jean Davies, who is also vice-chairman of the North Wales Coastal Forum, is now seeking support from council colleagues for her demand.
Coun Davies wants Aberconwy Borough Council to write to the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, asking that the safeguard be written into exploration contracts being negotiated.
Coun Davies is to put a motion, seconded by Coun Jim Knowles, to a full meeting of the council next week.
Yesterday, Coun Davies said she understood that bids had been invited for exploration of the coastal region which included Aberconwy.
She said she was concerned about the potential disturbance to Sites of Special Scientific Interest, conservation areas and heritage sites.
Coun Davies added that the exploration contracts would be awarded in the New Year.
Areas she wants protected include the Great Orme and the Traeth Lavan special protection area.
Coun Davies said: ‘The only way we can make sure these areas are protected is to have the three-mile stipulation written into the contracts.’
But she added that she feared it would not be possible to impose planning controls below the low-water mark, where the drilling rigs would be established.
Almithak shock
SEVEN Merseyside teams were successful in yesterday's F.A.
Sunday Cup second round ties, writes Corinthian.
But the 1989 holders Almithak lost 2-0 against local rivals Seymour (Gareth Drury, Stuart Humphries-pen) while Mitre B.S. lost 2-1 at Royal Oak.
Oakenshaw (Jimmy Lawler, Mickey Brooksbank) won 2-1 at BRNESC, whose goal came from a stunning Frank Maguire free kick.
After a goalless first half, Manfast Kirkby (Robbie Smart, Tony Weaver) won 2-0 at Littlewoods Athletic while Business Houses Sunday League holders Nicosia (Dave Hodgson, Bonny Mattar (2) and Joey Gibiliru) coasted home 4-0 at Prescot against Carnforth.
Lobster (Sean Hegarty, Kevin Hagan), the first local side to win the trophy in 1979, defeated Hartlepool Lion Hotel 2-0.
Napoli (Chris Staunton 2, Paul Gamble) won 3-2 after extra time at Dock (Colin Skillen, Stuart Jones).
B & A Scaffolding beat Lion Hotel (Rob Cowley) 2-1 at Hull while an 84th minute goal from Billy Roberts clinched a 1-0 home success for Eagle-Knowsley against East Bowling Unity.
A3 (Dave Styles 2, Barry Heard, Kieron McDonald) won 4-3 at Edinburgh Park against Framwellgate Moor & Pity Me.
Clubmoor Nalgo (Paul Alley) drew 1-1 after extra time against Britannia (John Bird).
They replay next Sunday at the Nalgo Sports ground (1.00).
£1 means BA takes control of Dan-Air
BRITISH Airways yesterday completed its takeover of Britain's oldest independent airline, Dan-Air.
The price was a nominal £1.
It went ahead after being approved by European and British regulatory authorities, despite protests by a number of other British airlines.
BA said it would operate 13 former Dan-Air short-haul routes from Gatwick, using Dan-Air liveried aircraft for the time being.
From tomorrow they will have BA flight numbers.
These services will be flown by 450 former Dan-Air flight and cabin crew, the only jobs saved so far from the 2,000 permanent Dan-Air staff.
A week ago it was announced that the Government would not refer the deal to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Trade and Industry Secretary Michael Heseltine was said to be particularly concerned about the adverse impact Dan-Air's closure would have on services at Gatwick, where it was the largest operator with 24.3pc of the slots.
BA had made it clear it would drop the deal if the merger was referred to the commission or bound by conditions.
David James, chairman of Dan-Air and its parent company, Davies and Newman, said last night the deal was essential to avoid the group going into receivership.
He said £43m of debts to trade creditors, including £13m pre-paid customer tickets, were fully protected.
Some 450 jobs had been saved and the potential for more jobs at Gatwick sustained.
Barnes on comeback trail
A welcome sight for Reds…winger John Barnes makes his first tentative step towards full fitness in an ‘A’ match against Tranmere at Melwood this afternoon.
Picture:MARTIN BIRCHALL.
Another picture on Page 2.
Leicester City 0 Tranmere Rovers 1
EVERY once in a while Tranmere produce a performance which makes nonsense of their reputation for being uneasy travellers.
They did it at Derby County a year ago and turned up another at Filbert Street on Saturday.
They looked a class act and for once came away with a result to match.
Victory came courtesy of rock-solid defender Richard Smith's one mistake eight minutes from time.
His sure touch for once betrayed him as he fumbled to intercept Chris Malkin's through ball, allowing Pat Nevin to slip in guide the ball home past ‘keeper Kevin Poole.
Steve pens a dramatic finish with treble haul
A LATE Steve Pennington hat-trick was the pick of a great all-round team performance by St Helens Town, who beat Darwen 5-1 in the Bass North West Counties League.
The striker hit his treble in the last half hour, after Steve Cannon and former Marine ace Derek McClatchey had put much-changed Town 2-1 ahead.
Though they've shown promising form in recent weeks, this emphatic win was only the second in 16 games for Mick Holgate's men, who hold their middle of the table spot with rather more comfort after their best win of the season.
Maghull 3 Atherton Collieries 0:
A six-minute blitz at the start of the match secured three points for the Second Division title favourites.
Nick Hogan, twice, and Lee Cooper scored the goals for Arthur McCumiskey's men, who move back into the top five, ten points behind the leaders but with six games in hand.
Priceless
Castleton Gabriels 0 Formby 1:
Paul Proctor emerged in the last four minutes to give Peter Henerty's men a priceless win in Lancashire.
Formby now stand on the verge of a top-six place in Division Two.
Stantondale 4 Westhoughton Town 2:
A Paul Diamond double strike, the second of which was a delightful chip, helped Second Division leaders Dale to their fourth win on the trot.
Second-to-bottom Westhoughton were better than their position suggests, but they were no match for a hungry outfit, who sealed the win thanks to further strikes by Graham Dodd and a Mark Wilson penalty.
Burscough 2 Clitheroe 1:
Erratic Burscough held off the challenge of in-form Clitheroe to pick up all three points.
Sean Togher (28 minutes) and Kevin Still (68) scored their goals with Clitheroe's Mick Graham scoring in between.
Kidsgrove Athletic 2 Skelmersdale United 2: Luckless Skem were denied a deserved victory in the last two minutes after coming back from behind.
Graham Stamper and Mick Jones scored their goals in the first half, after Dean Ashton had given the home side an early lead.
But Athletic equalised with a last-gasp Anton Hughes penalty.
Ashton Town 1 Bootle 1:
Leading scorer Billy McArdle struck with just five minutes left to give Tommy Fagan's promising young side a priceless point after Dave Tabener had put bottom club Ashton ahead.
Oldham Town 2 Ellesmere Port Town 1:
Though they took the lead through Jamie Williams on 39 minutes, Port fell to goals by Dave Betts (43) and Mick Bartholomew.
PRESCOT returned to winning ways with a fine 3-1 win at Salford City on Friday night.
They had lost to the Manchester club the previous Saturday in the FA Vase.
Eight years for youth who stabbed frail pensioner, 85
A TEENAGER who plunged a screwdriver into a frail 85-year-old woman as accomplices ransacked her home, has been sentenced to eight years’ detention.
Jason Page, 17, had already punched and kicked Daisy Castle before stabbing her twice in the chest, a St Albans Crown Court jury was told.
It was the third raid the gang had made after hearing Miss Castle kept thousands in cash at her home in Trinity Road, Ware, Hertfordshire.
David Kennedy, prosecuting, said Kevin Fripp went out with a relative of the spinster, from whom he learned of the cash.
On March 31, Fripp told Page and two other youths and they broke into her garage.
A day later Page and two different youths returned.
During a third raid, on April 3, Page stabbed Miss Casle.
She was rushed to hospital, where her life was saved.
Page, of Queens Road, Ware, pleaded guilty to causing grievous bodily harm and three burglaries.
Fripp, 25, of King George Road, Ware, who admitted burglary and two charges of handling, was sentenced to 180 hours' community service.
POCKET MONEY BEATS LEAN TIME
Merseyside teenagers third highest paid in country
By Rachel Harrison
MERSEYSIDE parents are among the most generous when it comes to giving pocket money, a survey has revealed.
And that is despite being named among those who are the lowest paid in the country.
Average pocket money per week in Britain is around four pounds.
But North West teenagers receive an extra 20p making them the third highest paid in the country.
The Halifax Building Society, conducted a survey of its ‘Quest’ club members with an age range of 12 to 16 years of age.
Today's results show that many teenagers have been hit by the recession, with the average pocket money received falling this year.
However another recent survey of younger children said that the under 12s were outperforming inflation.
Despite the fall in the average rate of pocket money, the majority of British teenagers still manage to save all or most of their money.
The number with saving goals has risen from 66% to 79%.
Most popular being holidays (41%), and computer software (11%).
Extra
Jim Birrell, chief executive of the Halifax, said: ‘They still recognise the value of trying to save at least some of their income.’
In their previous survey the Halifax state that 54% of the children under the age of 11 earn extra money by doing jobs around the house.
Less than a third of the teenagers questioned earned any extra money from part time jobs.
Despite their cash worries many teenagers still pursue Further Education.
An average 66% opt to continue into Further Education and don't worry about a job.
Death threats by clergyman over woman priests
By Linda Jackson Daily Post Correspondent
A LEADING campaigner for women priests said yesterday she had received death threats.
The Rev Nerissa Jones, a deaconess at St Botolph's Church, Aldgate, east London, said she was sent a stream of hate-mail threatening decapitation.
Police treated the letters very seriously and concluded they came from a ‘disturbed clergyman,’ she said.
News of the threats came just three days before an historic vote on women's ordination and as a poll was published showing most church-goers are in favour.
Women have been able to baptise, marry and bury parishoners since they were allowed to become deacons in 1986.
However, they are barred from giving Communion.
Ordination would allow them to perform the Eucharist.
The latest survey of 1,473 church-goers shows 67pc approve of allowing the ordination of women, 22pc would vote against and 11pc were undecided.
It was carried out by BBC Radio 4's Sunday programme to gauge public opinion before the crucial Church of England General Synod vote on Wednesday.
Voting on the issue is thought to be too close to call.
Despite two years of intense lobbying by supporters of women's ordination, the outcome is on a knife-edge, to be decided by a handful of waverers in the House of Laity.
Speaking on Radio 4's Sunday programme, Ms Jones claimed the letters indicated the deep resentment harboured against women by some opponents to women's ordination.
‘Some of the levels of resentment are plainly woman-hating,’ she said.
They had led to ‘a stream of anonymous letters, threatening decapitation and all sorts of things which the police took very seriously and were pretty sure came from a disturbed clergyman’.
She said the Church could not afford to refuse to ordain women if it was to win more supporters.
The Decade of Evangelism would be a ‘dead duck’ if the Church decided to be ‘structurally sexist’, she added.
Father Geoffrey Kirk, from the Cost of Conscience Movement which opposes women's ordination claimed members would not recognise women priests.
The Sunday programme's poll follows another survey by BBC Radio 4's Today programme suggesting that the opinion in the House of Laity is within a hair's-breadth of the necessary two-thirds majority.
There must be a two-thirds majority in all the Synod's three houses of Bishops, Clergy and Laity.
However, the poll showed 66pc of the 203 members of the House of Laity taking part were in favour, with 34pc against.
Of the 32 bishops responding, 75pc were in favour and of the 196 clergy, 68pc were in favour.
Tapes ruling halts TV show
A TV documentary which includes tape recordings of Orkney children, made during the ritual abuse investigation, has been postponed.
The decision follows the Scottish court ruling which banned the BBC from broadcasting tape recordings of interviews with nine children caught up in the scandal.
In a statement, the BBC said the Panorama programme was bound by the Scottish ruling because it would have been seen in Scotland.
Medal salute for two great grans
POPPY VETERANS STILL SOLDIER ON
Words: Philippa Bellis
Picture: Martin Birchall
WORLD WAR II was still raging when Shay French started selling poppies.
Great-grandmother Shay, 75, from Walton, has been collecting in memory of fallen heroes since 1942.
Now, she and another veteran poppy seller, Brenda Maudsley, 78, of Bowring Parkhave themselves been remembered by the British Legion in Liverpool.
Between them they have 90 years of selling Remembrance Day poppies.
The pair were presented with merit medals at a service for war veterans in the Garden of Remembrance, St John's Gardens, Liverpool.
Brenda, who has four children and nine grandchildren, said: ‘Yesterday, would have been my brother's 70th birthday.
‘He was in the Pathfinder Force and he was killed when he was 21 years old and buried in Germany.
‘After his death I decided to sell poppies in remembrance of all those who died.’
Regimental Associations from around the city and further afield joined together for the ceremony, with music provided by Liverpool's 100year-old Red Rose concert band.
Going strong…
Shay and Brenda who between them have 90 years experience of selling poppies in memory of those who died in the service of their country
Death of silent film legend
HAL Roach, the pioneering movie producer who launched the careers of Harold Lloyd, Laurel and Hardy, and other classic comedians, died yesterday at the age of 100.
He died at his home in BelAir, California, of pneumonia, said a friend, Richard Bann.
Roach, who was a producer, director and screenwriter, had been ill for some time and was under the care of doctors of the Motion Picture and Television Fund Hospital, a hospital spokeswoman said.
He drifted into films as a bit player in 1912 and went on to produce dozens of comedies.
Actress Audrey Hepburn, 63, has undergone surgery to remove a tumour from her colon, a hospital spokesman said last night.
Ron Wise, of Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre, said doctors had not disclosed whether the tumour was cancerous.
Vandals wreck Mersey train
A MERSEYRAIL train may not run for three months because of vandals.
The rampaging hooligans ran the length of the train, frightening passengers, smashing light bulbs and windows and ripping up seats, then attacked the driver and a woman guard.
Staff at Liverpool's Sandhills station, on the Northern Line, called the police, who arrested three men.
British Rail released details of the damage to Saturday's 8.49pm Southport to Hunt's Cross train only last night.
The alarm was raised when the train stopped half in and half out of the station, and its driver radioed to say there was fighting on board.
Station staff called the police, but the fighting became fiercer and reinforcements had to be sent for.
The gang had been intimidating passengers and had attacked the driver and a woman guard.
A BR spokeswoman said: ‘The gang went down the train smashing windows and light bulbs and scaring the passengers.
They've caused several thousand pounds worth of damage, and the train will be off the tracks for two or three months.’
The three men arrested were later released on police bail by British Transport Police.
Their spokesman said: ‘We would like anyone who was on the train, or who may have information, to call us on 051-709 2120.’
Para parents' tribute as coroner defies the IRA
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
THE parents of a paratrooper killed by an IRA mine have praised a coroner's courage for condemning their son's murderers.
Irene and Samuel Macaulay defied advice yesterday to travel to Northern Ireland to hear an inquest into their son Donald's death nearly three years ago, and to lay a wreath at the spot where he lost his life.
The coroner's court heard that Private Macaulay, 20, of Mossley Hill, Liverpool, was killed along with Lance Corporal Stephen Wilson, 23, of Hull, and Private Matthew Marshall, 21, of Welwyn Garden City, Herts, when a mine blew up their Land-Rover on a deserted country road in Mayobridge, near Newry, County Down.
Pathologist Dr Derek Carson said all three died from multiple injuries with Pte Macaulay's death ‘almost immediate.’
Coroner Daniel Thompson described the attack as an ‘appalling attack of savagery motivated by the hatred of the past.’
And he added: ‘The IRA's actions are as irrelevant as they are violent.’
Pte Macaulay had served with the 3rd Battalion Parachute Regiment for 15 months, and had just completed six months of his tour of duty in Northern Ireland at the time of his death.
Nearly three years after the murder, Mr and Mrs Macaulay still share the same sense of outrage and defiance against the IRA which they felt at the time of the killings.
As a way of coping with the pain the couple have moved house, but each room remains a shrine to their youngest son.
‘We still feel there is Donald's presence everywhere in the house,’ said Mrs Macaulay.
‘All I could think about was Donald.
I kept imagining him talking and laughing and thinking what his last thoughts would have been as he travelled along that road.’
Mr Macaulay praised the coroner's courage for his remarks openly condemning the IRA.
He said: ‘Mr Thompson is a very brave man who has to live among these people, and we congratulate him.’
No verdicts were recorded by the coroner in accordance with the usual practice when dealing with British soldiers killed in action in Northern Ireland.
Mine victim: Pte Donald Macaulay
No surrender: Irene and Samuel Macaulay with a defiant smile at their son's funeral
OAP dead and husband critical after house blast
A PENSIONER was killed and her husband critically injured yesterday in an explosion which ripped through the ground floor of their home.
So fierce was the blast that Patrick Lennon, 68, was blown through the his house's front door.
He was found on the doorstep.
His wife Margaret, also 68, died instantly inside the house.
A neighbour who often did shopping for the Lennons had left the semi-detached in Heyford Road, Marsh Green, on the outskirts of Wigan, only a few minutes earlier.
Mr Lennon was treated at the scene by a team of paramedics before being taken by ambulance to Wigan Royal Infirmary.
However, so severe were his injuries that he was transferred almost immediately to the burns unit of Withington Hospital in Manchester.
Early today, Mr Lannon's condition was described as ‘critical.’
Fire brigade investigators are still trying to discover the cause of the explosion and any chain of events which might have led up to it.
A spokeswoman for Greater Manchester Police said: ‘A woman who did some shopping for the couple dropped the items off at the house.
‘She returned home and around fifteen minutes later she was in her downstairs living room when she heard an explosion.
‘The lady went to her rear lounge window and saw that the whole of next door's window had been blown out.’
The spokeswoman added: ‘The man was found on the front doorstep and the body of his wife was on the floor of the living room.
‘The whole of that room had been destroyed by fire.’
Greater Manchester Fire Brigade sent three appliances to the scene.
Two of the appliances were from Wigan, the third from Hindley.
Olympic arena plan hits snag
AMBITIOUS plans to turn a former biscuit factory into an Olympic venue risks failure because it is in the wrong place, city leaders conceded last night.
But Liverpool City Council still fosters hopes that the former United Biscuit factory in Edge Lane will be accepted as part of the Manchester Olympic bid, even though it is 35 miles from the proposed host city.
The building is still owned by the United Biscuit Company and is currently leased as a warehouse to telecommunications giant GPT.
The cost of acquiring the building could be up to £2.5m and converting into a 3,000seater arena, hosting judo, volleyball and handball, could cost the same again.
‘There are real advantages to the facilities being within a ‘Manchester ring’,’ admitted Norman Wilkinson, assistant director of the city's sports and leisures services.
‘That certainly goes against what was preached by Olympic bid co-ordinators in the early days, but there is a difficult balancing act.
‘In the Government's terms, there are economic advantages to it being a regional Olympic bid.
‘But the idea of a ‘Manchester ring’ has grown in strength.’
A Manchester Olympic bid spokesman said last night prospective venues had not been finalised and the Edge Lane site had not been ruled out.
WHEN YOUNG NEED A FRIEND…
Duke backs new scheme
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
A NEW scheme to help youngsters who find themselves under pressure and at risk of turning to crime has been welcomed by the Duke of Westminster.
He was speaking at the official launch of ‘BackUp’, a befriending scheme designed to help Wirral children and young people going through difficult periods in their lives, yesterday afternoon.
It provides a team of trained adult volunteers to offer friendship, companionship, support and advice to young people who are at risk of being drawn into crime or anti-social behaviour.
The duke president of Youth Clubs UK, catering for a million young people said the scheme was long overdue.
He said: ‘One can see the pressures young people are going through, especially in the inner cities.’
The duke welcomed the partnership approach of the Back-Up scheme, funded by the Home Office-backed Wirral Safer Cities crime prevention project and supported by other statutory or voluntary agencies.
He said the scheme could give confidence to youngsters who were in danger of losing it at a crucial time in their lives through adverse family or other circumstances.
By having a friend to share their problems with they would feel less isolated and could learn how to cope.
As a Territorial Army officer with a squadron of soldiers from Birkenhead, he knew of the town's high unemployment rate.
The duke presented certificates to the first 16 volunteers who have been trained for the scheme.
Another 12 are about to start training.
The Duke of Westminster with ‘Back-Up’ project certificate winners at Prenton Park
Sharp rise in homeless young
COMMUNITY workers say there has been a big increase in the number of young homeless people as winter sets in.
Merseyside's leading housing advice group also says that over the last year there has been a 100pc rise in the number of young homeless being referred to it.
But staff at the Young Persons' Housing Resource Centre add that there are fewer places available to house these people.
Lol Walters, a worker at the centre, which is funded by Shelter, said homeless ness was a year-round problem which tended to become worse in winter.
‘People take more interest because the weather gets cold,’ said Mr Walters.
‘But more young people leave home around Christmas as the pressure of not having money to spend can become too much of a strain.
It can make a tolerable situ ‘There are fewer places for the homeless, particularly as bed and breakfast landlords are closing their door to young people on benefit.
The hostels are also filling up because people don't move on.’
Young homeless people are referred for legal advice to the centre by agencies such as the Young Persons' Advisory Service in Bolton Street, Liverpool.
Workers at the YPAS have also seen a surge in homeless young people seeking help.
Science triumph
FOUR pupils at West Kirby's Calday Grange Grammar School, West Kirby, are in the finals of the Schools Science Olympiade.
The Calday Grange team of Richard Box, 16, Matthew Jones, 15, Michael Caffon and Paul Smith, both 14, defeated teams from Neston County High, Wirral Grammar School for Girls and Wirral Grammar School for Boys in the Wirral heat.
The Calday Grange team now goes forward to the national finals of the competition, which is run by Lancaster University and Shell UK to encourage British children to gain greater knowledge of science and industry.
The Calday Grange quartet will compete against teams from seven other schools at Lancaster University in January.
Pits row ‘threat’ to hopes of oil field bonanza
By Ian Herbert Daily Post Staff
THE dream of an oil and gas bonanza in Liverpool Bay faces the risk of ruin from the turmoil surrounding pit closure plans, city analysts declared last night.
The furore has hit Hamilton Oil's £2bn plans hardest because it has come while they are locked on hold by a full-scale public inquiry, a report by brokers County Nat West claimed.
The report says that the economic value of the oil and gas field could become uncertain if electricity generating companies are forced to use more British coal.
Welsh Office approval is still being sought for the conversion of a disused coal power station, owned by PowerGen at Connah's Quay, Clwyd, to the gas-fired technology which would burn much of the fuel from the field.
County Nat West oil analyst Neil Thomas said that the inquiry's decision could be affected by the furore surrounding the planned closure of Point of Ayr colliery a short distance from the Connah's Quay station.
The report stated that the future of Hamilton's four virgin oil and gas fields, was dependent on gas-fired stations being able to generate electricity.
But Mr Thomas said: ‘Hamilton's plans are in a greater stage of flux than any other.
‘If the inquiry had finished, it would be slightly different.
‘But the Secretary of State is not in a position to give it the go-ahead at the moment and the companies involved will be worried.
‘Legally, the Government is not in a position to force generators to take more coal.
‘I don't know what form that decision will take and how they would work out the practicalities of making the generators buy more coal.’
Last night, the United Kingdom Offshore Operators' Association conceded that the ‘sword of Damocles’ was hanging over oil drilling plans.
Spokesman Christopher Ryan said: ‘I hope the decision over the plans will not be affected by the political climate.
‘It will not be satisfactory to have marched a lot of money up the hill, only to march it down again.
‘Clearly, it is not good news for the investment if there are violent swings in the policy towards individual energy elements.
‘The political climate is clearly causing concern.’
A Hamilton spokesman yesterday refused to be drawn into the political controversy created by proposed pit closures.
‘It is too early to comment on these developments and it would be inappropriate at this stage to entre the public debate,’ he said.
But Tony Craven-Walker, chief executive of Monument Oil and Gas another member of the consortium investing in the mining project said: ‘We are all well aware of the different costs of the different energy sources.
‘We are not trying to undercut anyone but gas and oil are at the competitive end of the energy spectrum.’
Housing to spearhead major facelift in resort
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
A HOUSING scheme designed to sweep away the desolation of New Brighton's Victoria Road is expected to start in the New Year.
Demolition work to wipe out decades of decay from the once thriving highway is nearing completion, leaving a bleak and forlorn landscape.
But work has already started on roadworks to create a mini-roundabout and piazza at the mid-section of Victoria Road.
This will provide a break between shopping and housing areas.
The newly-named Victoria Square will be a pleasant landscaped area with trees, shrubs, seats and Victorian railings.
A complex of private houses and flats will be built between Victoria Square and a proposed ‘town square’, which is earmarked for the seaward end of Victoria Road, which will in turn revert to its ancient name of The Horseshoe.
Developers are staying tight-lipped about details of the housing scheme until a formal announcement is made.
Contract work should start soon on a facelift scheme at The Horseshoe, involving hard landscaping and the creation of sitting-out areas.
But major projects earmarked for the area have had to be put on ice.
They include an Edwardian-style Winter Gardens shopping and leisure complex.
A spokesman for Merseyside Development Corporation, which is spearheading the multi-million pound regeneration of the resort, said they hoped to start the housing scheme in January.
The architects plans give a flavour of the redevelopment, which will mark a new dawn for Victoria Road in New Brighton
Fight backed
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A PRESSURE group set up to oppose a new waste disposal plant planned for Wirral yesterday won vital support in its campaign.
Communities Against the Bidston Incinerator has been at the forefront of the fight to ensure that the controversial plant is not built.
Now Wirral City Lands Executive a body made up of senior council officers has decided to show its opposition to the £30m move put forward by a Kent-based company.
Fears have been expressed by campaigners that the huge plant might pose serious health and social risks to people living nearby.
Now Wirral City Lands Executive has decided to oppose the idea after receiving a petition from various community associations.
The executive was also addressed by Dr Vyvyan Howard of the Wirral Environmental Protection Group.
The company behind the plan, Bybrook Waste and Power formerly known as Urban Waste and Power said that the plant, if granted permission, would be among the best in the world.
The issue has already prompted Environment Secretary Michael Howerd to order a public inquiry into the proposal.
It will be held at Wallasey Town Hall next February and already the local authority has ensured several technical experts in an attempt to defeat the plan.
Wirral Council's refusal to approve the original plan led to the the inquiry being ordered.
Ministers dig in as hint of spending cuts U-turn denied
By David Rose and Chris Moncrieff
JOHN Major was plunged into another U-turn row last night after a marathon Cabinet meeting over spending cuts deteriorated, according to some, into a ‘dogfight.’
With his credibility already on a knife-edge in tomorrow's vote on Maastricht, Whitehall suggested the Prime Minister was about to ease the brakes off public spending to speed Britain's recovery from recession.
But fears that this could send the pound plummeting prompted Downing Street to issue a denial, and insist that next year's spending target of £244.5bn would not be breached.
Cabinet members were tight-lipped and unsmiling as they emerged from Downing Street, but MPs were convinced that it had been a stormy session, with ministers bitterly fighting their corners in what has been described as the most stringent public spending round for years.
The demands for more cash came from the need to uprate welfare benefits in line with inflation, money to meet the soaring cost of unemployment, and provision to cushion the effects of the council tax.
Harriet Harman, shadow Treasury chief secretary, said: ‘The last thing the country needs at the moment is a dogfight in the Cabinet and that is what has been going on.’
The outcome added to the atmosphere of crisis and confusion heightened by an extraordinary speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, who admitted he had no idea about the real state of Britain's battered economy.
‘It isn't just me.
No one can honestly say that they have any real certain picture about how the economy is performing now, or in the near term.
‘I am more uncertain about the real state of our economy than at any time since I can remember,’ he told the Foreign Press Association in London.
The Governor's brutally candid assessment struck a new blow to Mr Major as he grappled with two crises: the threat of a crippling defeat for the Government tomorrow night, and a Cabinet deadlocked over next year's spending plans.
As the Cabinet met for an unprecedented late-night session, Mr Major was searching for a way out of the deadlock that would help Chancellor Norman Lamont unveil a mini-Budget for recovery next week.
One compromise under discussion was to unfreeze some of the £4 to £5bn of receipts from council house sales to allow town halls to spend more to boost the construction industry, and help get the economy moving.
Another plan was to ease Whitehall rules to encourage private firms to take a stake in new toll roads and other capital projects that help the economy.
Bending the rules would allow the Government to claim it is sticking by next year's public spending ceiling of £244.5bn while actually allowing public borrowing to rise.
But the decision would be seen by Labour as another U-turn.
Whitehall appeared earlier to pave the way for the change by softening its line on public spending.
After weeks of insisting that the £244.5bn spending ceiling agreed by the Cabinet in the summer would not be breached, officials became less categorical.
They said instead the Cabinet was ‘working towards’ the target.
But, after Mr Leigh-Pemberton issued his warning about rekindling inflation, Downing Street abruptly changed its tune, and insisted the spending target would not be breached.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke alerted Tory MPs to expect a public backlash when he went on TV to ram home the message that ‘painful’ spending decisions had to be accepted by the country.
King in call for a special Prenton delivery
by Peter Jardine
TRANMERE manager John King is looking for some special deliveries against Southend tonight.
Rovers enjoyed the bulk of the possession in Friday's 1-1 draw with Peterborough but failed to turn their superiority into goals.
And King is seeking quality crosses as Tranmere bid for a Prenton victory that would take them third in the first division.
King said: ‘We got to the byline a lot on Friday which is always encouraging but too often the ball hit the first defender.
‘What we needed was a cutback or a deep ball to the back post.
It is not down to one player or even only Pat Nevin and John Morrissey, it is down to the team.’
Rovers winger Pat Nevin said: ‘As someone who likes to make goals, I definitely came off on Friday feeling disappointed not to have set up a goal.
Fed up ‘We want to win every game so while it was a good performance we were a little fed up with the result.’
Dave Higgins, who missed Friday's match with a stomach complaint, is likely to return to the Rovers defence but other changes will be at a minimum.
And King is once again looking for backing from the crowd.
‘The atmosphere on Friday was the best for a long time and if any of the ladies want to come along, they will be more than welcome!’
Southend, who drew 2-2 at Luton on Saturday, will be without striker Brett Angell who is out until February with a thigh injury.
Rovers challenge mob rule -Page 30
TRANMERE:(From) Nixon, Mungall, Brannan, Higgins, Vickers, McNab, Morrissey, Irons, Aldridge, Malkin, Nevin, Cooper, Hughes, Martindale.
More time please, begs city
A COUNCIL poised to lose £1m in benefit aid has appealed for Parliamentary help.
The money could be lost from Government subsidies on rent allowances and community charge benefits which should have been reviewed by October.
But a long-running dispute by benefit staff forced the council to put back its own deadline for thousands of outstanding benefit claims.
This will put Liverpool council outside the deadline and an appeal to Government for a February extension remains unanswered.
Mossley Hill MP David Alton is backing the council's appeal with a letter to Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley.
Batty awaits cup verdict
DAVID BATTY still hopes to feature for Leeds in tomorrow's climax of their all-British European Cup clash against Rangers.
The little England midfielder is nursing badly bruised ankle ligaments after a challenge from Coventry's Stewart Robson at the weekend.
But with Howard Wilkinson needing all his battlers as he tries to recover a 2-1 first leg deficit against the Scottish champions, Batty insists: ‘I've not ruled myself out of it yet.
Royal look of misery or respect?
THE Prince and Princess of Wales stand side by side during one of their first joint public trips since book revelations over their marriage.
The couple, at the start of a four-day tour of South Korea, were stony-faced as they honoured soldiers killed in the 1950 war.
But the sombre ceremony threw royal watchers a dilemma.
Was this the look of a pair uncomfortable in each other 's presence, or simply the appropriate stance for such a solemn occasion?
Royal circus Page 8
Francis backs strike-force
TREVOR FRANCIS is fed up with hearing about how Sheffield Wednesday will miss strikers David Hirst and Mark Bright for tomorrow's UEFA Cup return with Kaiserslautern at Hillsborough.
Hirst, seven goals in nine games this term, is banned after being sent off in the 3-1 first leg defeat while £1 million new boy Bright is ineligible.
Their absence has been the major talking point as Wednesday plot how they will overturn that two-goal deficit, but Francis has had enough.
‘Everybody's talking about the two forwards, but you can have the best forwards in the world and there's still no guarantee they will score,’ he said.
‘I'm not worried.
I knew we would be without them for the return so there's no point talking about it we have other players who can score.’
Gordon Watson, who scored twice in last week's Coca Cola Cup seven-goal rout of Leicester and again in the reserves on Thursday, now looks certain to fill one of the strikers' roles.
Paul Warhurst is fighting to shrug off a thigh strain to join him while David Johnson has recovered from a cartilage operation and Francis himself is back in contention after a groin strain.
Nigel Jemson is still ruled out along with centre half Peter Shirtliff (hamstring), but full back Roland Nilsson looks set to return at full back in place of John Harkes.
Despite all the problems and uncertainties, Francis remains confident.
He is especially encouraged by the performances of Leeds and Celtic in overcoming deficits against Bundesliga opposition in European competition already this season.
Francis added:’ We can certainly take heart from what Leeds and Celtic have done and, having already played Kaiserslautern, I'm still convinced we can win through.’
St George's Hall a £60,000 setting for Hamlet
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
THE stage is finally set for what promises to be an unforgettable performance of one of Shakespeare's finest plays.
Following months of preparation, Liverpool's St George's Hall has been transformed into one of the most imposing venues in which Hamlet will ever be performed.
The role of Hamlet will be played by Alan Rickman, who shot to fame with his performance as the Sheriff of Nottingham in the film Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves.
Ophelia will be played by Geraldine McEwan.
Overseeing the venture is Colette Walker, who manages St George's Hall, a Grade I listed building which is owned by Liverpool City Council.
Ms Walker's main job will be to make sure the hall's famous Minton tiled floor is not damaged by either the cast's or the audience's feet.
To prevent damage to the hall's ceiling, more than 500 feet of metal trusses from which the stage lighting will be suspended have been put up.
Two custom-built stairways have also been made for the rear of the seat scaffolding to allow access for the 546 people who will see the performance.
A 30-strong team has worked around the clock since midnight on Saturday to build the stage and seating area for the hall in readiness for the sell-out performance, which starts at 7.30pm this evening.
Co-ordinating the logistics is Roz Robins, administrator of the Everyman, which is backing the venture.
Ms Robins said: ‘It has been a challenge and everybody has learned a lot from it.
We couldn't possibly have got a production company of this size to come to the Everyman.
‘Putting on this performance has brought everyone together and there has been a buzz around the building during the last few days.’
Production costs have exceeded £60,000, but the Everyman is hoping to break even, thanks to grants from the council, the Merseyside Development Corporation and the Arts Council.
Performances of the Everyman production of Shakespeare's Much Ado About Nothing can be seen at the Huyton Suite in Poplar Bank, Kirkby, on November 19 at 2pm and 7.30pm.
Roz Robins
TRANSPLANT GIRL HOME THIS WEEK
Joy as Laura, 4, set to return
LITTLE Laura Davies, who was flown to America for a double transplant operation, is due to return home this week.
She has passed a clinical inspection at the Pittsburgh children's hospital and it is expected she will be discharged after the result of a final test today.
Laura's parents, Fran and Les, are making arrangements for their four-year-old daughter to return home to Eccles, Greater Manchester, on Thursday.
A spokeswoman for the hospital, where the liver and bowel transplant was performed, said: ‘Everything seems to be in order.’
Results of the last test would be known today ‘then she should get the green light to go home.’
She said doctors were pleased with Laura's progress, and it was thought she would be able to lead a normal life.
Laura's parents have been with her since she was flown to the US on May 30.
Consultant Adrian Bianchi, of the Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, and another British doctor and nurse have flown to Pittsburgh.
Laura's grandfather, Alan Cooper, said last night: ‘I am getting everything ready and counting the days.’
Laura's life was saved by the 15-hour operation on June 10 after an appeal raised £350,000, including £150,000 from King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.
Feeling great Laura Davies smiles after her surgery
Recession busting golf tour could top £25m
EUROPEAN golf continues to beat the recession and prize money next season could approach £25m.
Ken Schofield, executive director of the European tour, said in announcing details of a circuit that runs from mid-January to November and includes tournaments in Dubai, Singapore and Morocco: ‘Our overall target is £24.75m, an increase of 12.5%.
‘We may suffer some setbacks, but for the 18th successive year we shall be increasing prize money.
Golf in general is very fortunate in that our game is not in recession.’
Seve Ballesteros criticised the length of the tour when it was announced in September, but Schofield stated: ‘Our job is to get competitive opportunities for our members and we are not going to turn down opportunities.
But of course there is a limit and we are near to that now.’
Nineteen different countries will be visited for the 43 tournaments and the average prize money fund will go up from £461,000 to approximately £500,000.
Exceeded
‘We have no minimum all we try for is the maximum,’ ' added Schofield.
Total prize money in 1975 was just £700,000 a figure that Nick Faldo has exceeded on his own this year.
Slick Nick
NICK Jones, from the Wirral, progressed through to the second round of the 1992 Volkswagen Nationals Tennis Championships men's singles event at the Telford Raquets Centre in Shropshire.
The 25-year-old Newtown born player beat Peter Wright from Devon 6-4 6-4, in the first round and now faces No. 6 seed, Danny Sapsford from Weybridge in Surrey, in the second round.
Andrew Castle is the defending champion while British No. 1 Jeremy Bates will be bidding for his fourth title.
School success despite row
CONTROVERSY surrounding Wirral's oldest grammar school has failed to mar the excellence of its achievements, a report confirms.
Parents of Calday Grange Grammar School students face a second ballot on opting out following a veto of the first vote by Education Secretary John Patten.
The initial poll, which resulted in a 713-711 vote in favour of a split from local authority control, was ruled ‘unsafe’ by Mr Patten.
Earlier this year, Wirral education director David Rigby warned that a switch to grant-maintained status would create problems for the local authority.
Now a report from a local authority inspection team has underlined the quality of the school.
It concludes: ‘Calday Grange aims for excellence in the achievements of its young people and in the professionalism of its staff.
‘The inspection has shown the school to be successful in its pursuit of that aim.
‘It can be proud of the achievements, both academically and in the ethos which has been created.’
Veronica Robertson, caretaker chairman of governors, said last night that opting out was the only way forward educationally for Calday Grange.
Opponents of opting out have said that the school would lose the services of the education department and other council services.
Rovers have to smash mob rule
AN Italian heavy mob are lurking to try and ruin Tranmere's first competitive venture into European football.
For the four clubs Rovers are due to meet in the next stage of the Anglo-Italian Cup are setting the pace in Italy's Serie B.
Cremonese, who Tranmere meet at Prenton on November 24, are the current league leaders.
They are closely followed by AC Reggiana, who Rovers visit next week.
Pisa and Cosenza, the other two Italian sides in the group, are joint fourth.
Cremonese beat Ascoli 3-1 at the weekend to stay top with 16 points from nine games.
In doing so they established a new serie B record with their eighth consecutive win, beating Lazio's previous record.
And their tally of 22 goals scored bettered a record start set by Genoa in season 1962/63.
Capacity
Cremonese, who were relegated from Serie A last season, boast the top two goal scorers in Serie B, Argentinian Dezotti and Tentoni, who both have six.
AC Reggiana are based in the town of Reggio Emilia, close to Bologna and Milan.
They play in the Mirabello Stadium, which has a capacity of 13,887.
Second-placed Reggiana beat Lucchese 2-1 on Sunday to maintain Serie B's only unbeaten record with five wins and four draws, leaving them two points behind Cremonese.
Top goalscorer Guiseppe Shienza is their star man with five goals this season.
Reggiana supplied three players goalkeeper Luca Bucci and defenders Massimiliano Corrado and Gianluca Francesconi for the Italian Serie B side that lost 3-1 to the Barclays first division at Bristol last month.
Pisa, who Rovers visit on December 8, play in the impressive Arena Garibaldi which holds 26,000.
They are currently equal fourth with four other clubs on 11 points.
They lost 1-0 at home on Sunday to Bologna.
Top star at Pisa is Danish international Henrik Larssen who starred in the European Championships.
Cosenza, also on 11 points, won 2-1 at home to Monza at the weekend.
They visit Prenton on December 16 for Tranmere's final match in the group.
Three points are awarded for a win and one for a draw with Derby, Bristol City and West Ham also in Rovers' group.
PASTA JOKE…
Rovers coach Ronnie Moore (left) with Ged Brannan, Steve Mungall, Chris Malkin and Neil McNab get into the spirit of things
Boss Bob hits the winner
LIVERPOOL second division action saw Devonshire House score a 3-2 verdict over Village Eagle with goals from Mick Brooks, John Garner and the winner from player manager Bob Lee.
Carl Brownlow, John Williams and Joe Fenlon were on target as Bradewell Clock beat Grange Cavalier by the same scoreline.
In Division Three, Mark Brown and Mark McNally scored to give Brookhouse a 2-1 win over High Oaks.
Murder charges
A TEENAGE student appeared at a special youth court yesterday charged with murdering his 38-year-old mother and 67-year-old grandmother.
The 17-year-old youth, who cannot be named for legal reasons, faced Warrington magistrates, accused of murdering his mother on October 28 and her mother two days later at their home in the town.
An application for bail by Gary Heaven, defending, was refused during the hour-long hearing.
The youth was remanded in custody until November 11.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted.
Plan to comfort victim's families
Brave Helen's parents in cancer group tribute
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
BEREAVED parents Roy and Linda Grainger are to set up a support group as a tribute to their little girl who lost her battle against brain cancer.
Helen died the day before her seventh birthday surrounded by her parents and brother and sister at Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool.
Mr and Mrs Grainger now plan to establish the association in Helen's name to provide support, comfort and information to people whose relatives are suffering from cancer.
They also hope to raise funds for research into brain tumours.
Mr Grainger, who believes that the association could be the first of its kind in the country, has contacted the American Brain Tumour Association which has provided him with a wealth of information.
‘We want to help people in a similar situation to us.’ said Mr Grainger of Crosby.
‘Helen's tumour was diagnosed in 1989.
It may have helped us if we had had such an organisation to fall back on.
‘The more information people have the better.
A greater understanding of this wicked disease can help.
‘We can also help people to ask the right questions because when a diagnosis is first made, they may feel confused and upset.
‘We also hope to raise funds for research into brain tumours and to correlate lots of facts and figures.’
The Graingers began a worldwide hunt for a cure when the diagnosis was made three years ago.
They flew their daughter to Mexico and San Francisco in search of treatment.
A pioneering surgeon in America operated and removed 99pc of the tumour but then more tumours were discovered on Helen's spine.
‘We need to raise money now for research,’ said Mr Grainger.
‘Not enough funds are going into research on brain tumours in both adults and children.’
Helen's funeral will take place at St Luke's Church, Crosby on Friday at 3pm followed by a church burial.
Floral tributes can be sent to the family at 9, Roehampton Drive, Crosby.
Anyone wanting to get in touch with the Graingers can write to them at the above address.
Roy Grainger with a photograph of his daughter, Helen Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN
£20,000 to catch BT arsonists
BRITISH Telecom yesterday offered a £20,000 reward for information leading to the prosecution of arsonists who caused major fires at two telephone exchanges.
Thousands of homes and businesses were cut off by two fires at exchanges in Liverpool and Sheffield last month depriving them of all telephone services, including emergency 999 calls.
Alfie Kane, BT's director of network operations, said: ‘Crippling the 999 phone service in this way may sooner or later lead to the death of innocent people who cannot gain access to emergency services, and it is in everyone's interest that these people are caught.’
Engineers are still working around the clock to restore services at the Woodhouse exchange in Sheffield following a fire on October 25, which affected 13,000 customers.
A blaze at the Wavertree exchange in Liverpool a week earlier hit 13,500 homes and businesses.
It took eight days to restore normal service in the area.
BT says it is now providing additional security at exchanges, and is asking the public to report any suspicious incidents.
Fury over £27m poll tax loss
A POLL tax write-off row has flared as a council's shortfall heads for £27m.
Wirral Tory claims that the situation is a result of Labour councillors backing a ‘can't pay, wont pay’ campaign have been dismissed by Labour leader Coun Dave Jackson.
He said: ‘The Tories are trying to lay the blame on the ghost of years past.’
And referring to the council's hardship panel he added: ‘We have had scores of people with high mortgages, some as much as £600–£700 a month, which gives an indication that people who have not paid are not just one class of people.’
In a report to Wirral policy and resources committee finance director Ian Wood has identified a figure of £27.1m as the likely total write-off from three years of poll tax collection.
He indicated that a vigorous recovery programme was being carried out 90,000 reminders had been issued and thousands of summonses sent.
Tory group leader Coun John Hale said: ‘It all stems back to the early days when people were encouraged not to pay and the momentum has built up from this.’
A finance spokesman said: ‘We wont write anything off until we have made fairly extensive inquiries.’
Going for a Burton
TOP carp fishery Burton Mere should be ready for fresh stocks of very big carp by Christmas.
Following extensive maintenance work the 2.5 acre South Wirral lake is being refilled with water and is ahead of schedule for fishing early in 1993.
When fishing does get underway Burton Mere will be an exclusive water with a strict limit of 10 anglers a day paying about £10 each.
And what they will be trying to catch is just 70 very big carp dominated by a monster 36lb specimen.
Fishery owner Terry Knight now makes his living from running four fishing lakes at Burton Village.
There is the main mere which is reserved for carp fishing only; Woodlands Pool which is a general coarse fishery; and two rainbow trout pools where fishing is restricted to fly-only.
It is a big investment and, as Terry explained, his latest project has cost more than £10,000.
‘The old mere needed deepening and by taking away more than 400 wagon loads of mud the average depth has gone from two to five feet,’ he said.
‘The deepest parts of the lake will be eight feet, but the margins are shallow enough to retain features such as the lily pad beds.’
His main concern now is the protection of the valuable fish some worth more than £1,500 each so special ‘unhooking mats’ have been ordered so that the fish do not get damaged by mishandling.
Terry has designed a PVC-covered three foot foam mat with an eight inch deep cut-out for fish to be laid in while the fishing hook is removed.
Tinhead Fly
Finally there will be a careful check on the ability of fishermen applying for day tickets, and unless they are known as serious carp anglers they will not get the slightest chance of a day on the lake.
Long gone are the days of the cane, worm and jam jar!
Prestatyn greengrocer Trevor Jones is making the new-style Tinhead Fly catch trout at Felin-y-Gors fishery.
The imitation fly is like a Goldhead but has a pewter coloured head on a nymph body.
Trevor, fishing it with a floating line and a 20-foot leader, retrieved the Tinhead slowly on Kingfisher Pool and tempted a fine 7lb 2oz rainbow trout.
Mind you, that wasn't the biggest of the week.
There was a fine 8lb 4oz catch made by Simon Kent on a visit from Leicester, who fished with a Green Shrimp on the Mill Pool.
The best brace of the week was taken by Bala farmer Hugh Jones who had rainbows weighing 6lb 6oz and 5lb 9oz on the same morning.
Pits row ‘threat’ to oil and gas bonanza
By Ian Herbert Daily Post Staff
THE dream of an oil and gas bonanza off the North Wales coast faces greater risk of ruin by the turmoil of pit closures than any other UK mining project, city analysts claimed last night.
The furore has hit Hamilton Oil's £2bn plans hardest because it has come while they are locked on hold by a full-scale public inquiry, says a report by broker County Nat West.
The threat of electricity generators being forced to buy more British Coal, after a review of the energy market, would have ‘serious implications’ for the economics of the field.
Welsh Office approval is still being sought for the conversion of a disused coal power station, owned by PowerGen, at Connah's Quay, Clwyd, to the gas-fired technology which would burn much of the mined fuel.
County Nat West oil analyst Neil Thomas said that decision would be affected by anger over the planned closure of nearby Point of Ayr colliery.
The report says that the future of Hamilton's four virgin oil and gas fields is dependent on gas-fired stations being able to generate electricity.
But Mr Thomas said: ‘Hamilton's plans are in a greater stage of flux than any other.
The companies involved will be worried.
‘Legally, the Government is not in a position to force generators to take more coal.’
Last night, the United Kingdom Offshore Operators' Association conceded that the ‘sword of Damaclese’ is hanging over oil drilling plans.
Spokesman Christopher Ryan said: ‘I hope the decision over the plans will not be affected by the political climate.
‘It is not good news for the investment if there are violent swings in policy towards individual energy elements.’
A Hamilton spokesman said cautiously: ‘It is too early to comment on these developments.’
But Tony Craven-Walker, chief executive of Monument Oil and Gas another member of the consortium investing in the mining project said: ‘We are not trying to undercut anyone, but gas and oil are at the competitive end of the energy spectrum.’
‘We just want to get to the bottom of things’
Family could sue over death of young Marine
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
THE family of a teenage Royal Marine who died after a party to celebrate winning his Green Beret have launched a compensation claim against the Ministry of Defence, it was revealed yesterday.
Last night Marine Ian Mallard's father, Malcolm, declared: ‘I want to get to the bottom of things once and for all.’
Ian, 17, died of acute alcohol poisoning and choking on his own vomit after the traditional celebration to mark completion of the gruelling 30-week course at the Commando Training Centre, Lympstone, Devon.
Last month a coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death on the young Marine, who had drunk four or five bottles of lager and six quadruple or triple glasses of a mixture of whisky and vodka.
His parents, Malcolm and Susan Mallard, of Blacon, Chester, claim the Ministry of Defence did not look after him properly.
Mr Mallard said he was also unhappy with the way the MoD had handled the matter after their son's death.
‘They've cut us off completely.
We haven't heard a thing from them.
That makes me very angry.’
Mr Mallard said he hoped their claim would open up the matter once more.
‘We want to find out what happened, we just want to get to the bottom of things.’
The family's solicitor, Peter Anderson, said he was waiting to hear if the MoD would deal with the matter, but added that the family may pursue a civil claim.
‘We think the Ministry of Defence was negligent in the way they looked after this young man.
They were meant to be looking after this lad and they had clearly got a duty to do so.’
Commando training centre commandant Colonel Mike Taffinder said: ‘A number of steps have been taken to stress, yet again, that under-age drinking is not only dangerous, but illegal.’
The results of a military investigation have been sent to the MoD.
The inquest into Ian's death was told that £950 was spent at a pub during the fatal party.
Not forgotten Royal Marine Ian Mallard
Mersey woes continue
MERSEYSIDE hockey clubs had another disappointing weekend in the National League.
Neston went down 4-2 against Firebrands at the Recreation Centre, Warrington crashed 6-1 away at Guilford and are now bottom of the second division.
In the second round of the HA Cup Southport caused the main shock with a 3-0 win over neighbours Formby at Birkdale.
Southport, heartened by an early goal from Andy Ferns, defended well throughout and took their chances.
Talented schoolboys Mathew Holmes and Stuart Humphries completed the score.
Liverpool Sefton beat Bowdon 2-1 at Wyncote to record their first Premier League win, but they lost 2-0 to Ben Rhydding in the HA Cup Tie.
Hightown-Northern, handicapped by injuries, were well-beaten 3-1 by Cheshire side Timperley at Crosby.
Nicholson (2) and Pittam were Timperley's goal scorers and Dave Enoch scored a last minute goal for Northern from Mike Cooke's free hit on the right.
Results Saturday.
North Premier League Division One: Ben Rhydding 2 York 1; Durham University 2 Formby 2; HightownNorthern 1 Timperley 3; Norton 2 Alderley Edge 2; Sheffield 4 Wakefield 0.
Div Two: Disley 4 Ramgarhia 2; Halifax 1 Knutsford 1; Harrogate 5 Blackburn 1; Liverpool Sefton 2 Bowdon 1; Sheffield Bankers 2 Swalwell 2; Southport 5 Springfields 1; Stockton 7 Sunderland 0; Wigan 1 Preston 2.
HA Cup Round Two: Southport 3 Formby 0; Liverpool Sefton 0 Ben Rhydding 2; Swalwell 3 Harrogate 2; Norton 1 Sheffield 8; Wakefield 0 Alderley Edge 4; Timperley 0 Pelicans 0 (Timperley win on penalty strokes).
‘400,000 more jobs to go’
ABOUT 400,000 people will lose their jobs over the next 15 months before the unemployment rate peaks, according to the National Westminster Bank yesterday.
Jobless numbers would reach a high of about 3.25m towards the end of 1993, said chief economist David Kern.
South East England would bear the brunt of the increase with a total of 1.08m out of a job by the end of next year.
Chancellor Norman Lamont's push for growth will boost recovery prospects in 1993 but do little to alleviate the economic pain over the rest of the year, according to separate forecasts yesterday.
The Oxford Economic Forecasting group said the economy worsened ‘appreciably’ in the late summer and autumn, flattening hopes of a spring rebound.
But Britain would step tentatively out of recession next year, it predicted, with national output expanding 0.8pc after an 0.9pc fall this year.
The OEF warned against relaxing interest rates too quickly as this would have little immediate impact on the economy while storing up ‘problems for the future’.
But a report from City finance house County Natwest is more bullish, saying Britain will buck the global recessionary trend next year with growth of around 1.1pc.
However, it warned that inflation could slip out of the Government's 1pc-4pc band towards the end of next year and rise to 5.3pc by the final quarter of 1994.
Boys saved as canoes capsize in high seas
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A HELICOPTER from RAF Valley on Anglesey was scrambled yesterday to help rescue three young canoeists who were in danger of being swept out to sea.
The aircraft was requested by coastguards after they were alerted to the drama off the coast of the Isle of Man.
And last night, the emergency services condemned the children's school for organising the event during such bad weather.
The trio were found clinging to their upturned canoes in the waters off the island after gale force winds capsized their small craft.
And, if it had not been for the speedy response from the coastguard, the boys would have found themselves out in the open sea.
Five boys and three girls all of whom are pupils at King William College at Castletown on the island were on the canoeing trip.
It was part of their Combined Cadet Force training at the exclusive public school.
The girls managed to paddle themselves to the shore, but the boys spent almost an hour before being rescued.
Initially, just two of the canoeists capsized but a third also got into difficulties after he and two colleagues attempted to rescue their friends.
A full air sea rescue was put into operation, involving St Mary's lifeboat and a helicopter from Valley.
The boys were eventually picked up by a small boat and were taken by ambulance to Nobles Hospital in Douglas where they were treated for the effects of cold.
By David Rose Political Editor
JOHN Major was plunged into another U-turn row last night after he was accused of backtracking over public spending cuts.
With his credibility already on a knife-edge in tomorrow's vote on Maastricht, Whitehall suggested he was about to ease the brakes off public spending to speed Britain's recovery from recession.
But fears that this could send the pound plummeting prompted Downing Street to issue a denial, and insist that next year's spending target of £244.5bn would not be breached.
The outcome added to the atmosphere of crisis and confusion heightened by an extraordinary speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, who admitted he had no idea about the real state of Britain's battered economy.
‘It isn't just me.
No one can honestly say that they have any real certain picture about how the economy is performing now, or in the near term.
‘I am more uncertain about the real state of our economy than at any time since I can remember,’ he told the Foreign Press Association in London.
The Governor's brutally candid assessment struck a new blow to Mr Major as he grappled with two crises: the threat of a crippling defeat for the Government tomorrow night, and a Cabinet deadlocked over next year's spending plans.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton, however, sounded a stark warning to the Cabinet not to take risks with inflation: ‘We have to be very clear about the objectives of policy.
The objective is to achieve sustainable, non-inflationary growth.’
As the Cabinet met for an unprecedented late-night session, Mr Major was searching for a way out of the deadlock that would help Chancellor Norman Lamont unveil a mini-Budget for recovery next week.
One compromise under discussion was to unfreeze some of the £4 to £5bn of receipts from council house sales to allow town halls to spend more to boost the construction industry, and help get the economy moving.
Another plan was to ease Whitehall rules to encourage private firms to take a stake in new toll roads and other capital projects that help the economy.
Bending the rules would allow the Government to claim it is sticking by next year's public spending ceiling of £244.5bn while actually allowing public borrowing to rise.
But the decision would be seen by Labour as another U-turn.
Whitehall appeared earlier to pave the way for the change by softening its line on public spending.
After weeks of insisting that the £244.5bn spending ceiling agreed by the Cabinet in the summer would not be breached, officials became less categorical.
They said instead the Cabinet was ‘working towards’ the target.
But, after Mr Leigh-Pemberton issued his warning about rekindling inflation, Downing Street abruptly changed its tune, and insisted the spending target would not be breached.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke alerted Tory MPs to expect a public backlash when he went on TV to ram home the message that ‘painful’ spending decisions had to be accepted by the country.
Boy to meet his Waterloo
THE latest act in the long-running Katabatic and Waterloo Boy show goes on stage at Exeter today.
A late decision by Andy Turnell to run Katabatic in the Plymouth Gin Haldon Gold Cup provides racegoers with another fascinating contest.
To keep you up to date with the story so far: Katabatic first met Waterloo Boy over fences in the Captain Morgan Chase at Aintree in April 1990, the pair finishing third and fourth behind Nohalmdun.
Memorable
Three victories for Katabatic the following season, highlighted by his seven-length win from Waterloo Boy in the Champion Chase, were followed by two more last term.
That memorable Champion Chase clash with Remittance Man saw Katabatic beaten a length, with Waterloo Boy three and a half lengths back in third.
And the season was rounded off with Katabatic hammering his old rival by eight lengths over two and a half miles at Cheltenham.
A score of six-nil points pretty conclusively to Katabatic, fit from an Ascot victory last month, coming out on top again.
But Waterloo Boy should by no means be written off.
He goes well fresh, was possibly past his best for the season in those two clashes with Katabatic last term, and comes from a stable firing out winners.
It seems sure to be close and this is probably a race best watched but if forced to pass judgement, a narrow vote is advised for Katabatic.
The odds are likely to be fairly restrictive, and sadly those about Romany King are probably going to be no better in the Whitbread Pub Partnerships Handicap Chase.
Whitbread winner Topsham Bay is unlikely to be near his peak, so one-paced Paco's Boy seems the only remote danger.
Romany King, runner-up in last season's National, has plenty of pace over shorter trips and with the benefit of a reappearance run at Kempton is difficult to oppose.
The presence of Martin Pipe's Highland Spirit in the Ferguson Brewery Novices' Handicap Hurdle should guarantee value elsewhere, and it could pay to have an each way interest in Volpedo.
Promise
A close third to Jadidh at Wincanton in January, Volpedo ran with promise on his reappearance at Chepstow last month.
Though no match for Gaelstrom and Now Your Talkin, he was running on well into third at the end, and in receipt of 20lbs from Highland Spirit should go well at a big price.
Highland Spirit's stablemate Grand Hawk is expected to come out best in what is virtually a two-horse race for the St Austell Brewery Company Novices' Hurdle.
A useful performer with Mohammed Moubarak on the Flat, Grand Hawk finished a creditable second to Satin Lover on his hurdling bow.
Wincanton winner Sun Surfer will give him plenty to do, but Grand Hawk is sure to have learned plenty and has more scope for improvement.
ANDY TURNELL: Late
‘Eyesore'cranes set to tumble
THREE huge dockside cranes an eyesore to many people are being demolished.
The Bidston Dock cranes have been a Birkenhead landmark for many years.
A Mersey Docks and Harbour Company official said: ‘They are quite old, and have not been in regular use in recent years.’
GIFT TO 25,000th VISITOR
Centre's landmark
PORT Sunlight Heritage Centre which tells the story of the 1st Lord Leverhulme, his soapworks and model village has welcomed its 25,000th visitor this year.
The surprised caller was Jo Heaton, of Formby, vice-chairman of the Southport and Formby Decorative and Fine Arts Society, whose members were given a guided tour of the village by Heritage Centre guide, Pat Dobbie.
Mrs Heaton was then presented with a floral arrangement and a gift of a framed print by local artist Jenny Holland.
Mrs Heaton said: ‘I certainly did not expect this we had come to look at the architecture.’
Information officer Elaine Hazlehurst said visitors had increased by 4.5pc this year.
Jo Heaton receives her gift from Elaine Hazelehurst
Hotelier checks in for award
A HOTEL owner is celebrating after picking up a top award.
The Redlands Hotel in Hough Green, Chester, was picked as the best small hotel or guest house in the North West and Midlands.
Owner Teresa White was delighted to win and was given a rose bowl and certificate by the RAC.
Mrs White, who is originally from Edinburgh, but who has lived in Chester for six years, said the accolade for the hotel was given because it is a ‘gorgeous place,’ built in 1860, with wood-panelling throughout and full of antiques.
COLLECTION GOES UNDER HAMMER
Sale sounds like a bargain
Ex-Miss UK Amanda Flood, from Chester, with a 1910 HMV gramophone
A COLLECTION of unusual antiques that has been 30 years in the making will go under the hammer this weekend.
Their owner, a collector from Rossett who wishes to remain anonymous, said it was time to let his collection go.
‘It was all or nothing,’ he said.
‘If I sold them one or two at a time I'd be here for twenty years.’
‘It's not the money.
I've just got too much.’
The sale will feature 400 lots in all.
One of the most unusual items is a grandfather clock featuring the figures of Adam and Eve when it chimes Adam passes an apple to Eve.
There are also 50 or more old fashioned wind-up gramophones on sale, complete with horns.
The sale will take place at Wingetts in Wrexham on Saturday, with a viewing on Friday.
Ex-Miss UK Amanda Flood, from Chester, with a 1910 HMV gramophone
Kwik Save ‘rancid and mouldy’ food fines
By Mark Thomas Daily Post Correspondent
SUPERMARKET chain Kwik Save was yesterday fined more than £19,000 for offences which included selling rancid and mouldy meat and having high bacteria counts in cheese.
The prosecution was brought by trading standards officers who discovered food on sale after its ‘use by’ date at five stores in Knowsley, Merseyside.
The company pleaded guilty at Kirkby Magistrates' Court to a total of 15 charges, including having for sale six packs of sausages containing fat which had gone rancid and two packets of meat contaminated by mould.
Kwik Save also prosecuted for offering Danish blue cheese which was unfit because of its bacteria count, and having food on sale at temperatures of up to 20 degrees which should have been stored at a maximum of eight degrees centigrade.
The chain was fined £19,200 and ordered to pay £4,700 costs for the offences, the charges having been brought under the Food Safety Act.
After the hearing a company spokesman said: ‘Kwik Save has a vast number of stores throughout the country and we do take this area very seriously.
‘We have undertaken internal investigations and we are satisfied that this was a one-off case.’
The spokesman added: ‘The magistrates were made aware of that and appreciated that we have taken steps to prevent a recurrence of this problem.’
Knowsley's principal trading standards officer, Frank Harper, said: ‘After the recent listeria and salmonella cases in the late 1980s the public was rightly concerned about food safety.
‘This led to a tightening up of the law and Knowsley's environmental health and trading standards officers will continue to monitor the sale of food in the borough to ensure that it is as safe as the public rightly expects it to be.’
‘Beware of £1m car sale swindler’ warns victim
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
A WOMAN who fell victim to a cruel conman estimated to have swindled more than £1m is warning other people not to be taken in.
Tina Jones, 35, who was tricked into parting with a Vauxhall Cavalier, is urging people to be vigilant and careful when selling their cars.
The Southport woman is one of many people believed to have been tricked by the 38-year-old Glaswegian who masterminded a sting from a car showroom in Rufford, near Ormskirk.
Police at Skelmersdale are hunting the smartly-dressed man, who used the name Peter Scott while persuading people to part with their cars on the promise of a good sale.
The vehicles were then sold for cash with which Scott disappeared.
Police believe he has been responsible for similar crimes in Manchester and Accrington, Lancashire.
Tina Jones, of Salwick Close, Marshside, agreed to sell her friend Wayne Spalenice's Vauxhall Cavalier while he was away.
‘I put the advert in the papers but nothing came of it,’ she said.
‘Then I was contacted over the phone by a company in Rufford who agreed to sell the car for £50.
‘It seemed like a good deal so we went down to Rufford to check the company out.
It appeared bona fide and very professional.
‘All the cars were out on the forecourt and priced and the staff were very helpful.
‘We handed over the keys and MoT.
A week later we were contacted by Ormskirk police who said the car had been stolen and sold at an auction at Haydock.’
Detective Inspector Frank Wilkinson of Skelmersdale CID said: ‘We want to find this man before he has a chance to do the same thing again.
‘We would warn people to be on their guard because this man operates in a very professional manner.’
Conman ‘Peter Scott'
Tina Joneswarning other car-owners to be careful
Businessman jailed for racket in stolen goods
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
A BUSINESSMAN was jailed for 18 months yesterday for receiving thousands of pounds worth of stolen goods.
Nicholas Dodman, 34, of Wynstay Lane, Wrexham, pleaded guilty to receiving part of the proceeds of a £14,500 haul from a burglary at an off-licence in Deeside.
Dodman, who ran the Smithy View garage in Wrexham, paid £4,000 for 30 cases of spirits and 85,000 cigarettes, believed to be worth around £8,000.
A last-minute application by him to change his plea was turned down by Judge Robin David yesterday.
Police intercepted the exchange of the goods near to the Sainsbury's store in Ellesmere Port on December 18, 1990, the day the burglary had taken place.
Dodman was driving a van which was being loaded with the stolen property which was later traced back to the burglary at Victoria Wines.
Dodman also admitted receiving stolen cigarettes and spirits on four other occasions.
‘In total, he received around £12,000 of cigarettes and spirit which he had given away to business colleagues or sold on through his business,’ said Roger Dutton, prosecuting.
‘It would appear he was a regular customer and willing and prepared to take stolen items.’
Dodman offered to give evidence against another man whom he claimed had carried out the burglaries, but he was unable to do so because of a mental condition and the charges against the other man were dropped.
Andrew Loverage, defending, asked for Dodman's psychiatric condition to be taken into consideration.
He said that Dodman had been suffering from a mental illness which could have affected his behaviour.
‘Criminals far more vicious than Nicholas Dodman looked upon him as an easy target to provide an outlet for their criminal activities,’ he said.
‘It is a measure of the level of the people with which he was dealing, in that at a time when he thought he might be a witness in another case, he was assaulted rendering him unconscious and his house was the subject of an arson attack.’
But Judge Robin David told Dodman: ‘This matter is so serious that a custodial sentence is inevitable.
‘You were ill at the time to some extent, but you were a businessman and must have known what you were doing, paying substantial sums of money yourself.’
Dodman was sentenced to 18 months with a further 12 month sentence to run concurrently for the other four offences.
PWLLHELI postman Elfed Evans kept his cool to reach the final of the Regal Welsh Senior ranking event at Bridgend.
Evans, a winner of two of the four ranking tournaments last season, won his semi-final match against Swansea's Paul Gavey 3-2 on the final black.
Earlier he had seen off Darren Thompson of Newport, and beat Blackwood's Nigel Organ in the quarter-final.
Organ, the number two seed, had put out another North Wales hope Peter Roscoe of Caernarfon.
Welsh amateur champion Andrew Peters, of Connah's Quay, found Rhymney top seed Ron Jones too hot to handle.
Evans now faces Jones in the final in Ogmore in December.
Armed robberies may be linked
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
POLICE are investigating possible links between a number of robberies in Chester in the past month.
They say there are similarities between a robbery at the Cellar 5 off-licence in Garden Lane 10 days ago and a robbery at La Bodega off-licence in Hoole last week.
There is also a possible link with a robbery a month ago at Saughall Motors.
‘Although we have no definite links between any of the robberies there are similarities between the property taken and the fact that there were firearms or imitation firearms used in all the incidents,’ said Detective Inspector John Phoenix of Chester CID.
Police are also investigating possible links with another robbery in Garden Lane, Chester, on Saturday when a woman shop assistant carrying £1,000 in takings was robbed outside the post office.
She fought her attacker, who eventually seized her plastic bag and ran off.
He was later seen getting into a silver metallic car which was driven off in the direction of Cheyney Road.
‘I would not advise lone female staff to carry money like this, although I am aware that many shops employ only females and have very little option,’ said Det Insp Phoenix.
In a separate incident on Sunday night, a policewoman escaped injury when she stumbled upon three burglars who had just raided Brooks the jewellers in Eastgate Rows, Chester.
They pushed WPC Sarah Pengelley to the ground, but she chased them and retrieved jewellery worth £5,500 which they dropped as they fled.
Police believe they still escaped with thousands of pounds' worth of goods.
They abandoned their getaway car in Sealand Road.
Assault probe TV plea
POLICE are hoping to help their search for a man who attacked a hotel doorman, leaving him in a coma, by broadcasting a plea for help on the BBC's Crimewatch programme.
Phil Jay, 50, was assaulted in September as he stood outside the Plantation Hotel in Chester.
‘We have heard nothing definite yet but we are hoping for a spot on Crimewatch,’ said Chief Inspector Steve Cross of Cheshire's Serious Crime Squad.
Mr Jay has remained unconscious ever since the attack and his condition has worsened slightly.
North Wales Athletics
CLARE Greenslee (Macclesfield) took a massive 10 minutes off the women's course record in the 10-mile hill race up Moel Fammau from Loggerheads and finished 13 minutes clear of runner Sue Rawsen.
Results: 1 D.Neill (Staffs Moorland) 73.33, 2 M.Weedall (Pennine) 78.26, 3 M.Williams (Pennine) 79.04, 4 D.Hughes (Wrexham) 80.08, 5 I.Selvey (Wrexham) 80.56.
M40: 1 J.Kershaw 79.46, 2 T.Hulme (Pennine) 81.34, 3 P.Stott (Hebog) 81.55.
M50: 1 J.Marsh (Tarran Hendre) 87.49, 2 T.Eckersley (Saddleworth) 97.22.
Ladies: 1 C.Greesley (Macclesfield) 87.55, 2 S.Rowsen (Macclesfield) 100.59, 3 B.Evans (Shropshire) 145.25.
Team: Pennine.
The Abergele 5.5-mile road race was won by Colwyn Bay's Glyn Harvey, with veteran Colin Dennet (Salford) second.
Results: 1 G.Harvey (Colwyn Bay) 28.18, 2 S.Shiels (Wrexham) 28.32, 3 T.Cahill (Colwyn Bay) 29.12.
M40: 1 C.Dennet (Salford) 28.23, 2 M.Hayton (NWRR) 33.49, 3 T.Powell (Mid-Cheshire) 33.54.
M45: P.Roberts (Prestatyn) 31.02, 2 J.Marples (NWRR) 31.49, 3 A.Keyell (Colwyn Bay) 32.08.
M50: M.Pollard (CB) 33.34.
M60: N.Connor (NWRR) 39.30.
Junior: S.Crowe (UCNW, Bangor) 30.00.
Team: UCNW.
Ladies: 1 C.Iwahashi (Stockport) 35.09, 2 R.Carin Evans (UCNW) 38.30, 3 S.Mather (Wrexham) 42.02.
F35: 1 J.Jeffreys (NWRR) 43.03, 2 P.Grant (CB) 44.34, 3 N.Houghton (Denbigh) 50.06.
F40: F.Mudway (CEPAC) 35.32.
F45: J.Hallard (CB) 37.37.
F50: S.Arnold (Abergele) 39.52.
Junior: I.Redfern (CB) 37.05.
Team: Colwyn Bay.
Double murder charge
A TEENAGE student appeared at a special youth court yesterday charged with murdering his 38-year-old mother and 67-year-old grandmother.
The 17-year-old youth, who cannot be named for legal reasons, faced Warrington magistrates, accused with murdering his mother on October 28 and her mother two days later at their home in the Cheshire town.
An application for bail by Gary Heaven, defending, was refused during the hour-long hearing.
The youth was remanded in custody until November 11.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted.
Free classes for artists now on offer
ADULTS can take part in free art workshops today and tomorrow at Hope Farm Library.
Under the guidance of Kate Egan, Ellesmere Port Library's first artist in residence, they will make a wall hanging from metal and fabric.
Bookings can be made by ringing 051-355-8923.
Card players bridge gaps
A SUCCESSFUL bridge day has raised £500 for the roof appeal at St Paul's Church Hall, Helsby.
The appeal, which has a £5,000 target, now stands at £3,200.
The money has been raised in less than two years.
The next money-raising event is a dance at Helsby Community Centre on November 13.
Open forum
VILLAGERS can have their say in Burwardsley tonight at an open meeting of the parish council.
The 7.30pm meeting, at the village institute, will discuss a number of topics, including home watch schemes.
Prize harvest
AT tonight's meeting of Dunham Hill and Hapsford Parish Council, winners of a council-sponsored gardening competition will receive trophies.
Toys for sale
GOOD quality old toys can be sold for 10pc commission at Kelsall Toddler Group's annual sale on November 14.
More details are available from 0829 52693.
Question time
GARDENERS will be testing their knowledge tonight in a quiz organised by Tiverton Gardening Club, at 7.30pm in the village hall.
Trust meeting
NON-MEMBERS are invited to tonight's meeting of Tarvin Civic Trust at 8pm in the community centre village room.
Wirral Ranger Michael Ingham is guest speaker.
Confirm date
THERE is still time to register for confirmation classes in Guilden Sutton.
Classes start on Friday at the Vicarage teenagers, 7-7.45pm, adults 8-9pm.
Valued advice
SOTHEBY'S ceramics valuation specialist Jeremy Rye will be at their Chester office today to give free advice on saleroom values.
Around fire
NORTHWICH Round Table and Rotary Club are holding their annual bonfire and firework display at Verdin Park on Thursday evening.
Grieving parents plan final tribute
BEREAVED parents Roy and Linda Grainger are to set up a brain tumour association as a tribute to their little girl who lost her battle against cancer.
Helen died the day before her seventh birthday surrounded by her parents and brother and sister at Alder Hey Children's Hospital.
Mr and Mrs Grainger now plan to establish the association in Helen's name to provide support, comfort and information to people whose relatives are suffering from cancer.
They also hope to raise funds for vital research into brain tumours.
Mr Grainger, who believes that the association could be the first of its kind in the country, has contacted the American Brain Tumour Association which has provided him with a wealth of information.
‘We want to help people in a similar situation to us,’ said Mr Grainger, of Crosby, Merseyside.
‘Helen's tumour was diagnosed in 1989.
It may have helped us if we had had such an organisation to fall back on.
‘The more information people have the better.
A greater understanding of this wicked disease can help.’
Helen's funeral will take place at St Luke's Church, Crosby on Friday at 3pm followed by a church burial.
Floral tributes can be sent to the family at 9 Roehampton Drive, Crosby.
Young targeted for road safety
A NEW road safety initiative aimed at reducing the toll of deaths and injuries to children has been launched in Cheshire.
TOTTS (Teach our Tinies Traffic Safety) is being launched by Cheshire County Council's road safety unit.
Latest figures for September show 20 child pedestrians were injured on the county's roads, four seriously.
A further 13 child cyclists were injured.
Three children have died on Cheshire's roads so far this year and a total of almost 400 injured.
TOTTS is largely aimed at the under fives and aims to teach them road safety through play.
Jigsaws, dominoes and games will all be used to get the message home.
‘A set of toys has been carefully chosen to get away from the narrow road safety image,’ a spokesman for the scheme said.
‘Because they can be integrated with existing toys they are always on hand to provide a natural stimulus for discussions throughout the child's nursery and playgroup experience.’
Chester's latest park and ride scheme was officially launched by the Mayor of Chester Coun John Randall yesterday.
The Upton park and ride has been built on zoo-owned ground at a cost of £1m and will eventually have 750 spaces.
Mayor John Randall, right, with Ellesmere Port and Neston MP Andrew Miller, left, and former councillor David Robinson at yesterday's launch of Upton park and ride
Mystery of vanishing voters
PEOPLE who seem to want their names to vanish from the voters' roll are causing a borough council problems.
In Vale Royal, 30pc of registration forms have not been returned this year, meaning that thousands of people may lose their vote.
Normally, the council has about 90pc of the 58,000 forms back by this time.
But for some reason, this year people seem not to be keen to register.
Canvassers who normally get the forms back after a maximum of four visits to any household are now having to return seven or more times before the people hand back the completed form.
Ruth Batsford, of the council's electoral registration office, said: ‘We really don't have an explanation why people aren't sending the forms back.
This time last year we were fairly hyped-up with an election coming and people were checking if they were on the register.’
NAKED TRUTH
For years they were greeted with a filthy snigger and a knowing wink.
But now the naturists are coming out of from behind the bushes in growing numbers.
Intrepid reporter JASON BURT boldly unbuckled his belt and went along…
Jason Burt, shaking like a leaf, on his way to breaking another revealing story
THERE were a few looks of mock horror as I walked through the door.
After all I was fully clothed.
Ken met me at the entrance and guided me into a side room.
‘Don't worry,’ he said.
But it was too late, I already was worried.
The prospect of entering the world of naturism filled me with dread.
Ken undressed.
After a few moments hesitation so did I.
I gulped, opened the door and was greeted by the sight of twenty or so completely naked people.
No-one looked up from what they were doing chatting, eating, reading the paper.
For many people their worst nightmare is to be presented as naked in front of a group.
But one man's nightmare is another's dream.
And for Ken and the other Wirral naturists they were in heaven.
The Central Council for British Naturism claims to have over half a million members (so to speak)-and the figure is growing.
Many go on naturists holiday or to camps, strip off on the beach or simply in their gardens.
Or, as in the case of the Wirral group, they hire a hall for the evening.
‘We'd love to go outdoors but land is so expensive,’ laments John, 46, a naturist of 12 years experience.
‘Of course it's better in the fresh air -as long as it's not too cold.
We're not stupid.’
John explains his love of nudity: ‘The glib answer is freedom.
When you take your clothes off you are taking off your identity.
‘We are all here with what we were given -and mine's no different from yours.’
I was too self-conscious to notice but nodded anyway.
‘All naturists are very warm people and there's friendship in belonging to the club just like any other.’
Naturism is seldom mentioned with a straight face -even by the naturists.
John adds: ‘The problem we have as naturists is that we are our own worst enemies.
‘But members of the movement are becoming more open.
It is more accepted.
‘People are more liberally minded.
It used to be very covert but now we are coming out from behind the bushes.’
Still the threat of embarrassment or even blackmail remains.
‘We have people here who are QCs and clergymen and they feel they have to be very careful, although they are doing nothing wrong.’
Bob is 53.
He first got into naturism in 1959 and spent years only stripping off abroad -especially in Yugoslavia, the Mecca for all naturists.
‘It used to be virtually impossible to find a place to go.
It used to be so secretive.
‘Now most people don't bat an eye.
We are not cranks or nutters.
I just love the feeling of being without clothes.
‘But I'm not daft -I won't fry chips in the nude.’
Most clubs do have strict rules.
Many will not accept single men and sometimes throw out those whose wives have died -even if both were naturists for years.
John, who is a regional organiser for the CCBN, explains: ‘The clubs that do accept single men usually put them on a 12 month waiting list to let them prove they are serious.
‘Even then you get the gawp brigade -but we soon get rid of them.’
Uncynical
A blacklist of known nuisances is circulated between the clubs.
The Wirral club have members from all age groups -from babies to pensioners -although the average age of the group I met was early 40s.
The nudists were refreshingly uncynical and desperate to answer my questions.
But although I relaxed a little in the hours I spent with them, I never really felt comfortable — and at all times I felt compelled to keep eye contact…and a small notebook strategically placed.
Cost of take-over battles to soar
A RECENT ruling by Customs and Excise could add millions to the costs of company takeovers.
Customs has ruled that, following a European Court of Justice judgement, the basic activities of a holding company, such as acquiring subsidiaries or defending against takeovers, are not business activities for VAT purposes.
The ruling will have effect from March 1, 1993, and means that there will be no right to deduct any VAT on these costs from that date.
Tony McClenaghan, a VAT Partner with accountants Touche Ross, said: ‘From next March the basic functions of a holding company will no longer be accepted as business activities by Customs and Excise, and so there will be no right to deduct VAT incurred in carrying out takeovers, acquisitions, or defences against hostile bids.
‘Currently, such costs count as a general overhead of the business, and the VAT on them is usually deductible.
In large takeovers the VAT involved can often run into millions of pounds and so the new rules will add a considerable cost to corporate acquisitions and battles.
‘In addition, it is likely that Customs will also seek to prevent the recovery of VAT on other costs incurrred by holding companies which is at present recoverable, for example the costs incurred in restructuring a commercial group.
‘The typical costs involved are lawyers’ and accountants' fees, advertising and the cost of holding general meetings.
‘These charges,’ continued McClenaghan, ‘will affect all groups of companies and will effectively increase the cost of the activities concerned by up to 17.5pc.
Unless Customs back down, the only way for companies to avoid the extra VAT bill is to make sure any acquisitions are completed before March 1 March, 1993.’
CHESTER MP STARS IN VOTE-CATCHING FILM
Brandreth sells EC to the Tories
CHESTER Tory MP, author and television personality Gyles Brandreth was helping explain Europe to the people yesterday.
Or more precisely, to the Tory Party.
With the Prime Minister's crucial Commons vote on the Maastricht Treaty imminent, Mr Brandreth was busy making a film to explain who does what and why in the European Community.
‘If this film had already been made there wouldn't be so much confusion about what the Maastricht Treaty is and what it means to Britain,’ said one of the film's producers, as Mr Brandreth rehearsed his lines in front of the European Parliament in Brussels.
The £40,000 film a plain man's guide to the EC is being financed with Conservative Euro cash.
It will be screened in the first instance for Tory Party workers throughout Britain.
The idea is that by the time of the next Euro elections in 18 months, better knowledge of the EC and particularly of the role of MEPs will improve Tory fortunes at the polls.
Gyles Brandreth explaining the EC
FRIARS JOIN FIGHT TO STAVE OFF DEMOLITION
D-day for crumbling convent
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
COUNCILLORS meet this morning to decide whether to allow the partial demolition and redevelopment of a 19th Century convent.
Delyn Borough Council's planning committee is being advised to allow parts of the St Clare's convent in Pantasaph, near Holywell, to be demolished.
Council officers are also backing plans to build 35 new houses on adjoining farmland by Flint-based construction group David McLean.
Nearly 4,000 objectors from all over the country — including religious pilgrims who attend retreats at the Franciscan Friary opposite the convent have signed protest petitions.
The Pantasaph Conservation Group says Delyn would be breaking its own policies.
It wants talks with developers and backs a use for the convent more appropriate to the rural and religious character of the area such as a hospice.
Flint-based construction company David McLean wants to convert the convent, empty since 1983, for its headquarters and offices.
The convent, built between 1868 and 1907 has been used as a school, orphanage and convalescent home, but is in a derelict state and in full view of the main A55 Expressway into Wales.
Delyn's planning committee will be advised to hand the whole issue over to the full council for a final decision.
An application for 53 houses on the site — 18 starter and small retirement homes on the convent site, 16 on the site of the farm and 19 in a field opposite the Feilding Arms should be refused, say planners.
A second application which cuts out the 18 starter and retirement homes is recommended for approval.
The developers say the housing investment would offset the cost of rescuing the convent from dereliction.
If councillors recommend development, it will have to go to Welsh Secretary David Hunt for a final decision.
Yesterday Tim Moynihan, of the Pantasaph Conservation Group, said the group's objections were supported ten-to-one locally.
GIRL IN BID TO BECOME ‘PRESIDENT OF THE US’
Election fever grips sixth form
VOTING was brisk in today's Presidential election with the Republicans hoping to return their first-ever woman President.
In case anyone imagines they have missed the news and George Bush has stepped down, this was the alternative US election…in Holywell.
Three sixth formers are fighting the election Cathy Wimpenny is the Republican candidate, Stephen Edwards is the Democrat and Lee Barlow is standing as the Ross Perot-style Independent.
The politics students have staged American-style political rallies in the High School hall, complete with cheerleaders and placards.
Almost 1,000 students will be voting, though the result may differ from the real thing tomorrow four years ago the school ‘elected’ Michael Dukakis.
Candidates and cheerleaders prepare for today's Presidential election Picture: JEFF PITT
TEN years on and going from strength to strength…
On November 2, 1982, television history was made with the birth of Channel 4.
With it came the first episode of Merseyside's very own soap Brookside.
A decade later and it is still tackling the controversial issues and delighting its loyal audience.
But what is it like to actually be in Brookie?
Read on, and you may well find out!
ENTHUSIASTS PAY HOMAGE TO A ROYAL LADY
MODEL railway enthusiast Len Fidal puts the finishing touches to a model of the Princess Royal at the Merseyside Model Railway Society's exhibition, which ran at Mosslands School, Wallasey, throughout the weekend.
Distracted driver jailed for road death
A SPEEDING driver distracted by laughter and loud music in his car ran down and killed a woman delivering pizzas on a moped, an Old Bailey judge heard yesterday.
Shopkeeper Ajay Patel, 24, failed to see 26-year-old Lynn Jones an honours graduate working to finance biology studies in Africa until it was too late, said Derek Inman, prosecuting.
Miss Jones, of Friern Barnet, north London, suffered multiple injuries including brain damage, when she was thrown from her moped in Finchley, north London, and never regained consciousness, said Mr Inman.
The counsel told the court: ‘In Patel's car they had loud music on and there was a certain amount of laughing going on.
‘Witnesses seemed to think the driver was distracted and did not see the moped in time.’
Patel, who was driving friends home after drinks at a pub, fled the crash which happened on November 30 last year.
He was arrested after painstaking detective work.
Fragments found at the scene led police to the garage where his silver Rover was being repaired.
Judge Tyrer jailed Patel, of Finchley, for 20 months for causing death by reckless driving, which he admitted, and disqualified him from driving for five years.
He added that he had caused the loss of a life of ‘most promising proportions’.
Scoop a slice of fame
A star is about to be born and it could be YOU!
SO you want to be a star?
Who doesn't?
Everyone at some point has dreamed of being seen by millions and now YOU have the chance!
We've teamed up with Channel 4's top show Brookside to bring you an exclusive competition that gives you the chance to be seen on screen in Merseyside's favourite soap.
You will see where the dramatic storylines are shot and go behind the scenes during a hectic recording schedule as well as in front of the cameras.
Not only will you will be present during a recording at the Pizza Parlour but you will also be in shot and you will be seen on screen reading a copy of the Liverpool Echo when the episode is broadcast!
It goes without saying that it will be a day to remember, as our lucky winner will be treated like a star.
Limousine
First you will be picked up from home in a luxury stretch limo courtesy of Elegance Limousines of Waterloo.
You'll feel like a Hollywood star during the journey as the classy chauffeur-driven vehicle comes complete with a television and video and there will be champagne on ice to get you in that million dollar mood!
You'll be taken to Mersey Television's headquarters in Childwall, home of the shopping parade.
It's straight into make-up as the experts behind-the-scenes work a little magic, then on to the wardrobe department for that all-important on-screen outfit.
After that comes the recording in the Pizza Parlour in scenes that will go on air.
After all that, it's back into the fabulous chauffeur-driven limousine for the trip home.
All you have to do to enter is answer the questions below, and send the entry form, along with your name, address and day-time phone number to: Brookside Star Competition, Department C, Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall, Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
The sender of the first all correct entry drawn after the closing date of noon on Friday, November 13, will win the prize.
If there is no all-correct entry, the draw will be between those with the highest score.
You must be over 16 to enter the competition and because of recording schedules you must be available for filming at a couple of days' notice.
Usual Echo competition rules apply.
1.
What happened to Sue Sullivan and her baby?
And who was really responsible?(2 points).
2.
What's Terry's connection with the Pizza Parlour?(1 point).
3.
Whose wife works for Ron Dixon?(1 point).
4.
A member of the Rogers family was against this relationship.
Who was it and why?(2 points)
5.
Patricia Farnham is a freelance public relations expert.
Which Liverpool charity (which really exists) is she helping on screen now?(1 point).
6.
These three nurses shared a home and an unhappy ending.
They were stalked by gunman John Clarke at a fundraising event for Alder Hey Children's Hospital at which Russell Grant appeared as the celebrity guest.
Other celebrities have also appeared.
Name the following three: The woman who now hosts a breakfast show, the Liverpool band and the children's show presenter who will appear in scenes going out next month.
(3 points).
7.
The Farnhams have a new nanny.
What is her nationality?(1 point).
8.
John Harrison had a brush with the law.
He was released with a warning but what had he been up to?(1 point).
9.
Who spearheaded the Free George Jackson campaign and why was she so aggrieved?(2 points)
10.
Julia has recently got a little job.
Where is she working?(1 point).
11.
Laura and Jonathan look happy here but she was doomed.
Following her death, which country did Jonathan go to with Terry in an attempt to come to terms with her death, and who did he meet there?(2 points).
12.
Ron and DD Dixon have recently been on a trip.
Where did they go to watch their son's video premiere?
And for another four points, who went with them?(5 points).
13.
What's the screen name of this couple who appeared in the very early days?(2 points).
14.
Tracy Corkhill has a new boss.
What's his name?(1 point).
15.
Frank Rogers' new girlfriend Lyn has two children.
Name them.
(2 points).
Greenalls goes on a hotels buying spree
By Stephen Suckley Business Editor
BIG spending pubs and hotels group Greenalls went on the acquisition trail yesterday, adding two more hotels to its portfolio.
But a top North West broker reckons the group is set to increase borrowings to realise the potential of its businesses.
The Warrington-based group has spent more than £100m on acquisitions as it repositions itself for an upturn in the economy and yesterday it added to the line-up with The Crossroads hotel and restaurant at Weedon, Northampton, for £1.5m and South Marston Country Club near Swindon for £800,000.
The company's inns and restaurants division, Premier House, bought South Marston from administrative receivers and will spend £700,000 on renovations to provide 40 bedrooms and a restaurant.
And it will invest £250,000 in The Crossroads, which will have 50 bedrooms when work is finished next December.
The group recently purchased the Belton Woods hotel from receivers, while the off-licence operation benefitted from the acquisition of Blayneys chain which has been integrated into Cellar 5.
But the big spend as the group sorts out its core operations has already meant an increase in borrowing which have risen to £21m at the end of September compared with £160m the year before.
The new acquisitions come as Manchester and North Wales stockbroker Henry Cooke, Lumsden express concern that the group's businesses require investment in excess of operating cash flow for the foreseeable future.
HCL is forecasting slightly lower pre-tax profits of £63.5m for the year ended Setember 30, 1992, compared with £64.1m a year earlier, as interest payments increase and property sales yield less.
Final results are due on December 9.
But Greenalls, which announced a rights issue to raise £86m recently, is expected to declare a 7pc lift in its final payout, also payable on rights shares, to 6.93p a share.
Chilly for this time of year
METEOROLOGISTS at Bidston Observatory have released their report on weather conditions in the region during October the coldest since 1926.
Following a wet start, October was generally overcast but dry until the 14th.
Cold, wet weather, with frequent heavy showers of rain and hail, accompanied by several thunderstorms, prevailed for the rest of the month.
Air temperature averaged 8.4C (47.1F) giving the coldest October at Bidston since 1926, and ranged from a maximum of 15.1C (59.2F) the lowest October maximum since 1974 recorded on the 1st, to a minimum of 2.7C (36.9F) the lowest October minimum for four years recorded on the 20th.
Ground frost was recorded on seven occasions, the lowest reading being -2.3C (27.9F) on the 17th.
Rainfall totalled 124.2 millimetres (4.89 inches), 56pc above average.
There were 17 rain days, the wettest being the 25th, when 19.4mm (0.76in) of heavy overnight rain were measured.
Widespread flooding was reported on Merseyside.
Hail was recorded on eight days, accompanied by thunderstorms on October 15, 23 and 28.
Sunshine amounted to 73.9 hours, a mean of 2.4 hours per day, only 79pc of the average, giving the dullest October at Bidston since 1976.
The sunniest day was the 30th, when 7.5 hours were recorded.
There were eight sunless days.
Wind speed averaged 9.3 knots (10.7 mph), and there were 30 hours of strong winds during the month.
Challenging times ahead for Granada's new team
GRANADA Television has announced a number of new board appointments aimed a creating a more focused approach to managing the business.
Announcing the new top level team, new chief executive Charles Allen said: ‘During my first month, I have had the opportunity to review and study current and future needs and opportunities for Granada Television.’
Granada will now have a smaller cohesive top management team which will enable the group to respond quickly and effectively to challenges.
Steve Morrison takes on the role of managing director broadcasting, with David Liddiment the new director responsible for programmes.
Kate Stross becomes commercial director with Mick Desmond, sales director.
In another media appointment, David Williams has been appointed editor of BBC Wales' evening news programme ‘Wales Today,’ and will take up his new job in February next year.
Mr Williams is is presently a producer/director at HTV Wales in Bangor, where he is also presenter of ‘Wales This Week.’
Ken Ewen has been promoted to managing director at Redrow Homes (Northern).
He joined the company in 1986 as sales director, having previously held top position with other well-known house builders.
Mr Ewen takes over from Les Nicholls who became senior director, Redrow Homes group.
Gwen Jones, who started here banking career in Abersoch has become the first woman in Oxfordshire to manage a National Westminster Bank branch.
After joining the bank in 1975, she moved to Bangor and in 1978 took up a post in London where she worked in a number of West End branches.
The job of putting the Ryal International Pavillion, Llangollen on the Map has been taken on by Carolyn Brindle who has been appointed administrator.
He job will be to give the Pavillion a higher profile among local companies and organisations looking for conferences and events.
Originally from Hull and now living near Llangollen she was previously with the Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester and is a former Press officer for the National Musems and Galleries, Merseyside.
Carolyn Brindle
Ken Ewen
Steve Morrison
Kate Stross
David Liddiment
£300,000 bridge for dock
WORK on a second footbridge linking Liverpool's Albert Dock complex and the Pier Head will start later this month.
The £300,000 bridge has been designed to tone in with the area's historic buildings.
The Merseyside Development Corporation says it hopes the bridge will ease congestion in the area during the tourist season particularly during next year's Battle of the Atlantic 50th anniversary celebrations.
Harbourmaster Bill Broadbent said: ‘In the short term, construction is likely to cause some inconvenience in the Albert Dock.
However, we're confident that the results will be well worth the wait.’
The hidden dangers of old and battered equipment
AGRICULTURE remains a hazardous occupation which is perhaps no surprise for an industry in which mechanisation has replaced human labour on farms.
The risk factor is heightened when cultivation, harvesting and other work is carried out over sharply undulating terrain.
Most farmers and their workers are fully alert to the potentially fatal consequences of an overturning tractor, but fail to recognise that its power take-off shaft can also be a killer.
A survey carried out by the Silsoe Research Institute for the Health and Safety Executive found 156 out of 210 ptos inspected damaged.
The main causes were broken retaining chains, out of position guards, tubes sealed altogether, and impact damage caused by the guard hitting tractor wheels, lift arms or the implement.
HSE will doubtless take speedy action to secure in-built improvements to new tackle but what of the aging and battered equipment which has been given an extended life because of the current recession?
Farmers owe it to themselves and their families to make sure that there is no chance of a pto or any other ill-guarded piece of moving machinery becoming the cause of very serious injury or death.
A corresponding study has prompted Silsoe researchers to suggest that using hydraulic motors to replace ptos will keep operators away from dangerous rotating shafts.
Farming's image looks like getting another damaging self-inflicted dent as a result of what the public perceive as wholesale tax dodging.
And it is understandable when taxpayers, who have their dues deducted before they receive their wage or salary, see themselves contributing towards keeping farmers on the land.
Some farmers have been so convinced by industry-generated publicity over the absence of a proper income that they just haven't bothered declaring any income.
It has been known for some time that the Inland Revenue has been taking a close interest in the marketing practices of livestock farmers in parts of Wales and the West Country.
The National Audit Office in its oversight of the work of the Inland Revenue revealed what triggered the probe into suspected widespread tax evasion by farmers.
Inspectors, it is reported, discovered that two farmers had not declared their income for 11 years during which their actual earnings were £900,000 and £250,000.
The NAO says that ‘early indications suggest significant under-declaration of income by farmers may extend beyond the original area and that some farmers may not be registered as taxpayers.’
While the NFU, maintains that the majority of farmers are honest, it has nonetheless set up a telephone ‘help desk’ in collaboration with accountants Grant Thornton to deal with members' enquiries about taxation and VAT.
It was GT's Geoffrey Harrison who recently lambasted farmers who during the more buoyant 80's had been ‘obsessed with the idea that they should not pay tax.’
As a result, many are still burdened by this attempted avoidance, not evasion, of tax.
Having taken advantage of 100pc relief he claims they not only bought tackle which ‘has mainly stood idle ever since’ but did so with borrowed money on which they are still paying interest 10 years on.
Farming history was made when a bunch of 10 Charolais steers grossed £17,000 in the first satellite-television auction of prime meat on the hoof.
Cheshire-based Wright-Manley is one of 11 auctioneering firms nation-wide to be associated with CLASS the Central Livestock Auction Satellite Sales.
This novel way of selling means participating companies can offer vendors another option to selling through the fat cattle ring or deadweight direct to the abattoir.
Videos of the cattle taken on the farm means that buyers for the big meat companies can shop around from their offices.
For the vendor satellite selling cuts transport costs and puts less stress on the animals.
Buyers' bid are passed to the auctioneer via a bank of brokers who are seen on screen along with the animals on offer.
CLASS managing director and computer software expert David Jones claims the cattle videoed in their own environment look and feel their best.
Potential buyers, who have a pre-sale preview of all stock on offer, then watch the screen on sale day and pick up the phone to make a bid.
One must wait to see if satellite selling proves a commercial success but it is reassuring to find are auctioneers prepared to consider new ways of offering a comprehensive sales service to their farmer clients.
Inland Revenue tax probe prompts farmers' helpline
By David Lloyd Farming Correspondent
PROSPECTS of a nation-wide investigation into farmers' tax affairs is on the cards following initial probes in Wales, the West Country and parts of the North West.
Apart from looking into market deals and reports of cheques being repeatedly endorsed and passed around as if they were like cash, Inland Revenue investigators have been checking if farmers have undedeclared Government grant payments.
This has prompted the National Farmers' Union to establish a telephone ‘help desk’ to deal with queries about taxation and VAT.
Set up yesterday in association with agricultural accountants Grant Thornton the desk will be staffed by experts in all areas of taxation.
Farmers need only give their NFU membership number to get 15 minutes of free advice by phoning 0993 706999 which will be available Monday to Friday from 9am to 1pm and 2pm to 5pm.
The NFU in Wales said those using the service will be able to ask about any matter that concerns them including Inland Revenue investigations.
The spokesman explained: ‘When problems cannot be resolved in just one 15 minute call, Grant Thornton can provide further help either by telephone or by a visit to the caller's farm subject to their normal terms of business.’
This followed the National Audit Office report stating that it may be appropriate for the present procedures for examining farm accounts to be strengthened, ‘particularly if widespread tax evasion is confirmed.
Last year, Inland Revenue investigations into the affairs of 1.54pc of the nation's farmers is said to have produced an additional £18m tax revenue.
Inspectors have obtained the records of 350,000 livestock sales to assist their investigations into suspect of secret bank accounts and undeclared cash transactions.
The probe started after the Revenue discovered that two Welsh farmers had not declared their income for 11 years in which time their actual earning amounted to £90,000 and £250,000.
The varying nature of farming and diversity of farming income had complicated the investigation.
The prospect of a wider ranging enquiry emerged with the report suggesting ‘significant under-declaration of income by farmers may extend beyond the original area and that some farmers may not be registered as taxpayers.’
A spokesman for the Farmers' Union of Wales, which has set up a farm and rural consultancy service, considered reports of widespread farm fraud ‘greatly exaggerated.’
Farmers, it was claimed, were basically honest people but their book keeping was not all that it should be which could result in some omissions due to carelessness.
Britain ‘facing reign of terror’
RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley last night warned of an IRA terror campaign on the British mainland with more and bigger bombs.
The latest outbreak of violence in London, he claimed, was only a foretaste of what might happen.
The Chief Constable said it was clear hard-liners now held sway within the republican movement.
Sir Hugh told BBC Northern Ireland's ‘Inside Ulster’ that lives had been saved because of interruptions to IRA attacks in London.
But he warned: ‘It would be naive to think the Provisional IRA are not planning a major attack on the British mainland.’
The Chief Constable added that loyalist paramilitaries posed a ‘significant threat’ in the Irish Republic.
Meanwhile, Belfast is bracing itself for a vicious war between rival republican terror groups over drugs.
During the weekend, the IRA shot dead one man and injured eight more in a series of attacks which the terrorists said were the opening shots in a campaign to drive drugs barons out of the city.
They have warned the purge will continue.
Gerry Adams, president of the IRA's political wing Sinn Fein, yesterday joined the terrorists' anti-drug drive, calling on authorities to take more action.
West Belfast SDLP MP Dr Joe Hendron accused the IRA of ‘gross hypocrisy’ for speaking out on drugs when it terrorised the city.
Staff go back to school to parlez Francais
By David Hope Business Staff
SENIOR managers and staff in a packaging firm asked themselves ‘Parlez vous Francais?’
When the answer was a resounding ‘Non’ they decided to go back to the classroom.
The staff, all from the Burscough-based Westbrook Packaging firm, had seen their company taken over by the French-owned Seyfert Packaging Group and decided it was time to learn the language.
Five management personnel brought in a local French teacher, Eileen Hutchinson through Pontefract company ‘Communication 92’ to lead them through two hours of French instruction each week using a text book and cassette tape course.
And the group have now celebrated their diploma success.
Typical of the group is 61-year-old John Turner, a management accountant from Thingwall, Wirral.
He said: ‘It's been great fun.
I failed my school cert in French way back in 1948 so it was a question of starting out all over again.
‘Seyfert's HQ is in Nice, South of France.
Their executives visit us, and we travel there.
We also have paper delivered from the Continent.
We meet with the French regularly so it is important we can converse and understand each other.’
Other diploma recipients are Westbrrok's art department manager David Dodd, of Bromborough, Wirral; sales administrator Bill Ashcroft of Burscough; Janet Lamb of Ormskirk, the director's private secretary, and Burscough man Mike Marsland, production manager.
Communications expert Sheena Howarth, left, with Eileen Hutchinson, third from right, with their ‘pupils’, from left, John Turner.
Janet Lamb, David Dodd, Bill Ashcroft and Michael Marsland
THE LAST VOYAGE BEFORE WINTER SEIZES THE LAND IN ITS GRIP OF ICE
SAILING into winter…the ancient steamer, Gondola, sets out across Coniston Water on its last trip of the year before being laid up until spring
Better silage helps breed dairy herd award winner
By David Lloyd Farming Correspondent
CONJURING an average 600 litres extra milk from each cow in his herd gave Clwyd dairy farmer David Price-Jones, of Little Overton Farm, Overton-on-Dee, near Wrexham, the top progress prize in BOCM PAULS dairy herd management scheme.
David, who received his award from Jonathan Paul, the chairman of the newly-merged company, puts his success down to making better silage and improving the utilisation of grass on his 100-acre farm.
Cattle specialist Chris Elliott said the overall winner had increased his margin over purchased feeds by more than £200 and the margin over concentrate per litre by 2p.
He had increased his herd's yield by 600 litres a cow and the yield from forage by 950 litres per cow.
The runner-up was former contract herdsman Rex Goodfellow, who started farming on his own account three years ago on a 34 acres Cheshire County Council smallholding Westview Farm, Shotwick Park, Saughall, near Chester.
Rex who is assisted by his wife Cath, matched the winner's increased margin over concentrate and recorded a 1p per litre improvement in the margin over concentrate.
The couple had a dual cause for celebration.
They have been granted the tenancy of a 71-acre county council holding at Underbank, Gawsworth, near Macclesfield.
Third prize went to Dan and Anne Jones, Park Hall Farm, Hollowmoor Health, Great Barrow, Chester.
Three well-known Holstein breeders and show exhibitors collected Progressive Breeder Awards.
They were Philip Davies, representing the Gornal Herd, Four Crosses, Llanymynech, near Oswestry; Harry Evans, the Ceinwen herd, Rhosbadrig Farm, Ty Groes, Gwynedd; and Ray Brown, the Bidlea herd, The Orchards, Twemlow, near Holmes Chapel.
BOCM PAULS technical services manager Rob Weeks reviewing the dairy herd management scheme said the main improvements were a 2pc increase in output from similar feed usage.
He said: ‘They improved their yield from forage which went up by 7.1pc which is quite a hefty increase, equivalent to about another 170 litres per cow, per year, from forage.’
Improvements in profitability in the year ahead will come partly from direct changes in milk price but efficient dairy farmers should also concentrate on the management of quota.
‘This may seem obvious, but MMB statistics show that at least 50pc of producers could have profitably produced more milk,’ he told producers.
‘Most years, we end up just on quota 50pc below, and 50pc above.
Levy costs 26p less a margin of 15p equals 11p.
But each litre missed loses 15p.’
Rex and Catharine Goodfellow Picture: TEGWYN ROBERTS
PRESS PACK ON SCENT OF STORY AFTER NEW DIANA SECRETS
Royal circus arrives in the land of calm
A SMILING Prince and Princess of Wales arrived in South Korea yesterday to face a warm welcome amid the rumble of renewed media speculation about their marriage.
But there were no signs of strain as they carried out their three brief engagements of the day the ceremonial greeting at the airport, a wreath-laying at the National Cemetery and the formal opening of the new British Embassy building in Seoul.
The royal couple retired early after their 13-hour flight from London to spend the night in the two-bedroomed £2,500-a-night presidential suite on the 20th floor of the Hyatt Regency.
The couple arrived at a military base outside Seoul for the start of their four-day tour in the ‘land of the morning calm’.
Moving to the National Cemetery, the princess wearing a Catherine Walker primrose and navy outfit bowed her head as the prince stepped forward to lay a wreath at the Hyun Choong monument to unknown soldiers killed in the 1950-53 Korean war.
Later, dozens of people were waiting to greet the couple when they arrived at the new £4m British Embassy building.
The prince and princess's hectic schedule of engagements will be closely observed by royal watchers.
Newspapers in Britain are reopening the controversy over their marriage with details of an updated version of Andrew Morton's book Diana: Her True Story.
The updated version, now on sale in the US, describes a frank and angry exchange of letters between the princess and her father-in-law, the Duke of Edinburgh, about the first version.
The Prince of Wales yesterday called for £1m aid for the victims of Saddam Hussein's regime in south eastern Iraq and warned that half a million people were at risk of genocide.
In the foreword of a book to launch an appeal for the marshland people he appealed for cash to buy food, medicine, clothing and shelter for the refugees.
He said: ‘The lives of over half a million people, victims of an utterly inhuman policy of cultural genocide, are at risk.’
The appeal is named after Amar, a 10-year-old boy orphaned by the bombings in the marshlands, who was flown to London for plastic surgery at Guy's Hospital.
The Princess of Wales is to play a leading role in a charity caring for the homeless, it was announced yesterday.
She has agreed to be patron to the London-based Centrepoint project, which helps take vulnerable young people off London streets.
The charity has been ‘much heartened’ by her support on past visits to several hostels and shelters.
The prince and princess at Seoul's National Cemetery yesterday Picture:MARTIN KEENE
Bush defiant but Democrats set to take White House
Clinton scents victory
By Daily Post Correspondent
PRESIDENT Bush and Democrat Bill Clinton, the man who looks set to beat him in today's US Presidential election, set off yesterday on election eve odyssies.
Twelve years after the Republicans moved into the White House and 13 months after the Arkansas governor launched his long-shot bid to win it back for the Democrats, the man on the defensive was Mr Bush.
But Mr Clinton still warned his supporters against over-confidence as a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll gave him an eight point lead over Bush.
The poll showed Mr Clinton with 44pc support to 36pc for President Bush and 15pc for independent Ross Perot.
The latest CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll showed Mr Clinton 12 points ahead, while Mr Clinton's own pollster, Stan Greenberg, said his last minute reading put the Democrats seven points ahead.
Although pollsters say the race is volatile, not one major national survey now gives the lead to Bush, who enjoyed a record popularity rating after the Gulf War only to watch it drift away amid worries over the weak US economy.
But Mr Clinton, 46, was yesterday taking no chances and set out on a final round-the-clock trek to nine states before heading home today to cast his own vote.
There was one glimmer of hope for Mr Bush.
A survey in the crucial state of Ohio gave him a slender lead.
Mr Bush turned to attacks in a last bid to keep his job and pull off the political upset of the century and ripped into ‘the slippery one’ as a man who cannot be trusted during a hectic five-state blitz to shore up his support.
He also tried to dismiss the opinion polls as worthless.
The mood in the Bush camp yesterday swung from ‘maybe we'll get lucky’ to resignation, but Mr Bush put on a brave face.
Meanwhile, Texan billionaire Ross Perot, who is predicting a ‘silent majority’ will catapult him to the White House, went to rally the faithful in his Dallas home town.
A wealthy American woman placed a £25,000 bet with British bookmaker William Hill on Bill Clinton winning the race for the White House, at odds of 9-4, it was revealed yesterday.
His odds are now 1-6.
Tragic baby's warning signs' heeded too late'
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
A SENIOR consultant admitted yesterday that the decision to carry out a Caesarian section on an expectant mother was left too late.
Jeffrey Edwards, consultant orthopaedist and paediatrician at the H M Stanley Hospital, St Asaph, told an inquest at Prestatyn that, in retrospect, warning signs over the baby's heartbeat should have been heeded earlier.
When little Jacob Bates was born he remained unconscious because of a lack of oxygen to the blood.
He stayed on a ventilator but died after surviving for just 14 hours.
East Clwyd coroner David Jones read a statement by Jacob's mother, Alison Bates, in which she said her pregnancy had been normal but she was warned that intervention might be necessary because of the position of the baby's head.
Mrs Bates, of New Road, Denbigh, who is a nurse at the Maelor Hospital, Wrexham, was admitted on the morning of April 16 and the baby's heartbeat was monitored in the delivery suite.
At about 4pm she noticed that the foetal heartbeat had fallen to 65 and by 7pm to 50-60.
Her husband Adrian, a mental nurse, called the midwife from time to time and at about 7.30pm the midwife told the registrar.
Jacob was eventually born by emergency Caesarian section at 8.54pm after an unsuccessful attempt to deliver by forceps.
The following day Mr Edwards told the couple that labour had been allowed to go on too long.
Consultant pathologist Dr Brian Rogers said Jacob had no congenital malformations and died from a lack of oxygen which was probably caused by the umbilical cord being around the neck before birth.
Mr Edwards, who examined Mrs Bates during her early pregnancy but was not on duty when she was admitted, said some deceleration in foetal heartbeat was not unusual, but it should alert one to possible dangers.
Under cross-examination Mr Edwards said a formal investigation had been carried out after Jacob's death.
‘We concluded that the outcome may well have been different had a different path of management been taken,’ he said.
‘I think Alison should have been delivered by Caesarian section much earlier in labour,’ said Mr Edwards.
The decision to carry out a Caesarian section should perhaps have been taken after the 4.30pm examination when the heartbeat was known to have decelerated, he said.
Ideally, said Mr Edwards, he would like a consultant to be on duty full-time in the labour ward but because of financial constraints that was impossible.
Midwife Christine Hall told the hearing that she could not remember whether she notified the registrar when she noticed some deceleration in the heartbeat at 4.25pm but did so when she became worried at 7.30pm.
The hearing continues.
Alison and Adrian Bates in Prestatyn yesterday Picture: PHIL MICHEU
1,000 die in Angolan battles
THE Angolan government was yesterday back in control of the capital Luanda after four days of heavy fighting in which more than 1,000 people have been killed.
Troops mopped up the last pockets of resistance by men loyal to the former rebel movement, Unita.
Angolan state radio said 1,000 died in the clashes in Luanda and four cities in south and central Angola.
At the UN ambassadors of the five permanent members of the Security Council, including Britain, were to meet to discuss the crisis.
Two of Unita's top leaders, Jeremias Chitunda and Elias Salupeto Pena were among those killed in the capital.
Foreign casualties included six Portuguese, a Filipino, a Bulgarian and two UN peace-keepers.
Portuguese and Brazilian military planes flew in to evacuate foreigners.
Portugal, the former colonial power, has 40,000 nationals in Angola, and there are about 230 Britons there.
The United Nations said it had arranged a ceasefire between the government and Unita on Sunday night, but it was largely ignored.
Britain urged both sides to abide by the ceasefire before new UN talks with the parties in Luanda.
WARDENS WIN FIGHT TO PRUNE PUPPY NUMBERS
DOG wardens have been highly successful in their campaign to cut the number of abandoned puppies.
The success of the campaign, operating in Sefton, is mainly due to a unique low cost neutering service.
The scheme has run for three years and, during that time, around 180 dogs and bitches have been neutered.
When the dog service was introduced six years ago, between 50 and 100 puppies were abandoned annually.
Last year, the number was drastically reduced to eight.
Head dog warden Helen Wignall said: ‘Last year alone, approximately 85,000 dogs were taken to RSPCA shelters all over Britain, including strays, unwanted, and abandoned dogs and puppies.
‘The fact that there are too many dogs and not enough caring homes to go around is a national scandal.
Fortunately, our neutering scheme has gone a long way to alleviating this problem.’
Sefton warden Sue MacDonald with Pepsy and Tanya two dogs neutered in the borough's campaign against unwanted pups Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
Ability to communicate ‘is the vital key’
PETER MacLeod believes that an ability to communicate is one of his vital strengths.
Together with his determination to encourage people to maximise their potential, he considers this the key to his success in reaching his present position as Assistant Operations Manager with Knowsley Contract Services.
Mr MacCleod is currently involved in managing an annual budget of more than £7m and a workforce of around 250, providing services, including street lighting, highways, cleansing and maintenance, landscape and grounds maintenance on behalf of Knowsley Council.
After spending his formative years in junior and middle management with the Leisure Services Department of Wirral Borough Council, his first senior management position was as Operations Manager for a leisure park on the site of Liverpool's International Garden Festival.
That experience proved useful when he worked with the Cipperfields organisation to help design, develop and construct a themed leisure facility in Jordan the first of its kind in the Middle East.
He sees the introduction of compulsory competitive tendering as a career turning point which encouraged him to move back to local government work.
He regards the next phase of his career with Knowsley Contract Services as a crucial test of his whole management philosophy, since he admits he is operating in an area where he has no technical expertise or background.
As he explains: ‘If I can successfully transfer what I believe to be management skills applicable to any discipline, then I would hope to follow a career path that will ultimately lead to directorship within an operations environment.’
Peter MacLeod crucial test Picture: TRACEY O'NEILL
NEW TREE FOR BABY SON
Parents branching out!
A YOUNG oak tree was planted yesterday to mark the birth of a Welsh couple's youngest son.
Gwynedd County Council is the first in Wales to offer a free tree to celebrate the birth of every baby born within the county's boundaries.
Ifan Tegeryn, four-month-old son of farmer Owen Arfon Jones, 29, and his wife, Anwen, of 300-acre Bronmiod farm at Llanaelhaearn, near Pwllheli, was the first to have a tree planted in his honour.
The ceremony was performed by Coun Islwyn Morris, chairman of the council's environment working party.
Mrs Jones, 26, said: ‘Ifan Tegeryn weighed 7lb 15oz when he was born and is coming along fine.
‘My husband went to register him and was told of the tree offer.
They had to choose someone for the launching ceremony and our child's name was first out of the hat.
‘We now intend to buy and plant an oak tree for each of our other five boys it's an excellent scheme.’
Proud parents Owen and Anwen Jones with baby Ifor Tegeryn at the oak tree-planting ceremony
Ireland braced for election
THE Irish Republic looked set for an early General Election last night despite claims by Prime Minister Albert Reynolds that he was doing everything possible to avoid a poll.
He again resisted calls to withdraw a charge of dishonesty against senior Ministerial colleague Des O'Malley, head of the Progressive Democrats, junior partners in Dublin's coalition government.
Mr Reynolds, speaking on the eve of an expected Progressive Democrat walkout of government, said the door remained open for talks to resolve the crisis.
The Progressive Democrats claim Mr Reynolds effectively accused their leader of committing perjury at a hearing of the continuing judicial inquiry into Irish meat trade malpractices.
The Progressive Democrats are today expected to rule out Mr O'Malley and fellow minister Bobby Molloy at a subsequent cabinet session.
That would force Mr Reynolds to either announce a general election or struggle on with minority status and face defeat on an inevitable no-confidence motion within the week.
DIGNIFIED DIANA
THE Princess of Wales maintained a dignified poise yesterday as renewed speculation about her marriage threatened to upset her visit with Prince Charles to South Korea.
She is seen at the National Cemetery in Seoul paying her respects to the thousands killed in the Korean War.
Full story Page 8 Picture: MARTIN KEENE
Brum's answer to LA Law?
Above, Leigh with Twiggy.
Top, as Kinsey.
WHEN Leigh Lawson flew to Britain to talk about his role in the second series of the legal drama series Kinsey, his beautiful wife Twiggy stayed behind in their rented home in Los Angeles a victim of British casting directors.
For that's the way it is for the talented twosome.
He has no problems finding work here in his native Britain, but she is ignored by TV and stage bosses on this side of the Atlantic.
In the States, says Leigh, they go wild for the lady he affectionately calls his Twiggs.
She works consistently for American television, on Broadway and in films.
But here, where she WANTS to work, she is curiously cold-shouldered.
‘I could work in England all the time, but no one uses Twiggs,’ sighs Leigh.
‘That's the reason we went to LA in the first place, to be perfectly honest.
She would never have had the kind of success she's had, with Broadway and so on, if she'd stayed at home in England waiting to be asked.
Sitcom
‘She's inundated with work over there she's just done a 13-part sitcom for CBS, for example.’
Leigh, who is 48, is keen to point out that he and Twiggy still regard their real home as England.
They have a beautiful house in Oxfordshire and wouldn't venture far from it if the work situation was better for members of the acting profession.
‘We base ourselves mainly in LA because at least over there you can get products done,’ he says.
‘We have formed our own company, Mask Productions, as a way of creating work.
‘Times are hard and the recession has hit Hollywood, too.
But we're battling away and have a number of projects on the go.’
They have bought the rights to a book called Sleepless Moon, by Darling Buds of May author H.E.
Bates, which they plan to turn into a TV movie starring Twiggy.
‘We can get to see people and they take our ideas seriously,’ says Leigh.
Twiggy, who is now 43, came to England while Leigh was filming Kinsey (which starts tonight on BBC1), in Birmingham.
The six-part series is Brum's answer to LA Law.
He's glad to be back.
‘I'm a Midlands boy from Warwickshire so it's always nice to return to my roots.’
But he was slightly apprehensive about his most recent visit to London.
As we talk, yet another IRA bomb has exploded in the capital.
‘It's terrible,’ he says.
‘You come from a violent city like LA to what you think will be a nice peaceful place and what happens?
You find bombs going off!
‘It's actually made me quite nervous about being in London.
In LA at least you can take basic precautions, like constantly looking over your shoulder and locking your car up.’
Even so, he says both he and Twiggy get ‘desperately homesick’ when they're in America.
‘Like most Brits abroad, our friends tend to be English.
In fact, nearly all our best friends from way back now live in the States, so in that sense it's like home from home.
There are 250,000 Brits in Santa Monica alone!’
The couple each have a child from respective previous marriages Leigh has a 16-year-old son, Ace (by Hayley Mills) who is at school in England, and Twiggy has a daughter, Carly, who is 14.
But they have no plans to have children of their own.
‘We have friends of our age who have just had a baby and it's smashing.
It certainly makes you think about it but then the thought of all those nappies puts you off!’
Twiggy's health came into the spotlight recently, with at least one tabloid paper suggesting in banner headlines that she had undergone an operation to save her life.
‘In fact,’ says Leigh, ‘it was a very routine op that many women undergo.
She's absolutely fine, I'm glad to say.’
Architects win accolade for Toxteth restoration work
By David Hope Business Staff
A NORTH WEST architectural partnership has been placed among the UK greats by the national Royal Iinstitution Chartered Surveyors for its conservation work in Liverpool 8.
And yesterday, TACP Design's practice partner Brian Evans, a former city councillor and conservation work pioneer, showed off the prestigious trophy he received at the RICS Awards 1992 ceremony in London.
TACP, based at the South Harrington Building, a beautifully re-styled former timber warehouse at the Brunswick Business Park, received the Urban Renewal Award for outstanding work in reversing the process of urban decay in the Canning Conservation area with a particular mention of their work at Blackburne Terrace.
Their work ranked alongside conservation and improvement awards for work at London's Liverpool Street Railway Station; King's College, Cambridge; Newcastle Business Park and Stansted Airport in Essex.
The firm had beat off competition from 260 other submissions.
‘We are well and truly among exalted company,’ said Mr Evans.
While TACP Design acted as architects, John Dansken and Purdie acted as Quantity Surveyors with Wimpey Construction managing the building work in the £5m project carried out over a five year period.
TACP Design's history dates back to 1907 and 30 years ago two old established practices in Liverpool and North wales combined to form The Anthony Clark Partnership later abbreviated to TACP.
After 25 years of further growth and restructure, TACP Design who have the slogan: ‘Large enough to cope, small enough to care’ have had a string of conservation successes in the NW.
They include housing association designs in Liverpool, Wirral and St Helens; restoration and repairs to listed buildings, including Rufford Old Hall and Chirk; Penrhyn and Powis Castles; conversion work to old properties in the Liverpool Bold StreetDuke Street triangle.
There is also inspection work for Midland bankers, survey work for Wirral and Sefton Councils and acting as church and ecclesiastical architectural consultants to both the Church of England and the RC Archdiocese.
Blackburne Terrace restored to their original appearance
Brian Evans with his award
Art comes dancing out of the dark
By Philip Key Arts Editor
DANCE is making its way back to the Liverpool arts scene following what seemed a fallow period.
At the city's Bluecoat Concert Hall, dance has once again taken centre stage.
And at the Liverpool Empire, London Contemporary Dance arrive back in the city tomorrow after an absence of some years.
At the Bluecoat, events director Chris Layhe and deputy Paul Roots are planning to turn the concert hall into one of the North West's leading dance venues.
‘There are other places that can stage fringe drama but we really are ideal for small-scale dance,’ Layhe says.
‘And there is a lot of contemporary dance today that is exciting and novel and there is certainly an audience for it.’
The hall, with its sprung-stage, has been attracting a growing number of groups.
Events lined up for the next few weeks include Indian dancer Bisakha Sarker performing as part of a Verbal Images event, a European Youth Dance Night, The Cholmondleys and V-Tol Dance Company.
Layhe, a former professional musician, is particularly excited about V-Tol, a relatively new dance company which has already attracted attention.
‘They are very different, very physical and will be making their Liverpool debut at the Bluecoat.’
Meanwhile, London Contemporary Dance makes a rare four day visit to the Liverpool Empire tomorrow with a three-work programme in which one piece is danced to Rolling Stones music.
‘It is a tremendous programme but Rooster choreographed by Christopher Bruce and danced to Stones music is the one that tears most slates off the roofs,’ explained company spokesman Chris May.
London Contemporary Dance Theatre leaps into action
The Bluecoat's Chris Layhe, left, and Paul Roots
Police say holiday homes fires are linked to Meibion Glyndwr
By Gerald Williams Daily Post Staff
POLICE say they have found strong evidence linking a series of fires in Gwynedd at the weekend with the Meibion Glyndwr arson campaign.
But the incendiary devices were different from those used in previous arson attacks by the extremist group.
Plaid Cymru president Dafydd Wigley, MP for Caernarfon, has condemned the new wave of attacks which, he has warned, could end in loss of life.
‘I just hope that they're not an indication of Irish troubles finding their way into Wales in the way they have in parts of England over recent days and weeks,’ said Mr Wigley.
Yesterday, police confirmed that, in addition to three fires they were already treating as arson, a fourth fire at a holiday home in Pennal, Meirionnydd, was being treated as suspicious.
The firebombers struck on Saturday night and early on Sunday morning at Cae Gwernog, a small unoccupied cottage overlooking Llyn Celyn, near Bala; at an unoccupied house owned by Wolverhampton social services at Towyn Camp, Pwllheli; and at the DSS offices in Briddge Street, Llangefni, Anglesey.
Both houses were badly damaged and at the DSS offices some damage was caused to the door and surrounds of a porch.
Police confirmed yesterday that at 11.10am on Sunday information had been received that Pant y Carneddi, Pennal, was on fire.
The house, a holiday home owned by a Wolverhampton family, had been almost completely destroyed and the fire was being treated as suspicious, the spokesman added.
Detective-Chief Superintendent Gwyn Williams, head of North Wales CID, said: ‘Initial examination strongly points to these incidents forming part of the Welsh arson campaign.’
Burscough aim to build on triumph
By Gareth Jawad
BURSCOUGH will put behind them their best victory of the season as they travel to Blackpool Rovers tonight for a Bass North West Counties League clash.
Russ Perkins' men triumphed superbly 2-1 against NPL outfit Netherfield in the F.A.
Vase on Saturday, a result that put Burscough in confident mood.
But Perkins warned his players: ‘Our league form is nothing like it should be.
We want to put that right, starting at Blackpool.’
The Burscough boss believes he can put his finger on why his side can consistently beat opposition from higher leagues, as they have done time after time in the past two years, yet struggle at their own level.
‘We're too inconsistent to win league championships,’ he admitted.
‘But we're good to watch, and are capable of beating anybody.’
Unfortunately, said Perkins, Burscough are also capable of losing to anybody!
For tonight's game, Burscough will welcome back Gary Winn, who joins a squad that is slowly getting back to full strength.
‘I am getting the strength in depth that I need,’ added Perkins.
‘We have a squad that is a fine mixture between promising youngsters and experienced stars.’
Skelmersdale United have signed seasoned midfielder Mick Fagan from Bangor City.
The 31-year-old son of ex-Liverpool manager Joe is a former Knowsley United player.
Skem boss Dave Maloney, who watched his side beat Glossop 2-1 on Saturday, has also strengthened his squad with the arrival of goalkeeper Lee Duffy.
ICI blames spiralling costs for 100 job losses
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
SPIRALLING electricity prices were blamed last night for the loss of another 100 North West jobs.
Chemical giant ICI said it was ceasing production at two chlorine plants at Fleetwood on the Fylde Coast and listed increased fuel charges as one of the reasons for closure.
The announcement comes just days after ICI said high electricity prices were threatening jobs at its Runcorn plants.
But the chemical company admitted that environmental legislation would also place a heavy financial burden on the plants and was a factor in the closures.
ICI Chemicals and Polymers Chlor-Chemicals said the closure of the plants at its Hillhouse site, Fleetwood, Lancs in mid-1993 would help consolidate its plants on Merseyside.
Chief executive Mike Brogden said the decision to close Hillhouse resulted primarily from the increase in UK electricity prices which eroded ICI's international competitive position in that sector of the industry.
He said: ‘Our chlorine plants at Hillhouse will require large capital expenditure to meet environmental legislation.
‘Given the declining demand on ICI's chlorine plants and with huge electricity price increases, this expenditure cannot be justified and we have no choice but to announce this closure.’
A company spokesman said staff would be redeployed where possible.
‘HE'S BEING KEPT IN UNTIL HE CAN BEHAVE HIMSELF’
Diamondring's return spells relief for Kevin
NAUGHTY Kevin Corbett was almost back in his mother's good books yesterday, a week after he sold her engagement ring for one pound.
Cheeky 10-year-old Kevin, of Holywell, took the engagement ring as a prank so he could show it off to his friends.
But he was apparently talked into selling it by a mystery man for just one pound.
His horrified mother made a public appeal for the return of the ring, given to her by husband Alfed 18-years ago.
And yesterday the story had a happy ending when the man who bought the ring returned it with a mumbled apology.
‘I am so delighted -I never thought I would see the ring again,’ said Linda Corbett.
‘The man gave it to my husband, who didn't ask for names, he was just so pleased to see it.’
She added: ‘From now on though it is staying firmly on my finger.
I am not letting it out of my sight.’
Kevin, too, is being kept under close supervision, she said.
‘He is being kept in until he can learn to behave himself.’
Back again Linda, the ring and Kevin Picture:JEFF PITT
Monday blues are in the air
WORKERS have good reason to dislike Mondays…but it's got little to do with returning to work and a lot to do with the air-conditioning, a researcher said yesterday.
New studies show that office air-conditioning can make workers feel physically ill when they return to their desks, according to an Australian university professor of health education, Ronald Laura.
‘It's important that people realise the Monday feeling is not just felt by those who do not like their jobs,’ said Professor Laura, author of a new book Hidden Hazards.
‘A lot of people who love their jobs get sick.’
Professor Laura, writing in the latest edition of Nature and Health, said bacteria, fungi, amoebae, worms and mites grow in a brown slime found in contaminated air-conditioning plants and are circulated and inhaled.
A weekend away from the office can lower the body's resistance to the organisms in air-conditioning systems.
No action over river pollution
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
THE Duke of Westminster's Cheshire estate would not be prosecuted over a huge leak of diesel fuel into the River Dee in June, the National Rivers Authority decided yesterday.
Between 400 and 500 gallons of diesel poured into the river from a tank on the Grosvenor Estate at Aldford, near Chester, forming a slick almost two miles long.
‘After extensive enquiries we've decided there isn't enough evidence to proceed with a prosecution,’ an NRA spokeswoman said yesterday.
The spokeswoman added: ‘We believe there was some third party involvement in the spill…the Grovesnor Estate says that vandals had tampered with the tank.
This doesn't excuse the estate…but it's a recognised defence that if there's third party involvement we cannot prosecute.
‘And we can't prosecute the vandals because we don't know who they are.’
However, the NRA has come in for some criticism for not taking action.
Sue Adams of Greenpeace said: ‘The NRA does have adequate powers to prosecute, but it doesn't seem to use them often enough.’
But Hilary Murphy, of the Chester Green Forum, believes the rivers watchdog does not have sufficient powers to deal with incidents such as the diesel fuel spill.
‘The NRA doesn't seem to have enough clout,’ Ms Murphy said.
The Grosvenor Estate's management blamed vandalism for the spill from the outset, saying that someone had deliberately opened a valve in the 1,000-gallon tank at Aldford Hall Farm and allowed the diesel to leak into the river.
The NRA had to put booms across the Dee at the iron bridge on the Grosvenor Estate to try to contain the fuel, to which a red dye had been added to denote that it was for use in farm vehicles only.
Comedy flies on wingers of fantasy
An Evening With Gary Lineker
THEATR CLWYD
Review by Philip Key
SEX and football are like oil and water they don't really mix.
That at least, seems to be the premise of the comedy An Evening With Gary Lineker at Mold's Theatr Clwyd.
Set in a Mallorcan hotel room on the night of England's World Cup semi-final against West Germany in 1990, the action follows both the game and the disruption of Bill and Monica's marriage.
He wants to watch the match; she wants to discuss their marriage and also entering the fray are one of his old colleagues wimpish Ian, a German female courier Birgitta and travel writer Dan.
Although the script comes from contemporary comics Arthur Smith and Chris England, it is really an old fashioned drawing room comedy with rude words.
The targets are fairly easy football fanatics, foreigners, train spotters and sex and the scoring rate is variable.
Footballers are either softies (Lineker) or hard men (Graeme Souness) and, like tea, everything stops for football.
The plot gets muddied with the whose-been-sleeping-with-whom scenario and much shifty eye gazing.
Basically it is about success and failure.
Bill (Andrew Hall) is fighting for his job and careless about his wife; Ian (Paul Venables) has already lost his job; and Dan (Steven Hartley) is a mindless heart breaker.
Along the way we have some mild humour, a few belly laughs, touch of drama and a running commentary on the football game.
It all ends on a fantasy scene in which the wrong man gets the girl and England win.
Jilted lover delivers a crushing blow…
A JILTED boyfriend left his ex-love with something to remember him by her car, crushed into a block.
Michaela Dyson returned home from a holiday in Spain to find a one-ton cube of crushed metal on her driveway where her Ford Cortina had once stood.
The car-crushing came courtesy of Vinnie Parkes, Miss Dyson's ex-boyfriend, who swore revenge after arguments when the couple split up four months ago.
‘I said I would never forget.
Even if it took me ten years I would get my own back.’
It took him considerably less than that, for within weeks of the couple parting, Mr Parkes, 27, took advantage of Miss Dyson's trip to Spain to return to the home in Northwich they had once shared.
He snatched his furniture from the house and dumped it on a tip, then took the car which he had given her as a present away for scrap.
All that was left to identify the W-registered Cortina was its number plate, left perched on a mangled lump of metal.
Miss Dyson, 24, a mother of three, said: ‘It's just childish and pathetic, i don't want to say any more than that.
‘At the end of the day I've got three kids to look after and they're going to get stick in school over this.’
An unrepentant Mr Parkes said: ‘It's all over now.’
The crushed remains of the Ford Cortina
Vinnie Parkes
A NORTH West architectural partnership has been placed among the UK greats by the Royal Iinstitution of Chartered Surveyors for its conservation work in Liverpool 8.
Brian Evans with his prestigious award
Canoeists narrowly escape tragedy
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
THREE young canoeists are lucky to be alive this morning after they were plucked to safety minutes before being swept to sea.
And last night the emergency services strongly condemned the children's school for organising the event during such bad weather.
The trio were found clinging to their upturned canoes in the waters off the Isle of Man after gale force winds capsized their small craft.
And if it had not been for the speedy response of the coastguard, the boys would have found themselves out in the open sea.
Five boys and three girls, all of whom are pupils at King William College at Castletown on the island, were on the canoeing trip.
The girls managed to paddle themselves to shore but the boys spent almost an hour before being rescued.
Initially just two of the canoeists capsized but a third also got into difficulties after he and two colleagues attempted a rescue.
A rescue involving St Mary's lifeboat and a helicopter from RAF Valley, Anglesey was launched.
The boys were eventually picked up by a small boat and were taken by ambulance to Nobles Hospital in Douglas where they were treated for cold.
Two pupils were released but a third was detained.
The coastguard said: ‘They were very lucky.
It could have been a dire result if they had got into the surf.
‘We are not at all pleased with them and we will be speaking to the college about what occurred.’
The party was accompanied by a cadet instructor.
Last night, Stuart Westley, the school's principal, said they were investigating the matter.
He added: ‘The incident is the subject of an internal inquiry.
‘There is nothing which I can or should say in advance of the inquiry.’
IT'S A FACT
by Harold Wolfe
PLEASE detail the transfers of Mickey Hazard, in particular his move from Tottenham to Chelsea.
2.
How many games did Mark Ferguson play for Tranmere, and what was his scoring record?
Tony Murphy, Celle, West Germany.
Hazard was transferred from Tottenham to Chelsea on September 19, 1985 and from there to Portsmouth on January 11, 1990.
He then moved to Swindon on September 28, 1990.
Ferguson scored 13 goals in 87 league games.
WAS the former Liverpool player Avi Cohen born in Cairo or Tel Aviv?
Torbjorn Flatin, Bjorneveien, Kongsberg, Norway.
He was born in Tel Aviv.
I SAY Peter McCann had a Birkenhead trainer when he became Birkenhead's first ABA champion.
Workmates say he had a Liverpool trainer.
J Evans, New Chester Road, Birkenhead.
He was trained in Birkenhead by Johnny McKeown.
‘Sieg Heil’ killer is jailed for life
A ROBBER who made Nazi salutes after shooting dead a 15-year-old Asian schoolboy and attempting to murder his uncle was given two life sentences yesterday.
At the Old Bailey, Judge Kenneth Richardson described Joseph Conroy's behaviour as ‘shocking’.
Conroy, 27, showed no emotion as he was led away.
Shortly after shooting them, Conroy displayed utter contempt for his two victims, the court heard.
He stood to attention with his hand in the air and shouted ‘Sieg Heil’.
Then, told by police how badly injured his victims were, he said: ‘Good, I hope they die.’
Prosecutor Michael Birnbaum said Conroy went on: ‘My name is Conroy.
Good English name that.
What am I going to get for doing a couple of Pakis?
I am Anglo Saxon.’
Conroy was high on drink and drugs when he attacked an off-licence in south-east London in January.
His victims made a tragic mistake by thinking his silver-coloured pistol was a toy.
Shopkeeper Nasser Ali, 25, hurled himself at Conroy, who emptied his magazine of all six shots.
One bullet struck Navid Sadiq in the temple.
Another hit Mr Ali in the stomach.
He later had to have his gall bladder removed.
Conroy was restrained by Mr Ali but when police arrived the shopkeeper was screaming in agony.
His nephew was on the floor, blood trickling from his temple.
Conroy, of Holly Grove, Peckham, south London was found guilty of murder and attempted murder.
He also admitted two other robberies and one attempted robbery.
Miracle of ‘dead’ woman
AN AILING 68-year-old Seattle woman miraculously came back to life after an emergency medical team who rushed to her home declared her dead and her cold body had been taken to a funeral home.
Hours later, an employee at the funeral home found faint signs that she was still breathing and had her rushed to the hospital in what the funeral home owner said could be nothing but ‘a miracle’.
‘You don't have no pulse, no heartbeat, no nothing (and then recover) it just doesn't happen,’ said Paul Lewis, the owner of the Columbia Funeral Home.
The woman, identified as Roberta Jones, is now listed in a serious condition on Sunday night at Harbourview Medical Centre, according to the hospital's nursing supervisor.
The supervisor declined to provide further details.
No one could say how long the elderly woman had been lying lifeless in her home, but the authorities told reporters she had apparently not responded to calls since before Hallowe'en.
Outrage as price on Rushdie's head rises
By Jackie Burdon Daily Post Correspondent
SUPPORTERS of author-in-hiding Salman Rushdie expressed horror yesterday at the news of an increased bounty on his head.
The Tehran newspaper Jomhori Islami reported that the Khordad 15 Foundation had increased the £2m (about £1.3m) reward offered to a successful assassin.
It said the increase was prompted by Mr Rushdie's visit to Germany last week to plead his cause with politicians.
Germany is Iran's largest trading partner.
‘Germany, clearly at the moment, is the key in many ways to this campaign,’ Mr Rushdie told reporters.
‘Because there is this very large economic involvement, this gives Germany more power in Iran, more influence in Iran than any other country.’
Carmel Bedford, spokeswoman for the International Committee for the Defence of Salman Rushdie, said yesterday: ‘This is international terrorism which breaks all the international conventions Iran is party to.
‘It is outrageous that a British citizen cannot go to another European country without provoking such a move.’
She said the Iranian government had always disclaimed responsibility for Khordad 15, said to be a religious charity.
‘We think the government of Iran should seize this opportunity to condemn this so-called charity in an effort to normalise relations with the outside world,’ she said.
The Foreign Office also condemned the increase.
The late Iranian leader Ayatollah Khomeini declared a ‘fatwa’ against Mr Rushdie on February 14 1989 because his novel, Satanic Verses, was said to blaspheme Islam.
Salman Rushdie: bounty
Granada TV growing
GRANADA TV is to expand its late-night programming from the beginning of next year.
The station is extending its peak-time slots from the present 10.40pm until midnight in order to include a regular series of programmes.
Monday will be movie night; Tuesday documentary night; Wednesday sports night; Thursday drama night; and Friday will feature live programmes.
Managing-director, broadcasting, Steve Morrison, said the station's audience increased following News at Ten and Granada News.
‘Granada's continued investment in home-produced quality programmes, imaginative scheduling and a strong audience share demands that we expand peak to satisfy our available audience,’ Mr Morrison added.
Hardman signs in with salute from new boss
By David Bassett
EXPERIENCED non-league campaigner Mick Hardman has been signed by Warrington Town and is included in their squad for tomorrow's HFS first division visit to Great Harwood Town.
Central defender Hardman, 30, who played for Macclesfield in the F.A.
Trophy Final at Wembley in 1989, has moved to Cantilever Park from Hyde United, and his arrival has delighted Town boss Derek Brownbill.
‘Mick is a very experienced player and is an excellent addition to our squad,’ said Brownbill, who has signed the newcomer as cover.
Local-based Hardman, who was originally at Warrington before spells at Runcorn and Altrincham, has been sidelined by injury since pre-season, but played for Warrington's reserves at the weekend.
Apart from long-term absentee John McInnes, Brownbill has a full squad from which to select tomorrow as Town look to extend their eight-match unbeaten run.
Marine boss Roly Howard takes charge of the HFS League representative side for the ninth consecutive season tonight, when they take on an F.A.
XI at Leek Town.
Four of Howard's Marine players are included in the HFS squad, although midfielder Jon Gautrey is struggling to overcome a knee ligament injury suffered in the weekend victory over Worksop.
Keeper Kevin O'Brien and strikers Brian Ross and Chris Camden are the other College Road players in the HFS squad, with Southport keeper Paul Moore and Haig Avenue defensive colleague Derek Goulding also included.
And Runcorn striker Steve Shaughnessy stands by for a possible call-up into the F.A.
squad after weekend injuries hit the original pool of Conference-based players.
Runcorn midfielder Ian Brady, who has been sidelined by injury since the second game of the season, is set to make a return to action in a friendly against Poulton Vics at Canal Street tonight.
Also on the recovery trail is Marine fullback Keith Proctor, who came through the full 90 minutes of a reserve game at the weekend after a six-week injury lay-off.
BBC branded ‘anti-Irish’
THE BBC was accused yesterday of ‘anti-Irish bias’ after it dropped a performance by Irish dancers from a television tribute to the Queen last Friday.
Members of the Marjorie Hawkins School of Irish Dancing protested about the decision at BBC Television Centre in London yesterday.
A BBC spokesman ‘totally refuted’ the allegation of anti-Irish bias yesterday and said the piece was cut because the show over-ran.
Granada extends its peak-hours viewing
GRANADA TV is to expand its late-night programming from the begining of next year.
The station is extending its peak-time slots from the present 10.40pm until midnight in order to include a regular series of programmes.
Monday will be film night; Tuesday documentary night; Wednesday sports night; Thursday drama night; and Friday will feature live programmes.
Managing-director, broadcasting, Steve Morrison, said the station's audience increased following News at Ten and Granada News.
‘Granada's continued investment in home-produced quality programmes, imaginative scheduling and a strong audience share demands that we expand peak to satisfy our available audience,’ Mr Morrison added.
Coaches' stamp of authority
MIKE HOLMES and Ernie Gallagher, coaches to athletes Steve Smith and Curtis Robb respectively, were among 18 recipients of Post Office Counters Master Coach Awards in Coventry at the weekend.
Athletic's national director of coaching, Frank Dick says: ‘The award is the highest honour we can bestow upon these coaches, who have made enormous contribution to the craft of coaching.’
Apart from his personal link with British high jump record holder Smith, Holmes is senior coach at heptathlon, decathlon and shot, national junior event coach for heptathlon and a former national junior coach for shot.
Holmes, who set British League appearance records as a competitor with Liverpool Harriers, is currently very active promotion and developing multievents in the North West.
Gallagher, who also fits in duties as secretary of Liverpool Harriers, has coached 800/ 1500 metres runner at the highest level for 11 years.
Potato disease outbreak
A DISEASE which causes heavy losses in potato crops in Greece, Yugoslavia and Turkey has been found in Britain.
Potato Brown Rot, a bacterial wilt disease normally associated with a warmer climate than the United Kingdom, was identified on a farm in Oxfordshire.
The disease notifiable under the EC Plant Health Directive was identified after a suspect sample was sent to the Ministry of Agriculture for advisory identification.
Strict crop movement and hygiene controls have been imposed on the farm and MAFF plant health and seeds inspectors are carrying out investigations of the surrounding area.
Agriculture Parliamentary Secretary Earl Howe said: ‘I am very disappointed that Potato Brown Rot has been found on a farm for the first time in this country.
‘We are taking firm measures to ensure that the infection does not spread any further.
It is important that we do not give this disease any opportunity to become widely established here.’
Other potential hosts of the disease include tomatoes and weeds such as Bittersweet and Black Nightshade.
Union slams package as ‘cuts in disguise’
FURY AT SPORTS CENTRES SHAKE-UP
By Ray Kelly
COUNCIL bosses are planning a shake-up of sports centre services including shorter opening hours as part of a long-term move to save cash.
Nalgo has branded the proposed shake-up of the Knowsley centres as ‘a disguised package of cuts.’
But leisure services director John Bell said the changes, including shorter opening hours and some job losses, are vital to providing an acceptable level of service in the future.
In a report to go before members of the leisure committee tomorrow night, he says the plan which looks ahead from three to five years would prevent the department from running £670,000 over budget.
Demolished
Bridgefield Forum is set to be reduced in size, with the demolition of two blocks plus a wing which houses Silvers function room, Shapers gym, a snooker room and other multiactivity rooms.
The gym and other sports rooms would be relocated in the remaining building.
A new £160,000 allweather synthetic grass pitch would replace a rotting older pitch.
Under the plan, Prescot Leisure Centre would be split into three independent business units with the bar, kitchen and function rooms leased or sold to a private business.
Squash courts, the sports hall, activities room, weights room and synthetic pitches will all have shorter opening hours and the wooden annexe will be demolished.
Opening times at Kirkby Sports Centre and swimming pool and Heatwaves will all be cut.
Mr Bell says new marketing of the centres would bring in more customers during peak hours making savings despite the recession and heavy private competition.
The overhaul follows hard on the heels of increased charges earlier this year.
Nalgo branch secretary Roger Bannister said: ‘We are concerned that this is a fancily-disguised package of cuts.
‘We are in consultation with the employer over its implications for our members.’
In a recent consultation exercise with council members, they suggested franchise and sponsorship as possible moneyspinners.
Anfield fright night faces Spartak
LIVERPOOL'S Mike Marsh last night looked ahead to another big European night at sold-out Anfield and declared: ‘Even if the crowd doesn't scare Spartak, it will lift us!’ second goal a year ago when Liverpool overhauled Auxerre 3-0 in the UEFA Cup.
Thrilling
And Marsh and Ian Rush yesterday urged the fans to again provide the backing that helped KO the French when Liverpool meet Spartak Moscow tomorrow, trailing 4-2.
Said Marsh: ‘There was a great atmosphere against Auxerre last season, even when the ground was only half full.
‘If we can have a full house this time that will be great and even if the crowd doesn't scare them, it will certainly lift us.’
Rush, who also played in the thrilling victory over Auxerre, is hoping a packed Anfield will roar Liverpool into the European Cup Winners' Cup quarter-finals.
Said the record goalscorer: ‘It is a similar situation because we have to score goals but against Auxerre we had to win 3-0, whereas this time 2-0 or 3-1 will suit us.
‘Spartak won't be used to a stadium where the crowd is close to the pitch because in Russia they tend to have wide open stadiums with running tracks.’
However, Rush believes Spartak may prove more dangerous on the break than Auxerre.
‘I think they may be a better team away from home than the French were.
Spartak drew 0-0 at home in the last round and won 5-1 away so we must be careful.
Manager Graeme Souness had Steve Nicol and Rob Jones back in training yesterday, while Jan Molby trained for the first time after his ankle injury.
Bruce Grobbelaar and Paul Stewart are suspended and Torben Piechnik is ineligible.
Waterloo bloomin the Vase
By Corinthian
WATERLOO DOCK recorded their sixth consecutive win with a 3-1 F.A.
Vase first round success at HFS Loans League Radcliffe Borough.
Waterloo went behind, but equalised through Carl Finlay and won with further goals from Robbie Parkinson and Gary Maher.
In round two on November 21, Waterloo Dock are at home to Ashton United and Cammell Laird host Salford City.
Lucas Sports thrashed Knowsley United Res 9-0 in their LCFA Challenge Cup second round replay,(Derek Waugh 5, John Conway 2, Tony Dunn and Ian Budd).
Paul Jonas was a three-goal star for Ayone (Kevin Hagan, George Brookfield, Dave Whitcomb, Tony McCormack) in their 7-0 second round win against Bootle Res and Plessey forced a 1-1 extra time draw at Newton and replay on Saturday (2.0).
Aigburth P.H. (Peter Jones 2, Jimmy Comer, Tommy Manning) won 4-2 at Roma (Chris Lee, Steve Parry) in their replay and Liverpool Nalgo (Dave Bundu 2, Steve Woods) drew 3-3 with Collegiate OB in a replay, but won the penalty shoot-out 3-2.
Warbreck (Mark Backley 2, Graham Davies) registered a great 3-1 Lancashire Amateur Cup third round win at Rossendale Amateurs.
In the second round of the LCFA Junior Cup, Leyfield won 1-0 at Crystal Villa, Aigburth P.H. Res won 2-0 at Electric Supply Res and Edge Hill BCOB thrashed MD & HB 6-0.
Halewood Town beat REMYCA United Res 3-2, Merseyside Police Res (Frank Rennison 3, Jim Dermott 2, Howard Finney) beat Home Office 6-2, Beesix won 4-0 at St Mary's COB and Camadale drew 1-1 after extra time at Pilkington and replay on Saturday.
In the second round of the LCFA Intermediate Cup, Mossley Hill Res (Dave Tinken 2 beat Unity BCOB 2-1.
BRNESC Res (Graham Dickman, Kevin Lavelle) lost 3-2 to Liver Vaults (Tommy Holmes 2, Tommy Grant).
St Dominics (Gary Martindale 2, Colin Martindale 2, Jeff Dodd 2) beat Yorkshire CT 60in the County Combination first division and Earle (Alan Hayes, Barry Bibby) beat Ford Motors 2-1.
Electric Supply (Ian Holmes, Robbie Taylor, Tony Spellman, Barry Jamieson, Gary Murray) registered a superb 50 Peter Coyne Cup first round win at BRNESC.
Mossley Hill (Steve Delve, Jason Benson, Tony Cheung) won 3-2 at Speke (Steve Jackson, Phil Smith) and Littlewoods Athletic (Terry Molloy 2, Frank Maguire 2 pens) gained a superb 4-1 over Crawfords (Brendan Helm).
Royal Seaforth won 2-1 against MerseyBus in division two and Cheshire Lines S.L. (Tony Pownall, Peter Doran) beat Speke Res 2-0 in the Ceramics Cup first round.
Quarry Bank OB (Geoff Baird 3, Andy Mottram, Mark Lyons) beat Aintree Villa (Simon Kennedy) 5-1 in the I Zingari League premier division.
Stoneycroft (Paul Borrows 2, Gerry Scotland) won 3-2 against Old Xaverians (Carl Jenkins, Derek O'Hara).
In the top West Cheshire League clash, leaders Christleton (Robbie Antrobus) drew 1-1 at second-placed Vauxhalls (Mark Tabiner).
Cammell Lairds (Nick Dillon) were held 1-1 by Poulton Vics (John Coulter).
Merseyside Police (Billy Riley 2, Tommy Finnan) chalked up their sixth consecutive win 3-0 at Shell and Ashville (Dave O'Brien) won 1-0 against Moreton.
First div: Newton (Paul Griffin), Bromborough Pool 2 (Ronnie Deakin, Mick Caulfield); Upton AA 0, Heswall 4.
Clarke attacks ‘bogus’ UK asylum seekers
BRITAIN must tighten its immigration controls to exclude bogus asylum-seekers, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke told the Commons yesterday.
Opening a second reading debate on the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Bill, Mr Clarke said the Government would uphold the ‘fine tradition’ of admitting those genuinely facing persecution.
But he warned that open entry would put heavy pressure on public services at a time of ‘enormous potential movements’ of people worldwide and could delay the admission of genuine refugees.
The original Bill came under strong attack and fell when John Major called an April election.
It has now been modified.
Shadow home secretary Tony Blair said the Bill was ‘profoundly flawed’.
Farmer is to be Hunt's adviser
CLWYD beef and sheep farmer Michael Pickering has been appointed chairman of the panel which helps advise Secretary of State for Wales David Hunt on agricultural issues in the Principality.
Mr Pickering, who farms at Hafod y Bwch, Rhosytyllen, just off the Wrexham by-pass, is chairman of the governing body of LLysfasi College of Agriculture, Ruthin, a former chairman of Denbighshire NFU and once served on the union's ruling council in London.
He succeeds Meuric Rees, the Lord Lieutant of Gwynedd, of Tywyn, who steps down after 12 years as a panel member, the last six as chairman.
Two other long serving members Powys veterinary surgeon and BBC governor John Parry and Dyfed dairy farmer David George are also retiring.
The new members are Powys farmer and conservationist Tom Jones, of Dolanog, near Welshpool; Mrs Eileen Williams, of Pantydwr, near Rhayader; and Richard Howells, of Cymmer, Mid Glamorgan.
Mrs Ann Rees, of Cardiff, and David Williams, of Presteigne, Powys, have been reappointed.
Food Minister Nicholas Soames has appointed two new members to serve of the Food Advisory Committee chaired by Dr Ewan Page, the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Reading.
They are Tom Martin, technical manager at Allied Breweries and UK brewing industry representative on its European confederation, and Robin Evans, Tayside Regional Council's public analyst.
Cheshire County Council's fair trading and advice officer Roger Manley is also a member of the non-statutory body which assesses the risk to humans of chemicals used or occur in or on food.
Mrs Ann M Vinton, the chairman and co-founder of The Reject Shop plc, has been appointed a member of the Covent Garden Market Authority.
Dominant Gunners target the title
Crystal Palace 1 Arsenal 2
IAN WRIGHT grabbed a superb 73rd-minute winner against his old club Crystal Palace as Arsenal moved menacingly up to third place in the Premier League just a point behind leaders Blackburn.
The Gunners were immediately installed as 13-8 favourites to win the championship with bookmakers William Hill.
Wright, who was passed fit to play shortly before the kickoff following a hamstring injury, struck emphatically on the end of a lightning exchange of passes with Paul Merson and Kevin Campbell which cut the Palace defence to ribbons.
And his ninth goal of the season was enough to earn the Gunners their fifth successive League victory after Palace's own top scorer, Eddie McGoldrick, had equalised an early opener by the impressive Merson.
Palace battled commendably enough in a lively clash but Arsenal's dominance was so strong that it was surprising they finally needed Wright's brilliance to win a game they controlled almost throughout.
Residents rage over Sunday work plan
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
A QUARRY company which wants to operate a plant on Sundays has claimed the move will make the jobs of its 50-strong workforce ‘more secure’.
But people living near the Penmaenmawr plant say they would suffer from noise, dust and unpleasant smells.
ARC Northern wants a relaxation of planning conditions which prevent them from working their roadstone coating plant at their Penmaenmawr quarry on Sundays.
In 1988 they were granted permission to operate on 15 Sundays in any year but that permission expired in December last year.
Now the company want permission to work up to 20 Sundays in any year from 7.30am until 4.30pm.
According to a Gwynedd County Council report the company said it is unable to tender competitively for contracts unless it has the flexibility of Sunday working.
Aberconwy Borough Council's planning department has objected, but Penmaenmawr Town Council have no objections providing permission is for a limited period.
Recommended
In September, members of Gwynedd County Council's planning sub-committee recommended the company should be given permission for 15 Sundays in a year, with a time limit of two years.
Gwynedd County Council officers had recommended refusing the application.
Gwynedd County Council will consider the situation at a special meeting later this week.
A report to the meeting says that 24 people, living in 14 properties near the plant, had signed a petition strongly objecting to the proposal.
They wanted peace and tranquility on Sundays.
It adds that ARC Northern had permission for quarrying and treatment of stone, apart from the roadstone coating, to work at all times, including Sundays.
Yesterday, a spokesman, said the company did not want to work on Sundays.
He pointed out that during previous planning permissions for Sunday working the plant had only worked on two Sundays in three years.
Being able to work on Sunday would give them flexibility in their contract work, which included the Bangor by-pass and Pen-y-Clip tunnel.
He said there was no question of jobs being under threat.
But the flexibility would obviously make jobs ‘more secure’.
Croft's winning return
ANNABEL CROFT, the former British No 1 who reckoned she would be lucky to win just a few games on her return to competitive tennis, today clinched a place in the second round of the Volkswagen National championships in Telford.
But the forgotten golden girl of British tennis, whose flourishing stage career will take in the role of Cinderella this Christmas, made a pantomime of despatching Alison Smith 6-4 6-7 6-3.
The two-hour battle did not exactly revive memories of Croft's professional heyday when she reached the lofty heights of world No 22 as she struggled with her serve, and produced too many errors to get into any sort of groove.
Briefly, however, the TV-action girl-cum-panto star looked the belle of the ball as she swept to a 4-0 lead against an opponent beset by stage fright.
But her early surge soon gave way to predictable ring-rust after five years off the professional circuit.
Lillee steals show
BRIAN LARA cracked a sparkling 106 as the West Indies won their Australian tour opener today but he had to share the spotlight with Dennis Lillee.
The former Test fast bowler, emerging briefly from retirement to play for the Australian Cricket Board Chairman's XI, produced a cameo performance that captivated a 6,000 crowd.
Lillee completed his 10 overs for just 18 runs and captured the only two West Indian wickets to fall to bowlers as the touring side swept home by seven wickets with 5.4 overs to spare.
Lillee even found some old fire to greet West Indies captain Richie Richardson with successive bouncers.
Richardson scored 53 and shared a second wicket partnership of 141 with man-of-the-match Lara, who hit 14 boundaries and made his runs from 132 deliveries before being run out.
Scores: Australia 210-9 (Geoff Marsh 72) West Indies 210-3.
Anger as Point of Ayr investment is frozen
By Daily Post Correspondent
MINERS at Point of Ayr colliery are angry that a £7.5m investment programme has been put on ice by British Coal.
Unions believe the development work is vital to the future of the closure-threatened pit.
The second phase of installation of modern machinery was due to start this month.
But British Coal says it must be postponed until March the end of the Government-imposed moratorium to review pit closures.
The move caused a political row yesterday when the Wales TUC claimed that Welsh Secretary David Hunt had pledged that investment would continue during the respite.
Mr Hunt told a news conference after meeting union leaders in Flint on October 23: ‘A moratorium has been placed on the closure of Point of Ayr and a direction has been given by the Government to British Coal that development work must continue at Point of Ayr.’
But in a letter of clarification to the Wales TUC, he said later: ‘I have been advised that sufficient development work will be continued to avoid the outcome of the review being prejudiced.
‘However, British Coal believe that plans for major new investments have to be reviewed in the light of the changing market conditions, which I understand is happening at Point of Ayr.’
The Welsh Office said yesterday that Mr Hunt's remarks had been misunderstood.
‘The Government said that it wanted development work to continue at all pits, not investment, which implies new projects and new money.’
The £2.6m first phase of new technology and mining techniques has been installed at Point of Ayr.
TUC research officer Simon Jones said: ‘We understood the Secretary of State to give us an assurance that the investment plans would continue.
‘But the following Tuesday, British Coal's area director visited Point of Ayr and said the second phase would not go ahead during the review period, which effectively means development plans at Point of Ayr are on ice.’
Les Kelly, North Wales secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers, claimed that the shelving of investment contravened the moratorium.
‘It is clear that David Hunt has no influence over BC's decision on new investment.’
The new row follows plans by BC to seek voluntary redundancies at Point of Ayr to reduce the workforce from 467 to around 150, about 100 more job losses than envisaged under the new working regime.
BC is also seeking reductions in the cost of the coal produced there.
It is estimated that the 150 men could produce 10,000 tons of coal a week.
THINGS THEY SAY…
‘People say because I have a wife and baby I'm not committed as before don't believe them’
Six-times former world snooker champion Steve Davis during last week's Regal Masters at Motherwell
‘If there is any trouble, we will be on the first plane home’
South African rugby captain Naas Botha on the threat of possible demonstrations during their tour of England
‘The people on the stage are either Americans or Latin Americans, but we still feel the pride of Canada’
David Cone, pitcher for World Series winners Toronto Blue Jays, on the fact that none of the team were Canadians
‘At the end of the game I had words with the referee but I immediately afterwards apologised afterwards.
That was not enough for him’
Liverpool manager Graeme Souness on the incident after the game with Moscow Spartak which led to him being suspended from the touchline for five European matches by UEFA
‘I cannot say what he actually said because it was so bad, and it went on for so long.
He had started even before the penalty incident and the sending off’
a UEFA official commenting on Souness' misdemeanour
‘I am proud and privileged to have beaten the record of a great player like Roger Hunt.
He was my father's hero.
He used to call him Sir Roger’
Ian Rush on passing 287 goals
‘If I was a player, those sort of comments would fire me up’
Hearts manager Joe Jordan after his team was likened to a rugby team by Standard Liege coach Ari Haan
‘I wouldn't have thought he's too pleased with himself.
But we're big boys and they do say big boys don't cry’
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson on John Lukic's midweek mistake against Rangers
‘If I was in the same situation again 100 times I would come for the same punch and back myself to clear the ball every time’
Lukic on his mistake
‘You could video that and sell it as what you expect from a player the control, the passing, the will to take responsibility, to work, to retrieve situations.
Gordon defends better than some people twice as big as him, twice as strong and twice as athletic’
Wilkinson (again) on Gordon Strachan
‘In terms of personality and character he is the biggest name around there's nobody else within miles of him and sometimes it's really bad for poor old Gazza’
George Best on the media circus surround Paul Gascoigne
‘Basically the umpire should be taken out and shot,’
a furious Jimmy Connors after he was beaten by Israel's unseeded Gilad Bloom in the Tel Aviv Tennis Classic
‘If you can run about, take a knock and give a knock, you can play in the Premier League.
That is really not what the game is all about.
It's about people who can move and dribble, pass and generally entertain’
Liverpool boss Graeme Souness
‘He has had his time, made his money and to have him come back, well, people don't know when to quit’
Lennox Lewis on Bruno
‘The town's rocking at the moment.
I'm afraid to go into Newcastle.
The fans up there have waited a long time.
The saying goes that everything comes to he who waits well they've waited longer than most’
Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan after his side's ninth successive league victory
‘He can wait and wait and wait.
He made me wait for two years.
A lot of talking has been coming from Eubank's camp and I've kept quiet, but now it's my turn.
I've bitten my tongue so many times it's got holes in it’
Nigel Benn on talk of a rematch with Chris Eubank
‘I'm quite prepared to take a big reduction in salary while we experiment with an 18 or 16-club Premier League.
Then if the crowds return we can go back to the salaries we deserve’
Arsenal manager George Graham, supporting his plea for a smaller Premier League
‘The place is like a morgue most of those that did come are moaning bastards.
There's no home advantage for us we're better off playing away in this competition’
Wimbledon boss Joe Kinnear after just 1,987 fans turned up for the Coca-Cola match against Bolton
How can we be as good as the Germans and Italians when our players spend just an hour-and-a-half every day training and then can't wait to get home?’
Stoke City manager Lou Macari
‘We are getting to the stage where the club v country conflict will explode.
It seems only a matter of time before there is a major collision’
Welsh manager Terry Yorath
QUOTE OF THE WEEK and the ultimate lament for every mercurial winger you ever saw, from Kevin Sheedy to Peter Beagrie and beyond.
This quote from Portsmouth manager, Jim Smith, is about Mark Chamberlain (remember him?) but sums ups the breed: ‘On his day he can be as good as anyone in the country.
But he doesn't have a day, only minutes 10 minutes here, 15 minutes there.’
Democratic process
AS the shouting, mud-slinging and patriotic appeals die away, Americans face the crunch the moment when they have to decide who is to be their next President.
It has been far from an edifying election.
The three candidates never lifted it beyond a hard and drab slog.
George Bush has had the advantage which always goes with the holder of the highest office of being addressed as Mr President.
It carries an aura of respect and makes the main opposition candidate look even more of an outsider.
At the same time, as the incumbent President, he is also answerable for the state of the nation.
It is difficult to put forward a programme which holds out hope of a better life when you have singularly failed to live up to your promises during your term of office.
Bill Clinton has capitalised on this situation by stressing that he offers America change.
He has an effective slogan in asking the American people: Do you just want more of the same?
He has also possibly benefited from the personal attacks on him by Mr Bush, such as being dubbed ‘a two-faced pumpkin from Arkansas.’
The constant barrage of accusations about his integrity, competence, personal life and whether he dodged the draft during the Vietnam war may prove to have been a serious miscalculation by the Bush camp.
Relief
The third contender has offered what little light relief there has been.
It's been a good, if expensive, election for Ross Perot, from his own point of view, anyway.
He has enjoyed every minute of it in the certain knowledge that he was never going to be held to account by being elected.
His role has been rather like that of a stand-up comic warming up the audience for the main event.
But his intervention has made it much more difficult to forecast the result.
Who has suffered most from his reappearance?
Both the other candidates have been feverishly trying to assess what damage he has caused them.
It has also made the job of the pollsters more difficult.
If they are right, then Clinton, barnstorming to the end and almost hoarse, should do it.
But in any election, and especially in the United States with its complicated voting system, a small shift can make a crucial difference.
As, of course, can a single performance on television.
It is on such slender threads that the function of democracy rests in the world's most powerful nation.
Man burned in fireball riddle
A MAN was taken to hospital this morning after being found in flames by two passers-by.
They were alerted by his screams and helped douse the flames before calling the emergency services.
The crew of a police patrol car which was passing the scene near Higher Road, Halewood, at the time also helped treat him.
Early this morning, officers were speaking to the man's family to check on his movements before the incident.
A Merseyside Police spokesman said they were still investigating the matter which occurred around 12.30am today.
‘The man had burns to his chest and right shoulder.
He was found close to overhead electricity railway cables.
‘Two people walking by heard the shouts from a field and went to his assistance.
The CID are now waiting to interview him.’
The man who is said to be in his 40s and local was taken to the specialist burns unit at Whiston Hospital but his condition is not known.
Aussie ace in the clear
MICHAEL BRIAL has moved from a likely Wallaby tour drop-out to a possible starter for Saturday's game against Wales B in Cardiff.
The flanker underwent a series of tests at Cardiff Royal Infirmary which showed there was no cartilage damage to the knee which has twice ‘locked’ during training and again while swimming.
The tourists were so concerned Brial might become their fifth serious injury victim that Brendan Nasser, the former Wallaby studying at Oxford University, was put on standby.
Lloyd Walker arrives today as skipper Michael Lynagh flies home to have surgery on his dislocated shoulder.
War hero's widow raps TV ‘fairytale’ Civvies
By Paul Edwards Daily Post Correspondent
THE widow of Falklands Para hero Colonel H Jones yesterday criticised TV's Civvies, describing it as ‘a fairy story completely removed from reality’.
Civvies is a fictionalised account of ex-paratroopers trying to adjust to civilian life.
Sara Jones, speaking at the launch of the Royal British Legion's poppy appeal, said she wanted to send a message of support to servicemen who would be leaving the services under the Government's Options for Change programme.
‘I would appeal to future employers to take the television programme Civvies with a pinch of salt,’ she said.
‘As you know, my husband commanded 2 Para and as an Army wife I knew the Parachute Regiment for many years.
‘The people you see on your television screens bear little relationship to the people I have known and respected.
‘I suggest you treat the programme as a fairy story completely removed from reality.
‘And I appeal to employers to look on our ex-service people and see in them the opportunity for the loyal, dedicated, hard-working men and women that they are.’
Mrs Jones, who is a director of the poppy factory, was speaking at a ceremony at Southampton on board Sea Princess, whose P&O sister ship, Canberra, took part in the Falklands conflict.
Last year, the poppy appeal raised just over £13m and the organisers hope that figure will be exceeded this year.
Ian Cannell, appeal chairman, emphasised that the sale of poppies helped not only the veterans of the First and Second World Wars, but those that took part in more recent campaigns.
Mrs Jones, who presented poppies to Falklands veterans during the ceremony, said later she had been angered by Civvies.
‘I have to say having watched the first two I didn't want to watch any more,’ she said.
‘Most of the people in the regiment I have known and respected were hard-working, genuine people.’
Sara Jones
Colonel H Jones
Headache for Flynn as Mickey chalks up milestone
by Mark Currie
FIT-AGAIN defenders Tony Humes and Mel Pejic give Wrexham manager Brian Flynn the best sort of selection problems ahead of tonight's match with Scunthorpe United at the Racecourse.
Both were missing from the side which won 4-2 at Colchester United on Friday evening and the Robins' boss has to decide whether to stick with the makeshift back four which performed so well at Layer Road.
Flynn delays naming his side until shortly before the start but I believe young Kevin Jones will be asked to make way for one of the two vastly experienced defenders.
Teenager David Brammer is recalled to the squad in place of Dave Esdaille who suffered an ankle injury on Friday.
The game marks the 600th league appearance of skipper Mickey Thomas, who earned a generous tribute from his manager.
‘When you consider his international appearances and cup matches too, it means he's played about 800 matches.
Influential
‘If any youngster coming into football can put as much enjoyment into his game as Mickey has done, then he'll probably play as long.
‘Mickey has played at the highest level and he gets the same thing out of the game as he has always done.
He is still an influential part of the Wrexham side.’
That influence will be needed tonight as Wrexham bid to climb further up the third division table.
Two defeats in their six home games is hardly what the fans expect but Flynn isn't pressing the panic button.
‘Barnet were the best side I've seen this season and we have to admit they were better than us on the day but Northampton was one of those things.
They got a goal and hung on,’ he said.
‘Nevertheless we have scored 12 league goals at home, so that's not a bad average.’
WREXHAM: Morris;(from) K Jones, Phillips, Sertori, B Jones, Owen, Thomas, Bennett, Taylor, Connolly, Brammer, Watkin, Humes, Pejic
I'm just a big kid at heart says Shirley Valentine star Pauline Daniels
‘I AM 37 -and proud to be looking towards 40!’
There aren't many women who'd be so honest about their age.
But Merseyside comedienne Pauline Daniels is getting ready to be a kid again.
She says: ‘When I was 29 I remember going to bed and thinking I hope I don't wake up 30, which is dreadful.
‘I found you do your growing up in your thirties and your forties are your teenage years -or at least that's the way I look at it.
‘I am certainly not frightened of being 40.’
But then it is hard to imagine Pauline being afraid of anything.
Feminine
She's has survived for years in the tough world of clubs to eventually come out top.
She's gone from a Scouse-hold to a household name, co-starring in the latest run of the hit TV show The Comedians.
‘In the early days a woman stand-up comic was not really accepted.
‘It is still frowned on a little because men don't see it as a very feminine job.
‘And that means that you have to be better than the next man to be considered half as good.
‘But then that's the case for women in most jobs.’
Pauline, married to electrician Dave with an 18-year-old daughter Sarah, has been criticised for being too blue -a label she doesn't feel she deserves.
‘I do have a reputation but I don't think it's the language that's the problem as much as the subjects.
‘I talk about contraception, hysterectomies and the change of life.
But why not?
‘The nice thing about being a woman talking about women's things is that, as you grow older, you can relate to them.
‘And if you can put a smile on someone's face at the same time, that's great.’
Pauline is enjoying a spell at home in Ellesmere Port after this week starting a 12-day run at the Liverpool Playhouse stage in the title role of Willy Russell's Shirley Valentine.
It's a part she last played a year ago and ‘actually remembered the lines’.
Pauline is also in the middle of writing for a new BBC programme about women's health to be screened around next April.
And she is preparing for her own one-woman show next year.
‘The first half will be a tribute to women like Mae West, Doris Day and Madonna.
‘The second half will be stand-up.
‘Now I'm better known it has been easier to sell the show.’
Vocabulary
She adds: ‘After Shirley Valentine, it's back to the clubs and then I'm doing the Battle of the Sexes with Tom Pepper.
‘I've got a new manager and agent and I don't think the word the word ‘rest’ is in their vocabulary.
‘Next year will be hard work -but perhaps the year after that I'll get the chance to break away to a Greek isle and do a Shirley Valentine…‘
FUNNY GIRL: Pauline Daniels plans to laugh off the ageing process
Pauline with outfits from Shirley Valentine
Contrite Cottee pays penalty and says sorry to team-mates
CLUB CAPTAIN Dave Watson last night welcomed Tony Cottee back into the Everton fold.
Cottee was disciplined yesterday by Howard Kendall following his outburst against both manager and team-mates, reported in Saturday's Daily Post.
But Watson revealed the Everton players have accepted an apology from the £2.2m striker for his criticism of a lack of service to the strikers.
Punishment
Said Watson: ‘Tony was disappointed at being dropped.
He said what he most probably felt at the time, which was the heat of the moment.
‘But after he sat down and thought about it he has come in and apologised to the lads and realised he maybe should not have said it.
‘It was not the sort of thing you would normally say but you can maybe understand his point of view.
He has apologised and that is accepted.’
Kendall would not reveal the extent of Cottee's punishment thought to be a fine of two weeks' wages and insisted the striker can still have a future with the Blues.
Said Kendall: ‘He has been disciplined and whatever that is will not be revealed by me.
‘What had to be done has been done and Cottee trained with the first team squad.
‘If he had criticised only me, I can handle that.
But his timing was awful.
‘On the eve of a very important game he criticised fellow professionals, when in fact he was in the squad.
Offers
‘The situation is now that if he works hard and shows the right attitude and I think it is right, then last week will be forgotten and he will go in the side.’
Cottee was not transfer-listed yesterday, but it is common knowledge that Everton are open to offers and Kendall revealed there has been some interest already this season from other clubs.
Cottee declined the discuss the matter ‘I said enough at the weekend’ and would not reveal whether he has been fined.
Kendall received a boost yesterday with every first team player, including recent absentees John Ebbrell, Mo Johnston and Peter Beardsley, training except broken leg victim Mark Ward.
‘I had £4m worth of strikers training who were unavailable for various reasons on Saturday, so that is a lift and Ian Snodin scored for the A team.
‘We just have to battle on.
There have been changes and there will continue to be changes until some of them convince me they should be in the team regularly.’
The Blues boss dismissed weekend speculation linking Mo Johnston with a move back to Scotland.
Trial
NORWEGIAN Tore Andre Dahlum arrived at Old Trafford yesterday to begin a two-week trial period.
Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson is hoping he could be the answer to his side's goal drought.
Capped 12 times by his country, the 24-year-old is a leading scorer for his club Rosenberg with 20 goals this season.
Said Ferguson: ‘I hope we can get a game fixed up for him some time this week.’
House builders' plea for action
HOUSE builders in the North West are looking for the Government to do more to stimulate sales and economic growth.
According to the Aasociation of North Western House Builders, recent interest rate reductions were welcome but further action was needed to prevent additional house repossessions to encourage house moves and create employment in the construction industry.
The Association's chairman, Paul Bell, said there were signs of confidence creeping back into the market but there was room for additional measures if a fullblown recovery was to be seen.
‘Lower interest rates and current house price levels mean that house are more affordable now than they have been for over 20 years.’
He said Association member companies, 35 in total, fully support representations to MPs by the North Western region of the House Builders Federation.
‘Like the HBF we believe that the Government should target key sectors that can lead the economy out of recession and the housing market should be on the top of the list.’
He added an increase in house sales would give a much needed boost to retail sales and employment.
Striker and Reds face legal battle
Saunders shocker
Exclusive by Ric George
PAUL ELLIOTT has started legal proceedings against Dean Saunders and Liverpool over the tackle which threatens to wreck his season.
The Chelsea defender was stretchered off the Anfield turf on September 5 following a challenge with the former Reds' striker, suffering cruciate ligament damage which required one operation, with further surgery likely.
Saunders, playing his final match for Liverpool before his £2.3m move to Aston Villa, clashed with Elliott in the 10th minute as they went for a 50-50 ball.
But although the Chelsea star sustained serious injury, the Reds were awarded a freekick.
My opinion at the time was that Saunders had committed the foul, but it must be said that there appeared nothing malicious about the way he attempted to gain possession.
The fact that Sheffield official John Key penalised Elliott's tackle suggests the player has no grounds on which to sue.
However, I understand that Elliott has been advised that the referee's interpretation of the incident does not necessarily prejudice his claim.
And the Echo can reveal that he has already opened legal proceedings against Saunders and Liverpool FC, as his employers at the time.
While one can sympathise with a player whose season has virtually been written off, his decision to take legal action over what is surely an occupational hazard opens the door for other players to consider following suit.
Jail for businessman who was ‘easy target’
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
A BUSINESSMAN has been jailed for 18 months for receiving thousands of pounds worth of stolen goods.
Nicholas Dodman, 34, of Wynstay Lane, Wrexham, pleaded guilty at Chester Crown Court yesterday to receiving part of the proceeds of a £14,500 haul from a burglary at a Victoria Wines off licence in Deeside.
Dodman, who runs the Smithy View garage in Wrexham, paid £4,000 for 30 cases of spirits and 85,000 cigarettes, believed to be worth around £8,000.
Police intercepted the exchange of the goods on ground near a supermarket in Ellesmere Port on the day the burglary took place.
Dodman was driving a van found to be loaded with the stolen property.
Dodman also admitted to receiving stolen cigarettes and spirits on four other occasions.
‘In total he received around £12,000 of cigarettes and spirits which he had given away to business colleagues or sold on through his business,’ said Roger Dutton, prosecuting.
‘It would appear he was a regular customer and willing and prepared to take stolen items.’
Dodman had offered to give evidence against another man whom he claimed had carried out the burglaries, but he was unable to do so because of a mental condition and the charges against the other man were dropped.
Andrew Loverage, defending, asked for Dodman's psychiatric condition to be taken into consideration.
He said that Dodman had been suffering from a mental illness which could have affected his behaviour and asked that Dodman be sent for psychiatric help.
‘Criminals far more vicious than Nicholas Dodman looked upon him as an easy target to provide an outlet for their criminal activities,’ he said.
‘It is a measure of the level of the people with which he was dealing in that, at a time when he thought he might be a witness in another case, he was assaulted, rendering him unconscious, and his house was the subject of an arson attack.’
But Judge Robin David told Dodman: ‘This matter is so serious that a custodial sentence is inevitable.’
Dodman was sentenced to 18 months in prison with a further 12 month sentence, to run concurrently, for the other four charges against him.
Spartak wing in
Which way to Anfield…
Spartak players Andrey Chernyshov and Gintaras Stauche check the map on arrival at Liverpool Airport today.
Latham's ton-up delight
OPENER Rod Latham completed his maiden Test century as New Zealand consolidated their strong position in the first Test against Zimbabwe in Bulawayo today.
The Kiwis extended their overnight 205-1 to 279-2 at lunch on the second day.
Latham, 86 overnight, went on to make 119 in only his second Test, hitting a six and 14 fours in a 285 minutes.
Run out
Latham and Andrew Jones put on 127 for the second wicket before the opener was run out when his partner failed to respond to a call for a run.
Jones was unbeaten with 51.
Brian Lara scored a super century as the West Indes beat an Australian Cricket Board Chairman's XI by seven wickets in a one day clash in Perth today.
Scores: ACB Chairman's XI 209-9 (G Marsh 72) West Indies 210-3 (B Lara 106, R Richardson 53).
Life on the shelf
AN Olympic sprinter takes around 20 seconds to cover 200m, but how long would it take even the fastest reader to plough through the 211m of shelf space of new material acquired in the past year by the National Library of Wales' Department of Manuscripts and Records?
Remarkably, more than a third (83m) are University of Wales dissertations, three metres and a great deal of midnight oil more than in the previous year.
National librarian, Brynley Roberts, says in his annual report this is already causing storage problems.
Though space is being yielded by the Department of Printed Books, it seems unlikely there will be room for more than two or three years' acquisitions.
The good news is that plans have been made for a third building.
A new link building, already in use, relieves for the first time in years the problems of the Printed Books Department.
It should enable collections in the main building to be rearranged in a more logical sequence.
The bad news is that relief will be merely temporary.
Old newspapers are being preserved by photographing about 200 volumes a year to microform, priority being given to those for which readers make the greatest call.
Academic
The near £5m annual budget was in surplus for the year by more than £139,000 swelled by a £53,000 surplus from previous years to almost £193,000.
Welsh Office grants received during the year totalled £5.7m of which £1.3m was for capital projects and £500,000 used for purchases.
The National Library has seen a large number of retirements and new appointments during the year, including new departmental structures and staffing levels, leading to the overall number of permanent and temporary posts being increased.
Nearly 17,000 readers used the reading room during the year, while the manuscripts' reading room had almost 5,800 callers with a further 3,500 reading microform records.
More than half the inquiries related to family history, local history accounting for a further 13pc.
A quarter were researchers, either academic or students.
Remarkably almost a third of the readers were from outside Wales, a similar proportion came from Aberystyth itself, and the rest of Wales accounted for 40pc.
Among the year's acquisitions is an Augustus Jones painting with strong evidence that it may be an unusually late portrait of his sister Gwen John.
The national librarian's verdict is that the instititution is well placed to meet the challenges of the future.
Home for handicapped is ‘not likely to be replaced’
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A REPLACEMENT home for handicapped people in Wrexham looks unlikely to be built when an existing home closes, councillors will be told today.
Greystones in Chester Road is home for 10 people with disabilities, and is also used by eight others for respite care throughout the year.
But the building does not comply with the Registered Homes Act, and must close or be upgraded.
An earlier plan to build a new home in conjunction with a housing association on the Chevet Hey site in Prices Lane, Wrexham, failed to get off the ground.
And now the Greystones residents have been asked what sort of accommodation they would like in the future.
John Jevons, Clwyd's social services director, says in a report to councillors today that a plan would be thrashed out to best meet the needs of individuals based on the residents' reaction.
He says there appeared to be no demand for another residential home because the residents did not want to continue living together in such a large number.
But there was a liking for smaller groups of up to four people to share premises.
He said some new, purpose-built accommodation would probably be needed, but talks were also taking place with Wrexham Maelor Council's housing department about the possible use of council houses.
Support for the residents would be provided either by social services staff or workers from an outside agency.
County council funds used to operate Greystones which costs £294,000 a year to run will be switched to helping the residents and respite care users.
Lennox pledges to be a true Brit
LENNOX Lewis today pledged to be a truly British-based world champion.
If by next spring he becomes this country's first heavyweight holder for nearly 100 years, he intends to make the challengers come to him.
‘I want to make all my defences in Britian,’ said the 27-year-old Lewis, already regarded by many as the uncrowned champion after his two-round demolition of Razor Ruddock at Earl's Court in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Atlantic crossing
‘The Americans have kept the title in their country for too long.
The challengers have always had to go to their side of the Atlantic now its their turn to come to Europe.’
Lewis will meet either champion Evander Holyfield or Riddick Bowe before the end of April by virtue of his devastating final eliminator victory in front of a 12,000 crowd.
Lewis added: ‘But I don't think Holyfield will take a chance by coming to London to defend against me.
He's got enough money for one thing and I don't think he would fancy the risk.
‘But I'm fully confident of winning the world title wherever it takes place.’
Although the buoyant Lewis camp have not given up hope of staging the Holyfield fight here, they estimate that it would cost them a massive £17.5m purse to do it.
Choppinnng punch
Lewis, whose chopping right hand opened the way for his 226-seconds victory, today described the punch to a fortune as being merely ‘OK’.
He said: ‘I've thrown better punches.
The one I liked best was against Mike Weaver.
It was a right over the top and I stepped in with it.
‘I'd been working on that right during training it was more of a natural reaction.’
New moves needed to keep young on the land
PLANNERS are paying only lip service to new Government initiatives to keep young people on the land and in countryside jobs, according to the Farmers Union of Wales.
This conclusion emerged at a meeting between the FUW and Wales Young Farmers Clubs representatives.
The issue is to be taken up in a joint approach to the Welsh Office.
Planning authorities, it was claimed, showed an unsympathetic attitude to applications from young people for new homes or businesses despite the Government's Local Needs Policy which aimed to retain young people in the countryside.
‘In reality this is not happening,’ said Brecon and Radnor FUW executive officer John Roberts.
‘We have dealt with many cases where the local planners have done everything possible to prevent youngsters getting a start.’
Wales YFC chief executive Martin Pugh said it was a constant battle for young people to get planning consent for a home.’
The FUW is pressing the Government to continue the wool guarantee for another year because of the slump in wool sales.
Barrowful of injuries worry Chester
CHESTER CITY have injury problems as they bid to follow up Saturday's second win of the season against Rotherham at Millmoor tonight.
Barry Butler, who was stretchered off in the 2-1 Deva Stadium win over Brighton, yesterday had Xrays on his injured ankle.
He is likely to be out for a week, missing both tonight's match and probably Saturday's home game against Swansea.
And John Kelly, who had to go off with hamstring trouble, is also out of tonight's match.
Caretaker-boss Graham Barrow said: ‘Barry had Xrays but thankfully there is no break.
His ankle is badly swollen and he is struggling for the weekend.’
The absence of Butler and Kelly forces Barrow into changes he would have been reluctant to make after Saturday's performance.
‘The team was playing well on against Brighton up until Barry went off really.
Ideally I would not want to have made changes but that's football.
‘Having lost a 2-0 lead against Bolton in the previous home game there was a little bit of a mental block and I can understand that.
‘But we won and deserved to, so that should be gone now.
What we must try and do now is prove Saturday was not a flash in the pan.’
Barrow has had to add Spencer Whelan, Craig Goodwin and Mark Limbert to the remaining fit 11 from the Brighton game, and could play himself against Rotherham.
Glimmer
‘They always have a go up front and play to their strengths.
Obviously we haven't been good away from home this season but I was pleased again with the attitude on Saturday.
‘After a week's work it was satisfying to win against Brighton but it was only a glimmer of hope.’
Shaun Garnett has been secured on another month's loan while Eddie Bishop's knee ligament problem is not as serious as was first feared.
CHESTER CITY (from): Stewart, Preece, Comstive, Garnett, Lightfoot, Thompson, Ryan, Barrow, Morton, Pugh, Rimmer, Goodwin, Whelan, Limbert.
The satellite age arrives at auctions
NEARLY 400 cattle were auctioned in just one hour without the animals, vendors or buyers going off to market when the first sale of fat stock by satellite television went on screen.
Following a couple of dummy runs CLASS Central Livestock Auctions Satellite Sales which uses a split screen technique offered buyers the chance to see the stock on offer and the actual bidding.
One of 11 auctioneering firms participating in the CLASS operation are Cheshire-based Wright-Manley who offered two lots on the first day of the new system which is linked to the offices of some 30 buyers, mostly abattoirs.
One lot of five Continental cross bulls offered through Wright-Manley sold for 118.5p per kg but another bunch of 16 failed to reach their reserve.
Auctioneer Andrew Wallace, company fieldsmen and some 30 farmers watched the sale which was transmitted via satellite from the University of Plymouth's ground station to Beeston Mart.
Farmers wishing to sell finished stock on the hoof contact the company's field staff who video the animals intended for sale.
This has to be done by the Tuesday before the weekly Friday sale so that potential buyers can then tune in to an electronic preview of the lots to be offered together with their weights, breed and feed methods.
CLASS auctioneer Mark Miller then conducts the sale on screen in the Plymouth studio where 16 brokers handle telephone bids from credit-approved buyers who must confirm their PIN number before being allowed to join in the action.
After a close-up of the animals a split screen enables buyers to see still see the animals and relevant details including the current bid in the upper half and auction room with brokers delivering telephoned bids in the lower.
After the sale, payment is guaranteed within seven days of the cattle leaving the farm which has to be by the Tueday following at the latest.
Unsold cattle never leave the farm.
Commenting after the first sale Mr Wallace said: ‘I think it has got a lot of scope for selling cattle.
Certainly, as far as we are concerned we are after cattle from the periphery of our patch, that is North Wales and Lancashire.
‘If we can increase our market share through pulling cattle that would normally go deadweight we can offer the farmer who sells deadweight the service where he can have his cattle sold by auction.’
Piggott plans birthday treat
LESTER Piggott could be out of hospital in time to celebrate his 57th birthday on Thursday, his daughter Maureen said today.
The resilient 11-times champion jockey remains under intensive care in a Miami hospital, recovering from a fractured collar-bone and two broken ribs sustained in a terrible mid-race fall on Saturday.
‘He is doing fine, and he should be out of hospital in the next day or two,’ said his daughter.
Piggott was knocked unconscious when his mount Mr Brooks severed a foreleg during the Breeders' Cup Sprint at Gulfstream Park, the opening event of racing's unofficial world championships.
ON AN OPTIMISTIC NOTE
ONE OF the most promising young sopranos in North Wales has auditioned for the National Youth Choir of Great Britain.
Now Debbie Banks, of Kinmel Bay, is anxiously awaiting the result.
Debbie is a sixth former at Abergele High School.
Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Holyfield's £17m demand means Lewis must travel
EVANDER HOLYFIELD'S mighty £17.5m asking price for a London defence of his world heavyweight title is virtually certain to knock out Lennox Lewis's hopes of home advantage in next spring's challenge.
With Lewis's share likely to be around £5.5m for the fight of his life, the British and Commonwealth champion's handers would have to break the bank to shift the fight from Las Vegas -but they haven't entirely given up hope.
Said Lewis's manager Frank Maloney: ‘Holyfield wants a guarantee of 28 million dollars.
We'll be doing all we can to bring the fight here.
We've got accountants working on it to see if it is at all possible.
‘The world title has been the dream from day one; the dream is getting closer.
You never know, television could come up with a lot of money.’
However, the huge site fees lodged by the casinos in Las Vegas would appear to put London completely out of the running, despite Maloney's optimism.
Even a Riddick Bowe victory over Holyfield next week is unlikely to make it any easier to give Lewis a home run.
‘It doesn't matter where the fight is, I'm fully confident of winning the title,’ said Lewis.
Big risk
‘But when I'm champion I want to make all my defences in England.
The Americans have had the title in their country for too long.
‘The challengers have always had to go to the other side of the Atlantic now it's their turn to come to England.
‘But I don't think Holyfield would take a chance by coming to London to defend against me.
He's got enough money for one thing, and it's a bigger risk anyway.’
In the afterglow of his astonishing two-round demolition of Razor Ruddock at Earls' Court, Lewis played down the big, chopping right which opened the way to his Hallowe'en final eliminator victory.
‘It was okay, but I've thrown better,’ added Lewis.
‘The one against Mike Weaver was better.
It was a right which I followed in.
‘The one against Ruddock was more natural, more instinctive, something I'd been working on.
‘But after watching the video, I was more pleased with my movement away from the terrific power of his left hook and uppercut.’
Many pundits believe Lewis is almost certain to lift the world crown but the calm and calculated athlete prefers to keep his boxing boots firmly on the ground.
Mission
‘I started out with a mission and for me the mission isn't over…and that is to bring the heavyweight title to England.’
Lewis will have a firsthand close-up of Holyfield-Bowe as co-commentator on the live Sky transmission and, on the way to Las Vegas, will call in on the World Boxing Council convention in Cancun, Mexico.
Fight punters have given Lewis more chance than Frank Bruno of winning the WBA, WBC and IBF titles during 1993.
Williams Hill report a ‘rush of bets’ at odds of 811 for Lewis to become undisputed champion next year, but have received none for Bruno to do likewise.
Top planner bows out after 30 years
A MAN who has been at the centre of planning in North East Wales for more than 30 years will retire this month from public office, and turn his attention to private consultancy.
As Clwyd's head of planning, the responsibilities of Rupert Havard have included minerals and gipsy sites, so he is no stranger to controversy.
He does not believe the impending reorganisation of local government will lead to more efficient services.
‘If the new unitary authorities are geographically small, I do not believe that it will be possible to provide an effective and efficient planning service for the people, and that has always been the aim of the planner, since planning means people,’ said Mr Havard.
And he does not believe the Government's proposals to make gipsies responsible for finding their own sites will work either.
‘Someone has to provide the sites on a co-ordinated basis.
If local authorities have not been able to find sites how much more difficult is it going to be for gipsies themselves?’ he said.
Mr Havard, who lives at St Meugan's, Ruthin, has headed planning since the formation of Clwyd in 1974.
He was until recently chairman of the Dee Estuary Forum.
Rival in rap for Mansell
AUSTRIAN driver Gerhard Berger today criticised Nigel Mansell for letting a Williams teammate pass to win the world championship's most recent event.
Berger, who is preparing for Sunday's Australian Grand Prix in Adelaide, said the sport's credibility suffered from such actions.
Mansell already had a record nine victories for the year when he allowed Ricardo Patrese to win his first race of the season.
‘Nigel Mansell's action at Suzuka in Japan last month which allowed Ricardo Patrese to win was completely wrong,’ Berger said.
‘It was not honest help, and any action taken by a driver should be done properly.
‘I faced a similar situation at Suzuka last year when Ayrton Senna pulled up to allow me to win and I wasn't happy about it.
I don't want to win like that.
The first interest is to win and then to help the team who pays you and looks after you, but there is a right way of doing it.’
Maxwell's OAPs march
HUNDREDS of Maxwell pensioners are to march to the Commons tomorrow on the eve of the anniversary of the publisher's death.
In the year since the discredited media tycoon died after falling from his yacht, only £27m of the £458m he plundered from his companies' pension funds has been recovered.
C4 pledge
CHANNEL 4, the TV station with a reputation for producing the eccentric and bizarre, would carry on doing ‘mad things’, chief executive Michael Grade said yesterday.
‘It was a mad idea to begin with and it's still a mad idea,’ Mr Grade declared at C4's 10th birthday party.
Woman slashed by knifeman
A WOMAN aged 63 underwent plastic surgery yesterday after her face was slashed three times in an apparently motiveless attack.
The woman, not named by police, was walking home in Stevenage, Herts, on Sunday night when a man wielding a large knife slashed her three times on the forehead, leaving one cut seven inches long.
Freddie's pain
THE late rock star Freddie Mercury was deeply hurt by media coverage of his battle against Aids, a friend said yesterday.
The star publicly admitted that he had the disease only 24 hours before he died last November, but his friend, David Minns, said media rumours had been a constant worry to him.
Car sales boost
THE number of visitors to this year's Birmingham Motor Show topped 650,000, a 45pc increase on the last show in 1990, it was announced yesterday.
Sir Hal Miller, chief executive of the show's organisers, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, also revealed that more than half the visitors had said they planned to buy a new car ‘in the coming months’.
Coach quits
CIARAN FITZGERALD, former Ireland and Lions skipper, has quit as Irish coach.
Fitzgerald departed 48 hours after his team suffered yet another record defeat, Australia winning 42-17 in Dublin.
Death of Bill Scott
EVERTON have lost one of their most faithful supporters with the death in Marbella of former chairman and long-serving director Bill Scott.
He was 74.
A past chairman and managing director of the well-known Merseyside bakery firm, Mr Scott was elected to the Everton board in 1968, and became chairman eight years later, in succession to Mr Alan Waterworth.
During his two years in charge, he was responsible for the replacement as manager of Billy Bingham by Gordon Lee, stepping down for personal reasons after a comparatively short spell.
One of the kindest and most popular members of the board, which he served with distinction for some 20 years, Mr Scott played a major part in the gradual development of Goodison Park into one of the country's finest grounds, and also led the battle against hooliganism from the front.
He became a vice-president of the club three years ago, on resigning as a director to make way for Mr Bill Kenwright.
Cinders Croft keeps it horrific
PANTO STAR Annabel Croft huffed and puffed before finally blowing away the cobwebs of her self-imposed tennis exile in Telford.
And the former British No 1, who treads the boards as Cinderella in Norwich next month, was the first to confess her return to competitive tennis was hardly the stuff of fairy tales.
‘It must have been pretty horrific for everyone watching,’ Croft apologised after grinding down Alison Smith 6-4 6-7 6-3 to reach the second round of the Volkswagen National championships.
The match was definitely more deserving of rotten apples than curtain calls, played between the ring-rusty old trouper and a minor player overcome by stage fright.
Exhausted
And the girl who begins rehearsing her Cinders role later this month, was more adamant than ever that she would sooner eke out a living in glass slippers than tennis shoes.
‘I will not be playing in any more tournaments after this,’ she insisted.
‘I have aged about 20 years and I feel exhausted.
Panto is far easier!’
Smith, the British No 23 from Staffordshire, could hardly do anything right as Croft raced to a 4-0 lead and broke service four times en route to the first set.
But the former golden girl of British tennis, who was mixing it with the world's elite just five years ago, was pegged back when Smith won the second set tie-break 7-2.
However, Croft, who has slimmed down considerably since her last days on the women's tour, showed greater physical and mental stamina to take the match after more than two hours of sometimes unendurable tennis.
Plea on peas
PLANS by the European Commission to include vining peas within the EC arable aid scheme are being reviewed.
This follows concern from growers, and pressure from the NFU for their exclusion.
EC officials have been told that the market for vining peas and other processed vegetables is a volatile one, and area payments for vining peas could encourage excess production.
King demands more of same
By David Prentice
TRANMERE boss, John King, has demanded a repeat performance from his players for tomorrow's visit of Southend with a different result.
Rovers dominated Friday night's home game with Peterborough, but had to settle for a 1-1 draw, and King explained: ‘Noone can say anything but good about the way we played.
‘The one thing you could have a go at is when you are playing like that you have to be more ruthless and when you have people on the rack you have to be careful of the counter attack.
Consistency
‘But it's such an up and down game that every manager in the league is looking for consistency.’
King will be seeking to re-establish that winning consistency against a Southend team who have lost much of last season's impressive drive.
On New Year's Day they briefly topped the division, but since then have lost players and impetus.
Leading marksman Brett Angell will be missing until February after a thigh operation and full-backs Dean Austin and Peter Butler have been sold.
Atmosphere
While King is looking for a repeat performance, club officials are hoping for a repeat of Friday's biggest gate of the season.
A novelty ladies' night boosted the attendance mark past 8,000 for the first time this season, and Chief Executive Frank Corfe said: ‘The evening was a success.
‘I thought it added a lot of atmosphere.
We will probably consider repeating the venture later in the season, but more immediately we hope to get a spin-off tomorrow night.’
More of the same is King's Rovers demand
By David Prentice
TRANMERE boss, John King, has demanded a repeat performance from his players for tomorrow's visit of Southend with a different result.
Rovers dominated Friday night's home game with Peterborough, but had to settle for a 1-1 draw, and King explained: ‘Noone can say anything but good about the way we played.
‘The one thing you could have a go at is when you are playing like that you have to be more ruthless and when you have people on the rack you have to be careful of the counter attack.
Consistency
‘But it's such an up and down game that every manager in the league is looking for consistency.’
King will be seeking to re-establish that winning consistency against a Southend team who have lost much of last season's impressive drive.
On New Year's Day they briefly topped the division, but since then have lost players and impetus.
Leading marksman Brett Angell will be missing until February after a thigh operation and full-backs Dean Austin and Peter Butler have been sold.
Atmosphere
While King is looking for a repeat performance, club officials are hoping for a repeat of Friday's biggest gate of the season.
A novelty ladies' night boosted the attendance mark past 8,000 for the first time this season, and Chief Executive Frank Corfe said: ‘The evening was a success.
‘I thought it added a lot of atmosphere.
We will probably consider repeating the venture later in the season, but more immediately we hope to get a spin-off tomorrow night.’
Link can cut costs
A NORTH WEST designed communications systems could save businesses tens of thousands of pounds in operating costs, say the manufacturers.
The system is designed to link a local area network or telephone system between two separate buildings up to 1km apart.
The Digilink 60 radio line-of-sight system was developed by specialists Layer One of Haydock, St Helens and Liverpool manufacturer Microwave Modules who claim their system can save £40,000 over five years of operation compared with other link systems.
Time we rid society of these perverts
I WONDER why so much consideration is shown to paedophiles, surely the lowest and most disgusting form of human life.
Within the last fortnight, we have seen the release on parole of one offender after serving just 22 months of a five year sentence for sexual offences against at least a dozen young boys, and the sentencing of another man to life imprisonment after a sexual orgy resulting in the death of a nine year old.
In both cases the men concerned had a long history of previous convictions, with the killer already in jail following the deaths of two other boys.
I don't think I am a cruel or sadistic person, but I believe both the people I have mentioned, and certainly the second, should have been put down, unless a medical operation could be found that ensured their cure.
Not only do both represent a constant danger to the community, but their lives have ceased to have any real meaning.
The killer faces a future existence in solitary confinement, since his fellow inmates would undoubtedly do the court's job for them if they were given the chance.
Many arguments have been advanced against the death penalty, but the one that has most relevance for me is the fact that in the present state of our society, there is often no certainty that the right man has been convicted.
Where such doubt does not exist, as in the cases I have mentioned, I think it should be possible for habitual child molesters, those guilty of premeditated murder and terrorist bombers to be given a lethal injection.
Society is better off without them.
Remember the ones we often forget
WHAT is it about we British that makes us pay millions of pounds to actors who have never heard a shot fired in anger, while we ignore the heroes whose deeds they are paid to portray?
Almost unbelievable stories of courage in the face of danger regularly appear on our cinema and television screens, featuring men and women whom an ungrateful country has been only too happy to forget.
Every week one reads of Victoria Crosses being put up for sale by the hard-up families of men who willingly risked their lives for their country, yet at this very moment three holders of this supreme badge of courage live in unmarked graves on Merseyside.
In a few days time the nation will again pay lip service to the thousands killed in action during the Second World War, while preparing to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Battle of the Atlantic with a spectacular visit from a NATO fleet in May.
All highly commendable, but what about the thousands of humble seamen, greasers, stewards and stokers who bore the brunt of that battle to save civilisation, and have since received virtually no recognition?
I can only hazard a guess at what it must have been like to sail in a typical convoy, with bombers and submarines liable to strike at any moment, or to brave the Western Approaches with only a couple of inches of rusting metal between yourself and the enemy.
But as we saw in that magnificent film The Cruel Sea (recently re-shown on television) it was even more nerve-wracking to serve in a slow moving ammunition ship or tanker, bearing a lethal cargo, than to man the depth charges and guns on a naval corvette, which was at least able to defend itself.
Overshadowed
No fewer than 39,000 members of the Merchant Service lost their lives in the Second World War, many of them in the Western Approaches, yet they are invariably overshadowed by their more glamorous allies in the Royal Navy.
I am delighted to hear that St Nicholas' Church, long known for its association with sailors and the sea, is launching an appeal to create a special maritime chapel, something the city has lacked for a very long time.
But due to the lack of official interest, it has been left to the Merchant Navy Association to make enquiries about the possible striking of a commemorative award by the Surrey-based firm Award Productions, who have recently attracted attention with their issue of a National Service Medal.
Award Productions have previously struck similar medals on behalf of the veterans of the Normandy landings, Bomber Command and the Royal Naval Patrol Services, with 10% of the cost going to the appropriate service charity.
Incredibly, the government take £3.50 through VAT from the production of each medal, or roughly twice what the charities get, even though it is due to their cruel neglect that the medals have to be struck in the first place.
In my view every survivor of that gallant band who kept the wartime lifelines open should not only get his medal by right, but a cash grant too, and he should be honoured by an invitation to take part in a special parade through the City of Liverpool during the commemoration in May.
I think it will be nothing less than a public scandal if the Queen takes the salute aboard the Royal Yacht far out to sea, as currently planned, without meeting at least some of these forgotten heroes in person.
Without them, and thousands like them, none of us would currently be enjoying, if not prosperity, at least our freedom.
Family values skydive
WHERE on earth are we all going?
Only the other day it was reported that a young mother of a seven-year-old child had taken the Territorial Army to court for refusing to let her become a paratrooper…and won!
The most astonishing aspect of the case was not that she had an understandable desire to disport herself in space, but that under the law as it stands a major general had to offer her an abject apology for the recruiting sergeant showing a welcome piece of common sense.
Until recently we used to laugh behind our hands at the unfortunate women of the Soviet Union, who had to drive buses, work cranes and perform other heavy duties that have been a man's prerogative since the beginning of time, due to an acute shortage of labour.
Now we are charging blindly down the same path, while families break up and children turn to hooliganism for want of a mother's essentially female care.
Do we really want our daughters to become latter-day Amazons?
TALENT ALONE IS NOT ENOUGH
Slippery slope of sponsor hunt
FOUR North Wales schoolgirls are seeking sponsorship to help them get to the British ski championships.
The four Capel Curig youngsters, Rebbecca Banks, 11, Sally West, 14, and sisters Medi Ashton, 11, and Sarah Ashton, 14, all pupils of Ysgol Dyffryn Conwy, Llanrwst won the girls' section of the recent Welsh School artificial ski championships.
The win earns them the opportunity to go forward to the national championships at Hemel Hempstead in the south of England.
Their team manager, Lindsay Banks, said yesterday she was delighted with the girl's performance.
‘I am very pleased indeed,’ she said.
Now, she added, the next hurdle for the team would be to find a sponsor to help with the expense of travelling to the championships.
Rebbecca, left, Medi, Sarah and Sally looking for a sponsor Picture: JEFF PITT
Opponents of open-air market ‘out on a limb’
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
COLWYN Bay's chamber of trade was yesterday accused of being ‘out on a limb’ over its opposition to controversial proposals for an open air market in the town.
The chamber opposed plans for a market of up to 42 stalls in the town's Ivy Street car park, a scheme which was turned down by Colwyn Borough Council's planning committee last week.
Reasons included loss of parking and pedestrian safety.
But Fairway Investment, who are behind the venture, say the failure of the Ivy Street scheme is no great disappointment to them.
They now intend to go back to their original preferred scheme for a twice weekly market in nearby pedestrianised Station Road.
And they say they have the support of Station Road traders for the scheme.
Management of the nearby Colwyn Centre have also offered car parking space.
A spokesman said yesterday that in view of the support from traders and shoppers, it appeared that the town's chamber of trade was ‘out on a limb’ in opposing an open air market.
The chamber of trade responded that over 70 people objected to the Ivy Street scheme in a petition.
Cigarette' rewards' at special schools
CHILDREN in some special schools were often rewarded for good behaviour with cigarettes, according to a report yesterday.
The report said that disturbed children were more than twice as likely to become smokers as other youngsters.
The smoking habits of more than 600 secondary schoolchildren with special educational needs in England and Scotland were compared with pupils in mainstream education.
The study, funded by the Cancer Research Campaign, was carried out by Dr Lynn Michell and Wendy Fidler of Edinburgh, and Dr Anne Charlton of Manchester.
They found that more than six out of 10 children with emotional and behavioural problems were regular smokers.
In some special schools, good behaviour was rewarded with cigarettes.
In schools in the North West of England and the Lothian region of Scotland involved in the study, half the teachers did not feel their smoking habits affected the pupils they taught.
A quarter of those interviewed thought the rights of smokers outweighed those of non-smokers in the staffroom.
Dr Charlton, of the University of Manchester, recommended a policy directive from the Government to put the issue of smoking firmly on the agenda.
LETTERS
Right lines
TO ALL Telecom engineers, please accept my thanks for the effort and care you put into getting our phones back in order.
It was quite traumatic at the time to be sick or unwell in such a situation but you did your very best and succeeded in putting it all right.
A big thank you to all those concerned.
Well done.
Valued service
WE, THE officers and members of the Noctorum Residents Association, deplore and condemn the recent decision taken at Wirral Borough Council's meeting to withdraw all funding from the Bidston Roundabout Centre.
Also its outreach welfare rights facility which provides access for house calls to the disabled.
We value this regular service highly as it has been a source of up-to-date information which is readily available on a weekly basis.
There are very high rates of unemployment in this area, many disabled and elderly and long term ill people and single parent families who have benefited from this service.
Ask the people
ON THE subject of closing down the pits by this government.
I know I am only a layman, but I seem to remember that when the pits were taken over by the government, they became the property of the people to be run by the government.
So how can they close them down without the say-so of the people of this country?
I think they are breaking the law by not asking the people first.
The slogan was NCB, run by the people for the people.
RECENTLY I wasn't very well,
And had to go to Walton for a spell.
The first visit in all my 80 years,
With apprehension, doubts and fears.
Then on the wall beside my bed,
A notice, with my name, which said
That Dr Gill's Team B
Would be looking after me.
They were so kind, with loving care,
That even I liked being there.
And when it came my time to leave,
I was quite sorry — hard to believe.
So let us hesitate ere we decry,
The blessings of the NHI.
Out of tune
WHAT'S GOING on at the Philharmonic?
Not long ago, the orchestra was the toast of Liverpool, Merseyside, Great Britain.
Now it's on the verge of close down.
I'm sure I speak for most Merseysiders in saying enough is enough.
The squabbling is not fitting for the so-called ambassador for Liverpool.
Not long ago, they had people on the streets getting us to sign petitions to keep the orchestra.
This is the thanks we get near civil war in the boardroom.
I for one wouldn't sign another petition to keep the orchestra.
I think it would be better to get together with Manchester and get a really good orchestra there.
They're going ahead with a super new concert hall while our Philharmonic Hall is falling down.
Perhaps that's a sign for the future.
Let the hall fall down and let the so-called experts quarrel elsewhere.
There are better things to spend the money on in Liverpool.
What a change
WHAT MEMORIES the Echo article brought back about the evacuation.
I am one of triplets, Jean, Joyce and Robert Siddall.
We were ten years old and were evacuated from Heyworth Street School, Everton, Liverpool.
We were given a carrier bag containing a block of chocolate, crackers, corned beef, condensed milk, and we got on the train at Lime Street station.
I can see my mother now.
She had a bottle of milk and a bag of fairy cakes in her hand, the tears running down her face.
We were split up which I thought was cruel.
I still have the very first letter I wrote from home: ‘Please Mam, say you love me and bring me home’.
A few weeks ago a friend took me back to Dieniolen, near Bangor.
What a shock.
The village was run down, only two shops open, houses boarded up, neglect.
There was an elderly man about 80 sitting on a seat, so I showed him an old photograph, and he remembered the lady we were with.
How very sad.
We wanted to go inside the church on the hill but he told us it had to be kept locked because of vandals.
I should have kept my happy memories.
I don't think I will be going again.
The village looked as if it was dying.
Happy ending
IN THESE days of gloom and doom, how refreshing to read about the lifeguard who risked his life to save his dog.
Thankfully, the story had a happy ending.
Good luck to you, Mr Freer.
You deserve more than a medal.
Help starving
I NOTE with disgust that two students are able to spend £25 on a tome of filth.
In a Christian country, this book would be banned altogether instead of which so-called poverty-stricken Merseysiders have the wherewithal to make it a sell-out.
It would suit them better to use their surplus cash to aid starving children in other countries.
Where are their priorities?
Down dark road
I READ Brian Reade's column ‘Dragged down a dark road’(by the Conservatives).
I hope this excluded ‘young’ Winston Churchill who seems to be doing more for the miners than the opposition parties put together.
I seem to remember the Labour Party being dragged down what proved to be a very long dark road indeed by the trade unions.
I do hope that the warm display of unity by all political parties over Maastricht does not herald the start of another dark road.
It seems to me that all the main political parties are prepared to lead or perhaps, in the absence of a referendum, ‘drag’ us further down the European road whether we like it or not.
The only ‘heartless muggers’ who will really try to stop them are the likes of Norman Tebbit.
More toilets
REFERENCE the letter from H.G.T., Fazakerley, with regard to public toilets in the town centre.
I am one of hundreds of people who suffer from colitis and I would love to spend one or two days every so often in town.
But where to find a toilet?
The market is the only one.
The next one is at the back of St Luke's Church.
Shops in town don't want to know when you ask for a toilet.
They more or less show you the door.
I'll tell you what happened to me seven months ago.
I got off the train at Central Station.
I asked the porter about the toilet being locked up.
He said it was broken, had been for some time, and that if I wanted a toilet I should go to the cafe upstairs.
It's about time something was done to help people who have this complaint.
I doubt whether 50% of Liverpool is Labour
WHAT A ridiculous letter from Mrs F. Taylor (Echo, October 23rd) regarding Cilla Black's ‘blatant betrayal of Liverpool’.
Why does she assume that 100 per cent of Liverpool people are red hot Labour supporters?
I doubt if there are 50 per cent.
And why does she believe Cilla's son would be embarrassed by his mother voting Tory?
He's a little young for political bias.
Anyone doing as well as Cilla would be hypocritical to say they voted Labour.
Like Cilla, I think Liverpool and the majority of people are great, but I don't have to be a Labour supporter to appreciate it.
RE THE letter from Mrs F. Taylor about Cilla Black being a Tory and therefore a traitor to Liverpool.
I thought we lived in a democracy and valued freedom of choice.
It amazes me how so many Liverpool people seem to think that by being born here (which none of us have any control over) people who ‘get on’ should be obligated to Liverpool for ever more.
Mrs Taylor and her ilk talk utter tripe and thank goodness I have the freedom to say so.
Voters ‘unsure’ about reforms
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
THE Government is failing to get its message across in Wales on its citizens' charter and sweeping reforms in education.
Two surveys whose findings are published today show that many voters are unsure about some main planks of Government policy.
A survey for the Welsh Consumers' Council shows that 40pc of shoppers had never heard of the Government's citizens' charter despite publicity costing £350,000.
Just over one in four people in Wales supported the Government's plans for opt-out schools, while 41pc were undecided.
The blow to the Education Bill proposals for all schools to become grant maintained came in a survey for BBC Wales.
The poll carried out by Beaufort Research shows that 27pc support opting out, 31pc are against it and 41pc undecided.
The results will be analysed in tonight's Week In Week Out programme.
Earlier this month, the Welsh Office issued new information booklets for schools on grant-maintained status.
The poll results suggest that many parents still fail to understand the grant-maintained system.
So far only three schools in Wales have opted out after a ballot of parents.
They chose to be funded directly by the Welsh Office rather than by the county council.
Three more schools at Abergele, Clwyd, Llanerfyl, Powys, and Caergeiliog, near Valley, Anglesey, have applied for such status.
Meanwhile, the consumers' council says citizens' charters for patients and parents cost around £200,000 and £150,000 each to produce in Wales alone.
Director Katherine Hughes said: ‘We are concerned at the results of the survey.
‘They show that churning out pamphlets and booklets is ineffective if consumers cannot understand the messages.’
Don't panic says Marsh
EVERTON chairman Dr. David Marsh today called for a united front at Goodison Park as the club strives to edge away from the top flight danger zone, writes Ken Rogers.
Dr. Marsh once again reiterated the cold, hard fact of life that cash throughout the Premier League is extremely tight with Everton, in tandem with a host of clubs, feeling the pinch of the recession.
It is patently clear that the Blues must sell to buy or consider the possibility of exchange deals.
But with the season less than a third of the way through, the club is refusing to press the panic button, despite the worrying League situation.
Dr Marsh said: ‘There has been no radical change to our financial situation since the Annual General Meeting in August, apart from the income that has been generated through the gates.
Things are running as they were.
‘There are two things to consider availability of players and availability of cash.
‘A lot of people are saying that the board must get its act together and get some money to spend.
But you can't guarantee success through the transfer market.
‘Buying players is not like buying machines.
You have to look at the availability of funds.
Even if players become available, very few clubs have a fairy godfather to take care of things.
‘We are less than a third of the way through the season.
We are not about to panic.
We must be resolute and get on with it.
Every team goes through a bad patch.
We must all continue to work hard, for the club and the fans.’
Everton's annual accounts showed a loss last year of £1.8m and a £3.6m overdraft.
Since that time the club has spent a total of £1.7m on Barry Horne, Paul Rideout and Preki.
Against that, they have received around £200,000 for Pat Nevin.
National setbacks
MERSEYSIDE Hockey clubs had another bad day yesterday in the National League, Neston losing 4-2 to Firebrands and second division bottom club Warrington crashing to a 6-1 defeat at Guildford.
In the second round of the HA Cup yesterday, Southport caused the main shock with a 3-0 win over Formby at Birkdale.
Southport heartened by an early goal from Andy Ferns defended well and talented schoolboys Mathew Holmes and Stuart Humphries scored their other goals.
Liverpool Sefton beat Bowdon by 2-1 at Wyncote to record their first Premier League win, but they lost 2-0 to Ben Rhydding in the HA Cup.
Hightown-Northern handicapped by injuries were beaten 3-1 by Timporley at Crosby.
Nicholson (2) and Pittam were Timporley's goal scorers and Dave Enoch scored a last minute goal for Northern from Mike Cooke's free hit on the right.
Saturday
North Premier League Division One: Ben Rhydding 2 York 1; Durham University 2 Formby 2; HightownNorthern 1 Timporley 3; Norton 2 Alderley Edge 2; Sheffield 4 Wakefield 0.
Division Two: Disley 4 Ramgarhia 2; Halifax 1 Knutsford 1; Harrogate 5 Blackburn 1; Liverpool Sefton 2 Bowdon 1; Sheffield Bankers 2 Swalwell 2; Southport 5 Springfields 1; Stockton 7 Sunderland 0; Wigan 1 Preston 2.
HA Cup round two: Southport 3 Formby 0; Liverpool Sefton 0 Ben Rhydding 2; Swalwell 3 Harrogate 2; Norton 1 Sheffield 8; Wakefield 0 Alderley Edge 4; Timporley 0 Pelicans 0 (Timporley win on penalty strokes).
Hightown clear
HIGHTOWN moved two points clear at the top of the National Women's Hockey League (Div 1) after a 3-0 win at Chelmsford.
Maggie Souyave, Trish Mawdsley and Tina Cullen got the goals.
IF YOU are a fan of collectables, you won't want to miss the new ‘on-pack’ offer from Carnation Evaporated Milk.
To celebrate 70 years of their product, Carnation has produced a model replica of its original 1922 Morris Delivery Van.
In bright red and gold livery, the replica will make a charming addition to any collection and a super gift for adults and children alike.
These commemorative vans are available from Carnation for two labels and £2.25.
But as a special offer to our readers, we've got 100 to give away for free, along with a set of five colourful Carnation leaflets featuring Favourite Desserts, Party Specials, Simple Suppers, Sweet Surprises and Kiddies Kitchen.
Carnation Milk contains no added sugar or preservatives, just concentrated fresh milk.
It can be used in all sorts of recipes from paella or salmon and broccoli quiche to lemon layer-pudding.
For your chance to claim one of our 100 1992 Carnation Model Delivery Vans, write with your name and address on the back of a postcard (or sealed down envelope to: Carnation Offer, Echo Dept C, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB.
The first 100 names drawn after November 17 will each receive a model van.
Bangers on the menu for bonnie fans
IT CAN get a bit nippy even when you're huddled around a flaming bonfire.
And there's no better way to keep warm than to tuck into a tasty treat or two.
You can be a sizzling chef this Guy Fawkes Night with our quick and tasty recipes.
They can be prepared in advance to ensure you don't miss out on the firework fun.
BACON ROCKETS (serves 8)
9fl oz milk
7oz packet instant mashed potato
1oz freshly-grated parmesan or cheddar cheese
1 small, chopped, green pepper
2tbsp course-grain mustard
8oz cooked, chopped, lean bacon
4oz can of hot dog sausages
12oz rindless streaky bacon rashers.
Put the milk into a large saucepan with 9fl oz water.
Bring to the boil and stir in the instant potato.
When evenly blended, stir in the parmesan cheese, pepper, mustard and lean bacon.
Leave to cool.
Preheat the oven to 190/375F/Gas 5.
Cut the sausages in half through the middle and push each half on the end of a wooden skewer.
Shape some of the mashed potato mixture around each sausage.
Cover the sausage completely, then wrap around with a bacon rasher.
Arrange the ‘rockets’ in rows on a lightly-greased baking tray and cover the ends of the skewers with a piece of foil.
Bake for 20-25 minutes.
Serve with…
FIERY DIP
1 onion
2 sticks celery
1 clove garlic, peeled and crushed
14oz can chopped tomatoes
1tbsp tomato puree
3tbsp malt vinegar
1tbsp Worcestershire sauce
1-2tbsp chilli powder
salt and ground black pepper.
Put all the ingredients into a saucepan and simmer uncovered for 20-25 minutes, or until thick.
TOFFEE APPLES
8-10 small, crisp dessert apples
1lb demerara sugar
2oz butter
1tbsp vinegar
1tbsp golden syrup
pt water.
Wipe the apples and push lolly sticks into them.
Put the sugar, butter, vinegar, golden syrup and water into a heavy saucepan.
Place over heat until the sugar has dissolved completely.
Increase the heat and boil rapidly for about 5-8 minutes until mixture reaches the ‘soft crack’ stage (290F).
Put the saucepan into a large bowl of hot water to keep the toffee warm and soft while dipping the apples allowing the excess to drip off.
Put each dipped apple onto a lightly-buttered tray or parchment paper.
Allow to cool and set.
Fortex D-day on lamb plant
AN announcement is expected this week on the NewZealand-based company Fortex Group Ltd's plans to establish a new lamb processing plant in the United Kingdom.
The final choice appears to rest between sites at Llandrinio, Powys, or one in neighbouring Shropshire.
Fortex chairman John Austin chose the presentation of the company's annual results to confirm the group's intention to reinforce its ‘on-the ground presence’ overseas.
He said: ‘Fortex already has a major presence in the UK through Towers and Co, which is the company's official importer of chilled and frozen lamb into the UK.
There are mo immediate plans to change that situation.
‘However, one of our main aims in the coming year is to strengthen our overseas marketing connections by establishing two new wholly-owned marketing companies, one in the UK and the other in Hong Kong.
‘To finance these initiatives, the directors have approved a rights issue to raise NZ£14 million (£4.7m).’
Mr Austin reported a 220pc growth in net profit to NZ£9.12 million (£3.03m) for the year ended August 31.
In spite of bad weather conditions for livestock farmers over the New Zealand winter and early spring, the company increased throughput by 23pc, reflected in a 40pc increase in turnover to NZ£297.10 million (£98.7m).
‘Fortex has shown that it can come through a difficult trading period in excellent financial shape,’ said Mr Austin.
Put some sparkle in your life
JANET lights the blue touchpaper
BONFIRE parties are supposed to go with a bang…
And it is a big let-down when they fizzle out with only a snap, crackle and pop.
Fireworks are what youngsters are waiting for all year round when they remember, remember the fifth of November.
Cheaper
When your Rainbow Fountain is a wash out-or your Traffic Lights as dull as ditch water, sparks fly.
So we decided to take a look at just a little of what was on offer — comparing the leading firework brand with a cheaper one on offer.
STANDARD FIREWORKS (BOX B), price £7.99
Perhaps an unfair comparison, because this wasn't the smallest box Standard do.
But it was the only one we could get hold of.
One of the biggest pluses for Standard was that all the fireworks were different.
And the box contained a safety taper to light each firework.
Standard really do win hands down for quality, variety and colour.
The Shooting Star was so spectacular it was awarded a ‘wow’ from our young audience, while the Retro Jet was an explosion of colour which brought squeals of delight.
The only minus: Our spectators would have liked a rocket in the box.
ASTRA MINI BOX, price £4.30
This contained 10 fireworks so was good value for money, but there were only seven varieties.
A definite rocketing for Astra, though, because there was no safety taper.
A plus, however, was that the fireworks have a wick, instead of blue touchpaper, so you are left in no doubt about when they are lit.
Mount Stromboli was the firework which got the biggest applause from the Astra box.
And their Roman Candle was brighter and longer-lasting than Standard's.
Protesters clash with Springboks over attack
SOUTH African rugby team officials denied claims yesterday that anti-apartheid protesters hit Springbok players with eggs and flour at the start of their tour of England.
The City of London anti-apartheid group claimed that 30 protesters infiltrated a private sports club in south-west London where the South Africans were staying on Sunday night.
They said the protesters let off stink bombs and covered four players with eggs and flour.
But Springbok officials and security officers at the club gave a different version of the incident which occurred just a few hours after the team had arrived.
Simon Pape, head of security, said: ‘There were about 25 protesters inside the club.
‘They were initially very polite, but when they saw three of the South African players walk in, the situation turned nasty and scuffles broke out.
‘They did throw eggs and flour, but the players did not get hit and just walked through to their rooms.
‘In fact, the only person to get hit was me.’
But one of the demonstrators, Cat Wiener, said: ‘One player got hit in the ear by an egg, and others ended up with flour all over them.’
The protesters were eventually removed from the club where they continued to demonstrate outside, but no arrests were made.
Tour manager Gabriel Malan said: ‘The players were not involved.
We just watched the protest from our bedroom windows.’
Protesters have vowed to carry on the demonstrations despite the fact the tour has been given tacit approval by the African National Congress.
The team's arrival follows the end of a stormy and un successful tour to France.
They were accused of snubbing their French hosts by missing two official functions.
Riddle of human torch attack
POLICE are today investigating a claim that a man was beaten unconscious and set alight by a gang of six or seven.
Alan Haughton, 27, of Elsinore Heights, Halewood, was discovered in flames by two passers-by at 12.30am.
They heard his screams and doused the flames before calling emergency services.
A Merseyside Police spokesman said: ‘CID officers are making inquiries.
Two people heard the shouts from a field and went to help.’
Mr Haughton was taken to Whiston Hospital and treated for burns to his chest and right shoulder.
Detectives were today waiting to question Mr Haughton.
Caring cancer victim strikes gold
AN 80-year-old woman who lost a leg because of cancer but who nonetheless still campaigns for the handicapped, was rewarded yesterday for her ‘triumph over adversity’.
Dorothy Barlow was one of eight old people presented with Help the Aged 1992 Golden Awards by Dame Barbara Cartland at the London Hilton Hotel.
Despite her handicap Dorothy, of Chandlers' Ford, Hants, campaigns for improved access for wheelchair users.
The awards, sponsored by the communication equipment manufacturers Tunstall Telecom, were for outstanding achievements by elderly people and their contribution to helping others.
Other winners were: Elsie Looker, 79, of Southsea, Hants, who won the Tunstall Telecom Caring Award for looking after her sister in her home after she developed Alzheimer's disease.
She is chairman of the Portsmouth branch of the Alzheimer's Disease Society, which she founded; Denis Blinco, 68, of Coventry, for his contribution to the arts.
Mr Blinco was a founder member of the Coventry Reminiscence Theatre and he is currently working on a one-man show; Irene Hildred, 72, of Sleaford, Lincs, for her work with young people.
She teaches at Sleaford division of the Girls' Brigade and also at her local Sunday school; Phyl McMillan, of London, for her contribution to swimming for the disabled and for the over-50s, for whom she and her husband formed a club.
By Will Rolston
MERSEYSIDE youngsters are 100 times more likely to be injured by fireworks than the government admits, according to a report published today.
Surveys conducted in Liverpool, London and other cities show that around 80,000 youngsters a year are wounded by fireworks.
But government figures compiled from hospitals put the figure at 800.
Liverpool City Council claims Michael Heseltine's Department of Trade and Industry is responsible for playing down firework risks.
Cllr Eileen Devaney, chairman of the Consumer Protection Sub-Committee, said government statistics underplay the true level of injuries and could lull parents into a false sense of security.
More than 32,000 youngsters were interviewed by Trading Standards departments.
Their research, in two separate exercises, showed 2.7% of all 11 to 15-year-olds receive fireworks injuries.
The results go before Liverpool City Council on November 11, but consumer chiefs want the findings to create maximum impact before Bonfire Night.
Liverpool Trading Standards chief Peter Mawdsley says the massive gulf between injury statistics is because the DTI estimates findings from certain hospital casualty units.
He said that the government had sat on the council figures which include injuries treated by GPs and first aid for two years.
High stakes: Page 11
Mum sues over ‘terror’ strip search during prison visit
By Jules Stenson
A YOUNG mother told a court today that she felt dirty and humiliated after a prison strip search.
Natalie Bayliss, 22, is suing the Home Secretary and the prison's governor for damages in a legal test case at Liverpool County Court.
She said she was 18 when she was put through the ‘terrifying’ ordeal by two women officers.
Miss Bayliss, of Boode Croft, Stockbridge Village, Liverpool, said she stopped having sex and had a bath three times a day for months after the search in December 1988.
The court was told the incident sparked off a week-long rooftop protest by inmates at Franklands Jail, County Durham.
Miss Bayliss, who has a six-year-old daughter, initially refused to be searched but agreed after being told she would not be able to see her brother Michael, a heroin addict.
She said she thought she would only be frisked but was told to strip.
Miss Bayliss claimed male officers could see her as she stood naked in the room, through a small window in the door.
She said she was too terrified to visit her brother again.
Miss Bayliss had been visiting her brother with her cousin Brian Barton, 21, who was also strip searched.
Both seek damages for injury, discomfort and inconvenience.
(Proceeding)
Exhibition
IMAGES of Italy, a selection of photographs by landscape photographer Joe Cornish, continues at the Tabernacle Centre, Machynlleth, until Saturday.
Tourism visit
NEW chairman of the Wales Tourist Board, Tony Lewis, is visiting Mid Wales today and tomorrow, meeting individual operators as well as local authority, national park and National Trust representatives.
He will be at Llandrindod Wells, Aberaeron, Machynlleth and Aberdyfi today and at Caersws tomorrow to address members of Mid Wales Tourism.
Waste action
CEREDIGION councillors are being urged to take action against the owner of Piercefield Farm, Penparcau, Aberystwyth, for illegal tipping.
Slug in milk
A WARNING letter has been sent to a dairy by Montgomeryshire's director of environmental health after a slug was found in a bottle of milk.
Recycling
POWYS Training, in conjunction with Ysgol Bro Ddyfi, is considering a recycling initiative for aluminium cans in the Machynlleth area.
Richardson raps back in war of words
WEST Indies skipper Richie Richardson today dismissed allegations by Australian fast bowler Craig McDermott that he runs a side of ‘sledgers.’
McDermott, in a book released as the West Indies begin their tour of Australia, said he was the target of abuse by some West Indian cricketers during Australia's 1991 Caribbean tour.
He singled out bowler Curtly Ambrose and Viv Richards, the West Indies skipper at the time, for ‘sledging’, cricketing parlance for verbal abuse from the opposition during a game.
New skipper Richardson said he had heard of McDermott's allegations but repeated his desire that the series, unlike the previous clash between the two teams, be played in good spirit.
Good behaviour
Richardson said he could not understand the timing of the release of the book, ‘Strike Bowler’, but would ensure that his men maintained good behaviour.
‘I don't like confrontations.
I don't like to see people getting at one another, picking at one another , sledging one another ,’ Richardson said.
‘I would be the first person to tell my players to get on with the game because when you don't do that, you are only upsetting your rhythm.
‘You can sometimes lose concentration and lose focus.
It's best with anything like that to dismiss it and get on with the game,’ said Richardson, whose team were playing their opening tour match against an Australian Cricket Board XI in Perth today.
Bumper war
McDermott, who as a lower order batsman was a prime target in a ‘bumper’ war between the two sides in 1991, said he had gone public with his allegations after reading Richards' recent autobiography, ‘Hitting Across the Line.’
‘The reality is that the West Indians in 1991 did everything Richards accused the Australians of doing 16 years earlier,’ McDermott wrote, referring to the 1975-76 series in Australia.
He alleged Ambrose last year consistently labelled him a ‘coward’ because he backed away from the West Indian fast bowling, and that Richards was the most verbal player of all.
The West Indies won last year's test series against Australia in the Caribbean 2-1, with two matches drawn.
Bottling plant revival boosts new jobs hopes
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
PLANS for a water bottling plant which could bring jobs to the Llangernyw area of Clwyd are likely to go ahead.
There had been fears the scheme had collapsed.
Agents for Hafodunos Estates, who own the site of a mineral water spring, yesterday confirmed they were negotiating with a view to getting a project off the ground next year.
They say there has been no shortage of interest in the project from potential backers.
In October, talks between Llangernyw-based Water tight Ltd, who were hoping to develop the plant, and Hafodunos Estate, broke down.
Watertight had hoped to build a £3m plant, creating almost 90 jobs near a spring at Hendre Ddu.
The aim was to get the plant operational by March.
But Hafodunos said they were ending negotiations with Watertight, who they said had failed to provide evidence of sufficient financial backing.
That drew an angry reaction from Watertight, which had invested more than £200,000 in preparation work.
They insisted their project had a backer but there were commercial reasons why the details could not be revealed until the deal was finalised.
Yesterday, a spokesman for the Shrewsbury-based agents acting for Hafodunos Estates said discussions were continuing.
It was still early days but he stressed they were still committed to the scheme and had confidence in its future.
He said the situation with Watertight had been ‘unfortunate’ but they had realised very quickly there was no shortage of alternative backers.
Interest had been so great that they had not got around to marketing the idea elsewhere.
He said it was too early to talk about the number of jobs but the project would probably be less ambitious than the original scheme.
Yesterday, Annette Hosking of Watertight Ltd, said she was pleased to hear the scheme was still alive.
‘I am desperately sad that our scheme did not come to fruition but I am glad that someone will take it over and bring these jobs to the area.
We will give them all our support,’ she said.
A messy divorce
IN OUR arrogance, we parents tend to assume that our children love us, respect us and think we are endowed with the wisdom of Solomon.
But how often is that really the case?
How many would be glad to see the back of mum and dad?
Seems we may have a chance of finding out: In America, 12-year-old Gregory Kingsley has already ‘divorced’ his real parents in a successful legal action.
Now we are about to witness a similar case in Britain where a young girl wants to get shut of mummy and daddy and live at her boyfriend's home.
It must be sad and hurtful for any parent to find themselves in this situation, because the vast majority of us have nothing but our children's good at heart.
And in most cases, mum and dad do know best.
If they give advice, they mainly do it after a lifetime's experience and because they are anxious to help — though I'll not deny that some parents can be real nasties as far as their children are concerned.
On the other hand these things work both ways.
And unless we happen to be absolute saints, I'll bet most of us would admit that there have been occasions when we would willingly have ‘divorced’ our young ourselves…
In fact, mums and dads have to be pretty tough to bring up children nowadays.
Modern pressures have ensured that today's youngsters have far too much to say for themselves and do not always display the respect for their elders which they should.
Even so, if you grit your teeth and sweat it out, most of them do emerge as reasonable human beings.
Family life needs a bit of tolerance on both sides — not recourse to the law.
Plan to prevent agony of eviction
A NORTH Wales council wants to ‘buy time’ for families who face being made homeless because of mortgage arrears.
Arfon Borough Council is keen to explore the possibility of leasing houses which owners are unable to sell or have been repossessed by building societies.
Such a plan would be similar to the Nationwide Building Society's scheme by which local authorities can lease properties for one to three years.
Another option to be explored is the Nationwide Safe Haven scheme, the council says in its housing strategy and operational plan submissions to the Welsh Office for 1993-94.
Under that scheme, owners who face being made homeless due to mortgage arrears are allowed to stay in their homes as tenants for 12 months as the council takes up a head lease.
The document, approved by the housing committee, says: ‘Schemes of this nature are vital to ensure a better use of the housing stock.’
They also enable the council to respond to the growing number of families becoming homeless due to mortgage difficulties.
Arfon Council has 975 council house applicants on its waiting list, compared with nearly 1,400 in 1989.
Despite the drop, there is still a demand for council houses that cannot be met, it says.
The council proposes to budget £100,000 in 1993-94 to provide grants for about 10 existing tenants so that they can buy private houses and release family-sized council houses for re-letting.
Many three-bedroomed houses occupied by single people or couples could be occupied by families now on the council's waiting list, it says.
It is also planned to introduce a scheme to provide grants to meet the costs of moving to alternative accomodation.
Double trouble for Tories
By Mark Davies, political correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT today faced a double dose of difficulty with a key Cabinet meeting on spending and continued uncertainty over this week's crucial Euro vote.
Ministers were meeting to get to grips with the strictest public spending controls for years.
It is also estimated that 37 Tory backbenchers are set to vote against the government in Wednesday's Maastricht debate, making the result too close to call.
Today's talks on spending comes amid reports of splits in the Cabinet over the best way of meeting the £244.5bn ceiling for 1993-94 spending.
Downing Street sources have already ruled out any relaxation of the public spending limit.
There are also claims that some ministers are calling for increased borrowing to reduce the impact of cuts while others may push for tax increases.
The outcome of this evening's meeting will be revealed in Chancellor Norman Lamont's autumn statement on November 12.
Cuts in benefits and a public sector pay freeze are thought to be likely.
Waterloo Boy to open with a win
By Captain Becher
WATERLOO BOY sets out on another chasing campaign tomorrow at Exeter with expectations high of a season full of more success.
The nine-year-old has been a fine servant for trainer David Nicholson and, although a few pounds below the very best over two miles, he picks up enough prize-money each year to comfortably pay his oats bill.
The Haldon Gold Cup provides an ideal start to his 1992/93 wage earning even though Katabatic may look a more obvious choice.
A race-fit Sabin du Loir proved six lengths too good for Waterloo Boy in this race last year before Nicholson's gelding ran up a four-timer in the build-up to Cheltenham.
His clash with Katabatic and Remittance Man was the highlight of the meeting.
Waterloo Boy was travelling best of all three out, but found only one pace as the two principals slogged it out up front.
There were signs that Waterloo Boy was past his best for the season and those were emphasised when Katabatic easily beat him at Cheltenham in April.
With Katabatic not as effective away from Cheltenham (particularly on right-handed tracks) and Waterloo Boy going well fresh, the tables are set to be turned.
Nicholson's fine form since his move to new stables over the summer adds to confidence.
Assistant Alan King said: ‘Waterloo Boy is in fine shape and did a lovely piece of work on Saturday morning.
He's more forward than at the same time last season.’
Romany King should be straight enough after an easy reappearance to win the Whitbread Pub Partnerships Chase.
His second to Party Politics in the Grand National marked him down as a stayer, but he is by no means a slouch over shorter trips.
He has plenty of good form over three miles and less and the way he progressed last season suggests he could develop into a Gold Cup horse.
He looked burly on his return at Kempton last month, but travelled strongly until weakening behind Far Senior.
Ballystate looked in need of the run despite winning here last time, so improvement can be expected in the John Devenish Handicap Hurdle.
Travelling strongly for much of the way, Ballystate had just moved ahead when belting the final flight.
Although tying up, she battled on well to hold off Flying Speed by a neck.
FURY OF FLAKE GIRL'S FAMILY
Rachel in hospital as party drink spiked with ecstasy
By Paul Byrne
TOP Liverpool model Rachel Brown was recovering in hospital today after apparently taking a drink spiked with the designer drug, ecstasy.
Rachel, who shot to stardom as the Cadbury's Flake model, has been kept under observation at Broadgreen Hospital for a week.
Doctors are concerned about her condition which this morning was described as ‘very poorly’.
She is understood to have become ill at a party after unknowingly taking the illegal drug.
Rachel was taken to her Allerton flat by friends.
But the 25year-old, who can earn a reported £5,000 a day, fled barefoot and arrived later at the Speke home of her grandparents, Bill, 80, and Irene, 72.
A doctor was called and the following day she was taken to Broadgreen, where she is believed to be having treatment for exhaustion.
Today, Mr Brown attacked the people who spiked his granddaughter's drink.
‘Whoever gave this drug to Rachel is evil and must be stopped before they kill someone,’ he said.
Rachel, a former Quarry Bank pupil, became a household face after she was filmed seductively eating a Flake chocolate bar while relaxing in a bath in Venice.
She was brought up in Speke by her grandparents at their home in Dymchurch Road.
Lee Kelly, a lodger at Rachel's flat, said: ‘We're all very worried.’
Drug victim…top model Rachel Brown
Dan-Air take-over cleared for take-off
THE take-over of Dan-Air parent company Davies and Newman by British Airways is not to be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, it was announced yesterday.
Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, said he agreed the merger raised competition issues but concluded the public interest would be better served by not referring the deal.
Up to 1,600 jobs will go in the take-over which will also halt charter operations and cut the number of Dan-Air scheduled routes from 28 to 12.
Rivals British Midland, Virgin Atlantic and Air UK objected to the merger and asked the Government and the European Commission to examine the takeover amid claims that it would lead to further domination of domestic airline business by BA.
But the EC said last week that the rescue of the Gatwick-based airline did not fall within its jurisdiction for a competition investigation.
A spokesman for Virgin said: ‘We are disappointed that there was not an opportunity to save more jobs.’
He added that Virgin was taking up the matter of the fairness of take-off and landing slots at UK airports with the European Commission.
‘We shall carry on the fight for individual airlines in this complaint to the EC,’ he said.
Wright's new challenge
BOOKIES' favourites Arsenal can climb to within a point of the Premier League leaders and set their sights firmly on a third title triumph in five seasons by winning at Crystal Palace tonight.
But there is a more immediate aim for striker Ian Wright who is fighting a fitness battle to return in the live Sky TV game against the club which sold him to Highbury less than a year ago and show he is still the man England need.
Wright's hair-trigger temperament has been questioned in the debate over who should succeed Gary Lineker in the England line-up.
His failure to accept at least one gilt-edged chance when he was finally awarded his sixth cap against Norway last month, may also count against Wright when England manager Graham Taylor picks his squad on Thursday for the next World Cup qualifier against Turkey on November 18.
But there is no disputing the 29-year-old's awesome record of 34 goals in 46 games for the Gunners.
Britain's best
SUPERMARKET chain William Morrison has beaten off Sainsbury and Tesco to be named the UK's best performing company.
The group was named as Britain's best by Director 1000.
Batty losing fitness race
LEEDS United's England midfielder David Batty was having more treatment to his injured ankle today.
He damaged ligaments in Saturday's 2-2 draw with Coventry, and his hopes of being fit for Wednesday's European Cup tie against Rangers remain slim.
But David Rocastle is poised to end his Elland Road isolation with a starring role in what had been billed the Battle of Britain.
Speculation about his Leeds' future reached fever pitch when he was not even on the bench for last week's Coca-Cola Cup tie at Scunthorpe.
Now he is the most likely replacement for Batty.
‘I would have chosen better circumstances,’ said Rocastle.
‘And we all hope David will be OK because he is a big influence on the team.’
But it looks more likely that the one-time England midfielder will start only his second game since his £2 million move from Arsenal in the summer.
Rocastle began the first Euro tie in Stuttgart but was substituted at half-time, and all his other five appearances have been as a replacement.
Snap happy for Di
PRINCESS DIANA captured the attention of the photographers yet again today when she arrived in South Korea with Prince Charles for their first official visit there.
It is the longest time the that the royal couple will have been together in public since the intense speculation about their marriage during the summer.
Full story Page 7
Clinton sweeps into White House with landslide
BILL Clinton swept to the US presidency with a landslide Democrat victory over George Bush in key states early this morning.
The 46-year-old Arkansas Governor stormed to a series of victories to become the first Democrat in the White House since the departure of Jimmy Carter in 1980.
At 3.15 this morning Clinton had passed the magical 270 electoral votes he required to win the presidency.
American voters, anxious for a change in economic policy, propelled the Arkansas governor to victory over the Republican President on a tide of discontent.
Mr Bush was in deep trouble as Mr Clinton won the normally Republican states of Vermont, New Hampshire and Georgia, and then carried West Virginia, which went for Ronald Reagan in 1984 before switching to the Democrats four years ago.
Mr Clinton also looked certain to win California early this morning to gain a further 54 votes.
Walking with his family to dinner in Houston, Mr Bush admitted after early results: ‘It doesn't look good.’
Exit polling showed independent Ross Perot was taking more votes from Mr Bush than from Mr Clinton in several states, which added to the President's problems.
Early this morning, Mr Clinton had 254 of the 270 electoral votes he needed to win the Presidency.
Mr Bush had a mere 46, and Mr Perot had none.
The big early Clinton victories included Michigan, New Jersey, Georgia three killer blows for Mr Bush as well as Illinois, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Maryland, Connecticut and West Virginia.
Even Vermont and New Hampshire staunch conservative New England states that are the emblem of stern Republicanism went for Mr Clinton.
Mr Bush had won only Indiana the home state of his Vice President Dan Quayle and Virginia.
After returning to Little Rock, Arkansas, from an eight-state, 4,000-mile flying campaign early in the day, Mr Clinton voted jokingly telling well-wishers he had cast his vote for Vice President for his running mate, Tennessee Senator Al Gore.
‘I voted for Al Gore for Vice President and had to vote for the other fellow to get his (Gore's) name,’ Mr Clinton told a neighbour as reporters listened in.
After returning to the governor's mansion, Mr Clinton later said during a jog through rain-swept neighbourhoods near the mansion that he watched a movie with his wife, Hillary, and their 12-year-old daughter, Chelsea.
‘I fell asleep in a chair and Hillary and Chelsea fell asleep on the couch,’ he said.
‘We were watching an old John Wayne revolutionary war-type movie.’
The over-riding reason for the President's apparent demise emerged clearly in opinions expressed by voters as they emerged from polling stations the economy, the economy and the economy.
The revolt against the Mr Bush's presidency a ran all to Mr Clinton's benefit and not much to that of Mr Perot, the acid-tongued Texas billionaire who styled himself the unorthodox candidate of protest.
Democrat Carol Moseley from Illinios became the first black woman to be elected to the Senate.
Clinton's pledge Page 5
£5.2mbid to clean up beach
WORK is soon to start on a £5.2m scheme which will prevent raw sewage being pumped on to a Merseyside beach.
The project is part of North West Water's £250m clean up of the Mersey estuary and will provide pumping stations to stop the sewage pouring on to Crosby shore in Sefton.
Work will start on the pumping stations on November 9 at locations near Harbord Road, Waterloo and next to the sea embankment north of Hall Road, Blundellsands.
When completed in about 18 months time, the stations, which are about four miles apart, will stop raw sewage from three outfalls that serve 42,000 people being discharged on to the foreshore.
They will pump waste water to an existing sewer at Crosby Road South and then to North West Water's multimillion pound treatment works at Sandon Dock.
David Horritt, the principal project manager for the scheme, said there would be some disruption while sewer pipes are laid.
‘But each stage will be reopened to traffic as soon as possible and local diversions will be signposted,’ he added.
OXFORD University is this morning preparing to salute old boy Bill Clinton, after winning the US presidency.
A letter inviting ‘President Clinton’ to speak at the prestigious Oxford Union debating society was typed and ready to send as soon as news of his victory became known.
With the Arkansas governor a Rhodes Scholar at the university in 1968-69 looking all set for victory, it meant the US would become at least the 10th nation this century to boast a leader taught at the city of the dreaming spires.
Had the unexpected happened, and Mr Bush reclaimed the White House, it would have represented the greatest political comeback since Truman defied pollsters in the late '40s.
Oxford Union treasurer Toby Lewis said: ‘Mr Clinton has got very fond memories of Oxford and we are very optimistic he will come here in the first two years of office.
‘A Clinton presidency will be extremely beneficial for the university, and raise its profile in the States,’ he said.
There is little doubt which way the university would vote, given the opportunity.
More than 1,000 students backed Mr Clinton overwhelmingly last week in a tense debate on the motion: ‘This house would vote Democrat.’
Yet Oxford Students' Union president Vicky Howe said support for Clinton was running high, not because he was a former student, but in opposition to President Bush.
‘I do not think people are particularly excited about the election because Clinton studied here,’ she said.
‘There have always been a lot of politicians at Oxford.
Only two or three post-war British Prime Ministers did not come here,’ she added.
Those who did include Clement Attlee, Anthony Eden, Harold Macmillan, Edward Heath, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Margaret Thatcher, and Harold Wilson.
QUICKFIRE Tranmere extended their home rule with a comfortable win over Southend last night.
Goals in the opening 15 minutes from John Morrissey and John Aldridge and a late counter from Neil McNab earned Rovers three first division points.
The only disappointment for chairman Peter Johnson and his board was an attendance of 5,870 more than 2,000 down on Friday's ladies night crowd.
Those who were there saw an eighth Prenton win of the season in an unbeaten run of 11 home games.
Two Southend players missed the team bus and had to fly north in time for kickoff.
But Chris Powell and Adam Locke could do little to bring John King's flight-to-the-moon Rovers down to earth.
Tranmere made a lightning start with Aldridge firing wide in the first 60 seconds.
And Rovers duly took the lead after eight minutes.
The goal actually stemmed from a Southend corner but Kenny Irons made a superb interception in his own half and released Morrissey who brilliantly beat his cover before lashing a 16-yard shot high past ‘keeper Sansome.
Rovers were bubbling and they made it two on 15 minutes.
Felled
Malkin's far post cross was headed down by Nevin for Irons to crash a shot off the bar and Aldridge netted from close range.
It was the 12th goal of the season for Aldridge, who was yesterday named in the Republic of Ireland World Cup squad to meet Spain in a fortnight.
Rovers might have had a penalty after 29 minutes when Aldridge was felled by Prior but referee John Lloyd of Wrexham dismissed the appeals.
Then Aldridge again drew applause with a superb piece of control and a chip over the ‘keeper that unfortunately drifted off target.
The second half began in the manner of the first with Tranmere in control.
Nevin shot over, Aldridge went close and then Higgins hit the bar with a header from Morrissey's cross.
Southend then enjoyed a revival but after 63 minutes Malkin could have tied up the points when set up by Aldridge but Sansome made an excellent save.
Rovers suffered from something of a fadeout and we even had a number of home fans who felt inclined to boo.
McNab silenced them perfectly within five minutes with a low 20-yard shot into the bottom corner after 77 minutes for his first goal g the season.
The second-half hadn't lived up to the football of the first but Tranmere played far better on Friday with less reward.
TRANMERE: Nixon, Higgins, Brannan, Irons, Mungall, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Malkin, McNab, Nevin.
Subs: Cooper, Hughes.
SOUTHEND: Sansome, Parkinson, Powell, Cornwell, Edwards, Prior, Ansah, Martin, Locke, Benjamin, Tilson (Sub O'Callaghan 59).
Subs: Scully.
REFEREE: John Lloyd (Wrexham).
ATTENDANCE: 5870.
Russians in mood to hit Reds on break
by Philip McNulty
SPARTAK MOSCOW are ready to throw up a Russian wall of defiance to end Liverpool's European dream at Anfield tonight.
Oleg Romantsev, coach of the newly-crowned Russian champions, was in confident mood last night as he prepared his players to face a hostile 38,000 crowd.
And he is convinced his side, leading 4-2 from the first leg, can hit Liverpool on the break to claim a vital away goal.
Outstanding
Spartak have proved themselves the masters of away goals and just one tonight will seriously jeopardise Liverpool's hopes.
In 1991, they went to face Real Madrid in The Bernabeu Stadium after a goalless first leg in Moscow, and came away with an outstanding 3-1 win.
And after a similar result in the first round of the European Cup Winners Cup against Avenir this season, they won 5-1 in Luxembourg.
Star striker Dmitry Radchenko scored a hat-trick in the 5-1 weekend win against Moscow Dinamo, who hold a 2-1 lead from the UEFA Cup second round clash against Torino in Turin, confirming Spartak's outstanding current form.
Coach Romantsev said: ‘We have a two-goal advantage from the first game and we always do well on the counter attack.
That is our strength and our forwards are in good form at the moment.
The pitch and conditions will be different from the first game.
Although I think it will be a good game, I don't think it will be as interesting.’
That suggests Spartak will adopt a safety-first policy.
Spartak captain and goalkeeper Stanislav Cherchesov said: ‘The first leg showed us that Liverpool possess a high-class squad again.
We know that a very difficult struggle is in store for us.’
Defender Andrei Ivanov said: ‘It would be very wrong of us to think that Spartak have already qualified for the quarter-finals.
Liverpool are not a team to concede anything easily.’
Brain op death verdict is challenged by father
By Sue Ormisher Daily Post Staff
A COMPUTER analyst died from a massive brain haemorrhage 36 hours after surgeons performed an exploratory operation.
The surgeons thought that John Cleary, 25, had a brain tumour and performed a delicate biopsy operation in an attempt to discover its extent.
Merseyside coroner Roy Barter recorded a verdict of death by natural causes at yesterday's Liverpool inquest.
But the dead man's father, Bernard Cleary, was angry with the verdict and revealed that he would be consulting his barrister to see if further action could be taken.
John Cleary died in December, 1991, at Walton Hospital, Liverpool.
An analyst with the Ministry of Defence in Winchester, he had returned home to Liverpool because he felt unwell.
He had suffered vomiting, dizziness, tiredness and headaches and had been seen by a doctor in Winchester before returning to his family home in Scarsdale Road, Norris Green.
He was admitted to Walton Hospital where doctors thought that he had a tumour.
John Miles, a senior consultant neurosurgeon at Walton Hospital said: ‘We now know that Mr Cleary had what is called an aneurysm, although most of the symptoms he displayed were not typical of this condition.
‘We discussed the condition and felt that it was a tumour.
I told the patient that it was in a treacherous position and an operation would be risky.’
Doctors said the biopsy was carried out in a different part of the brain to where the rupture of the aneurysm occurred and was not responsible for the death.
Before recording the verdict Coroner Mr Barter said: ‘It does seem a coincidence that this rupture should occur shortly after the biopsy operation.’
Special school policy ‘chaos’
PLANS to improve special education in Liverpool have been thrown into confusion.
A ruling Labour group proposal to shut down and sell three schools, and use the cash for reorganising existing sites, was thrown out in a stormy meeting.
Lib Dem councillors and the Liverpool Labour group joined forces in a frequently altered amendment which was still being thrashed out as councillors attempted to debate the issue at a special education meeting.
Labour councillors had proposed closing Finchlea and Princes School along with Oakfield Centre, the so-called Option 1, but were accused of not ring-fencing funds ensuring that cash raised from the sales would be returned to special schools needs.
Opposition councillors supported the so-called Option 3 which earmarked Finchlea and Oakfield for closure as presently constituted but left the door open for the working party to propose further use in the search for improved service for post-19 year olds.
Education chairman Gideon Ben-Tovim said Option 3 took the council back to square one in its search for a long-term policy for special schools.
Officers too voiced confusion.
But Lib Dem Coun Flo Clukas said officers should reconcile themselves to the fact that Option 3 will go ahead and should put plans into place.
Preview
by Philip McNulty
MARK WALTERS insisted last night that Graeme Souness's touchline ban will not reduce the manager's inspirational effect on Liverpool's players.
And Souness is ready to make his presence felt even before tonight's game against Russian champions Spartak Moscow by axing his £1m summer signing David James in favour of Mike Hooper.
Souness starts a five-match touchline ban when Liverpool attempt to reverse a 4-2 deficit in the European Cup Winners Cup at Anfield.
Battle cry
The Liverpool boss's punishment inflicted following a verbal attack on officials at the end of the second round first leg in the Lenin Stadium also excludes Souness from the dressingroom area.
But Walters expects every Liverpool player to be aware of their manager's presence, saying: ‘We'll feel his eyes burning through us if we aren't doing the business.’
Souness will deliver his final battle cry at the team hotel this afternoon, when he will also solve his difficult goalkeeping dilemma.
Last night, it looked almost certain that James would be dropped in favour of Hooper.
James is set to pay the price for an indifferent performance at Spurs on Saturday, Hooper winning a dramatic recall after his Anfield career looked over following his walkout on the eve of last season's FA Cup final against Sunderland.
Bruce Grobbelaar is suspended tonight, along with Paul Stewart, after his late dismissal in the first leg.
And Souness is likely to be swayed by the experience of Hooper, who has proved his excellent temperament in the European cauldron.
Walters' most memorable moment in a Liverpool shirt came when he scored the winner in the 3-0 UEFA Cup win against Auxerre last season, reversing a similar deficit as they face tonight.
And Walters believes that if Liverpool's players and supporters can rekindle the Auxerre spirit in front of a sell-out 38,000 crowd, they can clinch a place in the quarter-finals.
He said: ‘This is a similar challenge to Auxerre, but we've got a couple of away goals this time.
‘It's going to be hard because Spartak have got a lot of international players and lots of pace, but if we can get at them and the crowd get behind us we can hopefully get the right result.’
Walters added: ‘We know they have weak links.
They are not the perfect team.
‘With our crowd so close to the pitch, I feel Spartak's younger players will be in for a shock.’
He said: ‘The lads are disappointed about the manager's ban, but these are the sort of games you come into football for.
‘We will need no motivation.
The manager will tell us what he expects before the game and we will feel his eyes burning into us if we don't do the business.’
Souness said: ‘My ban is not an issue.
The only thing of any importance is the match.
We don't fear anybody at Anfield and if we approach it properly we can haul this back.’
Liverpool have a doubt about Steve McManaman, who has calf trouble, but Steve Nicol is fit to partner Mark Wright after a groin injury.
Jan Molby and Ronny Rosenthal are back in the squad after ankle injuries.
LIVERPOOL (from): James, Hooper, Marsh, Burrows, Jones, Wright, Tanner, McManaman, Walters, Rush, Redknapp, Thomas, Harkness, Hutchison, Molby, Rosenthal, Kozma, Nicol.
Cash threat to special breaks
A CHARITY which provides holidays for underprivileged children has issued a plea for help.
Liverpool Children's Holiday Organisation, which takes children from the poorest families on Merseyside for breaks in the countryside, needs £30,000 to avoid making cuts next year.
Ronnie Murphy, the organisation's co-ordinator, said: ‘The recession has hit our ability to raise funds.
Our large corporate donors are unable to come up with their usual contributions.
‘We need £30,000 in order to maintain the level of service we've achieved this year, with four holidays involving 172 children.
If we fail to raise it, we will have to organise fewer holidays.’
The organisation, formed in 1980, takes children aged between seven and 12 to country houses and youth hostels throughout the country, introducing them to open spaces and wildlife.
Two full-time members of staff are funded by Liverpool City Council, while running costs are met by public and corporate donations.
Volunteers will hold a meeting this weekend to discuss fund-raising plans for the Christmas period.
Mr Murphy said: ‘Kids have a great time on our holidays without being aggressive or competitive.
They take part in activities, games and crafts and they repeat their good behaviour at home.’
The organisation can be contacted on 051-727 7330.
No looking up -until Easter
TRANMERE Rovers manager John King dismissed promotion talk after a 3-0 home win over Southend lifted Rovers to third in the first division.
King said: ‘You don't even breathe a word about that yet.
Come and talk to me at Easter.
‘All I hope for then is that we are in a position to be challenging.’
Goals from John Morrissey, John Aldridge and Neil McNab put paid to Southend in front of 5,870 fans, but there was a slack spell in the second half which led to some booing.
‘I thought some of the football in the first half was superb again.
If we had been 6-0 up at half-time no-one could have complained.
‘We squandered some chances and after half-time for a spell our possession, which is Tranmere's strong point, was a little sloppy.’
McNab, who hit his first goal of the season, said: ‘The second half was as poor as we have been for a long time but recent performances have been magnificent.
Match report, pictures: 34
Soccer boy hurt in hit-and-run
By Oliver Holt and Graeme Wilson
A SOCCER-MAD teenager was lying seriously ill in hospital last night after he suffered severe head injuries in a hit-and-run accident.
Tony Atkinson, 16, was knocked unconscious yesterday as he walked to school in Norris Green, Liverpool.
Tony's team-mates from the local East Villa club joined his father, Michael, in an all-night vigil at the stricken youngster's bedside in Walton Hospital.
Mystery still surrounds the exact nature of the accident.
A police spokesman said it appeared Tony could have been struck a glancing blow by the wing mirror of a blue Transit-type van.
He said the driver may not even have realised that he had struck the schoolboy, who was walking from his home in Scarisbrick Drive, Norris Green, to Queen Mary Comprehensive, in nearby Long Lane, when the accident happened at the corner of Parthenon Drive and Walton Hall Avenue.
Last night, Mr Atkinson said doctors had warned him they might need to operate.
He said: ‘They told me that the worst case scenario was that his brain would swell and he would have to have an operation.
He is still unconscious and he is sick every time they move him.
‘He lives for football and all his mates from his team are in there with him.
I keep telling him there is a television at the end of the ward and that he better wake up so he can watch the European match tomorrow night.
‘If he has not come round, we will put the TV on anyway and hope that it brings him out of it.
He keeps trying to open his eyes.
‘The mate who was with him said one minute he was talking to Tony at the side of the road and the next he was flat on his back.
He has got a terrible gash on the top of his head and some bruising to his shoulder.
‘If the driver who hit him knows that he hit him, I would urge him to come forward just so that I can know what happened.’
Police need to speak to anyone who was driving a van in the area at that time.
Anyone with information can contact the police on 051-777 5855 or 777 5656.
Man, 23, found hanged at play area
A MAN was found hanged at a city centre playground yesterday.
The man's body was hanging from swings in the Panton Road playground, Hoole, Chester.
The grim discovery was made by a woman as she walked her dog at around 7.30am.
The man has not been named by police but was said to be aged 23.
He lived in Hoole.
Last night police were trying to contact his family.
A police spokesman said: ‘We are trying to trace the man's father.
He's out of the area at the moment.’
The playground is near Chester's busy Hoole Road and police were quick to remove the body before any children passed on their way to nearby schools.
Police believe there are no suspicious circumstances surrounding the man's death.
A post mortem examination is to be carried out today.
And Cheshire coroner John Hibbert is also due to open an inquest today.
Reds fans pay tribute to tragic supporter
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
THREE hundred Liverpool football fans are expected to gather to pay tribute to supporter Dennis Corbett, who died while on a trip to watch his team play in Moscow.
Mr Corbett will be cremated to the sounds of You'll Never Walk Alone at Springwood Crematorium next Monday.
After the ceremony friends and fellow supporters will gather at Liverpool Supporters Club to pay their final respects to the lifelong fan.
And his family are hoping to scatter Mr Corbett's ashes at Anfield, where his father Dennis also came to rest.
Mr Corbett, 38, of Bonsall Road, West Derby, died in his room at a Moscow hotel overlooking Red Square after a night out with friends Paul Linder and Wayne Morris.
The three had travelled to the Russian capital to watch their team play Spartak Moscow in the European Cup Winners' Cup.
The tragic news was broken to Mr Corbett's friends when they came down from their rooms the following morning.
Labour MPs Peter Kilfoyle and Bob Wareing helped the family cut red tape to fly Mr Corbett's body back to England.
A post mortem revealed the cause of death as a heart attack.
Mr Linder said: ‘We have organised a benefit event at the Dockers Club in Muirhead Avenue on December 11 to help raise money for the funeral costs.
‘We are expecting about 300 people at the supporters’ club after the funeral because Dennis was such a character and everybody who went on away matches knew him.’
Many of Mr Corbett's work friends from Knowsley Borough Council are also expected to attend the ‘wake’.
Dennis Corbett
Police facing damages claim
By Oliver Holt Daily Post Staff
FOUR men are suing Merseyside Police for damages after they waited nearly four years to face charges only for the Crown Prosecution Service to offer no evidence when their cases came to court.
Eric Haughton, Thomas Mende, Keith Palmer and Alan Martins, all from Toxteth, Liverpool, were arrested in November, 1988, after they were alleged to have used threatening, abusive and violent behaviour towards police officers.
They denied the allegations and last month three were bound over by a Liverpool stipendiary magistrate, despite the CPS successfully appealing against a decision that proceedings against the four be stayed.
Mr Mende was absent through sickness.
Last night the Londonbased Society for Black Lawyers called for a public inquiry into the men's cases and for the dismissal of the officers involved in their arrest.
Liverpool 8 Law Centre spokeswoman Maria O'Reilly said the case represented a ‘flagrant abuse of the legal process’ and was the latest in a series of similar actions against Merseyside Police.
The men, who are claiming damages for false imprisonment, assault and malicious prosecution, were arrested in the early hours of the morning by officers of the Operational Support Division.
There were protracted delays in their trial until they appeared before a magistrate in Liverpool on February 9 last year.
Their lawyers argued the men would not have a fair trial because of the delays, and proceedings against them were stayed.
But the CPS appealed to the High Court against the decision ten months later and three judges ordered that the case should proceed.
Last month the CPS offered no evidence on any of the charges, and Mr Haughton, Mr Martin and Mr Palmer were bound over at Liverpool Magistrates Court.
Euro official's knock-out blow to Major hopes
By David Rose Political Editor
JOHN Major went into battle with Germany again last night after his struggle to survive tonight's Commons vote on Europe was spectacularly sabotaged.
German Euro Commissioner Martin Bangemann opened up a second front by claiming the Maastricht Treaty was a milestone on the road to a federal Europe.
His bombshell directly contradicted Mr Major's own claim that the treaty marked a turning point in curbing the powers of the Brussels Commission and handing back more powers to national governments.
Tory would-be rebels privately described the development as ‘dynamite.’
Speaking at a Europe Day rally, Mr Bangemann a vice-president of the EC Commission nicknamed Mr Sausage after he tried to ban the British favourite said the ‘goal of a Federal European State’ was spelt out ‘for the first time’in the Maastricht Treaty.
From Downing Street, a livid Mr Major immediately demanded that EC President Jacques Delors should disown his vice-president.
This he did, insisting that Mr Bangemann's remarks reflected his own personal views.
And, in the Commons, Mr Major denounced the top German on the Commission as ‘silly and ill-informed.’
‘His speech frankly is wrong,’ he said, adding it did not reflect the view of the British Government or any other mainstream government in Europe.
Mr Bangemann's intervention comes only a few weeks after Mr Major accused the President of the German Bundesbank, Helmut Schlesinger, of sabotaging the pound.
It also unhappily coincided with an announcement from Downing Street that German Chancellor Dr Helmut Kohl will fly to Britain next Wednesday for an Anglo-German summit in advance of December's Edinburgh summit.
But, for Mr Major, the chief worry was that Mr Bangemann's bombshell could not have been better timed to inflict the maximum damage to his efforts to quell the Tory rebellion.
It exploded just as Mr Major called in 20 more Tory rebels in another desperate bid to save the Maastricht Bill, and lift the question mark still hanging over his own political future.
Jubilant Tory Euro-sceptics immediately claimed that Mr Bangemann had ‘let the cat out of the bag.’
‘Spot on Martin,’ Lord Tebbit declared.
Former Tory Cabinet Minister Lord Ridley said: ‘I am sorry for John Major.’
He added: ‘It was an extraordinarily tactless thing for him to open his mouth at this stage, and say what most people think is true.
‘This is the parting of the ways.
This is the moment when we decide whether we go in for a federal Europe or whether we go in for a Europe of member states trading together, competing together, co-operating together.
‘We know the people of Europe don't want this.
To see the Tory Party dragooned to vote for it does seem to be flying in the face of democracy.’
With 30 or more Tory Euro-sceptics still holding out last night, tonight's vote threatens to be a cliffhanger.
In the Commons, Labour MPs unleashed their anger at the Liberal Democrats for promising to back the Government.
Paddy Ashdown hit back by accusing Labour of jeopardising Britain's future in Europe and of putting thousands of jobs at risk.
This brought cheers from Tory MPs and John Major told Mr Ashdown: ‘I agree with you.’
Mr Major then angrily turned on Labour leader John Smith: ‘There was a time when the leader of the Opposition once said that he had always believed that Britain's future lay in Europe, and we must take a confident and leading role in the Community.
‘His idea of taking a leading role now is to hide behind the Danes or anyone else to hide the split in his own party,’ Mr Major said.
Liberal Democrat MPs were later warned they could face a backlash in the country if their votes save Mr Major.
Plaid Cymru president and Caernarfon MP Dafydd Wigley said: ‘The Liberal Democrats run the risk of being treated with contempt by the electorate if they decide to prop up such an unpopular Tory regime.’
Plea for Ecstasy witnesses
POLICE have urged party-goers who were with Cadbury's Flake model Rachel Brown on the night she unwittingly took an Ecstasy tablet to come forward.
Rachel, 25, was last night described as ‘still poorly’ in the psychiatric unit of Broadgreen Hospital where she was admitted more than a week ago.
Detectives believe Rachel's drink was spiked with half a tablet of the designer drug at a private party.
Yesterday, a Cadbury spokeswoman said no decision had been taken to stop screening the Flake television advert in which Rachel is shown eating the chocolate bar while lying in a bath.
ANIMAL MAGIC FOR YOUNGSTERS
FRANCESCA and Alexander di Stephano with their entries in the RSPCA colouring competition held at the Forum, Chester Town Hall.
The brother and sister, from Waverton, Chester, hope to win a first prize in the contest of free membership to the RSPCA's Animal Action Club.
Picture: BOB BIRD
Fast work leaves Southend at sea
ONE UP: John Morrissey drives home Tranmere's Prenton opener
THREE UP: Neil McNab scores from long range
LAST DITCH TACKLE: And it halts John Aldridge
New Trust chairman
UNILEVER senior manager Bill Duncan has been appointed the new chairman of the Wirral NHS Hospital Trust, which manages Arrowe Park and Clatterbridge hospitals.
The hospital is the largest on Merseyside, with more than 4,200 staff, over 1,300 beds, and a budget of more than £70m.
Mr Duncan, who works at the Unilever Research Labortory in Port Sunlight, has been deputy chairman since the self-governing Trust was set up last year under NHS reforms.
Aged 59, he was born in Bebington, took a degree in chemistry, and joined Unilever in 1959.
DRUG ABUSERS GET EXPERT HELP AT NEW CENTRE
Care and advice for addicts' families
A NEW unit for drug addicts was opened in Chester yesterday.
Mill House, in Russell Street, will house a new drug and alcohol service for abusers and their family and friends.
‘This will be a valuable addition to services provided by Chester Health Authority,’ chairman John Ross said.
‘It is vitally important that all members of the community have access to information about drugs and alcohol misuse.
‘That's why we chose this site near to the city centre.’
A team of skilled staff is available each weekday to provide advice, education information and treatment to people who require support.
Staff at the centre include medical experts as well as workers from the social services, probation service and youth services.
A residential facility will remain at the Countess of Chester Hospital for people requiring in-patient treatment.
Mill House co-ordinator Ann Gorry counselling a drug user Picture: CLIFF BRETT
‘This will be a valuable addition to services provided by Chester Health Authority,’ chairman John Ross said.
Industrial site's shock axe call
A SHOCK call has been made to Wirral Council to jettison plans for a ‘flagship’ site which offers the area's best hope of attracting industrial investment.
More than £1m in grants has been spent on reclaiming the site of the former Brom borough power station.
Consultants Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte identified the site in a ‘strategic sites and premises for inward investment’ report prepared for English Estates.
But three Labour councillors representing Bromborough claimed prospects of the site providing an industrial bonanza were remote.
Labour group leader Coun Dave Jackson, supported by Coun Alf Rose and Coun Paul Witter, are pressing for a report on the possibility of the 25-acre site being incorporated into adjacent Eastham Country Park.
Coun Jackson said: ‘According to the facts and figures I have been given, we won't get a Nissan to take this land.
‘The people of Brom borough have got more than their fair share of industry on their doorsteps.
‘By expanding Eastham Country Park we will at least be making use of the land for the benefit of the people of Wirral.’
Jim Wilkie, the council's director of planning and economic development, said English Estates was looking to forging partnerships with the council to try to realise development opportunities.
Shock call to axe flagship site plan
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
IN a shock move Wirral Council is being urged to abandon plans for a flagship site which offers the area's best hope of attracting new industrial investment.
More than £1m of derelict land grant has been spent on reclaiming the site of the former Bromborough power station.
Top consultants Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte identified the area in a ‘strategic sites and premises for inward investment’ report prepared for English Estates.
But three Labour councillors representing Bromborough claim prospects of the council-owned site providing an industrial bonanza were remote.
Labour group leader Coun Dave Jackson, supported by colleagues Coun Alf Rose and Coun Paul Witter, is pressing for a report on the possibility of the 25-acre site being incorporated into adjacent Eastham Country Park.
‘According to the facts and figures I have been given, we won't get a Nissan to take this land,’ Coun Jackson said.
‘Most approaches have been from smaller chemical plants.
There has been no interest from any big industrialists.
‘The people of Bromborough have got more than their fair share of industry on their doorsteps.
‘By expanding Eastham Country Park we will at least be making use of the land for the benefit of the people of Wirral rather than just have it lying there.’
The power station site is earmarked for ‘employment related uses’ in Wirral Council's draft unitary development plan.
Work is under way to design and cost infrastructure works to improve development opportunities.
Jim Wilkie, the council's director of planning and economic development, said English Estates was very supportive of the strategic sites study recommendations.
It was looking to forge partnerships with the council to try to realise development opportunities.
Mr Wilkie's report, which recommends endorsement of the development plan, will be studied by Wirral planning committee tomorrow night.
Late KO sends Robins reeling
Wrexham 0 Scunthorpe Utd 2
WREXHAM fell victim to a sucker punch for the second home match in succession, going down to goals at the end of each half at the Racecourse.
The Robins dominated the whole of the game but were unable to create a single clear cut chance, writes MARK CURRIE.
By contrast, the visitors had three efforts on goal in the 90 minutes.
Andy Stevenson's powerful strike as half time approached was followed by an injury time free kick from Ian Helliwell.
Hooked over
In between Wrexham had 98pc of the play but it counted for nothing.
Confusion in the Scunthorpe defence almost let in Gary Bennett for a fourth minute opener, but he hooked his shot over the bar under pressure from Matthew Elliott.
Then player manager Brian Flynn latched on to a Mark Taylor pass on the edge of the penalty area but his shot rebounded to safety off the inside of the post.
Scunthorpe were on the rack but the home side could not find the killer touch, Micky Thomas just failing to reach a Flynn chip and Bennett having a header blocked by the commanding Elliott.
It was 35 minutes before the visitors threatened and it took a reflex save from Mark Morris to deny Graham Alexander after a great run and cross by Tony Daws.
But they made no mistake on the stroke of half time when Stevenson pounced on an Elliott pass to crack the ball through a ruck of bodies after Wrexham failed to clear a free kick.
Flynn failed to reappear after the interval but his side began with an onslaught which brought seven corners in the opening 15 minutes, all to no avail.
Samways made a vital interception to snatch the ball off Taylor's foot and in the 71st minute Thomas hammered the ball inches wide from a Connolly pass cleverly dummied by substitute Steve Watkin.
Elliott was booked one of three cautions in the game for a foul on Bennett and from the free kick Owen drove the ball straight at the keeper.
But Scunthorpe withstood the pressure and scored in injury time with the very last kick of the match, Ian Helliwell curling a free kick into the corner of the net.
WREXHAM: Morris, Jones, Phillips, Flynn (sub Watkin 45), Humes, Sertori, Bennett, Owen, Connolly, Thomas, Taylor.
Sub not used: Pejic.
SCUNTHORPE UTD: Samways, Joyce, Longden, Martin, Elliott, Stevenson, Greaves, Alexander, Daws, Buckley, Helliwell.
Subs not used: White, Goodacre.
Ref: John Brandwood (Lichfield).
Att: 2,930.
Baby dies in TV house fire tragedy
A BABY girl died and two other badly-burned youngsters were fighting for their lives last night after a TV drowned out the sounds of a blaze ripping through a council house.
Four children, including a 16year-old babysitter, were trapped upstairs watching television in a back bedroom.
They did not hear the fire which broke out downstairs at the house late on Monday night.
Neighbours in Emlyn Road, Mayhill, Swansea, persuaded her to jump into their arms after she ran to a front bedroom and screamed for help.
She suffered burns to her back, legs and head.
Fire crews broke into the back bedroom and pulled out Shona Smith, 16 months, and Gavin Hurley, 8.
Shona died at the scene and Gavin, who suffers from asthma, was in a critical condition last night.
The babysitter, Janine Hold, is also critically ill in Swansea's Morriston hospital.
Becky is said to be ‘comfortable’ in the special burns unit of Frenchay hospital, Bristol, where her brother is also being treated.
She had told neighbours: ‘We were all watching television in a back bedroom when I went to the toilet.
When I came out, I noticed the smoke coming from downstairs.
I ran to the window in the front and screamed for help.’
Brenda Hurley, mother of Becky and Gavin, needed treatment for shock when she returned from a night at the bingo to find a scene of devastation.
£850,000 FACILITY FOR COMMUNITY
AN £850,000 building was opened at Chester College yesterday.
The new art building is the latest of the college's expansions and will provide new facilities for the college and the community.
The building will cater for art, sculpture, film, print-making, computer design and textiles.
The two storey building has space for 300 of the college's students.
As well as providing study areas, the new building also has exhibition space which local people will be able to use.
Upton student Seeyam Brijmokun at work in the new arts building Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Crash horror Michael bounces back to health
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
TODDLER Michael Gater has fought his way back to health after being seriously injured in a road accident.
Fourteen-month-old Michael suffered a fractured skull and bruising on the brain after he was flung 25 yards into the air from his pushchair and landed head first into a busy main road near the Mersey tunnel entrance in Liverpool.
He was rushed to the intensive care unit at Alder Hey Hospital in Liverpool where he remained for a week before being transferred to a rehabilitation ward.
Now, nearly a month after the accident in Byrom Street, little Michael is fully recovered from his ordeal and back home with his parents Robert Gater and Yvonne Stonehouse in Grosvenor Road, Wavertree.
His mother Yvonne, 22, said: ‘Michael has needed to build his confidence back again after the accident.
‘He is getting back to his normal self but he is still quite unsteady on his feet and gets nervous when there are a lot of people around.
‘While he was in hospital he had to be taught how to feed himself again.
He was given lots of cuddles because he kept looking at us as if to say ‘What has happened to me?’‘
Miss Stonehouse said she feared the worst when she saw her son flung from his pushchair after it was in collision with a car.
She said: ‘I heard a bang and the next thing I knew Michael was out of the pram and in the middle of the road.
‘When I first saw him I thought he was dead.
His mouth was pouring with blood and his face was grey.
‘I'm just glad he is alright and the doctors say he won't remember anything about the accident.’
A man has been reported for a number of alleged motoring offences following the incident.
Happy to be home Yvonne give baby Michael a kiss Picture: TONY KENWRIGHT
WREXHAM manager Brian Flynn said: ‘We desperately needed to score when we dominated things in the second half but we caught a goalkeeper on a hot day.
He made some good saves or we hit shots straight at him.’
Flynn admitted that two home defeats on the trot was hard for the fans to stomach.
‘I am disappointed for the crowd because generally they have been treated to some good football here and all our performance lacked was some goals.
‘We had plenty of the ball but we did not look as if we could do anything from our set plays and we did not look likely to score from them.’
Our friend Clinton's pledge
United States' special bond with Britain holds strong
By Sarah Womack Daily Post Correspondent
BRITAIN was facing up to working with America's Oxford University-educated President this morning, amid expectation the two countries'’ special relationship’will continue under the new administration.
Bill Clinton has gone out of his way to stress the so-called special relationship will not be imperilled while he is in the Oval Office.
The association dates back half a century and in some eyes was at its peak during the Reagan-Thatcher years.
The Arkansas governor has told reporters: ‘My first views about England were forged at Oxford.
They were based on respect.
They have never changed.’
John Major too has let it be known he believes President Clinton's foreign policy to be virtually indistinguishable from that of George Bush.
And London-based vice-chairwoman of Democrats Abroad, Sally McNulty, said Britain had nothing to fear from a Clinton presidency.
Generation ‘The fact that Clinton went to Oxford for two years makes it even more likely that there will be a very good, firm and friendly special relationship on a personal level,’ she said.
Both country's leaders were from the same generation Clinton is 46, Major 49 and came up the hard way, she added.
However, aspects of Clinton's overseas policy could exert a strain on the special relationship from the outset.
Most controversially, he has suggested sending a US peace envoy to Northern Ireland, a move which raises the hackles of many MPs.
And Clinton's campaign broadcasts have focused on the level of tax paid by foreign companies operating in America.
The threat of targeting US-based British businesses for more taxes has led to the conclusion in some quarters that Clinton is less pro-free trade than his predecessor.
Suggestions that Clinton wants to reduce American troops in Europe to as few as 75,000 have also raised eyebrows.
Country is no bumpkin
WHEN Country Member potters nervously into the paddock at Newbury today, the club regulars might feel inclined to dismiss him as some embarrassing visitor with straw in his hair.
After all, the slickers he is set to meet in the Lionel Vick Handicap Chase include two winners at the Cheltenham Festival.
Today, however, Country Member can reach the big time.
This is much the sternest test to date of trainer Andy Turnell's confidence that Country Member is a top staying handicapper in the making.
But a polished round of jumping on his reappearance at Wincanton last month showed Country Member to be much more the finished article than he was as a novice last term.
He has been put up five pounds for a decisive 2length defeat of Wellknown Character and, as just about the most progressive horse in today's field, he can scale this extra rung.
Double
Tim Thomson Jones is considering the Welsh National for Keep Talking, whose super season last term culminated in success in the National Hunt Chase.
That completed a Festival double for amateur Marcus Armytage, who had steered Tug of Gold to a game defeat of Paco's Boy in the Kim Muir the previous afternoon.
Tug of Gold has also returned in great heart, only put up two pounds for a 10length romp from subsequent scorer Rio Haina at Uttoxeter last month, and must rate a big danger.
Henry Mann and Springaleak were smart novices but face a stiff comeback task.
Tug of Gold's stablemate Baydon Star put up a most taking performance on his debut for David Nicholson at Ascot a fortnight ago, beating Cadency in style over an inadequate trip.
An extra half-mile in the Tom Masson Hurdle will see further improvement, and he will be hard to beat.
Retail Runner is also seeking to graduate from an impressive success on that Ascot card, having made all and jumped particularly well.
His trainer puts that improvement down to an earlier copper deficiency.
But, in the Hallowe'en Novices' Chase he might need to eat a whole mine, to beat Dusty Miller, another Festival scorer.
He has always looked a chaser and his unexpected achievements over flimsy flights of timber make him a most exciting prospect.
If Nodform Wonder is in anything like the form he was at Wetherby on Friday, he will laugh off the six pound penalty that is intended to slow him down in the Levy Board Handicap Hurdle at Kelso.
Well backed after catching the eye previously, he strolled home by 12 lengths, having his race won a long way out.
He will be hard to stop here.
Baydon Star's Ascot victim Cadency could do with a stronger gallop than at Huntingdon last time to help him settle, but he can justify the journey from Newmarket for the Scottish Power Handicap Hurdle.
Man who courted the Irish voters
BILL Clinton ruffled feathers over the thorny issue of American policy on Ulster during his campaign but now he is safely in the White House many promises may turn out to be little more than electioneering.
For years, the powerful Irish-American lobby has been vocal in its condemnation of British policy on the province.
And Clinton spent more time than many previous Presidential candidates courting the Irish vote.
At one point during the campaign, he said he would appoint a peace envoy to Northern Ireland if elected a controversial idea which drew a sharp response from Ulster Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew.
‘We do not need a peace envoy, thank you very much,’ Sir Patrick said, before going on to emphasise that what was needed was a settlement from the current all-party talks process.
Ulster Unionist David Trimble described the idea as ‘daft’.
‘We have just gone through quite intensive inter-party talks.
The problems are quite clear.
There's no indication Mr Clinton has a clue as to what the problems are,’ he said.
Some months ago, Clinton said of US policy on Ulster: ‘We've been a little too reluctant to relay our feelings in a positive way because of two reasons: our long-standing relationship with Great Britain and the perception that this (the troubles in Northern Ireland) is a very thorny problem.’
However, most observers believe the promises will remain just that and Clinton would be reluctant to alienate Britain, one of American's closest allies.
Pay freeze threatens winter of discontent
JOHN Major was facing a threatened winter of discontent last night over reports that he is to impose a 1pc pay freeze on 5m public sector workers.
Nurses, doctors, teachers, town hall staff and members of the Armed Forces would all be hit.
Reports of the pay freeze leaked out after the Cabinet spent another 4 hours trying to hold public spending to next year's target of £244.5bn.
And it provoked a furious backlash from Labour and union leaders.
After meeting Chancellor Norman Lamont last night, TUC chairman Rodney Bickerstaffe angrily claimed High Street sales and hopes of a recovery would be damaged if public sector workers faced a pay freeze.
‘It will hit jobs, it won't create them,’ he said.
‘It is cutting back.
It is not going for growth.’
And Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said that public sector workers were being forced to pay for the Government's mismanagement of the economy.
The threatened public sector pay freeze follows Mr Major's decision to preserve capital spending projects to help Britain out of recession.
While the Cabinet has yet to make final decisions, ministers seemed set to approve a pay freeze.
The 1pc figure is an average one, allowing some workers to get more, while others would get no increase at all.
But the move, which would involve suspending pay review bodies, is likely to be challenged by the unions, threatening the Government with more trouble over the winter.
FRANK AWARDED TOP OF THE PLOTS
He won the local authority competition in 1989, and was runner-up last year.
Meet a man who knows his onions
GREENFINGERED Frank Mercer sowed the seeds of his own success this year.
Frank, 61, is the acknowledged king of Wirral allotments following his Odyssey Trophy success in the annual competition sponsored by Wirral leisure services department.
Earlier this year he took third prize for his leeks in the British Championship and scooped the top prize in the Welsh Onion Championship.
The former building firm supervisor has been tending the 200 square meter allotment near his Newton home for the past eight years.
He won the local authority competition in 1989 and was runner-up last year.
He said: ‘It's a good, absorbing hobby and at the end of the day I always have something to eat.’
Frank proudly displays some of his winning vegetables Picture: BOB BIRD
Exchange rate soaring for students
A GROUP of students from France is gaining valuable work experience on Merseyside this week.
The students from Wirral's twin town of Lorient are sampling English working life in banks, solicitors' offices, schools, travel agencies and other companies.
They arrived with a group of Wirral students who had been undertaking work experience in France.
Meanwhile, Wirral schoolchildren are being invited to book their places on next year's exchange holidays with their counterparts in Lorient, on the coast of Brittany, and Wirral's other twin town of Gennevilliers, near Paris.
Each youngster will stay in the home of their ‘twin’ and become a member of that family for two weeks, sampling the delights of French cooking and a continental lifestyle.
Pupils must be aged between 13 and 18 years and must have studied French for at least three years.
Details of the exchanges have been circulated to Wirral schools and the closing date for applications is November 13.
Further information can be obtained from town twinning officer Wendy Pickles on 051-666 2121 ext 4544.
PANTOMIME BAN OH YES, THEY CAN!
TV twin's Christmas present
NEIGHBOURS stars Gillian and Gayle Blakeney will be topping the bill at the Liverpool Empire this Christmas despite an attempt to ban Australian soap stars from the British stage.
The British actors' union Equity had called for a halt to Australian TV actors appearing in British pantomimes.
But the go-ahead for the stars to appear has now been given by the Department of Employment.
And that means more than 20 Australians will be appearing in panto in Britain including twins Gillian and Gayle who played Christina and Caroline Alessi in the TV soap.
The pair celebrated the news yesterday by parading in the lavish costumes specially designed for them for Dick Whittington at the Empire Theatre.
Twins Gayle (left) and Gillian Blakeney in panto costume celebrate their good news
Police cash crisis job cuts loom, warns chief
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
CHESHIRE'S police force will have to cut jobs if extra funding cannot be found.
Chief Constable David Graham told the county's police committee yesterday that Cheshire Constabulary was the worst funded of the 35 shire forces.
He had been asked to make savings of £440,000 over the next three years but says, without more money, police vacancies will be frozen and jobs will be lost.
‘Underfunding is having a detrimental effect on the adequacy of policing services,’ he said.
‘In 1991/92 the force had to freeze recruitment.
‘If improved funding is not available and efficiency savings are still required, then the only flexibility in the budget is that of reducing police and civilian manpower levels.’
This meant foot patrols would be reduced and police stations might have to cut opening hours, he said.
Police were also having to carry out more paperwork in accordance with the recommendations of a national working group on pre-trial issues.
Cheshire police needed 26 more civilian staff to deal with the extra workload and might have to cut uniformed officers jobs as a result.
The Home Office was unlikely to provide Cheshire with more than seven new officers in the forseeable future, Mr Graham said.
Nationally the Home Office would provide no more than 1,000 officers in this financial year and no more than 500 in the next year, which would give Cheshire six to seven new officers on a pro-rata basis.
After that the Home Office expected no further increases.
Cheshire Police Force had also lost a considerable sum of money since they cleared their police cells of prisoners, Mr Graham said.
An expected £1.8m from the Government for the holding of prisoners in police cells had now been reduced to £1.3m meaning that Cheshire has lost £500,000 of its expected income.
Part of that money had been allocated to pay for pensions and vehicle leases, but now the force will have to find the money elsewhere or face cutting jobs.
Members of the county council's policy committee will meet to discuss whether they wish to contribute extra money.
Meanwhile calls by Bucklow Councillor Jim Brentnall for more bobbies on the beat were rejected by police committee chairman John Collins.
‘More bobbies on the beat gives rise to greater confidence but they are not necessarily an effective use of police time,’ he said.
Mr Graham is to provide committee members of the Police Committee with a breakdown of how Cheshire's officers are deployed.
Setting dwarfs Rickman as true star of Hamlet
Hamlet
ST GEORGE'S HALL
Review by Malcolm Handley
THERE is a divinity which shapes staged Hamlets rough hew them as we will.
Last night's effort in St George's Hall was hewn rougher than many a production but the magic and poetry of Hamlet defied the slings and arrows of outrageous acoustics.
Setting Hamlet in the cavernous St George's Hall proved the Everyman Theatre had perhaps more resolve than the diffident Hamlet and they, and last night's audience, were rewarded with a memorable occasion, if not the greatest ever Hamlet on stage.
Film superstar Alan Rickman took a little time to settle comfortably into the stage mantle of Shakespeare's much-wronged prince, as if the echo of his own voice was vying with King Hamlet's exhortations to do the deed, but this soon gives way to a gentle yet powerful Hamlet.
There are times when he looked totally unable to drink hot blood or speak daggers but there are as many ways of playing Hamlet as there are players and Rickman's warm, yet raging prince is one worthy of many a staging.
Michael Byrne's Polonius too is fine departure from the usual foolish prating knave, he treads an uneven but interesting line between the doting father and grovelling courtier.
David Burke's Claudius is superb.
It is perhaps asking too much to exact sympathy when one has killed a king and bedded his queen but he deserved all the accolades he received.
Add to this Geraldine McKewan's Gertrude and Julia Ford's Ophelia and all the ingredients are in place for the Bard's finest play.
Had Shakespeare demanded reverberating resonance from his tortured prince he might have chosen to set Hamlet in the finest piece of neo-classical architecture in Europe rather than the rotten state of Denmark.
He might even have warmed to the challenge.
Last night's audience certainly did.
It was a bold experiment that is almost certain to be rewarded with full houses and, as the acoustics are to be softened, by tonight's performance it might prove to be one of the better stagings.
Few will have claim to a more attractive setting.
Tunnel closed for facelift
BIRKENHEAD'S Queensway tunnel will be closed for major electrical works this week and Mersey Tunnels staff are taking the opportunity to spruce up the tube.
The tunnel will close at 8pm on Friday evening and will reopen at 5am on Monday.
Staff will work round the clock.
Mersey Tunnels general manager John Gillard said the extent of the work ruled out partial closure.
‘It will allow us to undertake a range of improvements from cleaning and painting inside the tunnel to maintenance work at the barriers,’ he said.
Hannon backs Piggott
RICHARD HANNON yesterday defended Lester Piggott's decision not to withdraw Mr Brooks at the start of the Breeders' Cup Sprint.
Piggott has come under fire from American observers after Walter Swinburn told reporters that Piggott said Mr Brooks ‘moved terrible’ going to the start.
NBC's live coverage on Saturday night suggested that Piggott should have alerted the course vet.
But trainer Hannon said any stiffness would have had no connection with the broken leg which led to Mr Brooks' death.
One-off
‘The horse was 100 per cent when he arrived in America and was 100 per cent right up to the start of the race,’ he said.
‘There was no way he would have been allowed to run if something was wrong.
‘That sort of injury is a one-off.
It could happen any time.
Everyone saw that the horse was galloping well until there was a clean break of the leg.
‘It's difficult to understand why he might have been moving badly going to the start, perhaps it was the dirt or maybe it was the heat.’
Piggott was still in the Hollywood Memorial Hospital yesterday, recovering from the broken collar bone and ribs he suffered.
PIGGOTT: under fire
Pay freeze threatens chilling winter for PM
By David Rose Political Editor
JOHN Major was facing a threatened winter of discontent last night over reports that he is to impose a 1pc pay freeze on five million public sector workers.
Nurses, doctors, teachers, town hall staff and members of the armed forces would all be hit.
Reports of the pay freeze leaked out after the Cabinet spent another four and a half hours trying to hold public spending to next year's target of £244.5bn.
And it provoked a furious backlash from Labour and union leaders.
After meeting the Chancellor Norman Lamont last night, TUC chairman Rodney Bickerstaffe angrily claimed High Street sales and hopes of a recovery would be damaged if public sector workers faced a pay freeze.
‘It will hit jobs, it won't create them,’ he said.
‘It is cutting back.
It is not going for growth.’
And Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said that public sector workers were being forced to pay for the Government's mis management of the economy.
Trouble
The threatened public sector pay freeze follows Mr Major's decision to preserve capital spending projects to help Britain out of recession.
While the Cabinet has yet to make final decisions, ministers seemed set to approve a pay freeze.
The 1pc figure is an average one, allowing some workers to get more while others would get no increase at all.
But the move, which would involve suspending pay review bodies, is likely to be challenged by the unions, threatening the Government with more trouble over the winter.
Meanwhile, the Chancellor was in retreat last night after some ministers appeared to be winning their battles for an increase in their budgets.
The Cabinet broke up without reaching a final decision, only to be warned by John Major that it risks having to meet at the weekend.
Mr Major has ordered ministers to reconvene tomorrow.
And he plans to keep them working on Friday and even on Saturday to force agreement.
He needs a final decision by Sunday so that details can be sent to the printers in time for the Chancellor to announce his mini-Budget next Thursday.
Musicians knock 'em for six
MUSICIANS from a Merseyside orchestra are really knocking 'em for six.
The Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral Concerts Society has scooped a top award for the sixth year on the run.
They have won the Performing Rights Society Enterprise Award for backing modern music in the season's programmes.
Anniversary
The awards are made annually to choirs, choral, orchestral and concert societies who have shown enterprise in plans for including contemporary music in their programmes.
It is cause for a double celebration because the Society is also celebrating its 10th anniversary.
They are now preparing for a special anniversary concert in the Crypt Concert Room at the cathedral on November 14.
Take away served up a ‘pickled’ cockroach
By Daily Post Correspondent
A TAKEAWAY restaurant served up a meal of pickled cockroach, a court was told yesterday.
And public health inspectors found the kitchen overrun with the insects after a hygiene probe was launched.
Magistrates in Southport heard how a shocked couple took away more than they bargained for after visiting the Lalquila takeaway in the town's High Park Road.
Returning home, they were half way through a portion of lime pickles before finding a 25mm-long cockroach in the food.
Keith Sutton, prosecuting on behalf of Sefton Council's Public Protection Department, told the court there was sufficient oil in the insect to suggest it had been there for some time.
He said: ‘Inspectors sent to investigate the premises then found it was infested with cockroaches from infant to adult stage, alive and dead, on work surfaces, in the waste bins, around the cooker and behind two storage freezers.’
‘It was obvious to any of the staff but not to the customers,’ he added.
An emergency prohibition order was served on the restaurant and joint proprietor Mohammed Uddin, 29, was later charged with selling an item which was not of the substance of the food demanded by the purchasers.
He was also charged with a second offence of running a business in a condition which exposed food to the risk of contamination.
Faha Sanchita, defending, said that Uddin had 10 years of experience in the food business and had owned and run the Lalquila with his brother for the last five years without any hygiene problems.
She stressed that her client only knew of the cockroach problem the day before the complaint was made and had immediately bought powder to rid the restaurant of the insects.
He had not realised the scale of the infestation, she said, until the following day.
Since the prohibition order was made, he had undertaken a stringent cleaning routine every night after closing and had also successfully completed a hygiene course on the advice of Sefton Council's own public health experts.
Uddin, who lives in flats above the restaurant, was fined £840 and ordered to pay £75 costs after pleading guilty to both charges.
Valentine has her day
Shirley Valentine
LIVERPOOL PLAYHOUSE
Review by Penny Kiley
PAULINE Daniels may not be the ideal Shirley Valentine in Willy Russell's comedy of the same name but she will have to do until the next one comes along.
For audiences at the Liverpool Playhouse it is difficult to imagine anyone who could portray the bored middle-aged housewife so well.
No oil painting and definitely on the large size, she really does become the beautiful lady of her (and Russell's) imagination.
Mind you, it was not all plain sailing for the Merseyside comic making her Liverpool debut in the role.
Initially, she rushed the lines and failed to realise those pauses that are so special in Russell's comic dialogue.
But when it came to the first anecdote the tale of her son's embarrassing performance in a school Nativity play the old professional skills suddenly shone through.
It was the best telling of that story that I have heard.
And from then on there was no stopping her.
She had the audience in her palm and the quality of her character off to a fine art.
It may be a one-woman play but it is peopled by many other characters in Shirley's life, from the stickin-the-mud husband to the snooty neighbour.
And Pauline brought them all into screaming life.
There was no attempt to glamorise her visually but by words and performance she really did become that desirable lady, one who would indeed swim naked with a Greek boatman.
Best of all, she was able to capture the sadness and tragedy of the character.
It was said to be the last performances of the long-running tour of Shirley Valentine.
But the play itself will continue to be a classic and last night we witnessed a classic performance.
Voice of reason falls on deaf ears
I DON'T blame Tony Cottee for speaking his mind about Everton, nor for criticising those parts of the team which good football doesn't reach.
He wasn't telling the fans anything they don't already know that this Everton team has been allowed to slide into mediocrity, and that the values of the old ‘school of science’ have been allowed to melt away like snow in the Sahara.
Cottee came to Everton with the best of references a goal every two games in his West Ham days.
He chose Everton over Arsenal and will regret that decision to his dying day.
He has never had the service from midfield that Sharp, Gray and Lineker had.
Everton have not had a playmaker since Peter Reid was shown the door.
And Cottee and his fellow strikers have suffered for it.
Even so, he has scored goals and, despite being the eternal scapegoat, has managed to retain his amiable Cockney outlook on life.
The fans support him because he has had a raw deal.
The great Ian Rush would struggle to score goals playing in front of a midfield that's designed to defend rather than attack.
Howard Kendall made a major mistake on Saturday.
He should have been tough enough to take Cottee's criticisms on the chin without flinching.
He should have told Cottee to go and do his talking on the park and perhaps tried to change the team plan to assist his strike-force (if that's the right word).
Instead, he threw a canary fit, accusing Cottee of the (alleged) cardinal sin of criticising his teammates.
What nonsense.
I'm sure Cottee's opinions on the Everton midfield are mild compared with the views of other senior Everton professionals who week in, week out, see all their hard work wasted by an engine room built to power a motorboat rather than an ocean liner.
If we had more courage at Goodison in facing up to the truth unpalatable though it may be things might begin to improve.
Tony Cottee and David Marsh have shown the way.
Hopefully others will follow preferably cash in hand.
Elderly ‘go without’ to stay warm
UP TO three quarters of a million elderly people could be at risk of hypothermia this winter.
The proportion of old people living in cold homes has hardly changed over the last 20 years despite improvements in living conditions, a report shows.
Poor heating systems, the high cost of fuel, and poverty are all to blame, according to preliminary findings of a report by Age Concern's Insititute of Gerontology.
The report, Cold Comfort, which is due to be published in February, shows that almost one in four elderly people have given up basic necessities like food and clothing in order to stay warm.
Half of those who set aside money to pay fuel bills are unable to stretch the budget for extra heating in very cold weather.
New charity states aims
A NEW charity to help care for the terminally ill has been set up in Liverpool.
The Woodlands Hospice Charitable Trust will be based near Fazakerley Hospital to help care of for people living in South Sefton, North Liverpool and Kirkby.
It will link up with other services already given in the local community and in Aintree Hospitals, such as Jospice, the Continuing Care Sisters and the Pain Relief Clinic.
Aims
The trust also aims to:
Provide a new unit where a consultant in pain-relieving medicine will be based.
Establish day care as the first phase building project.
Apply for funding for two hospital support nurses who will work with the consultant.
Build a 10-16 bedded hospice unit.
Invite existing home care team Macmillan and South Sefton Continuing Care Sisters to use the unit at their base.
Right wingers' boost for coal
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
SUPPORT for Britain's coal industry came last night from an unexpected quarter as the right wing pressure group Aims of Industry called for a wide ranging review.
In a tightly-argued four page document, AoI said it must be accepted that coal is not on its way out and called for the disbanded Energy Select Committee to be resurrected immediately.
The unexpected support came on the day miners' unions, after receiving assurances, agreed to call off a High Court bid to force British Coal to re-open and work 10 pits earmarked for early closure.
This had followed reports that Parkside Mine on Merseyside had already begun to deteriorate just days after mining was halted.
Later today, North West MPs from Merseyside, Cheshire, Lancashire and Manchester are meeting to demand that the Government keeps its promise to maintain the pits earmarked for closure.
St Helens MP John Evans said the MPs would be putting maximum pressure on the Government to change course and support the coal industry.
The recently-formed Bootle Miners Support Group has called for a lobby of Gladstone Dock tomorrow lunchtime.
Local residents, campaigners, coal workers and dockers aim to highlight the impact that foreign coal imported through the dock has had on Britain's mining industry.
One campaigner said this was the first in a series of activities to support the coal industry.
as if things weren't bad enough around Goodison Park, a worrying number of supporters are now testing EFC-negative.
The symptoms are easy to spot.
You don't need to be a Dr David Marsh to recognise the danger signs.
Lack of appetite for the game.
An inability to work up any enthusiasm for an Everton attack.
Strangulated vocal chords when sufferers long to scream ‘what a load of rubbish’ or ‘sack the board’.
The eyes are a dead giveaway.
Glazed, red-rimmed, they stare off into some dim distant past that has mid-1980s written all over it.
Add a convulsive twitch when the words ‘title challenge’ are mentioned and you have the classic case of EFC which loosely translates as Extremely Forlorn Chance.
In the latter stages of the complaint, the victims become catatonic as evidenced by the lack of visible motor response at Everton v Coventry and Everton v Manchester City.
(For further data on this phenomenon see the papers produced by Drs Philip McNulty and Colin Wood).
Some of the worst affected cases lose almost all power of speech except for odd words such as‘Lineker’, ‘Reid’, ‘Bracewell’, ‘Steven’ and ‘Gray’.
Legions of lost souls have taken to congregating at a popular local hostelry, the Throat and Razor, repeating those very words over and over again, till the tears run down their sunburned legs.
At the moment there's no known cure, though a long-lost word called ‘goals’ is believed to hold the key to future treatment.
Everton, for their part, have decided that shock therapy may be the answer.
Rather than pandering to these fading fans (and perhaps building up false expectations), the good Dr David Marsh has opted for the cattle-prod technique beloved of third division no-hopers.
Not for him the promise of jam tomorrow or a brave, new world waiting just around the next bank overdraft.
Oh no.
Donning the black cap of death row and unfurling a banner reading ABANDON HOPE ALL YOU WHO ENTER HERE, he tells the twitchers; ‘The position we are in is very difficult.
We have no fairy godfather or fairy godmother who will come along and give some money.
‘Howard Kendall is doing his best, but we think he is up against a brick wall.
He has no money to spend and yet he feels he has to strengthen.
Howard is the greatest, but he is extremely frustrated.’
Medicine
In other words, if you're looking for championships, FA Cup wins and European success, you're going to have to scour the video library not the Everton trophy room.
And if you have recently tested EFC-negative then you may be facing 10 years of bitter medicine, without any guarantee that a full cure will be found for your distressing condition.
My all-night vigil, being held this week at St Lineker's School (a foundation dedicated to the memory of lost centre-forwards) may be of some comfort.
All are welcome, except cheery souls wearing broad smiles and ‘We Luv Jack Walker’ badges.
Firefighters' 4.9pc pay rise lowest for 15 years
BRITAIN'S firefighters were awarded an inflation-breaking 4.9pc pay rise yesterday.
The award, adding £30m to local authorities' wages bill, was the lowest produced by the Fire Pay Formula established in 1977 after a nine-week strike.
The new rates will mean a qualified firefighter will earn £305-a-week from November 7, a rise of £15.
A new recruit to the service will be paid £243-a-week, £11 more.
A spokesman for the local authority employers said the 4.9pc rise was ‘significantly lower’ than the average level of pay rises across the whole economy.
It was also less than increases earlier this year for teachers (8pc), police (6.5pc), the Armed Forces (5.9pc) and nurses (5.8pc).
The award covers the UK's 42,000 full-time firefighters and 17,000 part-time fire men and women.
The formula governing firefighters' pay is linked to the national average earnings for manual workers.
A spokesman for the Fire Brigades Union said the pay formula had now brought industrial peace since it was set up in 1977 and ‘therefore it is in everyone's interest to retain it.’
Health care check-up
RESIDENTS in the Rock Ferry area of Birkenhead will be able to check up on the latest developments in health care at a special health awareness day.
Experts from 25 different agencies will be on hand with information about health care for all ages from babies to pensioners, at the event at St Peter's Church, Rock Ferry, on Thursday from 10.30am to 6pm.
Free
Visitors will also get the chance of free health check-ups.
Health workers will offer tests on a range of health indicators.
Other agencies taking part include Wirral's breast screening team, community dentists and chiropodists, plus drug, alcohol and solvent abuse groups.
Psssst…wanna buy a beard or shades?
KEEP a sharp lookout at Anfield tonight for bottle blondes in dark glasses and all-weather Nike slingbacks.
Ditto for Inspector Clouseau look-alikes, suspicious-looking security guards with overactive two-way radios and cameramen who don't know their Agfas from their extra-long lenses.
Hidden among their numbers could be a certain Graeme Souness, a man on the run from UEFA snoopers.
Banned from the dressingroom areas and the touchline, he could turn up in any number of disguises from hot-pie salesman to unhelpful steward.
He could even turn up as one of soccer's infamous ‘jobsworths,’ the stony-faced commissionaires whose job it is to keep ticketless journalists in a state of blind panic.
If I were Souness I'd go for the Charles Bronson option.
Lowered on a helicopter ladder over Anfield, he could bellow his instructions through a loudhailer, thus keeping in touch with his players while observing the letter of UEFA law.
Either that, or he could waylay one of the match officials and help run the line where he could not only point out to the referee the error of his ways but also use a brightly-coloured flag to do so.
Then there's the game itself.
Liverpool showed enough in Moscow before losing their heads to indicate that the task is not beyond them.
I think they can score the two goals they need, but whether their often naive defence can prevent Spartak Moscow from spoiling the party remains to be seen.
Spartak have a good reputation away from the Lenin Stadium and the Kop will need to be at its most intimidating to be of any help to a Liverpool side whose only consistency this season has been their inconsistency.
An early goal is required, obviously.
And maybe the referee still has a vital part to play as another breathtaking Anfield night unfolds.
UNDER COVER MAN…
Graeme Souness
Educating Rita
NEPTUNE THEATRE
Review by Caroline Bailey
WILLY Russell's Educating Rita is the first play from the newly-formed B M Productions and judging from the performance at the Neptune Theatre last night there will be many more.
The play begins with Frank awaiting the arrival of his first Open University student in a traditional university professor's study, littered with books and papers.
Enter Rita, a young, timid, nervous, woman in clinging red dress, lipstick to match and a pair of shoes in which you would not want to run for a bus.
Through a series of cleverly orchestrated scenes we watch their student/tutor relationship develop.
They both go on a journey of discovery, she intellectually and he emotionally.
Rita, beautifully and accurately played by Judy Holt, fulfils her personal goals and craving for a knowledge-filled, disciplined mind.
From eager hairdresser who lacks confidence, she grows into an articulate and sure young woman who can argue the merits of Chekov, Lawrence and Yeats with ‘real’ students.
Philip Bond gives a wonderful and moving portrayal of jaded professor Frank, who does his tutoring job so well he has to watch the once passionate and sentimental Rita turn into a trendy talker whose empty phrases contain nothing of the real her.
David Llewellyn's production is humourous but cleverly highlights moments of genuine tenderness.
Cowan through
BARRY Cowan from Ormskirk claimed a third round place in the 1992 Volkswagen National Tennis Championships men's singles event at the Telford Racquet Centre in Shropshire yesterday.
The 18-year-old Southport-born player beat Tom Spinks, from Norwich, 6-2, 7-6.
N West winning car crime battle
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
MERSEYSIDE'S battle against car crime reaped rewards last night when the region revealed figures almost four times better than the national average.
According to Home Office figures released last night, Merseyside showed a 9.3pc fall in car crime against a national average of a 2.6pc drop, itself a three year best.
Greater Manchester recorded a 9.8pc fall but Cheshire showed an 11.8pc increase and Lancashire a 1.3pc rise.
In North Wales car crime grew by almost 13pc and in Dyfed-Powys the increase was 6.6pc.
Inspector Ray Simpson of Merseyside Police said they were welcome figures.
‘It shows that the public is beginning to realise that for a few pounds spent on car security they can protect their second most expensive purchase,’ he said.
The first three months covered by Car Crime Prevention Year, April to June 1992, showed falling auto crime in almost half of all police force areas in England and Wales, said Home Office minister Michael Jack.
Two out of three motorists surveyed said the anti-car crime TV advertising campaign, featuring hyenas preying on unprotected vehicles, made them feel they should do more about car security, he told a London conference.
Manufacturers were now fitting more new cars with better security devices and insurance companies were starting to offer discounts for improved locks, alarms and demobilisers.
Police chiefs had also launched a Secured Car Parks scheme to upgrade parking security, supervision and car park design.
‘A great deal has been achieved’, said Mr Jack.
‘After more than three years of increasing car crime, we are now beginning to see a downward trend,’ he added.
Protesters demand ‘dirty Dee’ action
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
AN environmental group is demanding action from the National Rivers Authority to prevent further pollution of the Dee estuary.
Jean Jones, chair of Wirral Deewatch, is to present a petition of over 3,000 signatures to NRA area general manager Roger Thomas, at Heswall sewage works next week.
The petition calls on the watchdog to ‘force Welsh Water to take action sooner rather than later to upgrade the sewage works.’
It says this would result in a ‘great improvement’ in the quality of the Dee environment.
Wirral Council has banned new housing development in the Heswall area due to the overloading of the sewage works in Target Road, which is operated by Welsh Water.
There is a long-term plan to upgrade the works, which provides only primary treatment and a period of settlement before discharging effluent into the Dee through a short pipe.
Earlier this year Coastwatch UK, part of a coastal survey undertaken co-ordinated by the EC, said that Heswall beach was suffering from unacceptable levels of sewage pollution.
Jack Heery, assistant secretary of Wirral Deewatch, said: ‘The authorities seem to be happy with a ‘this year, next year, sometime, never’ kind of approach.
‘This is a reminder that people are concerned.
We feel we have to keep up the pressure.’
He said Wirral Deewatch had so far collected 3,100 signatures in Heswall and West Kirby, and hoped to collect more this weekend.
Welsh Water managers have been invited to speak at the annual meeting of Wirral Deewatch at the Friends Meeting House, Telegraph Road, Heswall, next Wednesday night, the day before the petition is presented.
The group hopes to be informed of the results of dye tests on the sewage works effluent.
You're breaking my heart, Rory
IT'S a heartbreaking moment when a great sportsman finally decides to quit the arena he has graced for so long.
No more the roar of the sweatshirt, the smell of the crowd.
No more the camaraderie of the international set.
No more the buzz of playing before a packed house at Twickers.
There are few tears to be shed.
‘What I'll miss most,’ confesses our retiring hero, ‘is being out on the stage before a 60,000 crowd, performing.
The other void will be the comradeship, the squad spirit which was established, particularly during the group of players who represented England during my last three years.
‘I can truthfully say that being with the recent squad has been like being with a family.
‘Now when I know the boys are preparing for another game and I'm not there, I will miss it; the familiar routine, meeting at the Petersham Hotel in Richmond on a Wednesday night, the late meal, the exchange of views as people come in; the Thursday morning training, dashing round to golf or wherever in the afternoon, the team meeting in the evening, the Friday session, probably going to the cinema at night, the leg pulling, the nervous jokes on the Saturday of the game itself, the closing in from the outside world.’
And now, sadly, no more.
I would pause to wipe away a tear or two of my own at this point were it not for the fact that the dear departed, otherwise Rory Underwood, has decided not to depart.
Underwood's new book, Flying Wing (Stanley Paul £1499), was intended to signal the end of a glittering career that brought him 55 England caps and a record 35 tries.
But in between writing and publishing, the RAF flier decided to make one more pass over his field of dreams.
Embarrassing for all concerned although I suppose we can always rip out Chapter 1, daringly entitled Leaving on a Jet Plane.
With hindsight, the second line of that hit song might has been less damaging and more prophetic.
Salute to General Patton
A LUNCH in memory of one of World War II's greatest generals will be held in Cheshire later this month.
The British Patton Historical Society is holding the lunch in honour of General George S Patton.
Guest speaker at the lunch will be Juliet Gardiner, author of a book on the US servicemen based in Britain.
The society's lunches were launched in 1985, the centenary of Patton's birth.
Patton's headquarters were at Peover Hall, Cheshire, in 1944.
Hooper in as Souness springs shock
MARK WALTERS insisted last night that Graeme Souness's touchline ban will not reduce the manager's inspirational effect on Liverpool's players.
And Souness is ready to make his presence felt even before tonight's game against Russian champions Spartak Moscow by axing his £1m summer signing David James in favour of Mike Hooper.
Souness starts a five match touchline ban when Liverpool attempt to reverse a 4-2 deficit in the European Cup Winners Cup at Anfield.
The Liverpool boss's punishment inflicted following a verbal attack on officials at the end of the second round first leg in the Lenin Stadium also excludes Souness from the dressingroom area.
But Walters expects every Liverpool player to be aware of their manager's presence, saying: ‘We'll feel his eyes burning through us if we aren't doing the business.’
Souness will deliver his final battle cry at the team hotel this afternoon, when he will also solve his difficult goalkeeping dilemma.
Last night, it looked almost certain that James would be dropped in favour of Hooper.
James is set to pay the price for an indifferent performance at Spurs on Saturday, Hooper winning a dramatic recall after his Anfield career looked over following his walkout on the eve of last season's FA Cup final against Sunderland.
Bruce Grobbelaar is suspended tonight, along with Paul Stewart, after his late dismissal in the first leg.
And Souness may have been swayed by the experience of Hooper, who has proved his excellent temperament in the European cauldron.
Liverpool cannot afford to concede a goal tonight -and James has yet to keep a clean sheet.
Walters' most memorable moment in a Liverpool shirt came when he scored the winner in the 3-0 UEFA Cup win against Auxerre last season, reversing a similar deficit as they face tonight.
And Walters believes that if Liverpool's players and supporters can rekindle the Auxerre spirit in front of a sell-out 38,000 crowd, they can clinch a place in the quarter-finals.
He said: ‘This is a similar challenge to Auxerre, but we've got a couple of away goals this time.
Pace
‘It's going to be hard because Spartak have got a lot of international players and lots of pace, but if we can get at them and the crowd get behind us we can hopefully get the right result.’
Walters added: ‘We know they have weak links.
They are not the perfect team.
They are definitely beatable.
‘With our crowd so close to the pitch, I feel Spartak's younger players will be in for a shock.
Hopefully their players will freeze in that atmosphere.’
He said: ‘The lads are disappointed about the boss's ban, but these are the sort of games you come into football for.’
LIVERPOOL (from): James, Hooper, Marsh, Burrows, Jones, Wright, Tanner, McManaman, Walters, Rush, Redknapp, Thomas, Harkness, Hutchison, Molby, Rosenthal, Kozma, Nicol.
MIKE HOOPER Shock recall
Irish coalition gets temporary reprieve
By Chris Parkin Daily Post Correspondent
THE Irish Republic's tottering coalition government last night appeared to have gained only a temporary stay of execution.
The administration's minority party has put off a decision whether to withdraw support for Prime Minister Albert Reynolds.
New confusion swamped the prospects for resolving the row between the two government parties when Irish High Court president Mr Justice Liam Hamilton issued a statement highly critical of senior cabinet minister Des O'Malley.
Earlier, the Progressive Democrats, junior partners in coalition, delayed authorising their departure following the apparent agreement by Mr Justice Hamilton to look into accusations of dishonesty levelled at their leader, Mr O'Malley, by Mr Reynolds.
Mr O'Malley reported his ‘understanding’ that the judge would hold a special investigation today into Mr Reynolds' comments, made when the premier gave evidence last week to Mr Justice Hamilton's tribunal of inquiry into malpractice allegations surrounding the troubled Irish beef trade.
But later the status of the inquiry into the row that has rocked the partnership government was thrown into serious doubt when Mr Justice Hamilton called Mr O'Malley's statement ‘inaccurate and misleading’.
The judge said there would be no special tribunal hearing to investigate the dispute between the premier and his cabinet colleague, but efforts would be made at today's session of the inquiry to clarify the facts that led to Mr Reynolds' dishonesty allegation.
Yesterday's crunch meeting of the Progressive Democrats' parliamentary party was adjourned until tomorrow, when they may be left with little option but to quit the Reynolds government.
Opposition efforts to table motions of no confidence in the coalition were rejected in the Dublin parliament last night on technical grounds, but it was thought Mr Reynolds would find it difficult to fend off further similar moves later this week.
Defeat on a confidence motion would prompt an early general election.
Later Mr O'Malley came close to confirming that his party would quit the coalition later this week.
Souness still inspiration insists Walters
MARK WALTERS last night insisted Graeme Souness's touchline ban will not reduce the manager's inspirational effect on Liverpool's players.
Souness's starts a five-match touchline ban when Liverpool attempt to reverse a 4-2 deficit against Russian champions Spartak Moscow in the European Cup Winners Cup at Anfield tonight.
The Liverpool boss's punishment inflicted following a verbal attack on officials at the end of the second round first leg in the Lenin Stadium also excludes Souness from the dressing-room area.
But Walters expects every Liverpool player to be aware of their manager's presence when he said: ‘We'll feel his eyes burning through us if we aren't doing the business.’
Souness will deliver his final battle cry at the team hotel this afternoon, and must also solve a difficult goalkeeping dilemma.
Bruce Grobbelaar is suspended tonight, along with Paul Stewart, after his late dismissal in the first leg.
Now Souness must decide whether to persist with England Under-21 youngster David James or recall the more experienced Mike Hooper, who has proved his excellent temperament in the European cauldron.
Liverpool cannot afford to concede a goal tonight -and James has yet to keep a clean sheet.
Walters' most memorable moment in a Liverpool shirt was when he score the winner in the 3-0 UEFA Cup win against Auxerre last season, reversing a similar deficit as they face tonight.
And Walters believes that if Liverpool's players and supporters can rekindle the Auxerre spirit in front of a sell-out 38,000 crowd, they can clinch a place in the quarter-finals.
He said: ‘This is a similar challenge to Auxerre, but we've got a couple of away goals this time.
‘It's going to be hard because Spartak have got a lot of international players and lots of pace, but if we can get at them and the crowd get behind us we can hopefully get the right result.’
Exploit
Walters added: ‘We know they have weak links.
They are not the perfect team.
They are definitely beatable and I just hope we can exploit any weaknesses they have.
‘With our crowd so close to the pitch, I feel Spartak's younger players will be in for a shock.
Hopefully their players will freeze in that atmosphere.’
He said: ‘The lads are disappointed about the manager's ban, but these are the sort of games you come into football for.
‘We will need no motivation.
The manager will tell us what he expects before the game.’
Liverpool have a doubt about Steve McManaman, who has a calf injury.
Liverpool have confirmed that The Kop is completely sold out, and only a small number of stand tickets remain.
LIVERPOOL (from): James, Hooper, Marsh, Burrows, Jones, Wright, Tanner, McManaman, Walters, Rush, Redknapp, Thomas, Harkness, Hutchison, Molby, Rosenthal, Kozma, Nicol.
MARK WALTERS Rallying cry
M&S share prices hit by High Street worries
MARKS & Spencer has just reported half-year profits up by a fifth, yet many investors will have been mystified to note that the stock market reaction was for the share price to fall back a bit.
This time, it was not profit-taking that was to blame, but much deeper worries about the level of High Street spending.
The M&S success story is a case of good getting steadily better.
But it has been a case of getting better at managing the cash; better at keeping down the costs.
Truth to tell, this time round there was no real growth in like-for-like sales, once you exclude the new store space opened.
So although M&S is regarded by the stock market analysts as a superbly run business, the lack of real growth in consumer spending has led some to say sell the shares mistakenly in my view.
Listen to this from County NatWest: ‘M & S is still a core holding long-term, but even quality has its price: The rating is too rich short-term and we would continue to take profits down to 300p.’
M&S is fighting back hard of course.
Its stores I visited last weekend were packed with customers testing out its ‘Great Autumn Value’ campaign.
But unless the offers, like £10 off a suit, make enough of us buy, the experts fear the campaign will end up biting into the M&S profit margins.
Two cleared of twin sisters' barn deaths
Pair not to blame for blaze
By Allan Smith Daily Post Correspondent
TWO men have walked free after being formally cleared of the manslaughter of teenage twin girls who died in a barn blaze.
Unemployed Wisdom Smith, 19, and student Daniel Winter, 19, were released from the dock at Bristol Crown Court on the seventh day of their trial after a jury returned formal verdicts on the judge's direction.
Smith, of Bishop's Cleeve, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, and Winter, of Albemarle Gate, Cheltenham, were also cleared of alleged arson.
The charge followed a blaze at Manor Farm, Uckington, near Cheltenham, where local twins Rebecca and Emma Harper, 17, died after a sex session last January.
Mr Justice Auld ruled in favour of the defence, who maintained there was no manslaughter case.
He ruled it would be inconsistent to consider the arson charge.
He also formally directed the jury to return a not guilty verdict on an arson charge against carpenter David Harper, 21, of Uckington, who is not related to the twins.
His trial for manslaughter continues.
The dead girls' parents have attended every day of the trial, watching intently.
Harper, Smith and Winter had denied a joint charge of the manslaughter of the girls, and a joint arson charge.
Prosecutor Paul Chadd QC, claimed the trio took the girls to a deserted barn at the farm for sex.
He said they were criminally reckless with matches and lit hay.
Harper had told the court he twice briefly lit tufts of hay in order to see better in the darkened barn.
But he insisted he quickly extinguished them.
Giving his ruling, the judge said there was no evidence that either Smith or Winter lit a tuft of hay.
The judge pointed out that when Harper lit the first tuft of hay Smith told him ‘in the clearest terms’ not to be so stupid.
Although Winter said nothing there was no evidence he was in any way party to events.
The trial continues.
Fire's twin victims Emma, left, and Rebecca Harper
Cleared: Wisdom Smith
Cleared: Daniel Winter
Sunday boost
CAMPAIGNERS for regular Sunday racing got another shot in the arm yesterday when the Jockey Club announced that a point-to-point meeting will be held on April 25 next year.
The Point-to-Point Owners' Association will organise the fixture at Ashorne, Warwickshire, with legal advice from the Jockey Club.
David Pipe, the club's director of public affairs, said: ‘This fixture will help to keep the issue of Sunday racing before the public at a time when the Government is likely to be carrying out its promise to reform the Sunday trading laws.’
Rovers in command
Tranmere 3 Southend 0
TRANMERE coasted to victory over am outclassed Southend side at Prenton Park.
John Morrissey put the home team ahead after eight minutes from a Kenny Irons pass and John Aldridge made it 2-0 eight minutes later after Irons rattled the bar.
Paul Sansome kept the visitors in the match until Neil McNab netted with a 20yard effort in the 77th minute.
SCHOOL'S IN FOR LAURA
PLUCKY Laura Davies is all set to achieve her main ambition tomorrow when she flies home from the US to begin school in Eccles, Manchester.
Surgeons in Pittsburgh have given the four-year-old the all-clear to travel home following her pioneering liver-bowel transplant operation five months ago.
Full story Page 4
Defiant Spartak
SPARTAK MOSCOW are ready to throw up a Russian wall of defiance to end Liverpool's European dream at Anfield tonight.
Oleg Romantsev, coach of the newly-crowned Russian champions, was in confident mood last night as he prepared his players to face a hostile 38,000 crowd inside Anfield.
Spartak have proved themselves the masters of scoring away goals and just one strike tonight will seriously jeopardise Liverpool's hopes of reaching the quarter-finals.
In 1991, they went to face Real Madrid in The Bernabeu Stadium after a goal-less first leg in Moscow, and came away with an outstanding 3-1 win.
And after a similar result in the first round of the European Cup Winners' Cup against Avenir this season, they won 5-1 in Luxembourg.
Coach Romantsev said: ‘We are looking forward to what we think will be a very good game of football.
We have a two-goal advantage from the first game and we always do well on the counterattack.
That is our big strength and our forward players are all in good form at the moment.’
Advice on asthma
DR PETER Saul will be guest speaker at tonight's monthly meeting of the Chester and Ellesmere Port branch of the National Asthma committee.
Non-members are welcome to attend the meeting at the Catholic Church Hall, Ellesmere Port, at 7.30pm.
Fergie backs Irwin
MANCHESTER United defender Denis Irwin is a surprise inclusion in Jack Charlton's 21-man Republic of Ireland panel for the World Cup qualifying tie against Spain in Seville on November 18 thanks to a plea from Old Trafford boss Alex Ferguson.
Irwin suffered a hamstring injury a week ago and only started training again on Monday.
But Ferguson informed Charlton: ‘Denis is doing everything in his power to get fit.
He badly wants to play against Spain.’
But ruled out of the squad at the moment are Liverpool's Ronnie Whelan, Sheffield Wednesday's John Sheridan and Celtic's Tommy Coyne.
Manager Charlton will monitor the progress and fitness of his three injured stars before deciding to add them to the panel at a later date.
Middlesbrough skipper Alan Kernaghan has a one-match ban and long-term injuries keep out former skipper Mick McCarthy (Millwall) and striker Tony Cascarino (Chelsea).
John Byrne, who missed last month's scoreless draw with European champions Denmark in Copenhagen, because of injury, is recalled to the squad after his recent £250,000 transfer from Sunderland to Millwall.
Poisoned girls' mother promises better future
By Graeme Wilson Daily Post Staff
A MOTHER has promised her children ‘the best Christmas of their lives’ less than a year after her husband tried to poison two of their daughters.
Ann Johnson, who is now separated from husband Andrew, said she and their three children have rebuilt their lives following their nightmare.
Mr Johnson was jailed for nine months in July after pleading guilty to administering poison to his daughters Samantha, seven, and Leanne, five, and assaulting his wife.
He was released from prison in September.
Mrs Johnson, 26, of Corwen Close, Birkenhead said yesterday: ‘This Christmas I just want myself and the kids to be together.
‘It's going to be the best Christmas ever because this year I have done everything myself and the horrible atmosphere of the last seven years has lifted.’
Mr Johnson gave the two girls up to six allergy tablets, after a row with his wife at a New Year's party.
Both had to be rushed to Arrowe Park hospital's resuscitation unit where they were given oxygen.
Doctors said afterwards the overdose was potentially life threatening.
Mrs Johnson, who also has a three-year-old son Andrew, said she was now taking a law and sociology course at the nearby Fender Neighbourhood College.
‘The whole incident with the tablets was just a nightmare so we have decided to put it behind us and continue our lives,’ said Mrs Johnson.
‘Samantha and Leanne were on heart monitors for about three days after it happened.
‘When they came home I took time off a typing course I was doing so we could be together.
‘After a few weeks though they went back to school and I started my course again.
‘I've talked with the children about what happened and been open with them.
‘But now we're just trying to forget that part of our life I know that sounds awful but we've just had to rebuild our lives again.’
During the summer the children had a treat when Mrs Johnson's mother came over from Norway to visit the family.
Mrs Johnson said her long-term dream was to complete her two-year course and begin a career as a legal executive.
Scot's chance
WREXHAM apprentice Scott Williams has been named in the Welsh Youth squad for their UEFA qualifying group match in Holland next Wednesday.
The 16-man squad which has Robins boss Brian Flynn as assistant manager.
Mistake costs £870,000
Bungled bridge in rap from watchdog
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
BOTCHED plans for a rail bridge which did not have enough room for trains to pass beneath cost the taxpayer nearly £1m, it was revealed yesterday.
Work had already started on the bridge when the error was spotted and it had to be raised at enormous cost.
The Department of Transport-backed project was built to carry the A55 over the Chester to Warrington railway line near Guilden Sutton.
It is part of the £17.5m link road between the M53 and A55.
Raising the bridge cost £70,000, but on top of that the contractor claimed £350,000 for delays and disruption.
The costs of delays to road users added another £450,000 to the total bill.
The mistake was highlighted in a report from the National Audit Office.
It was given as an example of how design errors and omissions can push up the cost of road contracts.
A spokesman for the Department of Transport said last night that the DoT would be making its response to the National Audit Office report today.
He explained: ‘It's a fairly lengthy report and we're taking time to digest its contents.’
Another case detailed in the report concerns a bypass project which was delayed because the Southern Electricity Board was late in starting the diversion of power lines as agreed with the DoT.
To compile the report the NAO looked at 120 road construction contracts and found costs increased by more than 30pc in 28 of the schemes and by more than 50pc in five of them.
The report suggested that if more liability for the contract was placed on the contractor it might result in a higher tender price, but lower cost increases during the work programme.
Hepburn op reveals cancer
A TUMOUR removed from actress Audrey Hepburn's colon was found to be cancerous, a hospital spokesman confirmed last night.
A spokesman at the Los Angeles hospital said the 63 year old actress — famous for her roles in My Fair Lady and Breakfast at Tiffany's had a ‘low-grade malignancy’ and that doctors were confident they had removed the entire tumour.
Miss Hepburn is said to be ‘in good spirits’.
Wilko's wish — better luck
LEEDS UNITED manager Howard Wilkinson looks for a change of luck tonight at sold-out Elland Road.
He says: ‘It's imperative we keep the confidence in our own ability to score goals, because then some of the bad luck we feel we've been having will start to change.
‘You never know when it will change; maybe this will be one of those nights.
But I can't see us not scoring.’
So much rides on this one game and not just the financial prize, considerable though that is.
The chance to battle it out with the giants of Europe in the new Champions League, the likes of AC MIlan, Barcelona and Marseille, is a dream, even for veterans like Strachan.
Whether or not David Batty is passed fit from his ankle injury to add bite to Leeds' midfield, Wilkinson looks certain to make a change by restoring French striker Eric Cantona alongside Lee Chapman in attack.
Rangers, meanwhile, are convinced they possess enough heavy artillery to win the war tonight.
Skipper Richard Gough, who returns after a groin injury, says ‘Sure, I'd like to get the first goal at Elland Road.
‘I would love to see how Leeds would handle the situation if we scored in the first minute, as they did at Ibrox.’
Rangers manager Walter Smith simply said: ‘We don't defend in any of our matches, home or away, so it would be foreign to us to start now,’
The magnificent seven
Schools Sport by Paul O'Brien
HOLDERS Merseyside will be able to call on seven members of last year's squad when they start their defence of the ESFA Adidas Under-19 Trophy against Greater Manchester at Wyncote on Saturday (11am).
Still eligible for selection are the De la Salle trio Paul Wilde, Stephen Carberry and Neil Williams, plus Mark McDonald (Cardinal Heenan), Steve Brough and Tony Meakin (both of St Wilfrid's) and Ian McIllwaine (King George V).
Five other squad members were with the Merseyside B squad last season.
The 16 are made up by Campbell, Ceralo (Birkenhead College), Ashton (St Margaret's), Black (Chesterfield), Byrne (Liverpool City College), Pritchard (Maricourt), Tickle (Cardinal Heenan), McMahon (St Mary's), Gray (Hugh Baird).
Liverpool meet Bootle in the semi-finals of the under-11 Everton Cup at the Civil Service Ground, Thornton, on Saturday (10.30), but the Kirkby v St Helens tie has been postponed.
Chester and Wigan should know their prospective opponents at the last 32 stage of the British Gas ESFA Trophy before the start of their third round tie at Overleigh on Saturday.
Already awaiting Friday's draw are Liverpool, 20 winners against Telford, and Kirkby Knowsley, who beat South Cheshire 3-2.
The Liverpool and Kirkby Knowsley teams plan to meet at Penny Lane in a Merseyside Under-15 Cup game, seven days before the next round of the national trophy.
On Saturday, Liverpool meet South Ribble at Penny Lane in the North West Alder Cup.
At under-14 level, Liverpool's Mike Branch scored his fourth hat-trick of the season in a 5-2 victory against Walsall last weekend.
Chesterfield (Crosby) recorded a fine 4-2 victory against De la Salle (Liverpool) to become the third Sefton team to reach round three of the Merseyside Junior Shield under-15 knock out.
The others are Maghull High and the holders, Savio.
Copters fly out to backup Cheshires
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
FOUR British helicopters are being sent to former Yugoslavia as air ambulances, the Ministry of Defence said yesterday.
The Royal Navy Sea Kings will be unarmed and operate from the Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship Argus until a secure shore base is found.
The Argus will leave with the helicopters on board next week and is expected to take seven days to reach the Croatian port of Split.
The helicopters will be used to remove casualties among British forces in Bosnia for medical treatment behind the lines.
The decision comes as British troops protecting aid convoys face growing dangers in the inter-ethnic war.
A member of the Cheshire Regiment yesterday told how he escaped being blown up by a mine, only to be fired at by Croatian forces.
He was one of a group of 28 Royal Engineers who had taken eight truck loads of blankets and supplies to Vitez to help refugees.
He went with one truck which drove on to the town of Travnik where refugees were coming under shell-fire.
Lt Cpl Jeff Jones, of Birkenhead, said they reached the town at about 1am, when it was under mortar fire.
He added: ‘As we approached the town we swerved to avoid a mine in the road, then I saw a second mine three feet in front of us.
‘It was too late to avoid.
We drove straight over it.
I braced myself for the explosion but luckily it went between the wheels.
‘The old ticker was going then I can tell you.
Suddenly someone opened up with a machine gun at us.
‘Tracer zipped past the cab window.
I was about to return fire but saw it came from a Croatian position.’
Apparently, Croatian fighters shoot across the front of vehicles they do not recognise to test if they are hostile.
The Royal Engineers did not return fire and were let through.
All 28 soldiers on the convoy returned safely to Split.
Yugoslav prime minister Milan Panic survived an attempt by hardline nationalists to oust him yesterday and won a round in his power struggle with Serbia's president Slobodan Milosevic.
The upper house of the federal assembly rejected by 18 votes to 17 a motion of no confidence in the Yugoslav-born American millionaire who took office in July, promising to heal ethnic rifts.
Piper calls the tune
NIGEL BENN will make his first defence of the WBC super-middleweight title against Welshman Nicky Piper at London's Alexandra Palace on December 12.
Former ABA light-heavyweight champion Piper, a member of Mensa, has won 16 of his 18 contests, including one of boxing's quickest victories in 12 seconds against American John Ellis.
Said Piper: ‘I'm confident because I believe Benn is beatable and I have the ability to do the job.’
Euro chances up for grabs
YOUNG cross-country runners from all over the country will meet at Bebington on November 15, for the Great Britain Catholic Schools championships.
Apart from the team and individuals at stake, athletes will be attempting to win places in the national side which to contest the European Championships, at Millfield School, Somerset, next Easter.
At Bebington the three girls championships will be run first, starting at 1.30 pm.
British high jump record holder Steve Smith is expected to be the chief guest at the Liverpool and District Catholic Schools prize presentation in the Philharmonic Hall on November 22.
Stuart rallies his troops
PLAYERS from schools and clubs in the Merseyside area will figure prominently in the annual British Aerospace Invitation Hockey Tournament at Stanley Park, Blackpool, on Sunday.
The tournament involves under-14, under-16 and under-16 teams from Lancashire, Cheshire and Yorkshire.
Merchant Taylors', Crosby, provide seven members of the 17-strong Lancashire under-18, including its captain Stuart Sinclair.
They have a further seven players in the under-16 squad.
Sinclair is confident his side will retain the tournament trophy.
They have recently registered good wins against Wirral and Staffordshire.
Wednesday full of woe
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY face a forward crisis as prepare for their UEFA Cup clash with Kaiserslautern.
Injured Wednesday player-manager Trevor Francis has ruled himself out of the second round second leg leaving his side woefully short of striking cover as they attempt to recover a 3-1 first leg deficit.
Francis has aggravated an old groin problem in training, and said: ‘You can count me out for the next two weeks.’
There was yet more bad news for Wednesday with stand-by striker Gordon Watson missing training for the last two days with a throat and chest virus.
Francis, rapidly running out of striking options, is still desperately hoping Watson can play a part.
Defender-turned-striker Paul Warhurst is fit and could well play alongside either Nigel Jemson, David Johnson in the running just three weeks after a cartilage operation or Watson, if he recovers.
Francis already has his main strike-force of David Hirst and £1m new boy Mark Bright ruled out.
Hirst was sent off in the first leg, for the first time in his career, and Bright he was signed too late to be eligible.
But the defiant manager is looking beyond the crisis, saying: ‘I expect to go through.
‘A lot has been written about our loss of Hirst and Bright, but John Sheridan and Chris Waddle can be very important players for us, and there are other good players here capable of a goal.’
Kaiserslautern also have problems, arriving in Sheffield yesterday with three key players injured -midfielder Martin Wagner, goalkeeper Gerald Ehrmann and defender Wolfgang Funkel.
FRENCH youngsters from College Centre, in Gap, braved the weather alongside those of Liverpool's Archbishop Beck for a half-term soccer meeting at the school's Evered Avenue ground.
Beck (on the left) won a close game, between mixed age group teams ranging from 13 to 16, by 4-3 with goals from Barry Harrison (2), John Edgerton and Darren Roberts.
Pollution survey slammed
A WATER quality survey off the North Wales coast has been condemned as inadequate by a Rhuddlan borough councillor.
The independent study was commissioned by local authorities and the Countryside Council for Wales.
The Countryside Council has set aside money to continue the survey and Rhuddlan Borough is being asked to contribute £2,500.
But Coun Jan Blythin, environmental spokeswoman for the council's Labour group, said the study was inadequate as it took no account of the influence of currents or tidal conditions.
‘We have spent thousands of pounds on a survey that does not supply us with the basic information that we need,’ she said.
‘We need to know exactly how Welsh Water's long sea outfall off Kinmel Bay will influence pollution off our coast over the next 30 years, and we need to know that before they build their sewage works,’ she added.
Rachel leads titles swoop
Swimming by Austin Rawlinson
DIVISION two of the English Schools Swimming Association which covers Merseyside, Lancashire, Cheshire and the Isle of Mannotched two individual and a team victory in the Schools National Championships at Wolverhampton.
The senior (16-19 years) boys 100 metres butterfly produced a keen battle in which Mark Wolfenden (Chester) returned 57.74 just a half metre ahead of Steven Mavin (Ramsay Abbey) 58.04 with David Carr (Dronfield) a close third in 58.62.
In the junior (12-14 years) 100m backstroke Rachel Line (Warrington) won by half a metre in 1 min 08.34 from Adele Grassby (Coventry) 1 min 08.79 and Sarah Lever (Oldham) 1 min 10.03.
Rachel was a member of the team which won the junior 4x50m medley relay by three metres in 2 mins 06.40 just outside the competition best time.
The team's other members were Helen Lawrenson (Liverpool), Caroline Hickey (Knutsford) and Vicky King (Liverpool).
Division three (Humberside, South and West Yorkshire) were second in 2 mins 08.02 and division one (Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear and Cleveland) third in 2 mins 09.86.
In the senior girls (16-19 years) 4x50m medley relay, division two were a close third in 2 mins 04.98 behind division 12 and 8, the team comprising Charlotte Halsall (Formby), Tracey Lee (Burnley), Zoe Wilde (Chester) and Joanne Hudson (Burnley).
Division two also had a number of minor placings including: Cheri Knight (Thornton) second in the intermediate (14-16 years) 100m backstroke 1m 06.40; Helen Billington (St Helens) second, senior 200m individual medley 2m 25.01; and Caroline Hickey third, junior 100m butterfly 1m 09.76.
Helen Lawrenson was third in the junior 100m breaststroke in 1m 16.87 and Liverpool's David Potter third in the intermediate 100m breaststroke in 1m 09.43.
GOLDEN GIRLS…the North West Schools junior medley team, from left, Helen Lawrenson, Vicky King, Rachel Line and Caroline Hickey
Two-day reprieve for Irish regime
A THREAT to the survival of the Irish Republic's coalition government was postponed yesterday when minority partners in the administration delayed a decision on leaving the cabinet.
The Progressive Democrats had been on the brink of walking out of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds' government team over an accusation of dishonesty he made against their leader, Des O'Malley, last week.
Mr O'Malley said a decision had been put off for 48 hours to permit a special investigation of Mr Reynolds' allegation by Irish High Court president Mr Justice Liam Hamilton.
Mr Justice Hamilton is chairman of a tribunal of inquiry into malpractices within the Irish beef industry, where Mr Reynolds made his claim about industry and commerce minister Mr O'Malley a week ago.
The Progressive Democrats said his comments amounted to a charge of perjury against their leader.
JOHN MAJOR anxiously awaits, but John Lukic has already won his European vote of confidence from Leeds United team-mates convinced he can still take them to Champions Cup fame and fortune against Rangers tonight.
If it had not been for the horrific blunder by their goalkeeper at Ibrox, Howard Wilkinson's men would go into Battle of Britain II at Elland Road seeking merely to confirm the superiority of the English domestic game over the Scottish.
Instead, they must now battle back from a 2-1 deficit after he punched the Glasgow club's equaliser into his own net in the first leg of the all-British second round tie.
But skipper Gary McAllister is backing ‘Lucky’ Lukic to give them the foundation to reach the last eight, and its lucrative mini-leagues, with a display which will restore his reputation.
‘We're all right behind him.
He's made great saves for us, week in and week out,’ said McAllister.
‘People forget that if it hadn't been for John, we might not have got this far.
We might not even have won the league in the first place.
Mistake
‘He has won two championship medals, he's played a million games and he's got the character to overcome setbacks like the one at Ibrox.’
Evergreen Gordon Strachan added his vote too, saying: ‘He has taken a lot of stick and I know that feeling; that sick-to-your stomach feeling after a costly mistake, like a missed penalty.
‘You don't want sympathy from anybody, you just want to suffer in silence.
‘But I wouldn't choose any other goalkeeper to be between our posts.
John Lukic is a top professional and the best goalkeeper I've ever played with.’
But Rangers' deadly duo, Ally McCoist and Mark Hateley, must fancy their chances of adding to Lukic's misery.
He has, after all, managed only one clean sheet in the last 16 games — and conceded 33 goals this season.
Most have been down to either rank bad defending or bad luck.
McAllister's headed own goal against Coventry on Saturday was typical.
If that run continues against a Rangers side who have won their last 15 games, re-confirmed Skol Cup winners and supercharged by the prolific McCoist, then not even the attacking flair which destroyed Stuttgart 4-1 at Elland Road five weeks ago may be enough.
GLASGOW RANGERS: Goram, McPherson, Gough, Brown, D Robertson, McCall, Ferguson, Durrant, Huistra, McCoist, Hateley.
Two cleared of killing sex session blaze twins
TWO men walked free yesterday after being cleared of the manslaughter of twin teenage girls who died in a barn blaze.
Unemployed Wisdom Smith, 19, and student Daniel Winter, 19, were released from the dock at Bristol Crown Court on the seventh day of their trial after a jury returned formal not guilty verdicts on the direction of the judge.
Smith, of Bishop's Cleeve, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, and Winter, of Cheltenham, were also formally cleared on a joint charge alleging arson.
It related to a blaze at Manor Farm, Uckington, near Cheltenham, where twins Rebecca and Emma Harper, 17, of Alexandra Street, Cheltenham, died in a fire after a midnight sex session on January 24 last year.
After a morning of legal debate the jury returned to deliver formal verdicts after direction by Mr Justice Auld.
Mr Justice Auld also directed the jury to return a not guilty verdict on an arson charge against David Harper, 21, of Uckington, near Cheltenham, who is not related to the twins.
But his trial continues on the sole charge alleging manslaughter.
The trial continues.
High car crime rate bucks national trend
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
CAR crime in North Wales has bucked a national trend by showing an alarming increase of almost 13pc.
The incidence of car crime in the UK as a whole has fallen by more than 2.5pc, reversing a three-year rising trend, the Government announced yesterday.
But the welcome figure was in stark contrast to Dyfed-Powys, with a 6.6pc rise, and North Wales at around 13pc.
A spokesman for North Wales Police said it was at least heartening to note that the rate of increase of vehicle crime up to June this year was less than for the previous 12 months.
The first three months covered by Car Crime Prevention Year, April to June 1992, showed falling auto crime in almost half of all police force areas in England and Wales, said Home Office minister Michael Jack.
Two out of three motorists surveyed said the anti-car crime TV advertising campaign, featuring hyenas preying on unprotected vehicles, made them feel they should do more about car security, he told a London conference.
Meanwhile, Merseyside revealed figures almost four times better than the national average.
According to Home Office figures, Merseyside showed a 9.3pc fall in car crime against the national average of a 2.5pc drop.
Cheshire showed an 11.8pc increase, Lancashire a 1.3pc rise, while Greater Manchester recorded a 9.8pc fall.
Inspector Ray Simpson of Merseyside Police said they were welcome figures.
‘It shows that the public is beginning to realise that for a few pounds spent on car security they can protect their second most expensive purchase.’
Michael Jack
Why Sky's the limit!
‘SKY Soccer Weekend’ provides an excellent insight into life in the Premier League…for London teams.
Badly hosted by Paul Dempsey, the satellite programme hardly hides its bias towards the capital's clubs — and it is becoming increasingly annoying.
When will these people realise that the game is widely played — often rather better outside ‘The Smoke’ and cater for viewers who happen to live north of Watford.
It can't hold a candle to ‘Football Focus.’
Not even with Bob Wilson there.
MILAN'S Giuseppe Meazza Stadium, otherwise known as the San Siro, has been relaid at the mere cost of £1m.
LIMERICK manager, Noel King, has signed former Liverpool midfielder Ken de Mange.
THE draw has been made for the Indoor Football Championship in Hong Kong, which runs from November 15 to 28.
It is as follows: Group A: Hong Kong, Poland, Argentina, Nigeria; Group B: Holland, Iran, Paraguay, Italy; Group C: Brazil, Australia, Costa Rica Europe (!);
Group D: China, Spain, Russia USA.
HOW'S this for confidence?
Caen's Dutch dead ball specialist, Willy Gorter, had promised to score from his team's first free-kick on his first appearance of the season against Lyon recently.
What happens?
Five minutes into the match he keeps his promise!
Hungary for success
HUNGARIAN legend, Ferenc Puskas (pictured above) has returned hom to take charge of the national junior team's international relations.
‘IF Bulgaria had qualified for Euro 92 they would have had a good chance of winning it.
‘Our team has the best attack in Europe and I wouldn't be astonished to see us finish among the best, or why not first, in the next World Cup?’
There's nothing wrong with being optimistic, but Bulgarian sweeper Nicolai Iliev is surely going over the top with his prediction.
THE trouble in Yugoslavia and all its consequences has persuaded Red Star Belgrade to part with a host of top players during the summer.
Pancev has moved to Internazionale, Najdoski to Eintracht Frankfurt, Jugovic to Sampdoria, Mihajlovic to Roma, Belodedic to Valencia, Bolic to Galatasaray and Tanjga to Fenerbahce.
Considering last year's sale of Prosinecki to Real Madrid, Sabanadzovic to AEK Athens, Stojanovic to Antwerp, Binic to Slavia Prague and Stosic to Real Mallorca, there can't be many players left on their staff!
What's more, Vladimir Popovic, who took charge of Red Star last season, has quit to become national team manager of Peru.
HELP!
WE GET SWEET F.A.
FROM TOP
UEFA seem intent on making life as difficult as possible for our clubs in Europe.
It makes you wonder if there is some kind of conspiracy going on, with one rule for the English and another for the rest.
Leeds were forced to play that third game against German champions Stuttgart, when the Bundesliga outfit should have been kicked out of the competition for fielding an ineligible player.
Not only that, Howard Wilkinson's men were forced to travel all the way to Spain to settle the tie.
Absolutely ludicrous
Now UEFA have handed Graeme Souness a five-match Euro ban, barring him from the Anfield touchline and the dressing room for tonight's big Cup Winners Cup clash against Spartak Moscow.
I'm not too worried about this because the team should be well prepared by kick-off time and in Ronnie Moran and Roy Evans, there are two people on the inside whose European experience is second to none.
The thing that really aggravates me is UEFA's decision to reduce the Kop capacity by 40 per cent, allegedly for safety reasons.
It's not just illogical, it's absolutely ludicrous.
Since the Hillsborough disaster, English clubs have had to adhere to safety regulations that are more stringent that anything else in the world, let alone Europe.
Corridors of power
If the English F.A.
are happy with the numbers standing on the Kop for a big derby game, why should UEFA ride roughshod over them and knock an astonishing 6,000 off the gate for what is possibly Liverpool's most important match of the season.
Equally, who is fighting our case in the corridors of power?
Is it F.A.
Chief Executive Graham Kelly?
Is it one of his many minnions down at Lancaster Gate.
I'd like to know who attended the meeting at which the attendance level was set and I'd like to know what he said on Liverpool's behalf.
Even with a reduced capacity, I'm sure the Kop will be a tremendous motivating force for the players.
I'm just annoyed that so many Liverpudlians will be denied the opportunity to support the lads and frighten the life out of the Russians.
I really believe that Liverpool can turn around that 4-2 first leg reversal and win this game.
It won't be easy, but it is well within their grasp.
When you analyse the four goals Spartak scored over there, one was a penalty, another down to Bruce Grobbelaar's eccentricities and a third one scored when emergency keeper David Burrows was between the posts.
Everything
Liverpool's main Euro trait down the years was always that the Reds didn't lose many goals in these type of games.
Another thing that surprised me was the manager's quotes after the defeat at Spurs.
Assessing the result, Souness suggested that the players had tonight's game on their minds.
In my experience, the only thing Liverpool players ever used to worry about was the game in hand.
They certainly won't be thinking of anything else tonight.
Come on you Reds and do the business for the supporters because they will be giving it everything for you!
Graham Kelly…
F.A.
chief executive who should be fighting Liverpool's corner
EVEN the most glittering royal occasion could not mask the frostiness between the Prince and Princess of Wales when they attended a dazzling presidential banquet in South Korea today.
The prince, in black tie, referred to his wife twice during a speech toasting South Korean President Roh Tae Woo and the Korean people.
‘My wife and I are immensely grateful to the president for his warm words of welcome,’ he said, and later referred to the princess's role as president of the Royal Academy of Music.
But the princess, in a sparkling gem-studded bolero jacket and long lilac split skirt, did not look at him once, according to experienced royal watchers.
One writer, who has covered the Royal Family for 12 years, said: ‘In 30 minutes of speeches and toasts, not once did they look at each other.’
Di was putting on a brave face today amidst speculation that their marriage is undergoing a serious rift is threatening to eclipse their visit to South Korea the first by members of the Royal Family.
The visit, at the invitation of President Roh, is seen as one of considerable significance, recognising the important trading links between his country and Britain and their alliance in the 1950-53 Korean war, in which 57,000 British troops fought.
Interest in their marriage intensified on the eve of their tour, with details emerging of the contents of the updated version of Andrew Morton's controversial biography Diana, Her True Story.
Letter
The book is said to mention a letter from the Duke of Edinburgh to the princess, warning her to toe the line, and claims the princess was forced to go on the present tour as a publicity stunt to demonstrate the couple's unity.
Although the last allegation is regarded with some scepticism by royal watchers, their speculation is heightened because the royal couple have barely been seen to exchange words or glances so far in the tour, even though they have been smiling and cheerful to those they have met.
It has led some to wonder whether this could be the couple's last royal tour together.
Ironically, the day began for the prince and princess in the grand Presidential Palace in the Korean capital Seoul, with President Roh through a translator telling them: ‘You are a very beautiful couple.’
The royal couple then went their separate ways the prince to a business seminar and the princess to a department store promotion of British goods.
At the Lotte department store ITN reporter David Chater broke the unwritten rule of protocol by asking the princess if she was ‘really happy to be here, Ma'am?’ to which she replied: ‘Yes, thank you.’
Battle
Later, the prince and princess stood on a windswept hillside overlooking the border area with communist North Korea, as war veteran Sam Mercer described a battle fought there between Chinese troops and members of the Gloucestershire Regiment in April 1951.
Boy, 14, ‘tried to rape WPC’
By Echo reporter
A SCHOOLBOY who tried to rape a young policewoman ended up by being dragged by the hair to the south London station where she was based, an Old Bailey jury was told today.
The ‘sexually mature’ 14-year-old followed the officer from an early-morning bus as she travelled to work, pushed her through a gate and attacked her only yards from the police station, said Peter Testar, prosecuting.
‘She is a police officer and naturally in the light of her vocation she was determined he was not going to get away with it.
She got hold of him by the hair and dragged him to the police station,’ he said.
Blazer
‘But equally naturally for a woman she was very frightened by what happened and you will hear from various colleagues she was very distressed afterwards.’
The boy made a ‘determined and chilling’ attempt to rape the 24-year-old policewoman, he added.
The boy who appeared in the dock in his school blazer and cannot be identified under an order made under the Children and Young Person's Act by Mr Justice Garland denies attempted rape and indecent assault on February 29 this year.
(Proceeding)
Winter warmer the Italian way
THE soup season is with us as cold winds blow and Christmas approaches.
You can more or less make soup from anything, though a good home-made stock adds a certain flavour.
In the shops though the range of stock cubes on sale is wide.
Chicken, beef, lamb, vegetable and fish stock cubes mean that you can store them in the cupboard for use when you feel like making a pan of soup for the family.
MINESTRONE
Ingredients (Serves 2 to 4): 2 sticks of celery; 1 carrot; 1 large onion; 1 oz margarine; 1 tin tomatoes; 1 cube chicken stock; 1 cube beef stock; pint of water; 1 small can of baked beans; 1 bay leaf; 1 dstsp basil; 1 garlic clove; 2 heaped tbsp chopped parsley.
Melt the margarine in a saucepan.
Chop the vegetables and heat them over a low flame.
Add the tinned tomatoes, the beef and chicken stock cubes and the water and slowly cook until the vegetables are done.
Add the baked beans, bay leaf, basil, garlic and parsley and simmer.
Serve with parmesan and crusty bread.
RAF ‘bomb’ pacifists
AN RAF dummy bomb fell into a crowd of German pacifists demonstrating in a military exercise area yesterday, slightly injuring a woman.
A Lower Saxony state interior ministry spokesman said the woman was hurt when the impact of the dummy bomb threw hard pieces of earth into her face.
It hit the ground near the group of about 20 protesters.
The ministry criticised the RAF for not suspending practice flights with dummy bombs over the exercise range in Nordhorn after demonstrators warned they would protest there.
But the British commander of the test range said that his forces were not aware of the demonstration until the protesters were spotted on the scene and one dummy bomb dropped.
BOOK OF THE WEEK
A vendetta is spawned
THE PALUCCI VENDETTA
Genevieve Lyons, £4.99 (Warner Books)
GIUSEPPE Palucci loves to tell his friends he is the happiest man in Sicily.
He has achieved his life-ambition of independance from his landlord the Duke of d'Abrizzio, and he and his wife Maria have eight children to be proud of though he is blind to their faults.
However a tragic accident shatters Giuseppe's dreams and the Palucci vendetta is spawned.
Cut off from their life of happiness and prosperity, the Paluccis swear vengeance on the family who have caused their ruin.
But the bloody vendetta will reach far beyond Sicily; to a manor house in the English countryside, and to the gangster-run Chicago of the 1920's.
US drug busters
EYES OF THE HAMMER
Bob Mayer, £4.99 (New English Library)
THE jungles of Columbia harbour a deadly secret: Cocaine producing laboratories whose market is America.
Dave Riley, a leading member of the US Green Berets is sent to destroy the labs with the help of AC-130 Spectre Gunships.
Katew Westland CIA liaison officer is his assistant but Kate is one person who realises the project is a matter few people understand.
Kate and Dave find themselves face to face with Colombia's most lethal drugs baron.
The naked truth
PRIZE DOUBT
Piers Anthony, £4.99 (Hodder and Stoughton)
ON the planet Proton, all serfs went naked by order.
Humans, robots, cyborgs, androids and aliens: If they were serfs they all had to strip off before going through Arrivals Registration.
Lysander however was a hybrid.
The body was humanoid but what was the brain?
An implant?
Or a bug-eyed monster?
Redhead in a green guise
MONTHS IN THE COUNTRY
Brian Redhead, £9.99 (Ebury)
IF you are a Radio 4 buff you will be aware of Brian Redhead's distinctive style on the early morning Today.
Redhead, however, is also a great country-lover and he writes eloquently on this theme for the magazine Country Living.
This is a collection of some of his articles which takes the reader through the year.
Ranging from advice on digging a pond, the importance of the village bobby to controversial political and conservation issues.
BY GEORGE!
IT'S THE GREAT DANE
Movie star brings the bard's best to city
By Joe Riley, Arts Editor
HAMLET took a look around the vast spaces of Liverpool's St George's Hall today and said: ‘It's beautiful but we'll mess it up.’
Superstar Alan Rickman was in quietly joking mood as he arrived in town to play the Bard's most quoted hero in a spectacular production of the world's best known play.
But Mr Rickman, who co-starred with Bruce Willis in the movie Die Hard, and went on to other leading screen roles including the Sheriff of Nottingham in Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves, is not appearing for superstar's wages.
His pay for the week's run at St George's Hall will be the Equity minimum of £200.
He said: ‘We're looking forward to it.
I love Liverpool.
‘A lot of people will be seeing Hamlet and even Shakespeare for the first time.
‘I don't think about the age of the role, if a play is well written it tells an actor what to do,’ said Mr Rickman, who is 45.
A thirty-strong team has worked around the clock since midnight last Saturday to build the stage and tiered seating for the production.
It is the first-ever full scale play to be presented in the 140 year history of St George's Hall.
Tickets for the show, which is being backed by the Arts Council, the City Council, and the Merseyside Development Corporation, sold out in only a few hours.
Just over 500 people will be able to see each performance — and Mr Rickman is expecting one very special guest.
Directed
Comedienne Ruby Wax is expected to see one of the performances — a return visit to Liverpool following her appearance at this year's Festival of Comedy.
Mr Rickman directed her show at the Empire Theatre.
‘There will be a sense of event for us all.
After appearing in two warehouses and a mill on tour, I am sure you can work it out for yourself.’
Picture: Steve Shakeshaft
Rabbits killed in city park
By Michael Huggins
TEN pet rabbits were found slaughtered in Liverpool's Sefton Park today.
A further 20 domestic rabbits were running around in the bowling green area when staff made the horrific discovery late this morning.
Park manager Paul Weston said the rabbits had apparently been battered to death.
He said dogs could not have killed the rabbits in the way they had been savagely slaughtered.
He said all the animals appeared to be domestic pets which had been dumped in the park, including a couple of angoras.
WildMr Weston said: ‘We are appealing to members of the public who can give them a good home to adopt them so we do not have to put them down.’
The park has a small number of wild rabbits, but Mr Weston said these were certainly not from that population.
It is presumed the rabbits were left in the park overnight.
Anyone wanting to adopt a rabbit is asked to call 051-427-6713.
Paul Weston with some of the rescued rabbits
Car plant in gear
VAUXHALL'S new £190m engine plant opens today at the firm's Ellesmere Port site.
The plant will manufacture the V6 engine for luxury versions of the Cavalier model.
The engine has been developed over the past four years by engineers and designers at Vauxhall's parent plant, General Motors.
Around 90pc of the engines will be exported for sale in Europe.
Tonight's Choice
LIVERPOOL IN EUROPE (BBC2, 7.20pm)
AT last, some soccer even those not blessed with a satellite dish can watch.
There are two European battles being waged tonight, but as the one being screened on ITV is the Leeds United v Glasgow Rangers' game from Elland Road, interest on Merseyside is going to be focussed on BBC2.
That channel has live coverage of the European Cup Winners' Cup second round tie clash between Liverpool and Spartak Moscow.
Needless to say, Liverpool are aiming to better their first round performance in appalling weather when their side was reduced to 10 men and went down 4-2.
POLE TO POLE: MEDITERRANEAN MAZE (BBC1, 9.30pm)
DAY 42 and Michael and the team hit Istanbul on the last boat out of Odessa.
Just hours after they left the port it was closed by the Russian generals' coup against Gorbachev.
This episode takes him across Western Turkey and the Mediterranean, on to Greece, and Rhodes (where he meets astrologer Patric Walker) before hitting Africa in the shape of Egypt and Luxor.
Again, Palin's natural humour and ability to laugh at a situation is never far away, but I can't shake the feeling that we've seen it all before somewhere.
SMOKEY ROBINSON IN CONCERT (BBC1, 11.20pm)
SMOKEY ROBINSON has been singing and writing his love sings since the age of 13 and it's a whole three decades since he had his first hit.
He says now: ‘My songs are written about love, and it's an everlasting subject.’
He adds persuasively: ‘If you write about dances, about cards or political situations, sooner or later your material sounds pass, dated.
But love has significance it never goes out of style.’
In this concert, recorded at the Stars' Desert Inn, Las Vegas, he does what he does best sings about love.
Hits soulfully delivered include My Girl and Tears of a Clown.
TVS take-over is on the cards
TVS, which loses its south of England television franchise at end of year, said it had been approached by a third party, which may lead to an alternative take-over offer to the one already proposed.
The group was set to be taken over by a company owned by Pat Robertson, an American televangelist and former right-wing presidential hopeful.
He was due to launch a satellite and cable service, The Family Channel, run by International Family Entertainment, one of the biggest cable companies in the US with more than 56 million subscribers.
IFE, which is 40pc owned by Mr Robertson, was reported to have agreed the £38.2m take-over deal six weeks ago.
IFE was particularly keen to acquire the valuable library of programmes belonging to TVS's loss-making US production arm MTM, including Hill Street Blues and St Elsewhere.
The announcement throws the agreed deal with IFE into doubt.
Shareholders would be notified as soon as possible whether the alternative offer would be made, and if so, on what terms, TVS said in a brief statement.
DOG SAVES WOMAN: Alsatian saved 27-year-old woman ower by biting man who attacked her with a knife.
Man ran off after incident in Laindon, Essex.
Quality first teach-in
A HALF-DAY seminar is to be held in Holywell on Nov 18 to tell North Wales companies about the growing importance of quality standards.
The seminar, called ‘BS 5750, A Necessity for the 1990s’ and organised by the Welsh Development Agency in conjunction with BSI Quality Assurance, Wales Quality Centre and TARGED, is aimed mainly at management.
1492 and all that
HOLLYWOOD'S first swashbuckling shot at the Christopher Columbus story hits video next month.
Marlon Brando, Tom Selleck, Rachel Ward and Catherine Zeta Jones beat the opposition to the punch with the speedy release of their Christopher Columbus: The Discovery at the box office even if reviews were only lukewarm.
Braveworld release it on tape on December 9 no early date is expected for the video release of the rival 1492: Conquest Of Paradise, starring French hunk Gerard Depardieu, which has just opened at cinemas.
Firework traders pass child sales test
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
SHOPKEEPERS have been praised for refusing to sell fireworks to young children.
Trading Standards officers from St Helens Borough Council have welcomed the responsible attitude adopted by local businesses in the run-up to bonfire night.
Traders in 18 out of 20 visited in the past two weeks refused to sell fireworks to children under the age of 16.
Chief Trading Standards Officer Ken Wardale said: ‘Our local traders have got the message that selling fireworks to young children is not worth the risk of prosecution.
‘However, we do intend to carry out further surveys right up to bonfire night and investigate any complaints we receive.’
Parents have been warned to think twice before buying cheap fireworks from disreputable sources.
A spokesman for Sefton's public protection department said: ‘Firework users should not only follow the firework code, they should buy well-known brands from bona fide suppliers.
‘If you are offered cheap fireworks, remember it could be your child that gets injured by them.’
The RSPCA is asking people to warn neighbours before beginning firework displays.
A spokeswoman said: ‘Neighbours should be told, especially if the display is held after November 5.
‘Cats and dogs should be kept indoors in a room with the curtains drawn and the radio or television on to drown out the sound.
‘Guinea pigs and rabbits should be kept in sheds or garages.
‘Please check your bonfire before lighting it to make sure no hedgehogs have hibernated there.’
Organised displays are taking place at the following sites.
All take place on November 5 unless stated.
Chester area: Bodelwyddan Castle, 7.30pm; Beaufort Palace Hotel, Mold, 7pm; Chester Zoo car park, 7pm, November 7.
Crewe and Nantwich: Red Lion, Barony Road, Nantwich, 6.30pm; Queens Park, Crewe, 7pm.
Ellesmere Port: Capenhurst Social Club sports field, 6pm, November 7; Chester Yeomen, Ledsham Road, Little Sutton, 7pm.
Halton: Spike Island, Widnes, 6.30pm; Runcorn Town Hall Ground, 6.30pm.
Knowsley: Stadtmoers Country Park, Pottery Lane, Whiston, 8pm.
Liverpool: River Mersey, off Kings Dock, 8pm; Sefton Park, 8pm; Walton Hall Park, 8pm.
Macclesfield: Macclesfield Rugby Club, 7pm.
Sefton: Leisure Lake, Mere Brow, near Southport, 6.30pm; Holy Family School, Norwood Crescent, Southport, 6.30pm; Ainsdale Lido, 6.30pm; Southport Football Club, 7pm; All Souls Church, 6.30pm.
St Helens: Sherdley Park, St Helens, 6.45pm.
Vale Royal: Barton Stadium, Winsford, 7pm.
Warrington: Orford Park, 7pm; Victoria Park, 6.45pm.
West Lancashire: Edge Hill College of Higher Education, St Helens Road, Ormskirk, 6.30pm; Lathom Slipway, Crabtree Lane, Burscough, 7.30pm.
Wigan: Standish High School, 6.30pm.
Wirral: Lower Park, Birkenhead Park, 6.30pm; Central Park, Wallasey, 6.30pm; Leasowe Adventure Playground, 6.30pm; Mayer Park, Bebington, 6.30pm; Woodchurch Community Centre, 6.30pm; Upton Park, Moreton, 6.30pm; Lingham Park, Moreton, 6.30pm.
Low note
IS it art?
Is it fun?
But most of all is it wise?
We are talking about the latest sing-along video to hit the market yes, I'm afraid it's Karaoke Opera time!
You may have thought that the alehouse renditions of My Way and Blue Suede Shoes took music to previously uncharted depths.
Well, you obviously ain't heard nothing yet!
Imagine the mayhem that could be caused to your ear-drums by amateur attempts at Nessun Dorma, made famous by Pavarotti.
And picture the scene when a bunch of the boys let rip with the Toreador Song from Carmen.
The new video, £10.99 from Pickwick, is out now and you have been warned!
Coming in Saturday's Videoview Captain Troy Tempest in Stingray, Jason Patric in the gritty detective yarn Rush and Wayne's World.
Like they say…excellent!
Police find art treasures
EIGHT paintings by a 16th-century German master, stolen from a museum three weeks ago in the country's biggest art theft since the Second World War, have been recovered with some minor damage, police said last night.
Five people were arrested and two were being sought after police in Erfurt, capital of east Germany's Thuringia state, tracked down the works by Lucas Cranach the Elder and associates.
Kenya election
KENYA will hold its first multi-party elections for 26 years on December 7.
The naming of the day ends weeks of speculation and teasing hints by President Daniel arap Moi which has generated election fever in the country and violent campaigns.
Iraq visit
IRAQ has granted visas to the parents of jailed Briton Paul Ride so they can visit their son, a Russian diplomat said last night.
Ride, a 33-year-old catering worker from Walthamstowe, east London, went missing from Kuwait in June.
Polar energy
NORWEGIAN explorer Erling Kagge, 29, aiming to become the first person to walk alone to the South Pole, left Oslo yesterday after piling on 18lbs of fat with huge meals to give him energy resources for his two months on the ice trekking 814 miles across the Antarctica.
Fighter boost
SPAIN is confident a cheaper European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) project on which thousands of British jobs depend will go ahead but sees production of the planes delayed to around the year 2000, a senior defence ministry official said last night.
Lightning ram raid on store
RAM raiders smashed their way into a store to steal clothes worth £5,000.
The raid happened at the Chester Saddlery in Boughton, Chester, where the thieves used a stolen car to break open the store's front door.
The three men, wearing balaclavas, reversed the Ford Sierra, which had been stolen from Huntington, through the doors.
Two men entered the shop while the driver waited in the car.
They stole 50 coats and jackets and drove off towards Chester city centre.
The saddlery is equipped with an alarm but owner Bill Perratt said the raid was over so quickly no one could react in time to catch the culprits.
The raid happened at around 7.45pm on Monday and the car was found abandoned on Sealand industrial estate.
The coats stolen were all country-wear, bearing trademarks such as Musto, Puffa, Mark Regent and Equest.
Police have appealed for witnesses to the raid or anyone who might have seen the men stealing the car or abandoning it.
Anyone with information is asked to contact Chester CID on (0244) 350222.
Happy to be a nappy daddy
By LINDA JACKSON
MEN love being fathers.
They love bumping their young offspring up and down on their knees and they love showing off their ‘achievement’ to their friends.
In fact, many of them are even happy to change the nappies and help out at feeding time.
But when it comes to the middle of the night, most of them prefer to leave it to mum to comfort the tiny tot when he's having a tantrum.
A new survey reveals that 80% of dads help with the bottle-feeding.
Most claim to bottle-feed at least once a day, with many doing half the daytime feeds.
But the willingness wanes when the sun goes down.
When it comes to the middle of the night, only one in 10 fathers are prepared to leave the cosy comfort of their quilt.
And it is the already sleep-starved mums who are left to tip-toe along the landing (so as not to wake hubby again) to feed the baby and settle him down.
The findings are reported in the survey, during which 539 new fathers and fathers-to-be were interviewed.
It was designed to discover the feelings of fathers and ascertain exactly how much help they really are when it comes to tending to the baby's needs.
And it gave a remarkable insight into thoughts and attitudes.
For instance, it revealed that 70% of dads believe breast is best.
Around half of the new dads questioned said they would be happy to see their partner breastfeeding at home.
But when it comes to going out, many revealed they would be uncomfortable if their partner began to breastfeed their child in public.
The research showed that men adopt three different approaches to fatherhood.
Some 47% were in the category of Mystified Manunsure about their role in feeding and about their role as a father.
Many of them often feel that baby has taken their place.
But while Mystified Man is youngish and has little confidence, he wants more involvement with his baby.
The New Man rejects traditional roles of parenthood and likes to play a part in decision-making.
He is the man who wants to take part, who wants to do everything the woman does where possible.
Unfortunately, only 27% of men fall into this group!
The Traditionalists, again 27%, are most likely to favour their partners breastfeeding.
But they are the ones least likely to take a child to the playground, or stand alongside the mums outside school at home-time.
According to the survey, they are more concerned about how the baby is going to affect them…and they're particularly worried about the impact of the new arrival on their sex life.
REVIEWS
The Doctor (15)
THIS is one of those traumatic American dramas that aims to put you through the emotional mangle and spit out the pieces on the other side.
William Hurt is the medic of the title, an eminent surgeon who finds himself on the other edge of the scalpel when he becomes seriously ill.
Only then does he discover that the system of which he is a hero is not so highly regarded by all its customers.
Emotional but effective and with some memorable flashes of gallows humour.
Rating: NIFTY
Wam bam glam
TWO old stagers return to the boards on video this month.
Veteran rocker Gary Glitter proves that there is life after Glam Rock by every year taking his over-the-top Gangshow on tour.
Now it is all down on tape in the modestly-titled Gary Glitter Live Rock'n'Roll's Greatest Show.
And old smoothie Smokey Robinson doesn't give up easily either he releases a concert recorded live at the Desert Inn, Las Vegas, to tie in with his current UK tour.
The Greatest Hits Live features Tears Of A Clown, Being With You, Get Ready and Tracks Of My Tears among many others.
Both tapes cost £12.99 and are out now from PMI.
£10m shortfall in elderly care fear
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
FEARS were expressed last night that Cheshire County Council could be £10m short of cash to care for the elderly.
A leading councillor is concerned about the way the Government is handing out community care cash.
Changes in the way the money is distributed could mean Cheshire only getting £30m when Coun Harold Tomlins claims it needs £40m to cope with demand for services.
Cuts might come in budgets for home help and day centres if there is a funding shortfall, he said.
Coun Tomlinson, chairman of the social services committee, said: ‘The Government has now announced how it intends to allocate funds for the next four years.
‘I am extremely concerned this is to be based on the Government's own estimate of how much each council should spend the Standard Spending Assessment.
‘This does not take into account the current demand for nursing and residential home beds in Cheshire and the county council believes this could mean Cheshire receiving only £30m instead of the £40m needed to meet existing demand.
‘This is bound to put our services under pressure and means we will have to concentrate even more on those people who are most at risk.
We shall not be able to help those whose needs are not so great.
‘We are still trying to persuade the Government to allocate funds for care in the community in accordance with current demands.’
Video Charts
RENTAL
1.
Basic Instinct (18)
2.
Cape Fear (18)
3.
The Last Boy Scout (18)
4.
Father Of The Bride(PG)
5.
Final Analysis (15)
6.
JFK (15)
7.
Prince Of Tides (15)
8.
Kuffs (15)
9.
Ricochet (18)
10.
The Doctor (15)
SALES
1.
Cinderella
2.
Hook
3.
Fern Gully
4.
Red Dwarf Volume IV
5.
Billy Connolly: 25 B.C.
6.
Terminator 2
7.
Dr Who: Aztecs
8.
City Slickers
9.
Rab C. Nesbitt Live
10.
Dances With Wolves
Chart courtesy of Our Price Video in Birkenhead.
‘No garden bonfire’ plea by fire chiefs
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
FIRE chiefs throughout the region are asking people to abandon back garden bonfires in favour of organised displays this week.
A spokesman for Gwynedd Fire Service said: ‘We are urging people to attend community bonfires, which are much safer than back garden displays.
‘We are worried that fireworks may be made available in shops to children under the age of 16.
We want all shopkeepers to keep safety in mind.’
The RSPCA has asked people to inform neighbours before holding displays.
A spokeswoman said: ‘Neighbours should be told, especially if the display is held after November 5.
‘Cats and dogs should be kept indoors with the curtains drawn.
The television or radio should be kept on to drown out the sound.
‘Guinea pigs and rabbits should be kept in sheds or garages out of the way.
‘Please check the bonfire before lighting it to make sure no hedgehogs have hibernated there.’
The following organised displays will take place on November 5 unless otherwise stated:
Clwyd: Bodelwyddan Castle, 7.30pm;
Beaufort Palace Hotel, Mold, 7pm;
British Legion, Llay, near Wrexham, 6.30pm;
Brookes Fields, Rhyl, 7.30pm;
City Arms, Wern Road, Minera, near Wrexham, 6.30pm;
Cross Keys, Chester Road, Buckley, 7.30pm;
Eirias Park, Colwyn Bay, 7.30pm;
Flint Castle, 5.30pm;
Holywell Football Club, 5.30pm;
Parciau, Wrexham, 6pm.
Dyfed: Black Lion, Newquay, 7pm;
Football Club, Aberystwyth, 7.30pm.
Gwynedd: Beach, near Dale Road car park, Llandudno, 6.30pm;
Nuclear Electric, Cemaes Bay, Amlwch, 7pm;
Beach Road Playing Fields, Bangor 7pm;
Blue Peter Lifeboat Shed, Beaumaris, 6pm;
Llanddona beach, 8.30pm, November 7.
Ysgol Y Garnedd, Bangor, 6pm.
Powys: Trefonnen school, Llandrindod Wells, 7pm;
Rugby Club, Builth Wells, 7pm;
Garth Mead, Knighton, 7pm;
Llangynidir, Crickhowell, 7pm, November 7.
Full-time armed unit ruled out
CHESHIRE'S Chief Constable says he will not introduce a full-time armed unit.
Cheshire is one of only four forces in England and Wales not to have a full-time armed response vehicle.
But Chief Constable David Graham says he believes it is in the interests of public safety and the safety of officers not to introduce a full-time unit.
‘We do have a firearms unit which attends incidents when an armed response is appropriate but I think a full-time unit would give the wrong signals to the people of Cheshire,’ he said.
Damme good
KINGS of video action, Dolph Lundgren and Jean Claude Van Damme, team up in Universal Soldier which is set for a December 29 release on tape after a good run at cinemas.
Money talks
LYNDON Harrison, Euro MP for Cheshire West, has gained a place on the European Parliament's Monetary Committee.
He will be part of a team dealing with the details of the move to the Single European Market.
Lyndon Harrison
Madonna's Certain something
After THAT book comes THIS film Madonna again getting her kit off, this time before she was famous.
A Certain Sacrifice, made in 1979, features the shy, retiring lady we later came to know as Madonna in a drama set on New York's meanest streets.
She plays Bruna, a street-wise veteran of the East Side, who is attacked and sets out to get revenge.
Naturally, this involves her taking her clothes off…
The film is out next week from Castle Video at £5.99.
A 16-year-old youth is in hospital with serious head injuries after an accident as he was on his way to school.
Anthony Atkinson, of Scarisbrick Drive, Norris Green, was hit by a van which failed to stop on the East Lancs Road at Norris Green.
Anthony was on his way to Queens Mary's Upper School, Long Lane.
He was taken to Walton Hospital where his condition is understood to be stable.
Police say it is possible the driver may not realise an accident has happened.
They want the driver and anyone who saw the accident to contact them at Group 4 Traffic on 051 777 5559.
HAPPY HOUSE OF LOVE
Firm on track for a record success
A WELSH record company is celebrating its first big success thanks to a local band.
The City Zones is the first band with the Abergele-based Fast Tracks Records to achieve 2,000 sales.
It did so with its first single La Maison de L'Amour.
To mark the achievement singer Tim Sanders and guitarist Anthony Machin have been presented with a framed disc and plaque by local model Janine Bellis.
The single was released in June and the band's first album is due for release later this month.
All the tracks have been written by Tim, Anthony and fellow member, Ian Ainsworth.
Fast Tracks Records has a policy of seeking out and supporting local talent.
Tim Sanders and Anthony Machin with model Janine
USED CAR ROAD TEST
by Mike Alexander
Dream diesel a real driver's car
MAKE: Renault MODEL: 19-Turbo DX AGE: 1991 (J-Reg) MILEAGE: 10,400 PRICE: £9,995
I NEVER really believed it could be a pleasurable experience driving a diesel car.
Great for taxis, a non-starter if you crave performance.
That was until I tried the Renault 19-Turbo DX.
Here was a sleek but typically French looking car in Carmen Red.
The specs were tip top as well leather seats, alloy wheels and Renault's electrics pack of sunroof, windows and remote central locking.
Ease into the black leather and prepare for lift-off.
Then the illusion was shattered.
I switched on the engine, closed my eyes and…felt like I'd just stepped onto a corporation bus.
There it was, that familiar diesel rattle.
Surely this couldn't be just another flash boneshaker.
Thankfully it wasn't.
Once on the move, the Turbo DX comes into its own.
The car drives beautifully, in fact the throttle response from the 1870cc engine is almost petrol sharp.
And the handling is good too.
It rides bumps smoothly and hugs the road, cornering neatly.
Acceleration is handy, 0-60 in 11 seconds to be exact, with a top end of 114mph.
But while the turbo provides the poke, the diesel factor ensures economic consumption of around 47 miles per gallon.
The model I tested was provided by Renault of Liverpool in Sefton Street.
The car is 11 months old, spotlessly clean throughout and has been used as a staff vehicle by Renault UK.
The interior layout is smart and practical with accessible switches, though the electric front window controls are in the centre of the dash.
The radio/cassette player is security coded and for convenience has satellite volume controls a rare attraction.
It's a comfortable car to drive, assisted by power steering, and while leg-room in the back is just about adequate the low roof can prove irritating for tall rear seat passengers.
There's no problem with the boot though.
It's excellent for the size of car, conveniently shaped and the back seat splits or can be removed entirely.
Added features include seat and steering wheel height adjustment.
Renault Liverpool offer 12 months parts and labour warranty plus RAC membership on all their cars.
VERDICT
Comfortable, economic and quick — a far cry from the old derv-burner days.
Dream of a diesel
Crash girl set to win long battle
BRAVE crash victim Gemma Quinn has astounded doctors in her battle for survival.
Gemma, eight, from Childwall, Liverpool, was left paralysed after she and her family were involved in a crash on their way to a weekend in Pwllheli in June.
She was put on to a life-support machine, which her parents, Mike and Jackie, were told would be her constant companion.
But the plucky youngster has astounded them and medical staff at Southport General's spinal injuries unit by beginning to breathe for herself.
Mike said: ‘She breathed for three minutes, giving us hope she would one day be able to breathe for herself.
‘Now that has gone up to five hours on her own.
It is incredible.’
Mike revealed the news on the day the Gemma Quinn Appeal was wound up.
But computer programmer Mike, 32, said many fund-raising events are still to be held.
Predictably unpredictable
THE natural world is full of surprises and yet very ordered; one might say predictably unpredictable.
This is one of the great fascinations of being involved with living things, of discovering that the more one gets to know about natural things, the more there is still to find out.
For example, now that autumn is fading and the leaves are carpeting the ground in a tapestry of brilliant colours, just as one imagines that winter is only a clear night sky away, along come some plants which we might all associate with a spring display.
Rhododendron ‘Yellow Hammer’ is a real winner for the small garden.
There are hundreds of species and hybrids of Rhododendrons from small ground hugging shrubs ideal for the rock garden to huge tree-like species only suitable for the large estates.
Growing in a neat upright habit no more than a metre or so across and two metres high at maturity, ‘Yellow Hammer’ produces a magnificent spring display of butter yellow, narrowly tubular flowers.
What's different?
Most Rhododendrons flower in the spring.
True, but few produce so amazing a second flush in late autumn or early winter.
Catching the rays of sunshine this variety lights up the shrub border to prolong the last few days of autumn.
Witch Hazels are the harbingers of spring, their narrow strap shaped petals bursting from globular buds in February and March long before the leaves have begun to stir.
Species such as Hamamelis mollis and its form pallida with yellow flowers, and the hybrid Hamamelis ‘Jelina’ with orange blooms are favourites in many a garden.
Just now however, a different species from eastern United States of America is coming into flower.
Hamamelis virginiana is, admittedly, not so spectacular as its Chinese counterparts but its very narrow bright yellow petals cause all but the most unobservant to stop and ponder.
Can there be something amiss?
Should this not be springtime.
If Hamamelis are the heralds of spring, Snowdrops must surely be the epitome of the start of a new gardening year.
Once the white hanging bells open in the weak sunshine of a late February day, we can begin to believe that winter is nearly over.
So what is a Snowdrop, Galanthus to give it its botanical name, doing in flower now?
There may well be those who believe that plants should be rigidly seasonal and I tend to agree but nature goes its own way and Galanthus nivalis subspecies reginae-olgae is a true end of year Snowdrop.
Just now flowers of this species from Greece are emerging and soon will be fully open.
In the wild it grows in shady woodland so will do well under shrubs in cultivation.
Just three little surprises at the close of the growing season, something to marvel at, to accept for what they are.
There will be many more surprises before the year is out.
Belfast feud fades as faction disbands
A SAVAGE feud between rival Republicans which left three men dead may be over, after the IRA stepped in to target faction leaders.
The heads of one of the sections involved agreed to disband yesterday, hours before one of their men, shot dead by the IRA, was buried.
Sam Ward, a member of the Irish Peoples Liberation Organisation's so-called Belfast Brigade, was killed by the IRA at the weekend for alleged drug dealing.
Dozens of police kept watch at his funeral yesterday in the Short Strand area of the city.
Ward's side had been fighting it out on the streets with the IPLO's Dublin-based Army Council in a row over drug money.
Three men were killed since the shooting war erupted in August.
The Provisionals then stepped in, and shot Ward and eight others over the weekend.
They then demanded both sides stand down.
The Army Council faction has not yet responded to the demand.
But, early yesterday, the Belfast Brigade confirmed it was breaking up a move welcomed by the Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams.
A Brigade statement said: ‘The decision to disband has been taken by the leadership and will prevent any members reforming under any other name.’
The IRA has said it is determined to stamp out drug dealing.
It has accused the RUC of ‘turning a blind eye’ to the problem in Nationalist areas.
The IPLO is an off-shoot of the Irish National Liberation Army.
The IRA regards both as no more than gangster bands.
Why didn't they kill me off?
ACTRESS Eithne Browne left Brookside Close last year to find a new challenge.
Now she exclusively tells PETER GRANT about her four years with the top soap and reveals that she wanted the writers to kill off the character of Chrissie Rogers.
THERE is hope beyond soap…just ask actress Eithne Browne who played the much-put-upon housewife Chrissie Rogers.
Now the 37-year-old Liverpudlian is preparing for the sell out run of the stage play Alfie at Bolton's Octagon Theatre.
Yet she has one clear admission from her Brookie days.
So what's it all about…
‘I genuinely wish I had been killed off,’ says the Huyton-born star.
‘That's not sour grapes or anything like it more a professional belief in myself that it would have been better in the long run for ME Eithne Browne and probably for Chrissie, too.
‘When I first left the Close people were convinced that I was actually still in the series and that obviously had its drawbacks.
‘I would go for parts and they would still have this idea that Chrissie was very much in the series.
‘Even though we never do see her she is mentioned.’
The character, in fact, was last seen disappearing from the Close on what would have been her daughter's most memorable day.
‘I left her wedding with two suitcases and a hat,’ she recalls.
‘I honestly don't believe any mother would get up and go like that.
‘Certainly not Chrissie Rogers let's face it, if she was going to leave she would have gone the day AFTER the ceremony.
‘That wasn't Chrissie's way.
She'd been through so much with an alcoholic daughter, unemployed husband and dyslexic son.
‘But what I saw as the character and what they the writers saw didn't match up at all.’
Now when she catches the odd episode on TV, Eithne looks on as Chrissie is referred to by her remaining soap family members.
‘They say things like ‘I've just been to see Mum’ so I must be still in it sort of,’she laughs.
Eithne, an accomplished singer who stood in for Barbara Dickson in Blood Brothers at London's Lyric Theatre, says she left the soap because there was no future development for her Mrs Rogers.
‘Chrissie was supposed to be enrolling for a teachers’ training course all we saw her doing was peeling potatoes and with her hands in the sink for six weeks.
‘Sometimes I would cut out faces on the potato skins,’ she laughs.
Yet, the Close brings back some fond memories for Eithy mostly positive…others not so pleasant.’
‘I received a lot of abuse when I left Brookside, not ME personally but in a way just as bad.
Women would come up to me very unhappy about how I walked out on my children they REALLY believed I was their mother.
‘I also took note of the man who wrote to me saying ‘why do you sigh so much?’
I did take a step back and look at myself.
I didn't sigh as much after that.’
But she is continually spotted out in the real world, so to speak, especially in the shops even though she looks nothing like her screen image.
Leaving the soap has also given her much more personal freedom.
She has her own home in Mossley Hill and her 20-year-old son Neil calls around to visit her regularly.
‘Once I'd gone I was asked to do a wide range of things but not because I was Chrissie Rogers but because of me Ethy Browne that has been the most satisfying aspect.
‘I narrated a series of school concerts at The Philharmonic and I'm back in live theatre again.’
But being typecast in one of this country's most popular and lasting soaps did have it setbacks.
‘While waiting for drama roles I did actually have to make ends meet in other ways such as selling advertising space.
The recession has hit all industries and acting has been right in the thick of it.
Before I landed Brookside I was washing up in a wine bar so the experience obviously came in handy for playing Chrissie.’
Now she is getting her teeth into Alfie.
‘I play two people there's a lot of hysteria and screaming.
One of my characters owns a cafe but I won't be seen peeling any spuds.’
As for the next ten years of Brookside, Eithne and the elusive Chrissie Rogers offer their best regards to the series that made them both household names.
‘I wish everyone well from the cast to the gardening staff.
‘But sometimes I wonder where the series is going.
There's been everything from violent sieges to people walking around with shooters.
‘Maybe they should build a police station on the site it looks as though it could come in very handy in the future…‘
Radon gas hot-spots danger to thousands
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
SCIENTISTS believe that cancer-causing radon gas may be a health risk in 3,000 homes in Wales responsible for 110 lung cancer deaths a year.
A survey carried out for the Welsh Office, published yesterday, revealed radon ‘hot-spots’ in Clwyd, Gwynedd, Powys and Dyfed.
Now the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) is to carry out more detailed tests to assess the extent of areas affected.
Radon, a naturally-occurring radioactive gas, is formed in the earth from the decay of minute amounts of uranium.
It disperses rapidly in open air where levels are low.
When it becomes trapped in buildings, it is inhaled with the result that particles become lodged in the lining of the lung and irradiate the tissues, increasing the risk of lung cancer.
The Government-imposed safety limit for annual average exposure to Radon in a home is set at 200 becquerels per cubic metre of air.
This is the so-called Action Level beyond which the occupier is advised to reduce the radon level.
The survey monitored 1,100 Welsh homes and found the average level to be 20 becquerels per cubic metre, the same as the UK as a whole.
But some homes were as high as 600.
The survey shows that levels above the Government limit exist in around 3,000 of the one million homes in Wales and is not a significant or extensive problem.
But the report adds: ‘There is, however, prima facie evidence that some small areas of Wales may be affected by radon in the sense that increased percentages of dwellings with elevated levels are to be found in them.
‘These areas are Alyn and Deeside, Delyn and Glwyndwr in Clwyd, the Pembrokeshire area of Dyfed, Ynys Mn in Gwynedd and Radnor in Powys.’
A free measurement service is available to householders who are concerned throughout the areas.
Under Secretary of State for Wales, Gwilym Jones, said yesterday he had asked the NRPB to carry out still more detailed work.
‘Naturally I want to be sure that we have very precise data about radon's limited and localised occurrence.
That is essential to be sure that it can be properly monitored and dealt with.’
The board's scientists estimate that radon in Wales can be blamed for about 110 deaths a year, or 6pc of the 2,000 lung cancer deaths, mostly due to smoking cigarettes, and about 85 (1pc) of the 8,500 deaths annually from malignancies.
‘In public health terms, therefore, the effect of domestic exposure to radon is not a major cause of cancer,’ the report concludes.
‘However, elevated exposure of a section of the population to radon for prolonged periods is a matter of considerable concern.’
Boy in fight for life
A 16-YEAR-OLD boy is fighting for life in Walton Hospital today after being hit by a van as he was on his way to school.
The van, a blue Transit-type, failed to stop after the accident, on the East Lancashire Road near Stopgate Lane, Kirkby, at about 8.45am.
Police say the driver may not be aware that an accident has happened.
The boy has serious head injuries.
Bill celebrates Scottish 21st
40 years ago
NOVEMBER 5, 1952: Billy Liddell gained his 21st cap in a Scotland team that drew 1-1 with Ireland who had Billy Bingham, then with Sunderland, in their side.
November 8: Despite making six changes, Everton lost 1-0 at home against Rotherham.
Brian Williams and Ken Brierley got late goals for Liverpool at Charlton, but by then the Reds were three down and lost 3-2.
Tranmere lost 3-0 at Rochdale, where the goals came in the opening 34 minutes; Chester (Don Travis, Bill Deakin) beat Halifax 2-1 at home; and Southport (Jim Nuttall, Frank Hindle own goal) drew 2-2 with Bradford at Haig Avenue.
30 years ago
SOUTHPORT were beaten 3-2 by Wrexham in an FA Cup replay at the Racecourse on November 7, but only had themselves to blame.
Reg Blore failed with a penalty kick and a goalkeeping error by Willie McInnes gave the Welshmen their winner.
Wrexham went ahead with two goals from Ron Barnes, Jimmy Blain and John Fielding levelling.
The decider was scored by Brian Whitehouse.
On November 10, Liverpool drew a ding-dong battle at Manchester United 3-3 with Ian St John, Jimmy Melia and Ronnie Moran (penalty) finding the net.
Everton, with Roy Vernon back in the side, beat Blackpool 5-0 at Goodison Park where the goals came from Alex Young (two), Billy Bingham, Jimmy Gabriel and Denis Stevens.
Les Jones scored both Tranmere goals in a 2-1 win at York, while Chester (Peter Fitzgerald, Ron Hewitt and an own goal) had a 3-1 home success against Torquay.
Southport lost 2-0 at Workington.
BIRDS Eye meat products bought from supermarkets contained textured soya protein not mentioned in the food description, magistrates heard yesterday.
Branded items like Prize Grills, described as ‘pure ground beef with a hint of seasoning’ or ‘two pieces of southern fried chicken’were not all they might seem from the packet descriptions, the prosecution alleged.
Birds Eye Walls Ltd, of Waltonon-Thames, Surrey part of the Unilever Group denied seven charges brought by Shropshire County Council's Trading Standards Department at Telford magistrates court.
Four charges under the food labelling regulations alleged the name used for the products was not sufficiently precise to tell a buyer of the true nature of the food.
Three others alleged false trade descriptions.
Robin Spencer, prosecuting, said the case centred on the use of textured vegetable protein known as TVP in meat products, and the way in which it was declared.
Although the soya protein content was listed in the ingredients it was not included in the name of the products, even though it formed a substantial proportion.
‘The prosecution do not suggest there is any dishonesty to mislead, but, perhaps in the labelling, Captain Birds Eye was sailing a little close to the wind,’ he said.
Birds Eye allegedly told inspectors the soya was used to add texture and strength to the product and prevent shrinking.
The hearing continues.
Frightened of commitment
I HAVE been engaged twice before, but they were only kid's stuff as I was 17 and 19 at the time.
Now I am 25 and have a new man in my life who I think is the one for me.
I have been going out with him for three months.
We have a lot of fun and a lot of laughs and I know he is serious about me.
But he complains that I give him the impression that I am holding back and am not fully committed.
We are sleeping together and that is good, too.
So what is the matter with me?
I was upset when my two previous engagements broke up, but that was a long time ago.
Looking back, I am sure I did the right thing.
Friendship
Those relationships were based on sex alone, whereas I feel this one is based on friendship.
I know I don't want to lose this man, but I realise I will do if I can't sort myself out.
WENDY SAYS…
I don't think your problem is whether or not this man is the right one or not.
Rather, your problem is one of why you find it difficult to make a commitment to the relationship.
I suspect that however right you feel someone is, you are always going to have this problem.
Commitment is based on trust.
We commit ourselves to the surgeon when we go into hospital for an operation; we commit ourselves to the hairdresser, to the dentist and so on…
These are comparatively easy commitments to make because we can rely upon on both reputation and upon recommendation.
But personal relationships are different.
So often, what has happened to us in the past determines whether or not we find it easy to trust both ourselves and others emotionally as adults.
Could this apply to you?
If so, all I would say is that you are not a child now.
Your circumstances are different and so is your experience.
You will have to take the risk if you want to keep this man.
Otherwise, there is really no way you can find out whether or not your gut feeling is correct.
Breaking up is so hard to do
AFTER 16 years of marriage we are splitting up and are both agreed that it is the best thing to do.
We have a son, aged 15, and he says it would be more convenient for him if he stayed with his father.
Although I can see the sense of it, I feel very rejected.
I know I am being stupid and the last thing I want to be is a possessive mother.
It hasn't always been easy being the only woman in the house!
WENDY SAYS…
I can imagine!
You have every right to feel upset.
The only words of comfort I can give are that the more emotional freedom you give your children, the more likely you are to keep their love and affection.
Agree flexible arrangements for your son to visit (I say flexible because he won't want to feel obliged to turn up every weekend; that way, the visits won't become a chore for you or for him).
And don't forget, in two or three years time your son would be leaving home anyway, so his decision would seem to be a practical one.
Rushie fires four as Reds romp to Goodison glory
GREAT GOAL RUSH!
10 years ago
THERE are many dates Liverpool fans remember and Everton fans would rather forget, and vice versa, and one of those is November 6, 1982.
That's it!
Liverpool won 5-0 at Goodison Park, and Ian Rush became the first player to net four in a derby game since Freddie Howe in 1935.
It was also the first time Liverpool had gone ahead of their rivals — 45 wins to 44 — since the derby series, than at 127 games, began.
Liverpool's win was also the biggest by either Merseyside team on the other's ground for 68 years.
And to add to the Blues' tale of woe, Glen Keeley became the first player to be sent off on his debut in a Merseyside derby.
There was no luck for Tranmere, beaten 3-0 at Torquayor Chester, who lost 1-0 at Bury.
Rovers had been feeling better on Monday, November 1, when the F.A.
Cup draw gave them a home tie with Scarborough.
Chester were also drawn at home against Northwich Vics.
On November 2, a youngster named Paul Rideout netted two penalties for Swindon Town in that club's 4-2 victory against Tranmere, for whom Owen Brown and John Kerr scored.
Chester played out a goalless game at Bristol City.
There were no scoring problems for Liverpool, however.
They beat J.K. Helsinki 5-0 in a European tie at Anfield where Kenny Dalglish, Craig Johnston, Phil Neal and Alan Kennedy (two) were on target.
By the way.
On November 3, Graham Taylor was placed in charge of the England youth side.
RUSHIE RAMPAGE…
Ian Rush matches a 40 year old Derby scoring feat, by hitting four past Everton at Goodison.
HOT ROD…
Belfitt blasts a goal past Manchester City on his home Everton debut.
Laura's itching to get back home for school
LITTLE Laura Davies cannot wait to start school after being given the all-clear to travel home following her double transplant operation in America five months ago.
Yesterday, in Pittsburgh, she tried on her new school uniform for the first time but she was not too happy about the tie.
‘What's this scarf?
It looks so funny it makes me laugh,’ she said.
She twirled and turned in delight to show off the uniform to her mother Fran, adding: ‘I've already got two school bags one for my front and one for my back.’
Laura, 4, is due back in Britain tomorrow after undergoing a liver-bowel transplant at Pittsburgh children's hospital.
She is hoping to attend All Saints Primary School in Eccles, Greater Manchester.
Seeing Laura dressed for school brought tears to her mother's eyes.
Fran said: ‘Just look at her.
It's absolutely marvellous.
She looks great.
‘Six months ago, we never thought she would ever achieve her ambition but, fingers crossed, I'll soon be taking her to the school gates and she can sit in class with the other youngsters, just like she always wanted.’
A spokeswoman at the hospital said doctors were pleased with Laura's progress and it was thought she would be able to lead a normal life.
Consultant Adrian Bianchi, of the Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, and another British doctor and a nurse have flown to Pittsburgh to discuss Laura's after-care.
Laura's courage has provided the chance of life for a four-year-old American girl.
Charlie Fourstar, whose family live on an Indian reservation in Montana, underwent a complex liver-bowel and multi-organ transplant at the same Pittsburgh hospital on Monday.
Charlie's family had no medical insurance, but Medicare changed its mind about paying after seeing a film made by the Disney Corporation of Laura's discharge from hospital.
Head vows fight to save school
CATHOLIC school head Bernadette Ardern today accused her church bosses of turning their backs on a Liverpool community.
Mrs Ardern vowed to keep open Speke's closure-threatened Pope John Paul II High School even if it meant opting out of the control of the church.
The school the only senior RC school in Speke will close if a major shake-up of Catholic education in Liverpool is approved.
But today Mrs Ardern said the staff, governors, pupils and parents were determined to ensure that the school survived.
Problems
She said: ‘We are committed at the school to Catholic education in Speke and we are convinced we can become self-sufficient.
‘Speke is like an island with high unemployment and social problems and needs a Catholic school.’
Mrs Arden's headship has seen pupil numbers rise to 325 from 285 with a sixth form and thriving nursery.
Robert Newman, director of the schools department for the archdiocese of Liverpool, said there is a thorough consultation process before a final decision is taken.
Tribute to a legend
20 years ago
ONE of the Everton greats, Tommy Lawton, had a testimonial match at Goodison Park on November 6, 1972, which was attended by 12,209 fans and raised £6,300.
The following day Liverpool played their 25th game of the season and played it well.
It was a UEFA Cup tie in Greece against AEK Athens, which the Reds won 3-1 to tie things up 6-1 on aggregate.
Two brilliant first half goals by Emlyn Hughes shattered any hopes the Greeks might have had, despite banners which predicted ‘Liverpool will die today.’
It was Hughes, too, who handled in the box to give AEK their goal from a penalty.
Liverpool's third came from Phil Boersma near the end, after Kevin Keegan had done all the hard work.
Home debut
On November 10, an Eddie Loyden goal gave Tranmere a Friday night Prenton win against Swansea, but Southport (Frank Lee) lost 3-1 at Colchester.
Rod Belfitt scored on his home debut for Everton the following day and Roger Kenyon got another, but it was Manchester City who left Goodison as victors 3-2.
There was crowd trouble before and during the match at Old Trafford, where Liverpool lost 2-0 to Manchester United ending an unbeaten run of 18 games.
Chester (Derek Draper) and Bradford City drew 1-1.
TOMMY LAWTON receives warm applause at his Goodison Testimonial.
Now how do I stop loving her?
‘I married a woman who's old enough to be my mum’
I AM a handsome (so I have been told) 40-year-old man.
Ten years ago, I met an attractive woman who was the same age as my mother.
We got on well and a relationship developed — to such an extent that I eventually married her.
I kept leaving her as I had mixed feelings about being married to someone older than myself.
I started relationships with women my own age, but found I couldn't take to them because I couldn't forget the woman I had married.
I feel I have given her my heart.
I have tried to make myself hate her, yet my feelings for her remain very strong.
She divorced me because of my unreliable behaviour and adultery, but wherever I go she is in my thoughts.
I feel trapped and unable to escape.
How do I stop loving her?
WENDY SAYS…
Why do you have to?
Why not accept that you love, not hate, her?
You sound as though you feel as though there is something morally wrong in loving a woman who is old enough to be your mother.
But quite a few men do and live happily ever after.
Is it too late to mend fences with your ex-wife?
If you could go to her, genuinely sorry for the hurt you had caused her and knowing that you had come to terms with your conflict about the difference in your ages, then maybe she might be willing to consider starting again.
In order to understand your conflicting emotions, it may pay you to seek some help from a counsellor.
Try talking to the people at Relate.
Even if you don't want to go back to your ex-wife, counselling may help you to free yourself from the past.
Then you can move on towards making a stable relationship with someone your own age if that is what you feel you need and want.
Saturday Quiz
1,
Which city is served by Ben Gurion International Airport?
2,
Whose headquarters are at 16 Lancaster Gate, London?
3,
Who had a number one hit with The Israelites in 1969?
4,
Out of which two counties was Tyne and Wear carved in 1974?
5,
What nationality was the composer Bartok?
6,
Which prime minister was assassinated in 1991?
7,
Which political party won the 1962 Orpington by-election?
8,
In which year did Elvis Presley join the US Army?
9,
In which stories is Mrs Goggins a postmistress?
10,
Which product was said by its producers in adverts to Prolong Active Life?
11,
Brontophobia is a fear of what?
12,
Stirling is sited on which river?
13,
What does a pedologist study?
14,
Which football side plays at Portman Road?
15,
From which musical does the song June Is Bustin' Out All Over come?
16,
Who wrote the novel Tropic of Cancer?
17,
Which saint did Mrs Thatcher quote on first entering Downing Street as Prime Minister?
18,
Who wrote the novel Lolita?
19,
Where does the International Court of Justice sit?
20,
Which actor plays TV detective Columbo?
21,
What is the name of the prison in TV's Prisoner Cell Block H?
22,
Which group had an album called Meaty, Beaty, Big and Bouncy?
23,
In which English county is the M2?
24,
Of which US state is Little Rock the capital?
25,
Robert Muldoon was prime minister of which country between 1975-84?
26,
At the start of which season were substitutes first allowed in English football?
27,
Who wrote the play Death Of A Salesman?
28,
Who said ‘There can be no whitewash at the White House’?
29,
Who led the Kon-Tiki expedition in 1947?
30,
In which year did Aldaniti win the Grand National?
Love ‘n’ lust…
MY friends and I were discussing whether we would find it more acceptable if our husbands had an affair based on lust, rather than love.
We thought we'd ask your opinion.
WENDY SAYS…
What a dynamite question.
Well, from what I have gleaned over the years, I would say that many women find it harder to accept an affair which had a strong emotional attachment.
Then again, none of us can say how we would react until faced with the situation.
Paradise bought
A TINY island rich in wildlife, scenery and history is to be taken over by the RSPB with the help of a £400,000 appeal.
Ramsey Island off the coast of Dyfed, considered as ‘one of the wildlife gems of Wales’, will be turned into a nature reserve.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds launched the appeal to help buy and manage the 625acre island.
As well as at least 43 types of breeding birds, Ramsey, near St David's Head, has south-west Britain's largest grey seal colony.
Where there's a will
I HAVE been left some money by my grandmother and have decided to buy myself a car with it.
The trouble is my boyfriend, with whom I have been living for six months, thinks I should use the money to pay off our overdraft.
Although we have a joint account, he is the one who has taken it into overdraft and I don't see why I should do as he suggests.
His argument is that once we have cleared the debt we could buy a car with another loan.
But my fear is that once it is cleared, he will start spending on things he wants and my car will get forgotten.
However, I do love him and don't want to lose him so I feel as though I should do what he says.
WENDY SAYS…
You haven't yet agreed to endow him with all your worldly goods so that money is yours and yours alone.
Grandmother
I am sure your grandmother would have wanted you to spend it on something that would bring you happiness.
If you can't yet make up your mind about what to do with it, put it into a high interest-bearing account in your bank or building society until you do.
Should you buy a car, register it in your name alone, that will avoid problems should the two of you ever decide to split up.
Ex-lover convicted of stun gun rape torture
By Daily Post Correspondent
A SALES manager was found guilty at the Old Bailey of drugging his former girlfriend, imprisoning her in a hotel room, and twice raping her.
The 38-year-old man, who cannot be named to protect the identity of his victim, tortured her with an electric stun gun during the ordeal in front of their children, the court heard.
He was remanded in custody for social inquiry and medical reports to be prepared.
During the trial the court heard how the 21-year-old woman was tied up, handcuffed and subjected to sexual abuse.
The stun gun was applied to parts of her naked body and activated, the jury was told.
All of this took place in front of the couple's two young children.
During the trial the man claimed sex was by consent and told the jury his former lover enjoyed bondage.
The court heard her ordeal began when she and the children set off with the salesman on what they thought would be a family shopping trip.
When the mother complained of a headache she was given an overdose of anti-depressants and tranquillisers which caused her to lapse into unconsciousness.
John Williams, prosecuting, said she woke up to find herself in a hotel room with her hands tied behind her back.
She was also gagged and then subjected to a horrifying rape and torture ordeal in front of her children, he said.
‘She was plainly affected by the taking of the drugs.
She was turned on to her stomach and handcuffs and thumbcuffs were applied to her,’ Mr Williams added.
The man produced a stun gun which, when applied to parts of the body, gives out a ‘sharp’ electric shock, said Mr Williams.
She recognised the gun as one her ex-lover had bought her some time before as a form of self-protection, the court heard.
Mr Williams said: ‘The thread that runs through what he had to say is that he was desperately in love with and fond of the victim and wanted to get back at her.’
She had ended their four-year relationship three weeks earlier.
The man told detectives: ‘I only wanted to hurt her as she hurt me.’
Locks away!
I HAVE always known, ever since we first met, that my husband likes women with long hair.
So I've always kept mine long.
However, 15 years on, I feel the time has come for me to have a change of hairstyle.
But he won't hear of it.
He's even accused me of not loving him!
How daft can men get?
The thing is, do I do what I want or give in to him?
It is all so silly, and I wouldn't take him so seriously if it wasn't for the fact that five years ago he had an affair and, yes, she had long hair.
If I had mine cut, it might happen again.
WENDY SAYS…
It would seem that you have a basically strong marriage if you have lived through, and overcome, your husband's affair.
I would doubt very much whether you having your hair cut would seriously damage your future together.
Maybe you could try having it cut little by little rather than all in one go.
Then it wouldn't be so much of a shock to you, either!
Water plan
A NEW scheme to improve water supplies in Rhyl begins this month.
Welsh Water is to use modern techniques to scrape, clean and reline 9,000 metres of mains without the need for lengthy excavations.
The £350,000 scheme, which starts on November 16, will take about 24 weeks to complete.
Child care job delay under fire
By Chris Walker
THE appointment of a key child care solicitor in Liverpool has been held up.
City council officials say the delay has been caused by problems getting office space ready.
But Arundel Liberal Democrat councillor Roger Johnston claims applications for the post were left forgotten in a drawer for six weeks.
Cllr Johnston said it took the city solicitor's department two hours to find the application forms, after he had asked why interviews had not been held.
He has tabled a question on the issue for tomorrow's council meeting.
A council spokesman said there was no question of applications being overlooked and all candidates had been sent letters explaining the situation.
They hoped accommodation for the child care section would be sorted out soon.
A NEW BUSINESS BID
Helen makes a splash
HELEN Tapley is planning a rocky road to success.
The 23-year-old who lives at Sychdyn, near Mold, graduated this year from the University College of North Wales with an honours degree in geological oceanography.
Now she plans to set up her own business offering expertise which ranges from diving skills for seabed surveys, to investigating river pollution.
She is currently sharpening her business skills and gaining practical experience at the Greenfield Valley Enterprise Centre on a ‘Women into Business’ course.
She explained: ‘In the present climate jobs are very hard to come by so I thought, why not start up my own business?
I have nothing to lose.’
Oceanographer Helen Tapley Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Two cleared in barn blaze deaths trial
By Echo reporter
TWO men today walked free after being formally cleared of the manslaughter of teenage twin girls who died in a barn blaze.
Unemployed Wisdom Smith, 19, and student Daniel Winter, 19, were released from the dock at Bristol Crown Court on the seventh day of their trial after a jury returned formal verdicts on the direction of the judge.
Smith, of Longlands Drive, Bishop's Cleeve, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, and Winter, of Albemarle Gate, Cheltenham, were also formally cleared on a joint charge alleging arson.
It related to a blaze at Manor Farm, Uckington, near Cheltenham, where twins Rebecca and Emma Harper, 17, of Alexandra Street, Cheltenham, died in a fire after a midnight sex session on January 24 last year.
Formal
After a morning of legal debate the jury returned to deliver formal verdicts after direction by Mr Justice Auld.
The judge also formally directed the jury to return a not guilty verdict on an arson charge against David Harper, 21, of Homecroft Drive, Uckington, near Cheltenham, who is not related to the twins.
But his trial continues on the sole charge alleging manslaughter.
Tip talks
MONTGOMERY councillors will be meeting in private tomorrow to consider a report on unauthorised deposit of controlled waste at the Severn Farm Industrial Estate, Welshpool.
Masterful Scudamore
PETER SCUDAMORE, facing a powerful double challenge to his jockeys' title, grabbed back the advantage with a masterful winning ride at Exeter today.
Young Irish star Adrian Maguire joined Scudamore on the 32 winner mark yesterday with Richard Dunwoody just one behind.
But the eight-times champion was soon back in front thanks to an accomplished effort on Grand Hawk in the St Austell Brewery Company Novices Hurdle.
The even money favourite almost threw the race away with several bad jumps to the right and Scudamore was forced to use all his strength to withhold a late challenge from Sun Surfer.
Trainer Martin Pipe said: ‘This is a nice horse.
The owner bought him privately out of Mohammed Moubarak's stable.
‘We've no specific plans, just to win again soon.’
Contract cheer for Vauxhall workers
VAUXHALL's 4,500 Ellesmere Port workers were celebrating news of a major slice of a £17m Government contract last night while management were delighted at the confidence placed in their Astra car, estate and van production.
The workers had beaten off competition throughout the EC in order to secure the deal and the news broke on the eve of today's official launch of the new Ellesmere Port V6 engine plant.
A proportion of the cars will be left-hand production models destined for export to Europe.
The company announced they had secured a Ministry of Defence contract to deliver nearly 2,000 diesel engined Luton built Novas and almost 800 Ellesmere Port-built diesel 1.7 Astra Estates over the next three years.
The order secures virtually half of the £17m contract, certainly more than £8m, for the north-west workers.
The order is also the biggest ever MOD contract to be won by Vauxhall with fleet market ‘whole-life costs’, economical running, servicing, durability and second-hand value on replacement being a crucial factor.
A company spokesman said they were delighted at the order.
‘It doesn't mean new jobs but its good news for us just the same.’
Shell marks 100 years of shipping
By David Hope Business Staff
OIL and shipping giants, Shell, mark their centenary anniversary next week with a seven day exhibition at Liverpool's Albert Dock.
The company maintains one of the largest British merchant fleets and leads the world's maritime industry with health and safety standards to protect environment and crew alike.
The maritime history of the company began with the launching of their first tanker, SS Murex in May 1892, the first of a series to be built for Shell founder Marcus Samuel.
The early kerosene market was dominated by the American Standard Oil Company and Marcus Samuel realised the potential of Black Sea oil as a rival but had to design a new tanker to overcome stringent safety regulations operated by the Suez Canal.
His new innovation won approval and orders for the first 10 tankers were placed with NE ship builders.
The first ship, Murex, was named after a shell, a tradition which has persisted to the present.
The Centenary exhibition at the Grand Hall, The Colonnades, Albert Dock opens on November 7 and is based on a time tunnel which invites visitors to pass through and visualise the happenings of Shell's British Tankers fleet.
Audio visual and special effects will allow visitors to realistically experience life at sea.
Shell Marine Personnel (IOM) Ltd recruit, employ and manage the training of seafarers to meet Shell requirements and there will be a recruitment stand at the exhibition for secondary students considering an officer career in the Merchant Navy.
MP's plea for projects cash
WALLASEY MP Angela Eagle today appealed to the government to continue Wirral's status as a development area.
Ms Eagle has written to Trade and Industry Minister Tim Sainsbury to support the Wirral bid.
She said Development Area status is vital to the Wirral in its efforts to bring more investment into the area.
And removing it would be like asking the local council to continue its work with one hand tied behind its back.
In the last eight years, 62 projects have being supported to the tune of £20.5m.
Melbourne Cup for Subzero
THE victory of Subzero in the Melbourne Cup last night completed a rare treble for trainer Lee Freedman.
Following victories earlier this season in the Caulfield Cup and Cox Plate, Freedman has now saddled the winners of Australia's three most prestigious races a feat last achieved in 1954.
Subzero beat New Zealand-trained favourite Veandercross by one and three-quarter lengths, earning 910,000 US dollars for his syndicate of owners.
Patent Office is to open its doors wider to firms
LIVERPOOL'S Patent Office, with records of inventions dating back to 1617, is raising its profile among businesses as a valuable source of research and development material.
The Merseyside resource is one of 13 patent office libraries around the UK and is a mine of research and development information with its collections of not only British patents but American and European counterparts.
Businesses daily use the library facility for their own research and development.
This week the national Director of Marketing and Information services, Ted Blake, has launched efforts to educate UK firms into using the centres as a source of both technical and commercial information.
The library is one of the key members of the national Patents Information Network supported by the Patent Office and the British Library and Liverpool is the only library in the North West to offer the full range of patent information services.
Mr Blake said: ‘Patents are the largest single source of technical information in the world today.
‘They're invaluable for keeping an eye on competitors’ activities and can save thousands of pounds in research and development.
‘The European Commission recently estimated that a third of all EC research is repeating work that's been done before and is documented in patents.’
To help boost the use of patent information by the local business community, Liverpool's council-run Central Library is to be awarded a grant of £5,000 to help library staff assist local innovators.
Phil Herbert, Patent office Superintendent Examiner, plans to hand the cheque to Lord Mayor Councillor Rosemary Cooper later this week.
The cash will help companies and inventors developing new products which need patent protection and allow them to exploit the technical information available.
Town hall set for a new look
By Chris Walker
PLANS FOR the next stage of a multi-million pound facelift for Liverpool Town Hall went before councillors today.
The £2.3m programme of work inside the magnificent building will pave the way for restoring the civic HQ as a major public attraction.
City council leisure services director John Davies is recommending that more emphasis should be given to encouraging school parties, community groups and other visitors to use the Town Hall.
He says the facilities should also be made available at appropriate times and at competitive prices for conferences, seminars, meetings and dinners.
But he proposes that the strategy for the building should recognise that above all it is the home for the Lord Mayor, the council and civic functions.
Extensive work to the roof has just been finished and the next phase will concentrate on the interior.
It will include access ramps for the disabled, new heating, fire alarm and fire detection systems and toilets on the first floor.
The bill for the refurbishment will be paid for out of the government-backed Urban Programme.
Major attraction…
Liverpool Town Hall is set for a new look
Athey bid for free transfer turned down
FORMER England batsman Bill Athey has had his request for cricket's equivalent of a free transfer turned down by the Test and County Cricket Board.
The 35-year-old player wants to leave Gloucestershire, the county he joined from his native Yorkshire in 1984.
But Gloucestershire's decision to place him on the restrictive List One of available players has been initially supported by the TCCB registration committee.
Only one player a year from List One, and just two in any five-year period, can be signed on by a county making it unlikely that Athey would be able to move.
But Athey himself, or a county wanting to sign him and Derbyshire are reportedly interested can now approach the TCCB again to ask for a special exemption.
It is likely that such a move would then secure Athey the place on the unrestricted List Two that he wants.
Counties can sign as many players from List Two as they want.
Today's statement read: ‘The registration committee of the TCCB considered the case of Bill Athey in regard to his having been put on List One by Gloucestershire County Cricket Club.
‘Taking into account all the circumstances, the committee felt that he had been properly placed on List One and on the evidence available were not minded to move him to List Two as he had requested.’
Hold up for new town museum
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
HOPES of an early start on a planned museum have been dashed with news that premises earmarked for the project will not be released before April.
Wrexham Maelor council has been collecting historical and architectural items of interest for a decade.
Thousands of objects have been put into storage at three locations dotted around the borough because the council has nowhere to display them.
The council hopes to use the County Buildings in Regent Street, the town's former police station.
But its buildings have more recently been used as an exhibition hall and classrooms by the North East Wales Institute's College of Art (NEWI).
Clwyd council and the borough council had agreed to the transfer of the premises but the plan has been put on ice because NEWI, formerly under the wing of the county council, is to become an independent body from April.
Prof John Williams, NEWI executive principal, confirmed that no decision could be made on the future of County Buildings until April 1, when the institute becomes independent.
He said nobody else was in a position to approve the transfer of buildings before then.
A county spokeswoman said: ‘Clwyd has agreed with Wrexham Maelor that it can have the buildings but it is being held up because of the situation with NEWI.
The ball is in NEWI's court.’
Wrexham Maelor councillors, concerned at the lack of progress, have instructed officers to search for alternative sites.
Durie back in style
DEFENDING champion Jo Durie took a decisive first step towards her seventh title in the Volkswagen National championships at Telford today.
The 32-year-old top seed thrashed Birmingham's Katie Rickett 6-1, 6-3 in a whirlwind second round match to quash lingering doubts about her fitness.
Durie limped off court after five games of her first round match with Mary Joe Fernandez in Brighton two weeks ago.
But she looked fully recovered when despatching her unranked opponent in one hour.
Miners call off ‘re-open’ action
By John Aston Daily Post Correspondent
THE mineworkers' unions yesterday agreed to call off their High Court bid to force British Coal to reopen and work 10 pits earmarked for early closure.
The UDM, NUM and pit deputies' union Nacods abandoned their action after British Coal gave a 10-point assurance that no pits would be allowed to become unworkable while consultations on their future went ahead.
Agreeing to the move, Lord Justice Glidewell said he was ‘very conscious that there is a great deal of mistrust at the moment’.
But he said he hoped the assurances from BC deputy chairman, Albert Wheeler, would provide ‘a seedbed for the re-growth of at least some trust’.
Counsel for the unions told the judge that miners were ‘desperately worried’ collieries would become unworkable by the end of the 90-day consultation period before they could launch their High Court challenge later this month to the legality of the Goverment's pit closure programme.
But the judge refused to make a formal order allowing the unions to arrange for independent weekly inspections of the pits, to ensure they were not deteriorating.
The judge said he was satisfied BC would ‘take note’ of the miners' concerns and the assurances given would be carried out.
These included ensuring the consultations would be ‘meaningful, open-minded and fully taken account of before the final decision (on closures) is made’.
BC also pledged that miners would not suffer financially if they decided against taking early voluntary redundancy in order to await the outcome of the talks.
The unions have accused coal industry chiefs of offering men better redundancy terms if they quit soon, in order to undermine the campaign to keep the pits open.
When Sinbad's not cleaning windows
SINBAD has been cleaning the windows in Channel 4's Brookside since 1984, although he has only been on a regular contract for the last two years.
Paddy Shennan asked actor Michael Starke what he does when he puts his shammy leather down.
MERSEYSIDE'S most famous window cleaner puts his ladders away on Friday evenings…and looks forward to Saturday Afternoon Fever.
For Michael Starke, alias Sinbad from Brookside, is a red-hot Liverpool fan and alternate weekends revolve around a trip to Anfield.
But his celebrity status has forced the unassuming actor to take a seat in the stands.
He explains: ‘I'm a really big Liverpool fan and used to be a Kopite until a few years ago.
But it got to the stage where I couldn't enjoy the game because someone was always rubbing my head and saying ‘How are you doing, Sinbad?’'
‘But now that I've been on a regular contract at Brookside for the last two years I can afford a season ticket in the stand!’
Pilgrimage
Michael makes the Anfield pilgrimage with his wife, Lynn, while babysitters take care of their two daughters, six-year-old Jamie and Hayley, three.
But the girls take centre stage throughout the weekend.
‘When I come home from work on Friday evenings the kids take over,’ explains Michael.
‘They do all the performing and I just sit around watching them!’
Michael normally takes the children on a shopping expedition on Saturday mornings unless the Reds are on an away day, in which case a family outing will be arranged.
But there is a problem when it comes to putting the girls to bed.
Michael says: ‘They can be hard work at night.
They stay up for hours watching the Wizard of Oz and Grease 2 again and again on their video upstairs.
‘Grease 2 must be the worst film ever made but they love it!’
Unlike their dad, the children enjoy going to bed and getting up late.
‘I like staying up until 3am or 4am in the morning but I also get up early.
I catch up on video tapes of TV shows I've missed and I read a lot.
Read
‘I just can't put books down.
I have three or four on the go at once.
I read anything really but especially biographies and nonfiction.’
Saturday night socialising is down to the bare minimum since the children arrived.
‘I very rarely go out at weekends but if someone sees you in a pub once they assume you must be a real nightclubber.
‘In fact, Lynn's a bit of a disco person and she says my age is catching up with me.’
When the kids are safely tucked up in bed, Saturday night is surely the ideal time for resting.
But no.
‘I can't!
I just love staying up late.’
Sunday dawns and a pile of Brookside scripts are waiting to be memorised but Michael has other ideas.
‘It's like being at school.
I'm terribly lazy and always put it off until the last minute.’
Relatives call round to the Starke's Halewood home for a traditional Sunday roast and then it's time to plough through a big bundle of Sunday newspapers before a late afternoon nap.
‘I should then be learning my lines but I can't do anything before the kids get to bed.
Even then I find it hard to concentrate for long enough.
‘Fortunately Lynn makes sure I do it.
I need her to hold my hand and sit me down.
‘I could never survive on my own.’
Desert Storm ‘mascot’ is mourned by GIs
Gulf veterans comfort tragic Kevin's family
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
GULF war veterans have sent a letter of comfort to the family of the Llanrwst boy who became their ‘mascot’ during the war before he was killed in a tragic accident.
Kevin O'Toole, 11, achieved fame during the Gulf conflict when his uncle, Larry Kewley, of Betws-y-Coed, sent a video featuring Kevin to his brother Clive, who was serving in the Gulf, as a good luck message for the troops.
American servicemen who also saw the film wrote to Kevin at Ysgol Iau in Llanrwst, to say thank you.
But Kevin died in August when he fell thirty-feet from the top of builder's scaffolding and fractured his skull.
He was put on a life support machine in a special head injuries unit at Walton Hospital, Liverpool.
After three days the family made the agonising decision to switch the machine off when they were told he would not recover.
An inquest into his death is to be held later this month.
But it is only in the last few weeks that news of Kevin's death has reached American troops still in the Middle East.
They were contacted by Clive Kewley, who is an adviser to the Saudi Air Force and who acted as a Scud missile look-out during the conflict.
Now a letter has arrived from some of the American veterans of the Desert Storm campaign expressing their regret at Kevin's death.
The sentiments are expressed in a letter from a Sergeant Steven Drayton of the US Marine Corps, who is on his second tour of duty in Kuwait.
The letter expresses their ‘very deep sympathy’ to Kevin's family.
Speaking of the video sent to the Gulf, he says: ‘Kevin was our little pin-up.
He represented all the kids back home and all over the world.’
Yesterday, Larry Kewley described the letter as ‘lovely’.
‘We have had a lot of kind letters from people but it was very good of them to write and remember Kevin,’ he said.
Mr Kewley is acting as a spokesman for the family.
Kevin's mother, Patricia, is still too distraught to speak about the tragedy.
Kevin O'Toole
Accused denies attack after tackle
SOCCER PLAYER'S JAWBROKEN
By Harry Dean
AN amateur soccer player who allegedly kicked an opponent in the face and broke his jaw denied causing grevious bodily harm at Liverpool Crown Court.
John Newton, 25, a chemist of Newtry Road, Woodchurch, Birkenhead, was playing for ADS Graphics, in a Wirral Sunday League division one match.
He is accused of wounding David Hallam, 29, of Stanley Street, Garston, Liverpool, who was playing for the Oxton-based Queens Arms team.
Ian Harris, prosecuting, said the incident arose out of a match at Ridgewood Park, Pensby, in April.
In the 73rd minute, Mr Hallam late-tackled Mr Newton.
After the tackle, both players lay on the ground with their legs entangled.
Injuries
Mr Harris said Newton got up but instead of walking he punched Mr Hallam on the face while he was still on the turf and then kicked him.
Newton was sent off and Mr Hallam had to leave the pitch because of his injuries.
Mr Hallam was seen by a surgeon who found that his lower jaw was broken and he had damaged teeth.
Mr Harris said: ‘These injuries were caused by a violent and unprovoked kick delivered by Mr Newton.’
Mr Harris said Newton was arrested and when interviewed by police claimed that the tackle could have broken his legs.
Mr Hallam said he slid in for the tackle and they ended up with their legs tangled.
He told the court that as Newton pulled away, he kicked out while they were still on the ground.
Mr Hallam said: ‘I then felt a kick in the face.
I immediately realised that my jaw was broken.
‘I could only speak with a muffle.’
(Proceeding).
Debaters deflated
WITH the Bush-Clinton confrontation now resolved and our own Parliament on the brink of a crucial European Community debate today, modern Welsh politics seems tame in comparison.
There seems to be no real bite in exchanges between the parties.
Compare this to the infighting among Anglesey Liberals in 1928, when Megan Lloyd George became prospective candidate.
Though at the time parental influence by her former Prime Minister father was denied, an article in the newly issued 1992 Transactions of Anglesey Antiquarian Society claims this was not so.
It is probable that winning that nomination against three candidates was the hardest election of her life, until perhaps losing her seat two decades later.
Her majority over her nearest rival to become the candidate was 107.
LG himself apparently drummed up support for his daughter by suggesting he would help her main rival, Ellis W. Roberts, a local barrister, find a seat elsewhere.
Opponent
Megan claimed to be standing on her own two feet, but J. Graham Jones, of Aberystwyth, says LG confided to her that he had caused a hint to be given, if her opponent behaved himself after the vote, that he would help him find a seat to fight.
Even before the vote, LG regarded it as a ‘cert’.
A war of words continued for months, the defeated candidates complaining of unfair muckraking.
Almost a year later, a general election imminent, talk persisted that third candidate, Col. Lawrence Williams, would stand against her as a true Liberal candidate.
Declaring he would not stand, he said if no candidate were found, traditional Liberals would vote for Labour in protest.
Whatever worries the LG family may have had were dispelled when Megan polled only 300 votes short of half the total cast.
At the Commons at 27, the first Welsh woman MP joined her father, her brother Gwilym, newly elected for Pembroke, and a relative, Major Goronwy Owen, MP for Caernarfonshire, in a unique family group, LG becoming the first MP to have a son and daughter in the Commons simultaneously.
The rest is history.
Megan held the seat until defeated in 1951.
Since the war a Liberal, Labour (now Lord Cledwyn of Penrhos), a Conservative (the unfortunate Keith Best) and now Plaid Cymru member, Ieuan Wyn Jones, have sat for Anglesey.
It seems unlikely any had to fight harder for nomination than Lady Megan had to in 1928.
Clear way ahead for villagers
TRIUMPHANT villagers have won a battle to keep open an ancient public footpath.
A Welsh Office inspector has refused to confirm an order sought by Clwyd county council to divert the path, which runs off Pant Lane, Marford.
Objections to the order were made by Gresford Community Council, the Ramblers' Association, the North Wales Wildlife Trust and 21 individuals.
Welsh Office inspector Brian Evans said to be able to agree to the council's plan, he had to be sure that the diverted route would not be less convenient.
But the proposed new right of way descended a fairly steep slope by means of steps and Mr Evans ruled it virtually unusable by people with prams.
Union pledge to fight job order
A UNION which sacked a Liverpool councillor after she helped the police has demanded a review of a reinstatement order.
The GMB union claimed today the industrial tribunal's decision revealed double standards.
A spokesman said tribunals rarely ever order reinstatement when it is accepted that the allegations are true.
He said this was the case in Cllr Frances Kidd's unfair dismissal hearing.
Cllr Kidd, Labour councillor for Melrose ward, was sacked from her £14,000-a-year book keeper's job at the Edge Lane office.
She had helped police investigations into union membership.
Cllr Kidd said today: ‘It is hypocritical.
‘I can assure them I will go all the way.’
The union has a further right of appeal to an Employment Appeals tribunal on a point of law.
The GMB says Cllr Kidd was replaced before it was told of her claim.
Cllr Kidd's solicitor, Rex Makin, said today: ‘I can only say: Will they ever learn?’
Wide boy stake on muscle men
JOHN KING wants to outwit Southend's muscle men tonight, by giving his wide boys a bit of the action.
Rovers take on lowly Southend at Prenton Park (7.30pm), and King explained: ‘Southend are a physical side full of six-footers and we have to get behind them.
‘It's no use playing two wingers like Morrissey and Nevin and asking them to do the defensive bit for you.
We have to give them the ball out wide and let them get at Southend's back four.’
King has promised a positive outlook from his team, but warned that the home fans may have to be patient.
‘Southend haven't had a good start, but they came back from two down at Luton on Saturday which suggests there's nothing wrong with their character.’
King would be delighted with a repeat performance of Friday night, with a different result.
‘We created a host of chances and got one goal against Peterborough, when maybe we should have had a hatful.
But you couldn't really argue at the way we played.’
Centre half Dave Higgins, missing on Friday with a stomach upset, is likely to return for Mark Hughes.
Southend's year has shown steady decline.
On New Year's Day they topped the division for a couple of hours.
Now they lie just one place off the bottom having lost money, their manager, players and impetus during the past 11 months.
Most influential absentee has been top scorer Brett Angell.
He underwent an operation on an injured thigh in the summer and will be missing until February.
In his absence Ian Benjamin has assumed the top marksman's title with seven.
Boss Colin Murphy, who took over from David Webb at the end of a turbulent season for the club, is grimly realistic of his side's chances tonight.
‘Tranmere are one of the more difficult teams to beat in the division and it will be a tremendous task to come away from there with anything,’ he said.
TRANMERE ROVERS (probable): Nixon, Higgins, Brannan, Irons, Mungall, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Malkin, McNab, Nevin.
Subs from Hughes, Cooper, Muir, Martindale.
SOUTHEND UNITED (from): Sansome, Parkinson, Powell, Cornwell, Edwards, Prior, Ansah, O'Callaghan, Martin, Locke, Benjamin, Tilson, Scully, Jones.
By David Prentice
Education opting-out bullies get a warning
By Ben Preston Daily Post Correspondent
TOWN halls should not use dirty tricks, harassment or intimidation to stop schools opting out of local council control, Education Secretary John Patten warned yesterday.
Local education authorities which were found to be abusing their powers risked direct action by Whitehall, he said in a letter to 108 chief education officers in England.
The message comes at a critical time for the Government's flagship education policy, which critics claim has lost its momentum because schools are worried about public spending cuts.
Mr Patten remains convinced that most secondary schools will opt out within four years but is worried by the success of local campaigns against the switch.
With only 309 of 24,000 schools having chosen to become grant-maintained in three years, one minister recently warned that ‘the gloves are off’ in the fight against town halls.
Yesterday's letter spelled out Mr Patten's concern that councils were helping hostile groups fight opt outs with misinformation campaigns.
He highlighted concern that councils were:
Stopping headteachers from helping governors organise opt-out ballots.
Giving parents' names and addresses to campaigners.
Threatening teachers about their future careers.
Insisting that council officials should attend critical governors' meetings.
The letter said: ‘It is important that parents, governors and school staff should be able to consider the options available to them to pursue their chosen option without fear of intimidation or harassment.’
The National Union of Teachers accused Mr Patten of making unsubstantiated allegations which merely emphasised the Government's failure to get schools to opt out.
‘Despite all the Government's bribes, schools know their own best interest,’ said general secretary Doug McAvoy.
No 10 battles on Europe and spending
SHOWDOWN FOR MAJOR
By Mark Davies
JOHN Major and his Cabinet were today continuing their marathon meeting aimed at thrashing out a spending plan for 1993-94.
The session which follows on from late night deliberations comes amid predictions that tomorrow's Commons Euro vote will be a dramatic cliffhanger.
MPs were today playing the numbers game as the crucial Euro vote drew closer.
Tory rebels claim up to 40 MPs will vote against the government in the Maastricht Treaty debate.
But ministers and party leaders are confident of victory.
Even so, Tory MPs have been put on standby for a three-line whip on Thursday seen by some as contingency plans for a possible defeat tomorrow.
If the government does lose the showdown, it seems likely that John Major will call a confidence vote 24 hours later.
Mr Major met backbenchers, describing himself as the ‘biggest Euro-sceptic in the Cabinet,’ in a bid to win support.
As ministers met today there were renewed assurances that the public spending limit of £244.5bn would not be breached.
The plans, expected to include cuts in some minister's budgets, will be revealed in the chancellor's autumn statement next week.
Law firm's contract success
BERMANS, the Liverpool commercial law firm, has pulled off a coup in civil litigation work.
They have been handed all the debt recovery work of Westminster City Council in one of the biggest steps by a local authority in the contracting out process.
The firm will take on about 1,000 current cases from the council's in-house legal department, and expects to increase its workload by an additional 1,000 new cases annually during the initial 3-year contract.
Founded in Liverpool in 1970, Bermans has offices throughout Britain.
Unions step up campaign to save Welsh jobs
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
CIVIL service unions in Wales fear thousands of jobs are in jeopardy from Government plans to contract out services.
Now the Civil and Public Servants Association is to co-ordinate a campaign to protect Welsh jobs threatened by planned changes at DVLA drivers' licence centre in Swansea.
More than 3,000 jobs could go if plans in a leaked management document to contract-out the work go ahead.
But CPSA spokesman Geoff Evans said yesterday that it was the tip of the iceberg.
‘What is happening at the DVLA is happening in all civil service jobs in Wales.
Every department is having to carry out market tests and exercises to compare costs of the internal service to that in the private sector,’ he said.
‘The problem for us in Wales is that there is the potential for massive job losses.’
The union planned to unveil the full picture of potential job losses in Cardiff tomorrow.
Meanwhile, the Wales TUC, which is mounting a big campaign for jobs and recovery, claimed yesterday that the Principality was the poorest region of Great Britain.
The amount of industrial production per head and average wages below that of the UK, and a lower percentage of people in work, all indicated Wales at the bottom of the economic league.
Mersey tourist spots shine
TOURISTS are shunning fee-paying attractions like the Tower of London in favour of cheaper places like farms, gardens and country parks, a survey detailing Sightseeing in the UK during 1991 has revealed.
But despite money being tight Merseyside has weathered the recession comparatively well.
Merseyside Tourism Board has confirmed that last year attractions like the Albert Dock and the Bluecoat Arts Centre were again successful.
Visitors figures for the Lady Lever Art Gallery were up by 20,000.
An extra 1,000 people toured Speke Hall in Liverpool while the city's Anglican cathedral increased its figures from almost 280,000 visitors in 1990 to 326,000.
The most spectacular was the increase up 100,000 from 1990 in visitors to the Bluecoat Arts centre which in 1991 attracted 600,000.
Spotlight on business success
A NEW barometer of regional business strength and success is to be published next week by the Daily Post.
In association with business adviser Grant Thornton, the paper will publish the first in an annual series of league tables showing the top companies by turnover and employment in Merseyside, Cheshire, West Lanchashire and North Wales.
The Top 100 ranked by turnover, will be the most authoritative survey of leading companies and company information assembled following months of painstaking research.
It will be supplemented by the top 50 companies in terms of employment levels, and both tables will give those at the sharp end of the economy the chance to give their businesses a much higher profile.
The top 100 survey is an objective exercise based purely on turnover ranking and information gleaned from research will form part of a survey of various aspects of commerce and industry.
We will also publish a table of the top 50 companies by employer levels, together with in-depth articles on the changing pattern of the region's economic and employment make-up, written by Daily Post Staff and authoratative outside commentators.
Despite the recession, support for the Top 100 has been heartening.
A reply rate of 80pc was obtained to a questionnaire to companies identified as main contenders for the list.
This rate of return is extremely rare for questionnaires and reflects the high level of interest by local companies, in a project which will lead to an invaluable source of reference.
As far as we can ascertain, the Top 100 list is unique in that information of its kind has not before been published before, covering an area which coincides with the Daily Post's circulation area.
Winning car wars
CAR crime on Merseyside has dropped for the first time in three years but the rate is still one offence every 20 minutes.
Police and car owners are beating the criminals thanks to a series of top-priority initiatives, Home Office figures revealed today.
On Merseyside thefts from cars are down to 16,251 and numbers of cars stolen are down to 12,992 an overall drop of nine per cent.
Nationally there has been a 2.5% drop.
Councils' staff strike
COUNCIL workers will strike today to join a march and rally in London in protest at cuts in services and jobs in the capital.
Thousands will demonstrate against the axing of jobs and ‘vital’ public services because of council cutbacks in London boroughs.
Several areas of the capital, including Ealing, Hillingdon, Islington, Newham, Camden and Greenwich, will be hit by the Nalgo strike.
Pigeon pests could bloom as an attraction
PIGEONS blamed for damaging a borough's efforts in the Wales in Bloom contest should be turned into a tourist attraction, a councillor has urged.
The pigeons have a taste for flowers, nipping off their heads, and damaging displays around Rhuddlan.
The problem is worst around Rhyl town hall where several flower beds have been spoiled and earned criticism from Wales in Bloom judges.
Coun David Smith said they should consider turning the pigeons into an attraction, as they do in Trafalgar Square.
‘They may be a bigger success than some of our others,’ he said.
Bird lovers reacted badly to earlier attempts to control the birds by poisoning them and removing nests.
Health officer David Owen said it was a delicate subject and that one pet shop near the town hall sold seed for people to feed the birds.
The health and housing committee agreed to ask the North Wales Euro MP, Joe Wilson, to try to find out how other European countries tackle the problem.
Battle of Britain needs A Spirin
A REFEREE by the name of A Spirin could prove a headache for Leeds and Rangers when they clash in tomorrow's climax to their European Cup battle.
The Russian official recently so upset his domestic association that they suspended him for two months, although UEFA insist: ‘He's still one of the best referees in Europe and the right man for the job.’
Leeds midfielder David Batty is winning his fight to shrug off an ankle injury and be fit for the second leg, which his side start 2-1 down on aggregate.
Batty said: ‘If I had to miss the game, I know we still have a squad strong enough to beat Rangers.’
Final bow
LEGENDARY filmmaker Hal Roach, who created the comedy duo Laurel and Hardy has died aged 100.
The Oscar-winning Prince of Comedy died after a heart attack in a Los Angeles hospital.
Farewell to the king
GP fined over boy's acid burns
A DOCTOR was fined £750 with £213 costs yesterday after a child visiting his surgery was left with severe internal burns when he drank from a bottle of acid that should have been locked away.
Dr John Bromley admitted exposing two-year-old John Storey to a hazardous substance.
York magistrates heard Dr Bromley, 48, now faced the prospect of disciplinary proceedings by the General Medical Council, following the incident at his practice in York last September.
The court heard that the child had taken a bottle of Phenol, also known as carbolic acid, while unsupervised, and sipped some.
John spent two weeks in hospital and 10 days in the intensive care unit after receiving internal burns.
Clarke hails private jails as era of reform
By Peter Archer Daily Post Correspondent
PRISON privatisation is a means of raising standards and achieving much-needed reforms, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke said yesterday.
In the past, too high a priority was given to placating jail unions, he told the prison service annual conference in Blackpool.
Prisons had now reached a turning point and the Woolf Report into the Strangeways riots had set the scene for dramatic reform, Mr Clarke said.
‘I am determined that this exciting opportunity should not be lost,’ he said.
‘I want to see a prison system where grievance and disciplinary procedures work quickly and fairly.
A system that gives higher standards of hygiene and health care, stronger family ties, more time productively spent out of cells.’
Mr Clarke called for a system where prisoners were fed at normal meal times, had the space and opportunity to better themselves and address their offending behaviour.
‘Competition in public services is a valuable means of raising standards and of achieving these much-needed reforms,’ he said.
Widening the range of people who managed jails would lead to innovation and better value for money.
The prison service was on the brink of agency status and already showing willingness to change its management culture to compete with other organisations which wanted to run jails.
‘In the past in the prison service there has been a lack of clear, overall objectives,’ Mr Clarke said.
‘Too high a priority has been given to placating the unions and too low a priority given to hearing the voice of the public.
‘I do not want to labour the failures of the past but I do want to emphasise that many of the problems that are now being tackled are the legacy of past management failure.’
Kenneth Clarke
Dockyard move to oust its RN rival
MANAGERS at one of the two Royal Naval dockyards yesterday pressed its case to win all future nuclear submarine refitting work despite the jobs impact on its rival.
Management at Devonport Royal Dockyard said it would ‘defy logic’ not to site all future re-fitting at the Plymouth base in preference to Rosyth in Scotland.
The Government has denied a decision has already been taken to close Rosyth, Scotland's biggest employer with 4,000 workers, and an announcement is expected next month.
Devonport Management Ltd has already submitted a 13-volume report to the Ministry of Defence arguing that opting for Devonport would save the Government more than £400m through lower operational costs and more flexible dock facilities.
Mike Leece, Devonport chief executive, said there was a future role for Rosyth to work on minor vessels.
However, between 2,500 and 3,000 workers would be made redundant there under the Devonport plan.
BRAKE PUT ON MERSEY CAR CRIME
But still an offence every 20 minutes
By Caroline Storah, crime reporter
CAR crime on Merseyside has dropped for the first time in three years but there is still one offence every 20 minutes.
Police and owners are beating the criminals thanks to a series of top priority initiatives, Home Office figures revealed today.
On Merseyside, thefts from cars are down to 16,251 and the number of cars stolen has fallen to 12,992 an overall drop of 9%.
Nationally, there has been a 2.5% drop in car crime.
Chief Inspector John Henry, Merseyside's crime prevention chief, said the figures were good but there were no grounds for complacency.
‘It still means around 29,000 vehicles are being targeted by criminals and that is unacceptable.’
Prevention
Merseyside was winning the war against car thieves due to:
A special squad on the streets in one area of Merseyside to target car crime.
Merseyside police helicopter.
The Vehicle Watch scheme, which has 10,500 members.
Stopping and searching vehicles at the roadside.
More drivers installing car alarms.
The figures, announced today, are the first results from Car Crime Prevention Year which started in April.
Figures have fallen in almost half of all police areas in England and Wales, said Home Office Minister Michael Jack.
Two out of three motorists surveyed said the anti-car crime TV advertising campaign, featuring hyenas preying on unprotected vehicles, made them feel they should do more about car security, he told a London conference.
Manufacturers were now fitting more new cars with better security devices and insurance companies were starting to offer discounts for improved locks, alarms and demobilisers.
Police chiefs had also launched a Secured Car Parks scheme to upgrade parking security, supervision and car park design.
‘A great deal has been achieved,’ said Mr Jack.
‘After more than three years of increasing car crime, we are now beginning to see a downward trend.’
Latest figures showed a 2.6% fall from 381,969 thefts of and from vehicles between April and June 1991 to 372,081 during the same period this year.
Car crime accounted for 28% of all recorded offences in the year to June 1992.
Finger pluckin' good!
FOUR YEARS ago, Wirral plucked up the courage to make itself the centre of the finger-pickin' universe.
And the idea worked.
For the International Guitar Festival of Great Britain which kicks off on Monday is now acknowledged as the largest of its kind in the world.
This year's 14-day extravaganza will feature more than 80 performers, and encompass everything from Baroque and blues through to ragtime and rock.
Says organiser Rob Smith: ‘We are offering a unique opportunity to enjoy a unique series of events in unique surroundings.
‘There's something for everyone, whether they be guitar aficianado, music lover, player or spectator.’
The fortnight of concerts, workshops, exhibitions, master-classes, films and lectures spread between several Wirral venues old and new offers one great concession to the Liverpool side of the Mersey, by incorporating into the schedule the legendary Chuck Berry's appearance at the Empire Theatre on November 16.
Other great artists include:
Gerry Donahue, the world's leading exponent of country rock guitar.
Flamenco master Juan Martin.
Blues guitarist Woody Mann direct from New York.
Ian Cruickshank, global authority on Django Reinhardt and the gipsy guitar style.
‘
The entire package has informality as a key element.
The aim is to tell the history of the guitar from the days of the lute through to the present day.
Full details of events, venues and prices on 647-2366.
Watchdog may fight Dan-Air take-over deal
By Peter Woodman Press Association
THE Consumers’ Association was holding an urgent meeting yesterday over British Airways' £35m take-over of debt-ridden Gatwick airline Dan-Air.
BA was given the green light for the move yesterday when President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine decided not to refer the deal to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Yesterday, the CA was deciding whether to ask the EC competitions director if he had any powers over the move.
CA assistant director Derek Prentice said the Government decision was ‘staggering’ for consumers.
‘In view of the British Government's commitment to competition, it is unbelievable,’ he said, claiming that the Government had chosen to ‘ignore’the competition aspect with its benefit of cheaper air fares for consumers.
And Richard Branson, chairman of rivals Virgin Atlantic, said the Government must ‘urgently review competition policy’.
Despite the takeover, 1,400-1,600 of Dan-Air's 2,000 strong workforce will lose their jobs.
BA will find posts for 400-600 of them, but 26 of the 38 Dan-Air aircraft will be sold, its charter operation will cease, and the airline's scheduled service network will be cut from 28 routes to 12.
‘We are delighted.
It is welcome and constructive news,’ said BA chairman Lord King yesterday.
Together with British Midland Airways, Virgin consider the takeover will give BA an even more dominating position within UK aviation.
Dan-Air was Gatwick's main airline and it was the effect on the West Sussex airport that prompted Mr Heseltine to reach his conclusion after the recommendations of the Director General of Fair Trading.
He said he agreed the merger raised competition issues but concluded the public interest would be better served by not referring the deal.
It was generally understood that there was very little chance of the deal being referred to the MMC.
Indeed, BA would almost certainly have pulled out of negotiations if it had thought a referral was likely.
Founded in 1953, Dan-Air enjoyed many prosperous years as a holiday and scheduled airline before more recently running into deep financial difficulties.
Richard Branson
Lord King
Win a night with Hamlet!
THE HOTTEST tickets in town this week are for Alan Rickman's performance of Hamlet at St George's Hall.
Not least because there aren't any left apart from the two you can get through this column by answering the question: Which role did Alan Rickman play in the film Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves?
The first person to phone marketing chief Carmel Morgan at the Everyman Theatre after 10.30 tomorrow morning with the correct answer, will win two prize seats for Saturday evening's final performance.
The Everyman is making this exclusive offer to the Echo to promote the two for the price of one Bard Card ticket, which operates for its own Shakespearian production, Much Ado About Nothing, until Friday.
So fingers poised: The number to dial is 708-0338.
Not only does the winner get the Hamlet tickets but also two seats for Much Ado, which runs until November 14.
Shakespeare Fever continues to grip the entire region, with King Lear at the Unity; Measure For Measure opening at Chester Gateway this Friday; Twelfth Night at the Playhouse from November 17, and a presentation of the Sonnets at the Unity on November 17 and 18.
EVEN Mick Jagger failed to reach the physical heights achieved by London Contemporary Dance Theatre's Tom Ward.
But the spring of heel for Tom seen here with fellow dancer Kate Coyne is very much down to the music of The Rolling Stones.
No fewer than eight classic Stones' tracks make up Rooster, the new work from leading choreographer Christopher Bruce, which can be seen as part of a triple bill at the Empire from tonight until Saturday.
The show marks London Contemporary Dance's first trip to Liverpool for five years.
The company is also using the Merseyside visit for workshops sessions with 150 students at local schools and colleges.
Oh brother!
MADCAP moguls…
Meet the Brittonioni Brothers, a couple of avante garde movie makers, never happier than when they're jetting from one international festival to another.
Next stop is the Melling Tithebarn this Friday, when you can discover their true identity in a zany show from Forkbeard Fantasy Theatre.
But as one source close to the mayhem warns: ‘They are more interested in the cut of their trousers than the cut of their films.’
When did you last see this painting?
THE most famous painting in Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery is undoubtedly ‘And When Did You Last See Your Father?’ the Civil War picture of the little Royalist boy who may innocently reveal his father's hiding place to Cromwell's soldiers.
Over the years, it has been reproduced on cigarette cards, chocolate boxes, biscuit tins and in school books and encyclopedias.
However, the artist of this epic study W. F. Yeames (1835-1918) does not enjoy celebrity status.
But now the Walker hope to put matters right by highlighting the painting and its creator in a special exhibition which opens on November 13.
Yeames was part of the St John's Wood Clique who specialised in depicting everyday events of Tudor and Stuart history.
Other artists featured from the group are Charles Landseer, Francis Feeble and G. A. Storey.
3i delays flotation
VENTURE capital company 3i Group has once again delayed stock market flotation because of the economic slump.
3i, owned by the Bank of England and the high street banks, decided at the end of last year to put off flotation due to a plunge in the market.
Earlier this year, the group delayed the decision again but promised an announcement before the end of December.
‘Since then, we have not seen adequate signs of economic recovery and have decided to defer until 1993 any decision as to the date of a possible flotation,’ 3i said.
Last month, 3i said it was closing a quarter of its regional offices.
Finished Cattle: Throughputs of finished cattle increased in England and Wales while marketings fell slightly in Scotland during the first four days of the week commencing 26 October.
In England and Wales, prices fell during the week more markedly from mid-week.
In Scotland, prices were easier on the week but increased by over three pence on Thursday.
Store Cattle: Medium weight (300399kg) Simmental cross store steer prices fell by 1.5p to 111.1p per kg lw during the week ended 24 october while Charolais cross store steer prices rose slightly by 0.4p to 115.9p per kg lw Hereford cross store steer prices increased by 2.4p to 111.1p per kg lw.
The GB price of cull cows fell by 0.69p to 77.90p per kg lw during the Thursday/Wednesday week ended 28 October.
Lambs: Auction market throughputs of lambs were 10 per cent lower in Great Britain during the first four days of the week commencing 26 October.
The SQQ for the Monday to Thursday period ended 29 october was calculated at 73.51p per kg lw, which represents a fall of 0.79p compared with the corresponding period last week.
Pigs: The United Kingdom average all pigs price increased markedly by 3.22p to 106.96p per kg dw during the week ended 24 October.
Selected deadweight pig prices (GB) week ended 24 October 1992.
Method 1 and Method 2 up to 49.9 kg dw. 113.01p per kg dw, +6.64p 50-59.9 kg dw. 109.52p per kg dw, +4.68p 60-69.9 kg dw. 106.93p per kg dw, +3.31p.Liveweight pig prices (England and Wales) w/e 24 October 1992.
Porkers, 120.77p per kg deadweight equivalent, +0.78p.Cutters, 116.04p per kg deadweight equivalent, +0.85p.Baconers, 110.84p per kg deadweight equivalent, +1.72p.
Market Prices: The EC beef reference price for the week ended 29 October remained unchanged at 66.14 per cent of the guide price.
Prices in Germany and the Republic of Ireland rose slightly by 0.3pc and 0.4pc.
The UK price fell by 1.2pc.
The EC pig meat reference price increased by 1.9pc to 65.79pc of the basic price during the week ended 25 October.
German and French prices rose by 1.6 and 1.9pc respectively with a sharp increase in the United Kingdom price of 3.6pc.
Dutch prices rose by 1.6pc while prices in the republic of Ireland fell by 0.6pc.
WHAT is it about we British that makes us pay millions of pounds to actors who have never heard a shot fired in anger, while we ignore the heroes whose deeds they are paid to portray?
Almost unbelievable stories of courage in the face of danger regularly appear on our cinema and television screens, featuring men and women whom an ungrateful country has been only too happy to forget.
Every week one reads of Victoria Crosses being put up for sale by the hard-up families of men who willingly risked their lives for their country, yet at this very moment three holders of this supreme badge of courage lie in unmarked graves on Merseyside.
Pictures that tells us our Royals can't bear to be together…
By DIANA PULSON
THEY say every picture tells a story…and these pictures show a woman who just wants to be alone.
Only 24 hours after a grim-faced Di had accompanied husband Charles on an official engagement in Korea, she was all smiles again.
And the reason?
She was on her own.
Despite a massive PR job by Buckingham Palace, it looks like nothing has really changed as far as Charles and Di are concerned!
Going about their Royal business in Seoul, the Prince and Princess of Wales looked like Mr and Mrs Glum.
This was the trip that was supposed to show us that, despite their problems, Charles and Di can't bear to be apart.
As it is, it looks like they can't bear to be together.
On their arrival in the Korean capital, Diana was minus her famous and flashing smile.
She gave every indication that she was fed up to the teeth.
So did Charles.
However once the two separated for their various duties, the Diana we know and love was back.
Smiling, sparkling, with a new hairstyle and cheeky short skirt, she looked relieved…relieved to be away from what appears to be an uncomfortable, stifling relationship with the Prince of Wales.
When they are together the body language is clear.
There are no loving looks.
In fact, they scarcely acknowledge each others presence.
They don't like each other.
Unchained from her husband's side however, the Princes of Wales becomes her carefree self again.
As our pictures show what a difference a day makes!
DTI pledge on fireworks toll
VERBAL fireworks in Liverpool over how government officials compile Bonfire Night injury figures have hit their target.
Consumer chiefs put a rocket under Michael Heseltine's Department of Trade and Industry in yesterday's Echo, accusing it of massively underestimating firework injury risks.
The DTI today pledged to dump the existing system which produces an injury total 100 times less than council statistics around 800 against 80,000 a year.
A DTI spokesman said: ‘We will be talking to councils about how we can produce a set of figures that's more acceptable to everybody.’
Peter Mawdsley, head of Liverpool Trading Standards, said: ‘I'm pleased they have seen the current figures are unsatisfactory.
I can only stress again the importance of using the higher figures.’
Think before taking a profit
RULE Number One: If you hold shares in a company that receives a take-over bid, never sell out early.
When Lord Hanson made his cash bid for Ranks Hovis McDougall a month ago the shares shot up above the 220p offer.
Very tempting to take a profit, considering that not long ago the shares were only 130p.
But then RHM came up with a bid-defeating plan to split the company in three.
On that, the shares were up to 245p.
‘Take profits’ now said some brokers.
Wrong again, because along comes Greg Hutchings of Tomkins with an offer which is worth 260p cash, or 270p if you include the dividend.
Greg's early career was spent with Hanson.
So there is a bit of needle in this bid.
But Greg says he did set out to irritate his former boss as he got there first with talks with RHM last May.
Greg has been on the take-over path for 11 years now.
He carefully bides his time, and has done only seven take-overs in 11 years.
The result is that he now has a company worth £1.5bn.
His success is such that at 45 he has a salary of nearly £1m a year.
So somehow it was reassuring to find he had a sore throat when I saw him last Thursday.
But not quite so reassuring to see him out playing hockey on Saturday.
In spite of having that kind of energy he is very much a nice-quiet-guy-who-lives-next-door type.
One thing he said struck me as a pointer to watch when spotting for future take-overs: ‘Like every company we have ever taken over, RHM has had problems at head office.’
In this case the trigger for his bid move came when the RHM managing director went into retirement early this year.
Tomkins' shares have come down, falling from 260p to 220p on the extra shares it will have to issue for this bid.
But whether it wins or loses RHM, they are a buy.
Piper tunes up for big Benn
NIGEL BENN will make his first defence of the WBC super middleweight title against Welshman Nicky Piper at Alexandra Palace on December 12.
Former ABA light heavyweight champion Piper, a member of Mensa, has won 16 of his 18 contests, including one of boxing's quickest victories in 12 seconds against American John Ellis.
He was ranked 18th by the WBC in mid-summer, but promoter Barry Hearn said he would have moved up to ninth on the next list and so qualified for the fight.
Piper said: ‘I believe Benn is beatable and I have the ability to do the job.’
Benn won the title a month ago in Italy.
Hepburn ill
ACTRESS Audrey Hepburn, 63, whose star roles include My Fair Lady has undergone surgery to remove a tumour from her colon.
A hospital spokesman in Los Angeles could not confirm if the tumour was cancerous.
Audrey Hepburn
Doubts on ICI split
BECOMING less and less certain, is the plan for ICI to split in February into an ICI Bio pill-making business and an ICI basic chemicals side.
Latest ICI quarterly figures show the basic chemicals side made only £1m profit.
To cut it loose now could be to see it sink.
The ICI shares have fallen back from £14 to near £10.
I would say ICI shares are now cheap again.
The business cycle is still there.
The short-term effect of devaluation is like a ‘kick-start’ for exporters and companies with overseas profits.
But the long-term effect is that the economy at home will take off like a rocket in mid-1993.
Russian ref no headache for Wilko
A REFEREE by the name of A Spirin could prove a headache for Leeds and Rangers when they clash in tomorrow's climax to their European Cup battle.
The Russian official recently so upset his domestic association that they suspended him for two months, although UEFA insist: ‘He's still one of the best referees in Europe and the right man for the job.’
Not even Europe's governing body knows exactly what happened in a Russian League game involving Dinamo Moscow that earned him such a heavy punishment.
But a spokesman from Berne said: ‘We did not consider it a serious incident.
If we acted every time a referee upset someone in their own country, we wouldn't have any left.
‘He's always performed well for UEFA and we see no reason to take him off our list.
This could be a difficult game but we have no reservations about him.’
Neither should Leeds and Rangers.
Alexai performed well when he took charge of England against Germany at Wembley and Arsenal's European Cup first round tie against Austria Vienna.
But, according to Elland Road boss Howard Wilkinson, he has a hard task to follow the performance of Belgian official Alphonse Constantin in the second round first leg at Ibrox.
Passion
Despite the passion in Glasgow he did not have to show his yellow card once as Rangers won 2-1 and Wilkinson said: ‘It's always important to have a good referee, but I've been pleased with the standard of refereeing this season.’
The prize at stake is immense, but Leeds have five players walking a disciplinary tightrope and they risk missing out in the champions' league if they collect a second caution.
David Batty is one of them, but he is more preoccupied with fighting off an ankle injury.
He has not given up hope that he can recover in time, saying: ‘I've not ruled myself out of it yet I'm just looking forward and hoping I can be out there.’
Cyclist Chris to spearhead health drive
MERSEYSIDE Olympic hero Chris Boardman today set out to spearhead a new drive for better health in the region.
The gold medal winner from Hoylake was being signed up by Mersey Regional Health Authority as a freelance health promotion consultant.
The deal, believed to be unique in Britain, will give 24year-old Chris, pictured, the chance of staying as an amateur until the next Olympics, or until professional cyclists are allowed to compete in the games.
Chris, who dominated cycling events at the Barcelona Olympics, will take part in major health promotion events when his hectic racing schedule permits.
He will be involved in campaigns on the five Health of the Nation targets — heart disease and strokes, cancer, mental health, HIV/AIDS and sexual health, and accidents.
Houses tumble
HOUSE prices tumbled again last month, according to the latest survey by Nationwide Building Society published yesterday.
It recorded a 2.7pc fall on the month, cutting the average house price by £1,491 to £53,038.
The drop followed a 1.4pc fall in September on the Nationwide index, although the larger Halifax society reported a record 3.1pc drop.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is hoping for an end to the downward spiral in house prices to restore consumer confidence in the economy.
Nationwide's chief executive Tim Melville-Ross said two significant events had affected the housing market the end of the stamp duty holiday for most home buyers and the interest rate volatility.
Five men held in pub gun attack raids
By Caroline Storah
DETECTIVES investigating a shooting at a packed Merseyside pub today arrested five men in a series of raids.
They swooped on eight addresses in the Kirkby, Tuebrook and Kirkdale areas at 7am today.
An assortment of offensive weapons but no firearms were recovered.
Detectives are due to interview the five men later today.
The men were arrested in connection with the shooting incident at the Market Trader pub, Kirkby, on October 25, in which a 16-year-old girl was shot.
She underwent surgery at Walton Hospital to remove shotgun pellets from her side.
Blast
It is believed she became caught between two rival gangs when violence erupted in the packed pub.
Two hundred drinkers were forced to run for cover but she was unable to get clear and caught the full force of the blast.
A 70-year-old woman was injured in a struggle with a teenage mugger.
The pensioner had a handbag containing £400 ripped from her grasp when he struck in Old Roan.
The woman fell to the floor and fractured a wrist as the attacker made off.
Detectives are appealing for witnesses to the incident at 10pm yesterday.
Det Chief Inspector Neil McAteer said: ‘The woman had got off a bus and was walking home when she heard footsteps behind her.
‘The attacker dragged her to the floor and snatched the bag off her arm.
‘She was detained overnight at Walton Hospital.’
The mugger is described as being 15 or 16 years of age with short, dark hair.
Elliott told to go it alone in injury row
THE players' union today distanced itself from Chelsea defender Paul Elliott's plan to sue Dean Saunders and Liverpool over a career-threatening challenge.
As revealed in yesterday's Echo exclusive, Elliott, stretchered off with cruciate ligament damage at Anfield two months ago, is ready to launch legal action even though he is optimistic of making a full recovery from the injury.
Professional Footballers' Association spokesman Brendan Batson said: ‘Paul spoke to us following his injury, but because it involves two members of our association we have to adopt a neutral position.
‘The people involved must take their own independent legal advice,’ added Batson.
‘We hope Paul makes a full recovery, sooner rather than later.
He was on the fringe of a lot of things and hopefully will soon be back playing.’
London solicitor John Stitt confirmed: ‘We have been instructed by Paul Elliott to investigate the possibility of making a claim for damages against Liverpool and Dean Saunders.’
Stitt has watched a video replay of the incident on numerous occasions and already been in touch with colleagues who were involved in Danny Thomas's case against QPR's Gavin Maguire.
The difference was that Tottenham defender Thomas knew that his career was over when he took action against Maguire, the parties later agreeing an out-of-court settlement.
Elliott, 28, was hurt in Welsh international Saunders' final appearance for the Merseysiders before his £2.3 million switch to Aston Villa.
Sheffield referee John Key actually awarded the free kick in Saunders' favour but Elliott has been told that the official's decision would not necessarily prejudice any claim.
Key said today: ‘In my opinion Elliott came in dangerously.
I don't think I made the right decision -I know I did.’
Drop in cot death tragedies continues
By Amanda Brown Daily Post Correspondent
THE number of cot deaths in England and Wales fell from 1,593 in 1988 to 1,008 in 1991, according to figures published yesterday the third consecutive year the figures have fallen.
And the rate of deaths, the number per one thousand live births, has also dropped over the same period, from 2.30 in 1988 to 1.44 in 1991.
The statistics from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys show:
Sudden Infant Deaths (SIDs) among baby boys continue to be more common than among baby girls, accounting for 61pc.
About 85pc of SIDs happened to babies aged less than six months, of which 60pc were between one month and four months.
Most SIDs continued to occur in the winter months.
The figures are based on information from death certificates for babies less than 28 days old and those of infants aged between 28 days and one year.
Doctors and health visitors were yesterday sent new guidelines by the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths on how to deal with cot death tragedies.
Hooper on Euro alert
By Ric George
MIKE HOOPER could earn a shock recall tomorrow for a match which his manager describes as ‘potentially the most exciting European tie I've been involved in.’
Liverpool boss Graeme Souness must decide whether to opt for Hooper's experience or the raw talent of £1.3m youngster David James as the Reds bid to overturn their 4-2 Cup Winners' Cup second round, first leg against Spartak Moscow.
With Bruce Grobbelaar suspended following his dismissal in Russia a fortnight ago, Souness knows the importance of not conceding an away goal against a side which specialises in the counter-attack.
James, who played at Tottenham last Saturday, has not kept a clean sheet in his 12 first team appearances, while third choice Hooper excelled in last week's reserve clash with Leicester.
Souness' other selection worry concerns calf strain victim Steve McManaman, and the Anfield chief will leave it as late as possible before deciding on his fitness.
Spartak will familiarise themselves with the Reds' stadium tonight, but they are confident they can reach the quarter-finals despite facing a passionate Liverpool public.
Souness said: ‘I'd be happy if this full house makes as much noise as the 23,000 did last season against Auxerre.
‘Given the state of the teams, this is potentially the most exciting European tie I've been involved in.
I think the side that defends better will go through.
‘We're behind, so we have to go at them.
If we're 1-0 up at half time and kicking into the Kop, I'll be more than happy.’
Spartak, who have clinched the Russian championship, enjoyed a 5-1 win at the weekend, with striker Dmitry Radchenko firing a hat-trick.
Radchenko is clearly the dangerman in a team whose away exploits have earned them previous European qualification.
Two seasons ago, they beat Sparta Prague 2-0 in Czechoslovakia, then drew 0-0 in Napoli on a European Cup run which took them to the semi-finals.
In the quarter-finals, following a goalless home draw with Real Madrid, a double from Radchenko brought them a brilliant 3-1 win in the Bernabeu.
It is true that players like Igor Shalimov, Aleksandr Mostovoy, Valery Shmarov and Vasily Kulkov have since moved to the west, but their 5-1 success away to Luxembourg's Avenir Beggen this season shows Spartak can still threaten away from home.
Souness added: ‘I'm sure we can beat them, but I also feel they are capable of scoring against us.
‘They see themselves as being able to play the counter-attack, but we see ourselves as capable of beating anyone at Anfield.’
Like Grobbelaar, Paul Stewart is suspended and Torben Piechnik ineligible.
But Steve Nicol and Ronny Rosenthal should be available, with Jan Molby possibly figuring among the substitutes.
Hotpoint pay row threat
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
MANAGEMENT at one of Gwynedd's biggest employers were staying tight-lipped yesterday as industrial action loomed over a pay freeze.
A recent ballot of the workforce at Hotpoint over the issue resulted in a 2-1 vote in favour of industrial action.
There had been hopes that the workforce would agree not to press ahead with the step if management agreed to reprieve 70 jobs until next April.
But workers rejected that offer and the matter has now been referred to the national executive of the Amalgamated Engineering Union, which is expected to rule on the dispute in the next few days.
It is thought that a complete overtime ban will go ahead.
Shopfloor workers at the company's factory in Llandudno Junction are still reeling from the news that the factory is to close within two years, with the loss of 100 workers.
Only 125 staff will be kept on in the Junction making washing machine.
The remaining 475 will transfer to Bodelwyddan.
One Llandudno Junction worker, who asked not be named, said: ‘Morale is very low.
People have just had enough being thrown from pillar to post.’
He said that colleagues were determined to fight for a pay rise.
Yesterday Alwyn Rowlands, the AEU's regional officer, said a large majority had voted in favour of an overtime ban.
However, discussions had been interrupted by the announcement that the factory had to close.
Yesterday, a spokesman for Hotpoint declined to comment.
‘Poorly’ Rachel still starring in Flake ad
CHOCOLATE giant Cadbury is to continue screening an advert for its Flake bar featuring ecstasy victim Rachel Brown.
The 25-year-old former Vogue model was ‘still poorly’ in Broadgreen Hospital's psychiatric unit today.
She is said to have suffered horrific hallucinations since her drink was spiked with the dance drug ecstasy at a friend's 21st birthday party in Liverpool ten days ago.
A spokeswoman for Cadbury said no decision had been taken to stop the television advert in which Rachel is shown eating a Flake while lying in a bath.
‘Our thoughts are with her during this difficult time and we hope she gets better soon,’ she said.
Rachel's grandfather, former Liverpool docker Billy Brown, 80, has condemned those who gave her the amphetamine-based, mind-bending drug as ‘evil’.
Rachel was brought up in Speke by her grandparents at their home in Dymchurch Road.
Pictured last year…
Rachel and grandparents Billy and Irene Brown
Death mystery of man found in the river
A WOMAN walking her dog along Otterspool Promenade saw a body floating past, a Liverpool inquest heard.
The body was tracked by a police helicopter and recovered by the Mersey Inshore Rescue Service, said coroner Roy Barter.
The dead man was identified as Anthony Doyle, 49, of Croxteth Road, Toxteth.
Mr Barter said that despite a history of depression he had to record an open verdict.
He added: ‘There was no intimation from his doctor he was in any way suicidal.’
Mr Doyle's body was brought ashore at the Pier Head on July 7 this year, Det Sgt Cedric Jones told the hearing.
The woman had stated: ‘It was impossible to mount a rescue owing to stormy conditions.’
She said the body was buffeted about in the waves.
Mr Barter said: ‘There was no indication of when, where or why he got into the water.’
King's roar for positive action
By David Prentice
TRANMERE seek to turn positive performances into positive results at Prenton Park tonight.
Rovers two most recent matches have yielded just one point, despite impressive displays against Watford and Peterborough.
And boss John King is desperate for a more deserving return against lowly Southend this evening.
‘We played good football and created chances galore on Friday.
The only slight criticism I could have was that maybe we didn't finish as well as we should have,’ he said.
‘We created a host of chances and got one goal when maybe we should have had a hatful.
But you couldn't really argue at the way we played.’
Friday night's goalscorer, Chris Malkin, added: ‘We are disappointed because in our last two matches we've taken one point, when we've probably deserved six.
We created a lot of chances but the ball just didn't fall for us.’
Dave Higgins, missing on Friday with a stomach upset, is likely to return for Mark Hughes.
Southend's year has shown steady decline.
On New Year's Day they topped the division for a couple of hours.
Now they lie just one place off the bottom having lost money, their manager, players and impetus during the past 11 months.
Most influential absentee has been top scorer Brett Angell.
He underwent an operation on an injured thigh in the summer and will be missing until February.
In his absence Ian Benjamin has assumed the top marksman's title with seven, with Andy Ansah next on a miserly three.
Ansah was carried off with concussion at Luton on Saturday, but had a precautionary brain scan and reported fit this morning.
The only possible change may be Steve Tilson, who was substituted by Kevin O'Callaghan on Saturday, staying on the sidelines for the Northern Ireland international.
Boss Colin Murphy, who took over from David Webb at the end of a turbulent season for the club, has been forced to sell Dean Austin to Spurs for £500,000 and Peter Butler to West Ham for £275,000.
His only acquisition in that time has been full-back Gary Parkinson, currently on-loan from Middlesbrough.
TRANMERE ROVERS (probable): Nixon, Higgins, Brannan, Irons, Mungall, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Malkin, McNab, Nevin.
Subs from Hughes, Cooper, Muir, Martindale.
SOUTHEND UNITED (from): Sansome, Parkinson, Powell, Cornwell, Edwards, Prior, Ansah, O'Callaghan, Martin, Locke, Benjamin, Tilson, Scully, Jones.
Dave Higgins…on alert
Country Member set to score
By Captain Becher
TRAINER Andy Turnell has some nice young horses who will eventually take some of the burden from stable star Katabatic.
At Warwick last Saturday, Storm Alert confirmed himself a horse to follow with another impressive success, and at Newbury tomorrow stablemate Country Member can sustain his own progress with a win in the Lionel Vick Handicap Chase.
Turnell rates the seven-year-old the sort to make up into Hennessy Gold Cup material next year.
He must keep improving to live up to such expectations, but there was every sign that he is going the right way on his reappearance at Wincanton last month.
There was a lot more professionalism to his jumping as, travelling strongly throughout, the top weight only had to be shaken up after the last to beat previous winner Wellknown Character two and a half lengths.
At the other end of the weights here, he can make the most of the weight and fitness concession he gets from Keep Talking.
This exciting prospect, a bequest from the late Jim Joel to the Queen Mother, looks set to give his new owner a memorable season following four wins last term culminating in the National Hunt Chase at the Cheltenham Festival.
Retail Runner, who made all when a highly impressive eight-length winner at Ascot on his reappearance, looks set to take the Hallowe'en Novices Chase.
Another Ascot scorer, Baydon Star, has good prospects of following up in the Tom Masson Hurdle.
A two-length defeat of subsequent winner Cadency marked this half-brother to Rubstic and Kildimo out as an improving sort for his new stable.
At Kelso, Kushbaloo can complete a hat-trick in the Jack Britton Memorial Novices' Chase.
Already successful at Carlisle and Hexham, the Lockerbie-trained seven-year-old should not be hard pressed to win another small race before raising his sights.
And at Uttoxeter, Adrian Maguire has a good chance of stretching Peter Scudamore at the top of the jockeys' table with the help of prolific winner Sillars Stalker, who makes his seasonal bow in the David NorrisTom Pepper Handicap Hurdle.
PRINCESS DIANA put on a brave face today as rumours persisted of a serious royal marriage rift.
Diana and Prince Charles appeared happy and relaxed together as they visited President Roh Tae Woo in the South Korean capital Seoul.
After reports supported by glum-faced pictures that the royal couple had behaved almost like strangers yesterday, there appeared to be a distinct change of atmosphere.
Royal watchers said that during the first official engagement of the day the royal couple appeared to be in fairly good spirits, although they were not seen to talk to each other or exchange glances.
At one stage, contravening unwritten rules of protocol, ITN reporter David Chater asked the princess if she was ‘really happy to be here Ma'am?’
Miserable
She replied: ‘Yes thank you,’ although some reporters said that she had spoken in a ‘soulful way’and appeared quite miserable.
At the grand presidential palace in Seoul Charles and Di heard President Roh speaking through a translator tell them: ‘You are a very beautiful couple.
We are very happy to have you here.’
He asked after the Queen and the prince replied: ‘She is in very good spirits.
She has been very busy on a visit to Germany.’
The prince and princess signed the visitors' book under the pre-written heading ‘British Prince and Princess Royal Couple’.
Battle
Later the royal couple stood on a hillside overlooking the border with communist North Korea and surveyed the land on which British and Chinese troops engaged in fierce combat more than 40 years ago.
The prince listened intently as British Korean war veteran Sam Mercer described the battle in which he fought as a 21-year-old private with the Gloucestershire Regiment in 1951.
On the windswept hill above the Imjin river he heard of the advance of some 27,000 Chinese troops and the efforts of the ‘Glorious Glosters’, outnumbered 10 to one, to block their way through to the South Korean capital Seoul.
Dennis in driving seat
ST HELENS bantam Dennis Oakes was made to work hard for his fifth professional victory by Midlander Graham McGrath (Warley) at Devonshire House last night, but in the end was a decisive winner, writes Syd Dye.
Oakes, bidding to build into a British title contender this season, found McGrath in resilient mood, but referee Keith Garner got it right when he scored 40-38 for Oakes, who didn't lose a round.
After an even opening session and a terrific toe to toe burst at the start of the second it was Oakes who took a grip with McGrath soaking up a steady stream of hard right-hand shots.
McGrath's best work came from body punches, but they were few in number and he was heavily out-scored by Oakes, whose work was far more varied.
Intervened
Former Golden Gloves amateur Shea Neary made it three wins out of three (all inside the distance) since he turned professional by beating Sheffield lightweight Jason Barker.
Neary won on the referee's intervention after two minutes 30 seconds of the third round with Barker slumped, defenceless, in a neutral corner.
Quickest winner was former St Teresa's amateur Andrew Jarvis, who got the better of a big-punching clash with Scunthorpe light-middle Sean Martin, with Martin counted out on the ring apron after being felled by a great left hook which landed seconds before the end of the second session.
Liverpool could lose MP, warns Alton
By Mark Davies
LIVERPOOL could lose an MP under boundary commission changes, Mossley Hill MP David Alton warned today.
He said a city seat could disappear because not enough people are registered to vote.
And he identified poll tax dodgers as part of the problem.
Mr Alton said official electoral registration surveys were inadequate, missing many people actually eligible to vote.
And if the system was improved, Liverpool could keep its current quota of MPs.
Registers
Mr Alton and Derbyshire Labour MP Harry Barnes today introduced a private members bill aimed at improving the electoral registration system.
The bill which would be an amendment of the Representation of the Peoples Actwould introduce mobile registers.
It would mean more facilities for the disabled at polling stations.
Mr Alton said that the poll tax meant many people had dodged electoral registers in a bid to avoid payment.
New jobs boost for Mersey blackspot
A MERSEYSIDE unemployment blackspot looks set for a jobs boost.
Around 400 jobs could be created with the building of 12 units behind the Park Foods complex at Bidston, Birkenhead.
The actual construction would provide work for another 80 people.
The scheme has been put forward by Brothertons Limited, of Alderley Edge, Cheshire.
Certain
The local authority's planning and economic director Jim Wilkie describes the creation of more than 400 jobs as a ‘realistic estimate’.
He says it is almost certain that Park Foods will take one large unit, and that another party could be interested in another unit.
Building work could begin in January.
The area is among Wirral's worst jobless blackspots with unemployment at 36%.
Mr Wilkie says plans for the units are in line with one of the main objectives of the City Lands initiative — to provide more land for jobs.
Cochrane and Dettori join ton up club
By A Special Correspondent
RAY COCHRANE and Frankie Dettori both joined the Flat season's ‘100 Club’ at windy Newcastle yesterday, breezily leaving the nervous nineties in their wake with a double apiece.
The champagne corks were popping to brighten a raw afternoon in the weighing room, as the pair became its seventh and eighth members to reach the 100-winner mark this term.
Dettori, starting the day on 99, was first to join the elite when Gushing won the aptly named High Society Maiden.
The 21-year-old was recording his second century in three seasons.
He said: ‘I was very disappointed to miss three winners last week including Pip's Pride in the Racecall Gold Trophy while I was out with ‘flu.’
Following those frustrations, Dettori only narrowly avoided a final disaster when jockeys' planes were unable to take off from Newmarket owing to high winds.
A dash to the train saw Dettori and several colleagues arrive with seconds to spare before the first race.
Dettori, who will be warming up for next season in Hong Kong, did not rest on his laurels, steering odds-on Shintillo to a sauntering success in the Something For The Boys Maiden.
Shintillo, trained by Dettori's guv'nor Luca Cumani, had caught the eye in two hot Newmarket maidens, and looked a nice horse for next year when cruising to a facile six-length defeat of Cannon Carew.
Cochrane, starting proceedings on 98, relied on a car.
The betting suggested that the Ulsterman's mount in the Anything Goes Stakes, The Goofer, might need motorised assistance to make much impact.
But the outsider of three, trained near Thirsk by Andrew Stringer, made all for a runaway success over two well fancied raiders from fashionable southern yards.
That teed up the ton, completed on Our Rita who swept from last to first to land the (less aptly-named) You'll Never Get Rich Handicap by three lengths from Wellsy Lad.
Cochrane, 35, said: ‘Riding 100 winners when you are a freelance is a good achievement.
It's been a long old year.
I started on January 10, but it's all been worth it.’
Call for EC to put up price of smoking
HIGHER tobacco taxes and national targets for reducing the number of people who smoke should be considered by the EC, health minister Dr Brian Mawhinney told a seminar in London today.
His call for new ideas to curb the death toll from cancer and smoking-related illnesses is in advance of a debate on tobacco advertising by EC health ministers on November 13.
Influenced
The UK, which holds the presidency, is expected to oppose a proposal to ban tobacco advertising in Europe supported by Germany.
Health professionals and watchdog groups say children are influenced by advertising on hoardings and in newspapers and magazines.
The issue is not expected to go to a vote.
Ministers insist that voluntary agreements with the tobacco industry are more effective than outright bans.
Dr Mawhinney said there was a danger the single market could lead to downward pressure on tobacco prices in high duty countries and the possibility of more cancer in Europe.
Tonight's Choice
FIRST TUESDAY: LOCKING UP WOMEN (ITV, 10.40pm)
HOLLOWAY women's prison now has a nickname that is more telling than any it may have had in the past the Hilton.
Whereas it once had a reputation as being one of the toughest and most feared women's prisons in Britain, it is now regarded as having gone soft by some of the prison officers.
Where inmates were once locked up for 23 hours everyday a more liberal attitude now prevails.
Some prisoners are allowed out to attend college and job centres and some even have jobs and earn money.
But the officers aren't happy.
‘They call it the Hilton because it's such a relaxed regime,’ says officer Babs Hale.
‘They just come and go as they please.
They prefer to be unlocked but it is not prison to them.’
‘Other prisons are run what we call the right way and it's the short, sharp shock.’
First Tuesday producer Anne Webber gained unrivalled access to Holloway to record this enlightening look at life inside.
Officers speak freely and openly about being in the prison service and at Holloway and so too do the prisoners.
Says one inmate:’ I don't think it takes much to become a prison officer.
You don't have to be bright, just ignorant.’
CHARADE (BBC1, 11.15pm)
AUDREY HEPBURN is up to her cat-like eyes in murder and dirty double crossing in this clever comedy thriller that has become a film classic.
She plays Reggie Lambert, a woman who returns from holiday to find her Paris apartment stripped bear and her estranged husband murdered.
At his funeral she is surprised by the appearance of three Americans whom she has never seen before.
as if that weren't enough, she is next summoned to the American Embassy where the CIA chief (the wonderful Walter Matthau) tells her all about a war-time plot in which her husband was involved.
It all starts to get too confusing and she desperately needs help but who can she turn to?
Enter Peter Joshua (the elegant Cary Grant) whom she met on holiday.
Will he be able to solve her problems or is he more than just an interested bystander?
DECISION ‘92 THE US ELECTION RESULTS (BBC2, midnight)
JUST months after this country's own election fever, the cameras turn westwards to the States.
After more campaigning than John Major or Neil Kinnock ever did here, the American presidential candidates are about to have their fates decided.
And if you can be bothered staying up for this, it will take you through to 6am tomorrow.
David Dimbleby will bring on-the-spot coverage of the state of play in the world's most powerful country as it goes to the polls and the fates of Bill Clinton, George Bush and Ross Perot are decided.
And with some new hi-tech gear, British viewers should be able to see the results at the same time as viewers in America.
AS IT HAPPENS: US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION SPECIAL (CHANNEL 4, midnight)
FROM the political activists to the ‘don't cares, don't vote’ the team from As It Happens are out and about on America's streets.
Andy Kershaw is in Little Rock, Arkansas to see what's going on in Bill Clinton's home town and manages to interview Clinton's girl-next-door, the woman who has stayed friends with the Democratic challenger since they were teenagers.
Shyama Perera, meanwhile, is in Washington DC.
Maguire and Dunwoody both land doubles
ADRIAN MAGUIRE moved upsides reigning champion Peter Scudamore at the head of the jockeys' table when a double aboard Calapaez and Mr Felix moved him on to the 32 winner mark at Plumpton yesterday.
Richard Dunwoody also landed a two-timer at the Sussex track and is just one behind the pair.
Brooke Sanders thought twice about running her great favourite Calapaez on ground which changed to heavy following persistent rain.
But with only five runners declared -and two of those pulled out before racing -she decided to take the plunge.
Calapaez rewarded her with a seven lengths win over Homme d'Affaire.
‘I'm so pleased he got round,’ remarked Miss Sanders, who was hobbling around with her left foot in a plastic bag after breaking her ankle in a schooling accident and could scarcely bring herself to watch the race.
‘He's my very, very favourite horse and I think that's his 13th win for me.
I was delighted with the way he jumped in the ground and we'll now look for another small race as we want him to learn and build up his confidence,’ the trainer added.
Mr Felix also won very smoothly, going on five out and winning by eight lengths from Celtic Chimes.
Maguire will surely be champion jockey in due course but appreciates what a long haul he has ahead of him this season.
‘It's just great to be up there matching Peter Scudamore for the moment,’ he enthused.
Dunwoody completed his double on Andrew's Minstrel in the Autumn Novice Hurdle and Stirrup Cup in the Jolly Tanners At Staplefield Novices Chase.
Both handled conditions well, Andrew's Minstrel pulling eight lengths clear of Thuhool and Stirrup Cup making all and jumping well for a 20 lengths win over market rival Kingfisher Bay.
Maguire and Dunwoody both looked to have good chances of completing trebles in the concluding Chailey Handicap Hurdle, but Maguire's mount Manhattan Boy has yet to win outside selling company and faded into third, while Dunwoody's mount Ilewin found little under pressure after looking really dangerous.
The race was won by Hywel Davies' mount Gallant Effort, a two and a half lengths winner from Alton Bay.
Winning trainer Simon Dow regards the winner as a chaser in the making.
Knight makes a day of it
HENRIETTA KNIGHT notched four winners last week and continued the run at Wolverhampton yesterday when Well Wrapped and Hymne D'Amour, both ridden for Lord Chelsea by Jamie Osborne, pulled off a double for her Wantage stable.
Well Wrapped, 7-4 fav, is lucky to be alive after a crashing fall at Newbury in February but made all in the Charlecote Handicap.
‘The racecourse vet wanted to put him down and we thought about it a couple of times.
He couldn't lie down for seven weeks because of problems with his head, neck and pelvis,’ recalled Knight.
Following acupuncture treatment the ligaments and nerve endings healed, but no chances are taken with the eight-year-old who continues to have twice-weekly treatment on his badly wasted neck.
Hymne D'Amour turned Division One of the Shifnal Novices Hurdle into a procession.
Although not the class of ill-fated Thetford Forest, winner of this race last year en route to Cheltenham glory, Knight had special reason to be thrilled with the newcomer.
She had to be at her most persuasive before being allowed to send the tempramental and accident-prone filly over timber.
‘Hymne D'Amour was with Major Hern at two and three, but didn't run as she had all sorts of troubles,’ she said.
The 10-11 fav took charge before the home turn and trotted up by 20 lengths.
Osborne completed a 19-1 three-timer — his first since Flown, Young Pokey and Nomadic Way scored at the National Hunt Festival in March — when 11-4 fav Noble Eyre took the West Midlands Claiming Chase.
The second leg of the novice hurdle went to another newcomer, Captain My Captain, 81.
The winner was a first of the season for Roy Brotherton, who trains a team of 12 at Elmley Castle in Worcestershire.
Damian Casey was fined £160 for failing to weigh in on fourth-placed Tribute To Dad.
The horse was disqualified.
Well-backed Sovereign Niche, 5-4 fav, collected the Castlecroft Selling Handicap Hurdle in which Unassuming, gambled on from 20-1 to 6-1, was pulled up before two out.
Light Veneer also looked a useful prospect when making his fencing debut in the Moseley Novices Chase.
The 5-2 fav had drawn upsides The Vatman Cometh when that rival capsized at the final obstacle.
Paralysed crash girl astounds medics
GEMMA IS SET TO WIN LONG BATTLE
By Janet Tansley
BRAVE crash victim Gemma Quinn has astounded doctors in her battle for survival.
Gemma, eight, from Childwall, Liverpool, was left paralysed after she and her family were involved in a crash on their way to a weekend in Pwllheli in June.
She was put on to a life-support machine, which her parents, Mike and Jackie, were told would be her constant companion.
But the plucky youngster has astounded them, and medical staff at Southport General's spinal injuries unit, by beginning to breathe for herself.
Mike said: ‘She breathed for three minutes, giving us hope she would one day be able to breathe for herself.
‘Now that has gone up to five hours on her own.
It is incredible.
‘Gemma is fighting it and doing really well.’
Mike revealed the news on the day the Gemma Quinn Appeal was wound up.
He said: ‘What we want to do now is discover the total and make a statement.
‘It will mean, then, that we can decide how best to use the money to benefit Gemma.’
Computer programmer Mike, 32, added that many fund-raising events are still to be held.
Gemma…appeal winding up
Owens lines up champion fightback
By Syd Dye
LIVERPOOL super-featherweight Jimmy Owens, who in August was involved in an acrimonious split with his manager Carl Moorcroft, has come up fighting with the most important contest and biggest payday of his career.
Owens, whose dispute with Moorcroft was settled by the Central Area Council and who is currently handling his own affairs, is to box new British super-featherweight champion Neil Haddock (Llanelli) at Everton Park Sports Centre on December 1.
It will be a non-title clash, but if Owens is successful then he will obviously press hard for a title chance.
Promoter Brian Snagg plans to have Britain's new world title contender Lennox Lewis as a ringside guest for what looks set to be a bonanza show.
The 26-year-old Owens has not fought since last May when he gave a brilliant display to out-point Middlesbrough's Graham O'Malley.
He has been a professional for almost two years and has a ring record of nine wins out of 10 contests, his lone defeat coming when he was out-pointed by Manchester's Russell Davison for the Central Area title.
HOLYFIELD'S DAFT DEMAND FOR DEFENCE IN ENGLAND
HOPES of home advantage for Lennox Lewis when he fights Evander Holyfield for the world heavyweight crown is almost certain to be knocked out by the American's £17.5m asking price for a London bout.
With Lewis's share likely to be around £5.5m, the British and Commonwealth champion's handlers would have to break the bank to shift the challenge from Las Vegas.
Lewis's manager Frank Maloney said: ‘Holyfield wants a guarantee of 28 million dollars.
We'll be doing all we can to bring the fight here.
We've got accountants working on it to see if it is at all possible.
‘The world title has been the dream from day one; the dream is getting closer.
You never know, television could come up with a lot of money.’
However, the huge site fees lodged by the casinos in Las Vegas would appear to put London out of the running.
Even a Riddick Bowe victory over Holyfield next week is unlikely to make it any easier to give Lewis a home run.
Confidence
‘It doesn't matter where the fight is, I'm fully confident of winning the title,’ said Lewis.
‘But when I'm champion I want to make all my defences in England.
The Americans have had the title in their country for too long.
‘The challengers have always had to go to the other side of the Atlantic now it's their turn to come to England.
‘But I don't think Holyfield would take a chance by coming to London to defend agaist me.
He's got enough money for one thing, and it's a bigger risk anyway.’
EVANDER HOLYFIELD…crazy cash claim
Expert advice on offer
A RANGE of issues affecting personnel and training professionals, such as ways to measure and reward the competence of a workforce, will be discussed at a one-day seminar in Liverpool's Maritime Museum tomorrow.
Organised by the Merseyside Training Partnership the conference, says chairman Ray O'Connor, ‘offers businesses the opportunity to gain expert advice from training professionals all gathered under one roof.’
Quality drive: A Total Quality Management drive today to improve services company-wide, was begun by Commercial Hydraulics, based in Long Lane, Fazakerley, today.
General manager David Tarr started the ball rolling by undergoing training on the courses held at Everton Football Club.
Roadshow visit: A travelling roadshow promoting the benefit of independent financial advice is set to visit Liverpool's Albert Dock between November 5 and 8.
The Come Alive Magazine Show, supported by 32 separate companies, involves three daily presentations.
Echo puts Tall Ships pictures in the winners' frame
SNAP-HAPPY Echo readers are the focus of attention at a stunning exhibition of Tall Ships photographs.
Their award-winning pictures of the Grand Regatta Columbus go on display to the public from today at the Royal Liver Building.
The superb shots were chosen from a sea of entries which flooded into our offices after the Tall Ships' visit this summer.
All four winners attended the opening of the exhibition last night.
An atmospheric shot taken from Crosby beach earned George Fletcher first prize.
High
Mr Fletcher, 64, from Ormskirk, said: ‘I thought it was a good snap and sent it off but I didn't think any more about it.’
Each prize winner received a camera from Echo picture editor Stephen Shakeshaft.
He said the standard was very high.
Tommy Howard, 48, from Old Swan, won the Royal Liver Assurance award for the best picture of their head office, the Liver Building.
He said: ‘I read the tips Stephen Shakeshaft put in the Echo because I have always admired his work.
It paid off.’
The other winners were Rhys Long, 11, from Mold, and Michael Burgess, 16, from Otley, West Yorks.
The exhibition also features photos by runners-up and all 12 pictures from the Echo's Tall Ships calendar, taken by our own photographers.
It is open weekdays 9 am to 5 pm until November 13.
The exhibition, which is free, is supported by the Royal Liver Assurance, Fuji film and the Liverpool city centre's Colour Copy Centre, which enlarged all the original prints.
Snap happy…left to right, George Fletcher; George Cowley, Royal Liver vice chairman; John Griffith, Echo editor; Tommy Howard; Michael Burgess; Stephen Shakeshaft, Echo picture editor; Rhys Long (front).
No secret at all ONE of Merseyside's former top cabaret clubs has lost its 11pm entertainments licence following police objections.
Secrets disco, in Church Road, Litherland previously Allinsons Theatre Club was refused by Sefton's licensing committee after hearing details of disturbances outside the premises.
Sunseekers: Staff at Port Sunlight Heritage Centre have welcomed their 25,000th visitor this year.
Jo Heaton, from Formby, was presented with flowers and gifts.
Cold comfort: The average air temperature during October, 8.4C (47.1F), was the lowest recorded at Bidston Observatory since 1926.
It was also the dullest October since 1976 with an average of just 2.4 hours of sunshine a day.
Man named: Police have named a motorcyclist killed in a crash on the A559 near Northwich five days ago as Gregory Bate, 24, of Clegg Street, Warrington.
Woman mugged: A 30year-old woman was punched in the face by muggers who snatched a gold chain and sovereign pendant in Park Street, Toxteth.
Fire escape: A man escaped unhurt from an early morning blaze in Bromborough.
Firemen were called to the flat, above shops in Allport Road, at 4am.
They believe an electricity fault was the cause.
Coal names: A Coal Not Dole petition at the Liscard Shopping Centre has been signed by 3,000 people.
Dawn choir: Twitchers can wake up with the birds and enjoy the dawn chorus at 6am on Saturday at the Martin Mere nature reserve, Ormskirk.
But the dawn walk is strictly by ticket only.
LETTERS
Lazy parkers
NOW THAT the council has been given thousands of pounds for traffic calming measures, how about a pedestrian crossing outside Alder Hey Hospital?
It is, after all, the largest children's hospital in Europe and staff find it hard to cross, let alone mothers with young children and pushchairs.
With cars totally ignoring double yellow lines, double parking, unrestricted unloading and the bus bay constantly blocked up, it's about time the whole traffic flow in the area of Eaton Road, Honeysgreen Lane and Alder Road was reviewed.
Other parts of West Derby are also plagued with cars parked illegally (double yellow lines, on the pavement, in access only roads).
What would happen if we all parked where we pleased just because we were too lazy to park properly?
Fed Up Pedestrian, Liverpool 12.
Poignant pictures recall wartime memories
I HAVE recently returned from a trip to Italy where I visited the grave of my uncle, Harry Simms, at Bari War Cemetery.
While there, I photographed the graves of other servicemen who all hailed from the Merseyside area.
If any families of these men are surviving, I would be delighted to pass these photographs on to them.
Sapper Charles Gerard Irvine, Royal Engineers, age 28.
Died April 9th, 1945.
Son of Charles and Hannah Irvine of Liverpool.
Husband of Emily Josephine Irvine of Liverpool.
Pte Albert Paul Johnston, Royal East Kent Regiment, age 25.
Died June 2nd, 1944.
Son of Adam and Rose Ann Johnston of Old Swan, Liverpool.
Husband of Mary Johnston of Liverpool.
Pte John McGinnigle, Army Catering Corps, age 30.
Died August 25th, 1944.
Son of George and Elizabeth Ellen McGinnigle of Liverpool.
Husband of Lillian McGinnigle of Liverpool.
Sapper Charles Passmore, Royal Engineers, age 43.
Died April 9th, 1945.
Son of William Henry and Merena Ann Passmore.
Husband of Dorothy Jane Passmore of Liverpool.
L. Cpl Peter Price, The Queen's Own Royal West Kent Regiment, age 25.
Died December 17th, 1943.
Son of Thomas and Mary Ellen Price of Widnes.
L. Cpl Arthur Rogers, Royal Engineers, age 31.
Died April 9th, 1945.
Son of Lily Rogers of Garston, Liverpool.
Husband of Sylvia Jane Rogers, Garston, Liverpool.
Pilot Office George Valentine, 31 Squadron, age 23.
Died September 30th, 1944.
Son of John and Ellen Valentine of Liverpool.
Husband of Irene Valentine.
Sapper Thomas Wright, Royal Engineers, age 45.
Died April 20th, 1944.
Son of Peter and Ann Wright of Orrell, Liverpool.
Husband of Elizabeth Wright.
I can be contacted on   .
Door dangers
I'M WRITING after reading the Echo story about train doors opening on their own.
Some years ago I was travelling on a train from Liverpool to Southport.
I boarded at Seaforth and Litherland, heading into Liverpool.
I sat down in the seat right by the door and, in between Seaforth and Litherland and Bootle New Strand, the doors suddenly opened and then closed while the train was moving.
I remembered this recently with all these people falling from express trains but didn't think it could be the same on local lines as I had never heard anyone complain before.
After reading the story in the Echo I now realise it can happen on local lines.
Fighting back
AT THE very moment that even members of the UDM are admitting (belatedly) Arthur Scargill was correct all along, Frank Morris (October 20th) berates him for the ‘vicious attack he unleashed upon innocents during the Heath administration’.
By this I take it he means the miners strike of 1974.
Obviously Frank Morris doesn't know much about trade union history.
Arthur Scargill did not become national president of the NUM until 1982.
In 1974 the NUM was led by Joe Gormley (pictured), a noted ‘moderate’, and 81 per cent of the miners voted for industrial action hardly the minority militancy hinted at by Mr Morris.
The miners and their supporters are trying to protect communities and over 100,000 jobs at a time when there are more than one in ten people on the dole.
When I hear people attacking Arthur Scargill, militancy etc, I remind them that a militant is only a moderate who has learned to stand up and fight back.
Bikes risk
WHILE WALKING on the pavement last month, I received injuries which disabled me for for one week caused by a mountain bike.
Here in Liverpool, elderly people are being hurt every day.
Surely it is time to call a halt to all vehicles on the pavement.
The parents who buy these bikes should take their offspring to the park to cycle.
Teenagers should use the road which is intended for all vehicles.
Merseyside Police should enforce the law and, on a second offence, confiscate the bike before many more elderly people suffer injury.
Unique operation in military history
REMEMBRANCE DAY 1992 is, more than ever, special to members of the 1st Army Association.
On November 8th, 194250 years ago to the day the British 1st Army and their American allies mounted a seaborne assault on the shores of North Africa.
This was the first major operation to take the fight to the enemy and establish a new theatre of war in a place of our own choosing.
It was and remains a unique operation in military history.
Long distance convoys from America and the U.K. traversed thousands of miles through hostile waters to converge in the Atlantic and land the assault forces directly on to the beaches of Morocco and Algeria.
This remarkable feat of arms is largely unrecognised.
It led (in concert with the superb performance of the 8th Army and of the Royal Air Force, the Royal and Merchant Navies, and all other splendid organisations which assisted the Armies) to the fall of Tunis and the unconditional surrender of a quarter of a million of the enemy.
This included the vaunted Afrika Corps and paved the way for the conquest of southern Europe.
Merseyside members of the 1st Army Associaton take pride in the part they played in this achievement and in remembering present comrades and those gallant friends who fell in the conflict.
Philip Gilhooley (Chairman, Warrington branch), Reginald Norfolk (Chairman, Aintree branch), Gordon Scawn (Chairman, Wirral branch) for and on behalf of all Merseyside branches, 1st Army Djebels Association.
Dark, dangerous
IN THESE violent times when all young children are at risk — more so now that the nights are dark when they are coming home from school — the Government promised last year that this year they would leave the clocks alone.
Why not now?
If not, why not let the children out earlier.
Leave Cilla alone
I WISH people would leave Cilla Black alone.
Yes, she has been lucky but, if she wishes to live down south because of her work, why not?
I am no fan of Blind Date it is too contrived.
Also I wish she would drop the ‘lorra, lorra’ business and speak in an ordinary voice.
Not all Liverpool people speak that way.
She lets Liverpool down.
But what about Tarby?
He lives down there.
It suits him and he has every right to do so and Tom O'Connor has a lovely home down south.
What about people who live abroad to avoid taxation?
Are they loyal to Liverpool or any other town?
Change is in the air
THE election of a new American president is an event that affects us all.
The man in the White House is effectively the leader of the Western world.
He is also in charge of an economy so large that it makes a real difference to world trade and to British economic fortunes in particular.
It now looks all but certain that there will be a new man in the White House leading the United States in a new direction.
President Bill Clinton will represent a decisive break from 12 years of Republican Party rule.
He will have won because his vision offered more hope to American voters than four more years of George Bush in charge.
For a few days last week it looked as though United States voters would behave as British voters did earlier this year and swing back to the devil they knew.
The fact that they seem more willing to take a chance on change suggests that a new era may be dawning which represents a new problem for beleagured British Prime Minister John Major.
The Bush route out of recession was similar to that being tried by Mr Major.
It was not enough to pull America out of recession nor was it enough to save George Bush from defeat.
On the eve of his own political crisis, Mr Major must wonder if the same fate awaits him.
Leaves on the lines
AROUND about this time every year leaves fall off deciduous trees.
That may seem a statement of the blindingly obvious unless you are a British Rail planner that is.
Because once again BR seems to have been caught out by the problem of wet leaves on the line.
Today thousands of commuters were delayed for up to 35 minutes as trains ran behind schedule.
A spokesman claims ‘new technology’ is helping BR win the battle against the leaves and points out that German commuters are also affected by similar problems.
One puzzle remains.
How is it that this problem seems only to have emerged in the last few years.
Are the trains getting lighter, or are the leaves getting more slippery?
Perhaps the rail planners could take a leaf out of their Victorian predecessors' books.
Appeal plea is refused
A 21-year-old Liverpool man serving seven years' detention for robbing women working in two Southampton shops was refused leave by the Criminal Appeal Court in London to appeal against his conviction and sentence.
Kenneth Andrew Sanderson, of Wallace Avenue, Huyton, was sentenced in January 1991 after a Southampton Crown Court jury found him guilty of the two robberies for each of which he received seven years, concurrent; he got six months concurrent for an admitted burglary.
Educating Rita, Neptune Theatre.
PETER GRANT
EVERY version of Educating Rita has ingredients that set it apart from all others.
Of course the quality of the timeless writing stays the same but fresh interpretations of the characters are always welcome.
BM Productions, in their debut offering, combine the talents of Philip Bond as the disillusioned dipso Frank, alongside the refreshing and education-thirsty Rita, played by Judy Holt.
Willy Russell's story of a hair-dresser seeking to learn at any price via her reluctant and sozzled tutor continues to stand the test of time.
Judy Holt offers an aggressive Rita her face contorted into a bitter snarl.
It is a startling contrast, therefore, when this accomplished actress re-enters as the ‘new’ woman.
She remains gutsy throughout presenting a harder edge to previous Ritas I have seen.
An education, indeed.
Frank, who virtually lives in his brown jacket, blends in with his dusty study, and has a Shakespearean flourish.
Actor Philip Bond is no stranger to the bard and it shows as he injects a world weary stance through various theatrical gesticulations.
As always, the pathos and humour switch with the usual rapidity and David Llewellyn's direction ensures that the words are given priority.
From Macbeth to Danielle Steele, all literary criticism is here.
And, in true dramatic irony, the most apt piece of rhetoric comes from Rita who could well be summing up the everlasting appeal of the Russell classic as she tries to tempt Frank out to an evening at the local theatre:
‘It doesn't matter who's doing it it's still the same play…isn't it.’
Not so golden oldies
‘THEY'RE here…
‘The little girl in the film Poltergeist had her audience sitting on the edge of their seats when she revealed to her family that the strange creatures from the TV were back to haunt them all.
Now we know exactly what she means.
The television nasties we all thought had gone for good are here again and age hasn't improved them.
Terry and June (aaaghhh, no, no, I'll do anything, but please, not Terry and June), Father Dear Father, Never The Twain and Bless This House have returned.
And television comedy will never be the same again.
All four are remembered as milestones in British television history, for all the wrong reasons.
Put it this way, things couldn't possibly be this bad again…could they?
Yes they can…
The four, plus some genuine goodies like Alas Smith and Jones, The Goodies and Alexei Sayle's Stuff, are about to experience a resurgence in popularity as they get another airing.
UK Gold is the new satellite and cable station that isn't coy about where it has got all its programmes from the archives.
The BBC usually attempt to hide the fact that what they're about to show is a repeat by introducing it with the words: ‘Another chance to see…
‘UK Gold don't.
Rather they are emphasising the fact that every programme they show has been seen before, at least once although they are saying that they are ‘devoted to Britain's favourite TV programmes’.
The station hit problems with Equity over payments to cast members.
Equity claimed that UK Gold were ‘paying a pittance’ for showing its members' work.
But that row was resolved and the station went on air as scheduled on Sunday evening.
The channel is a partnership between BBC Enterprises and Thames Television and has shamelessly raided the vaults.
The service comes free to existing satellite dish owners and those hooked up to cable.
And it will wheel out some real oldies to broadcast 20 hours a day, ranging from comedy to dramas (The Onedin Line and The Duchess of Duke Street among them).
They are even repeating the repeats EastEnders, right from the start, is shown three times a day, every day, Terry and June twice, The Goodies once.
Juniors at Blackpool
MERSEYSIDE'S Junior boxing champions will be in action at the Cliffs Hotel, Queens Promenade, Blackpool, tomorrow night, when they bid for North West Counties titles against their East Lancs counterparts.
Included in the Mersey squad is Carl Wall (Gemini) who won a bronze medal in the recent European under-16 championships in Italy.
Title pairings (Merseyside names first);
CLASS A: 42 kgs T McCarthy (Transport) w/o; 45 S Warbrick (Gemini) v J Ashton (Arrow); 48 A Riley (Gemini) v T Ham (Boarshaw); 51 T Moore (Tuebrook) v M Armstrong (Collyhurst); 54 C Harris (Gemini) v R Munroe (Gallagher); 57 A Clarke (Tower Hill) v M McDonough (Fox).
CLASS B: 45 kgs K Brown (Wallasey) v Y Hussain (Blackburn); 48 W Toohey (Gemini) w/o; 51 L Eedle (Gemini) v J Ollerhead (Barton); 54 C McGowan (Tuebrook) v A Grimeley (Ancoats); 57 C Wall (Gemini) w/o; 60 K Fessey (Sefton) v A McVey (Hamer); 67 N Collins (Gemini) w/o.
Chemics ace Tony at the crossroads
Tony Myler…the Widnes star is facing a decision over his future after an injury-hit career
By Nick Walker
WIDNES international half-back Tony Myler faces D-Day today.
Myler, 31, was seeing a specialist amid fears he could be advised to quit.
Coach Phil Larder explained today: ‘He has been struggling and is in a good deal of pain every time he plays.
‘He showed a lot of courage at Leeds on Sunday as we already had two players injured and then we had two sent off.
But he decided to play on.’
The former Great Britain stand off, who has 14 caps, has had an injury-dogged career and delayed his start to the season for a fortnight, while contemplating retirement.
Last season he had a disc operation on his back.
Internationals Paul Moriarty, who was carried off with a knee problem, and Bobby Goulding were injured in Sunday's 48-16 defeat at Headingley and forwards Steve McCurrie and Harvey Howard both appear before the disciplinary commission on Thursday after being sent off.
They could also miss next Sunday's visit of third division leaders Ryedale-York to Naughton Park in their Regal Trophy first round tie.
Larder was unhappy about the manner of the defeat, insisting: ‘I felt that Widnes lost the game rather than Leeds won it.
‘We didn't compete in the first half and if we miss tackles like that we're not going to beat anybody.
‘I was very disappointed that the two areas we have concentrated on since I arrived the tackling and the kicking game were woeful at times.’
Meanwhile, hooker Phil McKenzie and second row Emosi Koloto will return from month loan spells at Rochdale and Halifax next week.
The Chemics have refused Hornets permission to play McKenzie in their Regal tie against French side Catalan to prevent him from being cup-tied.
ST HELENS are ready to welcome back centre Gary Connolly for the top Regal Trophy tie, against Leeds at Knowsley Road on Sunday.
Recovered
Connolly injured an ankle in the World Cup Final and second row Chris Joynt should have recovered from flu.
But Phil Veivers damaged knee ligaments against Bradford on Sunday and faces a month-long lay-off.
Saints have arranged their league match at Leigh for Wednesday, November 11.
Back on the road again
AN anonymous businessman has donated a van to Kirkby Community Action team after the Echo reported its desperate need for transport.
Operation Greenfinger volunteers can now tend the gardens and homes of the elderly and infirm.
Cranes go: Three huge dockside cranes, regarded as an eyesore by some local residents, are being demolished at Bidston, Birkenhead.
Rally date: Lancashire area NUM president Steve Sullivan will address a rally in support of the miners, organised by the Liverpool Broad Left, on Friday at the New Mayflower pub, Fazakerley Street, Liverpool.
New post: Wirral councillors have agreed to create a new post for a recycling assistant to boost the council's recycling effort.
Help please: Firefighter Dave Quirk is collecting blankets, toys, clothes, towels and non-perishable food for children in war-torn Yugoslavia, at West Kirby Fire Station, Grange Road.
Break-in: Thieves broke into a house in Norris Street, Warrington, and stole jewellery and goods worth £2,700.
Women take the bite out out of a four-legged foe
By Jane Gallagher
MAN'S best friend is on occasion woman's worst enemy.
But Sefton Council's all-female dog warden team provide the gentle touch which turns the fiercest four-legged fiends into pussy cats.
And showing off their work at Southport's prom were Head Dog Warden, Helen Wignall and her team, Susan McDonald, Shelley Fryer, Lesley Carrington and Amanda Townley.
One of their biggest successes has been the reduction in the number of abandoned puppies, largely due to a low-cost neutering scheme available throughout the borough.
In three years around 180 dogs and bitches have been neutered reducing the number of complaints.
Principal environmental officer, Bernard Cribbs: ‘We used to get lots complaints about dog packs but this year we have only had about two which shows how effective the scheme has been.’
When the dog warden scheme began six years ago up to 100 puppies were abandoned each year.
Last year, there were eight.
Anyone who needs advice on having their dog neutered should call Sefton's Dog Wardens on 051934-2095 or 2093.
Pet subject…
Shelley Fryer with Holly, who has been neutered in the Sefton scheme
Ban for Darley, Weaver
TOP Northern jockey Kevin Darley and apprentice Jason Weaver incurred the wrath of the stewards at Newcastle yesterday and both were suspended for 10 days (November 11-20 inclusive) after being found guilty of causing ‘intentional interference’.
The incident which led to the bans happened entering the last two furlongs of the You'll Never Get Rich Handicap when Weaver, on eventual fourth Corn Futures, hampered Darley's mount Love Jazz.
The latter, who went on to finish eighth, veered from a true line and in turn interfered with Corn Futures.
At an inquiry, the stewards considered both riders guilty of intentional interference, and as well as banning the pair, they disqualified the two horses concerned and promoted Love Returned to fourth place.
Major blow
Darley's suspension could prove a major blow in his quest to ride 100 winners in a season for the first time his 16 year career.
The jockey had earlier taken his 1992 score to 90 with a six lengths verdict on Sussex raider Lucky Noire in the Pirate Claiming Handicap.
Darley, 32, a former champion apprentice, is already assured of this year's Cock Of the North title, but conceded that he had no chance of reaching his century before the turf season ends next Monday.
He plans to continue on the all weather at Southwell and Lingfield up to Christmas.
‘I think I have a good chance of getting the 100 by the end of the year,’ he said.
THE POLLS GIVE A BIG WIN TO CLINTON
New era likely, but Bush and Perot defiant
AS the United States voted today for its next President, opinion poll leader Bill Clinton confidently climaxed his gruelling campaign by urging Americans to back new ideas after 12 years of Republican leadership.
But both President Bush and Ross Perot each predicted a poll-defying upset.
Arkansas Governor Clinton said America can be ‘the greatest country in the world forever;’ President Bush called Clinton ‘slippery when wet;’while billionaire Perot brushed off attacks against his unorthodox, self-financed campaign and adopted ‘Crazy’as his theme song.
As Clinton, Bush and their running mates scurried across several knife-edge states, the colourful Texan Perot bought two hours of TV network advertising to brand his rivals men who ‘don't know how to create jobs, don't know how to manage money, don't know how to build businesses.’
With opinion polls depicting a nation uncertain about its future and sceptical of political leaders, an estimated 100m votes are expected to be cast for a president, 35 senators, new House of Representatives, a dozen governors and countless state and local leaders.
As voting began, a 50-state TV survey showed Clinton ahead with 295 electoral votes, more than the 270 needed for victory.
Insisted
Clinton, 13 months on the road and his voice cracking, spent his last campaign day travelling through nine states before returning home to Little Rock, Arkansas, full of confidence.
But President Bush insisted: ‘I am going to win this election.’
Wallasey Labour MP Angela Eagle campaigned for Bill Clinton during a trip to America and her twin sister Maria, who failed to win Crosby for Labour in the April general election, is in Minnesota helping with the final push to bring the Democrat challenger to power.
Bill Clinton…confident
NEW LINK TO LONDON LINED UP
Moves to re-open old air route
JETTAIR, the Liverpool company aiming to reestablish air links between the city and London, has applied to operate an extra route to Gatwick.
Philip Ettinger, 37, the brains behind the bid to launch the link, today revealed the new move which coincides with the end of a three-week consultation period when objections to his proposals must be lodged.
Consultation
He said: ‘So far there have been no objections that I know of to either of our plans to fly from Liverpool to London's City Airport, or Gatwick.’
The PR boss, based in Wavertree's Church Road, began moves to reinstate a link with the capital after British Midland axed their Heathrow route last March.
He has agreed a leasing deal with Liverpool Airport owners British Aerospace to operate one of their 146 ‘whispering’ jets on the London link if it gets the go-ahead.
Mr Ettinger said today: ‘Now the consultation period is over, we will submit our business plans to the Civil Aviation Authority.
‘I hope to meet with the CAA in the next 10 days and we might be able to tie everything up within a few weeks,’ he said.
He aimed to operate an air route towards the end of this year, but he said it now looked likely that the service will begin early next spring.
Business travellers could use the morning and early evening flights to the City Airport in London's Docklands, while holidaymakers would be able to link up with international flights, particularly to North America, from Gatwick on a midday flight from Liverpool.
Hot-spot of top sport
HENRY BLUNDELL was never a fan of fishing on the Leeds-Liverpool Canal, until he found a hot-spot full of big fish.
Now it's difficult to keep the 60-year-old away.
He's been enjoying terrific sport with bream to 3.5lb and tench to 3lb on the Plex Lane stretch.
He even lost a huge bream estimated at 6lb.
Henry, who comes from Litherland and is secretary of Repcon Strand A.C., has been catching the bream on single yellow maggots and the tench on caster.
It has been essential to use light tackle and if he tries a hook any bigger than a size 22, the fish won't even look at the bait.
The shoal has taken up residence in one particular area of the canal and are congregating in a 6ft deep hole a yard from the far bank reed bed at Plex Lane.
Pike anglers are reporting catches up to 9lb on the canal.
Girl, 2, dies in blaze
FIRE experts and police were today investigating the cause of a blaze which killed a two-year-old girl and seriously injured three other youngsters.
The girl died after she and her 11-year-old sister, their eight-year-old brother and a 16year-old girl who was babysitting at the house, in Emlyn Road, Mayhill, Swansea, were rescued and taken to hospital.
Late again: Thousands of rail commuters on Network SouthEast were late for work today and British Rail said leaves on the line were again to blame.
Pit tragedy: An investigation was launched today into the underground death of a 47-year-old miner at Littleton colliery, near Cannock, Staffordshire the second fatal accident at the pit in five months.
Lamont plea: Union leaders were today holding a rare meeting with Chancellor Norman Lamont to press the case for economic recovery and an end to spiralling unemployment.
Ads warning: Companies which advertise misleading or non-existent job vacancies using premium rate telephone lines face a total ban if they fail to clean up their act, watchdog the Independent Committee for the Supervision of Telephone Standards, warns today.
Water alert: About 200,000 people in an area west of Southampton are being advised to continue boiling their drinking water as mains are flushed to clear a parasite which causes stomach upsets.
High-tech bid to beat freeze
COMPUTER technology is to help town hall chiefs beat the winter weather.
Engineers from St Helens Council's highways department are now relying on computerised Met Office reports to help them plan the gritting of icy roads.
And the high-tech scheme could save thousands of pounds.
A council spokesman said: ‘It has been found to be far more accurate than other methods.
‘Previously, a security officer at the Hardshaw Brook depot in St Helens checked with the Met Office, took readings from a thermometer and inspected road surfaces outside the depot.
‘In uncertain conditions it sometimes resulted in roads being gritted unnecessarily, and turning out the gritting teams costs £3,000 a time.
‘It has been found that sensors installed in the road give a more accurate reading of climatic conditions at road surface level.
‘These sensors are linked to a computer in Stockport and give a continuous weather picture.
‘The duty engineer will consult the computer before deciding to call out the gritting teams.’
True grit…the council's gritting team stands by for action
Weather watcher…council duty engineer Dave Robinson
Woman dies in house blast
A PENSIONER was killed and her husband is fighting for his life after an explosion ripped through their home.
The man was found lying on the front step having been blown through the door.
A neighbour had a lucky escape, for she had left the couple's house just minutes before.
Investigators are still trying to piece together the events leading up to the blast, which destroyed the ground floor of the house on the outskirts of Wigan.
Margaret Lannon, 68, died instantly in the blast which tore through the ground floor of her semi-detached property in Heyford Road, Marsh Green.
Her husband, Patrick, also 68, was treated at the scene by paramedics before being rushed to hospital.
He was said to be in a critical condition today.
Campaigner calls for a public debate
CHALLENGE TO MP ON HOSPITAL
A VETERAN campaigner for an accident unit at Halton Hospital, Runcorn, is challenging an MP to a public debate on the hospital's future.
Housewife Maureen Mainwaring was left bitter and confused after new Warrington South Labour MP Mike Hall declared hopes for a full accident and emergency department and maternity unit at the hospital had died with the recent granting of trust status.
Mrs Mainwaring founder of the Halton Accident Emergency Campaign has waged a one-woman campaign for nine years to see the new town hospital is completed with the provision of full services.
At present residents in Widnes and Runcorn rely on Warrington General Hospital.
Mrs Mainwaring's 18-year-old son died after being involved in a road accident yards from the Halton Hospital gates.
An ambulance took an hour to take him to Warrington.
Difficult
Mr Hall's comments came in the wake of what he described as the ‘sham consultation’ by Mersey regional health bosses on trust status.
He said because health services at the hospital will be dictated by market forces the hope of having a fully functional hospital had died forever.
‘Mike Hall has said my campaign is effectively all over I just can't believe it.
He's throwing in the towel and it's a towel he's never even held anyway,’ said Mrs Mainwaring.
Mr Hall says in a letter to her that he finds it difficult to understand how he can be associated with the previous Conservative MP Chris Butler's lack of support for the unit.
He said: ‘Since I was selected in October 1990 to fight Warrington South I have campaigned most aggressively on protecting the National Health Service.’
Fighting on…
Mrs Mainwaring at her home in Runcorn
Liverpool off top shock!
By Dave Houghton
RECORD books will have to be checked to find out when Liverpool Angling Society were not on top of the Wirral Winter League table.
It's about five years, but they came unstuck on the Shropshire Union Canal at the Golden Nook, Chester, on Sunday, and now lie second to Irby AC.
Steve Peers, fishing for Wirral Borough Council, could not lay his hands on any bloodworm, the most popular match bait on the can also put his faith in caster and won the match with 2lb 7oz.
It was his first win in the league and came from a peg at Waverton, where he used a loaded waggler to drag his bit along the far bank and catch quality roach to eight ounces.
Neil Faulkner, from Vauxhall Motors, was second with 2lb 3oz and then came Des Dingwall, from Cammell Laird AC, with 2lb 2oz.
Irby AC won the team event and go into the lead after two matches with 29 points, one better than Liverpool AS.
Vauxhall Motors have 27 points and Cammell Laird AC are fourth with 20.
It was tight at the top of the Northwich AA Open on the River Weaver at Hartford, with only eight ounces separating the top four.
Daren Hogg (Boathouse AC) did best with 3lb 14oz of small roach worth £150.
Di going Seoul-o
What a difference a day makes: A smiling Di goes it alone (far left); just 24 hours earlier accompanying her husband 
(above) she was Mrs Glum…
Poll looms in republic
THE Irish Republic looks set for an early general election because of a split in the ruling coalition.
The Progressive Democrats are expected to resign after Prime Minister Albert Reynolds accused their leader, Des O'Malley, of lying.
Still talking: Fresh talks to try to settle the row over European farm subsidies took place in Chicago between EC farm commissioner Ray McSharry and US agriculture secretary Edward Madigan.
Dutch heat: A new Dutch booklet recommends special fire safety regulations for brothels catering to sadomasochism in case clients are too tied up to escape.
Irving out: British author David Irving, who denies that six million Jews died in the Nazi Holocaust, is to be deported from Canada.
Fax paper: A new newspaper, delivered by fax, will fill the gap caused by the demise of the afternoon daily in Auckland, New Zealand.
Death sentence: A court in Pakistan has sentenced a Christian to death for blasphemy against Mohammad.
Parents of para praise ‘brave’ coroner
By Philippa Bellis
THE parents of a young Liverpool paratrooper killed by an IRA landmine defied advice and travelled to Ulster yesterday for their son's inquest.
Irene and Samuel Macaulay praised the coroner who condemned the murder as ‘an appalling attack of savagery.’
The coroner's court heard that Private Donald Macaulay, 20, of Mossley Hill, Liverpool, was killed nearly three years ago when a landmine blew up a Land Rover on a deserted country road in Mayobridge, near Newry, County Down.
Also killed were Lance Corporal Stephen Wilson, 23, of Hull, and Private Matthew Marshall, 21, of Welwyn Garden City, Herts.
Coroner Daniel Thompson described the attack as an ‘appalling attack of savagery motivated by the hatred of the past.’
He added: ‘The IRA's actions are as irrelevant as they are violent.’
Mr Macaulay praised the coroner's courage for his remarks which openly condemned the IRA.
‘Mr Thompson is a very brave man who has to live among these people and we congratulate him,’ he said.
Before visiting the coroner's court at Banbridge, Co Down, the couple laid a poppy wreath at the exact spot where their son met his death.
Private Macaulay had served with the 3rd Battalion Parachute Regiment for 15 months and had completed six months of his tour of duty at the time of his death.
He had flown home to be with his family and fiancee Carol Bettany for his birthday on November 7, and returned to his regiment just days before his death.
No verdict was recorded by the coroner in accordance with the usual practice when dealing with British soldiers killed in action in Ulster.
The Belfast brigade of the Irish People's Liberation Organisation announced it was disbanding today.
The announcement was made to Downtown Radio shortly after three more shootings.
Rare prints theft at bird centre
A WARNING has been issued to black market buyers after the theft of 93 rare prints worth £15,000.
The sketches are from the travel diaries of the late Sir Peter Scott, founder of Martin Mere Wildfowl Trust at Burscough.
The pictures were stolen with 10 gold pencil sets worth £2,000 from a storeroom at Martin Mere.
Signed
It is the second blow to hit the bird sanctuary in as many weeks.
Two weeks ago, seven jobs were axed after a 50% drop in attendances.
Spokeswoman Eileen Beesley said: ‘All the prints are numbered and signed.
Their retail value is £15,000, about half the amount it costs to feed the birds here each year.’
Anyone offered a Scott print should contact Ormskirk CID on 0695-576971.
Flier crash probed
THE British Hang Gliding Association is to investigate an accident in which a Wirral man's hang glider crashed into an 11,000 volt cable on the Great Orme, at Llandudno.
Ralph Cowell, 37, of Avalon Way, Noctorum, Birkenhead, escaped with minor injuries.
He was saved by the fact that only the wings of the glider struck the cable but it led to more than 250 households having their electricity supplies cut off.
He received a cut nose and bruised his arms and is now recovering at home.
Changing the ‘rules’ helps find the cash
ANY golfer will tell you that you stand little chance of winning unless you keep a close eye on the scorecard.
But when you are really up against it there are times when the only way to win is by a little crafty reinterpretation of the rules.
This is exactly what Chancellor Norman Lamont is about to do in order to find the resources with which to give the economy its required boost.
But first let me explain how the ‘rules’ work in high finance.
The key ‘score’ is the PSBR the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement.
This tells you by how much the Government is overspending.
In round figures the expected score for the fiscal year starting next 6 April is: Total National Income £600bn.
Government spending £250bn.
To be raised in taxes £200bn.
Bottom line: £50bn of overspending.
Not healthy, especially coming after a bigger than expected £30bn deficit in the current tax year.
However, these are the only building blocks which the Chancellor has to work on from which to construct next Thursday's (12 November) Autumn Statement.
The Autumn Statement is the real budget the one that decides on spending.
The Spring Budget only decides on taxes how to pay for the spending.
Next Spring's Budget will be the last of its kind, because from December 1993 we will have a unified budget, dealing with both spending and taxes.
That will be when the crafty bit comes in.
From next December we will also have a budget which draws a distinction between current and capital spending current spending being looking after hospital patients; capital spending being building a new hospital for them.
At present, the Government makes no distinction between the two.
This makes it very hard for it to pursue the traditional answer to a slump of ‘pump priming’ spending more on job creating projects like roads and railways.
The economist John Maynard Keynes advocated just such an approach in the Thirties, arguing that during a recession it made sense because there were idle resources available.
But obviously the Government cannot spend more when it is already ‘overdrawing’ at the rate of £50bn a year which anyone can work out is around £1,000 per head of population or say £2,000 per working person.
But if you reshape the national accounts and show the money is going on capital projects (something of a long term value) it becomes a different matter.
And if you get the private sector to finance some of the developments such as toll roads, then it has all the hallmarks of sound finance about it.
It should all be a lot clearer when the Chancellor speaks next Thursday.
And if I am not mistaken you could see share prices really motoring after that.
Small firms suffer as orders go on decline
By Daily Post Correspondent
A CONFEDERATION of British Industry survey out this morning shows that new orders and output among small manufacturing firms have declined at a greater rate than expected since July.
Richard Brucciani, chairman of the CBI Smaller Firms Council, said: ‘This survey shows that smaller firms’ optimism has weakened over the last four months.
‘There has been a marked decline in new orders and prices with the inevitable increase in job losses.
‘Smaller manufacturers have won the battle with inflation but the cost is now reduced spending on plant, machinery and innovation, with training intentions also reduced.
‘Export prospects look brighter with smaller firms expecting a slight increase in orders in the next four months.
It is now critical that investment begins again in both people and equipment, otherwise smaller UK manufacturers will not remain competitive in international markets and capture the business which is necessary to increase the country's employment and wealth.’
The survey, in which 814 manufacturing companies took part between September 23 and October 14, after the reduction in base rates to 9pc, shows:
Orders: 23pc more firms report total orders declined over the past four months than increased.
Output: The decline in output was greater than seen in the July survey and worse than had been anticipated, with a balance of 20pc of firms reporting a fall.
Jobs: The rate at which smaller firms are shedding jobs has increased, after declining in the last five surveys, with a balance of 20pc more manufacturers reporting a fall than an increase.
Costs And Prices: Unit costs growth is the lowest since the survey began in June 1958. 23pc more firms continue to reduce home market prices than raise them.
Asbestos led to death of worker
A RETIRED French polisher died of an industrial disease more than 40 years after he was in contact with asbestos while refurbishing a Canadian liner, a Liverpool inquest was told.
Clifford Crossthwaite, 76, of Gilroy Road, Kensington, Liverpool, died in Broadgreen Hospital on December 10 last year.
A friend had said he recalled they had worked on an ocean liner docked in Liverpool after the war alongside men stripping out asbestos, Det Sgt Cedric Jones told the hearing.
Merseyside Coroner Roy Barter said: ‘Although he didn't work directly with asbestos he was in an asbestos environment.’
He recorded a verdict that Mr Crossthwaite died of a prescribed disease.
Steady demand for industrial unit space
By William Leece Daily Post Staff
NEWTON Transport Services has taken a five-year lease on a 4,300 sq ft unit on the Greylaw Trading Estate in Aintree, Liverpool, paying in the region of £2.75 a square foot per annum.
The estate is owned by Commercial Union Properties, with Richard Ellis/Hepper Robinson in Liverpool as sole agents.
Despite the tight economic conditions, there continues to be a good market for middle-sized industrial property in the city, according to Roy Backhouse, industrial agent at Richard Ellis/Hepper Robinson.
One unit now remains on the estate, where tenants include the Post Office and Securicor.
The National Westminster Bank has bought the freehold of its premises in Whitby Road, Ellesmere Port, where it was previously a tenant on the ground floor.
NatWest paid around £355,000 for the freehold to Pearl Assurance, and for its money it has a building with a ground floor of 1,952 sq ft plus first floor offices of 1,749 sq ft.
The sale was handled by Beresford Adams Commercial in Chester, acting for AMP Asset Management on behalf of Pearl, and Legat Owen in Chester for NatWest.
Beresford Adams has also handled the sale of the lease of the former Linen Lair shop in New Street, Mold.
The shop, of 998 sq ft on two floors, has been taken over by Fols Ladiesware, who paid a premium close to the asking figure of £7,500, with the rental being £11,000 per annum.
There is still good demand for retail units in Mold, the agents suggest, at sensible rentals and premiums.
Nijman Zeetank, a Dutch transport operation, has set up its UK headquarters in Skelmersdale in a new office and transport yard complex in Paddock Road.
The company bought the 1.88-acre site from the Commission for the New Towns, responsible for the sale of industrial and commercial assets of the former Skelmersdale Development Corporation.
Nijman Zeetank's UK director Clive Riggall said the company wanted to move from its former Lincoln base to the North west as one of its major customers was Pilkington Glass, based in St Helens.
‘Many surveys took place over 18 months to find the ideal site.
Eventually, it was decided that Skelmersdale was the best location, not only for its very convenient site links with all motorway connections, but with the environment being a very important word in the haulage industry today.
‘The site enables us to carry on our day to day business without interfering with the local community.
To achieve this we found the CNT and the Lancashire County Council most helpful.’
Whitby Road, Ellesmere Port
New Street.
Mold
Green light for by-pass
WORK is to start this month on the £14.5m Widnes Eastern by-pass.
The 3.2-mile dual carriageway will take heavy traffic away from Birchfield Road and Kingsway, ending a 20year campaign by residents fed up with noise and fumes from as many as 50,000 lorries and cars which use the road each day.
CUSTOMS OFFICERS DISMISS DRUG PROBE THEORY
Soccer club balls ‘impounded’
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A SOCCER club says drugs-hunting Customs and Excise officials impounded 300 of its footballs when they arrived at Dover from Pakistan.
The balls had been ordered through an agent by Phil Stokes, sales and marketing manager at Third Division Wrexham, for the club shop.
Sporting the football club's logo, they were dispatched from Sialkot in northern Pakistan.
But when they were late in arriving, Mr Stokes rang the agent and was told that they had been impounded at Dover for five weeks while checks were made for drugs.
‘I do not know if they searched the balls, but they arrived at Wrexham in good order and have gone on sale,’ said Mr Stokes.
‘I have no idea where the drugs tipoff came from.’
But Customs officials at the Channel port said last night that they would be ‘very surprised’ if a long delay in clearing the consignment was because of suspicion of drug smuggling.
They said: ‘The last thing we would do if we suspected drugs were being imported would be to tell the agent or importer because they may be in touch with someone at the point of origin.
‘We deal with drugs virtually every day of the week.
The idea of holding on to goods for four or five weeks is rather surprising.
Unless we have very specific information, they would be cleared off the docks within two days.’
Customs officers routinely use X-ray equipment to run checks for hidden packages, and are always alert to possible drugs trafficking from the Indian sub-continent and elsewhere.
Drugs have previously been found hidden in sports equipment including cricket bats.
Goods coming into the country can be held up for other routine reasons, for example, non-completion of paperwork or the non-payment of tax and excise duties, said Customs.
Wrexham FC supporters' shop manager Phil Stokes with some of the impounded balls Picture: VIC CLEVELEY
On this day
1493
On his second voyage, Christopher Columbus discovered Dominica.
1926
Annie Oakley, markswoman, died.
1957
Russian space dog, Laika, was sent into space in Sputnik II.
The prospector who struck gold at Hollywood
Prince of Comedy: Hal Roach
LEGENDARY film-maker Hal Roach who died of a heart attack yesterday, aged 100, became known as Hollywood's Prince of Comedy.
He created and directed the comedy pictures of such greats as Harold Lloyd, Laurel and Hardy, humorist Will Rogers and the Our Gang group of youngsters.
‘In the 55 years I've been at Paramount we've lost a lot of giants, none more so than Hal Roach,’ AC Lyles said in a tribute to his old friend.
The story of Hal Roach was the story of Hollywood.
Born January 14, 1892, in Elmira, New York, Roach prospected for gold in Alaska and drove teams of mules and horses before drifting into films as an extra in 1912.
He was given a small part in a film and one of his fellow extras was Harold Lloyd.
‘He wasn't a comedian, but he was a helluva actor,’ Roach said.
Three years after entering films Roach had made enough money from Lloyd comedies to build his own studio in Culver City.
He partnered Stan Laurel, a stage act, with Oliver Hardy, who played ‘bad guy’ film parts, and the comedy team was born.
One day, tired of auditioning overdressed children of friends, he looked out of his window and saw street children arguing over a stick.
‘I realised I had been watching them for 15 minutes.
They were doing the things ordinary kids did,’ he said.
That observation sparked the highly successful Our Gang series of comedies.
He followed the trend into feature-length films and directed One Million BC and produced Of Mice and Men.
During the Second World War he made propaganda and training films for the US army.
When peace came he moved into television production.
Roach won two Academy Awards for best short subjects, for the Laurel and Hardy film The Music Box in 1932, and for an Our Gang film, Bored of Education, in 1936.
In 1984 he was given an honorary Academy Award for his ‘unparalleled record of distinguished contributions to the motion picture art form.’
Roach outlived two wives and two of his five children.
Couple are back in the water business
By David Hope Business Staff
HUSBAND and wife team, Beryl and David Davies, who four years ago sold 80pc of their Camarthen Water Company, have bought it back with the help of a consortium.
The Davies' sold the share to Brent Walker Group, but now with the help of property, hotel and distribution partners have bought back the business.
The acquisition is well-timed to take advantage of the continuing growth in demand for mineral water throughout Britain and Europe by discerning customers.
Now a major campaign is planned for next year to increase sales and distribution making the well known Pryseg water, a top brand in Britain and Europe.
The hotel, restaurant and take-home market, is to be particularly targetted.
The purity and quality of Pryseg, which was the first brand to gain natural mineral water status in Wales in 1986, is helping to capture a major share of the 1990's market.
The brand name is taken from the spring of the same name 20 miles north of Caernarfon at Naesyerugiau.
Founder and Managing Director Beryl Davies says the Prysg water is now the leading table water for Britain's top hotels and restaurants and is already the preferred mineral water for top Welsh Hotels, as well as London's Park Lane landmark hotels such as The Dorchester and the Inn on the Park.
She said, ‘We are starting a new company with an enviable account list and our eye firmly on market leadership in the quality sector.
‘With new capital, a dynamic new board and strong distribution through Whitbread Wales, Felinfoel and Tanners, we will achive it.’
Shareholders in the new company include Christopher Oliver and David Baird of Salmon Developments; Victor Watkins of VAT Watkins Limited and representing the prestige hotel market is Gordon Wiggington of the of the Angel Posting House and Livery Hotel, Guilford.
From the drinks industry is James Rackham of Wine Fair of London Limited and chairman of Carmarthen Water, Sir Alun Talfan Davies QC, chairman of the Bank of Wales.
David and Beryl Davies back in business
Bad debts are no excuse for banking folly
BANKS seem to have become experts at shooting themselves in the foot.
Here is another example of folly.
A greengrocer popped into a bank near his shop to change a tenner into £1 coins.
The girl behind the counter gave him eight £1 coins.
When he protested, she explained that as he was not a customer there was a minimum charge of £2 for the service.
The bank says she was quite correct.
The charge for changing money for non-customers is now 2pc with a £2 minimum.
Yet any individual who tried to get away with that would be regarded as either a crook or a crank or most likely both.
Clearly, the banks have problems.
Many of their customers are suffering losses or going bust, so they have bad debts.
Now interest rates have come down, the latest situation is that for a high rate tax payer an instant access bank account pays less than the rate of inflation.
One result is that higher rate taxpayers are switching their long-term deposits to tax free National Savings or to the taxable unit trust money funds such as Fidelity Cash, which pays 9pc gross.
Fidelity has also launched a ‘controlled risk’ unit trust series called the Stabiliser Growth Range.
Minimum investment £1,000 with a choice of investing in UK, America, Europe or Japan equities.
The idea is that at any one time 60-90pc will be in cash and the equity ‘risk’ will be controlled by using the rest on futures and options.
This investment is on offer with a 1pc discount until November 23.
Fidelity believes it breaks new ground by getting over the problem that has stopped unit trusts from showing any real growth since the Great Crash five years ago namely that 90pc of unit trusts are in high risk equities, whereas 90pc of savings are in low risk investments such as banks or building societies.
Shorter hours
BIG strides in reducing junior doctors' working hours have been announced by health minister Dr Brian Mawhinney, who said: ‘Posts with the longest hours those contracted for an average of more than 83 hours a week fell by more than 2,000 to 3,234, in the last six months.’
Dancers stage a protest
MORE than 200 young dancers are expected to join a protest outside the BBC Television Centre in west London on Sunday after being dropped from a major TV tribute to the Queen.
The dancers, from the south London-based Marjorie Hawkins School of Irish Dancing, took part in the tribute, 40 Glorious Years, televised last Friday.
But they were cut from the programme after it overran by 10 minutes.
Bike bite
POLICE in Hampshire are to issue on-the-spot fines to motorists who carry bikes fixed to their car boots and obscure the number plate of the vehicle.
Court date
A 43-year-old man was due today to appear before Leeds magistrates charged in connection with the rape of a 71year-old widow at her home in the city's Hawksworth district on Saturday night.
Island haven
RAMSEY Island off the Pembrokeshire coast is to become a nature reserve managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
The RSPB has launched a £400,000 appeal to finance the purchase and management of the island.
CYCLING GOLD MEDALLIST'S CAMPAIGN TARGETS YOUNGSTERS
Olympic ace to lead health bid
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
HOYLAKE cycling ace Chris Boardman is to lead a campaign to improve health and cut accidents in Merseyside and Cheshire.
The Olympic gold medallist signed up with Mersey Regional Health Authority yesterday as a freelance health promotion consultant.
He hopes to influence thousands of children and young people to adopt healthy lifestyles.
Sir Donald Wilson, the authority's chairman, said: ‘We feel he will set a good example to the region.’
Chris, 24, is to feature in a major anti-drugs poster campaign and will fit health education visits to schools and factories into his training schedules.
He said: ‘It makes sense to me to prevent ill health, so that people don't have to go into hospital in the first place.
‘This campaign will cover a broad range of subjects from diet to home safety and coping with stress.
‘Children will be the special target if you start with them you can build in good habits for later life.’
He will urge people to look after their hearts, eat a healthy diet, stop smoking, avoid excessive drinking and wear safety helmets when cycling on dangerous roads.
Chris said: ‘The majority of cycling deaths are due to head injuries.
We must stop these accidents happening, particularly by wearing reflective gear so we are seen at night.
‘I always wear a helmet when I go out on a bike, but I think we might have to make helmets a fashion accessory to get more children to wear them.’
Chris's new appointment will allow him to retain his amateur status and prepare for the 1994 Commonwealth Games and the 1996 Olympics, the two main targets in his sights.
Chris explained: ‘Turning professional was very much an option after winning a gold medal at Barcelona.
‘But the Commonwealth and Olympic Games are still amateur events and I wanted to stay an amateur if possible.
‘If you turn professional, you have to go to the continent or the United States to make a living.
I don't want to do that because I have a young family and I like living in Hoylake.’
After signing up with the health authority at the Brom borough Village Leisure Hotel, venue for an NHS Health at Work conference, Chris went to his first assignment, talking to pupils at nearby Bromborough County Primary School.
He showed the children his famed high-tech £17,500 Lotus prototype track racing bike and answered a barrage of questions.
He also met his namesake, a four-year-old pupil called Chris Boardman, who is no relation.
Chris Boardman using pedal power to get across a healthy message Picture: TRACEY O'NEILL
IF YOU are a fan of collectables, you won't want to miss the new ‘on-pack’ offer from Carnation Evaporated Milk.
To celebrate 70 years of its product, Carnation has produced a model replica of its original 1922 Morris Delivery Van.
In bright red and gold livery, the replica will make a charming addition to any collectionand a super gift for adults and children alike.
These commemorative vans are available from Carnation for two labels and £2.25.
But as a special offer to our readers, we've got 100 to give away for free.
And along with them, we've got sets of five colourful Carnation leaflets featuring Favourite Desserts, Party Specials, Simple Suppers, Sweet Surprises and Kiddies Kitchen.
Carnation Milk contains no added sugar or preservatives, just concentrated, fresh milk.
It can be used in all sorts of recipesfrom paella or salmon and broccoli quiche, to lemon layer-pudding.
For your chance to claim one of our 100 1992 Carnation Model Delivery Vans, write — including your name and address on the back of a postcard (or sealed down envelope to: Carnation Offer, Liverpool Echo Dept C, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB.
The first 100 names drawn after November 17 will each receive a model van.
Eurocare award for devoted young son
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
A DEVOTED son who cared for his paralysed father until he died has received a prestigious European Child of Achievement award at a ceremony in France.
Andrew Horton received his award from Terry Waite CBE and Princess Margarita of Romania.
It was presented ‘for outstanding care for his father, who was paralysed due to a stroke.’
The schoolboy from Banks, near Southport, then showed love and support for his mother when his father died earlier this year.
Andrew, 13, was just three years old when his father suffered the first of a series of strokes.
The youngster played a major role in looking after him and ensuring he could be cared for at home.
Andrew's mother Christine nominated him for the award.
Speaking from her home in Ralphs' Wifes Lane, she said: ‘Andrew is very special, I don't know what I would do without him.
‘Before his father died he would help me bath and feed him.
Now he helps to clean up and if he gets home before me he starts the tea.
‘We didn't know he'd won this award until last month.
It was a lovely surprise.
We had a marvellous time in France.’
Andrew said: ‘I am very proud to receive this award.
We had a great trip and I met lots of other children.’
He is a pupil at Moor-Hey School in Lancashire.
Andrew, who has learning difficulties, is a keen violinist and has earned a place in Banks Brass Band.
The awards were presented at Roissy-en.
A total of 50 European Child of Achievement Awards are presented annually to children up to the age of 16.
The awards are in recognition of their everyday tasks to help others or for those who have overcome personal illness or disability.
Andrew Horton
British Coal talk request ‘refused’
BRITISH Coal chairman Neil Clarke was repeatedly refused a meeting with employment secretary Gillian Shephard to discuss the effects of pit closures, MPs were told yesterday.
Mr Clarke said his office tried ‘several times’ to arrange a meeting, four months before the bombshell announcement that 31 pits were to close with the loss of 30,000 jobs, but was turned down each time.
He made the claim while giving evidence to the Employment Select Committee into events.
Mr Clarke was questioned closely on whether there had been any consultation with Mrs Shephard.
There were gasps from MPs when Mr Clarke said: ‘On a number of occasions in late June and July, my office sought an interview with her office and it was declined.’
Mr Clarke said he understood his staff were simply referred back to a January meeting with Mrs Shephard's predecessor Michael Howard.
But MPs heard that Department of Employment officials got in touch with British Coal to discuss the legal implications of not consulting the miners.
British Coal's employee relations director, Kevan Hunt, said: ‘Such a discussion did take place.’
Mr Clarke and Mr Hunt told MPs the decision to break the law by dispensing with a 90-day consultation period was taken because of‘special circumstances’ and in order to help the miners by giving them the best redundancy terms.
Mr Clarke said: ‘The key requirement was that we look after our people as well as we possibly could in these extreme circumstances.
‘If we went into the consultation period, the operation of the pits would run down.
The basis on which our miners receive redundancy pay is based on the 12 weeks prior to being made redundant.’
Pressed by the committee chairman, Labour MP Greville Janner, Mr Clarke admitted the final decision to close the pits was taken jointly by him and President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine.
He said: ‘The decision was made, first of all, by the market.
It was reached after endless agonising by British Coal.’
But Roy Lynk, president of the Union of Democratic Mineworkers, insisted there was no sound reason for the closures.
He told the committee: ‘Somebody's after revenge.
It certainly isn't in the interests of this country to do to the mining industry what is being done.’
Schoolboy cyclist killed
A COMMUNITY was in mourning last night after a young cyclist was killed as he rode through his home town.
Lea Moore, eight, was crossing Rivacre Road, Ellesmere Port when he was in collision with a Ford Sierra.
He died before reaching hospital and last night his mother was being comforted by relatives at her Princes Road home.
Police are appealing for witnesses to Tuesday's accident.
President-elect orders talks after crushing victory
Clinton swings into action
By Daily Post Correspondents
PRESIDENT-ELECT Bill Clinton yesterday lived up to his promise to set America swiftly on a new path by ordering talks with his takeover team just hours after celebrating victory over George Bush.
The ‘transition team’ has been quietly at work in Little Rock, capital of Clinton's home state Arkansas, mulling policy and future appointments.
The Democratic party winner partied hard through the night in Little Rock after his message of change pulled in voters of all parties who feared the future and were fed up with Bush.
The President conceded defeat late on Tuesday and was yesterday on his way back to the White House to finish a four-year term marked by a stunning Gulf War victory and a damaging recession at home.
Bush has pledged cooperation until Clinton's inauguration on January 20 and seemed almost relieved to be through with a vicious campaign.
The wild card in the race, Ross Perot, sent out word that he had no regrets about his longshot bid for the White House, which has been in Republican hands for 12 years.
With more than 98pc of the popular vote counted Clinton had won 43m votes, Bush took 37.5m and independent Ross Perot had a surprisingly strong 18.9m.
As for the state-by-state count which actually decided the race, projections showed that Clinton won 33 states with 370 of the key Electoral College votes to Bush's 18 states and 168 votes.
Clinton needed just 270 electoral votes to take the White House.
‘This was a win beyond all our expectations,’ said George Stephanopoulos, Clinton's communications director.
But now Clinton has to deliver his ‘new beginning’.
It is a formidable task.
America is trillions of pounds in debt, economic growth is slow at best around the world, the massive defence industry must wake up to a new post-Cold War world and the nation's infrastructure is in deep disrepair.
Clinton's ‘Rebuild America’ plan aims to invest more than £13bn a year in transport, communication and environmental systems.
Democratic Senator Tim Wirth of Colorado predicted Clinton and Vice-president-elect Al Gore would get straight to work.
‘These are two very serious young men,’ he said.
‘There's quite a significant mandate for change.
Now it's time to get on with the job.’
In the aftermath of defeat Vice-president Dan Quayle was magnanimous: ‘He ran an outstanding campaign.
If he runs the country as well as he ran the campaign we'll be alright.’
European heads of government from Moscow to Madrid showered telegrams of congratulation on Clinton, saying they expected to maintain good ties with Washington.
Prime Minister John Major spoke of Clinton's ‘stunning victory’ and hoped Britain's ‘special relationship’with Washington would not change.
See Centre Pages
Pointing the way to the White House, Bill and Hillary Clinton celebrate a landslide victory
Car park blamed for 30pc drop in business
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
TRADERS in Rhyl claim that business has dropped by 30pc because a new car park development has cut off one of the main accesses to the seafront.
But after receiving a 129-signature petition, councillors accused the critics of being shortsighted, calling on them to support the development.
The 500-space car park on West Parade will form the basis for a multi-million pound Children's Village, for which work will start next year.
The traders from West Promenade and Queen Street called on the Rhuddlan Borough Council to amend their plans to allow for pedestrian links between West Parade and the beach.
Margaret Shepherd, whose cafe in Queen Street has for many years been popular with parties of elderly people, said many handicapped groups had cancelled this year because they could no longer walk straight from the cafe to the seafront.
‘Rhyl relies on old people in May, June and September, but my coach party trade has dropped by 30pc,’ she said.
‘Queen Street has always been one of the main access points to the beach and it is too far to expect old people to walk around the end of the development,’ she added.
Vincent Trehearne, amusement arcade and pub owner, who has lived on West Parade all his life, said he was appalled that people had been misled into thinking that accesses would be retained.
‘We have lost a tremendous amount of trade over the 14 months that the construction work has been going on and we should have been told exactly what was happening,’ he said.
Chief executive officer Edwin Lake told the tourism and amenities committee that the Children's Village had to be protected from the sea, wind and sand and a reinforced concrete wall along the full length of the north side was a basic element of the design.
Coun Derek Davies said he found the complaints distressing.
‘The traders asked us to regenerate the area and the first thing they do is criticise,’ he said.
Chairman Coun Bill Lockit said: ‘We need support not criticism from business people.’
MP leads way on top Labour jobs committee
WALLASEY MP Angela Eagle has been elected to chair the Parliamentary Labour Party's employment committee, which is influential in formulating Labour policy on the issue.
She said last night: ‘With unemployment at 3m there was never a more important time for the Government's mishandling of the economy to be kept in the public's attention.
‘Their complacent attitude that unemployment is a ‘price worth paying’ needs to be challenged at every opportunity.’
Ms Eagle added: ‘Only the Labour Party is taking the question of unemployment seriously and working to develop policies that will ease the present situation.’
In a Parliamentary debate on wages councils Ms Eagle claimed that their abolition would see a return to poverty pay.
The Government is seeking to scrap the councils, which have powers to set minimum rates of pay and other terms of conditions of service.
About 2.5m workers, mostly women, are covered by wages councils.
Ms Eagle said that wages council inspectors last year checked more than 33,000 establishments and found illegal wages at almost 6,000 of them, with arrears totalling more than £1.5m.
She commented: ‘It is time for the Government to do another U-turn and save the wages councils.
Without them we will be back to poverty wages.’
Angela Eagle
POSTSPORT picture extra from Anfield
Rovers' travels
Italian job is a big hit with Prentonfans
by PETER JARDINE
WIRRAL'S gone to Wembley now we're all going to Italy!
After five trips to Wembley in recent seasons, Tranmere Rovers head for Italy next week for their first competitive match in Europe.
And the venture has grabbed the imagination of supporters with more than 250 expected to travel to the town of Reggio Emilia to see Rovers meet AC Reggiana in the Anglo-Italian Cup.
The club have chartered a special flight from Manchester to Bologna and over 100 fans hare already booked up to travel with the official party.
Two coaches are fully booked with dozens more Italia-bound by air, mini-bus and car.
Chairman Peter Johnson said: ‘We are delighted to have this following when you consider that the recession is biting deep.
We are playing practically the league leaders so to have some vocal support will hopefully lift the players.’
Waiting list
Commercial Manager Nigel Coates said: ‘The response has been tremendous.
I think with it being Tranmere's first competitive game in Europe it is something people don't want to miss.
‘We have chartered a plane and actually have a waiting list at the moment of more supporters who want to join us.
‘If we can get hotel rooms for them in Reggio then they will be on the flight.’
The club have also organised a coach tour, departing Tuesday morning, for around 50 fans and again there is a waiting list.
‘We also know of a supporters coach and a couple of min-buses going.
‘I have even heard of people buying up airmiles through newspaper adverts to get there!’
A rooster which is no poultry offering
Contemporary Dance
LIVERPOOL EMPIRE
Review by Malcolm Handley
IT takes a special group of dancers to drive a choreographed axis through the music of SaintSaens and the Rolling Stones London Contemporary Dance Theatre is that special group.
They assemble music, energy and an unerring tactile sense of which movement is just right in a mixture which frequently exudes power and control and often displays frailty and enthusiasm.
It always abounds with fun.
It is as though choreoghraphy the cornerstone of modern dance is secondary in importance, yet it is never less than critical.
Just how they manage to tread this highwire of deft abandon must be due, in part, to excellent artistic direction but in the main to superb dance skills.
Last night's programme did not have an auspicious start.
Mark Morris's Motorcade is a gentle enough piece, blending neatly with SaintSaens music but is too subtle an opener.
The oddly named My Father's Vertigo, a near narrative piece bringing out the best in LCDT, set the programme on its right tracks and proved that dance can contain wit.
Darshan Singh Bhuller, Sheron Wray and Isabel Tamen were excellent.
When its near discordant notes gave way to Rooster and the driving beat of early Rolling Stones music, it was as if the the group and the whole theatre had been struck by benign lightening.
Led by Kate Coyne at her brilliant best, and an almost flawless Elizabeth Fancourt, rythmn 'n blues were given a new lease of life, so too was the haunting Ruby Tuesday.
Sensuality, fun and an ample dose of raunchy dance brought the whole programme alive.
Ms Fancourt was superb and Ms Coyne would make walking to the bus stop seem a provocative and elegant statement.
Rooster is a vibrant piece of dance drama with Kenneth Tharp and Ben Wright also excelling.
It was a piece of exuberant fun which the audience and, one suspects, the dancers wanted to go on for much longer.
Feathers fly as Kenneth Tharp and Tracey Fitzgerald step into action
Pair charged over gang fight at pub
TWO men have appeared in court in connection with a gang fight and shooting at the Market Trader pub in Kirkby.
Scaffolder Clinton Jenkins, 27, of Medbourne Crescent, Kirkby, and unemployed Desmond Aley, 28, of Ormonde Crescent, Northwood, Kirkby, are jointly accused of conspiring with others to cause grievous bodily harm, using or threatening unlawful violence and damaging the pub windows to the value of £100.
The allegations all relate to an incident on Sunday October 25.
Jane Rodin, prosecuting, yesterday told Kirkby magistrates the trouble started two days before the Sunday incident in which a 16-year-old girl innocently enjoying a drink was shot in the side.
She said an assault at the St Chad's Drive pub on the Friday night was followed by a confrontation with the bouncers the following night when a gun was produced.
In a show of strength, she said a gang descended on the Market Trader on the Sunday wielding staves, pick axe handles and other weapons.
She appealed against the defendants being given bail for fear they would interfere with witnesses who could help police inquiries.
Neil Cobley, defending Jenkins, and David Watson, defending Aley, successfully appealed for reporting restrictions to be lifted to encourage defence witnesses to come forward.
The pair were refused bail and remanded in custody until November 13.
Brotherly love brings new hope for sick boy
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
LITTLE Jonathan Varney is bringing the precious gift of laughter into the life of his tragic elder brother Matthew.
‘It's lovely hearing them laughing together,’ their mother Sue said yesterday.
Three-year-old Matthew, of Elderwood Road, Tranmere, suffered a brain haemorrhage at birth and faces life with a visual handicap and cerebral palsy.
The Elleray Park special school pupil cannot sit, stand, crawl or walk unaided and his parents still await his first words.
But Mrs Varney is convinced the arrival of Jonathan five months ago has given Matthew new heart.
Great pals
She said: ‘He holds out his hands for him and loves to have him on his knee.
They are great pals Jonathan has given Matthew an added dimension to his life.’
Last year Matthew received treatment at a Scottish nursing home which a Hungarian team from the Peto Institute, famous for its work with handicapped children, were visiting.
But the youngster's eyesight problems have ruled out any immediate prospect of a trip to Hungary to continue the treatment.
The Spastics Society has advised the family to contact a Cambridge-based clinic which specialised in dealing with Matthew's kind of eyesight problem.
Thousands of pounds have been raised over the past few months by the local community and by Wirral council colleagues of the boys' father Bob, who works in the highways and building services department.
The cash will be used for trips to Hungary in the future and for further medical treatment.
Matthew and baby Jonathan ‘he has given his brother an added dimension to life’ Picture: JASON ROBERTS
Protest at crisis service closure
By Oliver Holt Daily Post Staff
COUNCILLORS in St Helens were jeered last night as they made their way through a crowd of angry protesters.
More than 100 trade unionists gathered at the Town Hall in opposition to cuts in jobs and services.
Nalgo members were protesting at the proposed closure of a 24-hour crisis intervention centre.
St Helens Borough Council has been forced to close the centre because it is facing a cash crisis.
But Nalgo leaders say residents need the service more than ever in the current economic climate.
Branch secretary Kevan Nelson said: ‘The centre is a proven front line service providing vital support to the community.
Rather than the need for the centre diminishing, it is now greater.
‘It is unacceptable that a decision with life and death implications for many people should be taken behind closed doors without any consultation with staff or service users.’
But a council spokeswoman said: ‘In the past two years, the crisis service has established a valuable role and done a lot of good work.
‘It is regretted that the council is no longer in a position to continue to finance this service.
However, it must be recognised that the level of service provided is substantially above that provided by other local authority mental health services.’
Four saved woman trapped by flames
Fire heroes honoured
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
FOUR men who saved the life of a woman when they rescued her from her blazing home were honoured for their bravery yesterday.
The two policemen and two ambulancemen received bravery certificates from the Liverpool Shipwreck and Humane Society at a special ceremony held in Ormskirk, West Lancs.
The drama occurred in Burscough in November, 1991 when the emergency services were called to a fire at a bungalow.
The police and ambulancemen arrived on the scene minutes earlier than the fire brigade and swung into action when they learned that an unconscious woman was trapped in the house.
PC Geoffrey Archer, 36, a recipient of the award, explained: ‘There was smoke billowing out of the windows when we arrived.
‘A man met us at the door and said his wife Sheila Brown was still in the bungalow.
He had tried to reach her but was beaten back by flames.
‘We looked around the house and found the woman in a bedroom.
We smashed a hole in the patio door and carried her out.
‘The house was full of smoke, it was very difficult to see.’
Other recipients were PC Richard Howarth, 29, ambulanceman Christopher Durkin, 46, and ambulanceman Ian Burnside, 48, who added: ‘We were surprised to learn that we were being honoured, it is tremendous.’
Mrs Brown, 35, has since made a full recovery but was unable to attend the ceremony because she has moved away from the area.
The awards were presented by Jean White, Chairman of West Lancs District Council.
Speaking after the ceremony Superintendent Andrew Lincoln: ‘The men showed outstanding bravery.’
Life savers Ian Burnside, Richard Howarth, Geoffrey Archer, Christopher Durkin
SALES of diesel powered cars have rocketed ahead in Britain this year.
In the first six months, oil burners accounted for over 11pc of total sales.
In the whole of 1991, 139,810 diesel models were registered, representing an 8.78pc penetration more than double the figure achieved five years ago.
Just ten years ago, diesel sales accounted for only 0.93pc with just 14,530 sales.
During 1992, this figure has been beaten, on average, every month.
The Citroen BX has long been Britain's most popular diesel-engined car but in recent months it has been overtaken by another model from the same French stable the ZX.
For the last few days, I have been driving Citroen's latest addition to the ZX range the Aura Turbo Diesel.
Citroen have another winner on their hands.
An unparalleled 115mph performance, mid-range flexibility and engine responsiveness are its hallmarks.
My test car was the Aura model, but both it and its sister Avantage Turbo Diesel, are powered by a new 1.9-litre version of Citroen's XUD engine the world's most successful diesel unit with production now topping four million units.
Diesels are condemned by some for being too slow off the mark.
The Aura TD gets to 60mph in 10.3 seconds, faster than some petrol engined rivals.
But it is in midrange flexibility, with 130 lbs/ft of torque available from 1750 to 3750rpm, that the Aura TD is truly outstanding.
Citroen's UK managing director Pierre Boisjoly is rightly proud of his new models.
‘With the ZX Turbo Diesel, the best diesel car has got even better,’ he boasts.
‘Its combination of performance, quality engineering, specification and economy will win customers away from competitive models and attract buyers who are considering diesel for the first time,’ he said.
Better performance is gained without any loss in overall fuel economy.
On official tests, the Turbo Diesel betters the normally aspirated ZX Diesel with 65.7mpg as compared with 64.2mpg at a constant 56mph.
The Aura is fitted with power steering as standard and with its 14-inch wheels shod with 175/65 tyres, road-holding is sure and positive.
Standard equipment includes an electric sunroof, electric front windows, remote control central locking and a 60/40 split folding rear seat.
The driver's seat has adjustable lumbar support while headrests are adjustable for height and angle.
At £12,260 the Aura TD is not particularly cheap but it would certainly be near the top of my shopping list if I was looking for a medium-sized diesel hatchback.
Lecturers one-day pay strike hits campuses
CAMPUSES throughout the region were hit yesterday as lecturers launched a national one-day strike over pay.
The industrial action by the University and College lecturers union NATFHE caused some disruption at a number of colleges of higher education and Liverpool's new university, John Moores.
More than 100 lecturers at Liverpool John Moores handed a petition to the university's vice chancellor Professor Peter Toyne.
They urged him to back their campaign for more funding and for the idea of performance related pay to be abandoned.
Elsewhere, NATFHE claimed ‘considerable support’ among more than 15,600 members demanding a 12.5pc increase.
Negotiations reached deadlock with employers offering lecturers 3.75pc and a further 0.75pc for incentive payments.
Jim Burke, the rector of the Liverpool Institute of Higher Education, said he was not aware of any disruption yesterday.
Chester College also reported virtually no problems as a result of the strike.
Shock as 400 jobs go at NWest chemicals plant
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
HUNDREDS of jobs are to be lost at a North West chemical firm.
A total of 400 workers at Brunner Mond soda ash company in Northwich, Cheshire, will lose their jobs over the next two years, reducing the workforce to 650.
The jobs will affect workers in all parts of Brunner Mond's Northwich operation.
The company blames the job losses on the need to streamline their operation, but unions have labelled the move a ‘ruthless attack on workers.’
The town of Northwich, where many of the workers come from, is facing a bleak Christmas and New Year.
‘As you can appreciate, people are devastated here,’ said John Torpey, branch secretary of the GMB.
‘There's no difference between doing this in a small place like Northwich and closing down a pit in a mining village.’
Brunner Mond took over the works from ICI last year.
‘They were taken over 18 months ago, and there were certain assurances given at that time,’ Mr Torpey said.
‘Here we are, 18 months on, and 400 people have gone down the road.’
But Bob Collicutt, general manager at Brunner Mond, says the cuts, which follow 200 job losses 12 months ago, are essential to secure the company's future.
‘Over the next two years, there will be a phased decrease in numbers involving 400 people across all parts of Brunner Mond,’ he said.
‘This is a continuation of the policy adopted by the business over a number of years.
It is well understood by everyone within the organisation.
‘When Brunner Mond acquired the soda ash business, it set a goal of becoming the world's best.
‘In order to help achieve that aim, a new business operating structure has been announced which will streamline the operation of each Brunner Mond business.
‘Detailed analysis over the past months has indicated that the Brunner Mond cost structures could be improved.
‘The new operating structure will involve an overall reduction in the workforce at every level of the organisation.’
Brunner Mond says it will help those affected find alternative employment, and has set up a team specially to help people relocate.
The bulk of the jobs will go next year, and the company is promising there will be no compulsory redundancies.
BACK TO SCHOOL FOR GRANDPARENTS
Pupils' warm welcome
GRANDPARENTS welcomed a rare opportunity in Wirral yesterday to see how school life had changed since their own childhood.
They were invited to spend the afternoon with their grandchildren in the classrooms and playground at Barnston County Primary School.
Two hundred of them accepted the invitation, ending their visit with tea and scones in the school hall.
They included five-year-old Scott Duffy's great-grandfather Tom Brown and great-aunt Bet Jones, from Andrews Walk, Barnston, who agreed that Scott's school was much more cheerful and welcoming than their own.
Mr Brown said: ‘I went to the old Puddydale school in Heswall and remember rows of desks and bare walls.
‘It was very drab in comparison with Scott's school, where the children's artwork makes colourful displays.’
Walter Rigney with his granddaughter Annika Robinson, second from right, and her friends
Classy Russians silence Anfield
Liverpool 0 Spartak Moscow 2 Aggregate: 2-6
Report by PHILIP McNULTY
SPARTAK MOSCOW formed an iron curtain of resistance before elegantly ending Liverpool's European ambitions at Anfield last night.
The silky attacking class and defensive composure of the newly-crowned Russian champions proved all too much for Liverpool as they slumped to a defeat which equalled their heaviest on aggregate in Europe.
Russia's striking star Dmitry Radchenko was the architect of Liverpool's undignified downfall on a black night for English soccer.
The flying forward scored the all-important first goal for Spartak and created a second for Andrei Piatnitski with three minutes remaining.
That came after Liverpool's frustration bubbled to the surface when Mike Marsh became the third Anfield star to receive a red card in four European Cup Winners Cup matches this season.
Manager Graeme Souness's touchline ban meant he could only watch in anguish from the directors' box.
And he was unable to offer crucial half time words of encouragement when it was already clear Liverpool were confronted by a Russian side in a different class.
Liverpool's performance was based more on perspiration than inspiration as Spartak provided confirmation that the Anfield club can no longer automatically regard themselves among the European soccer giants.
Souness offered no arguments against the result although the unnecessary jeering at the final whistle mystifyingly suggested the Anfield crowd thought otherwise.
Bruce Grobbelaar's sending off in the last ten minutes in the Moscow first leg ultimately proved decisive.
Liverpool, whose trademark passing game was never in evidence in the white-hot Anfield atmosphere, rarely looked capable of pulling back Spartak's two-goal advantage from the first leg.
Over the two games, Spartak were well worth their victory which puts them into the European Cup Winners Cup quarter-finals.
Liverpool's fans pumped up the volume before the kick-off in an attempt to unnerve Spartak.
And the Russians looked to have been the victims of psychological warfare when they were left to warm up without a practice ball.
In a predictably frenetic start which typified Liverpool's first half performance, Hutchison fired a good chance over the top and Rush's shot on the turn was clutched by Cherchesov.
The action was fast and furious, Onopko booked for exacting instant revenge for a Nicol foul by flooring the Scot.
And Burrows senselessly followed him after a late challenge on Khlestov.
Liverpool's desire to score the goals required was resulting in a glaring lack of composure, playing into Spartak's hands.
Spartak remained unruffled in the face of a Liverpool onslaught which failed to transform possession into clear chances.
Slick
The recalled Hooper was relatively untroubled in the first period, only being called into serious action to turn aside a Beschastnikh freekick.
Liverpool's best chance fell to Michael Thomas after 47 minutes, but his close range shot was deflected agonisingly wide.
That was the cue for Spartak to post the warning signals with a series of slick attacks.
Hooper saved twice from Khestov and Karpin before the deadly blow was delivered by Radchenko after 62 minutes.
Beschastnikh broke down the Liverpool right and found Radchenko unattended 10 yards out to sweep a comprehensive finish past the unprotected Hooper and stun Anfield into silence.
That was effectively the end of Liverpool's challenge, and Spartak confirmed their greater class with a second three minutes from time.
Radchenko was the creator, moving into the penalty area before setting up Piatnitski for a simple finish.
That only added to Liverpool's misery, frustration getting the better of Marsh a minute earlier, his clattering challenge on Radchenko deserving of a red card.
It summed up a night when the gulf between Liverpool and Europe's soccer elite was hammered home in emphatic fashion.
LIVERPOOL: Hooper, Jones (Rosenthal 55 minutes), Burrows, Nicol, Wright, Hutchison, McManaman, Marsh, Rush, Redknapp, Thomas.
Substitutes: Tanner, Kozma, Harkness, James.
SPARTAK MOSCOW: Cherchesov, Khlestov, Ivanov, Pisarev (Rusjaev 63 minutes), Beschatnikh, Chernishov, Onopko, Karpin, Piatnitski, Lediakhov (Bakschev 85 minutes), Radchenko.
Substitutes: Mamedov, Stautche.
Referee: Manuel Diaz Vega (Spain)
Attendance: 37,993.
Pet dog welcomes Caspar into family
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
WHEN Chester Zoo's latest arrival needed some special care, no one was happier than his keeper's pet dog.
Ray Packwood's pet bull mastiff Bess is used to strange animals coming home with her master so Caspar the Kinkajou was made to feel very welcome.
Caspar, a nocturnal mammal from South America, had to be hand reared by Mr Packwood because his mother was unable to produce milk.
This meant Mr Packwood had to bottle feed him every three hours when he was first born.
Mr Packwood explained that Bess was now accustomed to him looking after young animals.
‘Whenever I bring something home, she sits by the box until I take it out.
‘When I'm bottle feeding them, she sits with her head on my knee.
‘She got very protective about a young deer I had at home recently.
She wouldn't let anyone go near it.’
Fortunately for Mr Packwood's furniture, Caspar was a good deal less boisterous than the two young Persian leopards he recently cared for who wrecked two of his settees for his trouble.
Cappuccino's eastern promise
By Alistair Coull
PEUGEOT has launched a new parts initiative unique among car manufacturers.
It guarantees to deliver parts overnight or the customer gets the parts free.
The Peugeot Parts Promise guarantees that the parts the dealer orders to complete a job will be delivered from the company's central warehouse to any dealer in mainland Britain by 8am the next morning.
‘If something goes wrong with a customer's car they want it repaired as quickly as possible,’ said Peugeot Parts and Service Director Charles Greenland.
The parts promise applies to all parts which keep the vehicle off the road, and on all Peugeot models up to five years old.
A SPORTS car which doesn't go on sale in Britain until next year has won a top award at the British International Motor Show.
The Suzuki Cappuccino has been named the outright winner of the coveted Auto Design ‘92 Awards.
Thirty judges, all design engineers and managers working in the motor industry, made the award after a detailed study of the overall design, quality of fit and finish, interior design, ergonomics, passenger safety and comfort.
They also voted the Cappuccino the best sub-£20,000 sports car in the show.
In its home market, the Cappuccino has been acclaimed as the ultimate small sports car and is the acknowledged leader in the Japanese microcar sector.
With its 657cc fuel-injected, dohc, 12-valve, 3-cylinder turbocharged and intercooled engine developing 63bhp at 6500rpm, and with a kerb weight of just 1543lb, the Cappuccino has a better power-to-weight ratio than many larger sports cars, making for exhilarating acceleration and nimble handling.
Although small by comparison to some of the latest generation sports cars, the Suzuki is almost the same size as the famed MG Midget, launched more than 30 years ago and which, for two decades personified motoring fun.
Another manufacturer bidding for top spot in the microcar sales league is Mazda who have just launched a radically new gull-wing doored sports coupe onto the domestic Japanese market.
With parking space at a premium in Japanese cities, and the problem of pollution on the increase, the microcar is a popular and convenient form of transport for Japanese city workers.
The Mazda AZ-1 is a rear-wheel drive, mid-engined two-seater coupe with gullwing doors.
It is the first car of its type to have plastic outer panels for weight-saving.
The AZ-1 is powered by a fuel-injected 657cc three-cylinder, 12-valve, dohc turbocharged and intercooled engine similar to Suzuki's Cappuccino.
A five-speed gearbox is standard and anti-lock brakes are available as an option.
The transverse mounted engine produces 64PS at 6500rpm.
Its sports coupe looks incorporate a large glass canopy and gull-wing doors.
Internally, the AZ-1 is compact, the two bucket seats offering a low driving position but with all instruments within easy reach.
Mazda had tyres specially made for the AZ-1 to reduce unsprung weight.
These are mounted on standard 5Jx13 steel wheels.
Light alloy wheels are an option.
At the moment there are no plans to sell the AZ-1 in the UK.
THE National Tyre Distributors Association are warning motorists not to be tempted to buy cheap imported second-hand tyres.
These should be treated with caution as there is no guarantee of performance, said NTDA director Richard Edy.
New Audi
A SECOND diesel version of the Audi 80 saloon has been launched onto the UK market.
The Audi 80 TD (pictured above) costs £14,694, exactly the same as the identically equipped petrol engined Audi 80, creating a diesel or petrol choice at the entry level price.
Being £1,000 cheaper than the more powerful direct injection diesel Audi 80 TDI, the 80 TD brings the Audi 80 saloon within reach of many diesel buyers for the first time.
Powered by a 1.9-litre 75bhp indirect injection engine, the 80 TD will return over 55mpg at a steady 56mph, 36mpg in town and 42mpg on a longer run.
Coming next year the Suzuki Cappuccino
Only for Japanese eyes yet the Mazda AZ-1
‘Crippling’ bus bill
A COMPANY is threatening to axe half its workforce unless it is paid more than £20,000 claimed to be owed them by Liverpool City Council.
Paul Hunter, who runs a coach company which ferries schoolchildren to and from sports grounds, claims he has not received any money from the council for the service in recent months.
If he does not receive payment soon, Mr Hunter says he will have to make 20 staff redundant from the family-run firm, Village Group Tours.
Mr Hunter said: ‘We are at the stage where we are owed between £20,000 and £30,000.’
A council spokesman said: ‘The company has raised a number of issues which we are looking at and we are hoping to resolve the situation as soon as possible.’
LOOK AT LIFE ON THE BEAT
Arresting afternoon
SCHOOLCHILDREN were given an interesting insight into the exciting world of police work yesterday by their new community policeman John O'Neill.
PC O'Neill took the children on a tour of Copy Lane Police Station as he began his new role as community policeman for Netherton, Sefton.
The 30-year-old officer hopes to foster greater links between the public and the police, and will also be visiting schools and youth clubs to speak to the youngsters in the community.
‘I will be holding surgeries at Netherton Park Community Centre so people can air their views and tell me if there is a problem,’ he said.
‘I am greatly looking forward to the challenge.’
Laughing policeman John O'Neill meets the youngsters
Star of Antiques Roadshow
Mother's art on display
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
AN appearance by a woman on the BBC TV Antiques Roadshow has had an unexpected outcome an exhibition of a rarely-practised art form at the Williamson Art Gallery in Birkenhead.
When Monica Cooper, a retired Wirral midwife, heard that the show was to visit Queensferry she sent programme makers a photograph of an old chest in the hope of having it dated by experts.
It resulted in a visit to her home from BBC man Andrew West, but he was more intrigued by something else.
His eye was caught by several elegant little tables which had been decorated by Mrs Cooper's mother, the late Elizabeth Grace Atkinson, early this century.
And millions of viewers saw her work 24 years after her death at the age of 81.
Mrs Atkinson, who lived in Liverpool all her life, was a well-known pianist and singer, but she also did marquetery painting as a hobby prior to her marriage.
Marquetery involves covering the surface of furniture with veneers of different coloured woods, using the natural colour or grain to create different effects or designs.
The art, popular in Regency times, enjoyed a revival at the turn of the century, when Mrs Atkinson took it up in her leisure time.
Following the Antiques Road Show appearance, Mrs Cooper's art work was studied by a WEA antiques class who carried out a research project on marquetery.
Williamson Art Gallery curator Colin Simpson heard about the project and offered gallery space for an exhibition, which continues until November 29.
It features 26 pieces, including tables, vases, boxes, a combined pipe rack and tobacco box, and clock cases.
WEA lecturer Sue Lunt (right) and Monica Coooper examine the display Picture: BOB BIRD
Raider's cruel trick on lone pensioner
A PENSIONER hit out last night at a thief who burgled her house and then stole her handbag while pretending to be a Good Samaritan.
The cunning thief reached through a cat-flap to unlock the back door before putting the snib on the front door lock and ransacking the house.
When the 69-year-old woman tried to open the door he slipped round the front and pretended to help her before running off with her bag.
Last night the woman, who did not wish to be named, said: ‘I'm really furious, I'd just love to slap him on his fat chops.
‘It is a really mean trick to play on someone.
‘I couldn't understand why the front door would not open and this young fellow appeared and asked if I wanted any help.
‘I thought to myself ‘Well, at least the age of chivalry isn't dead’.
‘But after trying the door I turned round and he'd disappeared with my bag.’
The woman lost about £20 in cash and three National Savings books in the double theft.
She also lost several pieces of jewellery which were of sentimental value.
Police have described the thief as between 20 and 25 years old, white, 5ft 8in tall, stocky, with short, dark hair.
Anyone with information should contact the CID at Birkenhead.
Op girl stable
LIVER transplant girl Kelly Prosser was last night described as ‘stable’ in a London hospital.
Kelly, five, underwent surgery at Kings College Hospital following a dash from her home in Maghull when a donor became available.
Back us all the way -Morrissey
Report by PETER JARDINE
CROWD-PLEASER John Morrissey last night urged Tranmere fans: Stick with us for 90 minutes!
Rovers went third in the first division on Tuesday night with a resounding 3-0 win over Southend at Prenton Park.
But a section of the 5,870 crowd were unhappy with Tranmere's second-half performance and booed.
Excellent
In many ways it was an astonishing reception for a club occupying its highest ever League position and with an unbeaten record in 11 home games.
Morrissey, who scored the opening goal, said: ‘They have got to support us and get behind us.
‘I know supporters get frustrated at times so do we.
I think maybe we were due a bad 45 minutes because our recent performances have been excellent.
‘And the pitch was very sapping on Tuesday and we seemed to tire.’
Rovers were 2-0 in the opening 15 minutes through Morrissey and John Aldridge and perhaps made a rod for their own backs by scoring so early and then failing to add to that lead until the 77th minute through Neil McNab.
‘It must have been obvious that we weren't going to let it slip it seemed that way to me,’ said Morrissey.
‘But in the first-half our football was superb again.
I doubt if anyone in the four divisions is entertaining as much as we are at the moment.
Delighted
‘We need the supporters and all I ask is for them to stay with us for the 90 minutes.’
Morrissey's goal was his third of the season leaving him halfway to last season's tally of six.
‘I was delighted to score because it was my first one at home this season.
Hopefully I can improve on six and help the team as well.’
QUOTE of the Week goes to Steve Mungall.
Asked in Tuesday's programme what he does to relax after a match, Mungall replied: ‘These days I go to the Sponsors Lounge to collect the Man of the Match champagne!’
Wirral veterans on top
WIRRAL A.C.'s dominance of veterans cross country continued at Padgate when the Bebington club placed four in the top seven to clinch the team award at the Northern Veteran's monthly event.
With the McDevitt brothers filling the first two places it was left to Des Wilkinson and Les Coatup in fourth and seventh positions to give Wirral an easy win ahead of Sefton.
Sefton, however, had their reward, winning the over 45 team race despite only having 10th placed John Dobie amongst the top 30 finishers.
Wirral's Barry McGuigan took third place in the over 60 category and there were good individual performances from Warrington's Les Williams, Mike Frayne (Helsby) and Eddie Murphy (St Helens-Sutton).
At the other end of the age spectrum Wirral scored a tremendous double victory over Sale Harriers in both the boys and girls sections of the North West Sports Hall League.
Ernie Gallagher and Mike Holmes, who respectively coached Olympians Curtis Robb and Steve Smith, have been accorded the title of Master Coach.
The awards were presented at the annual coaches dinner sponsored by the Post Office.
Details have been announced of the GPT Harriers Christmas Pudding 10K which has been scheduled for Sunday December 6.
Information from E. Edwards, 23 Cresttor Road, Woolton.
Arrests in Flake girl drugs case
POLICE have arrested two men in connection with a drugs incident involving Cadbury's Flake model Rachel Brown.
Rachel, 25, is recovering in Liverpool's Broadgreen Hospital after allegedly being given the designer drug ecstacy at a party.
Police yesterday arrested two men, aged 29 and 24, both from the Wavertree area of Liverpool, where last week's party was held.
‘They were arrested in connection with the supply of a controlled drug,’ a police spokesman said.
Both were interviewed and released on police bail pending inquiries.
Former Vogue model Rachel, who lives in Liverpool, features in a television advert in which she lies in a bath eating a Flake bar.
By David Rose Political Editor
JOHN Major survived the challenge to topple him from Downing Street last night but one leading minister revealed the Government had believed it was heading for defeat.
Mr Major won his mandate to continue his premiership and press on with the Maastricht Bill by just three votes after a photo-finish climax to a day of drama.
A jubilant Mr Major greeted the result by declaring: ‘It was just an ordinary night's work.’
But a leading member of his Cabinet revealed the panic in the Tory leadership by admitting: ‘We thought we would lose throughout the day.’
Another top minister said the victory was a ‘miracle.’
Mr Major was saved from a crushing defeat that could have forced him to quit after several leading Tory Eurosceptics yielded to unprecedented arm-twisting from Government whips and constituency chairmen to back down.
The turncoat rebels included former Home Secretary Kenneth Baker, and right-wingers Sir George Gardiner and Sir Rhodes Boyson.
One Tory rebel, Michael Carttiss, who caved in after a plea from the Prime Minister himself, candidly admitted: ‘It would have been the end of John Major.
I could not bring him down.’
Even then, 26 Tory Eurosceptics still defied Mr Major to vote against the Government while at least another six abstained.
They included Cheshire husband and wife MPs Ann and Nicholas Winterton.
But with the backing of Paddy Ashdown and his Liberal Democrats, including Liverpool Mossley Hill MP David Alton, the Government won the vote to bring the Maastricht Bill back to the Commons by 319 votes to 316.
And they defeated a Labour amendment to delay the Bill until after the Edinburgh summit by 319 votes to 313 a majority of just six for the Government.
Labour, who had turned the vote into an issue of confidence in Mr Major, vented their anger on Paddy Ashdown's Liberal Democrats.
In the chamber, Left-wingers surrounded the Liberal Democrat MPs to point accusing fingers at them.
And seven members of the shadow cabinet put out statements warning Mr Ashdown that voters would neither forget nor forgive.
Had Mr Major lost, the Government would have tabled a motion of confidence and invited the Commons to approve it.
But, while this would have brought the Tory rebels back on board, it would have left a big question mark over whether Mr Major could continue.
Mr Major angrily accused Labour leader John Smith of reneging on his pro-European principles and putting party political interests before the needs of the country.
‘These are not politics of principle.
They are politics of political expediency.
You are hiding behind Denmark and the split in your own party.’
Mr Smith insisted the vote was about Mr Major, not Europe: ‘How can a motion, which attracted the threat of a general election, not be about the credibility, competence, and authority of the Government?’
Slow road to health
TORY councillor Brian Cummings, who has been laid low by a quadruple heart bypass operation, is under doctor's orders not to rush back into the political arena.
But the Wirral Tory group education spokesman is finding the restraint hard to abide.
He said last night: ‘I have had complaints from my family and the medical people that I am getting too impatient.
I was hoping to get back to council work before Christmas, but I recognise that if I rush, it I will only set me back.
Coun Cummings is receiving rehabilitation therapy at Clatterbridge Hospital and on Monday he will travel for a check up to the Royal Brompton Hospital in London, where the bypass surgery was carried out.
He suffered a heart attack at a meeting of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities’ education committee earlier this year.
Souness gracious in defeat
GRAEME SOUNESS had no complaints after watching Liverpool easily dumped out of the European Cup Winners Cup by Russian champions Spartak Moscow.
It was only Liverpool's fifth home defeat in European competition in 28 years, and their biggest at Anfield.
Souness, confined to the directors' box because of a five-game ban from the touchline and dressing room area, said: ‘I thought we played a very good team.
Looking back over the two games we made it extremely difficult for ourselves in Moscow.
‘The fact that we had to chase the game meant it was tailor-made for Spartak.
I thought they played very well.
They made us chase shadows for long periods.’
Souness could not resist a dig at referee Manuel Diaz Vega, who dismissed Mike Marsh, saying: ‘I thought his performance was very disappointing.’
He added: ‘Had we got an early goal and put them under a bit of pressure they may have reacted differently.
Maybe then they wouldn't have been so silky on the ball and looked such a good team.
‘We were too hurried when we had the ball and Spartak passed us out of it.’
Police cut-out used to slow speeding ‘dummies’
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
POLICE have added a decoy patrol vehicle to their fleet in a bid to curb speeding motorists.
Lancashire Constabulary positioned a replica police Range Rover at the side of the M55 yesterday as part of an experiment aimed at cutting road deaths resulting from excessive speeding.
Motorists can expect to see the decoy on any motorway in the region as it is to be moved frequently.
Tests carried out by the Traffic Research Laboratory suggest that the presence of a dummy vehicle cuts average speeds by up to 10 miles per hour, compared with speeds on roads with no visible police presence.
Scientists at the laboratory will carry out a study to gain a clearer picture of the dummy's effectiveness.
Chief Superintendent Jeff Meadows, head of Lancashire Constabulary's Traffic and Uniform Operations Department, said: ‘Tests in April showed that police cars parked at the side of motorways reduce speeds to 70-71mph, while the decoy reduces speeds to around 71-72mph.
‘A combination of police presence and decoy produces a significant impact on speeds.
It seems quite impressive.
‘There are still questions that need to be answered, and we hope this trial will help to answer them.
‘If people realise the vehicle is replica, will they speed up?
Will they simply ignore it?
‘We hope the presence of the dummy will remind people of the need to cut their speed.’
Chief Superintendent Meadows added:’ Excessive speed is responsible for around a third of all vehicle occupancy deaths.
We are prepared to consider the decoy as a permanent option if it helps to slow people down and save lives.’
Realistic the cutout seen at a distance
A traffic policeman props up the replica at the side of the M55
Oleg's boast
SPARTAK coach Oleg Romantsev said: ‘I think we can win this trophy now.
This team have only been together for less than a year and it is getting better all the time.
What we have achieved has not sunk in yet.’
Park riddle
AN INQUEST has opened into the death of a man found hanging in a playground.
Richard Brantley, 23, of Pipers Lane, Hoole, was found hanging from swings in the Panton Road playground, Hoole, on Tuesday.
Barcelona lose two-goal lead
HOLDERS Barcelona crashed out of the European Cup after squandering a two-goal lead in front of their stunned fans in the Nou Camp stadium.
The Spanish champions were beaten 3-2 by CSKA Moscow to go out 4-3 on aggregate.
Barcelona looked home and dry when going 2-0 up after 31 minutes but the Russians refused to surrender and scored three goals in 16 minutes either side of half-time.
Pensioner, 84, relives terror of gun raid
By Graeme Wilson Daily Post Staff
AN 84-YEAR-OLD man who braved German bombs as a fireman during World War II, told last night how he was threatened by two gun-wielding raiders.
Abe Abramson, who fought blazes during the Blitz of Liverpool, had just arrived at his son-in-law's shop to help his daughter when the attack happened.
He said last night: ‘I was scared for my daughter if they wanted to shoot anyone I wanted them to shoot me as I've lived my life.
She still has hers in front of her.’
Both the raiders wore balaclava masks and one was armed with a sawn-off shotgun when they ran into the Brodie Avenue Wine Stores in Allerton, Liverpool, on Tuesday evening.
Mr Abramson, of Shirley Road, Allerton, said last night: ‘I had just gone to the off-licence to help my daughter Trudie while her husband went for his tea.
‘A few minutes later two guys came running in with masks on they were both shouting and swearing and told me to lie on the ground.
‘The one by the door was holding a gun which was a big wooden thing.
‘They shouted at Trudy to open the till but she couldn't open it because it had jammed.
‘My daughter's dog an Alsatian called Prince went over to the men but we called it back when they said they'd kill it.
‘Once they realised they couldn't get any money they ran out of the shop and I think they got away in a car.’
Neither Mr Abramson nor his 59-year-old daughter, Trudie Haberman, were injured during the attack.
But Mr Abramson, who used to work in the clothing business, said he suffered chest pains because of the shock of the attempted robbery.
He added: ‘I've been in the shop when people have lifted something and run out, but I've never experienced anything like this before.
‘After the police had come and talked to us I just went home and had a cup of tea and a glass of brandy with water and went to bed.’
Detectives hunting the raiders have appealed for anyone who may have witnessed the incident in Brodie Avenue just after 6pm on Tuesday.
It is believed a third man drove the getaway car, a red Ford Escort XR3, which made off towards Horrocks Avenue.
Both masked raiders were described as between 5ft 5in and 5ft 6in tall.
Anyone with information should call 051-777 4482.
Bishop calls for peace in women priests row
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
A BISHOP has appealed to parishioners not to let the controversy over women priests tear the Church apart.
The Diocese of Chester could have as many as 27 women priests within two years if ordination of women gets the go-ahead.
The General Synod of the Church of England votes on the matter next week, but already the Bishop of Chester has taken action to head off a split in his church.
In a letter to parishioners in the Diocesan newsletter, Michael Baughen said: ‘When the result of the vote is declared many will give thanks and many will be distressed.
It is inevitable whichever way the vote goes.
‘There must not be attitudes of victory or defeat, but rather a deep sensitivity.’
He asked people to pray for him and his fellow bishops as they make their decision and added: ‘Whatever the Synod's decision, it is not a comfortable moment to be in leadership.’
In the Chester Diocese, opinion is split on women priests, though a vote held by clergymen came out 40 to 33 in favour of the ordination of women.
Lay members voted by 47 to 29 for women priests, and though the Bishop of Chester is not declaring openly which way he will vote, he has declared which way he favours.
He said: ‘My vote in Synod will be cast after careful consideration, but it is public knowledge that I'm inclined to support the ordination of women to the priesthood.’
There are 27 women deacons in the Chester Diocese at the moment and diocesan spokesman, Rev Tim Barker, said he anticipated that many of them would want to be ordained.
Mrs Yvonne Partridge, of Women Against the Ordination of Women, said she hoped that the Chester Diocese would remain united whatever next Wednesday's decision.
‘I sincerely hope people aren't going to leave from either camp,’ she said.
The ordination of women should be opposed, she said, because of the 2,000 year history of the Church.
‘I have always maintained that the priesthood is male, Jesus chose 12 Apostles and they were all men.’
‘What's been accepted for 2,000 years should not be changed now.’
Bishop Michael Baughen
South Africans in for merchant bank
By Kevan Reilly Press Association
MERCHANT bank Henry Ansbacher agreed yesterday to a take-over by the South African bank First National.
The take-over the first time a South African bank has bought a British bank values Ansbacher at £57.8m.
The Bank of England and the Department of Trade and Industry have already approved the deal which ends more than two years of uncertainty about the ownership of Ansbacher.
Major shareholders Pargesa the Swiss investment group owned by Belgians and Canadians Groupe Bruxelles Lambert and Banque Internationale a Luxembourg have already accepted the bid.
They own 73.1pc of the bank and other Anbacher shareholders representing 16.2pc have taken the cash offer of 30.5p a share.
Remaining shareholders are being offered 32p a share.
Pargesa, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert and Banque Internationale decided to sell their Ansbacher stakes in June 1990, although they later withdrew them because of the uncertainty caused by the Gulf War.
This year they stepped up attempts to sell and talks were held with UK merchant bank Singer & Friedlander before negotiations started with First National.
First National, which was an associate company of Barclays Bank until the UK bank withdrew from South Africa in 1986, has wants to establish a presence in the UK.
Barry Swart of First National is to become chairman of Ansbacher, with present chairman Richard Fenhalls remaining as chief executive.
Ansbacher announced results for the nine months to September 30 showing pre-tax profits of £3.13m compared to a loss in 1991 of £8.23m.
Woman who said goodbye to world's most powerful man
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
TAMARA Kennerley awoke yesterday morning to discover her ex-boyfriend had become the world's most powerful man.
Mrs Kennerley, 45, met Bill Clinton during his student days at Oxford University between 1968 and 1969.
During a summer romance together, the couple spent time at Oxford punting down the river, taking drives in the country and visiting local pubs.
Now, more than 20 years on, Mrs Kennerley lives with her husband, Stan, 52, in Holmes Chapel, Cheshire, with their ten-year-old daughter Georgia.
She runs a natural therapy business in nearby Brereton Heath.
Mrs Kennerley first met Clinton through sister Cheri and her boyfriend, John, who shared digs with the Rhodes scholar.
She said: ‘He stopped to speak to John then he looked at me, came down the stairs and said ‘aren't you going to introduce us?’'
After their first encounter, the couple began seeing one another regularly, but the romance fizzled out after Mr Clinton returned to America, believing he had been called up to fight in the Vietnam war.
When he returned, Mr Clinton tried to renew his relationship with Mrs Kennerley, but she was already seeing somebody else.
During his time in America, Mr Clinton sent her a letter talking about his views on Vietnam.
Mrs Kennerley sent a copy of the letter to his campaign team as proof of his patriotism at the time.
Tamara Kennerley at home shared romance with Clinton
Emergency call accent worries
CONCERN has been expressed that emergency calls are being answered by people who may not understand local accents.
The issue was raised by members of Cheshire's police committee who fear that since BT has re-routed reception of emergency calls, sometimes to centres as far away as Newcastle, the receptionists may not understand local accents and place names.
Moreton councillor Ken Hemsley said: ‘I am just concerned that people answering 999 calls may not understand a local dialect and they may be talking about a place which the person they are speaking to will never have heard of.
‘Taking this into account it is feasible that something could go wrong.’
Chester Central and Westminster councillor Derek Bateman said that on Sundays calls were sometimes answered in Gateshead.
BT says there have been no delays in responding to calls.
Full speed ahead for flourishing car plant
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
THE REGION'S car industry received a welcome boost yesterday with the launch of Vauxhall's new £190m V6 engine plant.
Vauxhall has shrugged off the difficulties dogging other car manufacturers to bring the massive investment to its plant at Ellesmere Port.
When running at full capacity it will employ 450 people, improving job prospects in Cheshire, North Wales and Merseyside.
The plant will be able to produce 135,000 engines a year, which will be available in luxury models of the Cavalier.
The new engine plant was launched at an elaborate ceremony yesterday, with music provided by the brass section of the Royal Liverpool Philarmonic Orchestra.
Vauxhall's Director at Ellesmere Port, Nick Reilly, told assembled workers, journalists and worldwide representatives of parent company, General Motors: ‘This engine plant at Ellesmere Port is right at the front of worldwide competition and with the team we have here it will stay there.’
The engine plant is situated in an existing building, which has been extensively refitted.
The 2.5 litre V6 engine has been developed in conjunction with Vauxhall's parent company General Motors.
It has been christened the Ecotec V6 (emission, consumption, optimisation and technology) because of its compactness, economy and cleanness.
Mr Reilly said: ‘The engine was designed and engineered at our technical development centre in Russelsheim, Germany, and through close co-operation between engineers, designers and manufacturing experts, the total development period has been only four years.’
Most of the engines produced at Ellesmere Port will be sold in Europe and components will be distributed for sale throughout the world.
The workforce at the engine plant currently stands at 150, most of whom have been trained from the main car production plant.
The extra 300 staff will be phased in over the next few years.
Vauxhall beat off worldwide competition for the engine plant contract.
The launch of the engine plant marked a double celebration for staff at Ellesmere Port.
This month, they also celebrate the 30th year of production at Ellesmere Port.
Nick Reilly
Louis Hughes, left, president of General Motors Europe, inspects the new engine production line at the plant
Fanfare for£190m engines venture
THE region's car industry received a life-saving shot in the arm yesterday with the launch of Vauxhall's new £190m V6 engine plant.
Vauxhall has shrugged off the difficulties faced by other car manufacturers to bring the massive investment to its plant at Ellesmere Port.
When running at full capacity, it will employ 450 people, giving a timely boost to job prospects in Cheshire, North Wales and Merseyside.
The plant, based at Vauxhall's existing manufacturing works in the town, will be able to produce 135,000 engines a year, which will be available in luxury versions of the Cavalier.
The new engine plant was launched at an elaborate ceremony yesterday, with musical accompaniment from the brass section of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra.
Vauxhall's director at Ellesmere Port, Nick Reilly, told assembled workers, journalists and worldwide representatives of parent company General Motors: ‘This engine plant at Ellesmere Port is right at the front of worldwide competition, and with the team we have here it will stay there.’
Most of the engines will be sold in Europe.
TOP OF THE POPS UNDER THREAT?
By Shenai Raif, Press Association
The future of Britain's longest running chart show, Top Of The Pops, was in doubt tonight after a report that it was to be axed.
The BBC would say only that the speculation was ‘premature’.
‘It is the highest rated chart-based show on any channel with a loyal audience holding steady at seven million.’
The programme first went on the air 28 years ago when the Beatles' I Want To Hold Your Hand was number one.
In the 1960s 15 million people watched its Christmas specials.
Over the years, its disc jockeys have included Jimmy Savile, Tony Blackburn and Kenny Everett.
But they have been replaced in recent years by unknowns in a series of changes designed to breathe new life into the programme.
BBC 1 controller Jonathan Powell has admitted that the show was a ‘pale version’ of its former self.
The Sun newspaper reports today that the programme will be formally axed later this year and will be replaced in February by another music show.
CLINTON ASSURES FRIENDS AND FOES
Backing for Bush in power transition
BILL Clinton last night reassured America's allies and enemies that foreign policy would remain firmly in President Bush's hands during the transition of White House power.
The President-elect said in a statement outside the Arkansas governor's mansion in Little Rock: ‘The greatest mistake any adversary could make would be to doubt America's resolve during this period of transition.’
Clinton made it his first post-victory order of business to send messages of reassurance both to the world at large and to the financial and business communities.
‘During the transition that is now beginning I urge America's friends and foes alike to recognise, as I do, that America has only one president at a time, and that American foreign policy remains solely in his hands,’ he said.
‘And even as America's administrations change, America's fundamental interests do not and the greatest gesture of goodwill any nation can make towards me is to continue their full cooperation during this period with our one President, George Bush.’
Clinton will take office on January 20.
Into action Page 12 
A hug from a friend's children for victor Bill Clinton
Best of British
Hateley secures Rangers' riches
Leeds United 1Rangers 2 (Agg -2-4)
Report by ROB KING
SCOTTISH champions Rangers are the undisputed rulers of British soccer but it was an Englishman who engineered the European Cup overthrow of Leeds United.
Mark Hateley scored the first and made the second for the prolific Ally McCoist to deliver the riches of the Champions' League into the already bulging coffers of the Glasgow club.
Old-fashioned
Hateley, who celebrates his 31st birthday on Saturday, virtually settled this second leg after less than three minutes.
Goalkeeper Andy Goram hoisted a long punt down field, McCoist headed across the edge of the box and the much-travelled striker spun onto his left foot to hammer the ball into the far corner.
It was the ninth goal of the season for a player who embodies all the traditional strengths of the old-fashioned British centre-forward but has been used only once against Czechoslovakia in Graham Taylor's two- year reign.
It was also possibly another embarrassment for Leeds goalkeeper John Lukic.
He punched a goal into his own net in Glasgow and this time was caught off his line and flailing backwards as the ball sailed over him.
He has now conceded 10 goals in the last five games.
With Leeds losing 2-1 at Ibrox, they needed at least two and preferably three goals to rescue their ambitions.
Instead they found Goram in magnificent form.
And their hopes died on the hour when Hateley's dummy gave Ian Durrant the space to release him on the left.
His cross swung away from Lukic and his undermanned defence who, just as at Ibrox, left McCoist unmarked to score his 29th goal of the season at the far post with a leaping header.
Eric Cantona's 85th minute goal was far too little and unfortunately far too late to save Howard Wilkinson's men suffering the agony of going out for the second time in the space of five weeks.
This time, unlike against Stuttgart, there can be no reprieve.
Instead, it is Rangers who go into tomorrow's draw guaranteed six more games from the recent innovation of the mini-leagues.
Stndrd Liege 1 Hearts 0 (aggregate 2-0)
A 62nd minute strike by Belgian international Marc Wilmots sent Hearts crashing out of the UEFA Cup.
Joe Jordan's men dominated the first half hour with Tosh McKinlay having a close range effort blocked by keeper Gilbert Bodart and then John Millar shooting just wide.
But Wilmots put the tie beyond reach when he squeezed the ball through Henry Smith's legs and late on Andre Cruz hit a post.
Playgroup in search for new home
NEW premises are needed for the Beeches playgroup, Malpas.
The group has a regular daily attendance of 22 youngsters, and currently meets at St Joseph's Retreat.
But the playroom is to be absorbed into the retreat and conference centre next year.
Offers of help should be made to Helen Sadler on 0829 782455.
More help for disabled
WORK started this week on a five-month project to provide a better access for disabled visitors to Manweb's Chester headquarters.
In addition to a ramp for wheelchairs, more disabled parking spaces are being provided.
Talk of war
CHESTER'S Victoria County History Appeal is being helped by a series of lunchtime lectures.
One held today, from 1-2pm, is about Chester in the Civil War.
Focus meet
THE first meeting of Focus, the new name for the re-formed Chester Lesbian, Gay and bisexual Group, takes place this evening, beginning at 7.30pm at the Quaker Meeting House, Frodsham Street, Chester.
A video on gender and sexuality will be followed by a discussion.
Choir appeal
TENORS are needed for Northwich and District Festival Choir, which rehearses this evening in Church Walk Primary School at 7.30pm.
French play
MOLIERE'S The Miser has been chosen for the next production by Ashton Hayes Theatre Club.
The comedy will be on stage at the village hall from November 18-21.
Paper chase
PARISH records, pre-1970, are needed for the Little Budworth history project.
Anyone with documents which would be of interest is asked to contact parish clerk R. Preece on 0606 559404.
Sale day
A ONE-DAY sale at Little Stanney Village Hall today has everything from Christmas decorations to household goods on offer.
Light refreshments are also available.
Book out
FOLK lore is included in a new book which traces the history of Northwich, written by Brian Curzon.
The book also has special chapters on ICI, Victorian working conditions, religious history, and education.
Road victim's father sets up family support network
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
A FATHER whose son was killed in a road accident has helped set up a support network in the North West for the families of other victims.
Roadpeace, an organisation offering legal advice and support to families and friends of road crash victims, is holding a publicity day throughout the North West tomorrow.
Andrew Heaton, of Wigan, whose son, Paul, died in a road accident at the age of 15, said: ‘The organisation was set up in London last February and its services are now open to everyone.
‘We work with other groups to help reduce the number of road accidents, as well as offering advice to families who may be unfamiliar with legal procedures.
‘We can put families in touch with local people who are able to help.
‘For many people, the tragedy of a death is followed by the confusion of dealing with lawyers, coroners and the Crown Prosecution Service.
All our volunteers have been through it themselves.
‘Families are often unaware that they can request a jury for an inquest, for example.’
The organisation also campaigns for tougher penalties for drivers who kill or injure other road users.
Mr Heaton said: ‘When my son died, I didn't know there was a support system for families affected by road accidents.
Roadpeace contacted us and helped us greatly.’
Mr Heaton can be contacted on 0942 727 436.
The national helpline number is 081 964 1021, address PO Box 2579, London NW10 3PW.
Release protection for birds
Laws wise up on owls
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
NEW laws to help safeguard the future of one of Britain's endangered species were announced yesterday.
Environment Minister Lord Strathclyde announced Government plans to introduce a licensing scheme regulating the release of captive-born barn owls into the wild.
Breeders will face fines if they attempt to boost the number of barn owls living in the wild by releasing birds without a license.
The announcement was welcomed by Malcolm Ingham, wildlife officer for Wirral Borough Council and based at Wirral Country Park, who breeds barn owls and returns them to their natural habitat.
Speaking at the park's Wildlife Rehabilitation Unit in Thurstaston, Mr Ingham said: ‘Barn owls end up dead if the release is not done properly.
Breeders often release the owls too old, without giving them time to establish themselves in the release area.
‘Owls are frequently killed by cars, or they starve, because the release hasn't been thought out properly.
‘If the owls are released as chicks, it can work.
But it has to be a gradual process.’
A pair of owls are a living testimony to the success of a careful nurturing regime.
They live wild, occasionally returning to the park, and have bred successfully for the past six years.
The painstaking steps towards releasing a captive barn owl into the wild involve taking the chick from the parent at the age of four to five weeks.
A nesting box must be positioned in an area that has no existing barn owl settlement, after checking that there are enough small mammals to feed an expanding population.
Small amounts of food must be left for the birds until they learn to fend for themselves.
After a century of population decline, only 4,000 of Britain's estimated 25,000 pairs of barn owls live in the wild.
Mr Ingham said: ‘There must be enough food for any offspring the owls produce, as well as sufficient nesting materials.
‘Barn owls breed very easily in captivity, but releasing them is a time-consuming process.’
RSPCA wildlife officer Colin Booty said: ‘The legislation should bring about responsible breeding and release of birds, with more thought given to their welfare after release.’
Breeders will need Department of the Environment licences before birds are left in the wild.
Some owls are unable to return to the wild, having been brought up by breeders.
Wildlife officer Malcolm Ingham with two-year-old barn owl Zuky, a permanent resident at the Wirral park.
Picture: JOHN DAVIDSON
Germans punish slack Wednesday
WEDNESDAY'S UEFA Cup hopes perished with two pieces of slack defending at Hillsborough.
Kaiserslautern, 3-1 up from the first leg of this second round tie, twice hit Trevor Francis's team on the break in the second half.
The Germans withstood an early flurry before creating chances of their own.
In the 12th minute, Oliver Schafer fired a low angled shot past Chris Woods only to see the ball hit a post.
But Wednesday took the lead against the run of play in the 27th minute.
John Harkes's long throw was flicked on by Nigel Pearson and Danny Wilson volleyed home.
Wednesday had another scare when Nigel Worthington had to head off the line.
But their hopes took a dive in the 62nd minute when Polish striker Marcel Witeczek went on a run to score a superb individual goal.
Sheffield hit back within two minutes when John Sheridan curled a free-kick over the wall and wide of stand-in goalkeeper Michael Serr.
Wednesday, needing only one goal to force extra-time, threw themselves forward.
But the inevitable happened in the 76th minute.
Substitute Michael Zeyer was given too much room on the edge of the penalty area and he fired a low shot past Woods to score.
Aussies outclassed
WORLD CHAMPIONS Australia crashed 21-6 to Swansea yesterday, leaving their coach Bob Dwyer admitting: ‘We were completely outplayed.’
Just a year ago Australia were defeating England at Twickenham to take the World Cup; and on Saturday they trounced Ireland by 42-17 in Dublin.
But missing captain Michael Lynagh and prop Tony Daly through injury, the Australians had no answer to a passionate Swansea display in the St Helens drizzle.
The result lifted the whole of Welsh rugby in anticipation of the Test against the Wallabies at Cardiff on November 21.
Swansea fielded six of the current resurgent Wales team and two of them centre Scott Gibbs and hooker Garin Jenkins grabbed their tries.
The rest of the points were kicked by fly-half Aled Williams, who sealed the famous victory by dropping a 77th minute goal to send the 11,000 crowd into a frenzy.
In the other tour match at Leicester, South Africa proved too strong for the Midlands, winning 32-9.
SWANSEA (8) 21.
Tries: Gibbs, Jenkins.
Cons: Williams.
Pens: Williams 2.
Drop Goals: Williams.
AUSTRALIA (6) 6.
Pens: Kelaher 2.
Att: 11,000.
MIDLANDS (9) 9.
Pens: Liley 2.
Drop Goals: Steele.
SOUTH AFRICA (10) 32.
Tries: Knoetze 2, Oosthuysen, Gerber.
Cons: Botha 3.
Pens: Botha 2.
United fight for pollution agencies
POLLUTION watchdogs from across Europe gathered at an historic conference in Chester yesterday.
Environment minister David Maclean praised the conference of EC enforcement agencies and said it could well have benefits for industry across the region.
More than 50 delegates from environmental protection agencies across Europe are at the three day conference to discuss harmonisation of enforcement throughout Europe.
Mr Maclean said: ‘You have big companies here who are trying to compete and the one thing these companies want is a level playing field.’
Lack of uniform enforcement of EC laws meant that companies would find it cheaper to move elsewhere, he said.
Giving the opening address to the conference, Mr Maclean said: ‘I believe that this network of environmental enforcement agencies is indeed an historic development in the field of environment protection.
‘It is important that laws drawn up at community level are seen to be applied in an effective and consistent manner throughout the community.’
Today delegates will visit industrial sites in the area, including Shotton Paper, in Deeside, Castle Cement, near Mold, and Hays Chemicals, in Sandbach.
SIR, John King and the Tranmere directors are wondering why the crowds are down.
Well let me inform them it has nothing to do with performances.
A lot of Tranmere supporters are sick of the treatment certain players are getting.
Look at what happened with Jim Harvey he did a lot for the club and Ian Muir was severely punished for an incident aimed at John King.
Over the years Muir has been through thick and thin with Tranmere, and has been worth his weight in gold.
I hope he stays at Tranmere, he is an excellent player.
King wants to think on about the time Steve Cooper threw his shirt at him.
You can't have one rule for a certain player, and different rules for others.
SIR, I wonder if Len Capeling will tip Everton to win the European Cup next season?
Attack dog destroyed
A ROTTWEILER dog which attacked a three-year-old girl was humanely destroyed yesterday.
Samantha Self, of Green Court Drive, Bognor Regis, West Sussex, was taken to hospital and released after treatment for head injuries after the dog attacked her as she played in the garden of a house at Hatherleigh Gardens, Bognor Regis, on Tuesday night.
Ministers quit
IRISH premier Albert Reynolds looks certain to fall today, after three members of his frail coalition government resigned yesterday and affirmed they would oppose a vote of confidence.
The move by the three Progressive Democrats, was unanimously authorised by party representatives.
Drive ban for biker champ
WORLD Formula One motorcycling champion Carl Fogarty was banned from driving for six months and fined £100 yesterday after admitting speeding at Dumfries Sheriff Court.
Fogarty, of Columbia Way, Blackburn, Lancs, who recently won the world endurance championship, admitted driving his car at 93mph along a 60mph section of the A75 near Annan, Dumfries and Galloway.
Ron wins vote
RON Davies, Labour agriculture spokesman and MP for Caerphilly, was elected to the shadow cabinet yesterday.
In the second ballot for the vacancy left by Bryan Gould's resignation, he secured 125 votes.
Rival George Robertson, a shadow foreign minister, polled 88.
Library hitch
THE new £450m British Library cannot open until hitches that include faulty book shelves are sorted out, its chief executive said yesterday.
The library, which had been scheduled to open in 1991, will not now open until 1994.
Reynolds: D-day Davies: Vote
Coalchief ‘denied talks on closures’
By John von Radowitz Daily Post Correspondent
BRITISH Coal chairman Neil Clarke was repeatedly refused a meeting with employment secretary Gillian Shephard to discuss the effects of pit closures, MPs were told yesterday.
Mr Clarke said his office tried ‘several times’ to arrange a meeting, four months before the bombshell announcement that 31 pits were to close with the loss of 30,000 jobs, but was turned down on each occasion.
He made the claim while giving evidence to the Employment Select Committee, which is looking at the way the closure programme was handled.
There were gasps from MPs when Mr Clarke said: ‘On a number of occasions in late June and July my office sought an interview with her office and it was declined.
‘My office sought to arrange an interview with the Secretary of State for Employment so I could brief her on the situation.
I'm informed they tried several times.’
One meeting had taken place with Mrs Shephard's predecessor, Michael Howard, in January, the committee was told.
Mr Clarke said he understood his staff were referred back to that meeting when they contacted Mrs Shephard's office.
It was not clear if Mrs Shephard herself turned down the requests.
However, MPs heard that Department of Employment officials got in touch with British Coal to discuss the legal implications of not consulting with the miners before making them redundant.
Neil Clarke
New stores policy pays dividends for Sainsbury
By Stephen Suckley Business Editor
SUPERMARKET chain Sainsbury spent its way to success in the past six months with vast amounts ploughed into stores paying dividends in increased customers and a big boost in profits.
Announcing half time results yesterday, the food retailer said it spent £384m in the first half of the year improving the quality and efficiency of the business.
And judging by the near 20pc lift in pre-tax profits it was money well spent.
Sales growth in UK supermarkets and hypermarkets rose by almost 13pc with the customer base increasing by 8.5pc.
These increases meant that total sales rose to £5.3bn compared with £4.8bn last time round, leading to pre-tax profits up 19.4pc at £391.1m.
Sainsbury maintains tight control of costs and benefits from its large investment programme were behind its success with capital expenditure expected to reach £800m by the end of the year.
Sainsbury opened 14 new supermarkets in the first half.
It plans to open a further nine in the current half year which will have the effect of increasing the supermarket sales area by 9.1pc.
‘Finding good sites is always a problem, but there are a lot of places where we are not represented,’ said chairman David Sainsbury.
The group has pinpointed 150 locations around the UK where it plans to open stores, particularly in Scotland, where it only recently opened its first store.
He emphasised that he placed no significance on figures showing Marks & Spencer vying for competition as the UK's leading retailer.
‘What we are concerned about is price control, price competition and quality,’ he said.
And further expansion is on the cards as Sainsbury plans to embark on a similar programme of store opening in future years.
Even the company's DIY operation, Homebase, appeared recession proof with a 5.7pc lift in sales to £158.6m leading to a 3.1pc rise in operating profit to £9.1m.
Six new Homebase stores were opened in the first half with a further new store and distribution depot to opened in the current six months.
But on the other side of the Atlantic the company's Shaws operation was hit by the depressed New England economy recession.
Analysts were expecting a good performance from Sainsbury, but at least one is advising investors to look elsewhere.
Nomura Research is advising investors to swap and tuck into Tesco.
The broker reckons although it is hard to fault Sainsbury's performance in tough economic conditions, the rating discrepancy between it and its peers in the food sector is so great that Sainsbury's obvious merits are discounted.
Nomura maintains from this level there is more upside potential in Tesco for investors.
Tesco has already produced a 10pc lift in profits, while Argyll is expected to produce a 14pc lift.
Gayle breezes in to stake his Robins claim
HOWARD GAYLE, the former Liverpool and Blackburn Rovers winger, will be training with Wrexham next week in the hope of earning himself a contract.
But he could face competition from a young North Wales amateur who impressed Robins' boss Brian Flynn in a 3-2 Midland Senior League win over Tranmere Rovers yesterday afternoon.
Richard Jones, currently with Anglesey side Cemaes Bay, was formerly on Bangor City's books and together with club-mate Simon Flowers has been at the Racecourse this week.
Full back Phil Hardy came through yesterday's match with no ill-effects following his recent heel operation and the 19-year old could come into contention for the visit to Lincoln City on Saturday.
‘He played a full game without any problems,’ said manager Brian Flynn, ‘and could figure in our plans.’
The Robins' boss is also pleased with the progress being made by YTS lad Jonathon Cross, who damaged ankle ligaments less than two weeks ago, and Dave Esdaille, injured at Colchester on Friday.
‘They both might be fit for Saturday and, even though they will not have had a reserve team match, they could well come straight back into the squad,’ he added.
Wrexham's FA Cup first round match at Crewe on Saturday week is not an all ticket affair with spectators from both clubs being asked to pay at the turnstiles.
Wrexham supporters' club presented veteran Mickey Thomas with a special award before Tuesday's game with Scunthorpe to mark the 600th league appearance of his career.
MICKEY THOMAS receives his award from Wrexham supporters' club chairman Carroll Clark Picture: Vic Cleveley
Assault on woman in terror drive
POLICE appealed yesterday for witnesses after a woman was kidnapped at gunpoint and sexually assaulted.
The 20-year-old woman was abducted late on Tuesday night by a masked man as she sat with her boyfriend in a car at a beauty spot near Winchester, Hampshire.
The man ordered her out of the car at Farley Mount and then bound her 23-year-old boyfriend before forcing him into the car's boot.
The woman was taken on a terrifying 45-minute journey in another car into the countryside before the gunman committed what police described as a ‘serious sexual assault’.
She was then driven for about another 30 minutes to the Hampshire village of Cheriton, where she was released and raised the alarm at a house.
Her boyfriend freed himself from the car boot.
House price survey brings more gloom
By Andrew Stevens Press Association
HOUSE prices have slumped 8.7pc below last year's levels following another monthly fall in October, according to Britain's biggest building society.
The Halifax said prices dropped 1.2pc last month and called for an immediate 2pc interest rate cut and ‘specific’ Government measures to stimulate the housing market.
Last month's drop followed a 3.1pc plunge in September, the biggest monthly fall since the society's survey began.
Prices paid by first-time buyers fell 0.6pc last month and are now 9pc below last year.
The Halifax said: ‘Any recovery in the housing market remains dependent on recovery in the economy generally and particularly on some easing of the rate of growth of unemployment.
‘Further falls in base rates to at least 6pc are necessary; in addition, specific measures to stimulate the housing market would boost confidence by indicating the Government's commitment to the home-owner.’
The monthly fall, which after seasonal adjustments was 0.8pc, confirmed the previous month's record drop was due to a distortion rather than a more general malaise.
Buyers brought forward purchases in August to beat the deadline on stamp duty, creating a vacuum in the following month.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is being urged to boost the moribund housing market in his autumn statement on November 12.
Head of the Building Employers' Confederation, Sir Brian Hill, on Tuesday called on the Government to raise the threshold of mortgage tax relief, now £30,000, for a limited period and abolish stamp duty on house purchases.
Crash car couple's fury at drink driver's £22fine
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
AN outraged couple are writing to the Prime Minister after a teenage drink driver who wrecked their £9,000 dream car was fined just £22.
Yesterday Frank and Dorothy Lewis were still seething following the court case, which arose from an incident at Ilkeston, in Derbyshire.
The couple, of Old Colwyn, had been visiting Dorothy's sick mother, Ethel, 12 days ago.
Their F-registered Toyota Corolla was written off when another car smashed into it.
The 17-year-old driver was subsequently fined £12.80 for drink-driving, £6 for having no insurance and £3.20 for having no driving licence.
He was also ordered to pay £30 costs.
The level of fine is the result of the new ‘unit fine’ system in which JPs decide what wrong-doers can afford.
The teenager was out of work and on the dole.
But yesterday Mr and Mrs Lewis said they were disgusted at the situation, which had left them the victims.
They have written to John Major expressing their outrage.
Insurers have told Mr Mr Lewis there is no point in civil action for damages because the youth has no assets and was not insured.
The car has been written off, which has left them with the prospect of having to pay out for a new vehicle.
‘We could just not believe it when we heard what he had been fined.
It is absolutely ludicrous,’ said Mr Lewis.
‘We paid almost £9,000 for the car but we will be lucky to get £4,000 for it,’ said Mr Lewis who believes the teenager should at least have been made to do community work.
Disgusted Frank and Dorothy Lewis
The Lewis' £9,000 dream car which was wrecked by a drink driver
Liverpool law firm in quality group
By David Hope Business Staff
A GROUP of 11 major law firms from across the UK has joined forces to form a unique quality network.
The North West is represented by long established Liverpool law firm Cuff Roberts, founder members in the venture which was launched in London this week.
The group has taken the title ‘QLG a National Group of Law Firms’ with the title derived from the quality law group idea.
A spokesman for Cuff Roberts said the scheme offered nationwide expertise from Liverpool and stiff competition to Manchester firms.
Members would be able to refer work to other firms best placed to serve the client with their specialist skills.
The member firms are all of similar size with a proven range of complementary specialist skills, an established corporate and commercial presence and a well-defined geographical area.
The aim is to provide a comprehensive range of services and expertise on a national scale to the business community in particular.
The group is run by its members with a full time executive officer drawing on the resources of a total 1,150 staff stretching from Exeter to Edinburgh.
Present at the launch was Sir Richard Gaskell, a partner in one of the member firms and a Past President of the Law Society.
New chief at Quicks
VEHICLE and parts distributor, Quicks Group has announced the appointment of Mr Michael Moore (above) as new group chairman, the first not to be a member of the Quick family.
The present group chairman, Mr Norman Quick retires at the end of the year having reached the age of 70.
Mr Moore, 56, is also chairman of Tomkins plc and The Bank of Edinburgh Group.
Allen defies the trend
CONSTRUCTION group Allen has bucked the depressed trend in the industry by winning £11.75m of orders for projects in the North West of England, the Midlands and Yorkshire.
Contracts include building warehouses and factories and refurbishing pubs and council houses.
Wigan-based Allen also announced that Ebor Estates, in which it holds a 50pc stake, has sold its Wakefield development for £2.5m.
Russia's move towards a market economy has prompted Securicor to launch a joint venture security company in St Petersburg.
The new company Securicor Okhrana St Petersburg has been set up with four Russian partners and the UK subsidiary of a Finnish bank.
Birds Eye £4,400 fine
BIRDS Eye Walls was fined £4,400 yesterday for failing to indicate the use of textured soya protein in the names of some of their beef and chicken products.
The firm was also ordered to pay £15,000 costs by magistrates in Telford, Shropshire.
Birds Eye Walls had denied seven charges brought by Shropshire County Council's trading standards department.
Four charges under the food labelling regulations alleged the names used to describe the products did not mention soya protein.
Three others accused the firm of false trade descriptions.
New-boy Spencer goes back to school
HESWALL'S Ian Spencer leads the contingent of north west hopefuls bidding for their tour cards at the annual European School at Montpellier in the south of France from November 13-18.
Spencer failed to retain his card this year after his debut season on the Volvo European Tour which saw him finish in 178th position in the Order of Merit with winnings of just £7,700.
Now he faces his sixth successive visit to the school when he will compete against over 300 other players over six rounds for the 40 available places on the European Tour.
Irish professional Martin Sludds, who lives in Southport and has an attachment to Formby Driving Range, has also qualified for the tour school along with Chorley's Liverpool-born professional Paul Wesselingh.
Adrian Hill, the former Cheshire match play champion from Bramhall, who turned professional last year, has also won through after an indifferent first season on the European Challenge Tour, which saw him back in 100th place in the order with earnings of just over £4,000.
Former Arrowe Park assistant Mark Roe completed his most successful season on the Volvo European Tour when joint 18th place in last weekend's Volvo Masters in Spain took his winnings to almost £210,000 and 18th place in the final Order of Merit.
The highlight of Roe's season was victory in the Lancome Trophy near Paris in September, his second title since he joined the tour back in 1985.
Roe, who won the Catalan Open in 1989, improved his position from 45th last year.
Warrington professional Derrick Cooper completed his 13th season on the tour with £72,000 in official prize money for 70th place in the order, an improvement of 13 places from last year but well behind his best season, 1989, when he finished 19th.
Returns
HILLSIDE member Denis Nutter, a well known squash coach in the Southport area during the late seventies and early eighties, is the new secretary of the North Region of the Professional Golfers' Association.
The 48-year-old returns to the staff of the Bolton-based North Region, where he was previously tournament controller from 1986-88.
Still a member at Hillside, although based at Altrincham, Nutter takes over as North Region secretary from Norman Fletcher, who is moving to PGA headquarters at the Belfry as Association Manager.
Andrew's final agony
A LOST BALL on the last hole cost former Royal Liverpool assistant Andrew Winstanley victory in the individual competition in yesterday's Liverpool Alliance meeting at Bromborough, which attracted a record field of 120.
Winstanley's wayward tee shot presented first prize to host club assistant Jason O'Brien, whose 39 points pipped Winstanley and Bromborough's other assistant Darren Robinson by one.
O'Brien was beaten into second place in the pro-am competition, with his 11 handicap partner Eddie Morrell.
They scored 43 points, two behind winners Andrew Malley and eight handicapper David Hughes, of West Lancs.
The am-am went to Kirkby pair Stuart Johns (12) and Jim Warrilow (10), with 44 points.
Next week's meeting is at Runcorn.
Unhealthy GPsg et taste of their own medicine
By Tom BoddenWelsh Affairs Correspondent
MANY family doctors in Wales are in worse physical shape than their patients, MPs were told yesterday.
‘This raises questions over their effectiveness as role models,’ said the chief executive of the Health Promotion Authority for Wales, Prof John Catford.
He was giving evidence to the Welsh Affairs Committee of MPs in the Commons on the role of the authority.
Montgomery Liberal Democrat MP Alex Carlile, a lay member of the General Medical Council, had said: ‘Many of us in the House have some concern over the standards of general medical practice in parts of Wales.’
He asked what support the authority had from GPs in promoting healthier living.
Prof Catford said two studies had been undertaken of family doctors' attitudes to health promotion and their own health.
‘In some cases their patients are healthier than they are,’ he said.
The authority's chairman John F. Davies agreed that more funding was needed for better health promotion in Wales.
Select committee chairman Gareth Wardell said the authority's annual budget of £2.81m amounted to just 98p per head of the Welsh population.
When broken down, the figure for direct health promotion programmes such as healthy living, substance misuse and sex education, amounted to just over 33p, he said.
‘You couldn't supply the children of Wales with a toothbrush or tube of toothpaste to promote their oral health with that budget,’ he declared.
Mr Davies replied that the authority's budget added up to about 0.2pc of NHS spending in Wales.
‘Health promotion has been very much the Cinderella of policy, not only in Wales but everywhere,’ he said.
‘The awareness of what health promotion can achieve has only recently swung into the consciousness of upper policy makers.
If you are asking whether we ought to be spending more, I can only agree,’ he said.
Mr Wardell further questioned the effectiveness of the authority and said: ‘You have some wonderful aims but, in reality, you have no clout, do you?’
Mr Davies insisted that the authority enjoyed status and influence in Wales.
And he denied a suggestion that the health promotion role could be better carried out at district health authority level because of the need to take an overall view of priorities.
The committee of MPs is investigating the workings of the Welsh Office and its relationship with other non Government agencies in Wales.
Captain marvel
Today's preview by ARGUS
TWO WEEKS after watching Remittance Man bounce back to action, Wincanton racegoers have another treat in the Badger Beer Chase today.
Nothing of Remittance Man's star quality contests the three mile one furlong event, but the presence of Sparkling Flame, Captain Dibble and Laundryman make this a cracking race.
Sparkling Flame, a cracking prospect two years ago, did not look the same horse when returning from injury last season.
And Laundryman, fourth to Brandeston on his re-appearance, is prone to errors.
The race is at Captain Dibble's mercy.
The Scottish National winner enjoys shorter trips and has made rapid improvement.
The Illywhacker should take the Silver Buck Handicap Chase.
Jenny Pitman's strapping gelding is a class act when right.
Kendall's new Blues give fans a raw deal
SIR, It is the fans of Everton Football Club who should be given most sympathy.
It is a sad fact of life that Howard Kendall must sell in order to buy, but from dealings to date (Beardsley apart) is Barry Horne an improvement on Stuart McCall, and are either Paul Rideout or Mo Johnston suitable to replace Graeme Sharp or even Mike Newell?
The players who might be worth persevering with such as Hinchcliffe, Cottee and Beagrie, are usually the fall guys (surely not because they were Harvey signings?)
While I admire John Ebbrell as a true product of Everton's youth policy, he really has been a terrible disappointment of late.
Recently touted as the next Bryan Robson by none other than Graham Taylor, Howard Kendall has handed him too important a role too soon.
Too often Kendall seems preoccupied with finding a place in the team for Alan Harper, and although he has been a great servant to the club over the years, Everton will only be a really good side when he is playing in the reserves, and I do not mean that as an insult to Alan.
Everton's defensive line-up is as good as anything in Britain Southall, Jackson, Snodin, Hinchcliffe, Ablett, Keown and Watson but Beardsley and Cottee need a genuine battering ram up front such as Steve Bull, Brian Deane, Mark Hateley, and some creativity in midfield and an extra wide midfield player.
Everton are supposed to be one of the big five ‘nothing but the best will do’.
It is the fans of EFC who should be given most sympathy, and what odds would you get for Everton's biggest financial asset, Martin Keown, wearing the colours of Leeds or Blackburn before the end of the season?
No excuse for Euro rumpus
SIR, How disturbing to see Alan Hansen defending Graeme Souness' loutish behaviour in Moscow as ‘understandable, heat of the moment’ stuff, and his subsequent ban a ‘joke’.
Even the Liverpool directors saw fit to apologise for this latest example of their manager's seemingly endless ability for sullying the name of this great football club.
What on earth the referee had done to incur such mindless, moronic abuse, one can only hazard a guess.
Thank goodness Ronnie Moran was at hand to prevent Souness causing even further disastrous consequences for the club in particular, and British football as a whole.
So come on Alan Hansen, you were a footballer of marvellous skill and dignified bearing.
A little more of the same in your sports column please!
The new rule (that you obviously loathe) banning the dreaded back-pass, is the best thing to happen in football for many years.
JET-SETTING Irish champion jockey Michael Kinane rode his 100th Irish winner of the season at The Curragh yesterday when Sinissipi landed the listed Eyrefield Race.
Making a flying visit home between the Breeders' Cup in Florida last weekend and resuming his contract job in Hong Kong, he cemented his eighth championship at the expense of arch-rival Christy Roche.
Roche was beaten a length on Desert Team, who had set sail for home through the testing ground but was collared by the John Oxxtrained Sinissipi.
Arabs alarmed by Bush defeat
ARABS are deeply worried that Bill Clinton's victory could slow down the Middle East peace process and undermine a cosy relationship developed with the Bush administration.
‘It is a scary moment in the region because nobody knows what this man thinks.
He has talked very little on foreign policy,’ said one senior Gulf official.
Arabs were alarmed by Clinton's pro-Israeli remarks and harsh attack on Syrian President Hafez al-Assad, he said.
In Iraq there was glee over the fall of President Bush, seen by Baghdad as the driving force behind the Gulf War and punitive UN sanctions.
‘The cursed and criminal Bush admits defeat’ Baghdad Radio gloated.
But the government newspaper al-Jumhouriya had little enthusiasm for Clinton ‘a chameleon that changes colour every day’.
It added: ‘He is a magician, clever and attractive.
But he is crazy with the game of power.’
Libyan leader Col Gaddafi, an unyielding foe of five successive US presidents, declared: ‘The victory of Clinton undoubtedly constitutes a revolution against an international policy that made the world live in terror, as in the time of Genghis Khan.’
In a statement carried by the Libyan news agency Jana, he said Bush had contributed to ‘world tragedy’ by his numerous attempts to create an American world order.
Many Arabs said however that no U-turns were likely in Washington's foreign policy.
Clinton could change the priorities of US policy in the region, but not its goals.
Pupils satellite stars
THE future of the Maastricht Treaty may be in doubt but a group of Clwyd schoolchildren are still determined to forge closer links with Europe.
Four pupils of Denbigh High School are to take part in an unusual international communications project in Plymouth.
The Gemini Project got under way last year when three of Denbigh High's feeder schools were invited to prepare a video film on the links between the schools.
The four youngsters who will be going to Plymouth formerly attended Ysgol Esgob Morgan, St Asaph.
Richard Parry, Robert Williams, Sara Andrew, Laura Gilmartin and Ysgol Esgob Morgan deputy head Helen Roberts will join representatives from schools in France and Spain.
Their video will be transmitted by satellite to each of the schools taking part.
Satellite conferences will also be held at which pupils will learn about the other countries.
Peace of mind puts Monty in the mood
MARK GARROD reports from Madrid
COLIN MONTGOMERIE is in the best possible frame of mind this week as he makes yet another attempt to win a golf title in 1992.
The 29-year-old Scot has arrived for the World Cup in Madrid after hearing that tests on the baby his wife Eimear is expecting next spring have shown everything is fine.
‘She has not been well and I don't mind admitting now that we were very worried,’ he said.
‘But the baby is healthy and we're both delighted.
It's a weight off our minds.’
Considering the concern he has had lately, Montgomerie has managed to play superb golf.
He captained Scotland to the final of the Alfred Dunhill Cup England beat them then was third in the Madrid Open and on Sunday lost a playoff to Sandy Lyle for the Volvo Masters.
‘I played the best round of golf I've ever played to get into the play-off, so rather than feeling disappointed I'm feeling very confident.’
Montgomerie partners Gordon Brand Jnr in the £700,000 event.
Optimistic
Two of the players who beat them in the Dunhill Cup final carry England's hopes.
David Gilford won all five of his matches at St Andrews and Steve Richardson won four.
They also have good reason to be optimistic.
Among their victims were Fred Couples and Davis Love III, but the top two moneywinners on the American tour this year state that revenge is not on their minds this week.
They simply hope to find some of their early season form.
The two millionaires made most of their fortunes in March and April, each winning three times.
The obvious highlight was Couples's first major victory in the U.S Masters and the 33-year-old conceded: ‘I've not been close to that form since.’
England, like Scotland, have never won the World Cup.
Ireland represented this time by Christy O'Connor Jnr and Ronan Rafferty were champions back in 1958 while Wales won five years ago through Ian Woosnam and David Llewellyn.
Woosnam's partner on this occasion is Mark Mouland, 84th in Europe this year.
The defending champions are Swedes Per-Ulrik Johansson and Anders Forsbrand.
Texas to extradite wanted car dealer
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
THE American government has told Welsh detectives that they can collect a former cut-price car salesman being held in Texas for extradition.
Derek Fletcher was arrested by police in the USA three months ago and has been kept in custody in Corpus Christi.
Magistrates in Wrexham where Fletcher launched cut-price car import firm Intercar (UK) five years ago signed a warrant for his extradition on deception charges.
But two detectives who flew to Texas last month had to return without their prisoner after it was discovered that all the necessary paperwork in the USA had not been completed.
His extradition was delayed by the US election.
The necessary papers had to be signed by the Secretary of State in Washington and James Baker quit the job to run President Bush's illfated re-election campaign.
Det Insp Wayne Williams, of Wrexham CID, said yesterday they had now had confirmation by fax that he is ready for collection.
Two officers will fly out today or tomorrow to collect him and Fletcher will appear in court at Wrexham next week.
Bargain-hunters lost deposits on ordered new cars after Intercar and its sister firm, general motor dealers Reddoe, who traded from the same garage in Kings Mills Road, called in the liquidators.
Intercar was launched in a blaze of publicity in 1985 as one of the country's first cut-price car supermarkets.
It claimed customers would benefit from new EC regulations by shopping around the Continent to find the lowest car prices.
It also claimed that buyers could save more than £5,000 on a top-of-the-range Mercedes and £1,000 on an Austin Metro.
But instead, the company found itself unable to deliver the vehicles and claimed it was caught out by fluctuating exchange rates.
The garage was later sold to Nissan for £200,000, allowing creditors to recoup some of the money they had lost.
Fletcher moved to California to work for a US offshoot, International Motor Sales Inc.
Gunman assaults woman after terror drive
POLICE appealed yesterday for witnesses after a woman was kidnapped at gunpoint and sexually assaulted.
The 20-year-old woman was abducted by a masked man as she sat with her boyfriend in a car at a beauty spot used by courting couples near Winchester, Hampshire.
The man ordered her out of the car at Farley Mount late on Tuesday night and then bound her 23year-old boyfriend before forcing him into the car's boot, which he locked.
The woman was taken on a terrifying 45-minute journey in another car into the countryside before the gunman committed what police described as a ‘serious sexual assault’ at an unknown location.
She was then driven for about another 30 minutes to the Hampshire village of Cheriton, where she was released, and raised the alarm at a house.
Her boyfriend freed himself from the car boot.
Officers were yesterday interviewing the woman, and Inspector Barry Jakeman appealed to anyone who was at Farley Mount in the hour up to midnight to contact police.
‘It is essential we catch the person who committed these serious crimes,’ he said.
‘Any information will be treated in the strictest confidence, and your purpose for being there is of no interest to the police.’
Prestige honour for battling Pat
By Margaret Kitchen Women's Editor
A COURAGEOUS Open University graduate, virtually blind as well as dyslexic, became the first North Wales Woman of the Year yesterday.
Mrs Pat Taylor, of Prestatyn, was one of 100 women nominated to attend the first North Wales Woman of the Year lunch, at the Kinmel Manor Hotel, Abergele, which raised £10,000 for the work of the children's charity, Barnardos, in Wales.
The event, sponsored by the Daily Post and Slaters Motors, is to be held annually in future.
Mrs Taylor, who only has partial sight in one eye, has spent eight years studying eight hours a day to achieve her degree by using a specially adapted tape recorder.
On receiving her award, she criticised the lack of resources for disabled people who are largely dependent on charities like Barnardos.
‘My strength was my determination to achieve.
We should all be able to participate in our life's ambitions, but sadly this is not always an easy matter,’ she said.
The Marchioness of Anglesey presented her with a ceramic dish made by Denbigh potter Margaret Frith and sponsored by the Daily Post.
Among the nominees attending the lunch, as recognition of their achievements, was Montgomeryshire nurse Sue Blower, who had returned specially from her work as a nurse tutor in Bucharest, Romania, where she is helping to set up that country's first school of nursing for 40 years.
Thirst for knowledge: Page 7 
Pat Taylor, centre, receives her Woman of the year ceramic bowl from the Marchioness, watched by Priscilla Hodgson of Barnardos Picture: COLIN PAXTON
Safety of children on farms is paramount, says Mutual chief
A POSTER campaign to help farmers make their farms safer for children has been launched by NFU Mutual chairman Alun Evans at the Mutual's head office at Stratford-upon-Avon.
Mr Evans, who is also chairman of the British Wool Marketing Board, farms near Tywyn, Gwynedd.
He said: ‘The importance of making farms safer for children cannot be stressed enough.
Between 1986 and 1991, 39 children were killed in farming accidents, and a further 180 seriously injured.
‘As a farmer whose children have grown up on a busy farm, I am very aware of the risks and the work pressures that all too easily lead to children being exposed to danger.
We need to keep safety in our minds when we work.
‘Modern farms with their powerful machinery, large stores and chemical stocks are a potential death trap for children.’
Posters, produced with the support of the Health and Safety Executive, can be ordered from the Mutual's Loss Control, Department 0789 204211.
Mr Evans pictured at the launch with youngsters Iain Ferguson, Daniel Lynch, Peter Hawkins and Richard Handy
Watch our lips, George
MUCH was expected of George Bush when he assumed the US Presidency four years ago.
His experience spanned not merely politics but also business, the United Nations and the Central Intelligence Agency, of which he had been director.
America and the Western world expected his experience, energy and competence to contribute to a distinguished Presidency.
Now, as Governor Bill Clinton replaces Mr Bush, it is difficult to recall anything distinguished about his policies.
His brow became more deeply furrowed as he made decisions in reaction to circumstances, rather than taking control of situations.
When the Iraqis invaded Kuwait, the decision to drive them out was made for him.
As leader of the free world, supported by many other countries and more than adequately equipped, he and the US would have lost all credibility, had any other decision been made.
And a question remains: would a more perceptive, persuasive statesman have captured Saddam Hussein to answer the war crimes charges he still faces?
At home, the Americans still guzzle gas, and much else, at a horrifying rate while the economy remains lopsided.
Mr Bush once invited the world to ‘watch his lips’ in an attempt to show he meant what he said.
But it became increasingly clear that he did not.
In the end, an election poster said it all: ‘Time to go, George watch our lips.’
He was certainly not the ‘exemplary leader of the western world’ to whom Mr Major referred yesterday.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd made a more important and realistic point when he said Britain should be able to work very well with Mr Clinton.
And that, now, is what matters.
Dotty buses
LONDON travellers are to be advised when buses are due by dot-matrix displays at 50 bus stops, similar to the system already in use on the capital's Underground stations.
The pilot scheme will cost £1.5m and ‘if successful’ might be extended at a cost of £35m.
This all seems an expensive gimmick in the depths of a recession.
In this region, most passengers count reliable bus services on sensible routes as the greatest luxury we can expect.
Record entry for show
A RECORD entry of 129 bulls and 22 breeding females have been entered for the second Autumn Multi-breed Show and Sale of Pedigree Beef Cattle beef cattle, on the Royal Welsh Showground, Builth Wells, on November 13.
The catalogue includes the first appearance of six red-coated Saler cattle which originate from France's Massif Centrale.
Gloucestershire cattleman Guy Wooding will judge the inter-breed championship on the afternoon before the sale.
Other judges are Tom Owen, of Wigan, and Anglesey showman Ernie Gibbons.
The end of another era as cranes head for scrapyard
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
THREE massive Wirral landmarks, quayside cranes at Bidston dock, are being dismantled after giving years of service to Birkenhead docks.
The Bidston Dock cranes have been a feature of the Wallasey landscape but unpopular with some local residents who regarded them as an eyesore and the cause of television reception problems.
The old bulk cargo cranes were once used to unload iron ore onto freight trains bound for Shotton steelworks at Deeside the traffic requiring the most powerful locomotives available on British Rail.
Dismantle
And during the bitter 1984 miners' strike the cranes were kept busy unloading imports of Australian coal for power stations.
Now they are to be scrapped and sold off as scrap metal.
A spokeswoman for Mersey Docks and Harbour Company said:’ They are now quite old and have not been in regular use in recent years so it was decided to dismantle them to improve the appearance of the area.
‘The site will remain in port use but many ships have their own discharge gear these days.’
Bidston Dock lies within the Liverpool Freeport extension and is also in the Wirral City Lands urban regeneration area, which is being improved with £37.5m cash aid from the government.
Wirral City Lands Department has approved more than £250,000-worth of environmental improvements along the Dock Road corridor in Wallasey with the aim of changing the image of the dockside area to attract new investment.
Dock Road is the main route linking the M53 motorway with Seacombe and the Twelve Quays area, and the cranes have been a familiar sight for drivers for years but some will see their disappearance as further evidence of the de-industrialisation of Merseyside.
Demolition worker John McCormack in front of the Bidston Dock landmarks shortly to disappear
Drowning riddle remains unsolved
AN open verdict was recorded yesterday on a 63year-old man whose body was found in the sea two days after he went missing.
Two anglers fishing at Towyn on August 13 recovered the body of Geoffrey Richardson, who walked out of a Llandudno home in the early hours of August 11.
Alan Brown, whose wife runs the Old Court Residential Care Home in Abbey Court, told the hearing at Abergele that he last saw Mr Richardson early on August 11.
Mr Brown said the former railway worker often said he felt he was dying but never hinted he might kill himself.
Mr Richardson, whose home was on The Promenade, Llanfairfechan, had been at the Old Court for six months because his wife was in hospital.
He suffered from dementia and schizophrenia.
Consultant pathologist Dr Brian Rogers said that death was due to drowning.
West Clwyd Coroner Bryan Lewis said there was no evidence that Mr Richardson took his own life.
Chain gang
PENSIONERS are being warned to be on their guard after two thieves stole a gold pocket watch on a chain worth £100 from the home of an 83-year-old woman in Third Avenue, Llay, Wrexham.
Anfield awards testimonial to Nicol
STEVE NICOL'S successful Liverpool career is to be rewarded with a testimonial, writes Philip McNulty.
The Scotland defender, in his eleventh season at Liverpool, has been granted a testimonial match.
Nicol is expected to stage his game some time next season, with Liverpool colleague Ronnie Whelan still waiting to have his match following a highly successful testimonial year.
Nicol has been one of Liverpool's most consistent defensive performers after forcing his way into the side following his £300,000 move from Ayr United.
Liverpool, meanwhile, will make a decision this week-end on their £500,000 move for Norway defender Stig Inge Bjornebye.
The Rosenborg left back played in an A-team game this week and has impressed boss Graeme Souness.
But Bjornebye wants to be assured his international ambitions with an emerging Norway side will not be affected by his proposed move to Anfield.
Norway boss Egil Olsen has insisted all his players must be playing first team football to come into consideration for international duty.
NICOL: consistent
Aid design wins nurse top award
DISTRICT nurses in Gwynedd have been supplied with a screening aid designed by a colleague.
Senior district nurse Dilys Richards won a £250 Gwynedd Research In Practice (Grip) bursary for her invention.
Mrs Richards designed an assessment prompt list to aid nurses and others involved in screening people aged 75 and over who live in the community.
She received her award from director of nursing services Nerys Owen at a ceremony at Bangor.
Dr Mike Nolan, a senior lecturer in nursing research at University College, Bangor, a member of the group which made the award, said: ‘Grip is a multi-disciplinary group whose main aim is to assist health care practitioners apply the results of research to their work in order to improve patient care.
‘The research bursary is awarded to the person who, in the opinion of the judging panel, has made an outstanding contribution to health care in Gwynedd by applying research to work.’
Runners-up were awarded £15 book tokens.
AID TRIP GIVES PUPILS A LESSON IN THIRD WORLD POVERTY AND FEAR
Gun terror for charity worker
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
CHRISTIAN Aid worker Lis Perkins found poverty and fear on a three-week visit to the Philippines which included a frightening encounter with armed vigilantes.
Yesterday Lis, North Wales area secretary for Christian Aid, was giving her backing to a major campaign to promote better understanding of the problems faced by people living in the Third World.
An appeal is also being launched to raise £25,000 toward projects being sponsored by Christian Aid in the Philippines.
The North Wales campaign has been organised by Anglicans in the St Asaph and Bangor Dioceses.
Yesterday Lis was at Bodafon Junior School, Craigside, Llandudno to help publicise the scheme and see project work about the Philippines carried out by pupils.
She spoke about the conditions faced by ordinary people in the Philippines where she says conditions are as bad as anywhere in the the Third World.
During her visit she had two frightening experiences.
On one occasion a jeep in which she was travelling was hi-jacked by a group of armed soldiers.
She said: ‘It was very very frightening.’
‘We were also stopped and interrogated by a para-military vigilante force who again wanted to know who we were and what were doing.’
For further information tel Lis Perkins on 0248361267.
Children from Ysgol Bodafon, Llandudno, show their model of the Philippines to Christian Aid secretary Lis Perkins
Gummer's secret trip
AGRICULTURE Minister John Gummer had an abortive trip to America to be on hand for a vain attempt to resolve differences leading to a settlement on the GATT-trade talks.
He jetted out in his role as President of the Council of European Farm Ministers to join EC Agriculture Commission Ray MacSharry and US Agricultural Secretary Edward Madigan who were trying to button up a deal before the transition of the US Presidency.
Although agriculture hardly figured in the race to the White House, Presidentelect Bill Clinton is regarded as being more protectionist and the failure to resolve outstanding differences over oil seeds could well fuel an agricultural trade war.
Mr Gummer's secret mission to the States emerged when David Curry MP, his number two at the Ministry of Agriculture, deputised at a dairy trade luncheon where he indicated that the bill to reform agricultural marketing which should have been introduced last week is likely to enter Parliament before Christmas.
Last night's crucial Maastricht vote following the debate in the House of Commons meant Mr Gummer had to pull out of the Welsh farming conference organised by the Royal Welsh Agricultural Society, the Welsh Agricultural College and Midland Bank.
FESTIVE GREETINGS RAISE £40,000
Disabled artist's charity cash cards
MUSCULAR Dystrophy victim Gareth Davies has raised over £40,000 in the past decade using his artistic talents to raise cash for research into the condition.
Each year the 20-year-old comes up with two unique designs for Christmas cards and calendars which have proved extremely popular last year he sold 40,000.
This year he hopes his latest designs will take his charity total to £45,000.
The cards go all over the country and are available in English and Welsh.
Gareth's eventual ambition is to become a freelance commercial artists taking on commissions for a living.
The cards at £2 for a pack of 10 and £1 for a calendar can be obtained from Gareth who lives at Pen-y-Berllan, Pentwyn Road, Deganwy (telephone Deganwy 581983).
Christmas cheer disabled Gareth Davies with his charity cards Picture: COLIN PAXTON
Stress-free Duchess goes back to work
By James Hardy Daily Post Correspondent
THE Duchess of York was back to her normal cheerful self yesterday as she undertook her second public engagement since the summer's topless photos saga.
Looking totally at ease, she exchanged jokes with sufferers of the muscle-wasting motor neurone disease and showed no signs of the stress that marred a previous outing when she broke down in tears.
Despite her fall from grace, at least two plain clothes detectives were in evidence with several uniformed officers during her two-hour visit to the West Midlands.
And as the duchess left to catch a train, there was a police escort to the station.
Her marriage troubles appeared to be firmly under wraps as she told delegates at a Motor Neurone Disease Association conference in Solihull: ‘It is good to be here again and it is nice of you to have me.’
Wearing a check two-piece suit and sporting a poppy on her lapel, the duchess smiled broadly as she stepped on to a red carpet.
The duchess also attended the founding meeting of the new International Alliance of Motor Neurone Disease Associations and spoke of her hope that the global effort would hasten a breakthrough in the disease.
MND kills three people a day in the UK and strikes more often than better known diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
The Princess Royal yesterday made an impassioned plea for help on behalf of the country's six million carers.
She urged GPs to involve themselves actively in offering support but warned them not to belittle the efforts of dedicated relatives and friends struggling to look after the sick and elderly in their homes.
The princess, who heads the fund-raising Princess Royal Trust for Carers, said the medical profession and other agencies must realise the old family structures, which for centuries saw people looking after relatives without outside assistance, were gone probably for good.
Duchess: jokes
Princess: plea
POPPY'S BONFIRE LIGHT
PRETTY Poppy Potter will be the envy of her friends tonight when she officially lights the massive public bonfire in Corwen her prize for winning a firework night painting competition run by the town's firemen.
Poppy, 7, a pupil at Ysgol Glyn, is pictured with leading fireman Adrian Roberts and fireman Bob Bowler.
Road stars head for Llandudno
SOME of Britain's top distance runners return to Llandudno on Sunday for the resort's annual 10-mile road race, the biggest athletics event in the North Wales calendar.
The race incorporates the Welsh championships, and among the 1,600 lining up will be Olympic marathon man Steve Brace, who won the national title the last time the championships were held in Llandudno.
Among his main challengers will be the Swansea pair of Nigel Adams and Jerry Hall, Blackpool's Paul Muller and Telford's Mark Flint.
Amanda Wright (Tipton), winner of the women's race for the past two years who set a new course record last year, will not be defending her title and so Cardiff veteran Liz Hughes looks like starting as favourite.
Hughes, who was runner-up last year, finished third in the veterans' cross-country international in Northern Ireland last weekend.
In the same race, Wrexham's Ann Cartwright finished 13th.
Once again, the Llandudno race clashes with the second fixture in the Deeside Cross Country League.
Royal couple out on the town together
Smiling pair shown sights
By Heather Tyrrell in South Korea
THE Prince and Princess of Wales last night stepped out on the town together after a day apart on separate engagements in the South Korean capital of Seoul.
The couple, on the last night of their four-day official tour of the country, were driven to Sejong Cultural Centre in an armoured stretched Cadillac to watch a performance of Delibe's Coppelia by the Scottish Ballet, which is on a Far East tour.
The princess, patron of the English National Ballet, appeared eager to get to her seat.
Wearing red, she led the way along the line of dignitaries, briefly waiting to allow the prince to catch up, before walking ahead up the steps to the royal box.
The couple, under the spotlight as royal watchers continue to speculate over the state of their marriage, were seen to exchange smiles.
Earlier the prince met top Korean businessmen and urged them to heed the teaching of ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius by balancing economics with the protection of the planet.
Many old Korean philosophers were inspired by the Confucian concept of Yin and Yang the belief there was always balance and harmony, he said.
‘With such a cultural heritage, Koreans are better placed than many of us to appreciate the dangers which confront us and the need for action before it is too late.’
Industrialists should temper their drive for growth with the development of sustainable resources and thought for pollution, he added.
The princess received an equally warm welcome when elderly Korean women broke into spontaneous applause and smiled as she entered their welfare centre in BongchunDong, a poor Seoul suburb.
After removing her shoes according to the Korean custom, she demonstrated her dexterity with chopsticks as she popped a delicate roll containing shredded beef and mustard sauce into her mouth.
Later she discussed beauty tips at a new Salvation Army home for the elderly when Han Yeh-won, 74, asked her how she stayed beautiful.
‘It's partly make-up and partly because I drink a lot of water,’ the princess replied, according to one of the home's sponsors.
Earlier, the royal couple unveiled a long-awaited memorial to the British troops who died during the 1952-53 Korean war.
Today they fly south to see a seventh-century Buddha statue and Buddhist temple before boarding a flight to Hong Kong, where the prince will stay for three days while the princess flies home.
The princess' poppy attracts a pupil at a British school in Seoul
The couple honour war victims
We're trailing in new league
Frozen out North
NORTH and Mid Wales is set to be a European-free zone as the South dominate the new Konica League.
Southern clubs make up less than half of the 20 sides in the league.
But they have stacked five clubs in the top seven, lining up European Cup and UEFA Cup campaigns next term.
The North and central sides, among them Bangor City and Newtown with top reputations earned in English leagues, are facing nothing but the wooden spoon.
The situation is even embarrassing league organisers.
Secretary John Deakin admits it's one of the few drawbacks of the new set-up.
‘I would have liked to have seen a few more North and Mid Wales sides near the top of the league,’ he says.
‘It's not good for the Konica League to be dominated as it is by Southern teams.
‘I just hope that the situation changes.
Southern clubs are playing each other every week now and obviously they can't all get three points every Saturday so maybe the North can catch up.’
Besides having much greater population centres, the South can boast better contacts, according to one Northern soccer fan.
Mark Jones, editor of the Welsh Football magazine based in Rhyl, points to seventh-placed Briton Ferry.
Talent
‘Their manager Carl Harris used to play professional football in the South, and he's on first-name terms with people at bigger clubs, which Northern clubs can't compete with,’ he says.
‘Clubs are allowed to sign for Konica clubs as well as teams in the feeder Cymru Alliance and Abacus Leagues.
The Abacus tends to be stronger, so the Southern League of Wales teams have a greater pool of talent to draw from.’
Bryn Jones, manager of exiles Colwyn Bay, argues that there are too many teams chasing ‘meagre pickings’.
‘You've got Connah's Quay, Flint, Holywell and Mold all within about 12 miles of each other, as well as ourselves just up the road,’ says Jones.
‘That's a lot of players needed from a small area and the net needs to be cast wider.
‘Being so close to Merseyside is a disadvantage, because a lot of Liverpool lads would rather stay in their area where there's such a good standard than travel into Wales.’
Many people feel the North's best chance of honours in the Konica League went when Colwyn Bay decided to play in exile in Northwich rather than join.
Bay did thrash Connah's Quay 7-0 in last season's Welsh Cup, and also hammered Briton Ferry, and Bryn Jones agrees his side would have been title contenders.
Now fourth-placed Aberystwyth Town four points behind the leaders with two games in hand and the goal-stopping experts of Conwy seem our best hopes.
The bottom of the league makes worrying reading.
Fortunes
The list of shame in the bottom seven sees only Abergavenny from the South, with Powys sides Caersws, Newtown and Llanidloes all in need of a change of form.
With the league regionalised over Winter it's almost certain that Clwyd, Gwynedd and Powys teams will prop up the table for a couple of months.
Two will go down, and unless fortunes change for our clubs the South will make up half of the Konica league next season, re-inforcing the ‘poor cousins’ reputation of North and Mid Wales.
With Cardiff City considering taking up the League of Wales challenge, perhaps the South's domination is only just beginning.
Tap alert over
AN ALERT to nearly 200,000 people to boil drinking water was lifted last night, five days after the warning was given to people in the Southampton area.
Southern Water said tests had shown that an organism, cryptosporidium, which can cause stomach upsets and diarrhoea, had been flushed out of the system.
Historic sites delay a ‘scandal’
THE BODY set up to protect Welsh historic monuments could take up to 60 years to list all the important buildings, its chief executive admitted yesterday.
An MP told the Welsh Affairs Committee in the Commons that the huge backlog in defending buildings from harm was a national scandal.
Roger Evans, MP for Monmouth, claimed ‘spot-listing’ of buildings believed to be under threat was a ‘haphazard process’.
John Carr, chief executive of Cadw, the Welsh Historic Monuments Executive Agency, denied important buildings were put at risk by the delays because local authorities had powers to intervene, pending a decision.
Cadw had three members of staff carrying out inspections but Mr Carr felt that this was adequate.
Back-to-work soccer plan
A TRAINING scheme aimed at encouraging sport in the community has started at Wrexham's Racecourse football ground with the goal of giving the unemployed a better chance of finding work.
The club's community development officer, Mike Rigg, said he was looking for eight unemployed young men and women, aged 19 or over, to organise soccer schools as part of the 12-month Employment Training plan.
‘It is not a job, but it is a training.
It is a stepping stone to the next stage of getting into a job,’ he said.
Scathing blast for banks' services
By Daily Post Correspondent
BANKS and building societies are still providing a service of ‘monumental incompetence’ despite the introduction of a strict code of practice earlier this year, it was claimed today.
The Consumers' Association said one in 10 people was unhappy with the running of current accounts, the same figure as a year ago when the association condemned high street banks for ‘breathtaking arrogance’.
Criticism centred on insufficient information about charges and interest rates despite a requirement in the code that banks must offer customers a ‘price list’ of charges, said the latest edition of the CA magazine, Which?
The new Which? survey disclosed:
An ‘astonishing’ one in 10 were charged incorrectly by their bank or building society.
One in five had wrangles over a direct debit or standing order.
One in seven had money incorrectly removed from their account.
Lloyds, Midland and NatWest came in for most criticism overall, while Abbey National, the Co-op Bank, FirstDirect, the Royal Bank of Scotland and the Yorkshire Bank came out best.
Association director Dr John Beishon said: ‘With a few honourable exceptions, banks and building societies are still providing a service of monumental incompetence to too many of their customers.
‘The recession has not dimmed the banks’ highhanded, bungling attitude to customer relations.
‘The much-heralded Banking Code of Practice appears to show willing, but most banks’ efforts at reform have been reluctant and puny.
‘We found fewer than a fifth of bank and building society branches publicised the code with posters or leaflets, and staff knew little or nothing about it.
This is an affront.’
Tourists lured by low pound
TOURISTS from western Europe are flocking to Britain in record numbers.
And the increases are likely to carry on now the plunging pound has made Britain such an economically attractive place for overseas visitors, the British Tourist Authority said.
The number of tourists from western Europe in August 1992 totalled 1.47m the highest for the month, the latest International Passenger Survey statistics showed.
This took western European visits for the first eight months of this year to 4.82m, another record.
Overall, overseas visitor numbers for August 1992 totalled 2.3m 4pc up on the August 1991 figure.
ENGLAND
Keown set for recall
EVERTON defender Martin Keown could be handed an England recall today when Graham Taylor names his squad for the World Cup qualifier against Turkey at Wembley.
Keown is fit again after knee surgery and Taylor has already made it clear that the Everton defenders is one of the key figures in his plans.
He won nine successive England caps and is regarded as one of the best man to man markers in the game by Taylor, who was with Keown when he was at Aston Villa.
Taylor is also likely to give David Hirst immediate consolation for having to sit out Sheffield Wednesday's UEFA Cup game last night.
Manchester United's Paul Parker is also under consideration for the game on November 18.
Along with Liverpool pair, John Barnes and Rob Jones, Keown, Hirst and Parker made up Taylor's five to follow the players he believes can add to last month's encouraging 1-1 performance against Norway.
Hirst's recovery from the ankle bone he cracked at the end of August is most encouraging, following the failure of Arsenal's Ian Wright to click alongside Alan Shearer.
Possible squad: Woods (Sheffield Wednesday), Seaman (Arsenal), Parker (Manchester Utd), Bardsley (QPR), Pearce (Nottingham Forest), Dorigo (Leeds), Walker (Sampdoria), Keown (Everton), Adams (Arsenal), Pallister (Manchester Utd), Platt (Juventus), Batty (Leeds), Palmer (Sheffield Wed), Ince (Manchester Utd), Gascoigne (Lazio), Clough (Nottingham Forest) or Parker (Aston Villa), Merson (Arsenal), Salako (Crystal Palace), Shearer (Blackburn), Hirst (Sheffield Wednesday), I Wright (Arsenal), Sinton or Ferdinand (both QPR).
World Cup prospects brighten
ENGLAND now look clear favourites to stage cricket's next World Cup following South Africa's decision to drop out of the bidding.
The Test and County Cricket Board have been working on a detailed financial plan aimed at hosting the competition on British soil in 1995.
England's only rivals will come from the sub-continent where India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are discussing a joint bid.
Applicants must submit their financial plans by December 1 in time for the International Cricket Council to make a firm decision by the end of January.
‘We are very keen to host the competition again and determined our bid to stage it will be acceptable,’ said TCCB chief executive Alan Smith when he announced recently that three major companies have expressed an interest in sponsoring the tournament.
England hosted the first three World Cups in 1975, 79 and 83.
The fourth was jointly staged by India and Pakistan and the fifth, earlier this year, went to Australia and New Zealand.
The sixth World Cup will be the biggest yet with 12 teams taking part.
While there may be support among ICC members for the sub-continent bid, South Africa looked England's most dangerous opponents.
A number of grounds in the Republic have floodlight facilities and could have offered day-night matches which were such a successful feature of the competition in Australiasia.
Ali Bacher managing managing director of the United Cricket Board of South Africa said they were withdrawing their bid because of a crowded international programme and to host the World Cup would take resources and attention away from their development programme.
Result of one-day 50 overs match in Perth: West Indies 199 (49 overs), Western Australia 171 (45.5 overs).
West Indies won by 28 runs.
Battle royal to save lost castle
By Gerald Williams Daily Post Staff
A FAMILY who discovered that their centuries-old manor stands over ‘the lost palace’ of the last Welsh prince are fighting a desperate battle to keep their home.
Brian and Kathryn Pritchard Gibson, who have three children, have until Thursday November 12 to find funds, or even a promise of funds, to avoid being made homeless.
Yesterday they appealed to the people of Wales to buy Pen y Bryn manor and 36 acres of land at Abergwyngregyn, near Bangor.
They have set up a trust fund, the Aber Trust, run independently of them, to raise the money around £200,000 to buy it for the nation.
‘It is part of the heritage of Wales.
It must not fall into the hands of developers,’ said Mr Pritchard Gibson, 46.
The Pritchard Gibsons bought Pen y Bryn, an historic house overlooking the A55 expressway and the Menai Strait, in 1988.
They discovered the manor stood on the site of a medieval castle ‘the lost palace’ of Llywelyn Fawr (Llewelyn the Great) and his son, Llywelyn, the last Welsh prince.
The couple opened the place to the public.
‘We took out a mortgage and used all our reserves publicising the site's historical importance,’ said Mr Pritchard Gibson.
But the expected tourist bonanza did not happen and now the finance company wants its money and the family have until Thursday to find backers.
Brian and Kathryn Pritchard Gibson outside their historic, and threatened, home Picture: RICHARD BIRCH
Barrow salutes battlers
GRAHAM BARROW praised his Chester players after Tuesday's fighting 3-3 draw at Rotherham.
City twice came from behind to take a point against one of the second division's form teams.
And caretaker boss Barrow said he was a little disappointed at not taking three points!
He said: ‘When you score three goals away from home you expect to take three points.
But really I am delighted because we showed a lot of spirit.
‘Rotherham are right up at the top of the table and they are there on merit.
Proving
‘But I cannot ask for any more from the players than the performances they are giving me and one or two are starting to show their true form.’
Stuart Rimmer fired City ahead at Millmoor but David Pugh had to equalise twice.
‘We knew he was one of the best finishers at the club and he is proving it,’ said Barrow.
Neil Morton suffered ankle ligament damage and is out of Saturday's home game with Swansea, as is Barry Butler, who suffered the same injury against Brighton last weekend.
Spencer Whelan and David Pugh both suffered injuries at Millmoor but should be fit to face Swansea, while John Kelly trained yesterday after his hamstring injury.
Cash for jobs plea
ON paper, at least, the depth of a recession seems an inopportune time to seek sponsors for a three-year programme to boost career opportunities for young Welsh speakers and help employers recruit more effectively.
Perhaps, on reflection, one might say that there never is a good time to seek £400,000.
If jobs are to be created in Welsh-speaking areas it is as well to prepare the ground well beforehand.
That is what Menter a Busnes, the unit that encourages enterprise among Welsh speakers, is doing.
The unit yesterday revealed its programme at Newtown.
It follows the findings of a unique study on the career hopes and opportunities of Welsh speakers.
The Development Board for Rural Wales's Social Development programme funded it, but Dyfed and Gwynedd County Council careers services, the University of Wales (Aberystwyth) careers service, Powys Education authority, Dyfed joint working party on bilingualism and the Welsh Language Education Development Committee, all had some input in the study.
DBRW chairman Glyn Davies says the programme would not only increase opportunities for young people, but also the effectiveness of employers by making it easier for them to recruit suitable employees.
Skills
Funding is being sought from private and public sectors to establish a network of local agents to form close contacts with businesses and employers, particularly those using Welsh for work experience and recruitment.
A marketing programme would increase awareness of opportunities.
Welsh language and bilingual skills would be built into career programmes with parents being encouraged to take part.
An important aspect would be a study of the progress of a sample of young people over a long period.
THE responsibility of community theatre includes producing interesting plays for audiences and encouraging young talent to develop theatrical skills.
Theatr Bara Caws hopes to achieve both with its pre-Christmas Chwarae'r Diawl dealing with the widespread belief in 19th century Wales in superstition and magic.
Young actress, Sin Summers, of Penrhosgarnedd, a former pupil of Ysgol Tryfan, Bangor, has her first shot at producing the play by Mair Gruffydd, a permanent member of the company.
The play features actors Catherine Aran, Maldwyn John, Merfyn Jones and for the first time with Bara Caws, Manon Prysor.
More than 20 centres in North and mid Wales are to be visited in the month from the opening night, November 17, and December 17.
Milk quota looking good
MILK producers are well on course to hit quota by the year-end, according to Milk Marketing Board head of quotas Huw Rees.
Butterfat-adjusted milk production continues to follow the MMB's quota profile very closely.
Production in the week ended October 10 was 1.1m litres, or 0.5pc below the quota profile.
The cumulative position shows England and Wales production at around 0.8m litres
Rule-change warning
LIVESTOCK farmers have been alerted to adapt their enterprises in readiness for the advent of suckler cow quotas.
Malcolm Thomas, the NFU's deputy director for Wales, points out that revised rules of eligibility will apply under the Suckler Cow Premium Scheme from January 1.
He said:’ As from January payment will only be made on pure beef or beef-dairy cross cows put to a beef bull.’
Sheep counting made easy
CHANGES in the Sheep Annual Premium Scheme regulations means that sheep farmers will have to count their sheep and record them from January.
To assist them the Farmers' Union of Wales has produced an easy-to-use flock record book costing 50p.
£m appeal by CPRE
TELEVISION personality Jonathan Dimbleby marked taking over the presidency of the Council for the Protection of Rural England by launching a £500,000 appeal to fund ‘the battle to protect the English countryside.’
Lord Hesketh, who farms 5,000 acres at Towcester Northamptonshire, has become the first honorary vice-president of the British Simmental Cattle Society.
Chief Whip in the House of Lords, he owns the 50strong Easton Neston pedigree herd plus 250 Simmental cross Hereford suckler cows.
There are between 800 to 1,000 crossbreds at any one time in his intensive beef unit.
More than 1,000 YFC members took part in the 1992 competitions programme staged at the National Agricultural Centre and watched by the Princess Royal.
Carmarthen's Bethan Non Bowen, won the national cookery final and Shropshire's Clare Evans, the intermediate fashion section.
Clwyd's Lowri Wyn was third in the national junior fashion competition and Lancashire's Julie Mercer shared third place in the senior section.
David Lloyd, a director of the family business for seven years, has taken over as managing director of the Shropshire-based Lloyd's Animal Feeds group.
Opportunities abroad -Tudor
SHEEP farmers should be working towards increasing the potential for earning foreign currency, according to Welsh Lamb Enterprise chairman Tom Tudor.
Mr Tudor, who farms, near Welshpool, is just back from the big SIAL international food exhibition in Paris.
He believes that sheep farmers who think only about the pound in their pocket could be doing themselves a great disservice.
‘They should be considering how to increase the value of that pound in terms of francs, liras and pesetas,’ he said.
‘Those lambs that are not expected to fetch a top price on the home market may well be ideally suited for export.
‘Hundreds of thousands of the smaller lambs, for example, are in great demand in European countries.
Every country has different requirements, and it is vitally important for Welsh lamb producers to be fully aware of the type of lamb that is needed for the various export markets.
‘It would be no exaggeration to say that the future prosperity of the sheep industry in Wales depends to a large extent on satisfying the palates of diners in Paris, Rome and Madrid.’
The first of a series of Welsh lamb export roadshows organised by WLE in conjunction with the Meat and Livestock Commission took place in Newtown this week.
The five-centre tour continues next week at LLysfasi College of Agriculture, Ruthin, on Monday and the Royal Hotel Caernarfon, on Tuesday.
Both presentations start at 7pm.
Homes protest
THE erection of 12 houses on land used as an orchard in the centre of Bettws Cedewain is being opposed by a Montgomery planning inspection panel.
Bettws Community Council and local MP Alex Carlile had both protested against the plan.
Fighting plan
AN APPLICATION to extend the Garth Caravan Park at Machynlleth to include 10 static holiday caravans is being opposed by Montgomeryshire planners following a site inspection.
True-blue breeders!
THERE was a good entry for the recent Belgian Blue calf competition, jointly sponsored by Oldacre Feeds of Wrexham and the North West Belgian Blue Club, and staged at Oswestry Smithfield.
Winner of the heifer calf prize was David Morgan of Cefn Twlch, New Mills, Newtown while the bull calf award went to John Edwards of Llyswen, Guilsfield.
The heifer realised £258 and the bull £305.
Pictured at the prize-giving are, from left: David Morgan; Brent Ion, representative of Oldacre Feeds; Graham Edwards with the bull calf shown by his father John, and Barry Davies, of Oswestry Cattle Auctions
stiff anti-housing battle
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
PLANS for a hotel and leisure development at Bodelwyddan Castle are moving ahead, but officials face strong opposition to part of the package.
Talks are well advanced with a mystery company prepared to enter into a partnership, Clwyd's planning director Phillip Eyton-Jones has told Rhuddlan borough's tourism and amenities committee.
The scheme, part of a package aimed at cutting the council's expenditure on the complex, will involve converting parts of the building into bedrooms and other leisure facilities, such as an indoor bowling centre and swimming-pool.
The second part of the package is the creation of a golf course which would retain the open parkland in front of the castle.
Mr Eyton-Jones said another firm had shown interest.
Those proposals have generally been well received but councillors are concerned over plans to part of the grounds for housing.
About 24 houses are proposed behind the castle but the strongest objections are to the development of an area alongside the A55 Expressway in a corner of the park.
Mr Eyton-Jones said the development was an essential part of the cost-cutting package and the 40 houses would be well located for the St. Asaph Business Park being built nearby.
He stressed that the most important aim was to retain the National Portrait Gallery exhibition within the castle.
The housing development was a key factor in enabling that to happen.
But Coun Dr Ann Macleod said: ‘I think it is too high a price to pay because the housing in the north-east corner will affect far more people than the loss of the National Gallery.’
But Coun Derek Davies said the compromise should prove acceptable, particularly considering the county council had in the past been forced to cut vital services to finance the castle.
‘We have to look to the future and I am sure that the unitary authorities will not want to pick up the massive debt charges on the castle,’ he said.
Bodelwyddan Castle: The fighting continues
Cereal growers get European parity in change of heart
By David Lloyd Farming Correspondent
BRITAIN'S arable farmers have welcomed Agriculture Minister John Gummer's announcement of a relaxation in the moisture content for cereals intervention.
This puts them on the same footing as European growers after earlier anger and allegations that Ministry of Agriculture officials had agreed terms that disadvantaged UK grain growers.
The National Farmers' Union described Mr Gummer's decision to seek the European Commission's agreement to a derogation increasing the moisture content standard from 14.5pc to 15pc as ‘a welcome boost after a wet and troublesome harvest.’
Mr Gummer, who had always maintained that he would act if circumstances demanded, said farmers were frequently forced to combine in very wet conditions.
He said: ‘In these exceptional circumstances the moisture content was bound to be much higher than usual, leading to additional costs in drying down to reach the normal intervention standards of 14.45pc.’
The derogation, which applies to all cereals intervened after November 1, puts UK farmers on a par with their counterparts in northern Europe where the relaxation has applied for some time.
NFU North West senior policy adviser Rodney Bacon commented:’ Lifting the moisture content from 14.5 to 15pc will put us back onto a level playing field.
This will cut farmers' grain drying costs at a time when margins are under pressure.’
Although the recent sterling value reductions look set to boost UK grain exports to make sales into intervention less attractive, many UK farmers felt lower moisture level standards on the Continent gave their competitors an unfair ‘floor’ to their grain market.
Mr Bacon said moisture levels of 18 or 19pc were the norm in the northern Britain after such a wet, difficult harvest.
‘The fuel savings will have enormous benefits both to the farmer's pocket and the environment.’
The Government has also announced that the deadline for cereal farmers to submit claims for repayment of cereals co-responsibility levy under the Small Cereals Producer Scheme and the two schemes open to participants in five year set-aside is to be extended until November 18.
The original deadline was August 31.
But the extension will not apply to those in one year set-aside for which the deadline for the receipt of applications is regulated by the EC.
Rector sex charge after 20 years
A CHURCH of England rector appeared in court yesterday accused of indecently assaulting a young girl nearly 20 years ago.
The Rev Patrick John Dennis, 48, rector of Bradfield, South Yorkshire, was alleged to have committed the offence against a girl under the age of 16 at Ponteland, Northumberland.
The court was told the charges relate alleged assaults between January 1, 1972, and December 31, 1973.
Magistrates at Bedlington, Northumberland, agreed to a month-long adjournment after Philip Jackson, defending, requested more time to study the case papers.
Dennis, of Braithwell, South Yorkshire, was granted unconditional bail until his next appearance on December 2.
US prepared to launch trade war
By Sian Clare Press Association
THE United States fired the first shot in a possible world trade war yesterday.
A senior US official said it was seeking approval from the world trade body, Gatt, for retaliation against the European Community in their bitter trade row over oilseeds.
Deputy US trade representative Rufus Yerxa revealed the move before a meeting in Geneva of the governing council of Gatt (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) where he said the approval would be sought.
Britain's Agriculture Minister John Gummer yesterday urged parties to the GATT trade talks to get back round the negotiating table because there was a ‘deal in sight’.
As a trade war between Europe and the US loomed, Mr Gummer remained optimistic that agreement could still be struck.
The minister, just back from Chicago where he had been fighting to prevent the breakdown of the talks, described the prospect of punitive tariffs as ‘sad’.
He said: ‘I very much hope we can get back to the table.
There is a deal within sight and it ought not to be like this between friendly nations.’
However, he put the blame for the crumbling negotiations firmly at the feet of the Americans.
‘I said some time ago that there was a mile to go and we had to go half a mile each, and the Community went more than its half a mile.
‘It seemed to turn out in the end that the American negotiator didn't have any flexibility and remained on the crucial issues unmoved.’
Talks between the world's two largest trading blocs broke down over US demands for cuts in subsidies paid to French farmers for oil seed products.
Members of the European Community now face punitive US tariffs on a hit-list of exported products worth £193.5m, although a 30-day interlude is expected before the sanctions take effect.
Mr Gummer claimed that during the negotiations the powerful American farming lobby had been ‘all over the hotel’.
He admitted the world was now ‘close to’ a trade war.
But he stressed: ‘It is the United States that is saying it wishes to take action against European exports to the United States.
‘If only there had been a little bit more flexibility on the United States side I think it could have been successfully accomplished.’
Gummer's secret trip
‘Tortured’ life of the Maxwell pensioners
Marching protesters plea to MPs
By Alan Jones Daily Post Correspondent
MORE than 1,000 Maxwell pensioners and print workers yesterday staged a rally and lobby of Parliament to step up their campaign for Government action to give them long-term security for their pensions.
The pensioners complained on the eve of the first anniversary of the publisher's death that they still did not know how long their pensions would be paid.
Maxwell Pensioners Action Group chairman Ken Trench said 20,000 pensioners were still on the ‘gangplank’ because of the uncertainty.
‘I cannot imagine a worse torture than not knowing how long your pension will be paid,’ Mr Trench told a London news conference before they marched to Parliament to lobby their MPs.
‘The Government has so far concentrated on short-term actions and pension law reform.
‘But pensioners need to know that their pension will be paid for the rest of their life.
‘The Government failed to provide adequate protection of pensions and it has a moral responsibility to help the Maxwell pensioners.’
Mr Trench said inadequate legislation allowed ‘the financial burglar’ to steal the security of 20,000 pensioners and the Government should now underwrite pensions to be paid in full.
The Government, he added, should take over the legal battle to reclaim millions of pounds which Robert Maxwell plundered from pension funds instead of leaving professional advisers charging £1m a month to unravel the complexities of the disgraced tycoon's financial dealings.
Graphical, Paper and Media Union national officer John Mitchell, whose members joined the march, said temporary government loans to Maxwell pensioners would run out in the New Year.
He said in a letter to MPs: ‘Maxwell pensioners will be asking Parliament to bring this gnawing uncertainty to an end by calling on the Government to shoulder its responsibilities by guaranteeing their pensions and assuming full responsibility for the pursuit and recovery of all stolen assets.’
Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley said later that the Government had taken ‘substantial measures’ to help the Maxwell pensioners, including last week's announcement of a £100m loan.
But he added: ‘No Government could accept an obligation to use taxpayers’ money to make good all losses resulting from fraud.’
Maxwell pensioners and print workers march to a lobby of Parliament to seek Government help in securing their pensions
Battling Wheatsheaf fuel their title hopes
WHEATSHEAF defeated Castrol Sports 2-0 in a keenly-fought Ellesmere Port Sunday League premier division clash, Ian Evason and Brian Jewkes netting.
Dragon Pallets (Ian Fullerton, Dave Pearce) won 2-1 in the first division against Light of India and Wing Half (John Farrell, Ritchie Martin) defeated MSC Eastham 2-0.
Paul O'Brien was a three-goal scorer for Station Hotel in a 4-3 win over Kingkabs, Woodlands (Craig Stanford, Paul Caslin) beat Ellesmere Arms 2-0 and Freeman accounted for Sutton Way Hotel 3-1.
John Ainsworth and Barry Moore each netted twice for Octel in a 5-2 win over Wirral Athletic and a Carl Walker hat-trick gained Vauxhalls a 5-0 second division success over AES Sutton Way.
Black Lion shared six goals with Travellers Rest, Warwick United hammered Brown Horse 6-1 and Lionel Robinson drew 2-2 with Rake Hall.
Simon Thelwell scored a hat-trick for Hollywood Rivacre in their 6-0 win over Bull Wanderers and in division three, Halfway House TTS had a three-goal star in Graeme Leadbetter when they drew 4-4 with The Gunners.
Wirral Athletic Res defeated Old Red Lion 32 and Dave Edwards scored three times for Nags Head in a 3-0 success against Princes Hotel.
Labour Social drew 3-3 with Station Hotel Res, Merebrook Res defeated Shell Villa 4-2 and Coach & Horses won 3-2 against The Knot Star Cars.
NOVA staged a battling fightback to book their place in the third round of the Wirral FA Sunday Premier Cup with a thrilling 5-4 victory over Hope Farm S.H.
Wirral Sunday League Nova were 2-0 down before Peter Barron pulled a goal back only for Hope Farm to restore their advantage.
Maurice Freeman grabbed a second for Nova and with eight minutes remaining Graham Murphy equalised to force extra time.
An own goal and a Freeman effort sealed Nova's win, despite a late Hope Farm goal.
FINN HARPS keeper Chris Whelton scored two penalties in a thrilling 4-3 victory over Athol, a week after saving a penalty and then converting a spot kick in a 4-1 win over the same opponents.
FOLLOWING their tremendous FA Vase first round 3-1 win at HFS Loans League Radcliffe Borough, County Combination challengers Waterloo Dock have a plum home second round tie against another HFS Loans outfit Ashton United on November 21.
In the same round West Cheshire League stars Cammell Laird entertain North West Counties second division Salford City.
Breck's Mark of class!
WARBRECK registering a superb 3-1 Lancashire Amateur Cup third round victory at Rossendale Amateurs as cup-ties dominated an action-packed I-Zingari League card.
Goal ace Mark Backley scored twice with Graham Davies also netting.
In LCFA Challenge Cup second round replays, Aigburth P. Hall (Peter Jones 2, Jimmy Comer, Tommy Manning) won 4-2 at Roma (Chris Lee, Steve Parry) and after a 3-3 extra time draw Liverpool Nalgo beat Collegiate OB 3-2 on penalties.
Leyfield (Mick Whittaker) won 1-0 at Crystal Villa in the LCFA Junior Cup second round and De la Salle OB defeated Walton Village 3-0.
Dove & Olive beat Avon Athletic 5-3 after extra time and Kevin Abley scored a hat-trick for Edge Hill BCOB (Steve Parry 2, Alan Fulton) in a 6-0 home win over MDH Co.
LCFA Junior Cup second round: Interox 4, Sacre Coeur 0; Quarry Bank OB 3, Old Bootleians 2 (Gary Carvell, Alan Gibson); Rainford North End 0, Selwyn 5 (Martin Dixon 3, Mark Maxwell, Kevin Blease); St. Mary's COB 0, Beesix 4.
LCFA Intermediate Cup second round: Counterline 2, Blacklow Brow 6 (Paul Jennings 2, Mark Round, Mick Feeney, Joe Pickup); Dista 2 (Tony Murphy, Bernie McLindon), Foran Hamlet 2; Mossley Hill Res 2, Unity BCOB 1 (Danny Milne); Riversdale College 5 (Kevin Dawson 2, Ian Grace, Robbie Houghton, Dave Gray), Essemmay OB A 3; St. Aloysius 2 (Chris Smith, Eddie Nugent), Cabiin 0; BRNESC Res 2, Liver Vaults 3 (Paul Holmes 2, Tommy Grant).
Premier div: Quarry Bank OB 5 (Geoff Baird 3, Andy Mottram, Mark Lyons), Aintree Villa 1 (Simon Kennedy); Stoneycroft 3 (Paul Borrows 2, Gerry Scotland), Old Xaverians 2 (Carl Jenkins, Derek O'Hara).
Second div: Bluecoat OB 3 (Terry Hackett 3), Jabisco 5 (Carl Robb 2, Tommy Williams, Stewart Brown, Keith Ashton); Liobians 0, NELTC 2 (Carl Campbell, Graham Phelan); Southport Trinity 4 (Tony Kennedy 2, Barry Short, Ian Pedder), Hillfoot Hey OB 3 (Mark Cutts, John Iglesden, Paul Leach); Waterloo GSOB 2 (Keith Richardson, Chris Stubbs), Rockville 1 (Martin Craven).
LITHERLAND Labour defeated Caradoc (Brian Kent 2) 4-2 to share the leadership of the IZingari Alliance first division with MerseyView (Alan Long), who drew 1-1 with Chelsea Walnut (Steve Wilde).
Finn Harps (Chris Walton 2) beat Athol 4-3 in a thrilling tussle, but Metal Box (George Williams) were held 1-1 by Old Cathinians (Tony Kelly).
Castle, Delco Electronics, Heathbank and Thirlmere progressed in LCFA Cup-ties, but Ambulance Services and Edge Hill BCOB were eliminated.
A total of 41 goals were recorded in six second division encounters, with leaders Liver Vaults (James 2, Shirley 2) beating New Hey B 4-3 in an exciting tussle.
Aigburth P. Hall (John Burke, Frank Gallagher, Brendan O'Hare) won 3-1 at Liverpool Royal (Tony McNeish) and four goals from Bernie Gunderson was the highlight of De la Salle OB's 8-3 victory at Aintree Villa (Tom Dempsey, Peter Cronin, Gary Geldhart).
Des Mullen and Steve Conlan each netted twice for Salle.
Leyfield (John Swift 2, Steve Clark) shared six goals with Pinewood and Mossley Hill drew 4-4 at Hale Village.
Dista won 4-1 at Old Caths Res.
Suicide rector was depressed
A CLERGYMAN found hanging in his garage had suffered from depression for several years, an inquest heard yesterday.
West Clwyd Coroner Bryan Lewis recorded a verdict of suicide on the Rev Tom Stillings, Rector of Trefnant, who died on September 18.
At the hearing in Abergele his widow, Gillian Stillings, read a letter from their family doctor which stated that Mr Stillings had been a patient of Dr Dafydd Alun Jones at the North Wales Hospital.
His depression had become worse over the past year.
She said that on the morning of September 18 her husband got up about 6.30am.
When she got up at 7.45am she found a piece of paper in the kitchen with an arrow pointing towards the garage.
In there she found her husband hanging from a beam.
Mr Stillings, 59, had been Rector of Trefnant for 18 months and had formerly been curate at Rhosymedre and Minera, Vicar of Bagillt and Rector of Llanfynydd.
MEET THE REF
Joe Cotter…marathons
LIVERPOOL referee Joe Cotter must be one of the fittest officials on the Mersey soccer scene.
Joe also combines his sporting activities with marathon running, having completed two London and three Liverpool races.
He attended Queen of All Saints school in Townsend Avenue and played centre half, but later switched to playing goalkeeper for four seasons with Aigburth Peoples Hall Reserves in the I-Zingari Combination.
Employed in the building trade, Joe stopped playing and took an interest in junior soccer with the Aigburth P. Hall juniors in the South Merseyside MYA League and in the Wavertree Youth Alliance.
In 1989 he took a rest from running junior soccer teams and this season began refereeing in the South Merseyside Junior League.
A Class Three referee, Joe, 42, is a member of the Liverpool Sunday Referees Society.
He is married with a son and daughter and lives in Mossley Hill.
SUNDAY BEST
THE second round of the FA Sunday Cup tops the amateur soccer scene throughout Merseyside tomorrow, with 14 clubs in action, including three local clashes.
Almithak, the 1989 winners, face Liverpool Sunday League rivals Seymour at Grove Mount, Penny Lane, and will be hoping to strike winning form after being held 1-1 after extra time at Memorial in last week's LCFA Sunday Cup second round tie.
Seymour hope to have recently injured stars Joe Jordan, Mick Hand, Darren Hand, Tony Kinnear, Stuart Humphries and Jimmy Brown available for selection.
Other ties, with games kicking off at 2 p.m. unless stated, are:
Royal Oak v MITRE B.S.;
CLUBMOOR NALGO v BRITANNIA at the Nalgo Sports ground (12 noon);
BRNESC v Oakenshaw at Melling Road;
LITTLEWOODS ATHLETIC v MANFAST KIRKBY at the Littlewoods Sports ground;
NICOSIA v Carnforth at Hope Street, Prescot;
LOBSTER v Hartlepool Lion Hotel at Croxteth Comp.
School;
DOCK v NAPOLI at Ashville FC;
B & A Scaffolding v LION HOTEL;
A3 v Framwellgate Moor & Pity Me at Edinburgh Park;
EAGLE-KNOWSLEY v East Bowling Unity at Alt Park.
TSB set to axe 440 jobs, says union
THE Trustee Savings Bank is to axe 440 jobs, many by compulsory redundancy, the banking union claimed yesterday.
The cuts will hit managers, clerical and computer staff and could lead to workers being made redundant before Christmas, said the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union.
The redundancies include 80 senior managers, 150 branch managers, 120 computer staff and 90 clerical staff, it claimed.
The branch manager jobs are said to be going as part of a reorganisation which BIFU believes will lead to more job losses.
‘These job cuts are totally indefensible and will also damage customer service,’ said Jennifer Cole, BIFU negotiating officer.
‘Surplus staff are being identified as unwanted and told that if redeployment is not possible within 28 days they could then be sacked just before Christmas.’
The bank, Britain's sixth biggest, will breach its agreement with staff if it makes workers compulsorily redundant, said BIFU.
Staff will hold a series of meetings over the next few weeks to decide how to respond to the cuts plan.
Tributes on death of opera star, 92
By Gerald Williams Daily Post Staff
TRIBUTES have been paid to a famous opera singer referred to as ‘the second Katherine Ferrier,’ Gladys Williams, who has died, aged 92.
Her rich contralto voice was heard by cinema-goers on the soundtracks of such films as The Proud Valley, The Last Days of Dolwyn, and How Green Was My Valley.
She frequently appeared on the London stage and other leading opera houses, and sang with Paul Robeson at Caernarfon.
A memorial service was held at Capel Tegid, the Welsh Presbyterian chapel at Bala, her native town to which she retired after her singing career.
Her minister, the Rev Brian Griffith, said: ‘She showed great promise and talent as a singer at an early age.
‘She was persuaded to pursue a singing career in London and, as Madame Gladys Williams, became a national name in the world of music.
‘There were frequent calls for her services from all parts of the British Isles and she was the first to sing in Welsh on Dublin radio.’
Audiences in South Wales liked her so much that she was invited to return there to sing time after time.
‘Songs were specially composed for her by such distinguished musicians as WSGwynn Williams and Meirion Williams, and she was often referred to as ‘the second Katherine Ferrier’,’ he said.
She sang in front of distinguished personages, such as former Prime Minister David Lloyd George and Dame Margaret, and was a personal friend of Lady Megan Lloyd George.
She returned to Bala at the end of World War II and lived at Hirwyn, Trem-y-Ffridd.
Her only surviving sister, Mrs Megan Edwards, 72, lives at Rhyl.
After yesterday's memorial service, cremation took place at Colwyn Bay.
Gladys Williams
Glebe's title boost
GLEBE consolidated their lead at the top of the Merseyside League by overcoming Kirkdale 5-3 in a thrilling encounter.
Moss Vale gained a comfortable 5-1 success at Kilversley, with Steve Smith and Paul Donahue each netting twice and Tony Shields rounding off the scoring.
John McCann converted a penalty for the losers' reply.
Tony Walsh scored six goals as Peppers won 12-2 at bottom-placed Palatine (Chris Sherry, Peter Middleman), with Paul McGuinness (3), Paul McGuire (2) and Steve Carroll also netting for the winners.
Kirkby beat Kingston 3-0 and Leamington had a three-goal star in Graham Phelan in their 5-3 win against Clifton, Billy Heinze adding a brace.
In division two, leaders Linacre Pacific beast Chaser 5-0, with Geoff Brighouse (2), Paul Walmsley, Paul Groom and Dave Blessington their marksmen.
Lagos Corinthians netted their second goal of the season in a 7-1 defeat against Stevenson & Reid, Ian Tweedale scoring three times with Tony Makin (2), Tony Kelly and Chris Delaney also netting.
Corporation Bootle and Hamilton both progressed in the LCFA Intermediate Cup, Corporation beating Sarum 3-2 and Hamilton having a hat-trick star in Ritchie Graham in a 3-2 success over Crusader (Adrian Apter, Stuart Thornton).
TETLEY Walkers beat Sidac Social 6-2 in a Warrington Saturday League Jubilee Cup-tie.
But their knockout involvement allowed Whiston Cross to take over the premier division leadership courtesy of a 5-2 victory over Monks Sports.
Vicars played a goalless draw with Ditton and Golborne Sports beat bottom placed Crosfields 1-0, while in division one, Halton Borough lost their unbeaten record, 2-1 at Poulton Smithys.
Padgate won 3-2 at Vulcan Newton and Laporte won 6-2 at ICI Widnes.
Laporte reserve striker Kevin Rimer cracked home six goals in their Rylands Cup 11-1 romp against St. Albans Res.
Birchwood Town won 2-1 at home against East Leigh in division two, third-placed Kingsway won 6-3 against Winwick and Norland collected their first points of the season with a 1-0 home win against Wood Albion.
In memory of 26,000
A SERVICE in memory of 26,000 people cremated at a North Wales crematorium may become an annual event after its success.
The remembrance service conducted by the Rev Paul Varah, Vicar of Rhostyllen, near Wrexham, at Pentre Bychan crematorium attracted more than 400 people.
One widow wrote to thank the organisers and said it was the most moving service she had ever attended.
The crematorium chapel was full and more listened to the service which was relayed to crowds outside.
Sad North End's stunner
THERE was no cup joy for St. Helens Combination club Rainford North End, who suffered a 5-0 LCFA Junior Cup defeat against Selwyn.
But Pilkingtons Res (Nuttall) drew 11 after extra time with Camadale to keep their hopes alive.
In the LCFA Intermadiate Cup, last season's semi-finalists Fingerpost Queens Arms (Mark Mitchell-pen) lost 2-1 at Newsham Park and second division Fridaymen (Eddie Valentine, Geoff Nulty) lost 3-2 against Clock Face Colliery.
Hen & Chickens (Alan Hockenhull, Darren Platt) won 2-1 against Prescot Celtic and Real Black Bull were hammered 10-0 at Shrewsbury HOB.
Old Ecclestonians lost 5-0 against Uni-Liverpool, but York won 5-4 against Walker Park.
In the Rainford Potteries Cup fourth round, York Res (Steve Ball, Ian Makin) won 2-1 against Prescot BICC Res (Jason Haskayne) and Nick Reid hit a hat-trick for Globe Res in a 4-2 home win over North End Res.
In the league, Prescot BICC (Colin Oakes 2) won 4-2 against Prescot Res and first division leaders Railway regained winning form with a 3-1 success against Carborundum.
Paul Molyneux followed his previous week's four goals with a hat-trick for Clock Face in a 5-4 win at East Sutton.
Greenpark power is a cup ticket
TWO goals each from Mick Shannon and Paul Petrie gained Greenpark a superb 5-2 home success over Childwall Greenvale in the Formers Sunday League McDonnell Cup first round.
Steve Wood also netted for the winners, while Danny Fair and Steve Lyons were on target for Greenvale.
There was no shortage of excitement or goals in Vale's 4-4 home draw with Parkside Villa.
Phil Potter, Steve Potter, Ken Baker (pen) and John Aulberry) scored for Vale, with Villa replying via Tom Whittaker (2), Don Owen and John Swift.
Norma Jeans (Brian McGorry 2, Brian Flowers) drew 3-3 at Mase (David Bond, Julian Berry, og) and two goals from Johnny Caulfield clinched a thrilling 3-2 victory for Overton (Dave Westhead) at Newbrook (Jason King, Bernie Fulton).
New Roy defeated Churchill (Ian Lawton 2) 6-2, Dave Mulrooney and Andy Webb each scoring twice with Marcus Thomas and Karl Skeete also netting.
Manstowe Eagle (Chris Cleary, Steve Fairhurst, Mick Knowles) won 3-2 at Stanbridge (Des Mullen, Phil Markey).
LONGVIEW Labour hammered Cronton Villa 9-1 in a Runcorn Sunday League premier division tussle and Cherry Sutton also hit top form, winning 6-2 against Egerton.
First division leaders CC Speke Res beat Wheathill 51 and second-placed Four Topper Oak beat Croft 5-4.
In a second division top-of-the-table clash, Thomas & Nelson drew 1-1 with Stockkman Lodge, Rocksavage won 2-1 at Duke of Wellington and third-placed Tarbock Villa maintained won 4-2 against Todds.
Tavern won 5-4 at Windmill and Southbank edged home 2-1 against Halton Cavaliers.
Third division leaders Dundalk won 3-1 at home against Chemie Pelser, AM Boothe defeated Boca 4-1 and High Leigh drew 3-3 at Brookside.
Cricketers romped home 7-1 against Castle and Laporte hammered The Inn 8-3.
Six shooters storm home
Sparks fly as Nalgo strike
CLUBMOOR Nalgo had to battle hard for their 6-3 victory over AC Sparks in the Business Houses Sunday League premier division.
Mick Jones and Lee Davis each scored twice with Sheldon Fayal and Tony Foster also on target, while Tony Murt, Pete Hawkins and Carl Bell replied.
Manfast Kirkby shared four goals with BRNESC and Iron Bridge won 2-1 against YC Whiston.
In division one, Sherwood Park (John Spriggs 2, Alan Birtles, Jimmy Clarke, Barry Mason, Chris Marsh, Paul Duggan, Mick Roberts) trounced Bohemians 8-1 and Duttons (Jeff Dodd 2, Steve Handford, John McKenna) shared eight goals with Daily Post & Echo (Alan Clark 2, Graham Clarke, Barry Williams).
Bendale (Willie Grant) drew 1-1 with Taveners (Mick Harrison) and Littlewoods (Mark Douglas 2, Paul Holmes 2) completed the double over Helsby (Alan Wilson) with a 4-1 win.
Draws were the order of the day in division two, Gainsborough (Marks Cutts, Jay McKettrick) drawing 2-2 with Gateacre and Pools (Mick Houghton, David Fox) sharing four goals with Norgreen Villa (Chris Quirk-pen, John Quirk).
Nationwide Funding (Jimmy McEnery 2) were held 2-2 by Gregsons and Dudley (Scott Davidson 2, Colin Graham, Steve Bird) beat Cottex 4-2.
Merrivale (Rick Matthews 2, Ray Fox, Graham Morgan) won 4-2 against Mast Laboratories and Pool Windows (John Wooding, John Boyd, Dave Reece) defeated Magnet 3-1.
Parkfield Toyota (Steve Barrett, Nigel Sartain) drew 2-2 in division three with Dales (Ritchie Kruger, Ian McCarthy), while Modern Ceilings drew 2-2 with Kingsheath and Power were held 2-2 by Homeright Bathrooms.
Danmare hammered Shannon United 8-3 and George FC won 3-0 at the expense of Ceramics EA.
Morcoast (Kevin Ryan, John Ryan 2, Dave Coney 2, Mark Johnson 2) hammered Radways 7-0, with the losers having two players sent off.
Lancaster accounted for Arc Joinery 4-0 and Clockhouse won 3-1 against Tessies.
Cox Radcliffe (Peter Lowe 2, Tommy Fielding 3) defeated Green Lane (Vinny Coleman) 5-1 and Kaydee Carpets beat Bankfield 8-2.
In re-arranged LCFA Premier Cup-ties, Tagos (Alan Yates 2, Eric Harris 2, Andy Cribbin) twice trailed before beating Tanhouse Labour 5-3.
Seddons beat Alt Park United 3-2, while Nicosia (Joe Gibiliru, Arthur Mairah, Carl Riley, Ian Wild, Ian Hodgson) coasted to a 5-1 success over Majors.
Ultimate Joinery (Ritchie Hetherington, Colin Martindale, Mark Nairn) beat Thirlmere 3-0 and Eric Dawson was a three-goal ace for Walford Maritime, who pulled back a 2-0 deficit to win 5-3 against Caldway.
Salerno lost 3-1 against Western, CADWA were beaten 2-1 by Boundary and Fairfield won 1-0 at Arncliffe.
In the LCFA Intermediate Cup, Ace Telvision (Simon Frost 4, Phil Carswell 3, John Taylor) won 8-2 at Breakers, Fairway (Steve Bradshaw, Sean Donn) beat Ship 2-1 and Kellys Newsagents (Barry Sampson 2, Lee O'Brien) won 3-1 against Argonauts.
Assurance Pearl won 54 against Self Service Shoes and Craig Howlett scored all three goals for Stockman Villa in a 3-1 success against Anfield Arms.
Insurance accounted for Haymans Green 3-2 and Obiter lost 4-2 against Charterhouse Tilney.
LCFA Cup-ties curtailed the Saturday card, with Bar Aces (Alan Fearnley 2) beating Parcelforce 2-0, Tapes For Industry (Paul Naylor 2, Martin Kelly) beat Delco Electronics 3-1.
In midweek, Northern Rail (Mick O'Brien, Jimmy Knowles, Tommy Garner) came back from a 20 deficit to win 3-2 against Hornby Road Sports, who suffered their first setback of the season.
Disaster fire hero awarded £147,000
HERO fireman Paul Hale, who will never recover mentally from the horrors of the King's Cross disaster in which his senior officer and 31 members of the public died, was yesterday awarded £147,683 High Court damages.
The award to Mr Hale, 44, who received three bravery awards for his actions that night, was the highest for a member of the fire service suffering from post traumatic stress disorder and is one of the largest for this condition.
Mr Hale, of Summerville Avenue, Minster-on-Sea, Sheerness, Kent, thought he was going to die and suffered hallucinations in the November 1987 blaze.
He saw a man crying for help with his face burned off, had to crawl over the dead and injured to reach the flames and brought out six bodies, including a child.
Devastated by his experiences and the death of his station officer, Colin Townsley, he suffered nightmares and depression to the point where his wife Jeanette and three teenage children contemplated leaving him.
Awarding the damages, with costs, against London Underground, which accepted liability but contested the amount, Mr Justice Otton said: ‘Mr Hale is probably one of the most courageous men I have ever had, or shall ever have, the privilege of meeting.
‘On that terrible night he showed devotion to duty at a level not only expected by the London Fire Brigade and the public, but well beyond it.’
He felt unhappy and downgraded in his current non-operational job as a fire prevention officer in the service.
He went sick in September and had not returned to work since.
The judge said the prospect of further improvement in Mr Hale's condition was minimal.
He felt unhappy and downgraded in his current non-operational job as a fire prevention officer in the service.
He went sick in September and had not returned to work since.
The judge said the prospect of further improvement in Mr Hale's condition was minimal.
After the judgment, Neil Garrie, head of corporate affairs for London Underground, said: ‘We did not want to cause additional stress to Mr Hale but the evidence we had would not have supported a settlement of the size of the eventual award.’
He added: ‘We wish Mr Hale all the very best for the future.’
Mr Hale's is the last fireman's claim.
In all, London Underground has settled 60 out of 80 claims arising out of the disaster, to the tune of £2m.
Mr Hale would not comment directly but said in a statement read by his solicitor: ‘I am pleased it is all over.
It has taken a long time to get justice but the compensation will give financial security to my family and give us sufficient breathing space to try and rebuild our lives.
‘I am grateful for the support given to me by the London Fire Brigade, who have done all they can to help me over the years since the fire, and I would also like to thank the Fire Brigades Union for underwriting the risks of my legal claim.’
Hair apparent
INTERESTING sidelight on behaviour in the corridors of power: Nigel Lawson has revealed that when Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher appointed him Chancellor of the Exchequer, she told him to get his hair cut.
Apparently, she did not mind him being a mop head when occupying other Government positions, but felt it would not be fitting for the role of Chancellor.
It's a pity she wasn't more concerned about whether he was fit for the job or not, whatever his hair style.
Not getting there
WE'VE had leaves on the line, snow, iced-up points and now BR in the South East has come up with a new one for explaining delays to trains: Heavy morning dew.
It's amazing how the rest of the world manages to get by DESPITE the weather.
Laura sings her farewell to surgeon
LAURA Davies said goodbye to the surgeon who saved her life yesterday…with a Christmas song.
She sang a couple of verses of Jingle Bells to Greek-born doctor Andy Tzakis, who led the surgical team which performed Laura's double-transplant operation in a Pittsburgh hospital.
Dr Tzakis hugged Laura's parents, Fran and Les, and said he would visit them in England.
He added that he had every confidence that Laura would continue her remarkable recovery.
‘After her initial difficulties she has made a very satisfactory recovery.
We are all delighted that she will be able to go home but we will all miss her.
She is a lovely character,’ he said.
Four-year-old Laura, accompanied by nurse Christine Kenny and her parents will arrive at Heathrow airport today before catching the shuttle to Manchester for a family reunion.
Laura underwent a liver-bowel transplant at Pittsburgh Children's Hospital five months ago.
Her mother Fran said: ‘I cannot believe we are just a few hours from going home.
‘The last few days have been hectic but, thankfully, Laura has stayed well.
‘A year ago we were told that Laura was dying today she is running about full of energy and looking great.’
Laura's father Les said: ‘We are looking forward to getting back and living a normal life and having a great Christmas together as a family.’
Five-star Maghull on song
MAGHULL Community Centre held a 5-0 interval lead against West End United in the Ormskirk Sunday League, Joe Roach 2, John Baker, Mark Vernon and Garry Watson scoring.
After the interval, United hit back to net through Kevin Duff, Dave Snellgrove and Noel Johnson but a sixth goal from John Baker clinched a thrilling 6-3 victory.
FOPA maintained winning form by beating Everest 6-1, with Lee Gray a three-goal star to take his tally to 11 from his last seven games.
In division two, Hightown Club (Dave Cochran) kicked off as leaders with a 100 per cent record, but they lost both records in a 4-1 defeat against new leaders Moorgate Villa (Robbie Waith 2).
Firswood Vics beat Harrock 4-1, Paul Rushton was a three-goal star for Weld Blundell in their 5-1 success against Regent Printing and Phil Kerigan was a four-goal ace for Ev Bar in their 10-2 win over Metropolitan.
Welcome boost
Ormskirk West End (Steve Stewart, Adam Slobom 2) won 3-0 at Aughton and Charlie C's gained a welcome boost when they overcame Hare & Hounds 7-3 with John Kemmett scoring a hat-trick.
Moreton Stafford (Tommy Morgan 2, Andy Robinson 2) defeated Advatech 5-2 and Ruffwood OB (Steve Reddy 2) won 3-1 against Ashworth Kestrels.
Memorial recorded a splendid 1-1 extra time home draw with Almithak, but Melling Vics lost 2-1 against Temple Inn and Alt Park United lost 32 after extra time against Seddons.
In the LCFA Intermediate Cupo, Fibrecan hammered luckless Lidell Avenue 15-0 and Buck I'Th Vine were beaten 13-1 by St. Alphonsus.
Kodak beat Cherryfield 4-1.
Toby Triangle lost 5-3 against Fusilier and Upholland Britannia lost 4-3 against Paraffin.
LiverBus defeated Horsehoe 3-2 and Swiss Pioneer won 5-2 against Northway.
Springbok tour kicks off without trouble
THE South African rugby team's first game in Britain for almost 23 years passed without trouble yesterday after the anti-apartheid movement urged supporters not to protest.
There was a heavy police presence at Welford Road, Leicester, amid fears of disruption at the controversial tour's opening game.
But the Springboks cruised to a 32-9 victory over the Midlands and received a warm welcome from a capacity 13,500 crowd, with police reporting no significant incidents.
There was certainly no repeat of the violent confrontations which marred the last Springboks' tour in 1970 as only a group of about 70 chanting protesters stood outside the ground.
The British Anti-Apartheid Movement had called on supporters to follow the African National Congress line and not disrupt the Tour.
AAM president Archbishop Trevor Huddleston, and chairman Robert Hughes MP, said in a statement that such acts would be ‘misguided and counterproductive’.
Police said nine people six men and three women were in custody after they were arrested on suspicion of planning disruption at the game.
Pet goat butchered by thugs
THUGS slaughtered and dismembered a pet goat then took away its head as a trophy, police said yesterday.
The attackers took the seven-year-old goat, called Marvin, from the back garden of the house where he was tethered, butchered and skinned.
They then hacked off his legs before dumping the remains in the grounds of a nearby hospital.
Owner Karen Alexander said at her home in Middlewood Road, Sheffield, South Yorkshire: ‘I cannot describe how I feel about the people who have done this.
‘We have had Melvin since he was six weeks old and he was a gentle pet.
He was tied up in the garden but was put in a pen at night.
‘If we had arrived home earlier, he would have been safely inside.’
Manor giant-killers put on style in cup shock
ACTION STATIONS
ACTION MANOR grabbed the cup glory as LCFA Premier and Intermediate second round ties dominated the Liverpool Sunday League card.
Second division Action recorded a superb 2-1 success at first division Seymour (Paul Brown), Tony Dixon and Alan Anderson scoring in a fine team display.
Goalkeeper Tony Henney and striker Gareth Drury starred for Seymour, but Action were full value for their success.
Western (Ray Kinnear, Carl Balmer, Martin Dixon) won 3-1 at Salerno, while Eagle Knowsley defeated Brownmoor Park 4-0 with Owen Brown, Mick Feeney, Mark Riddell and Billy Roberts their marksmen.
A Tommy Bennett penalty clinched a 1-0 win for Fairfield at Arncliffe and Netherley RBL (Jeff Richardson, Barry Hensley, Paul Jeffers, Paul Connolly, Gary Kimpton) won 5-2 at West Everton, who had led 2-1.
A Tommy Williams double gained first division Oyster a 2-1 home victory over premier division Britannia, and Whitestock Derby had a hat-trick star in Neil Sheridan when they won 3-2 at Halewood Labour.
Returned to form
Rob Roy (Keith Jones 2, Dave Massett) won 3-2 at Sullivan Express and Blue Union struck something resembling normal form with a 6-2 home success against CC Speke (Peter Lavelle, John Stanley), the winners' goals coming from Phil Smith (2), Colin Harris, Tony Hawkins, Mark Davies and Kenny Jones.
Almithak drew 1-1 after extra time at Memorial and replay at home on November 15.
Wood Lane (Dean Jones, Eddie McShane, Colin McCarten, og) beat Young Woolton 4-1 in the Intermediate Cup and a Steve Walmsley hat-trick steered Black Bull (Colin Walmsley 2, Paul Carmichael) to a 6-2 home win over Blue Peter (Chris Heron, Alan O'Toole).
Newfield took over top spot in the premier division after beating Lobster 1-0 with substitute Dino Farrag scoring with his first touch after 76 minutes.
Kevin Walsh scored three times for Sandon (Billy Hardacre) in their 4-2 win at Croxteth RBL, while in division one, Etnaward (Franny Hyland 2, Simon Connolly) defeated Flat Iron 3-1.
Garston Woodcutters won 4-1 at Dengo United and Allerton beat Crown 2-1.
Bradewell Clock (John Williams, Carl Brownless, Joe Fenlon) accounted for Grange Cavalier 3-2 at home in division two and goal ace Perry Elms netted an equaliser for Everton Supporters in a 1-1 draw at HOB's (Alan Doyle).
Devonshire House registered a 3-2 home success over leaders Village Eagle, while Brookhouse right-back Mark Brown and centre back Mark McNally scored in their third division 2-1 home win against High Oaks.
Greyhound (Mark Johnston 2, John Roberts 2) pulled back an early deficit at Caledonia (Nigel Munn) to win 4-1.
St. Ambrose (Joe King 2, Nick Smith) won 3-0 at home against Farnworth Alex, and Pineapple (Barry McCarten, Tony Heeney, Gerrard Hill) won 3-0 against Flathouse.
Oscars (Vernon Wignall 2, Joe O'Neill-pen) won 3-1 at Pipeline, who held a 1-0 interval lead.
Centre forward John Gaze hit all four goals for Speke Argyle in a 4-1 victory at Novak Newsham (Kevin Humphries) and Albert (Alex Shaw, Steve Taylor) defeated Prince George 2-0.
In division four, St. Phillips (Tony Johnson) beat New Adlam 2-1 with Mark Ellis scoring an 86th minute winner.
Hat-tricks from Dave Vedmore, Mark Delaney and Phil King led the hit parade for Holt S & S (Jimmy Lee 2, Steve Keogh, Tony Baxendale) in their 13-1 home romp against Inn Lodges.
Ian hits trail for Lussac
FOUR goals from Ian Fearns set the seal on a 9-0 win for Lussac at NELTC in the I-Zingari Combination first division, David Brown adding a hattrick.
Mark Roberts and Steve Power netted for Liverpool Nalgo in their hard-fought 2-2 draw at Leyfield and an Andy Taylor double clinched a 2-1 home win for Maghull Town against St. Mary's COB.
Sefton & District defeated Alsop OB 3-2 in division two, while Steve Doyle scored twice for Waterloo GSOB in their 4-1 home success against Liobians.
Old Bootleians won 2-1 at Sacre Coeur, Old Holts edged home 1-0 at Collegiate OB and Southport Trinity (Gordon Wilson, Tony Johnson) accounted for Rockville 21.
A Les Cheeseman goal gained Stoneycroft a 1-0 win at Aintree Villa.
Paul Simmons scored both goals for Aigburth P. Hall Res in their LCFA Junior Cup second round success at Electric Supply Res and Quarry Bank OB Res progressed 3-2 at home against Old Bootleians.
In the second round of the LCFA Intermediate Cup, Sacre Coeur trounced Bluecoat OB 9-0 away, Andy Boon (2), Eddie Furlong (2), Ken Duffy (2) and Brian Roache (3) netting.
Old Xaverians won 3-2 against Academicals and Old Swan Tech.
beat De la Salle OB 6-2.
Bond winners
NATIONAL Savings £10,000 premium bond winners for November are: 20WB 039667 (winner lives in Northampton); 26SL 620357 (Kent); 5DK 822777 (Middlesex), 30WB 735226 (Buckinghamshire); and 8DZ 461520 (Portsmouth).
Mannion double delight
TURPINS turned over a 1-0 interval deficit to beat Ambulance Services 3-1 in an exciting LCFA Intermediate Cup second round tie.
Tony Mannion equalised for the Liverpool SSU Shipping League premier division side and after Lee Walker had put Turpins ahead Mannion clinched victory.
Non Pareil trailed 3-0 after 20 minutes at Heathbank in another thrilling, but despite drawing level through Brack, Bramhall and man of the match Johnny Barton it was Heathbank who carried the greater power to win 5-3.
Merebank hit Liverpool Nalgo for six, Alan McMahon (2), Cain, Brett, D. McMahon and Whitelaw scoring, while Beeches won 1-0 at Speke Legion and All Saints (Ian Hughes 2, Chris Wade) won 3-1 at Haydock.
Holders Halfie also recorded a splendid 3-1 success over Garswood United Res, Tommy Flude scoring twice with Tony Stapleton also on target.
Cantril A came from behind twice against Yorkshire Copper Tubes Res to win 3-2 with Jason Webb and Sean Quirk putting them level and Dave Abraham steering home a header to clinch victory.
Devonshire won 2-1 against Edge Hill BCOB, who had taken an early lead.
With 15 minutes remaining Tony Butler equalised with a long-range drive and Chris Hodge fired in an 85th minute winner.
League high-flyers Academicals lost 3-2 at Old Xaverians and Cabin came unstuck when they failed to convert two penalties in a 2-0 setback at St. Aloysius.
Foran Hamlet (Billy Hardacre, Billy Carmody) drew 2-2 at Dista and the Caribbean v Windermere Breck Road tie was abandoned at 2-2 when the referee suffered a calf injury and could not continue.
In the LCFA Junior Cup, East Lancs Crown put their inconsistent league form behind them with a 4-3 success over Lee Jones OB.
On the league front, Eurodata collected their first point of the season in division one when they pulled back a 3-1 deficit against Stretton Lucas (Curry, Hughes, Clements) to draw a 3-3 draw, with Chris Melia (2) and Neil Smith scoring.
Second division leaders Cantril B beat Red Rum 2-1 to take a six-point lead, and second-placed Bakery Inn (Paul Clayton) drew 1-1 with the improving Home Office B (Cave).
Walvale Academicals beat Wellington Road SS B 1-0.
Queen's fashion firm open for now
THE doors of the Queen's dressmaker Norman Hartnell opened as normal yesterday despite receivers having been called in.
But the celebrated Mayfair fashion house is operating only on a week-to-week basis to complete orders and little hope exists of securing its future by finding a buyer.
Hartnell blamed its financial difficulties on the prolonged recession combined with the worldwide depression in the haute couture industry and luxury brand goods market.
Director Manny Silverman said the backing consortium, which took over the house of Hartnell five years ago, could no longer support the company.
Roger Harper, the Isle of Man-based receiver, said: ‘The doors are open in the short term.
The staff are working as normal but only on a week-to-week basis.
‘The London business is available for sale but I don't hold out much hope of finding a buyer.’
He added that the 20 staff were giving their ‘complete co-operation’ but were ‘philosophical’about the eventual outcome.
Sir Norman Hartnell, who died in 1979 aged 77, set up the firm in 1923.
Ace Phil leads the charge in knockout romp
PHIL HEWITT was a four-goal ace for Kirkby UC (Ian Hardman 2) when they overwhelmned Botanic 8-0 in a Knowsley Sunday League Hillsborough Memorial Trophy second round win.
Clydewell won 2-1 at Springs, Mainstay (Mike Lynch 2) trounced Milanda 6-1 and the Ashton family, Graham, Keith and Mark, all scored for Boulevard Kirkby in their 3-2 home win over Westminster Sportsmans.
Black Angus won 11-1 at Shado, Boffin accounted for Thrasher Northern 4-2 and Crosswood (Colin Oakes 3) beat Jeff Cherryfield 5-4.
Haswell Drive (Paul Evans 2, Dave McCabe 2) won 6-3 at home against Kemble Lion (Lee Muldoon 2).
Steve O'Brien was a four-goal star for Belle Vale (Les Luxan 2) when they defeated Carling 4-1 and RAFA Kirkby (Eddie Langstaffe 2) defeated Barncroft 2-1.
Peter Smith netted an 85th minute winner for Kirkby RAOB in a 2-1 home victory against Quiet Man, while in division one, leaders Walnut Tree (Gerry Tully 4, Benie Stratton 2) won 6-4 at home against Aly's Over 40's.
Axis Holdings (Steve Thompson 2, Steve Wilson 2) won 5-4 in division two against Newall Engine (Brian Doyle 2).
In the LCFA Intermediate Cup second round, I.P.L.
beat Merlane SSC 2-1 and DAC's Athletic lost 4-3 at home against Netherton.
Winsford defeated Dow 3-2 and Paraffin pulled back a 31 deficit to beat Upholland Britannia.
In a L.C.F.A. Premier Cup second round replay, Molyneux (Dave Bibby 2, Paul McCormack) won 3-1 against Dovecot.
LION HOTEL are firmly on course to retain the Crosby Sunday League championship after going top with a 10-1 romp at Carisbrooke Hotel.
Matt Smith scored a hat-trick and Steve Jones, John Lawson and John McAdam were each on target twice.
Eden Vale (Peter Cumiskey, Tony Conlon) were held 2-2 at home by Strand Tavern (Steve Johnson, Joe Burleigh), but third-placed RNA Kirkby hammered Tonms Tavern 7-2 with Les Higham a four-goal star.
Second division leaders De Vere (Kevin Ford) won 1-0 at Conlons Newsagents, Albion forfeited their 100 per cent record in a 3-3 draw with Doric Celtic and a second half goal from Paul Stevens gained Fitness Connection a 1-0 win over Alex.
Stags (Rob Williams 2) won 3-1 at Star and Colin Taylor was a hat-trick star for Database in a 5-1 success at Crosotel.
Thornton Rangers moved into second place in division three when they defeated Sunblest 20, John Thomas and Brian Hoare scoring, while John Hillier hit a hattrick for Jawbone in a 4-2 win over Racecourse.
In the LCFA Premier Cup, Brownmoor Park lost 4-0 at Eagle-Knowsley, and in the LCFA Intermadiate Cup all four Crosby sides, Cable Street, Netherton, Highgreen and Swiss Pioneer progressed.
Drugs problem prompts action
A SPIRALLING drugs problem has forced a health authority to call an urgent meeting to tackle the problem.
Clwyd Health Authority has brought in top researchers and experts from across Wales for the event at Wrexham Medical Institute tomorrow.
Prof John Catford, executive director of the Health Promotion Authority for Wales, will chair the evening, and speakers will include an attache from the US Embassy, university academics, and a Home Office representative.
Subjects under discussion will include the post-heroin drugs scene, research analysis of drug use among 14 and 15 year olds, and developments involving crack, ecstasy and ketamine.
The event, which is being organised by Clwyd Health Authority Drugs Service and Clwyd Centre for Health Promotion, comes just days before European Drugs Prevention Week on Nov 16-22.
The health authority says that with more drugs misuse in society it is vital that drugs-related services and professionals are constantly updated on development and trends so that they could best help those in need.
It is feared the number of registered drug misusers is just a fraction of the true amount.
Shrews' aces look to Keeley
KEELEY scored five goals for CMS League first division Shrewsbury HOB Reserves in their 10-0 LCFA Intermediate Cup second round home victory over Real Black Bull.
Dickens (2), Summers, Kidd and Walker completed the tally.
Riverside (Caveney, Hall, Bray, Jones) cruised into round three with a 4-1 home success against Countess, but Shakespeare lost 5-3 at home against Delco Res.
Thirlmere were 6-4 winners in a thriller at Muncaster (Blood 2, Cousins 2) but despite a fine double from Collins, Counterline lost 6-2 at home to Blacklow Brow.
Unbeaten Stockwell Mount (Lawson 2, Williams, King) won 4-3 at Carmel (Edwards 2, Hughes) and Mossley Arms forced a 1-1 draw at Banjo.
Whittle was a four-goal star for FC Salle (Welsby 2, Hogan, Cavanagh) who defeated Sheridon (Lunt 2, Dunn) 8-3 in division two.
POULTON ROYAL took over the leadership of the Wallasey Sunday League second division after recording a splendid 3-2 victory over Harvest.
Leading scorer Les Edwards netted twice to take his tally to 18 and recent signing Peter Silcock also hit the target.
Parkview lifted themselves off the bottom of the first division with a hard-fought 2-1 win over Premier Social (Alan Povey), Johnny Bennett and Mickey Brown scoring.
The Wirral FA Premier Cup hopes of The Oak were felled in a 1-0 setback against Archers Social.
Archers find the target
ARCHERS Social, the Birkenhead Sunday League cup stars, recorded a splendid 1-0 Wirral FA Premier Cup victory over The Oak and Turleys progressed 4-1 against Neston Legion.
Renbad Rovers regained winning form 4-2 against Golden Fleece in the Memorial Challenge Cup first round, Roy Atkins (2), Neil Sherlock and Gary Griffiths scoring.
A Ray Upton double gained Star their second success of the season with a 2-0 win against Holmlands in division one and Windmill sailed to a 6-3 win over ESWA with Dave Harding (3), Gary Myers (2) and Tommy Cartwright scoring.
In the only second division game, Sandon Arms beat Holt Springs 4-3.
Shaftesbury Colts won 5-2 against FC Observatory in division three and fourth division leaders St. Johns RCNF suffered their first setback, 2-1 against Club Octel.
Saddle Club ((Sean Pownall 2) lost 7-2 against Neston (Chris Dawson 3, Paul meadows 2) and in the Youth Division, Houlihans won 8-1 at Banbridge United and Shore Villa defeated Hope Farm 3-1.
WOODPECKER (John Donnelly, Mick Roach) recorded a splendid 2-0 home win over Quarry Green in the Kirkby Sunday League first division.
Trader & Entertainer maintained their improvement with a deserved 2-2 draw at Pearl Oyster.
Roughwood played a goalless draw at Farmers Arms and Pinewood shared six goals at home with Bulford.
Sacred Heart overwhelmed Olympia 12-1 and in division two, Voluntary Services recorded their second win of the season, 3-2 at home against Croxteth SC.
Waddicar Villa won 6-1 at Optician Conlon and in LCFGA Intermediate Cup-ties, Hamilton won 3-2 against Crusader Railway, Kodak beat Cherryfield 4-1 and LiverBus accounted for Horsehoe 3-2.
Spies ain't what they used to be
WHO could deny that we now have a more open society when MI5 is actually advertising for spies?
They don't, of course, call them spies.
Their title is: Higher Intelligence Officer.
And it's a desk job at a moderate salary in London terms.
The adverts come within a year of the Government admitting the existence of MI5 and named its head, Mrs Stella Rimington.
With KGB agents now giving interviews and writing their memoirs, spying is not what it used to be.
It rather pulls the rug from under all those James Bond films.
Wirral inter-club meeting
THE annual meeting of the Wirral Inter-Club Scratch League will be held at Bromborough Golf Club on Friday, November 27 (7.30pm).
Among the matters to be discussed will be the rubber-stamping of the applications for membership from Vicars Cross and Wirral Ladies men's section.
They will play in the Second Division next season.
The two Echo trophies for the League champions (Prenton, holders) and the winners of the Second Division (Upton-by-Chester) will also be presented.
Mrs Mita Harris, ladies captain of Lee Park in 1968 and 1977, has taken office as captain of the Society of Liverpool Lady Golf Captains.
Mrs Harris, who plays off a handicap of 12, joined the club in 1964 and plays for the club team.
Her husband, Tony Harris, was club captain in 1972.
Ace Affleck is Mersey tops
TOURNAMENT LEADER PAUL
PAUL AFFLECK, the 26-year-old tournament assistant attached to Heswall, could be on the way to becoming the most successful tournament professional produced on Merseyside since John Morgan, the former Royal Liverpool pro.
Morgan, now 49, retired from the European Tour after finishing 190th on the 1991 merit list and relinquished his card after 22 years of consistent performances on the tour, highlighted by his win in the 1982 Jersey Open.
Outstanding
Now Affleck, who turned pro as a teenager, has won a place on next year's European Tour following his outstanding season as he finished top of the European Challenge Tour, winning £39,769 official prize money.
The top ten on the ‘junior’ European circuit are awarded category 11b membership with increased opportunities to play next year on the multi-million senior tour.
There were 44 tournaments on the Challenge Tour this season, the idea behind its formation being to discover and launch new talent for the future good of European golf.
Affleck certainly falls into that description.
He played in 17 tournaments and had seven top ten finishes, including his first tour victory in the Audi Open in Germany.
He was twice runner-up and missed only one cut.
Third on the merit list was former Lancashire county player, Paul Eales, assistant at Royal Lytham and Affleck's best pal on the tour.
His prize money totalled £33,050.
Affleck practices regularly at Heswall and aims to play in as many Liverpool Alliance events as possible this winter, keeping up his competitive edge in preparation for the demanding 1993 season.
Obtaining membership of the full European Tour means he will not have to undergo the punishing marathon of the PGA Qualifying School in France on November 13-18.
His Heswall colleague, Ian Spencer, is the only player from Merseyside to have succeeded at the pre-qualifying stage for the school and will be in France next week.
PAUL AFFLECK…hitting heights.
Belle rings out in style at Formby
BELLE ROBERTSON, one of the most famous British lady golfers since the war, seven times a Curtis Cup player and twice the non-playing captain of the international team, was the leading invited amateur at the prestigious Formby Ladies am-am tournament and was asked to present the prizes.
But she had to step down at one stage because she herself won the top prize of the day — and couldn't present it to herself!
Mrs Robertson scored 72 in a demonstration of her enduring ability to win by three shots from current Curtis Cup girl Catriona Lambert and fellow Scottish international Fiona Anderson, who each returned 75.
First prize in the invited men's section went to former Brabazon Trophy winner and England international Charlie Banks, who shot 68.
Top team
Cheshire captain Phil Bailey (Caldy), and Lancashire players Nick Uttley and Jonathan Gallagher each scored 69, with Gallagher taking the runners-up prize on a card play-off.
The top team award went to the quartet led by former Lancashire champion Bob Bardsley, including Helen Sharpe (16), Lindsay Hayward (18) and Margaret Innes (21).
They had a better-ball return of 126.
Other team awards: 127 Karen Firth, David Parsons, Ginny Scorah and David Clay; Sue Glynn, Hugh Smyth, Joan Roddan and Syd Cooke; 128 Nick Uttley, Ann Charnock, Ed Starkey and June McGibbon.
Doctor judgement is tough justice
IT SEEMS to me to be tough on Dr John Bromley, head of a four-GP practice, that he should take sole blame after a two-year-old boy had wandered into a surgery and swallowed some carbolic acid which should have been locked away.
Dr Bromley was fined £750 and is also now likely to face a disciplinary hearing before the General Medical Council and could be struck off.
There is, of course, great responsibility on GPs to ensure that safety regulations affecting dangerous fluids are scrupulously observed.
But does the boy's mother have no responsibility in this?
How did the boy come to be wandering around the surgery?
I realise she had attended with other children and it's no easy task to keep track on all of them.
But wouldn't it have been a good idea to ask a relative or neighbour to go with her or to look after the children who were not going to receive attention?
I'm sure doctors will now be revising their arrangements for storing medicines safely.
I think mothers should also take note of this case.
There are bound to be dangers where poisonous liquids are involved and children should be kept under close control.
Spirited spoof
OH, what a stir was caused by Ghostwatch, the BBC Halloween programme which appeared to have conjured up evil spirits in a haunted house.
It was all a spoof, but taken for real by many viewers, particularly when cameramen collapsed and scratches mysteriously appeared on a girl's face which became covered in blood and distorted.
Probably nothing like it has happened since America was hoodwinked by the Orson Welles 1938 radio play based on H.G. Wells' The War of the Worlds.
This left many listeners convinced that Martians had landed.
It is debatable whether the media should be indulging in this sort of leg-pulling by their effects departments, given that the programme is being watched by millions, not all of whom will be of a hardy constitution.
But there don't seem to have been any serious consequences from the BBC spoof.
Michael Parkinson, who presented the programme and added some credence to it by his presence, said afterwards: ‘It just shows what a capacity television has for delusion.’
There's no disputing that.
America will soon be finding out whether their new president is really as good as the image he presented on TV.
Building with comfort and quality in mind
COMFORT and quality are the bywords of the newly-opened Haddon show home at Fresh Fields, a new development off Whittle Avenue, Westbrook, Warrington, by Bovis Homes.
The ground floor of this four-bedroom family home includes guest cloakroom, dining room, breakfast kitchen and separate utility room.
The first floor master bedroom, with beautiful fitted wardrobes, is complemented by luxurious en-suite facilities with larger-than-average shower cubicle and vanity unit.
Three further bedrooms and a family bathroom are also accessed from the light, airy first-floor landing.
Bovis Homes reckons a major plus point are the top quality carpets, which are included in the £139,950 price tag.
These can be chosen from 10 exclusive designer schemes.
Externally, both front and rear gardens have been landscaped.
Each Hadon home has a double garage.
The show home is open daily except Tuesday and Wednesday.
Further information, including a colour brochure, can be obtained by phoning Judith Lister on 0925 710414.
Welcome to my world…
by FELICITY NEWSON
UNTIL now, engineer Bob Jones would have found it hard to imagine himself having to learn Russian to communicate with the people sharing his Liverpool home.
But big-hearted Bob is having to extend his linguistic knowledge after giving an open house welcome to a family of refugees from war-torn Bosnia.
While pregnant Senada Causevic and her four children begin to recover from their months of hell, Bob is mugging up on Russian so he is better able to share the fears and hopes of his new friends.
To take on the responsibility of looking after a frightened and disorientated family of five, who speak not a single word of English, would be an overwhelming chore for the most seasoned carer.
Why then has a divorced man, who cheerfully admits he is the wrong side of 50 and used to a fairly fancy-free existence, decided to play Good Samaritan to Bosnian refugees?
Clearly, compassion is part of the motivation.
But Bob explains that he has special personal reasons for wanting to help to express the gratitude that he felt when he was in dire trouble himself, thousands of miles from home, and was baled out by the kindness of strangers.
‘My job as an engineer has taken me all over the world,’ says Bob, who lives in Kirkdale and now works for GEC.
‘About 15 years ago, I was in Africa doing work for the oil refineries.
‘Because it was a fairly long-term contract my wife, who was pregnant, and our two children, were living out there with me, which was all well and good until I fell seriously ill and was carted into hospital.
‘It was the kind of job where there was no such thing as sick pay and I was in danger of losing my home and not being able to support my family.
‘If it hadn't been for the native Africans in the community who rallied round, looked after my wife and kept leaving food parcels outside the door we would have been sunk.
‘I've always been very aware that I needed to give something back after this experience and when I read about the appeal for people prepared to give homes to the Bosnians, I decided it was time I stepped in.’
The Causevics' situation with a pregnant wife, young children, and a husband missing due to adverse circumstances is an uncanny mirror of Bob's own position in Africa.
And it is an irony which has not been lost on him.
‘I may not be able to say very much to the mother and her kids, but I sympathise with them so much because of what my own family went through,’ he says.
‘And I think they realise how I feel and this has broken the ice.’
Although Bob's command of Serbo-Croat is non-existent and he is only at the early stages of learning Russian the Causevics' second language — he has enlisted the help of a friend, native Yugoslav Maria Delahunty, to act as an interpreter.
Members of the family are still reluctant to reveal the full horrors they endured in their homeland.
But Maria has been able to glean that they were forced to flee their home town in northern Bosnia when their house was occupied by enemy Serbs.
The father, Jasim, was captured — but is since believed to have fled and may even be elsewhere in England by now.
Meanwhile, Senada and the children moved to at least three successive refugee camps to escape the fighting, and survived almost exclusively on a diet of tinned fish.
They were plucked out of Bosnia in one of the mercy missions undertaken by Formby businessman Fred Willis, who has now enlisted the help of the Red Cross in an attempt to trace Jasim.
The Causevics arrived in Liverpool three weeks ago worn out, scared and weeping with emotion and relief.
They only possessions they had were the travel-weary clothes they stood up in.
However, thanks to the efforts of Fred, Bob and a host of well-wishers, they have since been equipped with all the basics they need to start rebuilding the civilised kind of lifestyle they are obviously used to.
Senada and her children, Mevlida (16), Sanel (15), Saliha (12) and Jasmina (11), now have changes of clothes to see them through the week, cash in their pockets, and the run of Bob's kitchen and store-cupboards, which were pre-stocked with macaroni and pasta for their arrival.
They have been on shopping trips, watched plenty of television and have even enjoyed visits to the Camelot theme park and Formby sands, courtesy of John Davies, another friend of Bob's, who is currently out of work and has volunteered with his wife to take the Causevics on occasional days out.
‘For the first few days they were all a bit subdued,’ Bob said.
‘The mother has been rather tearful — understandably so, because she's worried about her husband, and concerned because she's expecting a baby.
‘But bearing in mind what a tough time they must have had they're settling in remarkably well.
‘The family is honestly a pleasure to be with and they're lovely, well-brought up children.’
Bob says he thinks Senada was initially wary about accepting hospitality from a single man.
‘There was little I could do to set her mind at rest except be myself, but I think they feel comfortable with me now.
‘I have no idea how long the family will need to stay with me — it will depend how long it takes to find the Dad.
But as far as I'm concerned, they're welcome to be here for as long as they need.’
City Ground clash a chilling reminder that no team is too good to drop down
Relegation blues!
It is a sobering thought that if the football season were to end now, just a third of the way through, Tranmere Rovers and Everton could be exchanging places in the Premier League.
Even a few months ago it would have been unthinkable that Howard Kendall's Moody Blues should face Brian Clough's Nottingham Forest, as will happen on Saturday, in a match billed as a ‘relegation battle.’
Their meeting at the City Ground supplies a chilling reminder that no side at the foot of the table is too good to go down, and that nice guys often do finish last.
Complete contrast
It is relatively easy to see what has gone wrong at both clubs.
Cloughie, probably now less adaptable to sudden change than he used to be, has been hamstrung by the departure of two high class central defenders, whom he has been unable to replace despite having cash in the bank.
In complete contrast, the hard-up Blues, who are now some £5m in the red, are failing to make the most of a sound defence because, as I have written repeatedly throughout the last 12 months, they are seriously short of creative ability in midfield.
Much attention has been focussed on the failure of five different strikers to score goals, but only recently have others, and notably the outspoken Tony Cottee, started to appreciate the real problem at Goodison.
Stuart McCall may not have been a second Peter Reid, Kevin Richardson was hardly another Paul Bracewell and Neil McDonald was very much a poor man's Colin Harvey, but all three were far more constructive than the people who have replaced them.
Until that fatal weakness is overcome, I fear that the understandably-depressed Dr David Marsh will continue to find chairmanship of a professional football club a far less rewarding pastime than captaincy of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club.
SPOT ON…
Tony Cottee has pinpointed Everton's weakness
It's only a game, honest
IT was supposed to be a friendly, lady-like affair, a civilised game of football between Manchester United and Chorley in Division One of the National League.
That was until United goalkeeper Debbie Phillips was sent off for using foul and abusive language, and replaced by impressive stand-in, woman of the match Kate Wells.
The second half produced any amount of action, including five goals, three of them to Chorley, before their striker Bernie Taylor had to be stretchered off following a tackle from Kath Townley, who became the second United player to be dismissed.
That set the fur flying and even United coach Geoff Konopka was also sent off for serious misconduct.
Who said ladies were too refined to play soccer?
A title punch below the belt
I SUPPOSE I should be cheering myself hoarse that Britain has finally produced a heavyweight fit to challenge for the championship of the world in the person of Lennox Lewis.
That I am not, is due partly to my dislike of professional boxing and the men who manipulate it for their own ends, and partly to the fact that Lewis is yet another ‘adopted’ Englishman, who has spent most of his life in Canada, and won an Olympic medal fighting in their colours.
At least he seems likely to prosper rather more than the unfortunate Zola Budd.
Fall guy Lester a hero
IT IS typical of the British approach to sport that Lester Piggott's horrific fall last weekend has probably put the seal on his final acceptance by most of the general public.
When he was winning all the time, people spoke of his alleged meanness and refusal to communicate; when he fell foul of the Inland Revenue they carefully looked the other way.
Now that he has shown courage in adversity and survived a potential tragedy, he can be safely accepted as a national hero.
Major new job for Botham
LIKE HIM or loathe him, nobody can ignore Ian Botham.
As his cricketing career nears its close, he continues to show his versatility with marathon charity walks and now two man chat shows in partnership with his friend Viv Richards.
Soon, the showbiz season will doubtless claim him again, unless or until he turns his attention to politics.
Now there's a thought.
How about Beefy for Sports Minister?
It is typical of British tennis that Annabel Croft, who had not played a serious match for five years, should celebrate a light-hearted comeback by beating one of our brightest prospects who has just taken up the game professionally.
Good for Annabel, who had the sense to quit the circuit in good time and launch a successful new career.
How appropriate that her latest stage role should be in pantomime.
Buyer boost before a brick is laid
RESERVATIONS have already been taken for houses at Longwood Park near Warrington and the show homes only open this month.
There has been a steady stream of visitors to the temporary sales office at the development at Pewterspear, Appleton, and this has delighted managers at Redrow Homes (Northern).
John Jarvis, senior sales manager, said: ‘With interest like this before a brick is even laid, who knows what results we will achieve once potential purchasers can actually see the finished product.’
As well as reservations, several registrations under Redrow's special Estate Agency Plan have been taken.
This scheme provides practical and financial help for would-be purchasers with existing homes still to sell.
John Jarvis went on: ‘Among those registered under the EAP are a family of four from Winsford who, if they proceed, will be purchasing their third Redrow home.
You can't get much more satisfied customers than that.’
Variety
Longwood Park will eventually consist of 30 top quality four-bedroom detached houses, in a variety of styles, all with en-suite facilities and double garage.
Initial prices range from around £121,750 to £162,500.
High-grade specification of each home includes double glazing, gas central heating, fully-fitted kitchen with split-level oven and hob, utility room, downstairs cloakroom and landscaped gardens.
For further details of properties at Longwood Park, contact sales negotiator Chris on 0925 210695 or the Redrow sales office on 0244 520044.
Kenny turns on Supply
Table Tennis
by Don Davies
BATH STREET number one, Kenny Jackson, turned on a super show in his side's home fixture against Liverpool League First Division leaders Electric Supply.
The popular veteran scored another big upset when he beat Malcolm McEvoy, having earlier this season overturned Liverpool number one Keith Williams.
He added another success against Ken Connor, while teammate Mike Keane chipped in with his best win of the campaign against Rob Bevan.
It still wasn't enough, however, to prevent the visitors leaving with a 7-3 success.
The in-form doubles pairing of Dave Tagg and Ahmed Thabet saved Liverpool YMCA ‘A’ from a whitewash against Cadwa, beating Neil Gravener and Kevin Dolder.
The YMCA first team progressed to round two of the Readman Cup, beating G.P.T. for the loss of two sets.
The all G.P.T. clash in the Rumjahn Cup produced a shock victory for the B team who accounted for the A team 6-4.
Ted Gilmour was the star man for the B team, claiming a hat trick of victories.
Liverpool Ladies team travels to Blackpool tonight for a first round tie in the J.M. Rose Bowl.
Stockport are Liverpool's opponents in the first round of the National Veterans Knockout Trophy.
Step back in time…
HERE's a home oozing with character.
The three bedroom property dates back to the 1860s and is situated in Allerton Road right in the heart of Woolton Village.
Gas fired central heating, secondary glazing, a fitted kitchen and a terraced rear garden with sandstone walls are among the features.
There's a small front garden.
Agents: Whitegates.
PRICE: £89,000
Extended four bed semi
THIS four bedroom semi will appeal to larger families.
The property in Lichfield Road, Liverpool 26 has been extended to the rear, providing spacious accommodation.
At ground level is a hall, lounge (22ft x 10ft), study, dining room and kitchen/morning room.
Upstairs are the bedrooms and bathroom/w.c.
Agents: Thompson Sloan.
PRICE: £59,500
Much improved semi
THIS two bedroom semi detached house in Renwick Road, Liverpool 9 has been much improved.
A single storey extension provides an additional reception room and cloakroom/ w.c.
Well maintained and well stocked gardens to front and rear — and there's a flagged patio area.
Agents: Berkeley Kersh.
PRICE: £47,950
Zoom in on this bungalow
BARRY Evans are the people to contact if this two bedroom bungalow takes your fancy.
Situated in Eaglehurst Road, Liverpool 25, the property has bright accommodation throughout.
Double glazing, central heating, patio doors, fitted kitchen and fitted wardrobes to one of the bedrooms are among the eye-catching features.
PRICE: £78,500
Want a quick deal?
WHITEGATES are looking for a quick sale on this three bedroom town house in West Derby.
Situated in Fordlea Road, the property has secondary double glazing and central heating.
A fitted kitchen and fitted wardrobes add that touch of luxury.
Accommodation: Porch, lounge, kitchen, three bedrooms and bathroom/w.c.
PRICE: £39,995
For a Mere £350,000…
NOW here's luxury for you!
This spacious detached residence has plenty to whet the appetite…including a 27 feet drawing room.
Situated in Chester Road, Mere, near Knutsford, the property has five large bedrooms en-suite facilities to two of them.
Large gardens to front and rear with mature beach, chestnut and oak trees.
PRICE: £350,000
Gore blimey as Hawkeye goes gung-ho
NOW here's an adventure yarn to set your teeth rattling, choc-a-bloc with full blown ‘Boys Own’ sock it to 'em action.
Fast paced, well acted, beautifully filmed in the famed Blue Ridge Mountains, possibly the last forested wilderness of the United States, this is a movie which insists you sit on the edge of your seat while skulls are cleaved and scalps lifted by the score.
Starring cast Daniel Day-Lewis as Hawkeye, the legendary hero of Fenimore Cooper's panoramic tale of derring-do set during the French/British wars of 1757 in and around New York State, Michael Mann's production dispenses with any namby-pamby pretence of squeamishness and gets stuck into the gore from the opening scenes.
It's certainly not for the prissy of nature but then the original novel was also considered at the time rather racy.
Daniel Day-Lewis grabs the part of Hawkeye with both hands and becomes transformed as the buckskin-clad, 18th century equivalent of Rambo, with knife and tomahawk ready.
Slanderous
Once again Day-Lewis manages almost chameleon-like to become subsumed by the part he is acting and although here it is basically one dimensional he persuades easily that this is his actual persona.
What the film lacks in political correctness the depiction of the North American natives of the time is, like Fenimore Cooper's attitude, verging on the slanderous it more than makes up for in vitality.
Russell Means, a considerable force in American Indian politics, makes a sturdy and proud Chingachgook, whose son Uncas, a grunt and growl performance from Eric Schweig, is the alleged last of the Mohicans.
Meanwhile, Jodhi May, in her first American celluloid outing, makes a good stab of portraying the frail but ultimately doomed Alice Munro, one of the daughters of Fort William Henry's Scottish commander Colonel Munro who the mighty Magua, the wronged Huron war chief, has vowed to destroy.
Co-star Madeleine Stowe is also convincing as the formidable, spirited Cora Munro, falling for the rugged, beef-cake charms of Hawkeye who instils in her a joyous understanding of the wide open spaces and star spangled skies.
While it may not fall within the same category as Dances with Wolves as an illustration of a time and people grossly misrepresented, it is a period piece of some strength and charm which just falls short of the epithet epic.
Consumed by drugs
TWO cops pay the price of their job in the tough new video Rush.
Jennifer Jason Leigh and Jason Patric are drugs detectives whose mission is to clear the streets of a 20th Century plague.
They slip into the shadows of the treacherous world of drug dealing and end up being swallowed up by the lifestyle they are out to eradicate.
The movie is released next week by Warner and we have six £60 copies of it to give away.
They will go to the senders of the first postcards out of the hat telling me which detective was Basil Rathbone's most famous screen character.
It's elementary, really!
Wayne's World is here excellent
FOR teenagers, Wayne's World is just the video they have been waiting for.
For those of us staring down into the yawning chasm of the generation gap it really isn't so bad, you know.
Mike Myers and Dana Carvey are the two dudes whose off-the-wall cable television show broadcast from a basement attracts a cult teenage following.
But it also wakes up media moguls, led by dastardly Rob Lowe, who see the benefits of hijacking their fame.
The movie shot in a record 35 days scored big at the box-office and is out later this month from CIC Video.
We have five £75 copies to give away and they will go to the senders of the first postcards out of the hat next Friday telling me on which American TV show Wayne's World had its beginnings.
Was it:
1.
The Cosby Show
2.
Saturday Night Live
3.
The Partridge Family
Whoopee!
It's sure winner
WHOOPI Goldberg led a bunch of rock ‘n’ roll nuns to displace Batman Returns from the top of the film charts unbelievable, but that's showbiz!
Sister Act pairs Whoopi with another Oscar-winning actress Maggie Smith in a tale of a nun on the run and the change of fortunes she brings about in the convent where she seeks sanctuary.
Hardly a candidate for success you might think but you would be wrong to the tune of £120m because that's how much it took at the US box-office.
The film comes to Liverpool's MGM Cinema on November 20 so you can see what all the fuss was about and for free if you win one of the TEN double tickets we have to give away, along with T-shirts and soundtracks.
Prizes will go to the senders of the first postcards out of the hat telling me either of the films for which Maggie won an Oscar.
All aboard Stingray
THE seven seas are safer place now that Captain Troy Tempest and his crew are back on patrol.
Tempest and his super-sub Stingray have re-launched their old series on BBC2 to acclaim from a new generation.
And the adventures are released on video in 10 volumes, out now from Polygram at £8.99 each.
We have ten volumes of those adventures to give away in our latest competition and they will go to the senders of the first postcards out of the hat telling me the surname of the puppet-master producer behind the so-called ‘Supermarionation’ series.
His Christian name is Gerry.
MIKE HOOPER is ready to answer Graeme Souness' call to keep Spartak Moscow at bay tonight.
Liverpool's third choice keeper is set to jump queue ahead of David James and make his first appearance of the season in the absence of the suspended Bruce Grobbelaar.
The Echo revealed yesterday how Reds' boss Souness was considering whether to opt for Hooper's experience in the Cup Winners' Cup second round, second leg, knowing that in carrying a 4-2 defeat from Russia, his side cannot afford to concede on home ground.
Hooper is taking nothing for granted as Souness contemplates his line-up for the vital clash, his latest worry being Michael Thomas' ankle injury which makes him doubtful with Steve McManaman.
James, who has still to keep a clean sheet, would be disappointed to be overlooked, but he has the confidence and the talent to establish himself at Anfield.
However, I believe Hooper will get the nod.
He told the Echo today: ‘I've been doing really well over the last month, playing probably the best football of my life.
’ It's good to know I'm in contention.
I've played the last three or four games for the reserves, which we've won.
I feel really sharp.
‘Being brought in for big games without any warning is something I'm used to.
It's nothing that intimidates me.
In fact, I quite enjoy the big occasions.
‘The match in Genoa last season was probably the best night of my football life, with the atmosphere there.
‘That's something I thrive on and it's something I can handle quite well mentally.’
However, with Grobbelaar approaching full fitness after his hamstring injury, and James determined to make his mark at Liverpool, Hooper knows he'd have to impress in order to keep his place in the team.
‘Even when I'm playing in the reserves it's a chance to impress,’ he said.
Disappointing
‘The manager has watched the last couple of games, which has gone in my favour with me doing well.
‘If I play tonight and put in a solid performance, hopefully he wouldn't look upon it as me doing a job just for one game.’
Hooper said that after all the speculation it would be ‘disappointing, but not the end of the world’ if he were left out against Spartak.
And he added: ‘I genuinely think I could do the better job because I'm full of confidence.
‘I know now that the way I'm playing, if it's not going to happen for me at Liverpool it's going to happen at another Premier club.
‘I'm sure the manager knows that if I keep playing the way I am then he's either going to have to let me go or put me in.’
While Hooper would relish facing the Russians, he would have sympathy for James if the former Watford star was named on the bench.
‘I'm full of encouragement for Dave, and there's no doubt he will play for England one day.
‘He's got limitless ability.
He just fills the goal.
Dave is going to be a great keeper.
He's a confident lad.
‘He played really well against Nottingham Forest and Arsenal, even though the team didn't win.’
Even accounting for Spartak's counter-attacking skills, I fully expect Liverpool to reach the quarter-finals, especially if Russian keeper Stanislav Cherchesov has one of his unconvincing nights.
Hooper said: ‘I've got more of a hopeful feel about this than the Auxerre game.
‘I thought Spartak were a bit lax at the back over there, and let's be fair, we gave them a soft goal.
‘If we'd been only 3-2 behind we'd be favourites tonight.
Having said that, you can look at the Auxerre tie, where we didn't score an away goal and we rallied at Anfield.
‘I just hope the lads can do it tonight whoever is in goal.’
LETTERS
Causing worry
I HEARTILY endorse the sentiments of S. Lynch, Childwall, re poll tax summons.
My 76 year old husband received such a summons on the day he was to enter hospital.
Having seen him safely in hospital, though not in the best of health myself, I called at the poll tax office and waited one and a half hours in a very smoky atmosphere to have the summons withdrawn.
The people concerned should make sure of the facts before causing unnecessary worry.
L. Oldfield, Liverpool 17.
Peaceful protest
I HAVE become so disillusioned with the dictatorial behaviour of the present government.
I have also lost hope that the Labour and Liberal parties will ever be anything but a weak and ineffective opposition to the Tory principles.
Principles that have let dishonesty, greed, and a profound indifference to the plight of the poor and unemployed play an important role in their programme.
For disillusioned people like me, why not have a method of showing displeasure by having on the ballot paper the names of the aspiring candidates and also a space for a no confidence vote.
Voting in this space could be a peaceful protest at the performance of all the parties in House, and a warning that the public want change of policy all round.
Saving ££££££s
NO DOUBT there is a problem with drug abuse in this city and not only on council estates.
However, the housing department should not use this as an excuse for poor management.
A few simple measures could cut down sharply on theft and vandalism of council properties.
One would be for the council to remove expensive central heating, boilers, bathroom suites etc from vacant properties before thieves do.
A second would be to ensure corrugated iron covers on doors and windows are better secured and quickly repaired if removed or damaged.
A third would be to consult tenants directly where the problems are as they know what is required.
Better management could stop the trouble in its tracks and save the city thousands of pounds.
Paul Rimmer, Liverpool 8.
Worse off
THE PERSON who wrote saying prices should be cut by 50 per cent is talking nonsense.
If prices were cut by 50 per cent, then employers in shops etc would have to cut workers' wages by 50 per cent in order to stay in business.
It would end up with people being worse off than they already are.
C. Jones, Aughton.
Lorra lorries
I WRITE to complain about the way the council allows lorries to drive over pedestrianised roads in the city centre.
I know they must deliver to shops but why not at a specified time, say 8-9am, then the shops can open and people can shop without worry.
Also I don't hold with the so-called traders in the centre of Church Street.
Can't the council find a pitch for them so we can have a clear walking area?
Mrs Sylvia Sumner, Mossley Hill.
YOUR COLUMNS are filled with letters denouncing the pit closures and rightly so.
But none have seen these closures as part of the European policy being imposed on us.
It is plain that Brussels is pursuing a policy of ‘regionalisation’ of industry and agriculture and, in the over-all plan, Great Britain does not feature as a coal producing region nor, in that case, as a chemicals producing region.
The Government is acting under ‘orders from above’.
There is a simple test of this.
It will cost a lot of money to close pits down, dismantle the sites etc.
It would save money simply to give the pits to the miners for a nominal sum, say £1.
Why is this not being done?
Because Great Britain is not to produce coal nor have any significant mining industry.
Can't the British people and their MPs grasp the simple fact that a European Bank and a single currency would complete Brussels' control over the locality of industry?
Anthony Cooney, Liverpool 17.
FUR WEARING IS ON THE INCREASE
FURTHER to Graeme Wotherspoon's recent letter, of course LYNX opposes mink farming.
Animal Rights groups seldom admit humane care of animals is possible because they are fundamentally against all human/animal relationships.
Mink breeders welcome the annual Government farm inspections carried out under the Mink (Keeping) Order 1987.
They, along with others living and enjoying the countryside, would be very sorry if these security inspections were discontinued.
The farmers presently pay for the inspection through the licence fee.
Many people would welcome additional laws penalising those animal rights trespassers who attack them and their property.
British fur farmers have always been conscious of their welfare duties and responsibilities to others.
They have never released their valuable stock into the countryside.
British fur farmers have an excellent husbandry and welfare record.
Fur wearing is on the increase.
Milan, Paris, London and New York fashion houses have incorporated this ecological material into their winter designs to meet wise public demand for quality, value and warmth.
Mike Allan (spokesman), Fur Education Council.
HOW COULD anybody harm a pensioner?
I found a pass belonging to a Mrs Mulholland of Bootle which I sent on to her.
Within a day I received a lovely thank you letter plus a stamp which I didn't want as I know they don't have much money.
God bless her.
Mrs C. Taylor, Litherland.
Not skilled but we do have our dignity
I WAS sad and also slightly amused to read the recent letter from a reader about the skilled worker only being offered £3 an hour.
Sad to see a skilled worker being offered so little yet amused that people like me on Employment Action and Employment Training only receive 20p per hour after deductions for travel costs.
No, we are not skilled people as such, but we also have our dignity and self respect.
That is why men and women come on these schemes for such a paltry sum.
Also we are being told we must work a minimum of 30 hours a week (meal times not included).
Some participants on EA have requested that they carry on after their 12 months course finishes, only to be told they can't as that might be using this to avoid looking for full time employment.
What nonsense.
These people have met new friends, gained in confidence and, most of all, self respect and would rather be doing some form of work rather than wasting away at home.
Michael Doyle, Liverpool 11.
41p bombshell
MY DAUGHTER, who lives at home with my wife and I, is in full employment and because of her low wage she pays a reduced poll tax.
She has received a letter from Liverpool Council threatening court action if she does not pay her arrears.
There are thousands of people in Liverpool who have not paid a penny in poll tax and here they are threatening a young girl with court action for arrears of a paltry 41p.
H. Lloyd, Dingle.
It was in the wrong spirit
I WONDER how many intelligent people such as myself watched and believed Saturday night's Ghostwatch with Michael Parkinson.
It was the most disgusting programme written without any feelings for people with missing or abused children.
Let's hope the BBC don't get any more ridiculous ideas.
Sarah Greene and Mike Smith should be ashamed of themselves.
Mrs R. Murphy, Litherland.
Real regeneration
AS WITH all the coverage the Echo has so kindly given our Battle of the Atlantic project, ‘Battle Stations’, I was delighted to read Will Rolston's piece in Friday's edition.
May I take issue with one relatively minor but important point?
I refer to the fact that, as presented, it would be all too easy for readers to be left with the distinct impression that the project is an initiative of National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside.
Not so.
The Western Approaches project is by Walton Commercial Group, and is the first part of a multimillion pound upgrading of Exchange Buildings of which the basement project area forms part.
Apart from anything else, the venture represents real regeneration in a city where talk of regeneration has come close to being a growth industry.
Think on.
Fred O'Brien, Project Adviser.
Ghostly trio…
Sarah Greene, Michael Parkinson and Mike Smith
GORDON WATSON…
Wednesday call.
Call for goalden Gordon!
GORDON WATSON has emerged from the Hillsborough shadows and is now poised to spearhead Sheffield Wednesday's UEFA Cup assault on Kaiserslautern tonight.
The former Charlton youngster has had a harrowing time at Wednesday since his £250,000 move in January last year — but is aiming to finally win over the Hillsborough boo-boys.
Despite a string of appearances from the bench it took Watson more than a year to open his account, finally breaking his duck in the 2-1 second leg win over Spora in Luxembourg in the last round.
He grabbed another in a Coca-Cola Cup clash against Hartlepool, but at last made his mark properly by notching two in Wednesday's 7-1 demolition of Leicester last week.
Watson had been given a hard time from the Wednesday crowd before those goals but is now hoping the tide has turned.
He is still trying to shrug off a throat and chest virus, but seems certain to start the game with Wednesday, 3-1 down from the first leg, struggling for striking cover.
First choice strikers David Hirst and Mark Bright are both unavailable, Hirst suspended and Bright signed too late to qualify.
Player-manager Francis has aggravated a groin problem and has ruled himself out.
Vinny Jones has been ordered to appear before an FA disciplinary commission on November 17.
The Wimbledon midfielder must answer a misconduct charge after his involvement in the controversial video ‘Soccer's Hard Men.’
Anfield mission
Ric George reports
MIKE HOOPER is ready to answer Graeme Souness' call to keep Spartak Moscow at bay tonight.
Liverpool's third choice keeper is set to jump queue ahead of David James and make his first appearance of the season in the absence of the suspended Bruce Grobbelaar.
The Echo revealed yesterday how Reds' boss Souness was considering whether to opt for Hooper's experience in the Cup Winners' Cup second round, second leg, knowing that in carrying a 4-2 defeat from Russia, his side cannot afford to concede on home ground.
Hooper is taking nothing for granted as Souness contemplates his line-up for the vital clash, his latest worry being Michael Thomas' ankle injury which makes him doubtful with Steve McManaman.
James, who has still to keep a clean sheet, would be disappointed to be overlooked, but he has the confidence and the talent to establish himself at Anfield.
However, I believe Hooper will get the nod.
He told the Echo today: ‘I've been doing really well over the last month, playing probably the best football of my life.
’ It's good to know I'm in contention.
I've played the last three or four games for the reserves, which we've won.
I feel really sharp.
‘Being brought in for big games without any warning is something I'm used to.
It's nothing that intimidates me.
In fact, I quite enjoy the big occasions.
‘The match in Genoa last season was probably the best night of my football life, with the atmosphere there.
‘That's something I thrive on and it's something I can handle quite well mentally.’
However, with Grobbelaar approaching full fitness after his hamstring injury, and James determined to make his mark at Liverpool, Hooper knows he'd have to impress in order to keep his place in the team.
‘Even when I'm playing in the reserves it's a chance to impress,’ he said.
Solid performance
‘The manager has watched the last couple of games, which has gone in my favour with me doing well.
‘If I play tonight and put in a solid performance, hopefully he wouldn't look upon it as me doing a job just for one game.’
Hooper said that after all the speculation it would be ‘disappointing, but not the end of the world’ if he were left out against Spartak.
And he added: ‘I genuinely think I could do the better job because I'm full of confidence.
‘I know now that the way I'm playing, if it's not going to happen for me at Liverpool it's going to happen at another Premier League club.
‘I'm sure the manager knows that if I keep playing the way I am then he's either going to have to let me go or put me in.’
While Hooper would relish facing the Russians, he would have sympathy for James if the former Watford star was named on the bench.
‘I'm full of encouragement for Dave, and there's no doubt he will play for England one day.
‘He's got limitless ability.
He just fills the goal.
Dave is going to be a great keeper.
He's a confident lad.
‘He played really well against Nottingham Forest and Arsenal, even though the team didn't win.’
Even accounting for Spartak's counterattacking skills, I fully expect Liverpool to reach the quarter-finals, especially if Russian keeper Stanislav Cherchesov has one of his unconvincing nights.
Hooper said: ‘I've got more of a hopeful feel about this than the Auxerre game.
‘I thought Spartak were a bit lax at the back over there, and let's be fair, we gave them a soft goal.
‘If we'd been only 3-2 behind we'd be favourites tonight.
Having said that, you can look at the Auxerre tie, where we didn't score an away goal and we rallied at Anfield.
‘I just hope the lads can do it tonight whoever is in goal.’
Police strap Jocks' Euro voice
POLICE will throw a security stranglehold around Elland Road tonight to ensure that not one dissenting Scottish voice dilutes the Yorkshire roar backing Leeds United's bid for European Cup glory.
Glasgow has had its say, lifting Rangers to a 2-1 first leg advantage.
Now it is the turn of Howard Wilkinson's English champions to reap the benefits of exclusive home support in the Battle of Britain.
But Leeds' own tartan terror, Gordon Strachan, insists it does not make much difference to players with championship credentials.
Intimidating
‘It was great fun up at Ibrox, wonderful,’ he said.
‘But only bad players are affected by crowds like that and the bad players are weeded out before they get to this level.’
Not that he does not appreciate the intimidating backing that the Leeds fans provide.
‘Our support drives us on, but we drive them on too by our performances.
We feed off each other.
They always get one hundred per cent from us, because they were there supporting us when we were in the Second Division.
Of course it helps, no doubt about that.
Oblivious
‘But it's within yourself, what drives you on to win championships and cups.
Sometimes you're oblivious to the crowd and just concentrating on what you're doing.’
He is backed by Rangers' Stuart McCall, who said: ‘We're not young lads, most of us are experienced internationals and it won't put us off.’
HE IS the next President of the United States but Bill Clinton's ‘reign’ will have a huge impact far beyond America.
The man who hails himself as the ‘comeback kid’ will be with us all for at least the next four years.
As the occupant of the famous Oval Office at the White House he will be the undisputed leader of the western world and, due to the collapse of the Soviet empire, the hope of many in the east as well.
A year ago most people on Merseyside had probably never heard of the Arkansas governor.
But there are 20 reasons why his election triumph matters to us all…
1.
Clinton has pledged that putting the American economy right will be his top priority.
If he succeeds, it will be good news for recession-ravaged Britain and its high unemployment trouble-spots such as Merseyside.
Economic ups and downs pay no heed to national frontiers and economic growth in Washington will have a knock-on effect this side of the Atlantic.
2.
A buoyant US economy will help that country's once-great car industry.
And that will be a blessed relief for workers at Ford's struggling Halewood plant and a boost for the Vauxhall employees at Ellesmere Port.
3.
The revival of the US as a great nation at the centre of world trade will also have an impact on the port of Liverpool, as it continues its fight back to become a key staging post on the transfer of goods across the Atlantic and around the globe.
4.
George Bush is yesterday's man.
The 68-year-old hero of the World War Two has still been fighting battles of his generation.
His rhetoric acknowledged the end of the Cold War, but his actions or lack of them spoke volumes about his inability to throw off the attitudes and beliefs that have shaped his entire political life.
Shaped
5.
Bill Clinton, on the other hand, is a ‘baby boomer’ born after the terrible war which Bush still has such vivid memories of.
Despite the flaws in his character highlighted during the bitter presidential campaign, he signifies a fresh start not just for Americans, but for many people the world over.
6.
It is not just bye-bye Bush, it is farewell to a failed philosophy.
Bush was elected on the coat-tails of Ronald Reagan, who in turn worshipped Margaret Thatcher's brand of politics and economics.
Bill Clinton is no miracle-worker, but he is much closer to the gut instincts of the majority of Merseysiders, who believe elected leaders have a key role to play in building a fair society.
7.
Clinton's wife Hillary one of America's top lawyers has already made it clear she will not be just the mild, meek First Lady.
Her likely high profile and that of Tipper Gore, wife of vice-president Al Gore will be a tonic for all women fighting for more recognition and a better deal.
8.
Bill Clinton is no stranger to the UK.
He was at Oxford University in the late 1960s and established a love of our country which he still cherishes.
That is bound to be an asset in relations between Washington and Westminster despite the political differences.
9.
Clinton has vowed to assist the beleaguered Boris Yeltsin as he struggles to pull Russia out of the mire caused by decades of hardline Communist rule.
If he delivers the help and cash it will make the world's nightmare of Russia's return to an anti-democratic, totalitarian regime much less likely.
10.
Clinton has also promised a renewed American effort to end the crisis that has turned the former Yugoslavia into a horrific centre of conflict and atrocities.
Soldiers in the Cheshire regiment now bravely trying to keep the peace among the warring factions are among those who will be praying for a fresh initiative.
Urban policy
11.
Clinton has pledged to refocus attention on the crumbling cities of the United States, with a new urban policy.
That will increase pressure here to spend more on cities like Liverpool.
12.
As Governor of Arkansas one of America's poorest states Clinton believes in help for hard pressed regions.
That is an approach we need to encourage here.
13.
Clinton has a much keener interest than Bush in the problems of Northern Ireland.
During the campaign he suggested appointing a peace envoy to the troubled province an idea that angered and appalled the government.
He may well moderate his stance under the burden of office, but many people of Merseyside with roots and relatives across the Irish Sea will be anxiously watching his every move on this front.
14.
Americans love retracing the footsteps of their leaders.
Many are likely to cross the Atlantic to visit Clinton's old Oxford haunts offering a boost to Britain's tourism industry.
Liverpool, where Clinton reportedly once saved Ringo Starr from a beating, could well benefit too.
15.
Health is another issue which Clinton has promised to put great emphasis on.
Progress to soften the heartless pay-as-you're-cured system in the States will give power to the elbow of those fighting to stop our National Health Service drifting in the same direction.
16.
The Democrats last won a presidential election in 1976.
Clinton himself was down and out 13 months ago.
It's a story which should inspire all Merseyside's Labour supporters and ensure the Tories do not become complacent.
17.
Clinton is a fan of Liverpool's four most famous sons, The Beatles.
Liverpool still benefits greatly from the Beatles link.
18.
Hope is the most precious commodity of all.
Clinton offers it to a younger generation.
Bush had become an old bore.
19.
He and John Major are a similar age.
That should help cement a working relationship that still matters.
20.
The bad news Clinton has pledged to tax foreign companies operating in America more harshly.
Britain is one of the biggest investors in the United States.
Laura's title sweep
SQUASH SCENE
HIGHLIGHT of the Merseyside Closed Junior Squash tournament at New Brighton was an outstanding performance from Laura Hamilton (Victoria Club, Southport).
She won three age groups under-14, under-16 and under-19.
The girls' under-12 tournament ended in an exciting finale in which Amy Barnes beat her Northern Crosby clubmate Charlotte Richards.
Paul Spencer, now playing professionally for Village Prestwich, beat Colin Hamilton (Victoria Club) 3-1 in the final of the under-19 tournament.
But Colin bounced back to score a good victory in the under-16 final against Adam Bond (Skelmersdale Park).
At under-14 Matthew Kaye (Shropshire) surprised the No 2 seed, 10-years-old Mike Hughes, in the semi-final, before losing out in the final to the more experienced Javaid Abbas, recently promoted to the England under-14 squad.
Hughes, of the New Brighton club, won the under-12 title.
The best final came in the under-10 open tournament.
Andrew Breen and Graham Jones, both members of the New Brighton Junior Elite Squad, were closely matched with Andrew winning 31.
MERSEYSIDE men showed their metal at the West Lancashire club as the finished second in the Inter-County Squash Championships.
Now they are poised to step up their bid for promotion to the Premier Division in the New Year along with group winners Cheshire.
Despite being without Merseyside No 1 Howard Nuttall or Zain Saleh, 1987/88 junior county champion Paul Ratcliff flew in from Belgium to take the top slot.
After losing to Lothian 2-3, with Ratcliff and Paul Spencer at No 4 the only winners, Merseyside scored a fine 4-1 win against West of Scotland.
Merseyside Ladies were not so successful on their travels to Grimsby.
They lost to Cumbria 2-3 with Carol Peet, the Merseyside county champion at No 1 and Christine Smylie at No 3, the only winners.
In the win over Lincolnshire Peet won a marathon against Gaynor Wilkinson 9-7 in the fifth while former Merseyside champion Sue Rutherford at 2 and Smylie at 3 also chalked up victories.
But without several key players they had little chance against winners Leicestershire.
In the Lancashire Ladies League last year's winners Liverpool have beaten Marple 5-0 to establish their position at the top.
Tonight they entertain Clitheroe.
Blues pray for change
EVERTON must change the habit of a lifetime if they are to arrest the current slide this weekend with a victory at Nottingham Forest, writes Ken Rogers.
They have not won in the League at the City Ground since April, 1982, when a certain Steve McMahon scored in a 1-0 victory.
Ironically, McMahon was in action against the Blues last Saturday, helping Manchester City to win 3-1 at Goodison Park.
That setback left Howard Kendall's men just three points off the foot of the table with the game looming against rock-bottom Forest.
Another defeat this weekend doesn't bear thinking about in terms of the League table.
For the record, the Blues' League sequence at Forest since that 1982 victory reads: LLLDLDLLLL.
Everton have only managed two goals in this ten year spell, one of them being an own goal scored by Stuart Pearce last season.
Mac nabs golden goal at last 
By David Prentice
SOUTHEND chairman Vic Jobson answered an SOS call from two stranded players last night to ensure his team kicked off at Tranmere with a full complement.
Adam Locke and Chris Powell missed the team coach and hit further trouble with a motorway breakdown as they tried to travel independently.
The chairman was alerted and he stepped in to fly the wayward duo into Manchester.
His high-fliers were brought crashing back to earth by a 3-0 Tranmere victory, however.
And midfield veteran Neil McNab sealed the win with a spectacular third strike.
‘I was a bit surprised,’ said McNab, ‘I didn't really know what to do when it flew in.’
With 13 minutes remaining of a dull second half, John Morrissey knocked a pass inside to the midfield schemer.
McNab, possibly mindful that his last League goal was more than two years ago at Crewe, seemed reluctant to fire, clipping the ball back to the winger.
Morrissey returned it again and this time the Scotsman crashed the shot into the bottom corner.
‘It was nice to get the goal when I did,’ added McNab, ‘because it killed the game off.
‘I think our second half performance was our worst for a long time, but we murdered them in the first.’
Once again McNab paid tribute to the old guard who have seen Tranmere soar into third place in the First Division the highest placing in the club's history.
‘Players like Steve Mungall have been an example to everyone else at the club.
Mungy is a superb pro.
In fact, he is one of the best professionals I have ever played with — and I've been around a few years!’
Ooops…
IN yesterday's Women's Extra we omitted to list the words in the Pillsbury Dough word-search.
They are Apple, Baking, Bread, Cookies, Countrywheat, Croissant, Doughboy, Kitchen, Oven, Pillsbury, Raspberry and Turnover.
She'll do it her way!
Hillary is very much her own woman
AMERICA now has a thoroughly modern First Lady in Bill Clinton's wife, Hillary.
NOT for her the stay-at-home, cookie-making image as a wife.
She's a woman of her time, and a person in her own right!
by DIANA PULSON
HILLARY Clinton, who is now America's first lady, is a very different person from her predecessor, Barbara Bush.
Barbara Bush was cosy and Mumsy with lots of grandchildren and a careless habit of wearing different coloured espadrilles on her feet; Hillary Clinton is the cool, radical feminist with an independent mind.
In the early stages of her marriage she kept her maiden name but when this caused a few rumblings in Arkansas and Clinton lost his bid for re-election as governor in 1980, she took his name and he was returned to office two years later.
But the pair attend different churches and have separate bank accounts.
In fact, though she has played a suitably supporting role during Bill Clinton's campaign Hillary is very much a woman of her time.
She's a lawyer, an advocate of childrens' rights, a former member of several corporate and public interest boards.
The causes she has espoused include lowering infant mortality and the provision of legal assistance to the poor.
So it looks like this particular First Lady will have more serious matters on her mind than re-decorating the White House like Jackie Kennedy had.
And it is doubtful that she will feel the need to consult a fortune teller as to her husband's ‘good’ and ‘bad’days as did Nancy Reagan.
If she resembles any recent First Lady at all, it must be Rosalyn Carter who liked to attend the odd cabinet meeting and who had an official lunch with Jimmy Carter each week, just so they could discuss political matters.
Hillary Clinton's critics say she is way to the left of her husband in her political views and have dubbed her the ‘Winnie Mandela of American politics.’
Her involvement in many issues prompted Bill Clinton to tell people during the early Democratic primaries that if they elected him, they would get Hillary too.
But he stopped that when there was speculation that she would get a cabinet post if he won.
Whether this transpires remains to be seen.
Meanwhile we have the jubilant pictures of Hillary Clinton celebrating her husband's triumph in which she has played no small part.
In particular she won a great deal of sympathy last January when she appeared on national television with Bill Clinton as he faced allegations of extra-marital dalliance with a singer.
‘I'm not sitting here like some little woman standing by my man, like Tammy Wynette,’ said Hillary.
‘I'm sitting here because I love him and I respect him and I honour what he has been through and what we've been through together.’
Neverthless the Republicans decided she was a dangerous, radical feminist, even though as she travelled round the country with him Mrs Clinton showed she could stand by her man as effectively as any woman.
Mother of the Clinton's daughter 12-year-old Chelsea, Hillary Rodham (45) was born the daughter of a wealthy Chicago industrialist.
She attended Wellesley College where she was the first student to deliver the graduation address.
She then went onto Yale Law School where she was on the board of the law review and met her husband.
They were married in 1975.
Only time will tell what Hillary Clinton, now American's First Lady will do next.
World bid dropped
SOUTH AFRICA have withdrawn their bid to stage the next cricket World Cup, said Ali Bacher, managing director of the United Cricket Board of South Africa today.
The Cup, to be staged either in 1995 or 1996, will now be hosted by England or in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Wire ace close to losing an eye
JACKSON'S INJURY HORROR
By Nick Walker
WARRINGTON skipper Bob Jackson came within an eighth of an inch of losing an eye on Sunday.
The Aussie forward was stretchered off during the win over Hull at Wilderspoool, after an incident involving former Welsh RU international Mark Jones.
Referee Ian Gilmour took no action at the time, but Wire general manager Ron Close revealed: ‘We have looked at the video and are considering citing Jones for the tackle.’
‘Jackson has been told by the specialist how close he came to losing an eye.
We are very upset about the incident.’
Jones said: ‘All I can remember was that it was in a tackle.
I was struggling to get to my feet and if my boot caught Bob Jackson then it was an accident.’
Jones already faces the RL disciplinary committee tomorrow night, as he was later sent off for punching Gary Tees.
A decision on Tony Myler's future has been delayed.
The career of the talented Widnes half back has been put in jeopardy by back injuries and he saw a specialist yesterday.
He said today: ‘I wasn't sure what was going to happen and didn't really expect to make a decision.’
‘I will be seeing the physio Peter Rostron today and he will tell me about a possible scan.
He says there's a large lump on the vertebrae, but it's one of many problems in my back.’
Ward doubt
The 31-year-old Chemics' stand off, who must count as one of the unluckiest players in the game because of persistent injury problems, added: ‘I shall wait to hear what the specialist says before deciding whether to play on or not.’
St Helens prop Kevin Ward is struggling to be fit for Sunday's Regal Trophy first round tie against Leeds at Knowsley Road because of a neck injury, but New Zealander George Mann could return to the pack after a being out for a month with back trouble.
Any of you who read about Ade Mafe's trials with Wigan in the morning papers may have thought the story sounded familiar.
Not surprising, really.
It was in the Echo a week ago!
Captain Dibble set to shine
By Captain Becher
STABLE star Captain Dibble should continue Nigel Twiston-Davies's golden run by landing the featured Badger Beer Handicap Chase at Wincanton tomorrow.
The seven-year-old showed steady improvement over fences last season, culminating in a brilliant eight lengths victory in the Scottish National at Ayr.
Handling the fast terrain with confidence several sceptics had previously labelled him a mudlark with no acceleration -Captain Dibble jumped superbly under champion Peter Scudamore, gradually grinding Dalkey Sound into submission.
Captain Dibble had previously proved himself a cut above the average novice when occupying the runner-up berth behind crack chaser Remittance Man over an inadequate two and a half miles at Newbury, and a promising Ascot second to Latent Talent last month should put him spot-on for this.
A combination of forceful fencing and enterprising tactics may seal first prize for Captain Dibble and enable his blossoming trainer to maintain a close vigil on Gordon Richards at the head of the table.
The booking of leading amateur Marcus Armytage for Good For A Loan in the South-West Racecourses Handicap Hurdle promises to yield maximum dividends.
A fluent winner of a mile and a half handicap at Kempton in June, the gelding shaped promisingly when chasing home Star of The Glen (successful since) at Wincanton four weeks ago and should be cherry-ripe now.
Good For A Loan is potentially well treated on some of his form last term -which included a neck verdict over Sukaab at the Somerset circuit 13 months ago -and can produce a potent turn of foot under favourable conditions.
Simon Sherwood has been breathing fire about Dragons Den for some time now and could not disguise his delight when the Furry Glen gelding burnt off Musthaveaswig by three lengths at Uttoxeter last month.
The six-year-old can underline his potential by defying a penalty in the Mendip Novices' Hurdle.
Snow Blizzard is something of a quirky character but would win Lingfield's mile and a half Taurus Handicap if adapting to the all weather surface.
An impressive five lengths Folkestone success over Thimbalina in June lingers in the memory principally because of an outstanding ride by Lester Piggott, currently recovering from that horrific Breeders' Cup fall.
The booking of Richard Quinn strongly suggests that connections mean business here.
Parrott's change of luck
HILARY PARROTT enjoyed an overdue change of luck at Hereford yesterday when Dare Say took advantage of the last fence fall of Mweenish in the Hugh Sumner Challenge Bowl Handicap Chase.
The previous afternoon at Wolverhampton Mrs Parrott had watched her West Orient come to grief when clear in a claiming event, but racing's renowned great leveller came into play here.
Long-time leader Mweenish would almost certainly have held on had he cleared the final obstacle without error.
Instead, he caught the top and crumpled on landing, slightly hampering the challenging Banbridge as he fell.
Their tangle gave Dare Say the advantage he needed and, despite jumping a path only 100 yards before the line, the nine-year-old held on to win by half a length.
‘I was beginning to think I couldn't win an argument,’ said a relieved Mrs Parrott, greeting her first winner of the season.
‘Dare Say certainly deserved this change of luck as he'd been second in three of his four races so far this term.’
Double confirms Berry as tops at Hamilton
HAMILTON PARK has always been one of Jack Berry's happiest hunting grounds, and the Cockerham-based trainer was in his customary bubbly mood as he brought off a 15-1 double yesterday at the track's final meeting of 1992.
Berry struck with Soba Guest and Anusha, who took his winner tally this year to 106.
Stable jockey John Carroll partnered both winners, making all the running in each case, bringing Soba Guest home five lengths clear in the Whirlies Selling Stakes and ushering Anusha to a three and a half length victory in the Auchingramont Maiden Stakes.
The double took Carroll's score this year to 67 but, more significantly, made it 50 winners for him on horses trained by his boss.
After receiving cases of whisky and champagne for being both top trainer at Hamilton and provider of most runners at the track this year, Berry said: ‘I've only a few left to run at Edinburgh on Thursday and Doncaster this weekend, but I could have half a dozen for the all-weather courses.
‘We've 27 turned out at home and I could bring any of them in for all weather racing at any time.
‘We've got only 45 yearlings, which is well down on our intake in recent years, so we won't be so busy breaking them in.
What I would really like is a couple more steeplechasers.
No More The Fool is the only jumper in the yard.’
Another horse to lead throughout was seven-year-old Hinari Video, who landed the Barncluith Sprint Handicap for trainer Mark Johnston and his stable jockey Dean McKeown.
Johnston, saddling his 48th winner of the year, should now go on to achieve his maiden half century, and does not mind whether it happens in the last four days of turf racing or on the all-weather.
He said: ‘All races count but what's more important to me today is seeing this old horse winning again.
‘He gave me my first winner when I started training in 1987, and today was the 100th race of his career and his 10th victory.’
On target
MARINE strikers Chris Camden and Brian Ross were each on target as the HFS Loans League beat an FA XI 3-2 in a representative match at Leek Town.
Morecambe's John Coleman also scored from the penalty spot, with Karl Thomas (Witton) and Simon Rudge (Altrincham) replying for the FA.
Waterloo Boy's revenge
WATERLOO BOY gained sweet revenge over Katabatic in Exeter's feature race yesterday and left his old foe's big race plans in tatters.
The leading two mile chasers had clashed on six previous occasions and each time Katabatic had come out on top.
But there was to be no repeat performance as the 2-5 favourite failed to sparkle in the two and a quarter mile Haldon Gold Cup.
Golden Freeze cut out much of the early running but Waterloo Boy moved smoothly into the lead three out.
Luke Harvey put Katabatic under strong pressure, but never looked likely to make up the leeway and was five lengths down at the finish.
Unseated
Waterloo Boy had unseated his rider in this event two years ago and finished second last year.
His trainer David Nicholson said: ‘He deserved this.
I hadn't realised that Katabatic had beaten us six times so it's nice to reverse the placings.’
Waterloo Boy will follow a similar route to last year on his way to Cheltenham's championship chase, taking in the Tingle Creek, Castleford and Victor Chandler Chases.
Trainer Andy Turnell blamed himself for Katabatic's defeat: ‘I might have left him short of a gallop,’ he admitted.
‘But he was never going with his usual fluency and is better on left- handed tracks.’
The trainer said it is now ‘very doubtful’ that Katabatic would take his chance in the Mackeson Gold Cup at Cheltenham a week on Saturday and is likely to reappear in the Rehearsal Chase at Chepstow over three miles.
Last year's Grand National runner-up Romany King scored an impressive win in the Whitbread Pub Partnerships Handicap Chase.
Confidently ridden by Richard Guest, he swept past the even money favourite Paco's Boy after the last to foil a Peter Scudamore Martin Pipe treble.
Romany King's trainer Toby Balding wants to give the improving eight-year-old an easy build-up to the National.
‘He's in the Hennessy but we'll probably miss that.
It's too tough a race,’ he revealed.
‘He will either run at Ascot later this month or in the SGB.
‘We'll give him a race around Christmas time and then one more to put him right in the Spring.’
Pipe and Scudamore had earlier completed a short-priced double with Grand Hawk (evens) in the St Austell Brewery Company Novices' Hurdle and Highland Spirit (5-4) in the Furguson Brewery Novices' Handicap Hurdle.
Stick with Barlow, Blues
THE Evertonians had every right to feel disgruntled after Saturday's defeat against Manchester City.
The Blues looked as if they might struggle to punch a hole in a paper bag, let alone score.
I felt a bit sorry for Stuart Barlow.
I was quite impressed with his pace and he never stopped trying from start to finish.
But I didn't understand why he took the penalty.
As it was, confidence was so low that nobody fancied it.
City created chance after chance and yet, on paper, the Everton defence is fairly sound.
I still believe the real problem right now is in midfield where they are neither defending well or attacking with an confidence.
Like I said last week, I would go for Andy Hinchcliffe down the left instead of Peter Beagrie.
And I would stick with Barlow for now up front.
He has got that little bit of alertness and determination that the likes of Rideout, Cottee and Johnston have all been lacking.
Your soccer travel guide
NOTTINGHAM FOREST v EVERTON (Saturday)
TRAFFIC travelling on the M1 should leave at Junction 25 and follow A52 Nottingham signs.
Traffic approaching the county through Derby should also follow the above signs.
At the Queens Medical Centre (new island/underpass complex) turn right onto Ring Road, right hand lane to go over flyover and follow A52 Grantham signs to join the new Lings Bar Road (at 2nd island) following signpost A52 Grantham/Gamston A1).
Follow to next island, turning left onto A6011 (Radcliffe Road) towards Nottingham.
On approaching Lady Bay Bridge continue on A6011 through traffic lights, take first left into Scarrington Road onto the East car park of Nottingham Forest Football Club where all visiting coaches will be parked.
In view of incidents involving visiting supporters vehicles during previous seasons, coaches are requested to rendezvous at junction 25, M1/A52 where they will be met by a police escort.
Notes for coach operators/drivers: Arrival should be timed to be within one hour of kick off.
Supporters should remain with the coach until parked on the East car park.
Passengers must return to the coach immediately after the game in order that they leave as quickly as possible under police escort.
LEICESTER V TRANMERE (Saturday)
LEAVE the M1 at junction 21 onto the M69 and leave the M69 at the A5096 (Soar Valley Way).
Follow road up to the traffic-light controlled ‘T’ junction.
Turn left into Lutterworth Road which goes into Aylestone Road.
Turn left into Walnut Street and then second left into Filbert Street.
Coaches should plan to arrive at junction 21 of the M1 at 1pm to 1.30 and make their way to the rendezvous point.
Improving Southwell
SOUTHWELL management have given the go-ahead for a £250,000 improvement programme at the midlands track.
The work, expected to be completed within six months, includes narrowing of the Fibresand track, erecting accommodation for stable staff and car park improvements.
Finance comes from the recent sale of land near the track for industrial development.
Emergency bells ring for 999 service
by ANGELA SINGER
AT present BT operators must respond to a 999 call within five seconds.
Operators also do more than just answer the phone.
In one typical case reported recently by the Union of Communication Workers, an operator was asked by the ambulance service to keep a woman talking until they arrived to prevent her falling into a coma.
It's possible that the BT operator saved the woman's life.
All this is set to change if the Government agrees to plans by Oftel, the telecommunications industry regulator, to centralise the 999 emergency service by contracting it out to a private Call Handling Agency.
This will mean cutting the current 70 telephone exchanges involved in the service down to just three.
The number of operators available to answer emergency calls at any one time will be reduced from 2,000 out of a trained total of 8,000, to just 150.
Fears are that callers will be held in a queue as they are now for Directory Enquiries.
Instead of being answered instantly by a human voice, callers at busy times may just hear a recorded message.
More than 100 MPs have already signed a Commons Motion asking the Government to reject proposals to change the present 999 system and a Day of Action has been organised for December 8 by the Union of Communication Workers.
The Commons' Motion was tabled by Peter Hain, the Labour MP for Neath, a firm supporter of the union's campaign.
Oftel admits that the new system will be no more efficient and that the annual number of emergency calls is expected to increase from the current 22.8 million a year to 24 million by 1996.
More than half of the 999 calls are for the police and, since crime is rising, Oftel estimates that the current average of 60,000 calls a day will rise to 70,000 by the mid 1990s.
Oftel argues that the move to a single private agency would prevent several private companies offering rival emergency services.
It also estimates that the changes will save BT some £31 million a year.
However BT can hardly be under heavy financial pressure considering its profits.
Also the scheme will cost more than £15 million to set up as well as £17 million a year to run.
Janice Stone, the national telecommunications officer for the Union of Commication Workers, says the protest is not simply about loss of jobs, though many jobs may go.
She says: ‘We have seen plenty of jobs cut by BT.
This campaign is about the loss of a vital public service.
Our members are proud of the job they do and this is about the quality of that job.
This is another result of the Government's policy of hiving off of core services.
It's another stage in a long line of streamlining with scant regard to customers’ needs.’
Hunt for muggers who put knife to baby's face
By Graeme Wilson Daily Post Staff
A YOUNG mother last night relived the moment when a mugger held a 12-inch knife to her sleeping baby daughter's face and threatened to kill her.
Julie Jones was taking five-month-old Steffine to her grandmother's house when she was set upon by a gang of four men.
One of the men brandished a jagged-edge Bowie knife and demanded that 25-year-old Julie handed over her handbag containing £95.
She said: ‘The man with the knife leaned into the pram and held the knife to Steffine's face.
He said ‘Give us the money or we'll kill her.’
‘I'm just thankful that the baby was asleep because if she had moved her face the knife would have cut her.’
She added: ‘I gave them the bag and then they ran off.
It was all over so quickly but I was completely terrified.
‘I pushed the pram to the top of the street I was afraid they were following me but when I looked round there was nobody there so I just ran to my mum's.’
When Julie made it to her mother's house in Northumberland Street, Toxteth, they called the police, but by this stage the gang had made their escape.
Julie, of Upper Stanhope Street, Toxteth, added: ‘I just started shaking because of the shock.
‘Steffine woke up and started crying I think she must have sensed there was something wrong.’
Police are appealing for witnesses to the incident, which happened at 11am on Monday in Windsor Street, Toxteth.
The four men are believed to have emerged from the all-weather pitch at Toxteth Sports Centre.
One of the men has been described as aged 25-30, 5ft 9ins, very slim, black, with short hair that is longer on top and plaited.
He wore a lime green tracksuit, gold sovereign ring and one of the fingers on his right hand was badly bruised.
Another is 19-20, 5ft, black, with a stocky build, a pock-marked face, a flat-top hair style and a thin moustache.
He wore a pink ski suit.
Julie Jones holds baby Steffine close after their nightmare ordeal in Toxteth Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN
Jailed soldier ‘not guilty’ of shooting Catholic man
Ulster murder claim
By Deric Henderson Daily Post Correspondent
A FORMER soldier jailed for murder in Northern Ireland is innocent, a new report claims tonight.
Neil Latimer was not the gunman who shot Catholic council workman Adrian Carroll in Armagh City nine years ago, according to a former loyalist paramilitary boss.
He claims the security forces are aware of the real killer's identity but have refused to take action.
Channel 4's Critical Eye programme claims to have interviewed an ex-Ulster Volunteer Force commander who alleges Latimer is not guilty.
Latimer, 30, and three former Ulster Defence Regiment soldiers were jailed for life for Mr Carroll's murder.
Earlier this year the three were freed by Appeal Court judges in Belfast but Latimer's plea was rejected.
He is still protesting his innocence.
The alleged former UVF commander, whose identity has not been revealed, claims the man who fired the fatal shots is well known to the Royal Ulster Constabulary and military in Northern Ireland.
He told the Channel 4 programme in a statement: ‘He has been involved in a lot of killings, not just in one area but in every area of the province.
He is what they call a travelling gunman.
‘I tried to bring this to the notice of the police and the Army but they did not want to know.
‘I was told to shut my mouth.
Somewhere along the line somebody has got to hear the truth and it has got to come out.’
The three freed men, Winston Allen, Noel Bell and James Hegan, have now joined a campaign for Latimer's release.
Meanwhile, a Catholic workman was shot dead outside his mother's house in Belfast yesterday.
Loyalist killers opened fire as the man was getting out of a car.
He died almost immediately.
The man, who was married with three children, was about to visit his mother's house for lunch in Fernwood Street in the Ormeau Road district when the killers struck.
Building gets facelift
By Neil Hodgson, Business Reporter
NEWLY created office space following a refurbishment scheme by owners Abaar Property and Development is available, either for disposal or on lease.
Built in 1891, the site at 5/7 Stanhope Street, near the junction with Dwerryhouse Street in the South Docks area near Liverpool Marina, offers about 2,500 square feet of ground, mezzanine and basement floor accommodation.
Professional services such as architects' or surveyors' offices, or a design studio would suit the property.
As part of the recent facelift, a new roof and floors were fitted.
Repointing and replastering were carried out.
A new burglar alarm and ventilation system have been fitted.
Abaar Property and Development is seeking either £75,000 for the freehold disposal of the property, subject to contract, or a leasing arrangement involving an annual charge of £10,000 for 10 years with upward rent reviews every three years.
A former glass works in Neptune Street, close to Four Bridges in Birkenhead, is being redeveloped to create the Neptune Enterprise Centre.
Two workshop units, totalling 6,356 square feet and a two-storey office complex, including a dedicated fully enclosed car park will be available.
Features include separate toilet and washing facilities, gas fired central heating, full security with the advantage of 24-hour access, roller shutter doors and a full burglar alarm system.
Rental terms for all three units start at £3 per square foota rent-free period for selective tenants.
A minimum term of three years will be offered.
Because the premises are situated within the Cleveland Street Business Association Development Area, grant aid and incentive schemes are available.
A former Heswall chartered accountants office in Downham Road South has been transformed into the Charter House Business Centre.
Aimed at new businesses, the centre provides private car parking and a range of office units available at weekly rents from £30 to £65.
The rental of each office is on a month's licence the fee for which includes the cost of a receptionist, rates, water and electricity, heating, lighting, insurance, cleaning maintenance, security, 24-hour access and secure parking.
Kitchen facilities are available and a range of office services.
Details of all above properties are available from the Hamilton Square offices of Birkenhead chartered surveyors Honeybourne Kenny.
Refurbished premises…at 5/7 Stanhope Street, Liverpool
…if you need a refreshing sleep
We'll make your dream come true
A GOOD night's sleep can work wonders for mind and body.
Some people reckon they can sleep on the proverbial clothes line, but most of us need a bed and a comfortable one at that.
Choosing between the romance of a four-poster, practicality of a divan or trendiness of a bunk is a matter of personal taste.
But it is generally agreed the more suited to our body shape and weight, the better for our general health particularly as we spend, on average, a third of our lives in bed.
Should the mattress be hard or soft?
That, too, depends on individual choice, though medical opinion usually favours the hard mattress.
When buying a bed, it is wise to visit a retailer who has plenty to choose from and to try out a selection.
A good idea is to sit on several, lie down, and even bounce.
That way, the feel of the bed can be gauged.
Litherland Bed Factory has a large range of beds on offer.
The factory was established eight years ago and its speciality is producing quality merchandise at competitive prices with all mattresses and divan beds are made on the premises.
Proprietor Martin Doyle said: ‘We buy all our springs, fillings, timber and coverings from many of the companies who supply the brand-name manufacturers.’
On offer is a wide range of single, double and king-size divans.
Special sizes can be made to order.
So can sprung edge, storage and orthopaedic divans.
Zipper-linked divans similar to those featured on television with a rhinoceros and canary are popular with couples who do not share the same taste in mattresses.
They can still sleep in comfort because one half of the bed has a hard mattress, the other soft.
The clean look of pine appeals to many householders and this factory reports high sales in pine beds.
Because of its popularity, a selection of items in matching bedroom furniture is also on offer.
Beds can be made, with or without storage drawers beneath.
A wide range of hand-made pocketed sprung units is available.
The company also has a selection of folding beds, sofa beds, bunks, traditional and continental headboards and pillows.
Litherland Bed Factory supply both domestic and commercial markets.
They equip the bedrooms of hotels, nursing and residential homes and other such establishments.
Protective mattress covers are also available.
Families with elderly, incontinent parents, may care to know that waterproof bedding can be purchased from this company.
The Litherland Bed Factory has three retail showrooms on Merseyside.
Its large premises in Long Lane, Aintree, are shared with Kennedy's Furniture Emporium, its sister company.
The comprehensive selection of lounge suites includes a variety of sizes and styles in flat weaves, cotton prints, dralon and American flocks.
Styles are traditional and modern.
Customers in search of lounge furniture need not restrict their purchases to the conventional combination of settee and two armchairs.
They can purchase items individually or in any combination to suit the space available in their homes.
Removable covers can be purchased for most of the lounge suites on offer.
A selection of leather suites is also available.
And the company stocks dining and occasional furniture, some imported from the Far East.
The Aintree showroom is open seven days a week, with late night trading on Thursdays.
On-site car parking is available.
Spoilt for choice…our showroom is packed with beds and furniture
Extra report by DIANA PULSON
THE phone rings…
‘Hello, can I help you?’ asks the person who answers.
The reply is a long, long silence.
This is a common scenario in Manchester at the North West HQ of Childline, the national helpline for children which was spearheaded by Esther Rantzen six years ago.
Sometimes the silence is never broken and eventually the caller puts the phone down, unable to bring themselves to spill out their fears and worries.
Sometimes the Childline counsellor manages to coax them to speak.
Meanwhile, other callers have so much to say that they can talk for up to an hour and a half about common family problems; about bullying, pregnancy, drug and alcohol abuse, bereavement and the most common subject of all sexual and physical abuse.
Since Childline began nationally in 1986, more than 215,000 children and young people from all over the country have been counselled.
Childline North West, which will be officially launched later this month, is already up and running and receiving some 300 calls a day.
And almost 30% of its callers are from Liverpool.
In charge of the Manchester operation is its director Elwyn Owens.
He says that Childine must survive because it has proved itself a lifeline for thousands of frightened, lonely and distressed children.
‘There is a real need for Childline,’ he explains.
‘It is working.
I think its financial problems stem from its youth and the fact that it has ploughed whatever money it has back into the charity.
‘It isn't old-established like Barnardos.
It does not have immense resources.
And don't forget, our service operates on a freephone basis.
‘Here in Manchester alone the phone bill is £100 a night.’
So far, there are 35 counsellors at Childline North West.
The youngest is 21; the oldest 70.
All are volunteers and the aim is to build the counselling team up to 70.
Counselling
Each counsellor goes through a 10-week training programme, says Marian Radford, the counselling manager.
The fully-trained counsellors at Manchester operate on a shift basis, currently from 4pm to 8pm every day — including Christmas Day.
Nationally, Childline operates 24 hours a day.
Calls made outside the Manchester line's opening hours are re-directed to the London HQ.
‘When they come off duty, all counsellors go through a de-briefing session,’ says Marian.
‘It is important that they do not allow the depressing things they have heard to affect them; that they do not take them home with them.’
And Childline's first duty is to listen, listen, listen, says Marian.
The counsellors are not there to tell any young person what to do though if they are asked for practical advice they will give it.
‘For instance, should a child who has run away from home ring and ask that their parents be contacted, then the counsellors will do that and tell the mum and dad concerned where the child is,’ she says.
Parents themselves ring Childline, adds Elwyn.
He says: ‘They may be worried because they feel that something is wrong with their child, but cannot work out what it is.
‘When children telephone, some talk freely and very emotionally; others are more bottled up.
You have to coax them to speak.
‘They can ring several times and, on occasions, they ring back to say ‘thank you’.
‘Perhaps they have taken our advice and talked to their mums and dads about what was wrong and things have worked out.
‘The large number of calls from Merseyside involve the same problems as from elsewhere, but there is that extra chirpiness in the voice no matter what is wrong.’
Whenever necessary, Childline officials involve the social agencies concerned.
Abuse
‘The two main problems suffered by our callers remain sexual and physical abuse,’ says Elwyn.
‘For this reason, Childline is frequently associated in the mind of the public with abuse.
‘But an equally important part of our work is helping the children who call — in their thousands — about problems such as bullying, teenage pregnancy, substance abuse, running away from home, feeling suicidal and eating disorders.’
I asked if the volume of calls which Childline gets indicates that today's young people cannot talk to their parents.
Marian agrees that current pressures make it harder to be a parent today.
But she adds: ‘It has always been the case that there are times when it is easier to talk to someone who is not that close to you about your problems.
‘At the same time, the saddest call I ever had was from a boy who said he had marvellous parents who gave him everything.
‘But because they were so busy with their business, he did not see them as much as he wished.
‘He was lonely.’
My date with the dentist left me numbed
ABOUT five weeks ago, I had a wisdom tooth removed and the left side of my mouth has remained numb ever since.
This causes problems eating and drinking to the extent that I am now too embarrassed to go to restaurants, or even to my local pub.
I'm very worried that my mouth may remain like this and feel something must have gone wrong when the tooth was removed.
Can I claim compensation for this?
NINA SAYS…
To bring a claim against your dentist would require evidence from an independent dental expert.
After reviewing your treatment and possibly examining you, he/she would consider whether, in your case, your dentist failed to exercise a reasonable standard of care.
It is of course possible that such a report might conclude that some damage perhaps nerve damage has occurred, despite the fact that the greatest of care was taken; in which case, there would be no redress.
As it is still early days, though, the problem may improve.
Maybe it's worth a chat with your dentist about your worries first.
THE parents of my grandchild were unmarried.
Their little boy was registered and baptised with the surname of his father, my son.
The baby's mother has since married and informs us that, at great expense, she has had our grandson's name changed by Deed Poll to that of her new husband.
I would like to know what the charge would have been, whether it is legal to do this, and whether I am within my rights to address mail to my grandson under his old surname.
NINA SAYS…
The charge for preparing a Change Of Name Deed can range from £25 to £75 and it is legal for the child's mother to do this.
With regard to sending mail to your grandson addressing him by his old surname, you are fully entitled to address him as you choose.
But for the sake of keeping the peace, it would probably be wise to use his new name.
Brit-style
PUSHCHAIRS have to be practical, but there's no reason why they can't be stylish too.
Britax have launched a new pushchair/carrycot combination — with a certain continental flair.
The Continental is padded and features large lockable, swivel wheels.
It is available now, priced around £169 for the pushchair and £139 for the carrycot.
Face facts
SAVING face is important, but it's not always easy.
The wintry weather can take its toll on the face because it is the only part of the body exposed to the elements all the time.
And when skin becomes dry, it can looked lined, drawn and dull.
Aapri's new Facial Wash Gel can help you to help your skin combat the winter weather.
The pearly gel is Ph balanced to maintain the skin's natural acid/ alkaline level.
It uses extract of apricot which helps to reduce the drying effect sometimes caused by soap.
The gel is available from Boots, Superdrug and major supermarkets.
Price, £2.60.
It's tasty for tinies
ST IVEL has come up with the first fresh yoghurt range especially made for young appetites.
Baby & Toddler Yoghurt (pictured above, right) is a smooth blend of mild, whole-milk yoghurt, fruit juice and natural flavourings for youngsters aged over six months.
It is available in four flavours strawberry, peach, raspberry and banana and contains minerals and vitamins needed for a baby's healthy development.
It also comes in handy little pots, so you don't have to waste half of it.
And the price? £1.15 for 4x90g multi-packs.
Britain given food for thought
THE UNITED STATES threatened a trade war with Europe on food and drink today after the breakdown of vital negotiations.
The last ditch collapse means the US is likely to go ahead with threatened sanctions on EC products.
Premier John Major is not optimistic that he will be able to rekindle the Gatt talks.
The Gatt trade discussions being held up over disputes about EC subsidies for oilseeds and the volume of exports could generate billions of dollars for world trade.
Mr Major was meeting Agriculture Minister John Gummer this afternoon for a report on the meeting in Chicago.
Mr Gummer said: ‘I very much hope we can get back to the table.
‘This ought not to be like this between friendly nations.’
Chopsticks Di gets a pancake surprise
THE Prince and Princess of Wales showed no signs of anxiety over the blanket coverage of their alleged marriage problems as their hectic schedule of engagements continued in South Korea.
The princess was in sparkling form on the third day of their four-day tour as she showed her skills with chopsticks when offered a pancake during a visit to a welfare centre in Bongchun-Dong, a poor suburb of Seoul.
She had walked in as a cookery demonstration for Korean housewives was under way.
Eyebrows
After removing her shoes in respect to Korean custom, she watched as chef Wang Jun Ryun filled the pancake with shredded beef, carrot and cucumber and mustard sauce.
Then the princess raised her eyebrows when she realised she was expected to eat it.
‘That's coming my way?
I thought you might do that to me,’ she laughed.
‘I am never going to get that in my mouth.’
The centre's director, David Chi, asked the princess if she could use chopsticks and she demonstrated her ability with a flourish before turning her back on photographers and popping the pancake in her mouth.
She then ate a prawn fried in flour and egg, saying: ‘I like that I had that last night.’
Pressed to eat more, she said: ‘I cannot eat any more, honestly.
It's nearly lunchtime.’
Women clapped with glee as the princess entered the centre and an elderly woman lying back in a dentist's chair with her mouth wide open burst into applause as the princess approached.
It was one of 11 engagements undertaken by the royal couple today eight separately and both appeared on top form despite the persistent reports about their marriage.
Experienced royal watchers claimed to note a distinctly frosty air between the couple.
The princess later visited the British School in Seoul, where a group of young girls performed the traditional Korean fan dance representing the flight of butterflies and the opening of flowers.
She watched, clearly enchanted, before being presented with her own fan and ornate head-dress by pupil Beth Ross, aged six.
Royal fans…children from the British School perform for the Princess
Boys caught dealing in evil tapes
TWO Liverpool schoolboys were caught dealing in the sick horror videos, it was revealed today.
The teenagers, aged 15 and 16, were given a police caution for distributing the illegal unclassified tapes.
They were trapped in the six-month, top-secret European-wide operation, which was co-ordinated by Liverpool's trading standards office.
Chief trading standards officer Peter Mawdsley said: ‘They were swapping films and selling them.
‘It has been claimed that their parents did not know the full extent of the dealings or what was on the films.’
More than 3,000 tapes have been seized throughout the country.
They include so-called ‘snuff’ films which claim to show real murders.
Appalling
Others show real-life autopsies, filmed for medical purposes, showing the removal of human eyes, tongues and scalps.
Many of the films, priced at £12 to £90, were made in the Third World.
The four-strong team from Liverpool's trading standards office had to watch appalling images from titles such as Cannibal Holocaust, Human Experiment and Blood Bath.
Two other men were prosecuted today for offences under the 1984 Video Recordings Act elsewhere in the country — and more cases are pending.
Mr Mawdsley said: ‘Liverpool trading standards office learned of the network.
‘We posed as dealers and that led to a number of raids.’
PUT a Panther in your pantry!
Stove specialists Morso have brought out an environmentally-friendly cast iron stove (left).
It fits into standard fireplace alcoves and runs on solid fuel.
Yet a special air management system gives a cleaner burn.
It is available from around £580, plus VAT.
For the stockists nearest to you, contact 0420 542654.
Animal magic
YOU would be a bit alarmed if you woke to find a monkey hanging from your headboard.
Or would you?
Littlewoods have gone animal crackers with a new range of alarm clocks for £8.99 each.
The Crab Clock, with a deep green body, has colourful bendable legs.
The Monkey Clock has two arms which can hook on to shelves and the like.
And the Frog Clock has suckers attached to its legs enabling you to stick it to mirrors or doors.
City man's sickening trade in illegal videos
FILMS SOLD WERE VILE BEYOND BELIEF
By Jules Stenson
A SCHOOL technician led a murky double life dealing in hundreds of horrific unclassified videos, a court heard today.
Martin Ellis, 26, called himself Editman and ran a business in the sickening trade from his home in Plattsville Road, Mossley Hill, Liverpool.
Liverpool magistrates heard that the illegal videos he sold to dealers all over Britain included scenes of cannibalism and disembowel ment.
Ellis was trapped after Liverpool trading standards officers, posing as dealers, smashed a nationwide network of underground sellers.
They raided his home on January 7 and seized a nine-page list detailing 272 titles called Editman's Horror List.
They also found Editman calling cards saying, Any Film, Any Time.
Videos seized had titles such as Blood Sucking Freaks, New York Ripper and Faces of Death IV.
At the time of the raid, Ellis was working as a technician at Ruffwood Comprehensive School in Kirkby.
He now runs his own business in Liverpool.
Ellis today admitted five charges in breach of the 1984 Video Recordings Act relating to the possession and supply unclassified videos.
He admitted a further 17 charges involving the breach of computer software and video copyright law.
Allan Auty, prosecuting for Liverpool trading standards department, told the court that the videos which would never receive a certificate for distribution in this country were beyond belief.
He said Ellis also sold pirated tapes of Hollywood blockbusters such as Terminator 2 and Bambi.
Mr Auty said: ‘While titles such as Bambi and Snow White are well known, the titles of the films that breach the Video Recordings Act could not be further from the Walt Disney classics.
‘Scenes of disembowelment, cannibalism, and violent death all featured in the films.
‘Correspondence was found clearly showing that Ellis was selling these unclassified videos.
In addition, entries in his diary indicate that he was both copying and selling these films.
‘The equipment seized from his house included five video recording machines linked together for multiple copying.
‘Officers from Liverpool trading standards who had to view these films found them sickening.’
Stipendiary magistrate Norman Wootton adjourned sentencing until December 9.
Ellis faces jail or a fine of up to £20,000.
Spreading the veggy word…
VEGETARIANS need go hungry no longer— because now there's a new range of spreads to go on their bread.
Princes has introduced a new veggie range of spreads and pates.
There is pizza spread with mushroom, a chick pea spread with nuts, a chilli bean spread with tomato and a vegetable pate with garlic.
They will sell in supermarkets for around 43p.
Terror as airgun sniper strikes in the street
BOY IS SHOT IN THE FACE
By Caroline Storah, crime reporter
TEN-year-old George Greenshields had a lucky escape when he was shot by an airgun sniper.
For the pellet went straight through his cheek and popped out of his mouth.
George, of Southdale Road, Wavertree, Liverpool, said today: ‘I felt a sharp pain and thought I must have been been stung.
‘Then I felt something in my mouth and spat it out.
When I looked it was a pellet and that was when I knew I had been shot.
‘The police doctor said it had gone straight through my cheek.’
The sniper struck as the youngster, a pupil at King David junior school, was walking to his friend's house along South Drive, Wavertree, when he felt his cheek burning.
His father, also George, said: ‘Whoever did this must be crazy.
George is lucky he didn't lose his sight.
‘Any higher, it would have hit his eye.’
George went to Alder Hey for a check-up and he was given the all-clear after an x-ray.
A police spokesman confirmed an investigation is under way.
The spokesman said: ‘Again and again this is happening.
‘The circumstances in this case are quite remarkable.
‘The boy is very lucky to have escaped with a minor injury.’
George Greenshields…lucky escape
Soccer fans step into the witness box
SPECTATORS at an amateur football match gave evidence at Liverpool Crown Court today at the trial of a player accused of kicking an opponent in the face and breaking his jaw.
John Newton, 25, a chemist of New Hey Road, Woodchurch, Birkenhead, has pleaded not guilty to causing grievous bodily harm to David Hallam, 29, of Stanley Street, Garston, who was playing for the Queens Arms team from Oxton.
Newton was playing for ADS Graphics in a Wirral Sunday League Division One match when the offence allegedly took place.
Substituted
Alexandra Mutch, of Barnston Road, Thingwall, whose husband was the manager of the ADS team, told the court that Newton had the ball when Mr Hallam knocked his legs from under him.
She said the legs of both players tangled, and then both players were on the turf kicking out at each .Members of the opposing team pulled Newton back.
She said she never saw Newton kick the other player in the face, and she never saw anyone's boot come in contact with Mr Hallam's face.
Brian Hopgood of Marsden Avenue, Irby, said he played for ADS Graphics in the first half but became a spectator when he was substituted just after half time.
He said that several players dragged John Newton away and he never had a chance to kick Mr Hallam in the face or punch him.
(Proceeding)
Psychics predicted pools jackpot for Charlie, 68
By Echo reporter
GRANDFATHER ‘Champagne’ Charlie Hill has become one of the biggest football pools winners in history, Littlewoods announced today.
Mr Hill's cheque will be for £2,008,137.60p, the company's sixth-biggest payout and only the seventh to top the £2m mark.
The jackpot is the climax to a life-long winning streak for Mr Hill, of Blackpool, Lancs.
‘Twenty years ago two mediums told me all they could see was bags of money over my head.
Turkey
‘It's been a long time coming, but it's worth the wait,’ said Mr Hill, 68, dubbed ‘Champagne Charlie’by family and friend because of his winning ways.
Mr Hill's delighted wife Mona said: ‘He's always winning things.
We haven't bought a Christmas turkey for years because he always wins one.
‘When we married 26 years ago I never realised it would be to a millionaire, but he has always been lucky.
‘He wins at everything and enjoys a flutter on the horses as well as his football pools.’
Mr Hill, a former supervisor at British Nuclear Fuels in Preston, Lancs, will be presented with his cheque in London today by Arthur Daley actor George Cole.
Littlewoods has hired the prestigious Jack Barclay Rolls-Royce showroom in Mayfair for the event.
Mr Hill's huge jackpot cost him just 54p.
Witnesses afraid, court is told
NO TO PUB BAIL PLEA
TWO men have appeared in court on charges following a gang fight and shooting at the Market Trader pub, Kirkby.
Scaffolder Clinton Jenkins, 27, of Medbourne Crescent, Kirkby, and unemployed Desmond Aley, 28, of Ormonde Crescent, Northwood, Kirkby, are jointly accused of conspiring with others to cause grievous bodily harm; using or threatening unlawful violence; and damaging the pub windows to the value of £100.
The allegations all relate to an incident on Sunday October 25.
Jane Rodin, prosecuting, told Kirkby magistrates that the trouble started two days before the incident, in which a 16year-old girl was shot.
Gang
She said an assault at the St Chad's Drive pub on the Friday night was followed by a confrontation with the bouncers the following night when a gun was produced.
In a show of strength, she said a gang descended on the Market Trader on the Sunday wielding staves, and pick axe handles.
‘A firearm was discharged and people cowered behind walls, under tables and in the toilets.
‘This was clearly intended to be a show of strength and involved a group of men simply taking the law into their own hands,’ she said.
An atmosphere of fear had descended with many witnesses too afraid to come forward, she added.
She said a third man being sought by the police had telephoned a Kirkby inspector and said he was sure the case would end because witnesses were not brave enough to give evidence.
Neil Cobley, defending Jenkins, and David Watson, defending Aley, appealed for reporting restrictions to be lifted so defence witnesses could come forward.
Presiding magistrate Doris Eccles said bail was being refused because it was feared the defendants would interfere with witnesses.
The men were remanded in custody until November 13.
Power firm angry over new rule on shipments
By Barry Turnbull
A ROW has erupted over the construction of the controversial coal imports terminal in Bootle.
Furious bosses of electricity giants Powergen claim environmental protection measures demanded by Sefton Council will add £12m to the cost of the £40m project.
The company is to challenge the conditions imposed by Sefton Council on the grounds that they are unnecessary.
Powergen got the go-ahead for the £40m Gladstone Dock facility earlier this year.
But cautious councillors demanded that all coal-laden rail wagons leaving the site should be fully enclosed and washed down to avoid spreading dust.
Hazard claim
Campaigners claim deposits of coal dust released into the atmosphere are a health hazard.
But Powergen bosses have reacted angrily to the new council demands.
A spokesman for the electricity generators said today: ‘There is no evidence that the release into the atmosphere of coal dust from rail wagons will be in quantities which are harmful.
‘The cost would be grossly excessive when compared to any environmental benefit.’
The company claims providing covered wagons would cost £12.6m, with an additional £900,000 a year running costs.
Instead, the company suggests installing a £30,000 spray system at the terminal to dampen coal.
Local councillor Eddie McEvilly said: ‘I don't really want to talk about conditions on the operation, because I don't want to see it at all.’
Councillors on Sefton's environment committee meet tonight to discuss the issue.
The Bootle coal mountains are to be the focal point of a demonstration against imports and pit closures tomorrow.
MUM'S TERROR AT THREAT TO BABY
By Caroline Storah crime reporter
YOUNG mum Julie Jones today spoke of her terror when muggers held a jagged knife to her baby's cheek and threatened: ‘Your money or we'll kill your daughter.’
Julie was pushing five-month-old Steffine in her pram along Windsor Street, Toxteth, on a short-cut to her mother's house, when the gang of four approached her.
She said: ‘One pulled out a knife and I thought he was going to kill me.
Then he looked in the pram and saw Steffine and put the knife on her face.
The jagged edge was right next to her eye.
‘He said he would kill her if I didn't hand over the money and I believed him.
I gave him the money and they told me to walk on and not look back because they would be following me.
I didn't dare look back.’
Despicable
Julie, 25, of Upper Stanhope Street, Toxteth, was forced to hand over the bag containing £95 income support to another member of the gang.
The Department of Social Security has since reimbursed her.
She reached her mother's in nearby Northumberland Street and broke down in a state of shock.
She added: ‘If I hadn't had Steffine with me I would have had a go.
They are despicable.
Steffine slept through it all and I am thankful for that.
But she cried a lot when she woke up and needed comforting.
‘I keep thinking what might have happened and I feel cold.’
Shaken
Detective Constable John Walsh, said: ‘This was despicable.
The woman had no alternative but to hand over the money because she felt her baby's life was at risk.
‘It was terrible for her and left her very shaken up.
Luckily neither her or her baby were injured.’
One of the men was wearing a lime green tracksuit and a gold sovereign ring with short hair on top and plaited.
He is black and aged 25-30.
Another had pock-marked skin, was wearing a pink ski suit and had a flat-topped haircut and a thin moustache.
He is black and aged 1920, 5ft tall and stocky build.
Anyone who can help is asked to contact Admiral Street CID on 051-777-4688.
Youngsters will get a sporting chance
A MERSEYSIDE authority plans a £140,000 sporting programme for youngsters.
Sefton Council is to appoint a youth sport manager in the borough as part of a phased three year sporting programme.
There are plans to extend the use of school sports facilities in the community and a champion coaching scheme for promising young athletes.
It will begin in Southport, Formby and Maghull, extending to the rest of the borough next year.
Sefton was one of five North-West authorities to receive funding from The Sports Council.
Your chance to spot a bargain
ALL the carpet fitters are time-served experts, fully insured and their work guaranteed.
A 10% deposit is usually required on ordering with the balance on completion.
Access or Visa are accepted and instant credit of up to £1,000 can be arranged; or buy now, pay January.
Cash is always accepted!
While staff including manager Laurie McDonald can advise, customers will not be pressurised while browsing.
Remember the special bargains will not be on offer for very long.
Couple flee gas blast
A COUPLE fled to safety from their home after it was rocked by a gas blast.
The explosion sparked a fire which caused serious damage to their flat above a shop in Pensby, Wirral.
Firefighters spent three hours tackling the blaze, which spread through the roof and into an adjoining property in Pensby Road.
EUROHOPES REST ON A KNIFE-EDGE
Rebels say they are heading for victory
By Mark Davies
WESTMINSTER was today buzzing with anticipation as MPs gathered for tonight's crucial vote on the Maastricht Treaty.
And the predicted result was: ‘It's too close to call.’
Premier John Major's hopes of a victory are on a knife-edge, with Tory rebels claiming they are heading for triumph.
Labour say the government is set to lose the Euro debate by 10 votes.
But Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said today he thought the Tory leadership would win, though he admitted it would be close.
The support of the Liberal Democrats is vital to the government, with 19 of the party's 20 MPs saying they will support Mr Major.
Strike
But Liverpool Broadgreen Labour MP Jane Kennedy today wrote to Mossley Hill's Lib Dem David Alton, urging him to vote with Labour.
She said: ‘Tonight's vote is not about the Maastricht Treaty.
It is a question of confidence in John Major, not because Labour says so, but because John Major does.
‘We have a chance to strike against a government whose policies are destroying Liverpool's jobs and opportunities for recovery.
‘We may not bring them down but we can undermine their authority.’
Mr Alton said today: ‘I am surprised at Jane Kennedy and other Labour MPs voting with the far right of the Conservative party on Europe.
‘I am not prepared to play fast and loose with Britain's future in Europe.
‘Labour MPs should stop playing silly party games.’
Mr Major will tell Tory rebels to look at their own constituencies to see the effect of Euro investment.
Mr Hurd said today: ‘We will win because we are asking the House to examine the Bill in detail.’
He said decisions were likely to be taken on the treaty in the New Year.
£1m price tag put on mansion
A MERSEYSIDE businessman has revealed plans to end the controversy surrounding the future of Hillbark House in Wirral.
The council has been trying to sell the half-timbered historic mansion in Royden Park for more than two years and has put a £1m price tag on it.
The authority had been hoping Heswallbased developers Dayglobe would buy the Grade Two listed property.
But their bid was rejected after 7,000 people signed a petition objecting to the scheme to turn the stately home into an hotel and leisure complex.
Now rivals Wirral Peninsular Care Limited is proposing a training and conference centre which chief executive Alan Blackburn says would satisfy the council and conservationists.
By Mark Davies, political correspondent
PRIME Minister John Major today sent a message of congratulations to Bill Clinton after his overwhelming triumph in the American presidential elections.
And Mr Major also sent a private message to defeated President George Bush.
Mr Major said: ‘I have sent a message to President-Elect Clinton offering him my congratulations.
‘Mr Clinton has already emphasised the areas of continuity we can expect in foreign policy under his presidency.
‘I look forward to working with him and his administration and to continuing the friendly relations between our countries.
‘I have also sent a private message to President Bush.
‘When I became Prime Minister we were on the eve of war to free Kuwait.
Gratitude
‘I found him to be a wise friend and an exemplorary leader of the western world.
‘All of us in democratic politics are only where we are by the will of the people and the American people have voted for change.
‘There is every reason to remember George Bush's achievements and the debt of gratitude we owe him for his leadership.
‘From what President-Elect Clinton has said and, from our own contacts with his team, I am confident that the cornerstones of US foreign and defence policy will remain firmly in place.
The close partnership between Britain and the US will continue.’
Content
Mr Major is expected to meet the new president for the first time before Christmas.
The meeting will probably be in America, and possibly in Clinton's home state, Arkansas.
Mr Major will meet Clinton in his capacity as president of the European Community during a preplanned US-Euro summit.
The premier is ‘perfectly content’ with the change in presidency.
Downing Street sources point out that the Clinton team including the new president have strong connections with Britain.
Many, like Clinton, studied as Rhodes scholars at Oxford University.
On Bill Clinton's proposal to send a peace envoy to Ireland, senior sources are more cautious.
They say it could cause difficulties, but are waiting to see whether the idea will come to fruition.
And sources said that despite plans to reduce the US military force in Europe, there would still be a substantial presence.
The election of Clinton came on the day when trade talks between Europe and the US broke down again.
John Major…congratulations
University lecturers come out on strike
LECTURERS at Liverpool John Moores University were on strike today — complaining about being ‘kicked in the teeth’ by the government.
They joined colleagues across the country in a national day of action.
The Liverpool lecturers are calling on vice chancellor Peter Toyne to join them in putting pressure on the government to end underfunding.
The lecturers are also protesting at the ‘inadequate’ pay offer of 3.9%.
They say that over only a four-year period, the number of undergraduate students at Liverpool JMU has more than doubled from under 10,000 to nearly 20,000.
Some lecturers at Edge College of Higher Education have also joined the action day and were picketing the college.
Disabled Vicky pines over her lost pet
By Jane Croft
A MUM is appealing for the return of a much-loved pet.
Its disappearance has left her handicapped daughter heartbroken.
Disabled 17-year-old Vicky Hoey who also suffers from epilepsy has been devastated ever since Penny, a four-year-old Tibetan spaniel, escaped from the family home in Morecambe Street, Tuebrook, Liverpool, on Saturday.
Her mum Pat, 48, said: ‘Vicky has been so upset that she has had two epileptic fits since Penny disappeared.
She talks of nothing else.
‘Vicky adores the dog and she is one of the few things she is interested in.
‘She attends a boarding school and every night when I phone her she asks how the dog is and whether we have fed her.
‘My daughter goes back to school this week after the half-term break and she really wants to know Penny is all right before she goes.
‘She has never gone missing before so this is unusual.’
Penny was bought as a puppy for Vicky at Christmas four years ago and cost the family £250.
She is brown and white and has a brown collar but no name tag.
Don't miss our birthday bonanza
Roll up for super carpet market!
EVERYBODY is invited this Saturday and Sunday to the seventh birthday celebrations of the Carpet Supermarket in Long Lane, Aintree.
There will be gifts and sweets for the children, but of much more interest to their mums and dads will be the special anniversary sale offers.
Prices start at 49p per square yard with rugs from £3 each, along with many other massive reductions.
In conjunction with these offers, there is free fitting and rubber underlay on any carpet from stock at over £4.99 per square yard.
For a limited period, there is three months interest-free credit.
Carpets can be bought now and fitted well before Christmas with no payment before the New Year.
Bulk-buying has made the supermarket the most competitive in its field.
Even during the recession, trade has grown through keen pricing and friendly personal service.
A large proportion of turnover is due to recommendations by satisfied customers.
A huge stock enables the firm to fit or deliver carpets within 48 hours.
Or a carpet can be stored on the terms quoted at purchase, even if there is a price rise in the meantime.
Carpets can be delivered or fitted any day except Sunday or cut on the firm's premises for the customer to take away.
Hurry…to the Carpet Supermarket, where ample parking is free
Offers galore…browse at your leisure and you're sure to find a bargain
Horror crash toddler is home
By Philippa Bellis
TODDLER Michael Gater is back home after suffering a fractured skull in a road accident.
Michael, 14 months, was flung 25 yards into the air from his pushchair and landed head first on a busy main road near the Mersey tunnel entrance in Liverpool.
He was rushed to the intensive care unit at Liverpool's Alder Hey Hospital where he stayed for a week before being transferred to a rehabilitation ward.
Now, nearly a month after his ordeal on Byrom Street, the youngster is fully recovered and home with his parents, Robert Gater and Yvonne Stonehouse, at their Grosvenor Road, Wavertree, home.
Unsteady
Yvonne, 22, said: ‘Michael is getting back to normal, but he is still quite unsteady on his feet.’
Miss Stonehouse told how she saw her son flung from his pushchair after it was in collision with a car.
She said: ‘I heard a bang and the next thing I knew, Michael was out of the pram and in the road.
A man has been reported for a number of alleged motoring offences following the incident.
A huge choice on offer
BRINGING a diagram with sizes marked on it is always a big help, as a rough idea of cost can be given there and then.
But an estimator can call at the customer's home, take measurements and quote a price.
Samples can also be brought to the house if matching with curtains and/or furnishings.
Selecting a carpet from the roll is always better than from a pattern book to get clearer idea of how the carpet will look.
Staff will draw out a length of any roll for inspection.
The Carpet Supermarket's range is wide, with something to suit every pocket Axminsters, Wiltons, Twists, Berbers, Shadows, prints; carpets for the bathroom, kitchen, bedroom, vinyls at two metres and three metres wide; Plush, Cord and many more.
Room-size roll ends are always a good buy.
Open seven days a week with a late night to 8pm on Thursdays, Sunday is one of the busiest days, mainly because the whole family can come in and browse.
No problem about parking there is a large free car park outside the main doors.
Cyclist John relives his epic journey
MARATHON man John Bishop, the Echo's round-the-world cyclist, related his adventures to members of Liverpool Rotary Club with a tribute to the club for its support.
John told of his epic journey, when he pedalled 12,500 miles from Sydney back to Liverpool for charity.
A sales rep from Runcorn, he was on the road for eight months and raised tens of thousands of pounds for the NSPCC, the charity which was originally founded in Liverpool.
As a direct result of the Australian leg of his ride, the first national ‘Scousers Down Under’ organisation is now being formed.
During his journey he cycled the bridge over the River Kwai, pedalled the peaks of Nepal and collided with a kangaroo in Australia.
He has raised around £10,000 for the NSPCC family centre in Liverpool.
Marathon man…
John (left) with Rotary Club president Cecil Jones
Leisure budget faces the axe
A SWEEPING £100,000 package of cuts is to hit leisure services in Knowsley.
Town hall chiefs want to slash £50,000 from libraries by buying no new books.
Many temporary staff at sports centres are to go.
And the leisure department is to be ordered on to a tough economy drive, paring back all unnecessary expenditure.
The round of cuts is a quick start to plans to save £670,000 on departmental spending in the next two years.
Huyton councillor Fred Curran said he was appalled at the cuts in the library book fund.
‘This is a cut to the bone.
Books are essential and it is a sad day when financial troubles force us to this action,’ he said.
The cuts will reduce the 1992-3 overspend from £460,000 to £360,000.
Boy, 8, killed in twilight bike accident
AN EIGHT-year-old was killed in a horror accident as he was riding his friend's bike.
The boy had swopped over bikes with his pal as they played on Rivacre Road, Ellesmere Port.
But in fading light the youngster crossed the path of a Ford Sierra car near to the junction with Forest Road.
The boy, who Cheshire police have not yet named, suffered severe head injuries in the collision.
Three emergency and paramedic crews rushed to the scene and fought in vain to save the boy's life.
Care
He died as he was being taken to the Countess of Chester Hospital.
Mersey Regional Ambulance spokesman Richard Oswick said: ‘Everyone has to be aware that the dark nights are drawing in and we all need to take special care.’
Ellesmere Port Police are investigating the accident which occurred at about 5pm yesterday afternoon.
Pals say prayers for young hit-run victim
SCHOOLMATES of a young hit and run victim today prayed for the recovery of their soccer-mad pal.
Tony Atkinson, 16, was fighting for his life after the collision which happened as he was walking to Queen Mary school in Long Lane, Fazakerley.
Today, head teacher Bob Mander held a special assembly for the popular pupil.
He said: ‘We are trying to keep the kids informed because he is a very popular lad and lots of people keep asking how he is.
‘We said prayers for his recovery and Tony's dad has promised to keep in touch to let us know what the latest is.
Vigil
‘Yesterday his father said there was no brain damage but Tony has a severe gash on the top of his head.’
Tony, of Scarisbrick Drive, Norris Green, plays for the local East Villa club and team mates joined his father, Michael, in an all-night vigil at Walton Hospital.
A spokeswoman described Tony as ‘comfortable’ today.
The accident happened at the corner of Parthenon Drive and Walton Hall Avenue yesterday.
Police believe Tony was struck a glancing blow by the wing mirror of a transit-type van.
Anyone with information should contact the police on 051 777 5855 or 777 5656.
A schoolboy dream comes true for Bill
By Echo reporter
AMERICA hailed the man from Little Rock as its leader today.
Bill Clinton swept in as the 42nd president of the United States with a landslide victory and the promise of a new beginning.
Speaking from the governor's mansion in Little Rock, Arkansas, local boy Bill, said: ‘I accept tonight the responsibility you have given me to be the leader of this, the greatest country in human history.’
He thanked his family, in particular his wife Hillary who he said ‘will be one of the greatest first ladies in the history of this republic.’
Strength
Clinton spoke in a hoarse voice, saying that he wanted to ‘bring our people together as never before so that our diversity can be a source of strength in a world that is ever-smaller’.
Speaking to his supporters in Houston, Bush said he had telephoned Clinton to congratulate him and promised to work closely with his successor to ‘ensure a smooth transition of power’.
He added: ‘There is important work to be done and America must always come first so we will get behind the new president and wish him well.’
Clinton praised Bush for ‘the grace with which he conceded the results of this election tonight in the finest American tradition’.
He said: ‘I want all of you to join with me tonight in expressing our gratitude to President Bush for his lifetime of service.’
He also praised him for ‘the way that he ended the Cold War.
‘But I ask you to be Americans again, to be interested not just in getting but in giving…not just in looking out for yourselves, but in looking out for others.’
Clinton had cast himself as the candidate of new economic opportunity and appealed over and over for voters to summon the ‘courage to change’ by electing him and running mate Al Gore.
Bill Clinton, born dirt-poor in the tiny town of Hope, Arkansas, has overcome extraordinary odds and obstacles to become the nation's 42nd president.
Offering an agenda for change during bad economic times, the 46year-old Arkansas governor harnessed his youth, dogged determination and a passion for politics to unseat a sitting elected president for only the eighth time in US history.
Appeal
Clinton's candidacy combined 1960s-style idealism with New South pragmatism to woo voters with a promise of results over ideology or political party.
To appeal to moderates who backed Republicans in the last three presidential elections and to avoid being labelled a ‘tax-and-spend’ Democrat, he set out a platform stressing economic growth, tax fairness, universal health care, racial harmony and a lower federal budget deficit.
He also warned Americans against expecting too much from their government, preaching personal responsibility and a smaller federal bureaucracy, even as he criticised the Republicans for refusing to harness the power of government to cure the nation's domestic ills.
The backbone of his campaign was a plea to reject the economic policies of the past 12 years of Republican administrations, which he derisively labelled ‘trickle-down economics’ in which tax breaks are given to the wealthy in the hope that the benefits will ‘trickle down’to lower-income groups.
In their place, he has advocated a more activist government role in the economy, by increasing public works spending, cutting middle-class taxes and retraining workers to prepare them for competition in the global marketplace.
Youngest
A true-grit survivor, he began thinking about a career in politics early, dreaming of being president while still in high school in Arkansas.
He won his first election in 1976, when he became Arkansas's attorney general.
Two years later, at 32, he became the nation's youngest governor.
After a dozen years in the Arkansas state-house he decided to run for president at time when President George Bush's re-election was considered virtually certain.
But the economy remained weak and Bush made a series of mistakes and miscalculations throughout the fall and winter.
After clinching the Democratic presidential nomination last spring, Clinton's campaign fell into the doldrums in June as independent Ross Perot climbed into the lead even without formally declaring his candidacy.
Then Perot bowed out of the race in mid-July, hailing a ‘revitalised’ Democratic Party on the same day as Clinton formally accepted his party's nomination at the Democratic National Convention in New York City.
Haunted
Suddenly, Clinton was leading in the polls a position he held on to throughout the remainder of the campaign.
But his dream of reaching the White House was haunted almost from the start by a series of disclosures that would have wrecked the career of another politician.
With steely reserve and remarkable grace under pressure and long odds, Clinton survived charges of adultery and draft evasion and even an evasive answer on whether he ever tried marijuana.
The candidate dubbed himself ‘the comeback kid’ and his campaign steadily picked up steam.
It took until the California primary in June to assure him enough party convention delegates to assure his nomination.
But after the convention, he launched his campaign with a spirited bus trip from New York to the Midwest and quickly ran up a daunting lead in the polls and held it until the campaign's end.
Victory wave…
Clinton salutes supporters in Little Rock
Have a drink with Clinton in Southport
By Ray Kelly
BILL Clinton was celebrating Presidential victory today with a pint at his local…in Southport.
Not THAT Bill Clinton, but OUR own namesake.
The retired Everton Football Club salesman has keenly followed the campaign and thoroughly enjoys finding a little fame at 70.
But, he says, he could not swop places in his favourite bar for the White House Oval Office.
He explained: ‘I worked with Yanks in the war and every one of them was as daft as a brush.
‘And I've noticed no change since then, looking at the US rallies on the telly.
‘But if we could swap jobs for one day my first task would be to address the Free World wearing the Everton strip, then run a Blues flag up the mast at the White House.’
His name has already made him the butt of many jokes.
‘I got the most stick when Clinton was defending himself against allegations of an affair.
‘Everyone told me to give up the womanising at my age.’
Bill, a former RAF operator, said the two men have could not be more different.
‘I didn't go to Oxford or Yale but he would have a good education if he had joined me at Birkenhead Institute.’
Bill, a widower, said he was secretly revelling in his new-found fame.
But as Bill celebrated it was curtains for George and Barbara Bush…from West Derby.
The postal workers watched the results at home in The Beech Walk.
George, 60, said: ‘I've got the President on my locker at work and everyone thinks it is hysterical.
‘There have been constant jokes about it but we quite like it because every time our names are called out we see a row of smiling faces.
‘Bill Clinton looks like he will be taking on quite a responsibility.
You have always got to be ready to smile and joke back with everyone who has a friendly jibe at you.’
Bill Clinton…with Bill Clinton Picture: STEPHEN SHAKESHAFT
Carmen celebrate launch of £190m plant
GEAR SHIFT TO SUCCESS
By Gwyn Griffiths
A BRIGHT new future dawned for car workers at Vauxhall's Merseyside complex with the opening today of a £190m engine plant.
Bosses at the Ellesmere Port factory say the new V6 engine plant will guarantee employment levels despite the recession sweeping through the motor industry.
They have already recruited about 150 workers to get the plant up and running — and at least another 250 jobs will be created.
The plant will make the V6 engine for top-range models in the company's Cavalier range.
It has been developed and refined over the last four years by engineers at the company's parent company, General Motors.
About 90% of the engines produced at Ellesmere Port will be exported to Europe.
Work on the production line starts in the next couple of days with the sales of the Vauxhall Cavalier and Opel Vextra containing the engine expected next spring.
Workers in Ellesmere Port beat off stiff competition from sister company Opel in Germany to win the contract for the plant.
About 130 VIP guests, including international Vauxhall bosses and representatives of the CBI and civic heads were expected at today's inauguration ceremony.
A Vauxhall spokesman said: ‘It is a very big day for Ellesmere Port and a very big day for the North-West.
‘The realisation of a £190m investment is something that doesn't happen every day.
‘This plant is likely to be one of the biggest investments in the British motor industry this decade.’
More rebels abandon Maastricht protest
MAJOR LOOKS SET TO WIN EURO VOTE
THE government may have a majority as high as 10 at the end of the crucial Commons debate on the Maastricht Treaty tonight.
That was the private calculation of some Labour MPs as two leading dissidents finally decided to abandon their threat to rebel and instead support John Major in the division lobbies.
But Tory rebels still remain confident they can win the day and in doing so inflict irreparable damage on the treaty.
A defeat would gravely damage the Prime Minister's authority at home and abroad.
Rebel ringleader James Cran warned today they were ‘quite determined to give the government a bit of a shock this evening’.
Suspicious
But Sir George Gardiner, chairman of the right-of-centre 1992 Group of Tories, and Brent North MP Sir Rhodes Boyson have both now said they will throw their hand in with the Prime Minister.
Sir Rhodes said: ‘I am not enthusiastic about the Maastricht Treaty.
I keep my views on that.
I am very suspicious of it.
‘But I am also concerned about the position of the Prime Minister.
It is only seven months ago that we won an election under his leadership.
‘He negotiated well at Maastricht.
And I am voting tonight as a vote of confidence in John Major.’
Sir Rhodes said he also objected to the Labour Party ‘playing politics’ with the vote when it should simply be about the Maastricht Treaty.
Mr Major yesterday held what was probably his last face-to-face meeting to win round a group of waverers.
Tory loyalist Ian Taylor, MP for Esher, said some of those determined to vote against the government falsely assumed that if they won, the Maastricht issue would disappear.
‘I don't think it will at all, and the overwhelming majority in favour of Maastricht in the House of Commons will show its strength and we will move into the committee stage,’ he said.
Brain op not to blame for man's death
By Philippa Bellis
A MASSIVE brain haemorrhage killed a man 36 hours after an operation on what surgeons thought was a tumour.
It was found that the swelling was not a tumour but an aneurysma large swelling of a blood vessel.
But an inquest heard that the rupture in the blood vessel was not caused by the operation.
John Cleary, 25, a computer analyst in Winchester, had been complaining of tiredness, headaches and dizziness for four weeks.
He had returned home to Liverpool and had X-rays at Walton Hospital.
John Miles, senior consultant neurosurgeon at Walton, told the inquest that an urgent scan showed a large rounded lesion.
After a magnetic resonance scan and talks with the neuro-radiologist, he decided that the lesion was more likely to be a tumour.
Punctured
He decided to explore the lesion to establish the diagnosis by taking a biopsy.
But when he punctured the lesion, blood came out and he knew he was dealing with an aneuyrism.
Mr Miles stopped the bleeding, but 36 hours later Mr Cleary suffered a major haemorrhage.
‘I am absolutely satisfied that the biopsy needle could not have been responsible for the rupture in the wall of the aneurysm, which was on the far side from the point where the needle entered,’ said Mr Miles.
He said he believed the rupture was spontaneous.
And he added: ‘This aneurysm was in the most treacherous position in the whole of the brain for the purposes of an operation.’
He said even if he had known it was an aneurysm, it may have been totally inoperable and would have carried a mortality rate of 80%.
Merseyside coroner Roy Barter recorded a verdict of death by natural causes.
Neighbours' twins look to big panto hit at the Empire
By Joe Riley
IT'S a long way to hitch from Down Under…but now they're here, it looks as if Neighbours' twins Gillian and Gayle Blakeney are here to stay.
For the soap stars from Oz who are topping the bill in Dick Whittington at the Empire Theatre, Liverpool, this Christmas revealed that they may end up settling in Britain.
As to where and when, a lot will depend on the success of their new-found careers as pop singers.
‘We love it here,’ said Gillian.
‘Both our grandfathers were English.’
The girls, who gained international fame as Christina and Caroline in Neighbours, are now recording an album and hope to have one of the tracks cut as a single in time for the pantomime's launch on December 18.
Meanwhile, there's absolutely no hitch with the show.
The twins have already learned their scripts off by heart.
Gillian plays Alice Fitzwarren and Gayle her Magical Fairy Protector.
‘I could hardly be Fairy Godmother,’ joked Gayle.
‘I am only nine minutes older than Gillian.’
The twins' outfits for the panto, two of which they modelled for a preview, have cost £13,500.
The entire production, which is being put together specially for Liverpool, will cost a cool £750,000.
The girls will get just two days off during the run.
Gayle said: ‘We've hired rooms in a real castle and we're hoping for snow.’
Long way from Oz…
Gillian, left, and Gayle give the thumbs up to city drivers as they wait to cross busy Lime Street
War family swops stress for smiles
By Jane Gallagher
A COUPLE forced to flee war-torn Bosnia smile as their young daughter plays.
It is a scene which seemed unimaginable as recently as a week ago for Branislav and Bilijana Markovic.
The couple lost everything in the savage civil war that has gripped their homeland.
Their nine-month-old daughter Isidora is no longer rocked to the sound of rifle fire.
Instead, she can play freely in the safety of a Skelmersdale home.
Before the war, Branislav, 31, was a water purification engineer.
Bilijana, 26, was looking forward to bringing up a family in their comfortable Sarajevo home.
But the couple, who are both of mixed Serbian/Croatian parentage, were forced to leave the country after their home was destroyed in a mortar attack and there was nowhere left to run.
Future
A friend of a friend knew of a Robert Johnstone in Skelmersdale and, following the briefest of messages, the family made their way to England.
Mr Johnstone said: ‘The first I knew they were in Liverpool and on their way here.
I rang around and a friend, Roger Gerrett, said they could stay with him until it was safe to return.’
Branislav said: ‘Everyone has been very kind.
We don't feel far from home, we feel we have another home.
‘The most important thing is the future of our baby.
We want Isidora to grow up without stress and fear.
‘We hope the war in Bosnia will end soon and we can see our family again.’
Happy families…
Isidora on the shoulders of Robert Johnstone, with mum and dad and Roger Gerrett (left).
Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN
Action call after Britons identified in child sex ring
LIVERPOOL MP David Alton is spearheading a campaign urging action over a sickening report on child abuse.
The grim 132-page report names British nationals arrested but never prosecuted for child sex crimes in the Phillippines.
Mossley Hill's Mr Alton, joint chairman of the Parliamentary Group on Street Children, said: ‘This report cannot be ignored.
If it was, we would be falling into the trap of ‘out of sight, out of mind’.’
An all-party group of MPs want ministers to bring in new laws so that UK citizens accused of child sex offences can be brought before courts in Britain.
Europe…it's a funny old place
LIVERPOOL is the comedy capital of Britain.
So we set some of our comics the toughest challenge of all make us laugh about Maastricht.
WILL ROLSTON found out what they could come up with…
LIVERPOOL'S top funnymen became Euro-comics today.
And their advice to John Major in his hour of crisis was to maintain a typically British stiff upper lip.
MPs may be worked up over tonight's vote, but Merseyside's comedians in gyms, golf courses and top hotels whiled away the day laughing at a brave new Europe full of German humour, Italian efficiency and French bathing habits.
John Martin is concerned about the cultural effects of the treaty.
‘The Europeans have a totally different culture to us,’ he said.
‘When you meet them they kiss you on both cheeks.
I met this Frenchman at Masstricht who kissed me on both cheeks.
Deck chair
‘It came as a shock, because I was bent down tying my shoelaces.’
John says the Germans have got a new Maastricht banner a deck chair with a towel over it.
And he's worried about Channel Tunnel trains.
‘Why have they got windscreen wipers?’
Stan Boardman, reckons the treaty must be a good thing for Bryant and May.
‘I'll tell you what the French and these other Europeans are like,’ he said.
‘They set fire to our sheep and never even invited us to the barbecue.’
He couldn't resist a swipe at the Germans, either.
‘My dad was talking to a German and he said: ‘I ran out of petrol near Maastricht.’
The German said ‘What were you driving, a Volkswagen?’
And he said: ‘No, a Wellington bomber.’
And he pointed to the way the French lorry drivers blockaded Euro-Disney, denying British kids holidays of a lifetime.
‘Where were the lorries in 1940 when the Germans marched in?’ asked Stan.
According to John Martin, there is some hope of unity.
‘In Maastricht, they've just opened a new EC public toilet, to help bring nationalities together, and it works.
‘When you go in there, it doesn't matter if you're British, French, German or whatever…the main thing is ‘European’.
Tom O'Connor more of a European Tour than a European Community man stepped off the golf course to chip in a Eurojoke.
‘I was at a dinner the other night and the Chancellor was speaking.
‘He said: ‘If we go in and sign it, beer will be fivepence a pint, cigarettes will be tuppence for 20 and petrol will be 50p a gallon.’
‘Then he sang two choruses from Nelly Dean and was sick in a bucket.’
Here are some others offered by the scriptwriters.
Clever people the Dutch.
A Maastricht clockmaker has just invented a new digital wristwatch.
You press a button and a hand pops up to point to the nearest person with the right time.
Two lads turned up at Goodison for trials claiming to be Dutch internationals from Maastricht Hertz Van Rental and Leasowe Van Hire.
John Major left for a tour of all friendly European countries this afternoon.
He'll be back in plenty of time for tonight's Maastricht vote.
Wires hot as world sends its greetings
RUSSIAN President Boris Yeltsin congratulated president-elect Bill Clinton and expects growing co-operation between the two countries, a Moscow spokesman said.
Anatoly Krasikov, asked for reaction to Clinton's win, said Yeltsin was sending a formal telegram.
Germany's President Richard von Weizsaecker said he was sure close ties between Bonn and Washington would remain a stable anchor.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said: ‘The special relationship between America and Israel will be as strong as ever.’
Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari expressed hope for co-operation on trade and border issues.
In Iraq, Baghdad radio greeted the defeat of President Bush with anthems in praise of Saddam Hussein.
Grandad with winning touch hits jackpot
CHAMPAGNE CHARLIE'S £2m TOAST
By Echo reporter
GRANDFATHER ‘Champagne’ Charlie Hill has become one of the biggest football pools winners in history, Littlewoods announced today.
His £2,008,137.60p jackpot is the company's sixth-biggest payout, the seventh to top the £2m mark.
The fortune is the climax to a life-long winning streak for 68year-old Mr Hill, of Blackpool.
‘Twenty years ago, two mediums told me all they could see was bags of money over my head.
‘It's been a long time coming, but it's worth the wait,’ said Mr Hill, dubbed ‘Champagne Charlie’by family and friend because of his winning ways.
Lucky
Mr Hill's delighted wife Mona said: ‘He's always winning things.
We haven't bought a Christmas turkey for years because he always wins one.
‘When we married 26 years ago I never realised it would be to a millionaire but he has always been lucky.’
Mr Hill won £6,000 with Littlewoods a few years ago.
A former supervisor at British Nuclear Fuels in Preston, he will be presented with his cheque in London today by Arthur Daley actor George Cole.
Labour plans schools bid
LABOUR councillors are bidding to overturn a decision which stalled reorganisation of Liverpool's special schools.
Education Committee chairman Gideon Ben-Tovim said Labour was proposing their reorganisation plans again at a meeting of the city council.
Raid terror: A brave caretaker was shoulder-charged to the ground after he disturbed three young burglars -one aged just 12 as he was carrying out his rounds at the City of Liverpool Community College.
Cash boost: Wirral council staff who retire are to receive £90 for the first 25 years of service and £3.60 for each subsequent year following an increase in long service awards.
Light show: Motorists in St Helens can have their headlights tested and corrected at Merseybus in Jackson Street for 50p on Saturday proceeds go to the Liverpool Royal School for the Blind appeal.
Kitchen carols: The Victorian kitchens at Liverpool's Croxteth Hall and Country Park will be open for a demonstration of cookery and a carol service on December 20 at 2.30 pm.
Minister tour: Housing Minister Sir George Young is to be shown the transformation of a former Merseyside slum area in Marsh Lane, Bootle.
Road plea: Drivers are being asked to avoid roadworks on Birkenhead Road, Meols, Wirral, at peak times for the next four weeks due to road works.
Concert date: Pupils from the Liverpool Bluecoat school will present a Christmas concert in Speke Hall on 12 December at 7.30pm.
Tickets are £8.00.
Check up on your health
RESIDENTS of Rock Ferry can check up on developments in health care at a special awareness day tomorrow.
Experts from 25 different agencies will be on hand with health care information about everyone from babies to pensioners at St Peter's Church, Rock Ferry.
Visitors can also have free health and fitness check-ups.
Organiser Pat Devey, of the Ferries Project, said: ‘Anyone who lives or works in the area will be welcome.’
City takes the result in its stride
THE stock market took the election of Bill Clinton in its stride despite his pledge to raise taxes on foreign companies operating in the United States.
Dealers are more impressed with his promise to galvanise the US economy, which they believe will outweigh the higher tax threat.
The FTSE index of the leading 100 companies opened down a marginal 1.1 at 2704.5, with interest focused more closely on political uncertainty at home ahead of tonight's Europe vote.
On the foreign exchange market, sterling gained against the US dollar, opening at 1.5560, up from 1.5473 last night.
It also improved against the German mark to 2.4339 from 2.4192.
The Essex boys aren't too bright, either
A QUESTION OF INTELLIGENCE
WHO says Essex girls hold the copyright on mental slackness?
Essex boys aren't too high on the taste and awareness ladder either, if the 50-odd who travelled the length of the country to watch Southend at Tranmere last night are any measure.
Their team squeezed the life out of this match with ambitions that stretched no further than damage limitation, coupled with a suffocating off-side tactic.
And after grabbing two goals in the opening 15 minutes, Rovers possessed neither the need nor the inclination to chase things.
The vibrancy of Tranmere's Friday night performance was repeated for just 15 minutes, but that was enough to seal the points.
Aldridge had already missed two acceptable chances before Irons an outstanding first half performer broke in a powerful burst forward and slipped the ball right to Morrissey, who skirted around Tilson and crashed a shot past Sansome.
Pat Nevin endured one of his less effective nights, but the beauty of his signing has been to bring the best out of Morrissey.
The number seven knows that any rocky run would have boss King itching to ditch the highly adventurous two winger formation and he knows which winger would go.
£300,000 signings take some ousting.
Not that Morrissey is in any danger at the moment.
His form and his work rate over the past two months have been sparkling.
It was Nevin who eked out the second goal in the 16th minute.
Reaction
He returned Malkin's right-wing ball for Irons to crash a shot back off the crossbar, Aldridge reacting instinctively to hook the rebound in.
After that the game became a procession.
Aldridge, Malkin from Irons' peach of a pass, and then Aldridge again, with a cute chip, all went close.
Higgins crashed a header against the crossbar before Southend successfully suffocated the game.
McNab briefly revived it 13 minutes from the end with a sizzling 20-yard strike for the third goal.
It sealed a comfortable victory and sent Rovers soaring into third place in the table.
Make no mistake, for the time being anyway, this is not a false position.
Rovers are playing the most attractive football in the division and look good enough for a play-off place.
TRANMERE ROVERS: Nixon, Higgins, Brannan, Irons, Mungall, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Malkin, McNab, Nevin.
Subs not used: Cooper, Hughes.
SOUTHEND UNITED: Sansome, Parkinson, Powell, Cornwell, Edwards, Prior, Ansah, Martin, Locke, Benjamin, Tilson (O'Callaghan 59).
Sub not used: Scully.
Referee: John Lloyd (Wrexham).
Attendance: 5,870.
GOALS: Morrissey 8 (1-0), Aldridge 16 (2-0), McNab 77 (3-0).
MPs ANGRY OVER ROYALS TAX ISSUE
Lamont says he has no plans to make them pay
A POLITICAL row has broken out over Chancellor Norman Lamont's rejection of demands that the Royal Family should pay income tax.
Labour MPs reacted angrily to the Chancellor's refusal which came in the form of a Commons written reply to Coventry South East's Jim Cunningham.
Mr Cunningham had asked Mr Lamont to ‘extend taxation of income to members of the Royal Family who are currently excluded.’
Mr Lamont replied: ‘I have no plans to do so.’
Falkirk West's Dennis Canavan, said: ‘It is a deplorable answer, particularly bearing in mind the fact that the Queen is one of the richest people in the world.’
Andrew MacKinlay, MP for Thurrock, said: ‘This will make a lot of people angry.
It is demonstrably unfair.
‘The Queen ought to pay tax and so should other members of her family.’
Desperate
Alan Williams, MP for Swansea West, said: ‘The Queen is a billionaire.
Her income from investments is a closely-guarded secret.
‘Why should she pay no tax when her subjects on minuscule incomes are paying tax?’
Robert Hughes, Aberdeen North, said: ‘I would have thought the Chancellor would be desperate to get some extra revenue.
I am surprised he turned it down.’
Broken jaw agony of footballer
A FOOTBALLER has denied causing grievous bodily harm after another player's jaw was broken in a match.
John Newton, 25, of New Hey Road, Woodchurch, Birkenhead, is accused of causing grievous bodily harm to David Hallam, 29, of Stanley Street, Garston.
The incident is alleged to have happened during a Wirral Sunday League match at Ridgewood Park, Pensby, on April 21.
Liverpool Crown Court heard that Newton, a chemist, was playing for ADS Graphics and Mr Hallam was centre forward for the Queens Arms from Oxton, Birkenhead.
Newton said he was the victim of a late sliding tackle by Mr Hallam.
Kicked out
Newton said: ‘We both fell to the ground with our legs tangled.
I tried to get up but my legs were pulled from under me and I was kicked by my opponent.
‘I kicked out to get away but only enough to free myself.’
He added: ‘I never struck him with my fists or kicked him in the face when I was in a standing position.’
One of Mr Hallam's team mates, William Morris, of Corwen Close, Ford Estate, Wirral, said that both players were on the ground kicking out at each other.
As Mr Hallam tried to get up, a member of the opposing team grabbed hold of him in a kind of headlock and he saw Newton kick Mr Hallam in the jaw.
Mr Hallam rolled over screaming in agony, he said.
(Proceeding)
New Chip shop?
THE CHIPPENDALES flexed a bit of muscle at the opening of the Formby Cancer Research Campaign charity shop.
Pictured are Brian (right) with Garrett (centre), organiser Carol Fell and guests.
You could win Ian Rush's record-breaking shirt
HERE'S your chance to win an exclusive and historic soccer memento.
We are giving you the opportunity of winning the shirt worn by Liverpool and Wales star Ian Rush when he beat the club's goal scoring record.
At the same time you would be giving charity a boost as the Echo will send a cheque for £100 to the charity of the winner's choice.
The contest could not be easier.
All you have to do is answer three simple questions on the coupon provided and send it to: Ian Rush Competition, Liverpool Echo, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
The first correct entry opened on Monday, November 9 will win.
Score
You can send as many entries as you like — as long as they are on the Echo's official coupon.
Another coupon will appear tomorrow.
Here are your questions:
1)
Against which team did Ian Rush score his record-breaking goal?
2)
Which striker did he overtake in Liverpool's goal scoring charts?
3)
Which team did Ian Rush join in Italy?
Ian Rush…
Reds' top target man
A bridge is bungled
PLANNERS bungled when they designed a new bridge over a railway line — without leaving enough room for trains to pass underneath.
The bridge, on the Chester improvement scheme on the A41, had to be raised at a total cost of almost £1m, said a National Audit Office report out today.
The error was spotted after work began and it cost £70,000 to raise the bridge.
The contractor claimed £350,000 for delays and disruption and the related delay costs to road users amounted to around £450,000, the NAO estimated.
BIRKENHEAD'S Queensway tunnel will be closed for major electrical works this weekend and Mersey Tunnels staff are taking the chance to spruce up the tube.
The tunnel will close at 8pm on Friday and reopen at 5am on Monday.
Working will continue round the clock in time for the start of the new working week.
Mersey Tunnels general manager John Gillard said the extent of the work ruled out partial closure.
‘It will allow us to undertake a range of improvements from cleaning and painting inside the tunnel to maintenance work at the barriers.’
SHOTGUN raiders fled empty-handed from a off-licence in Brodie Avenue, Garston, yesterday after the 84year-old licencee was unable to open the till.
They drove off in a red Sierra XR 3.
Costs row over coal terminal
By Barry Turnbull
A MULTI-MILLION pound row has erupted over the construction of the controversial coal imports terminal in Bootle.
Electricity giants Powergen claim environmental protection measures demanded by Sefton Council will add £12m to the cost of the £40m project.
The company is to challenge the conditions imposed by Sefton Council on the grounds that they are unnecessary.
Powergen was given the go-ahead for the Gladstone Dock facility earlier this year, but councillors demanded that all coal-laden rail wagons leaving the site should be fully enclosed and washed down to avoid spreading coal dust.
Campaigners claim deposits of coal dust released into the atmosphere are a health hazard and a nuisance.
But Powergen bosses have reacted quickly to the new council demands.
A spokesman for the electricity generators said today: ‘There is no evidence that the release into the atmosphere of coal dust from rail wagons will be in quantities which are harmful.
‘The cost would be grossly excessive when compared to any environmental benefit which may result.’
Instead, the company suggests installing a £30,000 spray system at the terminal to dampen coal.
Councillors on Sefton's environment committee will meet tonight to discuss the issue.
The dockside coal depot will be the focal point of a demonstration against imports and pit closures tomorrow.
Baby in knife terror
MUGGERS held a 12-ins knife to a baby's face and forced her mum to hand over her handbag.
The gang of four pounced on the young mum as she was pushing her five-month-old daughter along Windsor Street, Toxteth.
They held the knife up against the baby's face and grabbed the bag containing £95.
The mother and baby escaped uninjured and the gang ran off.
Angry tenants take protest to the Commons
MORE than 140 angry Liverpool City Council tenants travelled to Westminster to lobby MPs over moves to put the management of their homes out to tender.
The residents, from all over the city, are furious that the Housing and Urban Development Bill will take away their right to veto the contracting out of housing management.
And the protesters' anger was heightened when Environment Secretary Michael Howard refused to see them about their fears.
The Bill which had its second reading yesterday would bring in compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) for the management of houses currently run by local councils.
The residents met Garston MP Eddie Loyden, Broadgreen's Jane Kennedy and Riverside's Bob Parry who pledged their support.
Lesson for the Tories
BILL Clinton's decisive victory in the American presidential elections marks the end of an era.
The new President signals the advent of a new generation with a new and more positive approach.
The days of do-nothing government are numbered.
Like voters in Britain, the voters of the United States were told ‘there is no alternative.’
No alternative to recession.
No alternative to a growing gap between rich and poor.
No alternative to crumbling cities and a rust-belt wasteland where manufacturing industry once thrived.
The American people refused to believe it.
Instead they have voted for a man who promised change, who believed in change and who recognised that change had to come.
President Bush is now yesterday's man.
But despite his qualities and his achievements he has looked like yesterday's man for some time.
By seeming to do little more than wait for the economy to get better by itself, President Bush condemned himself.
There is a clear lesson there for a beleagured John Major and a rattled Tory government.
After this year's election win, they have time on their side.
Unless, that is, they commit the equivalent of political suicide over Europe.
But that time must be spent in tackling the same issues identified by Bill Clinton.
As a reminder to the British Government, we will state again what those real issues are.
The growing gap between rich and poor, our crumbling cities and the wasteland where manufacturing industry once thrived.
Winning performance
TODAY is a great day for everyone at Vauxhall's Ellesmere Port plant.
It marks the opening of the company's £190 million engine factory which will both secure jobs and create new ones.
Workers in Ellesmere Port beat off stiff competition from sister company Opel in Germany to win the contract for the plant.
About 90 per cent of the engines produced at Ellesmere Port will be exported to Europe which is good news for Britain too.
Congratulations to all concerned.
BAT profits surge through the roof
RECORD profits from international cigarette sales and a dramatic recovery at Eagle Star insurance helped BAT Industries surge ahead in the third quarter.
Today's pre-tax profits for the nine months to September 30 were up by 56% to £1.03bn from £657m in the same period last year.
The British insurance underwriting business at Eagle Star improved, although provisions on UK mortgage insurance were £29m in the third quarter.
About 200 Liverpool staff are employed at Eagle Star's India Buildings offices in Water Street.
Leap
Financial services including pensions and life insurance subsidiary Allied Dunbar, whose Liverpool office is one of the country's best performers saw trading profits leap to £376m in the nine months from £142m.
Exports of BAT's cigarette brands grew by 25% in volume, while sales to central Europe and the former Soviet Union trebled.
Trading profit in the tobacco division was 16% ahead at a record £805m thanks to the international spread of the business.
Princess tucks in as tour rolls on
THE Prince and Princess of Wales were putting on a brave front today.
They showed no signs of anxiety over the coverage of their alleged marriage problems as their hectic schedule of engagements continued in South Korea.
The princess was in sparkling form on the third day of their four-day tour.
And she showed her skills with chopsticks when offered a pancake during a visit to a welfare centre in Bongchun-Dong, a poor suburb of Seoul.
Respect
She had walked in as a cookery demonstration for Korean housewives was under way.
After removing her shoes in respect for Korean custom, she watched as chef Wang Jun Ryun filled the pancake with shredded beef, carrot and cucumber and mustard sauce.
Then the princess raised her eyebrows when she realised she was expected to eat it.
‘That's coming my way?
I thought you might do that to me,’ she laughed.
Doctors are confident after Hepburn cancer op
By Echo reporter
A TUMOUR removed from actress Audrey Hepburn's colon was found to be cancerous, it was revealed today.
Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre, Los Angeles, said it was a ‘low-grade malignancy’ and doctors were confident they had removed the entire tumour.
Miss Hepburn, 63, who underwent surgery on Sunday, was listed in fair condition and expected to leave hospital within a week.
Spokesman Ron Wise said: ‘It's a cancerous tumour.
There are more aggressive and less aggressive cancers.
This is a less aggressive type.
The doctors feel they've caught it all.’
Miss Hepburn, best known for starring roles in such 1960s' classics as My Fair Lady and Breakfast at Tiffany's, recently toured refugee camps in famine-ravaged Somalia as a goodwill ambassador for the United Nation's children's fund.
She had complained of stomach problems after returning and doctors at first thought she had picked up an infection in Africa.
Audrey Hepburn…operation
Local leaders play the game
LOCAL business leaders will be getting their games out next month.
The indoor table top games, such as treasure hunts and building Stonehenge, are aimed at improving management and team building skills.
Organisers Gower, and Liverpool's Saville Group, are holding their latest seminar at the Gateway Park Hotel, Halewood Road, in Gateacre, on December 9.
Grant aid for stricken firms
A GRANT of almost £250,000 has been awarded to aid Merseyside areas which have suffered job losses in the shipbuilding and repair sector.
Nimtech, the Skelmersdale-based North West Regional Technology Centre, will administer £240,310 under Europe's RENAVAL programme, via Liverpool's Department of Trade and Industry office.
At last, it's party time Down South after the never-ending election
By Paddy Shennan in St Louis
THE badges and T-shirts said it all: ‘Saddam Hussein still has a job.
Do you George?’
Screaming followers of president-elect Bill Clinton jostled for position in front of the TV cameras and unfurled banners asking: ‘Who's the Bozo now?’
Americans love to go over the top and now they have the perfect excuse.
Thousands poured into the huge Hyatt Regency Hotel in Union Street, St Louis headquarters of the Missouri Democrats.
‘George Bush and the Republicans have looked after the people who can look after themselves.
Now we are in line for a fairer society,’ said unemployed Dennis McDonough.
A hush descended on the giant ballroom as Clinton's face appeared on TV and video screens.
The cries rang out: ‘No more Bush!
No more Bush!’
Nightmare
Among many, the feeling seemed to be: ‘Thank God it's over!’
Let's face it, would you put up with a general election campaign lasting one year and one month?
This was the American nightmare.
Bush, Clinton and Perot were kept going by money, the media and mutual verbal abuse.
As the New York Daily News put it on the eve of the ballot: ‘The Muck Stops Here!’
Bush described his campaign as ‘probably the most unpleasant year of my life’.
But although it was dirty, it was never dull.
How could it be with the clown candidate Ross ‘I'm All Ears’ Perot.
In a bizarre pre-election address, the Texas tycoon put it all in perspective, declaring:’ We're all crazies, but there are millions of crazy people in this country!’
You said it, Ross.
You said it.
Furious protesters plan flaming demo
BURNING TO SHOW THEIR BITTERNESS
By Barry Turnbull
ANGRY campaigners plan to burn an effigy of social security minister Peter Lilley on Merseyside tomorrow.
The Campaign for Domestic Violence is demonstrating against government plans to introduce the Child Support Act next year.
They claim the Act will lead to more financial hardship for breadline families and trigger more violence in the home.
Protesters say they will carry out the symbolic burning outside St Martins House, Bootle, at noon.
Organisation spokesperson Ann Bannister said: ‘The government is aiming to save £400m by forcing absent parents to pay maintenance.
‘Payments will be made according to a formula — even if the parties involved have come to their own amicable agreement.
‘Partners who have never seen each other for 10 years may be forced into a situation that could cause stress and rekindle bitter feelings.’
Single parents will be obliged to tell the authorities how to contact former partners.
Peter Lilley…demo backlash
Fine for take-away owner after food complaint
THE owner of an Indian take-away was fined £840 after his kitchens were discovered to be infested with cockroaches.
Mohammed Uddan, who runs the Lal Quila take-away in High Park Road, Southport, pleaded guilty to two charges under the 1990 Food Safety Act.
Keith Sutton, prosecuting on behalf of Sefton Council, told Southport magistrates that a couple contacted the authority on May 8 after finding a cockroach in a half-eaten carton of lime pickle.
Tests showed the 25mm-long insect had been in the pickle for some time and environmental health officers inspected the premises.
Complaint
Officers found cockroaches of all ages in waste bins, under work surfaces, on the cooker, food storage areas and behind two freezers.
Mr Sutton said: ‘They posed a serious risk of injury to health.’
The take-away was served with an emergency prohibition notice.
Sanchita Saha, defending, said Mr. Uddin, 29, had owned the Lal Quila for five years and never had a complaint before.
She said since the complaint Mr Uddin had attended a hygiene course and intensified cleaning procedures.
Mr Uddin was fined £420 for each offence and ordered to pay £75 costs.
Urban farm wins cash pledge to aid the disabled
By Ray Kelly
A TOWN farm is ploughing ahead with fundraising schemes to help handicapped people and plans to roof in a riding area for the disabled.
The Acorn Venture Urban Farm, in Depot Road, Kirkby, also plans to cultivate a garden specially for the blind.
The educational centre, at the edge of the industrial estate, has won a £1-for-£1 pledge from the Sports Council to back its fund-raising efforts for the £17,000 roof project.
Wet and wintry weather regularly spoils the riding day treat for disabled youngsters from all over Merseyside.
Now, farm leaders want to cover the all-weather riding surface with a specially-designed roof, so horses can be ridden every day of the year.
Co-ordinator Ann Graham said: ‘It is a shame when young people look forward to a ride on the horses, often for weeks, to find it rained-off.
‘The children do not have much mobility and it can be dangerous for them to ride in the rain.’
Proud pensioner Peter scores a poll tax victory
MANY people will applaud Liverpool City Council for the zeal with which they are pursuing those residents who have deliberately refused to pay their poll tax.
But the treasury department must make sure that the people they target with summonses are not the innocent victims of a departmental mistake.
Protested
Peter Kaye, a pensioner of Beechtree Road, Wavertree, has met every poll tax payment demanded of him since the tax was introduced, keeping a careful note of the cheques he issued.
But in February, 1991, he received a summons to appear before magistrates on an allegation that he owed £269.40.
When he protested, he was told to ignore the summons.
Now, he has received another summons, claiming £89.90 is owed.
Mr Kaye writes: ‘Through the intervention of my councillor, Eddie Clein, I was given the names of two officers.
After a meeting with one, I thought the matter had been cleared up.
Then I received a final notice and now a summons.
I was able to put Mr Kaye in touch with a treasury official and the missing payments were funding a suspense account.
Mr Kaye will now NOT have to appear before magistrates.
The council says the withholding of poll tax payments and industrial action by treasury staff have made it difficult to collect money.
But, as Mr Kaye points out, that is no excuse for making innocent people feel that they are criminals.
£1m tag on mansion
By Anne Harrison
A MERSEYSIDE businessman has revealed plans he believes could end the controversy surrounding the future of picturesque Hillbark House in Wirral.
The council has been trying to sell the halftimbered historic mansion in Royden Park for more than two years and has put a £1m price tag on it.
The authority had been hoping Heswallbased developers Dayglobe would buy the Grade Two listed property.
But Dayglobe's bid suffered a major setback last month when councillors rejected its planning application for the site.
About 7,000 people signed a petition objecting to the scheme to turn the stately home into an hotel and leisure complex.
Conservationists feared a large extension and car park would destroy the building's setting.
Now rival company Wirral Peninsular Care Limited says its proposals to create a training and conference centre at Hillbark would meet the council's planning brief for the site, and satisfy local conservation groups.
Alan Blackburn, chief executive of WPCL, said: ‘It is a beautiful building.
‘Our plans are entirely within the council's planning brief.’
Mr Blackburn says he held talks about Hillbark with the council two years ago, but councillors twice rejected WPCL's bid of £680,000 in favour of a higher offer.
Cllr Peter Corcoran, Labour spokesman for land and development, said: ‘The offer we accepted at the time was, in our view, the best scheme.’
He said the council would be marketing the property again.
A Dayglobe Leisure spokesman said the company was still considering whether to appeal against the council's decision.
Hillbark House…controversy
Disability cash pledge set to end the long wait
JUBILANT LES IS BACK IN BUSINESS
THE long wait is nearly over for Leslie Lee.
Which means that he should soon be back on the road.
Mr Lee, 62, is disabled by arthritis and depends to a great extent on an electric scooter to help him get about.
Recently it broke down and he has been told that it could cost up to £400 to get him mobile again.
And that's a sum he cannot afford without his Disability Living Allowance.
He has been waiting for his allowance since first putting in a claim for the new benefit on April 24, more than six months ago.
‘I reckon the back pay they now owe me will cover the cost of the repairs that are needed to the scooter,’ says Mr Lee, of Thomas Winder Court, off Great Mersey Street, Liverpool.
Manage
‘The trouble is that nobody seems able to tell me when I'm likely to get any money!
It's so disheartening.
‘I like to go down to the Albert Dock but I can't manage it very well without the scooter.’
I put Mr Lee's problem to the government's Benefits Agency.
A spokesman said they had been overwhelmed by the number of applications when the new disability living benefit was announced and said it had taken longer than anticipated to sort out.
Specific
But he added: ‘The current delays are not acceptable and remedial action has already been taken.’
Because of the length of time involved, the spokesman made a specific inquiry on my behalf about the state of Mr Lee's application.
As a result, I am assured Mr Lee can look forward to receiving a first payment by the beginning of next week.
And as soon as that happens, Mr Lee can think about getting his scooter repaired and on the road again.
Albert Dock, here we come!
Benefit boost…arthritis victim Leslie Lee
Lee Davison, of Tuebrook, has dropped me a line of thanks for helping to resolve his problems over a faulty necklace.
And John Kelly, of Woolton, says thanks for successfully taking up his dispute over a hotel refund.
‘It is nice to know that there is someone to help fight your cause when you need it,’ added Mr Kelly.
Glad to be of service.
Ron's pub trip ends in pain
NORMALLY I insist on using the names of people who contact me for help, but in this case I am making an exception.
For, as the reader,(let's call him Ron), said in his letter: ‘I really felt a bit of a fool.’
In July, Ron was leaving the Aigburth Arms, Liverpool, one evening at about 7pm.
A contractor was working on a drain outside.
‘There was no sign to say the drain was uncovered and I fell down it, cutting my leg and ankle and ruining my shoes, socks and slacks,’ he writes.
Ron later agreed to let Greenalls handle a compensation claim on his behalf.
He has been in touch with Greenalls who, in turn, have been pressing the contractor to compensate him.
Ron has also contacted the contractor asking for £600 compensation.
I contacted Greenalls, who were very helpful, but it seems that the original contractors, A Temple Somerville, went into administrative receivership the day after Ron's mishap.
The company's affairs are now in the hands of accountants Cork Gully.
Mark Palios, the joint receiver in charge, said he was not aware of Ron's accident.
He said: ‘The matter has been referred to my insurers who will contact the company's previous insurers.’
He has promised to contact Ron direct to keep him up to date.
Flying into a storm
BUSINESSMEN are having to ‘slum it’ in aircraft economy class seats because of company cutbacks and some are very unhappy about it, according to a survey by travel company Wagons-Lits.
The same survey also says that ungrateful employers leave nearly all travel arrangements to their secretaries with scarcely a word of thanks.
Poor survey: Chartered surveyors are being badly hit by the construction slowdown, according to a new survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors which says that small practices have suffered a 28% drop in workload in the past year.
New journal: The Institute of Management, which was formed this week by the merger of two previous management bodies, has launched Professional Manager, a bi-monthly journal for its 75,000 members.
Lost bytes: Computer experts IBM have urged businesses to increase their back-up facilities after a survey commissioned by them suggests that up to £1.5bn a year is lost through computer breaches and damage to computer systems.
Debt advice: A new leaflet, and a confidential telephone service, have been launched by Birmingham Midshire Building Society to help homeowners in debt.
New supermarkets boost profits
SOARAWAY SAINSBURY
NEW supermarkets helped push sales and profits strongly ahead at J Sainsbury, the UK's biggest supermarket group, the company announced today.
During the 28 weeks to September 26 the company made pre-tax profits of £391.1m, compared with £327.5m last year.
‘We achieved excellent sales growth of 12.8% in our UK supermarkets and hypermarkets with customer numbers rising by 8.5%,’ said David Sainsbury, who took over from Lord Sainsbury on his retirement on Monday.
Openings
The group opened 14 new supermarkets during the first half of its financial year including two sites in Knotty Ash and Upton which have created more than 500 local new jobs between them.
Nine further new stores during the second half will mean a 9.1% increase in the group's sales area.
The company said: ‘A similar programme of new store openings is planned for future years.’
Roadshow ‘93 aims to be focal point for campaign
The way ahead for the disabled
A MOTOR show for Britain's disabled drivers next summer will be the world's largest event of its kind.
All the top car firms have pledged to be at the sixth Mobility Roadshow and Public Transport minister Roger Freeman says: ‘I am impressed at the range of high quality vehicles and equipment now available to meet the mobility needs of disabled people.’
The roadshow is held every two years and the 1991 event attracted 30,000 disabled visitors with some travelling long distances.
It is the focal point of a permanent campaign to give independence through personal transport to as many people as possible.
Mobility Roadshow 93 will be held from June 11-13 at the Transport Research Laboratory, Crowthorne, Berkshire.
Teamwork
The Motability campaign is made possible by the teamwork of:
Manufacturers providing cars which people can easily drive.
Charity cash-raising activities to finance special adaptations.
Department of Social Security mobility payments to buy or lease a car.
But much more still needs to be done to make people aware of the potential.
Only 130,000 of 700,000 eligible disabled people in Britain use their mobility allowance to run a vehicle which could give them a new life through personal transport.
Ford says it has provided more than half of the Motability-registered cars currently used under contract hire agreements.
‘The freedom to travel independently is taken for granted by most of us and only assumes its real importance when it is limited or even removed,’ said a spokesman.
The DSS has created a new Disability Living Allowance which merges the old attendance allowance with two new components of the mobility allowance.
They can be used to purchase a wheelchair and buy or hire a suitably adapted car or van to restore freedom of movement.
Contract hire is the more popular method because vehicles are exempt from special car tax and VAT but remain the property of Motability Finance who pay for the car insurance, servicing and maintenance.
AA roadside assistance cover is included.
A typical agreement lasts three years and a disabled person can have more than one person insured to drive the vehicle.
In 1991, Motability provided more than 43,000 vehicles.
In many cases, says the charity, family cars can be paid for entirely with the DSS allowance but a more severe disability will often mean that a more expensive vehicle is needed.
Grants
Power steering, automatic transmissions, hand-controlled accelerator and brake and swivel seats are often required.
According to Motability, adaptations to enable severely handicapped people to travel by car in their wheelchairs often cost as much as the vehicle itself.
Grants can also be available to help with the cost of driving lessons and initial deposits.
In 1991, Motability's Charitable Fund awarded grants of more than £1.28 million, compared with less than £1m in 1990.
Demand is continuing to increase.
Last autumn, a five-year-old boy from mid-Glamorgan and his parents went to Buckingham Palace to receive from the Queen the keys of the 250,000th car supplied by Motability since 1978.
They said the car would enable them to take him to school and on holiday.
Vauxhall says it has invested significantly in dealer training and customer care with its 500 dealers registered under the Motability scheme reporting increased business.
Problem
Surveys suggest that other motorists could do much more to make life easier for disabled drivers.
Parking is a major problem, often because vehicles are parked too close to their vehicle.
Many want to see the return of petrol pump attendants because of the difficulties with self-self service.
The RAC believes most of the problems are caused ‘through ignorance, not malevolance’.
Mum hunted over grim find
A MOTHER was being hunted after the bodies of two newly-born babies were found in an outside toilet at a derelict house in Stoke-on-Trent.
After the discovery in the Hanley area, police said they believed the woman needs medical attention after giving birth.
Shooting quiz: Three men are being questioned after a Catholic was shot and wounded at his west Belfast home in an area where Loyalist killers have staged a series of hit-and-run attacks.
Rock on: Millionaire rock star Dave Stewart is giving the proceeds from his latest record, Light Up The City, to help youngsters in his native Sunderland take part in music-related projects.
Stage star: Young actress Tara FitzGerald won a standing ovation after her stage debut as Peter O'Toole's mistress in the Keith Waterhouse comedy Our Song at London's Apollo Theatre.
Maxwell plea: Maxwell pensioners were being joined by print workers at a mass Westminster demonstration and lobby of MPs in their campaign for long-term security for pensions.
Fighting back: Disabled people suffering discrimination at work should be given legal backing to claim compensation of up to £30,000, said the Law Society.
Wise move: Breeders of barn owls will need a licence to release them into the wild from January to stop them being freed into unsuitable areas ill equipped for life in the wild.
Queen's green praise as forest is saved
THE Queen has spoken of her concern for the environment while praising the Sultan of Brunei for his work in protecting his country's rainforests.
Guests at a Buckingham Palace banquet held last night in honour of the Sultan's four-day state visit heard the Queen hail Brunei as ‘an example to the world’ in the way it was preserving its natural habitat.
Polo
The 130 guests attending the banquet in the splendour of The Ballroom included a host of senior members of the Royal Family, Prime Minister John Major, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bank of England Governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton.
The Prince of Wales, who like the Sultan has a passion for polo, has already taken a close interest in the environmental impact of destruction of the world's rainforests, a key factor in global warming.
And Prince Edward underlined the Royal Family's concern with a visit last March to a rainforest research project established jointly with the Royal Geographical Society in Brunei.
In a formal speech at the end of the state banquet, the Queen told the Sultan, said to be the world's richest man: ‘In the preservation of its beautiful forests, Brunei is an example to the world.’
The Sultan is visiting with the senior of his two wives, the Raja Isteri, in an official capacity — for the first time since his country achieved full independence from Britain in 1984.
The Queen…concern Sultan of Brunei…example
Piggott to go home
JOCKEY Lester Piggott has been discharged from a Miami Hospitalthe day before his 57th birthday.
Piggott fractured a collarbone, two ribs and suffered bruising around his right eye after his high-speed fall in a million dollar Breeders Cup race just three days ago.
Car bomb: A car bomb injured a British man and a woman in the German town of Siegen, near Bonn.
The unnamed man, 34, had just turned the ignition of the Mercedes when it exploded.
The woman is critical with severe burns.
Chopper squad: Four Royal Navy Sea King helicopters are being sent to former Yugoslavia as air ambulances.
Britain will also send 180 staff, taking the total of forces in Bosnia to 2,580.
US snail: The snail's pace of American economic growth will continue into next year, said the US Commerce Department.
Washington's key economic gauge faltered for a second month in September.
Task force: The US has sent an amphibious task force with Marines aboard into the eastern Atlantic.
The troops were sent because of the upsurge in Liberia's three-year-old civil war.
Ride fear: Sally Ride, America's first woman in space, told an audience that flying on the shuttle Challenger in 1983 and 1984 was frightening.
UN troops: UN Security Council members agreed to reinforce their military presence in Angola.
At least 1,200 people have been killed in recent fighting.
Pluto wait: A Japanese freighter due to ship a cargo of highly radioactive plutonium from France is waiting for the material to be loaded.
Nearly a quarter of all British households, some 24 per cent, claim to have some involvement with horses, according to a survey by Horse and Hound magazine.
According to the study, published tomorrow (Thursday October 29) said to be the largest of its kind ever undertaken in the UK, six per cent of British households have a horse-rider in the family and the average horse owner, there are about 252,000 of them, spends more than £5,000 on their horse.
The figure of £5,291.64p includes an average of £1,256 for livery (care and grooming) £989.11 for stabling and £663.97 for feed.
Transport is another high cost at an annual average of £651.04p.
Other expenses are tack and equipment, insurance, vets fees, competitions, security and wormers.
Horse and Hound says the aim of the survey was to gauge the size and importance of the equestrian industry.
The magazine, the largest equestrian weekly, selling more than 75,000 copies each week, commissioned Taylor Nelson to carry out a random face to face survey, interviewing some 3,862 people across the country during July and August about their involvement with horses.
Also during July, Horse and Hound distributed a questionnaire in 20,000 copies of the magazine, and analysed the first 1,017 to be returned.
More than half the respondents, 54 per cent, said they had been readers for at least ten years and three quarters (76 per cent ) had been readers for five years.
The most committed readers, those claiming to buy every issue, tended to be male horse owners, aged 45 or older.
As Horse and Hound points out, the current UK population stands at 56 million, or 21.5 million households.
Some 76 per cent of these claim to have no involvement with horses, however, 24 per cent or 5.1 million households say they are involved with horses.
There are 2.8 million people in the country who ride.
Most are female, outnumbering males by four to one.
The largest group of males is young, aged under ten, while the largest section of women riders is in the age band 16 to 24.
Horse riding is a significant part of the economy, generating some £350 million a year in business for ancillary trades.
Saddlers have the biggest share with approximately £240 million.
Rider's clothes account for £180 million, and horse clothing at about £10 million.
Riding schools have an estimated annual turnover of £9 million and horsefeed £60 million, which does not include specialist supplements.
There are an estimated 1,800 farriers in the UK with a market turnover of about £36 million.
As for insurance, the market for horses is dominated by nine main companies with an estimated bloodstock trade of £400 million.
However, though estimates for riders can be made, the magazine says it is much more difficult to estimate the number of horses.
Some 300,000 horses are registered across 14 breeds including Thoroughbreds, Arabs, Ponies, Heavy Breeds.
However it is difficult to estimate the unregistered animals.
A figure of about 500,000 was calculated after establishing the amount of shoeing steel produced for local consumption by British Steel and dividing by an average of four new sets a year.
This calculation was combined with a figure based on how many horses were advertised for sale each year in Horse and Hound.
Contact: Paul Phillips, IPC Magazines, 071 261 6825.
set to shoot it out for a good cause
HEAD teachers from rival schools are staging a sudden-death charity shoot-out before thousands of football fans.
The fun penalty competition will be on the pitch at half time during Tranmere Rovers' first division match against Brentford on November 14.
Organisers of Wirral's Initiative for Needy Children (Winch) are also lining up a celebrity spot-kick contest for the same day at Prenton Park.
Cheque
Both events are to promote Winch's fundraising efforts for the BBC's annual Children in Need TV appeal.
More than 30,000 pupils from 70 Wirral schools have been raising money for Winch, which expects to hand over a five-figure cheque to the national appeal the following Friday.
Organiser Andrew McCartney, head teacher at Thingwall Primary School, said: ‘Ours is a unique project.
The BBC have told us we will be featured on television on the night, hopefully with footage of some of our activities.’
Collections
These include a concert last May at Prenton Park by Merseyside bands Oceanic and River City People.
Wirral's mayor, Cllr Frank Jones, and education director David Rigby will attend the match against Brentford.
Collections will be made for Winch and cheques presented.
Cot deaths fall for third year running
COT deaths in England and Wales have dropped for the third year in succession.
The number of deaths fell from 1,593 in 1988 to 1,008 in 1991.
Office of Population Censuses and Surveys figures show: Sudden Infant Deaths (SIDs) among baby boys continue to be more common than among baby girls, accounting for 61%.
Information
About 85% of SIDs happened to babies aged less than six months, of which 60% were between one and four months.
Most SIDs continued to occur in winter, with nearly twice as many between January and March compared with June to August.
The figures are based on information from death certificates for babies less than 28-days-old and those of infants aged between 28 days and one year.
Pub pals grant last wishes of tragic Steve
PUB regulars have helped fulfil the last wishes of a friend who died from cancer.
Before kiln operator Steve Kelly died at 55, he asked for help to be given to the team of Macmillan nurses who cared for him in his last months.
Grateful
As soon as regulars at the Stirrup pub in Birkenhead heard about his request, they arranged fund-raising events and collected £1,819 for equipment, including two syringe drivers and two special mattresses for cancer patients.
Steve's wife, Norah, of Woodchurch, said: ‘I'm very grateful to everyone at the Stirrup for raising this money so quickly for such a good cause.
The Macmillan nurses do a fantastic job.’
Praise for ‘be a friend’ campaign to help youngsters with problems
DUKE BACKS SCHEME TO CUT CRIME
By Anne Harrison
THE Duke of Westminster has praised a new anti-crime initiative which aims to keep young people out of trouble.
He officially launched Back-Up, the Wirral youth befriending scheme supported by the Home Office, at Tranmere Rovers' Prenton Park ground.
Back-Up aims to help young people aged eight to 24, who are regarded as being ‘at risk’, through a difficult time in their lives.
Each client is matched with a trained volunteer who will give support, advice and companionship to that young person through meeting them regularly.
The volunteer may help the young person with job applications or other form-filling, go to a football match or the cinema with them or just meet up for a chat.
The Duke said the scheme would help youngsters such as those without family support, to learn how to cope with the stresses of life today.
He said his experience as president of Youth Clubs UK which looks after around one million youngsters in Britain, had shown him the pressures faced by young people today.
Unemployment
He added: ‘There are a lot of kids living under adverse conditions and the first thing that goes is their confidence.
‘Adolescents are at a very difficult stage anyway.
If they have people they can talk to and relate to who are from a non-statutory body, it gives them a greater degree of self-confidence.’
He said he knew from members of his TA squadron, who were from Birkenhead, about the difficulties, such as unemployment, affecting families living in the town.
The scheme is overseen by a management committee with representatives from voluntary groups, education welfare, the police, and educational psychologists.
Ian Horton, co-ordinator of Wirral Safer Cities, praised the commitment made by Back-Up volunteers.
Well done…the Duke of Westminster with Back-Up volunteers after the presentation of certificates
Sex heiress found dead
THE daughter of Liverpoolborn erotica impresario Paul Raymond has been found dead.
Debbie Raymond, who was one of Britain's richest women, had been groomed to take over her father's £80ma-year business.
The 36-year-old is believed to have suffered a heart attack in her London flat.
FIREFIGHTERS UNDER ATTACK IN BONFIRE NIGHT DRAMA
Firework explosion injures a baby girl
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A BABY girl had a miraculous escape last night after a firework exploded and sprayed red hot fragments into her face.
Ambulance crews who treated the child said she was extremely fortunate not to suffer serious eye injuries in the incident.
The incident was one of dozens which emergency services had to deal with across Merseyside on Bonfire Night.
In another, children put a lighted firework through the letter box of a house.
And fire crews were stoned in three separate incidents as they tried to deal with fires.
The baby was being held in her mother's arms when the rocket careered towards them at the family's home.
Ambulance spokesman Richard Oswick said the girl's father had been lighting the fireworks at the back of the house in Blisworth Street, Seaforth.
‘They were doing everything by the book.
‘One firework somehow went wrong and exploded and a fragment hit the baby.
‘The girl fortunately suffered only a very small burn on her forehead, but it could have been an awful lot worse.’
In Newton-le-Willows, a 12-year-old schoolboy suffered burns, not thought to be serious, after falling onto a bonfire.
And in Halewood, Merseyside, a 40-year-old man was also taken to Whiston after being burned in Lower Lane, but he too escaped with just slight injuries.
Mr Oswick strongly condemned vandals who deliberately fired a firework into a house in Scott Avenue, Whiston, late last night, while the householder was still inside.
He said: ‘It was absolutely mindless.
This could have been a real disaster.’
Overall, though, Mr Oswick said he was happy with the way things had gone this Bonfire Night.
But, in a sinister turn of events, firemen were stoned by gangs of youths as they tried to deal with several out-of-control bonfires on Merseyside.
Crews came under attack twice in Bootle and once in Kirkby.
In one of the largest bonfire events in the region, over 2,000 people crammed into Central Park, Wallasey, for a fireworks display organised by Wirral borough council.
Ex-councillor arrested
A FORMER Knowsley councillor was among three people arrested by fraud squad detectives.
Tony Beyga, 47, was arrested at his home in Childwall, Liverpool, along with a woman and another man.
All three were charged with conspiracy to defraud, conspiracy to commit forgery, and false accounting.
They were then released on police bail.
Panic call
A MAN aged 20, not named, was stuck in a phone box at the corner of Mersey Road and Aigburth Road, Liverpool, for more than an hour after getting his fingers jammed in a slot in the instrument.
He managed to free himself only when an ambulance team talked him into trying to wiggle his fingers.
ICI toxic gas clouds probe launched
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
AN INVESTIGATION was under way last night after clouds of toxic fumes escaped in a huge chemical factory blaze.
Children were taken to hospital and teachers sent home from schools after they were overcome by fumes from the fire at ICI's Lostock plant, near Northwich, Cheshire.
More than 100 firefighters fought for four hours to bring the blaze under control.
Warnings were issued to 5,000 people living downwind of the fire to stay indoors and keep windows closed.
The fire engulfed five storeys of building where Alloprene a rubber compound added to paint is produced.
Cheshire's emergency services launched their Operation Cloudburst procedure for dealing with chemical emergencies.
A number of people were affected by hydrochloric acid released by the burning Alloprene.
By the time fire crews arrived on the scene, flames were shooting from vents on the roof of the building and a huge pall of smoke was billowing out of it.
It was feared the burning Alloprene was producing phosgene gas, carbon tetrachloride and hydrochloric acid.
A spokesman for ICI said the fire was not hot enough to produce all of these gases, and there was only a tiny amount of hydrochloric acid in the fumes.
However, two girls from St Nicholas School in Davenham, who live in Lostock, were taken to Leyton Hospital, Crewe, suffering from a rash and breathing difficulties.
Ten staff who fell ill after breathing the fumes from the fire were sent home from Wincham CP School.
A massive operation was launched by emergency services and 100 firemen were on the site.
Twenty-eight ambulance and paramedic staff were placed on standby in Northwich.
The south-westerly wind carried the gas away from Northwich but directly over the nearby villages of Lostock Gralam and Wincham.
A statement released by ICI after the fire said: ‘Atmospheric tests taken within the site boundary indicated negligible amounts of hydrochloric acid in the smoke from the fire.
One employee was affected by smoke and sent home.’
Fire crews were called to deal with a leaking drum of hydrochloric acid at Pioneer Concrete in Bridge Road, Ellesmere Port, late last night.
Award marks brave boy's triumph over adversity
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
A BRAVE schoolboy who overcame a devastating illness to return to school and pass his exams is to receive a prestigious Champion Children Award.
Christopher Coyne, 14, will attend a glittering celebrity luncheon at London's Savoy Hotel next Wednesday.
The determined youngster will receive an award in the ‘triumph over adversity’ category, watched by his proud family and friends.
Two and a half years ago Christopher, of College Road North, Blundellsands, was a prize pupil at St Mary's College in Crosby.
He sang in the choir, was a talented musician and a keen sportsman.
However, disaster struck when he was 11 years old.
He contracted glandular fever and viral meningitis.
He lost all movement in his limbs, was unable to swallow food and his weight plummeted.
Christopher was to embark on a painful programme of physiotherapy.
He had to wear finger and leg splints for several hours.
When he was able to be put in a wheelchair he was strapped upright and wore a collar.
Eventually he managed to sit in a chair unaided and began to attend the hospital school, where he operated a computer with a mouth-held drumstick.
He insisted on returning to his old school, where he passed his exams and regularly plays football.
An avid Everton supporter, Christopher was nominated for the award by a teacher.
He said last night: ‘I was surprised when I heard about this but very pleased.
‘I have always been determined and I think that helped to get me through.’
He added: ‘I feel fine now and am looking forward to the presentation next week.’
Christopher could be featured on the BBC after a television crew filmed his brave story.
His proud mother, Rita Coyne, said: ‘He has struggled for two and a half years and is now determined to live life to the full.’
The Champion Children Awards are in aid of Barnados.
Champion child of courage Christopher Coyne, who has overcome an horrific illness Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN
Champ Parrott cleans up
By Graeme Wilson Daily Post Staff
BRITISH snooker champion John Parrott yesterday revealed what he was doing to prepare for his title defence next week washing the dishes.
Liverpool's snooker ace made his admission at the launch of Royal Liver Assurance's £375,000 sponsorship of the event which starts in Preston next Friday.
The world number two said: ‘I've had a very busy early season, playing in China, Dubai and Belgium, so I'm just trying to refresh myself before this tournament.
‘I've been going to the races and washing up the dishes with my wife, as I need a bit of a rest before I start.
‘I'm also trying to shake off a cold which I picked up in Belgium.’
Parrott has already enjoyed success this season, winning two tournaments and finishing runner-up in a third.
But he admits that the UK Championship is the most attractive title for players to win after the World Championships.
‘If you look at the names of those who have won the trophy there are no bad players among them,’ he said.
‘Hopefully the fact that a local firm is sponsoring the event will bring me a bit of luck but I think it will certainly help the game's image in Merseyside.
‘You can never be 100pc confident when you go into the championships, but as long as you're playing well you should be okay.’
It is the first year, Royal Liver Assurance has sponsored the championships, which start at Preston's Guild Hall on November 13.
A total of 64 players will take part in the tournament and Parrott's opening opponent will be Canadian Kirk Stevens.
d to keep in the championships Picture: STEPHEN SHAKESHAFT
On top of the world…
John Parrott hangs on to the trophy he is determine
Crash mother's fears dispelled
BOUNCING BABY BEATS THE ODDS
A MOTHER who was involved in a hit-and-run horror, only weeks before she was due to give birth, last night cuddled the little baby boy who dispelled all her worst fears of what could have happened.
Barrister Deborah Gould, of Oxton, Wirral, was 8 months pregnant when she was hit by a Nissan Micra which swerved into her path as she was out driving her Ford Escort last month.
She admits she had been worried about the consequences ever since even though hospital scans seemed to show everything was all right.
Yesterday she looked at her eight-pound new arrival, born at Arrowe Park Hospital, and said: ‘It was a fabulous moment when the doctors came in with him and let me hold him.’
Full story Page 3 
Barrister's baby joy…
Deborah Gould and her new arrival Picture: BARRY FARRELL
Cousins win search damages
TWO Liverpool cousins who have become the first prison visitors awarded damages after a search ordeal will have to wait for their cash, following a Home Office decision to appeal against the award.
Natalie Bayliss, 22, and cousin Brian Barton, 21 both from Stockbridge Village, Liverpool say they were humiliated when they were strip-searched at Frankland Prison, County Durham, four years ago, during a visit to a relative.
Yesterday, a Liverpool County Court jury awarded Miss Bayliss £10,000 damages, and Mr Barton £8,000.
But the Home Secretary has ordered an appeal against the jury's decision.
The original incident, during a visit to Miss Bayliss' heroin addict brother, Michael, sparked off a week-long roof top protest by inmates at the jail.
Legion bug killed patient in new hospital unit
THE death of a woman from pneumonia brought on by Legionnaires' disease she had contracted while a patient in a Liverpool hospital's newly-opened heart unit was accidental, an inquest jury decided yesterday.
Lilian Ormerod, 63, of Stonedale Crescent, Norris Green, Liverpool, had been in Broadgreen Hospital's cardio-thoracic centre, in which she had been given blood transfusions and other treatment for heart disease.
Mrs Ormerod fell seriously ill again only days after having been allowed home.
She was taken to another hospital, where she died on October 8 last year.
A post mortem showed the cause of her death to be pneumonia caused by the Legionella bacteria.
At a previous hearing into Mrs Ormerod's death, pathologist Ian McDicken confirmed that Mrs Ormerod had died of pneumonia caused by Legionnaire's disease.
At that hearing, Nigel Gilmour QC for the hospital, asked for an adjournment for an independent report.
Yesterday, however, Mr Gilmour declined to call any independent evidence.
Yesterday's inquest was told that Legionella bacteria had been found in the heart unit's hot water system after Mrs Ormerod had gone home.
Merseyside Coroner Roy Barter told the Liverpool hearing that she must have inhaled the bacteria as it floated through the air as vapour from a contaminated hot water outlet.
Mr Barter said that there were many shortcomings in the valves, heat sensors and hot water system at the centre, which had been open for only six weeks at the time Mrs Ormerod was treated in it.
But the coroner added that the water system had since been disinfected and was now cleaned out regularly.
Writer's life is saluted by laughter of friends
By Rob Scully Daily Post Correspondent
LAUGHTER punctuated a thanksgiving service yesterday for the life of the prolific dramatist William Douglas-Home, whose plays chronicled the capers of the upper classes.
In a series of hit shows, including The Reluctant Debutante, The Chiltern Hundreds and The Kingfisher, he drew on his background as the son of the 13th Earl of Home.
And at yesterday's service at London's St Martin-in-the-Fields church, cricket commentator Brian Johnston, a lifelong friend, recalled his ‘kindness and generosity and unfailing good humour.
‘I never heard him say an unkind thing about anybody and I never heard anybody say an unkind thing about him.’
The pair were friends for 65 years after meeting at New College, Oxford, and regularly telephoned each other with their latest jokes.
Mr Johnston said: ‘He was asked to write an essay on the future of coal and wrote simply ‘Smoke!’.
I shall ask him for the latest joke at the gates of heaven,.’
The writer, younger brother of former prime minister Lord Home, died at his Hampshire home in September.
He was 80.
Actor Michael Denison, who appeared in four of his plays, also paid tribute to the comic writer.
‘He was a great friend and, like Noel Coward, he wrote the kind of dialogue that was easy to remember because it was the kind you would like to write yourself but couldn't,’ he said.
His widow, Lady Dacre, and his family were joined by Lord Whitelaw, Lord Grimond, BBC chairman Marmaduke Hussey, and actors Derek Nimmo and Gerald Harper in the 500-strong congregation.
During the war he appeared before a court martial as a captain in the Royal Armoured Corps for refusing to take part in the bombardment of Le Havre in 1944 and his attempt last year to clear his name was rejected by the Ministry of Defence.
William Douglas-Home
Merseysider on Thai drugs charge gets life
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A MERSEYSIDE man faces spending the rest of his life in a Thai prison after pleading guilty to drug offences.
Brian Mounsey, from Liverpool, admitted possessing two kilos of heroin when he appeared before a court in Bangkok.
He was given a life sentence by the judge and has been told by his lawyer that such a term in Thailand means for the rest of his life.
Mounsey, who is married to a Thai girl, will be joined in a top security prison by another Briton who appeared in court on similar charges a day after him.
Peter Heather received a 40-year jail term after being caught with less than 400 grammes of heroin.
He had also pleaded guilty to charges of possession and trafficking in an attempt to receive a lesser sentence.
But the court disregarded this and imposed a heavy sentence on the 27-year-old from north Staffordshire.
Last night, a spokeswoman for the British Embassy in Bangkok said Mounsey had refused to pass on details about his Liverpool family.
Spokeswoman Carol Downes described the news as ‘very bad’.
She said: ‘We are somewhat shocked by Peter Heather's sentence.
We had expected 25 years at the most.
‘However, the Thais have shown they are really cracking down on foreigners becoming involved in heroin.’
Heather appeared in court manacled and was prevented from talking to reporters after his hearing.
His father, Ted, said yesterday he feared his son would be kept in chains.
Mr Heather, a garden nursery owner, of Meirheath, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs, had hoped his son would receive a lenient sentence about 15 years after pleading guilty.
He said: ‘I am devastated at the verdict.’
Peter Heather, formerly of Kingsley Holt, Staffs, was arrested by Bangkok detectives in January.
He said he had met Mounsey in prison and believed they were set up by the same gang of traffickers in Bangkok.
Operation ‘can make spectacles obsolete’
BRITISH eye surgeons are to carry out a pioneering implant operation which could mean short-sighted people throwing away their glasses.
It involves making a small incision in the cornea and ‘threading’ a clear plastic ring through the deeper tissue layers.
The tiny ring ‘flattens’ the curvature of the cornea, correcting vision for people with short-sightedness.
A variety of ring thicknesses may ultimately assist in meeting patients' differing requirements the thicker the ring, the greater the reshaping of the cornea.
The ring is virtually invisible around the central cornea which is the critical area for clear vision.
A team of Bristol University surgeons is soon to carry out the ring trials at Bristol Eye Hospital with volunteer patients.
But patients from all over the country are to be considered for the trials, mostly after referral from their GP or from other eye hospitals.
Reversible
The planned operations follow clinical trials in America.
Bristol leads a multicentre European programme investigating the ring procedure.
A specialist surgical instrument was developed in America to make a ‘channel’ in the corneal tissue to insert the ring.
The operation takes around 15 minutes under general anaesthetic.
Current surgical techniques also involve reducing the cornea curvature in a bid to correct short-sightedness.
Radial keratotomy involves making radial cuts in the cornea, while excimer laser treatment removes a thin layer from its surface.
The use of the plastic ring device termed an Intrastromal Corneal Ring has the added advantage of being reversible if the surgery does not improve the sight condition.
The British surgeons have funding for 20 operations initially.
They will start work first on patients with a relatively low level of shortsightedness.
200 face axe at rental company
MAJOR job cuts at a television rental company were announced yesterday.
Up to 200 workers at the Granada TV Rental service centre in Kirkby may face redundancy in the New Year.
Seven centres will close as part of a nationwide redundancy package, with the loss of 1,000 jobs.
Granada chief executive Graham Wallace said the cuts were a result of the recession but added that staff at Kirkby and other centres may be eligible for transfer to other sites.
Granada managers held talks with union leaders about the job losses in London yesterday.
A member of staff at the site in Abercrombie Road, Kirkby, said: ‘It is yet another big firm pulling out of the area.’
Mr Wallace, based at the Granada headquarters in Bedford, said: ‘Like a lot of businesses, we are under pressure at the moment.’
Meanwhile, workers picketing the Lyons Maid ice cream factory in Kirkby have written a letter of welcome to potential buyers.
A picket was organised last week after receivers Robson Rhodes refused to withdraw redundancy notices issued to 67 staff.
Shop stewards will send the letter to joint administrative receiver Ipe Jacob, requesting it be presented to potential buyers.
Redundancy notices were issued after Lyons Maid parent company Clarke Foods went into receivership.
Campaigners are organising a rally in Kirkby for November 14.
Dead driver is named
A LORRY driver killed in an accident on an M1 contraflow was from Greater Manchester, police said.
Anthony Gibbins, 49, of Park Road, Timperley, Altrincham, died following the five vehicle accident on Tuesday afternoon, near Newport Pagnell in Buckinghamshire.
An inquest has been adjourned until January.
Appeal Court frees schoolboy killer
A FORMER public schoolboy convicted of murdering a fellow pupil he claimed had raped his girlfriend was freed by the Appeal Court yesterday when his conviction was reduced to manslaughter through provocation.
Andrew Richens was 17 when he stabbed William Choi, who he claimed had boasted of having sex with his girlfriend and had taunted him by saying she had probably never had a real man before.
The killing took place at Choi's flat in Balham, southwest London, in December 1986.
Richens and the girl, Sabrina Ngiau, put the body in a trunk and had it driven to Kent where it was buried in a field behind his parents' house at Borough Green Road, Ightham.
At the Old Bailey in March 1988, Richens was ordered to be detained during Her Majesty's pleasure.
But yesterday three appeal judges headed by Lord Taylor, the Lord Chief Justice, ruled that the trial judge did not properly direct the jurors on how, when deciding between murder and manslaughter, they should view the lies initially told by Richens to the police.
Richens's lies and attempts to cover up the killing were not necessarily inconsistent with his defence of provocation, said Lord Taylor.
The judges substituted a manslaughter conviction and a seven-year sentence, which Richens, now 23, has served.
Morning call saves family from fire
A WOMAN saved her parents and brother from possible death in a fire at their home yesterday.
Cyril and Florence Ormerod and their son Andrew were asleep when the fire started.
By the time Andrew was awakened by his sister Gillian Parry battering on the door of the house in Newton Street, Southport after calling in on her way to work, the lounge was burning fiercely.
Andrew, 27, explained: ‘We'd gone to bed at about midnight.
My sister Gillian, who lives round the corner, always drops her young son off early in the morning because she works shifts.
She came at 7.15am and saw the blackened windows and gutted room through the window.’
Andrew added: ‘She smelled smoke through the letterbox and naturally panicked and started banging on the door and shouting.
She woke me up and when I discovered the fire I got my mum and dad out of the house.
The lounge is virtually destroyed and there's a lot of smoke damage.
My mum and dad were very shocked by the incident.’
Station Officer Russ Broadbent of Southport Fire station, said: ‘It was very lucky that Mrs Parry happened to be passing at the time.
‘The family was also very sensible because all the doors downstairs were closed, which prevented more air getting to the fire.
We would urge all householders to do this.’
The fire is believed to have started in an armchair in the lounge.
A barn containing 100 tons of potatoes and 20 tons of straw on Yew Tree Farm in Burscough, West Lancs, was severely damaged by fire last night.
The cause of the fire is not yet known.
Disruption on railway
COMMUTERS on Merseyside have been warned of disruption on the railway network over the weekend, as engineers carry out essential maintenance work on the Wirral line.
Trains from West Kirby will finish at Birkenhead North station and a shuttle bus will convey them from there to Hamilton Square station.
There will also be a bus service from Hamilton Square to New Brighton.
Desert stormer
ORRELL, the North West's sole representative in Courage Division One, will this month exchange the lush turf of England for the sand pitches of the Middle East.
The club have been invited to join some of rugby's elite in the Dubai Sevens to be held on November 19 and 20 when they will face one of the toughest rugby sevens line-ups ever assembled.
The opposition will include national sides from England and Scotland, South Africa's top club side, Natal, defending champions Queensland of Australia, and All-Black outfit Ponsonby.
Race to avert a chemical disaster
THE first fire crews arriving at ICI Lostock yesterday knew instantly they had a fight on their hands.
For more than four hours they battled to bring the blaze under control and stop dangerous fumes spreading across Cheshire.
This is the timetable of the incident:
5.52am: Cheshire fire brigade is alerted to the fire at ICI's Lostock site and two fire engines arrive at the scene to see a 1,000 metre smoke plume coming from the building and flames shooting from vents on the roof.
6.05am: Two firemen wearing breathing apparatus enter the blazing building.
6.15am: Fire service uses the Government's Chemdata computer for information on Alloprene and discovers that possible toxic products from fire are hydrochloric acid, carbon tetrachloride and phosgene.
6.22am: Attendance increased to 10 fire engines and Operation Cloudburst is declared.
Police and fire crews tour the area warning people of the danger and telling them to stay in doors and shut their windows.
6.30am: Fire engines increased to 15 plus special incident units.
Firefighters set up a water curtain to contain the smoke and fumes.
Teams of 12 firefighters at a time enter the building in a bid to reach the source of the fire.
8.30am: Firefighters have reduced smoke and fumes by 80pc and the the source of the fire has been found.
10am: Operation Cloudburst is stood down.
Firemen remain damping down and an investigation into the cause begins.
Shrimper dies after rescue drama
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A FISHERMAN died after collapsing on board his shrimping vessel yesterday, despite a major rescue operation.
The drama began after the man's colleagues, who were working on neighbouring boats off the Southport coast, became concerned about their friend.
They alerted Liverpool Coastguard but their amphibious craft, a DUKW, was unable to get close enough to the vessel so the town's own lifeboat was launched.
Despite fast-flowing seas, the three-man crew of the lifeboat managed to scramble on board the shrimper where they discovered Joe Ross, partially submerged inside the cabin.
Because Mr Ross was unconscious, he had been unable to steer his vessel and the craft had drifted two miles out to sea much further than it was designed to go.
It is not known how long the 54-year-old, who lived in Squarehouse Lane, Crossens, had been unconscious before the alarm was raised.
A spokesman for Southport lifeboat service described the operation as ‘very tricky.’
He said: ‘The rig was in about six feet of water, much deeper than she would normally go.
The man had collapsed and the vessel had carried on running into the water.
‘The DUKW had tried to reach the vessel but could not get anywhere because of the nature of the craft.
‘The crew had quite a struggle to get into the cabin.
It was very difficult because there were ropes floating around everywhere.’
The lifeboat crew administered first-aid to the fisherman and despite the problems they managed to get him on board their vessel and return him to shore.
A paramedic crew from Mersey Regional Ambulance was waiting on the beach for Mr Ross and they took him to Southport and Formby District and General Hospital but he died shortly afterwards.
Star's salute to Rovers revival
Fit for a Saint
Report by Peter Jardine
THE RISE and rise of Tranmere Rovers has been given the Saint's blessing.
Television presenter Ian St John, who ended his playing career at Prenton, has given his backing to John King's current squad.
And the Saint reckons Prenton is the place to be for Merseyside football at the moment.
Said Ian: ‘Tranmere Rovers were the last team that ever paid me to play.
I broke my leg in training and I only played a dozen games undefeated, mind you!
Great to watch
‘Ron Yeats was the manager then and John King was with us as trainer.
‘I have a lot of admiration for him.
With Aldridge in the Irish squad and Nevin with the Scottish squad, they've got two top international players there, along with Neil McNab in midfield and some great young players coming through.’
The Saint, who lives in Wirral, loves going to watch the side he used to call his ‘Friday night favourites’ on ITV's Saint and Greavsie.
‘John King always advocates playing football and that's why I like to go to Tranmere, my local club, and see a team that plays football from the back; it's great to watch.
‘People ask if they can go all the way to the Premier League.
Well, all I can say is it'll be a case of ‘move over’!
‘The way Liverpool and Everton are performing who's a big club?
‘If the three of them were playing on the day, I think I'd go to see Tranmere…‘
Progressed
The Saint's views on Rovers appear in Matchday, a new magazine devoted to first division football.
TRANMERE'S young goalkeeper Danny Coyne was yesterday included in the Welsh under-21 squad to meet Belgium in the European Championship qualifier in Belgium on Tuesday, November 17.
Rovers, meanwhile, have progressed to the next round of the FA Youth Cup thanks to a 2-1 first round win over Blackpool.
100 new jobs at food shop
AN EXTRA 100 staff are being recruited by Co-operative Retail Services following planned modifications to their Pioneer discount food shop in Prenton.
Alterations to the Woodchurch Road store will include the creation of a ‘food island’, comprising a pizza bar, delicatessen and snack bar.
A CRS spokesman said recruitment was being carried out at Birkenhead Job Centre.
About 15 posts are supervisory and management jobs and the remainder are for checkout, shelving and other staff.
The 34,000 sq ft discount food store will close tomorrow while work is carried out.
Gunman in £2,000 raid
A MAN armed with a handgun burst into a building society yesterday, threatened staff and stole £2,000.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the robbery at the Birmingham Midshires Building Society in Chapel Lane, Formby.
No one was injured and the gun was not fired.
The robber, aged about 20 and wearing a green hat, escaped in a G-registered burgundy-coloured Vauxhall Cavalier and is believed to have had a trilby-hatted accomplice in the car.
MP urges cash for community facelift
A COMMUNITY which formulated a £23m facelift scheme will learn next month whether Government acclaim will be backed by hard cash.
Birkenhead MP Frank Field has taken up the fight of Tranmere residents who feared they were in danger of becoming a ‘forgotten area.’
He plans to lobby Witehall mandarins to press for special resources for a five-year programme of improvements.
Dave Kennedy, Wirral council's deputy director of housing and environmental protection, said the project had impressed top civil servants in the Department of the Environment.
He said: ‘In principle they like the scheme but we have to see whether they can find any money to back it up.
‘We have been told that any decision won't be made until the overall allocations decision is made on capital allocations for 1993/94.
‘If no financial support is forthcoming, we would like to see the scheme re-submitted for the following year.’
A special working party, which drew up the proposals, wrote to Housing Minister Sir George Young: ‘Around us, Wirral is being improved dramatically under the City Challenge and Merseyside Development Corporation's programmes but we are the forgotten people.’
Problems listed in their report include: Unemployment at double the Wirral average; run-down parks and open spaces and uninviting and limited shopping facilities.
50 protest over coal imports
PROTESTORS gathered at a Merseyside dock yesterday to campaign against coal imports and pit closures.
Dock workers, pensioners and residents were among a 50-strong group who lobbied Gladstone Dock in Seaforth, Sefton.
The protest was organised by the newly-formed Bootle Miners Support Group and spokesman Eddie McEvilly explained: ‘Our aim is to highlight the impact that cheap coal is having on polluting the community and destroying North West mining jobs.’
The Mersey Docks and Harbour Company last night declined to comment.
No one was available for comment at PowerGen.
Arnott frustrates the Kiwis
OPENER Kevin Arnott's maiden Test century helped Zimbabwe fight their way to a draw in the first Test against New Zealand in Bulawayo yesterday.
Arnott was unbeaten on 101 in Zimbabwe's second innings total of 197 for one when bad light stopped play 50 minutes before the scheduled close.
Set 329 to win in a minimum of 73 overs, Zimbabwe made no effort to go for the total.
Arnott, whose century took just over four hours and included 12 fours, shared an unbroken second wicket stand of 105 with Alistair Campbell (48 not out).
New Zealand added 59 to their overnight 163 for one before declaring their second innings at 222 for five, Mark Greatbatch scoring an aggressive 88.
Student engineer's chance for title
AN INVENTIVE student has designs on a new title.
Keith Bailey, 18, from Oxton, Birkenhead, has won a place in the national final of the Rotary Club Inventor of the Year competition at the Birmingham National Exhibition Centre on November 14.
A former pupil at Birkenhead Sixth Form College, Keith is currently studying for a BSc degree in product engineering and product design at the University of Central England.
He has already won the title Young Engineer of Britain from the Engineering Council for inventing a device to warn pedestrians that pub cellar trapdoors are open.
Keith's design was also successful in the local final of the Rotary movement's competition, with two other Birkenhead Sixth Form College students, James Taylor and Tim Leadbetter, coming second and third.
Keith went on to win the district final and a prize of £300.
He now competes for £10,000 prize money in the final.
His other designs have included Parkright, a reversing aid for safe parking of vehicles, and Visitors' Aid, an electronic device for locating staff at his former college.
College design and technology teacher Bill Greenwood said: ‘Our success in this field is largely due to frequent help and support from local industry, for which we are always grateful.’
Keith was formerly at Ridgeway High School.
Jones let off
HULL'S giant Welsh prop Mark Jones, sent off last weekend for striking Warrington's Gary Tees, last night escaped a ban after a disciplinary hearing in Leeds.
Jones' dismissal was deemed sufficient punishment, leaving him free to play in Sunday's Regal Trophy tie against Dewsbury.
But Warrington have warned they may cite Jones for a different challenge in the same game.
Health campaign for NHS workers
HEALTH service leaders are backing an initiative to improve the health and wellbeing of 45,000 NHS staff in Merseyside and Cheshire.
The ‘Health at Work in the NHS’ initiative was launched at a Wirral seminar attended by chairmen, chief executives and senior managers of district health authorities in the Mersey region.
Co-ordinator Howard Seymour said: ‘People spend 50pc of their day at work and if we are going to prevent ill health, the workplace is a good place to do it.’
The aim is to develop occupational health strategies and provide more opportunities for health promotion at work by offering, for example, exercise facilities and programmes, healthy food, no smoking zones and stop-smoking classes.
Sixteen exhibitors displayed examples of good occupational health practices at the seminar.
The Wirral Heart Support Centre has an open day tomorrow.
The open day at the centre at St Catherine's Hospital, Birkenhead, between 10am and 4pm, is aimed at people who have had a heart attack, are waiting for or recovering from surgery, or have a family history of heart disease.
But people who want to learn how to remain healthy will also be welcome.
There will be an exhibition, blood pressure checks and advice on diet and relaxation.
Cathy Tunley, clinical director of the Wirral cardiac rehabilitation service, will be available to answer questions, with Sister Frances McManus, liaison officer, and Lyn Fuller, cardiac liaison officer.
Around 1,000 people a year die of heart disease in Wirral, and 1,2000 are admitted to local hospitals after heart attacks.
England no longer expects
ENGLISH soccer is having to face the nation's greatest European humiliation.
The season is only three months old and yet Leeds, Liverpool, Sheffield Wednesday and Manchester United are yesterday's news.
It is the first time since 1958-59 that league clubs have failed to survive until after Christmas.
Clearly a major price is being paid for the post-Heysel exclusion and Manchester United's 1991 Cup Winners' Cup win looks but a false dawn.
That was England's 26th triumph in Europe and whether the latest exits can be blamed on bad luck or tactical naivety is a matter for conjecture.
Wednesday boss Trevor Francis said: ‘British teams in general, and that includes our international teams, are always vulnerable to the quick counter-attack.
That is how we were caught out.
‘Most teams in this country play with an orthodox back four and in Europe you play against teams that have very quick midfielders and forwards who move the ball around very quickly.
Most of our defenders are not equipped to cope.
British teams get caught out pushing forward.’
Fire crews in bonfire dramas
FIRE crews across the North West last night reported a very hectic Bonfire Night but very few casualties.
There were dozens of incidents throughout the region as firemen were called to tackle a variety of firework-related matters.
A Cheshire Fire Brigade spokesman described their evening as ‘very, very busy.’
But fire crews on Merseyside reported a number of serious incidents.
A six-month-old baby girl had a miraculous escape when a firework exploded, and a fragment landed an inch from her eye in Seaforth.
She was taken to Liverpool's Alder Hey Hospital for treatment for minor injuries.
And, in Newton-le-Willows, an 11-year-old boy suffered burns to his upper body after falling onto a bonfire.
He was taken to Whiston Hospital for treatment.
Taylor's target to stop the Euro rot
Report by Rob King
GRAHAM TAYLOR is challenging his internationals to pick up the fallen standard of English football, after Wednesday night's triple European club disaster.
The England manager wants an emphatic World Cup win over Turkey at Wembley on November 18 to restore national morale after the exits of Leeds, Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday.
‘It was a very sad and disappointing night,’ said Taylor.
‘It means it now rests with the international side to put on the same, if not a better kind of performance as we put on against Norway last month.
Hopefully we'll also get the right result.
‘If we do that then perhaps we lift our football again.
I recognise the importance of this particular game, not only from England's quest to qualify for 1994, but also to lift us out of our doom and gloom.’
Taylor, who sticks with the same squad with QPR's uncapped striker Les Ferdinand the only change, believes this week's results emphasise the need for change.
Successes
But he does not believe the English game has fallen behind technically, simply because of the Eighties ban from club competition, saying: ‘After six years out of Europe our national side finished in the semi-finals of the World Cup.
‘The next year the ban was lifted on our clubs and Manchester United won the Cup Winners’ Cup.
Those two successes proved that we probably hadn't missed European football.
‘We've now had two further years when we don't seem to have gone on from that.
There's no doubt that the club that was a major success in us winning so many European titles, Liverpool, is in a transitional stage.
‘Sometimes we don't always appreciate what we have when we have it, but when we look back now we recognise what very good teams Liverpool had.’
ENGLAND SQUAD: Woods (Sheffield Wednesday), Seaman (Arsenal); Dixon (Arsenal), Bardsley (QPR), Pearce (Nottingham Forest), Dorigo (Leeds), Walker (Sampdoria), Adams (Arsenal), Jobson (Oldham), Pallister (Manchester United), Platt (Juventus), Batty (Leeds), Palmer (Sheffield Wednesday), Ince (Manchester United), Gascoigne (Lazio), Merson (Arsenal), Sinton (QPR), Salako (Crystal Palace), Shearer (Blackburn), Clough (Nottingham Forest), Wright (Arsenal), Ferdinand (QPR).
Standby: Martyn (Crystal Palace), P Parker (Manchester United), G Parker (Aston Villa), White (Man City), Deane (Sheffield United).
Elton and Bernie get £26m in advance
ELTON John and his longtime lyricist Bernie Taupin have signed a contract with Time Warner in Los Angeles that will give them a £26m advance the largest cash advance in music publishing history.
The deal gives Time Warner's music publishing arm Warner/Chappell Music sole rights to market Elton's catalogue of music from 1974 to the present as well as material from his next four albums.
Warner/Chappell chairman Les Bider said: ‘Elton's music crosses all universal boundaries of taste.
We are extremely pleased that he is part of the family.’
The £26m advance will be deducted from their royalties over the next 12 years.
Elton John
COURAGEOUS LAURA COMES HOME
PLUCKY little Laura Davies arrived back in the UK yesterday after her life-saving bowel and liver transplant in America.
Laura, four, pictured waving to well-wishers at Heathrow with parents Fran and Les, was at her bubbly best, and eager to get home to be reunited with her two-year-old brother Louis.
Mother Fran told reporters: ‘Pinch me, I must be dreaming,’ before the family flew on to their Eccles, Manchester, home.
Full story P5
Memorial plea for ‘forgotten’ soldiers
By Oliver Holt Daily Post Staff
THE distraught parents of soldiers killed in Northern Ireland last night bitterly condemned the exclusion of their sons' names from local cenotaphs.
As the nation prepares to honour the dead of two world wars on Remembrance Day this Sunday, two grieving fathers claim their sons' memories are being neglected.
The Royal British Legion maintains that local councils decide whose names go on the cenotaph.
But council policy seems to vary from authority to authority.
William Beacham whose son 20-year-old son Stephen, from Warrington, was killed in a bomb attack on a Londonderry roadblock two years ago said the situation was ‘a disgrace.’
Ted Kenealy, from Ellesmere Port, is again refusing to wear his poppy in protest against the omission of his son Adrian's name from the cenotaph at St Paul's Church, Hooton, after he was killed in a helicopter crash in Crossmaglen 19 years ago.
Mr Beacham said he has been pressing the British Legion to put Stephen's name on the role of honour.
His son died with four other members of the Kings Regiment when the IRA forced a proxy driver to smash into an army roadblock carrying a huge bomb.
Mr Beacham said: ‘I think what is happening is a disgrace.
‘He was killed doing his job, killed by a massive bomb.
If that is not a war out there, then I do not know what is.
‘The British Legion has been in touch with Warrington Borough Council about putting a plaque on the cenotaph but nothing has happened yet.’
Mr Kenealy, from Great Sutton, near Ellesmere Port, Cheshire, says the only surviving tribute to his son appears in a book of remembrance at an Ulster church.
He said: ‘The only recognition Adrian got was on the day he died.
I have tried everywhere in the Legion, but every time I have hit a brick wall.’
The Legion's Cheshire County treasurer Ron Hulse has now taken up Mr Kenealy's fight.
But the Legion's North West regional officer Peter Holland said: ‘If you put every name of every soldier who died while on active service where would you stop?’
An Ellesmere Port council spokesman said: ‘We do not have a policy on this matter.
We only maintain the cenotaph memorials for the Royal British Legion.’
A Liverpool City Council spokesman said: ‘It is our understanding that the cenotaph is a remembrance of people who died in the first and second world wars.’
Memories William Beacham with a picture of his soldier son, Stephen, killed by the IRA in 1990 Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN
Armed miner in nine-hour pit protest
By David Fothergill Daily Post Correspondent
AN ARMED miner gave himself up to police yesterday after a nine-hour underground protest over planned pit closures.
He emerged from a cage which had been suspended 25 feet down a shaft at Markham Main colliery, near Doncaster, after handing police a shotgun.
Russell Telford was protesting against the possible closure of 31 pits.
British Coal spokesman Eddie Mardell said: ‘The police operation has been a complete success.
The man gave up his gun and is now in police custody.’
The drama began at 5.15am as the day shift was going on duty at the mine one of the 31 earmarked for closure.
Mr Telford, who took redundancy from the pit in 1988 and had been working as a mining contractor at Rossington, near Doncaster, allegedly threatened a man with the gun to gain entry.
Surface worker Peter Moran, 40, lowered him down the shaft but then stopped the winding gear, leaving him dangling half-a-mile from the bottom of the pit.
Police established contact with the man after several hours by lowering microphones down the shaft.
National Union of Mineworkers president Arthur Scargill offered police his help and stood by to talk if necessary.
Steve Taylor, NUM branch delegate, said Mr Telford was protesting over allegations that British Coal was continuing to run down 10 of the 31 pits.
Police Superintendent John Ashton said Mr Telford, 29, who is married with three children, had been rational and very calm.
‘During our negotiations, he said that he wanted to get a message across to the media.
‘The incident ended very satisfactorily.
The object of the operation was to ensure the man was brought out of the pit shaft without any harm to him or to any police officers or the workforce.
It was most successful.
‘We achieved the objective through the perseverence of our trained negotiator who was able to talk to the man through a telephone communication which we had set up.’
He said Mr Telford was in custody, and would be interviewed after medical checks.
‘We have taken possession of a firearm and that is to be examined.
I cannot confirm whether it is a replica or a real firearm at this stage but the man does not hold a firearms certificate.’
Mr Ashton added: ‘Nobody was in any danger at any time.’
Russell Telford: nine-hour protest
Colliery ‘can be saved’
HOPES of saving North Wales' last pit from closure were boosted yesterday by Energy Minister Tim Eggar.
After a meeting with him Clwyd North West Tory MP Rod Richards declared: ‘The Point of Ayr colliery can be saved from closure by British Coal.’
Mr Eggar, Michael Heseltine's secretary, said it was up to the local management to press the case for the pit to stay open to the independent consultants reviewing the pit closures.
And he made clear that even if British Coal decided against a reprieve the Government would not block its sale to a private company.
Two private coal companies have already expressed an interest in operating the pit.
Record buy
BRISTOL ROVERS, bottom of Division One, broke their transfer record fee yesterday by spending £370,000 on QPR defender Andy Tillson.
They also paid £100,000 for his clubmate Gary Waddock.
‘Oliver Twists’ in artful dodges
By Chris Moncrieff Press Association
CAMERA-shy ministers avoided photographers yesterday as they gathered for a crucial Cabinet meeting to thrash out the Government's public spending plans for the coming financial year.
Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine, not renowned as a shrinking violet, entered Downing Street from the bottom end, took one look at the array of pressmen and crept into No 12, which has an interior walkway to No 10.
A few moments earlier, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd dithered on the pavement for a few seconds, presumably wondering whether to brave the cameras but thought better of it and he, too, entered by No 12.
It is the third Cabinet meeting this week at which this issue has been debated.
Chancellor Norman Lamont has warned that the cash available £244.5bn for 199394 cannot be exceeded.
This means ministers are wrangling for a bigger share of the cake.
The three ministers at the head of the Oliver Twist queue for more are Peter Lilley, Social Security Secretary, Gillian Shephard, Employment Secretary and Michael Howard, Environment Secretary:
Mr Lilley needs more to ensure the Government can fulfil its Tory election pledge to uprate welfare benefits in line with inflation;
Mrs Shephard is demanding extra to meet the soaring cost of unemployment;
And Mr Howard is requesting special provision to cushion the impact of the new council tax and to prevent a repetition of the ‘nightmare’ over the illfated community charge.
The Cabinet meeting broke up after two-and-a-half hours with no sign of a solution to the public spending dilemma.
Ministers emerged as tight-lipped as they had entered, shirking the cameras and hurrying away with serious expressions.
Press laws go on trial
A PUBLIC debate on new laws to monitor the Press in Britain takes place in Liverpool later this month.
Daily Post editor Keith Ely will be debating with Labour MP Clive Soley on his Private Member's Bill ‘Press freedom and responsibility.’
Mr Soley wants an independent Press authority to be set up to both ensure press freedom and investigate inaccuracy.
Also taking part is John Griffith, editor of the Daily Post's sister paper, the Liverpool Echo.
The event takes place at 7.30pm on November 19 at the Bluecoat Arts Centre.
‘We're living on a time bomb’
OUTRAGED residents living in the shadow of ICI's Lostock plant yesterday claimed they were ‘living on a time bomb.’
They were told to stay in their homes as emergency services launched a huge operation to put out the blaze and contain a cloud of smoke and fumes that threatened to spread across the Cheshire countryside.
Pat Emerson, who runs an animal rescue group and lives in James Street, Northwich, the closest house to the ICI plant said she was extremely worried by the incident.
‘It was very frightening really.
There were fire engines all over the place, but nobody came to tell us what was going on.’
‘We are living on a time bomb here.’
One shopkeeper, who wished to remain anonymous, said: ‘People around here are worried about things like this but if you complain and ICI close the place down what happens then.
Northwich was built around ICI.’
Crowds gathered near the factory yesterday, despite warnings to people living nearby to stay indoors.
Northwich was buzzing with news of the fire yesterday and many were speculating as to whether ICI would bother reopening the plant, which is scheduled to close this year.
At Wincham CP School, downwind of the blazing factory, staff and pupils were hit by the effects of the fire.
Head teacher John Moorhead had to send 10 of his staff home.
He said: ‘They suddenly started feeling quite ill, if you went outside you could feel little bits of burning on your skin.’
He said the staff felt nauseous and their throats and eyes were irritated.
This may have been the effect of the hydrochloric acid released in the fire.
Fortunately most families in the area had heard the warnings and kept their children home.
Only six out of the school's 260 pupils turned up at the school, and four of them were later picked up by their parents and returned home.
Mr Moorhead kept the two remaining pupils in the part of the school where the air was least affected.
Like other schools in the area Wincham stayed closed all morning, but opened at 1pm.
In the area surrounding the plant there was some confusion about what had happened, some people had heard and heeded the warnings, others had not heard anything.
Pat Emerson fears
Head teacher John Moorhead and pupil Frankie Mckay, who turned up for school yesterday morning
£20m meat plant hopes soar
A MID Wales site is in line to win a £20m meat processing works development which could create 700 jobs.
Llandrinio, near Welshpool, Powys, is on a short-list of two sites being considered by New Zealand-based Fortex Group.
The other site competing for the plant is in Lockerbie, Scotland.
Up to 12 locations in the UK were originally considered by Fortex.
A decision on the successful site is expected in the middle of next year.
Llandrinio is at the centre of one of the UK's biggest sheep producing areas.
The plant will process up to 1.5m lambs a year approximately 5pc of the UK kill.
Montgomeryshire Council chairman David Jones, who has been working to secure the Fortex investment, said: ‘I am sure the site will prove to be the best for Fortex, Montgomeryshire and Mid Wales.’
Armed raid at offices
POLICE are seeking a man who committed an armed robbery in Bollington, Cheshire, yesterday.
The man, carrying a postal package, walked into the Shrigley Dyers factory in Church Street at 9.25am, pulled out a handgun and ordered the staff to lie on the floor.
The man then took an undisclosed amount of money from a metal box and escaped
Scheme's opponents fear ‘ordeal by juggernaut’
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
RESIDENTS claimed last night that a multi-million pound development which could create 400 jobs would intensify their ordeal by juggernaut.
The project, to build 12 industrial units and an access road at Gautby Road/ Valley Road, north Birkenhead, was greeted angrily by residents at Wirral borough council's planning committee.
The plans, submitted by Brothertons Ltd, Alderley Edge, Cheshire, were passed by the committee.
North Birkenhead residents' spokesman Robin Newport, of Gautby Road, said: ‘We don't want to stop the development.
All we want is to get rid of the juggernauts.’
Residents claim that their homes were already being ‘shaken to bits’ by the amount of heavy traffic connected with Park Foods on the existing industrial complex.
A residents' petition called for the venture to be shelved until a more suitable access route was devised.
Mr Newport told councillors that one Monday 146 juggernauts were unloaded at Park Foods.
He said: ‘This meant that my house shook 292 times.
‘They are shaking our houses to bits, it is becoming dangerous.
The noise is intolerable at times.’
Labour councillor June Williams said there had been five fatal traffic accidents in the area in recent years.
Bill Waddell, chairman of The Avenues Tenants Association which covers the area, said: ‘We are terrified a child is going to be killed.’
Assistant planning director Phil Hardwicke told the committee that the day when 146 heavy lorries unloaded at Park Foods was a ‘one-off situation’.
Peter Coffey, director of Wirral City Lands initiative, said alternative access routes had been investigated but they were either not feasible or extremely expensive.
He added: ‘We are relatively optimistic that if planning go-ahead is given we can translate this into operational activity and jobs within the next 14 months.’
Company shells out for new kit
PARKLANDS Strikers football team are playing their first full season in the Ellesmere Port Junior League in new tracksuits.
The team bought the kits with a £250 grant from Shell's community fund.
Charities' fair old time
CHARITIES in Ellesmere Port will be promoting their services at Ellesmere Port Civic Hall tomorrow.
The Council of Voluntary Services and the Volunteer Bureau are organising their second annual charities fair.
Hall help
THE high cost of running Chester's Guild Hall Museum will be offset tomorrow when the President's wife Mrs Dylis Dutton organises a money-raising fair at the Guild Hall.
Tickets are 10p
RNLI boost
A COFFEE morning tomorrow will boost funds for the Kelsall branch of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution at the Village Institute.
Curse it…
TO celebrate the 70th anniversary of Howard Carter's discovery of the tomb of Tutenkhamen, Empty Space Theatre is performing ‘The Curse of the Pharoahs’ at the Harlequin Theatre in Northwich tomorrow at 7.45pm.
Historic talks
ORDINARY life in medieval Cheshire will be discussed tonight at the joint meeting of two local history societies.
Members of Hargarave and Huxley and Waverton Societies will gather at Tarvin Community Centre to hear a talk by Paul Booth.
Battling on
THE tragedy of the British Civil War will be commemorated tomorrow in a short play at Ellesmere Port Library.
Neston Youth Group, part of Action Transport Theatre, are presenting ‘When Cannons Roar’ at 10.30 and 11.30am.
Fund-raiser
A COFFEE morning is being held today to raise funds for the Farndon and Holt branch of the National Childbirth Trust.
Venue is Badgers End, Quarry Hill, Farndon.
Country tour
A GUIDED circular tour on Sunday will look at the woodlands and village at Styal Country Park.
The walk starts at 2.30pm.
Toy fair
A TOY fair tomorrow will raise funds for Mickle Trafford Mother and Toddler Group.
The fair is in the village hall.
Healthy son for victim
Hit and run crash woman's baby joy
By Graeme Wilson Daily Post Staff
A PROUD mother told last night of her joy when she was handed her new-born baby boy only weeks after she had been the victim of a hit and run accident.
Deborah Gould was eight-and-a-half months pregnant when she smashed into a car which swerved into her path as she was out driving last month.
But her fears evaporated after she gave birth to a healthy 8lb baby boy at Arrowe Park Hospital.
She said last night: ‘It was a fabulous moment when the doctors came in with him and let me hold him.
‘They've said he's 100pc, so I've been able to dispel any fears I had after the accident.’
The 28-year-old barrister from Oxton gave birth to the baby who will probably be called Benjamin in Arrowe Park hospital on Tuesday.
But she admitted that in the aftermath of the collision on Borough Road, Birkenhead she had feared the worst.
Her Ford Escort hit a Nissan Micra which swerved into her path from the other side of the road.
She got out of her car and though the men in the other car saw she was pregnant, they pushed their car into a side street before driving off.
She was left with bruising and whiplash injuries and her three-year-old son Aaron, who was travelling with her, was also bruised.
‘Immediately after the crash I couldn't feel the baby moving and he was normally a quite active baby,’ she said.
‘I was taken to Arrowe Park Hospital where I spent four hours having scans and the doctors said he seemed to be OK.
‘When they said he was fine it put my mind at ease but I was so relieved when they said he had no problems after the birth.’
Ms Gould is hoping to return home with her new son today to join his older brother.
‘Aaron seems to have coped with the accident and put it to the back of his mind,’ she added.
Police are still hunting the hit and run driver of the Nissan.
Surface tension
CLUB officials at the Volkswagen National tennis championships last night hit back at complaints by Mark Petchey over playing conditions at Telford.
Third seed Petchey savaged the super-slick carpet courts after losing 6-2 6-2 in his third round clash with Neil Broad.
But venue boss Alan Durban retorted: ‘I am surprised he didn't complain about the wind, the sun or the mud.’
Top seed Jeremy Bates, reached the last eight with a 6-4 6-4 victory over Darren Kirk.
Lawson sells house for song
FORMER Chancellor Lord Lawson has sold his luxury home after reducing the price by a quarter to £239,000 and waiting two years for a buyer.
The ex-Tory MP, whose high interest rate policy caused mortgage misery for millions, put the house, in Leicestershire, on the market for £325,000 in 1990.
Perfect cure for winter Blues
FOR those fans with Royal Blue blood in their veins, the pictures on the front of Guinness Books' Everton Player by Player are enough to bring tears to the eyes.
Try not to break down as I read the roll of honour: the golden vision Alex Young, the Huyton Hercules Peter Reid, the Blackpool buzzbomb Alan Ball, the Tyneside tornado Howard Kendall, the Birmingham blockbuster Bob Latchford and the Llandudno leopard Neville Southall.
In today's troubled Goodison times how wonderful it would be to have them all playing together for Everton, with perhaps a Ray Wilson and a Tommy Wright for good measure.
That's the danger of a book as seductive as this one, the memories come flooding back along with the great names: Bobby Collins, Tommy Ring, Roy Vernon, Jimmy Gabriel, Colin Harvey, Joe Royle, Gary Lineker, T.G. Jones, John Hurst, Jimmy Husband, Kevin Ratcliffe, Tony Kay.
Whichever age you encounter down the Everton trail, you come up with marvellous contributors to the club's roll of honour.
In Ray Wilson you had one of the best left-backs ever.
In Alex Young you had a centre-forward of gazelle-like grace and subtlety.
In Bobby Collins you had a pocket battleship of an inside-forward who could mix the sacred with the profane.
In Roy Vernon you had one of the best-balanced and most punishing strikers of his day.
In Colin Harvey you had a twinkle-toed midfielder with a heart as big as a lion's.
In Alan Ball you had a gifted player you could talk about from now until Christmas.
Before the tears become a torrent, let's offer 10 copies of this treasure house of a book to 10 Evertonians who may be in urgent need of the comfort that past achievements can sometimes bring.
Warm yourself by the fireside of pure genius and it won't cost you a penny.
All you have to do to stake your claim is find the 10 words associated with our Guinness Books competition and hidden in our word search grid.
Just to make it extra easy, here are the words you're looking for: EVERTON, PLAYER, BY, PLAYER, ALEX, YOUNG, PETER, REID, GUINNESS, BOOKS.
When you've completed the grid, send it with your name, address and phone number (if possible) to EVERTON COMPETITION, C/O Dept M, Daily Post, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB, to reach us not later than first post, Friday November 12.
First 10 correct entries opened after that date will each win a copy of Everton Player By Player, whose pictures and text by Ivan Ponting will make this one of the soccer books of the year.
Usual Daily Post rules apply, Sports Editor's decision is final.
Everton Player by Player, by Ivan Ponting (Published by Guinness Books, £14.99).
VETERAN U.S. chess star Bobby Fischer beat his former World Championship rival Boris Spassky yesterday to win their 5 million dollar ‘revenge’ re-match.
Fischer, playing black, won the 30th game after Spassky resigned on the 27th move.
It was Fischer's fifth attempt to get the 10th win needed to clinch the series.
The match, a re-run of the 1972 World Championship also won by Fischer, was held in former Yugoslavia despite UN sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro.
TV news film men's story ended in mugging
TWO members of a Granada TV news team were robbed while in the US to film Laura before she and her parents left for home.
The cameraman and sound recordist were mugged on their last day in Pittsburgh.
The third member of the team, reporter John Moulson, was not involved in the incident, which occurred last Sunday.
Confirming that his men had been robbed, Granada News editor Mike Spencer said: ‘There was an incident involving the soundman and cameraman, in which they were robbed.
But fortunately they're both all right.’
Mr Spencer added: ‘They weren't filming at the time of the incident.
I'm not sure if there were any guns involved, but I think they possibly believed these people had guns on them.
‘They called the police, but were able to fly back home the next day, as planned.
Both of the men were quite badly shaken by the incident and understandably don't want their names to be released.’
Laura was able to have the life-saving £350,000 operation carried out by the Pittsburg surgeons thanks to the generosity of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.
The king gave £150,000 and the rest of the money was raised by an appeal fund.
Senna ponders
NIGEL MANSELL and Ayrton Senna will leave a gaping hole behind them in Grand Prix racing if the Brazilian decides to join the Englishman in retirement next season.
Senna, in Adelaide for Sunday's Australian Grand Prix, said: ‘If I join Nigel in leaving, it will be a tremendous loss to Formula One.
‘I feel sad about this, especially for the fans -and it's all because of one man, Alain Prost.’
Women warned after kidnap ride of terror
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
POLICE are warning lone women drivers to be on their guard after a 21-year-old woman was abducted and beaten about the head by a kidnapper.
The woman, who has not been named, suffered a one and a half hour ordeal in her car, which only ended after the Ford Fiesta broke down in Cheshire.
The woman, from Heywood, near Rochdale, had stopped to look at directions in Farnworth near Manchester when the man struck at 5.40am on Saturday.
She initially mistook him for a police officer as he was wearing a police-style anorak, white shirt and black tie.
‘The man knocked on her door and started calling her names,’ a spokesman for Greater Manchester Police said yesterday.
‘When she realised her mistake she tried to keep the door shut, but the man forced it open.
‘He struck her in the face and told her to move over.
When she tried to get out of the passenger door, he struck her again and called her more names.’
When the woman put her hand up to protect herself the man grabbed two rings off her fingers but they were later recovered in the car.
She was then told to take off her coat and put it over her head.
‘She was then grabbed and pushed violently against the dashboard causing bruising to her face and head.’
The woman was then driven around for over an hour and believes part of the journey may have been on a motorway.
Her ordeal finally ended when her car broke down on the A559, near Cransley Private School in Great Budworth, Northwich.
The man told her to stay where she was, saying: ‘I'll be back for you,’ but she managed to flag down a passing motorist.
Police say the man may be dangerous and are warning women to keep their car doors locked when travelling alone.
‘This is a very serious kidnapping,’ a spokesman for Greater Manchester Police said.
‘It was a very nasty ordeal for this woman and we would wish to alert other women to it.’
The kidnapper is described as white, aged about 38, with dark combed back hair, between 5ft 6in and 6ft tall and with a Northern accent.
Anyone who saw the woman's silver-coloured Fiesta on Saturday or who may have seen the man thumbing a lift in the Northwich area, should contact Greater Manchester Police on 061 871 5050.
Couples shows the Master touch
Report by Mark Garrod in Madrid
FRED COUPLES, who miraculously avoided a lake on his way to winning the U.S. Masters in April, did it again yesterday as America charged into a two-stroke first round lead in golf's World Cup in Madrid.
The world number two saw a splash after topping his drive on La Moraleja's 414-yard fifth hole, but the ball had only skimmed the surface and finished back on dry land.
Couples went on to score a six under par 66, and with partner Davis Love shooting 68, the favourites finished the day on the 10 under par total of 134.
‘I didn't even know the water was there,’ said Couples, whose Augusta victory came after his tee shot to the short 12th on the final afternoon defied gravity by clinging to a near-vertical bank instead of dropping back into the lake.
Deficit
Spain lie second and Wales share third place with Japan, Ian Woosnam collecting seven birdies in a 67 and teammate Mark Mouland recovering from an early triple bogey six to record 72.
‘I was letting Woosie down badly and had no feeling at all,’ said Mouland, who came into the tournament after finishing only 84th in this season's European money list.
‘But I kept trying my hardest and came good at the end.’
England and Scotland, neither of whom have ever won the title, already have a nine-shot deficit to make up.
David Gilford's 74 undid Steve Steve Richardson's 69, while Colin Montgomerie and Gordon Brand Jnr scored 71 and 72 respectively.
Ireland made a far worse start, though.
They are 16 shots behind after Christy O'Connor junior's 73 and Ronan Rafferty's 77.
Jose Rivero birdied the last three holes to trim America's lead to two shots and join Couples out in front in the individual race, won by Woosnam last year.
‘I always seem to play well in this,’ said Woosnam.
‘I putted as well as I have all year.’
Scot Montgomerie said: ‘We probably can't afford to give the Americans nine shots.
We didn't get going.
Our playing partners Paraguay beat us and that says it all really.’
Rafferty had the opposite experience to Couples on the fifth, kicking off a bank into the lake, and also went in water on the long 16th.
Partner O'Connor did the same there and admitted: ‘It was a stupid shot.
I need my head examining.’
Ireland lie joint 26th of the 32 teams, alongside such minnows as Greece and Finland and behind teams like Mexico and Norway.
FRED COUPLES: flirted with the water
Blazing trail to Russia
CHESHIRE'S fire fighters are to help colleagues in Eastern Europe by providing them with advice and more equipment.
The move follows a visit to the fire department in St Petersburg by a group of firemen from the county.
The Cheshire brigade previously donated a quantity of out-dated equipment to the Russian city's fire department and had received a request for technical help.
County councillor John Herbert said: ‘The visit highlighted the lack of modern technical equipment which is available to fire services in the former Eastern Bloc countries and even the provision of out-dated equipment from this country is an extremely worthwhile and valuable improvement.’
He added that plans are now being considered for fire officers from behind the former Iron Curtain to come to Britain to study modern techniques.
MODEL WAY TO BEAT CRUELTY
Three of a kind…models show off the latest range of styles which will be on display at the Tesco and RSCPA Cruelty Free show at London's Regents College in London this weekend Picture: DAVID GILES
MacSharry quits as trade feud escalates
By Sarah Womack and Geoff Meade
EUROPE'S top trade negotiator stepped down last night, as the Americans raised the stakes in a bitter wrangle over imports.
Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry quit his post as GATT mediator as the US ordered 200pc tariffs on £200m-worth of imported European wines and farm goods.
The move covers wines from France, Italy, and Germany but appears to largely exclude British products.
It will come into effect in 30 days, and effectively triple the price of blacklisted bottles to American consumers.
Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, described the US decision as ‘highly regrettable.’
Mr MacSharry and Commission President Jacques Delors have been at daggers drawn for weeks over tactics in the GATT talks with the Americans with Mr Delors accused of favouring the powerful French farm lobby.
And last night it came to a head with Mr MacSharry privately blaming his interfering boss for his decision to stand down, and Commission sources confirming that he felt badly let down by M Delors.
Officials in Brussels claimed Mr MacSharry's scope for bargaining was undermined by warnings from M Delors that he would not sanction a deal which penalised Europe's farmers.
In a Commons statement, Mr Heseltine said the EC would need to consider its response very carefully.
But he cautioned against a trade war, saying: ‘It is in the interests of both sides to avoid starting a spiral of retaliation, which can only harm exporters and damage the prospects for GATT agreement.’
European officials, though, have already warned they will retaliate by boosting tariffs on US goods, escalating a row that has lasted six years and blocked agreement in the GATT international trade talks involving 108 countries.
Around 200 white wines were on the US tariffs blacklist, but a White House trade official would not deny they were taking special aim at France, which has persistently tried to block an agreement on farm subsidies and the prices of cereal substitutes.
‘I wouldn't want to suggest that, but if you look at where most white wine comes from…’ he said.
The US also released a list of other European products on which they are considering imposing additional duties if negotiations with the EC ‘failed to result in adequate reform’ of its system of agricultural subsidies on oilseed exports.
Products on this list with an estimated imports value of more than £1bn include perfume and toilet water, food additives, car tyres, paper, ceramics, glassware, pipes, recorded material and furniture.
‘We regret that we were forced to take this action,’ said US trade representative Carla Hills.
‘We have demonstrated extraordinary patience and we are open to further negotiations in the 30 days before the duties become effective.’
President Bush said yesterday that he did not want a trade war with European countries.
‘We're not going to engage in a trade war,’ he said.
‘We've got some tough fighters on our side, but no trade war.’
He also said his objective was ‘just looking after the interests of world trade.’
A spokesman for Presidentelect Clinton said he had ‘always said we need open trade, but it must be fair trade, and if foreign countries won't open up their markets, we have to get tough.’
ROSEBUD'S PRIZE-WINNING BLOOM
PRETTY six-year-old Chantelle McArthur has added yet another title to her list of 35 successes in carnival queen competitions, after being voted Miss Welsh Resorts in the Rosebud section of a contest held in Llandudno.
Her mother, Gayle, puts her winning ways down to a combination of looks and personality.
Surprisingly, modelling is not a career Chantelle wants to follow, expressing instead a keen interest in learning languages.
Agency to host EC conference
By David Hope Business Staff
NORTH WALES is to host a major international research and development conference next week at Mold, organised by the Welsh Development Agency.
Delegates from all over Europe are due to arrive at what is described as a major event during the British Presidency of the European Community.
Next January the Single European Market takes effect and the conference will highlight the vital role of research and technological development and how it can be shared across national boundaries.
WDA chairman, Dr Gwyn Jones will host the opening session at Theatr Clwyd next Wednesday.
The WDA is already active in increasing levels of research and development work in Wales.
Electronics
Secretary of State for Wales, David Hunt, will open the conference and EC experts and industrialists will explain the Commission's thinking.
Advice will be provided on subjects including electronics, information technology, engineering, materials technology, the environment, medical and biomedical advances and a special workshop for non-EC companies.
In addition to Welsh experts, on hand will be representatives from the Baden Wurttemberg and RhoneAlpes regions which, together with Catalonia and Lombardy, have forged economic links with Wales.
Mother-to-be in crash
A PREGNANT teenager had a miraculous escape last night when the car in which she was a passenger overturned.
The 17-year-old suffered only minor injuries despite the Vauxhall Cavalier car being extensively damaged.
The car had been travelling along the A534 from Wrexham to Holt when it went out of control.
Police believe it was a mechanical fault.
The driver was uninjured.
Pedal-powered peace-keeper
BRITISH troops in the former Yugoslavia have to perform a fine balancing act between the warring factions as they start to deliver humanitarian aid in Bosnia.
But none more so than eccentric RAF Flight Lieutenant Rob Bridges.
For the 30-year-old air liaison officer with the British force in the Croatian port of Split has introduced a novel way to get around.
Dumbfounded Croatian troops stare in disbelief as Flt Lt Bridges, from Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, races around on his unicycle.
‘I took it up as a form of exercise in Germany, where I've been for the past two years,’ he said yesterday.
‘It's excellent exercise and it certainly beats Army PT.’
He does not mind being the butt of his colleagues' jokes because he always has the last laugh.
‘They find it all rather amusing but it's a different story when they have a go and fall off,’ he said.
‘It takes months of practice to master the art.’
Flt Lt Bridges was delighted when the bright yellow unicycle recently arrived via a supply ship.
Flt Lt Rob Bridges doing the rounds of the Split barracks Picture: JOHN GILES
Cash in on Penny Drops at Doncaster
Preview by ARGUS
PENNY DROPS seems the obvious conclusion for punters in today's Poppy Handicap at Doncaster.
Lord Huntingdon's filly, on a hat-trick after recent wins at Newbury and Nottingham, was most impressive last time out, scoring easily by a length and a half over a mile.
The daughter of Sharpo steps back a furlong for this race.
But, such was her superiority over Good For The Roses and 17 others that she could have won at almost any distance.
A four pounds penalty for her latest victory looks unlikely to stop her going in again.
Well-contested
Willie Carson gets the leg up on Nafuth, who should go some way towards repaying the 500,000 dollars he cost owner Hamdan AlMaktoum by winning the EBF Dunkirk Maiden Stakes (Division One).
Two runs in well-contested events, including a length-and-ahalf second to potential Classic candidate Felucca at Newmarket last month, have given every indication that Peter Walwyn's charge is capable of scoring in less exacting company.
Against those he meets now, Nafuth warrants maximum confidence.
Carson should also be in contention on Flashman in the Normandy Beaches Nursery.
Francis Lee's youngster has ideal form for a contest like this and seems to be improving with every run.
UEFA may get tough as Anfield plays its cards wrong
LIVERPOOL'S shameful disciplinary record in Europe this season could bring new punishment from UEFA chiefs.
Mike Marsh became the third Anfield star to be shown the red card in successive European Cup Winners' Cup matches when he was sent off in the closing stages of the defeat against Spartak Moscow on Wednesday.
Suspension
He joined a roll of dishonour which includes Paul Stewart, sent off for violent conduct against Apollon Limassol in Cyprus, and Bruce Grobbelaar, shown a red card in the second round first leg in Moscow.
Manager Graeme Souness is serving a five-game touchline ban for remarks made to officials in Moscow and David Burrows must also serve a one game ban in Liverpool's next European game after picking up his second booking of the competition on Wednesday.
Those misdemeanours mean Liverpool will start their next European game with Souness banned from the touchline and dressing-room area and Stewart, Burrows and Marsh still under suspension.
And that dismal record is likely to come under scrutiny from UEFA shortly, with Liverpool possibly in line for a warning or even a heavy fine.
Punishment
Neil Livingstone, secretary of UEFA's referees' committee, said last night: ‘There can be group punishment in addition to the individual punishment of the players concerned.
The disciplinary committee reserves the right to punish teams for three consecutive sendings off.
‘I know that three red cards in successive matches is something the disciplinary committee will look at.
They will discuss whether there is a case to answer.
‘They look at each individual case, but it is certainly possible that Liverpool will be punished for three red cards.
This sort of thing is not good for our image.’
He added: ‘In Liverpool's case, two of their red cards were for violent conduct, which does not go down to well.
‘Two Turkish teams have had three players sent off in the same European match.
We have a referees’ committee meeting on Monday and this trend will certainly be examined.
‘This is more of a warning to clubs that three red cards in as many games will not be tolerated.’
Bruce Grobbelaar is still fighting to shake off a hamstring strain in time for tomorrow's Anfield clash with Middlesbrough, but manager Graeme Souness could be tempted to continue with Mike Hooper, who impressed against Spartak.
Meanwhile Rangers, the club Souness left behind, are poised to land the biggest cash jackpot British soccer has witnessed today when they go into the European Cup draw with some of the giants of the game.
Although the Ibrox side are currently servicing a £12m overdraft, they could slash that figure dramatically thanks to their triumph over English champions Leeds United.
After years of frustration in the European arena, Wednesday's success has finally carried Rangers to the threshold of untold riches.
Pay-out
Today's draw in Geneva, which splits the eight survivors into two groups of four, guarantees Rangers another six matches in the tournament.
Rangers are already assured of a near half million pound pay-out from UEFA for reaching the last eight and, with around £200,000 at stake for each point earned from now on, a maximum of £2.4m is also up for grabs.
Doomed — by ten minutes' madness
LIVERPOOL paid the price for Moscow madness when they were dumped out of the European Cup Winners Cup on Wednesday.
I agree one hundred per cent with Graeme Souness when he insists it was that last 10 minutes in the Lenin Stadium which cost them eventual victory against Spartak Moscow.
What made it worse was I heard people saying what a very good side Spartak were.
Forget it.
Liverpool engineered their own downfall and I don't think I'm sticking my neck by saying Spartak have got no chance of winning that competition.
Souness's side missed two great chances at the start of each half, when Don Hutchison and Michael Thomas failed to convert chances.
Liverpool's inexperience meant they got sucked into the type of game a more experienced side would never have got involved in.
The referee was weak and allowed the Russians to get away with a few naughty episodes but to be honest Liverpool weren't that far behind.
Scandalous
Spartak defender Victor Onopko smacked Rushie while in the penalty box, but instead of pointing it out to the referee and then playing it by the book, we had David Burrows tearing into an absolutely scandalous tackle and the tone was set.
Liverpool were distracted from the main business of the evening scoring two goals and the tie was gone.
Two plus points for me were the performances of Jamie Redknapp and Mike Hooper.
Redknapp was absolutely tremendous for a 19-year-old.
His ability to get the ball and pass it was out of the ordinary.
Hooper did enough, in my opinion, to be given a run in the side.
I've played in front of Mike Hooper and I believe he is one of the top six in the country.
He never let Liverpool down, but the management have always gone back to Bruce Grobbelaar.
This time Liverpool should stick with him and give him a run.
Liverpool have got to play him against Middlesbrough and it is my belief that if someone comes in and does a turn for you, stick by them.
Liverpool should do that with Hooper.
Stress remedy is out of this world
Welsh tonic for spacemen
By Gerald Williams Daily Post Staff
A HERBAL health remedy marketed by a North Wales business is to be given to Russian cosmonauts to help them cope with stress in space.
The breakthrough has been made by Eladon, a small company headed by Irishman Richard Ross from an office in High Street, Bangor.
The company is hosting a two-week exchange research visit to North Wales by Russian space scientist Colonel Vladimir Alexseva and cosmonaut Colonel Alexander Volkov.
Under the brand name Elagen, the company markets high-potency capsules of eleutherococcus senticosus, the Ginseng-like root extract of a plant which grows in Siberia.
It has been known for its medicinal properties for 2,000 years and has been used by Russian cosmonauts since the 1970s.
But it is only available in Russia in liquid form, which turns to globules which are difficult to swallow in space.
Now a deal has been struck for the scientists to take 200 packs of Elagen, which contains refined, concentrated extracts of powdered eleutherococcus, back with them to Russia for use by cosmonauts at the Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre in Moscow.
Eladon will supply the centre with future stocks as required.
‘It's like selling coal to Newcastle, as eleutherococcus comes from Siberia and is widely used in Russia,’ said Eladon director Mr Ross.
Thee months ago he and fellow directors Merfyn Davies and Dr Moira Willaims went to the Yuri Gagarin Centre where Col Alexseva is head of medical research.
Cosmonaut chief Col Volkov has spent more than 300 days in space.
On his last mission he joined fellow Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev for the last three months of his marathon 11 months in orbit.
Mr Ross, who is convinced that eleutherococcus could be a major factor in the fight against physical and mental fatigue, said: ‘He has validated our claims and by confirming the benefits he has found from using it as an aid to post-flight recovery.’
Col Volkov had also found it helped the body to cope with stress in the cramped conditions of a space module.
‘He is a strong advocate of cosmonauts using eleutherococcus,’ said Mr Ross.
‘The problem they have in Russia is the quality inconsistency of their products.
Ours is of a guaranteed, standardised consistency.
‘It meets the standard requirement of the Russian space programme.’
Russian cosmonaut Col Alexander Volkov, left, and Mervyn Davies of Eladon discuss the merits of the herb tonic which is backed by the Russian space programme
New faces at agency
INWARD, the regional development agency for North West England has confirmed the appointment of five new directors to its board.
The new faces, including Leader of Liverpool City Council, Harry Rimmer who represents the five metropolitan districts on Merseyside and Coun Edward Bowden of Warrington Borough Council representing Cheshire's shire districts, increases the size of the board from 18 to 23.
The increase, says INWARD, brings extra expertise and contact to the agency's operations and makes the board geographically more representative.
Other new directors include Prof Harold Hankins, vice-chancellor of University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology; Coun David Holtom of High Peak Borough Council and Mr Harry Tuley, chief executive of the Scapa Group at Blackburn.
The appointments were confirmed at INWARD's annual general meeting which also re-elected Tom Weatherby as chairman.
Royals in ‘honeymoon’ washout
THE Prince and Princess of Wales ended their tour of South Korea yesterday at a traditional honeymoon spot keeping their distance and looking miserable.
The romantic backdrop of mist-shrouded mountains and ancient temples in the southeast town of Kyongju only highlighted the strain between the two.
A Buddhist monk offered prayers for their health and happiness in contrast to the royal couple's general downcast attitude.
They stared with fixed smiles while the monk prayed for their contentment.
What was to have been a grand finale to the four-day official visit had to be hurried along with little ceremony as rain pelted down on Kyongju, spoiling the autumnal splendour of the ornamental gardens, a favourite spot for young honeymooners.
The princess, in a royal purple suit-dress, pushed on in front to sign the visitors' book while the prince wandered off at the end, leaving his wife in his wake.
Korean newlyweds in the crowd clapped and cheered the royal couple.
The royal couple flew out of South Korea last night, the prince bound for Hong Kong and the princess for Britain.
Back Howard now -with cash to buy
EVERTON'S season is in such dire straits that only a magician in the mould of Paul Daniels can rescue them from big trouble now.
I've watched Howard Kendall's side recently, and the stuff they have been serving up has been bordering on the pathetic compared to earlier performances this season.
Vultures
I'm glad I'm not in the position of having to sort out Everton's troubles, because I wouldn't have a clue how to get them out of the mess they are in.
The vultures are already circling around Howard Kendall, suggesting Everton's slump to third from bottom of the Premier League is confirmation of his folly in returning to the scene of his greatest triumphs.
That's nonsense a clear case of people being wise after the event.
It is always hard going back somewhere, because you WILL be judged on what you've achieved before.
But everybody was happy when Howard walked back through the Goodison Park door two years ago.
The supporters were happy, the players were happy and everyone agreed the Everton board had pulled off a coup in tempting their most successful manager back to Merseyside.
But there is no getting away from the fact that Howard has got big problems.
He's got no money to spend, and when he turned a losing team around in 1983 he had four or five exceptional and emerging players in his squad.
That does not mean you will get Alan Hansen joining any lobby kicking Howard when he's down.
Toiling
It wouldn't matter to me who was manager of Everton at the moment, they would still be toiling to turn things around.
In the short-term it might work as a morale-booster for players to see a fresh face, but in the long-term I don't think anybody else could do any better than Howard.
If the Everton board -and remember they have given no indication of doing so -were to replace Howard, would they promise the new manager money?
If there is money to spend, they should give it to the man who has won two championships at Everton.
It disappoints me to say this about Everton, because you will have read me raving about some of their performances earlier this season.
If someone had told me after Blackburn that Everton would be third from bottom a few, short weeks later, I would have told them they were living in cloud cuckoo land.
But there are key areas where I feel they have gone wrong.
One tell-tale statistic is the lack of bookings this season.
I'm not suggesting players should go around collecting yellow cards, but you must have players who are going to get stuck in for you when the going gets tough.
Then we come back to the big man up front.
When they play like they did at Blackburn Rovers, it doesn't matter who you've got up front.
But when you are struggling like Everton are at present, you need somebody who will scrap for it and give you that little bit extra in the box.
I'm not suggesting that Paul Rideout, Tony Cottee, Maurice Johnston and Stuart Barlow are all bad players, but they do not give Everton that extra option someone like -dare I say it again -Graeme Sharp would offer.
You can point the finger at the manager and coaches all you like, but now is the time for the players to stand up and be counted and get in there for Everton Football Club.
Everton, to put it bluntly, are in dire straits.
And when a club is in dire straits there is a tendency to be over-critical, but Everton are not just in trouble, they are in big trouble.
They travel to Nottingham Forest tomorrow for a game with a real edge to it, with Brian Clough's side propping up the Premier League.
I think it is a tragic commentary on the state of the English game that Everton and Forest, two sides who at least try to play, are third bottom and bottom respectively.
Add that to the fact that three Premier League clubs have gone out of Europe this week and you get an idea about the state of English football.
Don't give me all that about the ban from Europe, it is because of the way the game has gone in England that we are not the force we were in European competition.
Quarry's Sunday opening go-ahead
A ROADSTONE coating plant at Penmaenmawr Quarry is to be allowed to operate on 15 Sundays every year, despite local objections.
Gwynedd County Council yesterday voted by 35 to 19 to grant the firm temporary permission for Sunday working at its tarmacadam plant.
Llandudno councillor Arthur Todd said people at Penmaenmawr had suffered from traffic noise and dust during the building of the A55 bypass of the town and the works at the Pen-y-clip tunnel.
He had seen one woman actually ‘shovelling dust’ outside her front door.
He said: ‘Surely they are entitled to at least one day in a week when they can have peace and quiet.’
But Coun Olwen Jones, in a letter to the council, supported the quarry company's application so that it would have the flexibility to compete for contract work on the A55.
The vice-chairman of the county council, Coun Hywel Thomas, of Llanfairfechan, supported her and said the quarry had provided ‘the bread and butter’ wages of people at Penmaenmawr and Llanfairfechan for 150 years.
Stone was quarried there seven days a week, he said, and the only way the tarmacadam plant could be competitive was by having the flexibility to work on Sundays when necessary.
Fischer wins
VETERAN US chess star Bobby Fischer, 49, beat former 1972 World Championship rival Boris Spassky, 55, in Belgrade yesterday to win their 5m dollar re-match.
Fischer, playing black, won the 30th game after Spassky resigned on the 27th move.
The 1972 match was also won by Fischer.
FORMER Newcastle United chairman Stan Seymour, who signed Kevin Keegan as a player, has died.
He was 76.
Seymour saw Newcastle beat Birmingham 3-2 on Wednesday night and was discovered yesterday in the bed of his Birmingham hotel.
Magpies chairman Sir John Hall said: ‘He travelled down with the team on Tuesday but stayed overnight.
His last words to me after the match were, ‘Don't worry, we'll be promoted’.’
TELECOM is among the international players whose long-term business strategies depend on an ability to turn today's research into tomorrow's marketable products.
World leaders clamour to welcome Bill Clinton
US PRESIDENT-elect Bill Clinton spoke by telephone yesterday with several world leaders, among them Russia's Boris Yeltsin.
‘We just talked about what he was doing.
I said I supported democracy and free-market economics in Russia,’ Mr Clinton told reporters later outside the governor's office in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Mr Clinton said he also had spoken with Britain's John Major; Canada's prime minister Brian Mulroney; Italian premier Giuliano Amato; President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico; President Carlos Menem of Argentina; and Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress.
‘We had no substantive conversations.
They were all just welcoming me,’ added Mr Clinton, part of whose 20-minute talk with Mr Yeltsin was shown on TV.
The Kremlin said later that during the course of the conversation, Mr Yeltsin had invited Mr Clinton to a Moscow summit and had also suggested further reductions in nuclear weapons.
Of his talk with Mr Yeltsin, Mr Clinton said: ‘We just talked about what he was doing and I said I supported democracy and free-market economics in Russia.’
However, despite his brief sortie onto the world stage, Mr Clinton repeated his promise to focus ‘like a laser beam’ on problems at home, particularly the ailing US economy.
‘There's just an immense amount of work to be done,’ he said.
Mr Clinton added that the number and range of the decisions he would have to take was ‘mind-boggling’.
Bill Clinton
Cheshires aim for Bosnia ‘stability’
By Charles Miller in Split, Croatia
THE commander of Cheshirer Regiment troops preparing to launch relief convoys in the war-torn Bosnian mountains yesterday said his men would attempt to establish a pattern of stability in the region.
Brigadier Andrew Cumming said that although the troops' primary role would be to get aid through to people desperately in need, they would attempt to adapt their peace-keeping experiences elsewhere in the world to the current crisis.
Speaking in the grounds of the force's new Divulje base outside the Croatian port of Split, he said: ‘The aim must be to employ the more traditional British approach to international security.
Stability
‘It is to adapt our traditional role of peace-keeping and try to establish a pattern of stability even though it may be only on a very temporary basis.’
He acknowledged the enormous difficulties facing the 2,400-strong British force.
And he stressed it was unlikely an ‘entire pattern of stability’ could be set up for every operation.
It is hoped to set up a network of United Nations monitors along the routes who will work closely with liaison officers from the Serb, Croat and Muslim factions so that the convoys are not fired on.
Brig Cumming said a key element of the plan was to ‘picket the people’ in other words to set up communications lines so that all levels of the factions from top commanders down to local warlords and the actual troops manning barricades were aware of the nature of the convoys and when they were planned to pass through a specific area.
‘Of course, there is always the danger that you actually identify the time a convoy is passing through,’ he admitted.
New dangers erupted last week when fighting broke out between Bosnian Croats and Muslims, who previously had united against Serbian attacks.
But it appears that following the fall of the town of Jajce to the Serbs peace has been restored.
The Serb frontline now all but encircles Jajce and runs east just north of Travnik and turns north not far from Vitez, which will be the base for the Cheshire Regiment battalion group.
Brig Cumming said he remained happy with the choice of Vitez, which he did not consider to be under threat at the moment.
But he admitted to being confused about the Serbs' current aims.
‘I have never felt more comfortable in a job saying I just do not know,’ he said.
Brig Cumming, who is operating from a stark small office in the barracks with just a trestle table and canvas chair, said there had been no direct links between the British commanders and the Serbs.
However, once the troops are fully operational tactical command will be handed to the two-star UN commander General Philippe Morillon of France.
Chegwin's fears in alcohol battle
FORMER children's TV favourite Keith Chegwin yesterday told of his fight against alcoholism.
The 34-year-old Liverpool-born presenter, who had two four-week spells in a drying out clinic, said: ‘I am an alcoholic.
It's a disease.’
He said his hectic work schedule led him into a downward spiral where he needed a drink to relax and help him sleep.
He told Granada TV's This Morning show: ‘I'm just frightened because, God, I could so easily pick up a drink.
‘I was in the hotel last night.
I would have loved to have sat in the bar and had a drink but I couldn't.
‘The moment I have a drink, then bang I am gone.
It won't be a couple of gin and tonics, it would be like two bottles.’
He said he battled against the bottle by checking into a private clinic but started drinking as soon as he came out.
‘I just said ‘Oh sod it, I'll see if this clinic has worked or not and I'll just have one’.
But the trouble is I can't just have one.’
He refused to blame his alcohol problem for the break-up of his 10-year marriage to TV presenter Maggie Philbin, saying: ‘I don't think we split up because of the drink.’
He is to appear in a Christmas pantomime this year.
TRANMERE go into Europe next week and that is a remarkable achievement for a club that nearly went bust five years ago.
When Liverpool beat them 7-1 in a pre-season friendly a few months ago I think a few people thought the Prenton bubble had burst.
But John King has stuck to his principles and Rovers have strung together an impressive home record.
Pat Nevin's signing has given them balance with a two wingers system that is committed to attacking.
And my old team-mate John Aldridge continues to score goals on a regular basis.
I made Aldo my Merseyside Player of the Year last season and at the rate he is going, he could win my vote again!
As well as Aldo, Rovers are currently being well served by two of my compatriots Steve Mungall and Neil McNab.
They are showing there is no substitute for experience and the only disappointment for Tranmere at the moment is the crowd, or rather lack of it.
It is a great shame more people aren't backing them, especially when they are well established in the top six.
Cashing in on treaty
THE dust is settling on the Maastricht Treaty parliamentary debate in which every Labour MP voted for delay.
The views of North Wales MEP Joe Wilson are of interest, if only because he is so adamantly in favour of the treaty.
Clwyd's Euro Week starts today with a special edition of Clwyd Connections published to mark the occasion by the county council.
It includes an article by Mr Wilson, Why we must say Yes to Maastricht.
‘The question is whether John Major's Maastricht Bill, minus the Social Charter, should or should not be supported.
I am saying yes,’ he said.
‘We can't deny the other 11 states the right to progress.
Germany has taken on board much of the Social Charter but it is its economy we are all trying to match.’
He points out that Clwyd benefits from the EC's regional policy to the tune of about £10m a year.
Wrexham, Shotton, Flint and Rhyl are travel-to-work areas all qualifying for grant aid under a European Regional Objective designed to revive run-down industrial areas.
If the treaty is not ratified Mr Wilson suggests there will be no extra money in the budget and Clwyd could well lose Euro grants.
Funding
If ratified, the Regional Development Fund will increase by half and Clwyd would stand a better chance of retaining its status in 1994.
Current programmes end in 1993.
The newsletter reports Clwyd has had £25m from the Regional Development Fund since 1975.
And £3.5m has been provided in the past three years from the Social Fund to help the young and long-term unemployed.
A cloud of balloons will be released by county chairman Dennis Parry over Ysgol Bryn Coch, Mold, today to launch Euro Week.
Tomorrow Rhyl, has a Festival of Fun and Tuesday's seminar at Wrexham Industrial Park seeks to help smaller businesses prepare for the single market.
Priorities for industrial innovation and the transfer of technology in Europe is the theme of Wednesday's international conference.
It will be opened by Secretary of State for Wales David Hunt at Theatr Clwyd.
Another conference at Llangollen on Wednesday examines how indigenous cultural resources can generate economic growth.
One of the speakers will be European Commissioner Bruce Millan.
Next Thursday, former Minister for Overseas Development Lord Judd gives the keynote speech at Bodelwyddan Castle on Europe's response to the Rio Earth Summit.
Say the Leeds and I'm smiling
THE PITCH wasn't the only place staging a Battle of Britain at Elland Road on Wednesday.
Inside a packed-to-capacity press box, national passions were running high Scottish press corps to the right, English press to the left, and never the twain shall meet.
Ally McCoist headed Rangers' crucial second goal after 59 minutes and was met by stunned silence from 25,118 home fans.
Behind the smoked glass of the press box, however, a cry and a clenched fist went up: ‘What's the score now, England?’
It wasn't me, Ed, honest.
4-1 was the answer and Cantona's late goal was but a minor irritation as the power of Scotland proved best of British.
Stuart McCall, not rated at Everton but an international star at Ibrox, said: ‘I do feel we struck a blow for Scottish football.
Eighty or 90 percent of the population down south didn't expect us to win this.’
Little wonder.
Only Manchester United in two cups have won at Leeds since Ronnie Moran guided Liverpool to a 5-4 win 30 League games ago.
Yet Rangers came to Yorkshire, saw, and conquered.
John Lukic's Ibrox error passed into folklore and Andy Goram playing as if he held responsibility for Frank Haffey (9-3 England), Stewart Kennedy (5-1 England), and Alan Rough (Peru, Iran) in his hands was a Scottish goalkeeper inspired.
Pity he was born in England.
Ironically, Leeds failed partly because they adopted a tactic so often attributed to Scottish football, the aimless high ball.
Why Howard Wilkinson thought Richard Gough and Co were vulnerable in the air is beyond me.
Hadn't he watched Gough in the European Championships?
Rangers' second goal was worthy of Red Star Belgrade in its speed and simplicity.
Or possibly Terry Mac for Liverpool against Spurs.
And who was the goalscorer?
None other than failure-in-England Ally McCoist, who scored nine goals in 47 appearances for Sunderland.
‘He finds the space so well,’ said the man from BBC Leeds admiringly in the dressing-room area afterwards.
Sure McCoist's 29-goal tally this season has been helped by feeble defences in the Scottish Premier League.
Rangers' victory does not elevate the Motherwells and Airdries to a higher plain.
But it does largely bear out what David Murray likes to remind Graeme Souness Rangers are the most powerful club in Britain at the moment and can play quality football.
Souness should know.
His contribution cannot be understated and he did sign Gough, Mark Hateley and, most importantly of all, his successor as manager Walter Smith.
Outside the ground, I met Jimmy Armfield, Daily Express writer, BBC commentator and the manager who took Leeds to the 1975 European Cup final.
He said: ‘I thought Leeds were very poor.
They missed David Batty.
But Rangers did play well and they have some good players.
‘The second goal was a beauty.
It was a great header by little McCoist.’
Little McCoist?
At 5ft 9, yes.
Belittle McCoist?
Leeds had to think again on that score.
Drink-drive loophole is closed
THE House of Lords yesterday blocked a legal loophole which cleared boxing promoter Frank Warren of a drink-driving charge.
The decision closes the floodgates to hundreds of potential appeals by convicted drink-drivers.
Mr Warren was arrested in Mayfair, London, in May 1990 after a roadside breath test proved positive.
He was cleared by the Bow Street stipendiary magistrate in January last year because he was not given the opportunity to say whether he would prefer to give a urine or blood sample when Vine Street police found the intoximeter did not function properly.
The High Court upheld the magistrate's decision.
Lord Bridge of Harwich, sitting with Lords Templeman, Roskill, Goff and Jauncey, ruled there was no question of the driver having an option as to what kind of sample he provided.
Campese out
A SPRAINED ankle will prevent Wallaby hero David Campese from playing before the November 21 Test against Wales at Cardiff Arms Park.
Campese lost his footing and fell heavily during yesterday's training session at Swansea University.
Physio Greg Craig said: ‘It is a Grade One plus sprain which isn't serious enough to warrant X-rays, but still needs lots of treatment.’
The injury-plagued Aussies have already have seen Tony Daly, Cameron Lillicrap, Anthony Herbert and skipper Michael Lynagh return home.
Campese will be replaced by Damian Smith in the team to tackle Wales B tomorrow.
US job saviours drop in on European ‘flagship’
TOP industrialists from the United States travelled to Snowdonia to hold a board meeting at the site of their latest acquisition Austin Taylor Communications Ltd at Bethesda.
Senior management figures from Communications Systems Inc (CSI), led by company chairman and president Curt Sampson, took the opportunity to tour their ‘flagship’ European company.
CSI bought Austin Taylor Communications outright last January to give the Minnesota-based telecommunications manufacturer a base from which to expand into Europe.
In doing so the firm helped safeguard 145 jobs at Bethesda after international negotiations involving the Welsh Development Agency, the Welsh Office, Gwynedd County Council and Arfon Borough Council.
WDA executive director of business services, Meirion Thomas, together with representatives from the local authorities, met the CSI board members at the factory.
He said the decision to hold the meeting in North Wales demonstrated the Americans' commitment to the area.
The WDA invested £100,000 for shares in the new company and substantial sums were jointly loaned by Gwynedd and Arfon, with grant aid supplied by the Welsh Office.
Austin Taylor managing director John Hudson, expressing his gratitude for the support shown, said market conditions were still tough because of the recession but added that joining CSI had greatly enhanced the Bethesda company's prospects.
Pictured at the Bethesda plant are, from left: Meirion Thomas, Curt Sampson, Eurwyn Lloyd Evans of Gwynedd County Council, John Hudson and Brian Owen, Arfon Borough Council.
Taylor's Euro face-saver
GRAHAM TAYLOR is challenging his internationals to pick up the fallen standard of English football, after Wednesday night's triple European disaster.
The England manager wants an emphatic World Cup win over Turkey at Wembley on November 18 to restore national morale after the exits of Leeds, Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday.
‘It was a very sad and disappointing night,’ said Taylor.
‘It means it now rests with the international side to put on the same, if not a better kind of performance as we put on against Norway last month.
Hopefully this time we will also get the right result.’
Taylor sticks with the same squad apart from QPR's uncapped striker Les Ferdinand.
SQUAD: Woods (Sheff Wed), Seaman, Dixon (Arsenal), Bardsley (QPR), Pearce (Nottm Forest), Dorigo (Leeds), Walker (Sampdoria), Adams (Arsenal), Jobson (Oldham), Pallister (Man United), Platt (Juventus), Batty (Leeds), Palmer (Sheff Wed), Ince (Man United), Gascoigne (Lazio), Merson (Arsenal), Sinton (QPR), Salako (Crystal Pal), Shearer (Blackburn), Clough (Nottm Forest), Wright (Arsenal), Ferdinand (QPR).
Stand-by: Martyn (Crystal Pal), P Parker (Man Utd), G Parker (Aston Villa), White (Man City), Deane (Sheff Utd).
Nation to decide as Premier loses confidence vote
Irish face general election
By Chris Parkin Daily Post Correspondent
IRISH Prime Minister Albert Reynolds last night called a general election after losing a confidence vote.
The Irish will elect a new government on November 25 the same day they decide in three referenda whether to reform their constitution's ban on abortion.
The date for the election was at first announced for November 26.
It is understood the moves were made to make it easier to count the votes and complete the procedure by the weekend.
The four-way poll was confirmed when Mr Reynolds's motion of confidence in his government was defeated by 88 votes to 77 in the Dublin parliament following a day-long debate.
Defeat became inevitable 24 hours earlier when the Progressive Democrats, junior members of Mr Reynolds' coalition government, ended more than three years of partnership power.
The minority group walked out after a week of bitter exchanges generated by a charge from Mr Reynolds that Progressive Democrat leader and former minister Des O'Malley had been dishonest.
The confidence debate heard claims by Mr O'Malley that the coalition had become unworkable because of a lack of trust in the cabinet engineered by Mr Reynolds.
The Prime Minister came in for strong criticism from opposition leaders but insisted only single party government by Fianna Fail could work for Ireland.
Fianna Fail, by far the biggest party in the Republic and the only group with genuine prospects of making it on its own, are likely to fall short of a parliamentary majority.
Although an opinion poll last week suggested they could just secure the required number of seats, the tide is expected to turn against them in the course of a three-week campaign.
Figures due out today will confirm an unemployment rate close to 20pc, while mortgage interest rate levels are their highest ever.
The fact that the abortion referenda will be held the same day may also count against Fianna Fail.
The Irish Roman Catholic Church bishops yesterday made clear their disapproval of the form of wording chosen by the government to permit abortions in cases where the life of a mother-to-be is at risk.
Ireland's pro-life movement said it would not field anti-abortion candidates, but urged voters to ‘consider the attitudes’ of those running for office.
When votes are counted under the proportional representation system, it is probable Fianna Fail will have to seek an alliance with another party to retain office.
The price for such an arrangement could be the ousting of Mr Reynolds.
Yesterday, the Londonbased Irish Emigrants Voice campaign renewed its demands for Britain's Irish community to be allowed to vote in the elections.
Spokesman David Reynolds said: ‘Ireland is the only country in Europe that doesn't give its emigrants the vote.
It is a denial of Irish emigrants’ constitutional rights.’
Irish Prime Minister Albert Reynolds last night
Belgium re-run is what Yorath wants
by Tony Banks
TERRY YORATH last night called for a repeat of Wales' European Championship performance in Belgium last year as he named his squad for the World Cup re-run.
They drew 1-1 in Brussels with a late equaliser from Dean Saunders a result which virtually ended the Belgians' interest in the competition after their 3-1 defeat in Cardiff three months earlier.
‘If I could have the same result again, I would be delighted,’ said Yorath after naming his squad for the November 18 game.
‘Belgium have played four and won four.
For us to stay in contention in this group we need to get some sort of result.
‘I watched the video of Romania losing 1-0 there and the Romanians had chances, so we know the Belgians can be got at.
‘It will be a difficult game for us, but we have to go there with a positive attitude.’
Wales have responded to their 5-1 opening game thrashing by Romania with two successive wins, at home to the Faroe Islands and last month in Cyprus, to put their campaign back on the rails.
Yorath has made two changes, bringing in Crystal Palace utility man Chris Coleman for Swindon's Paul Bodin (knee), and QPR's Tony Roberts as reserve goalkeeper for Sunderland's Tony Norman, who is still suffering from a hand injury.
Cloud
Manchester United's Ryan Giggs is also included, despite being controversially pulled out of the Cyprus game by manager Alex Ferguson.
Saunders has a cloud over him with the possibility of legal action by Paul Elliott over a tackle which ruled out the Chelsea defender for the season.
But Yorath concentrated on Saunders' form for Aston Villa, saying: ‘I always felt he got unjust criticism at Liverpool.
‘Now he's in a side that is going well, with goals coming from all over the team.
He's blossoming and that can only be good for us.’
SQUAD: Southall (Everton), Roberts (QPR), Bowen (Norwich), Phillips (Norwich), Coleman (Crystal Palace), Young (Crystal Palace), Melville (Oxford), Symons (Portsmouth), Blackmore (Man Utd), Giggs (Man Utd), Hughes (Man Utd), Rush (Liverpool), Saunders (Aston Villa), Speed (Leeds), Horne (Everton), Pembridge (Derby).
WALES UNDER-21 squad for the European U-21 qualifying group match v Belgium Under-21 at the KV Kortrijk Stadium on October 17: Margetson (Manchester City), Coyne (Tranmere Rovers), Hughes (Bury), Baddeley (Cardiff City), Searle (Cardiff City), Blake (Cardiff City), Bowen (Swansea City), Chapple (Swansea City), Jones (Liverpool), Neilson (Newcastle United), Owen (Wrexham), Powell (Southampton), Robinson (Charlton Athletic), Davies (Hereford United), Edwards (Bristol City), Ready (QPR).
War without a winner
THE 200pc tax slapped on European wine imports by the United States has brought into the public eye the bewildering tangle of international trade agreements or lack of them which come under the umbrella of GATT (the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade).
GATT is supposed to operate against the principle that, nationalism being what it is, individual countries will try to protect their own manufacturing and agricultural interests while seeking to inhibit everyone else's.
In the old days, Japan was regarded as one of the worst culprits, happily pumping its electronic goods into duty-free Europe, while imposing horrendous taxes on any attempt to sell European goods there.
So GATT has a purpose in trying to sweep these injustices away and achieve a fair balance, if necessary by forcing some countries to cut production.
The problem is that, with so much self-interest at stake, it is slow, complex and cumbersome.
The present round of talks, which broke down and sparked the trade war between the US and Europe yesterday, has been going on for six years.
And the eventual cause of the impasse a row over French intransigence on its oilseed production is only the tip of a terrifying iceberg of disputes which centre on such other products as steel, coal and even financial services.
No solution
But the trade war, which results from failure to agree, offers no sort of solution at all.
At a time when the world is struggling to get out of recession, it is just about the worst thing that could happen.
As tit-for-tat measures impose new, higher taxes on imports, the only result can be a general cutback in consumption.
There will be no winners in this war.
And once again, it brings into focus the curious contradiction of Europe where, when it comes to the final analysis, countries like France, which spend so much time preaching about European unity, find themselves unable to act in the mutual interest of the community.
No wonder the chief European negotiator, Ray McSharry, felt compelled to quit last night, blaming EC President and French fundamentalist Jaques Delors for the stubborness which finally brought the Americans to the end of their tether.
Mr McSharry is supposed to have suggested that jubilant M Delors might care to take charge of the negotiations himself, since he had caused the mess in the first place.
No thank you.
The last thing GATT needs is a stronger dose of insanity.
WIDNES star Jonathan Davies will again skipper Wales for the Rugby League clash with England at Vetch Field, Swansea, on November 27.
The Anglo-Welsh encounter will be the first for more than eight years.
England won the last 28-9 at Ebbw Vale.
Squad: R Ackerman (Salford), A Bateman (Warrington), D Bishop (London Crusaders), G Cordle (Bradford Northern), J Davies (Widnes, capt), J Devereux (Widnes), K Ellis (Warrington), P Ford (Salford), J Griffiths (St Helens), A Hadley (Widnes), M Jones (Hull), P Kennett (Swinton), I Marlow (Hull), M Moran (Leigh), P Moriarty (Widnes), G Pearce (Ryedale-York), R Phillips (Warrington, currently on loan to Rochdale), I Stevens (Hull), A Sullivan (St Helens), B Williams (Carlisle), D Young (Salford).
BICC helps to restore flow
BICC Components has supplied more than £250,000 of materials to Kuwait as part of the country's multi-billion pound rebuilding programme.
The Prescot-based firm supplied glands and joints to the Kuwait Oil Company for its programme to restore oil production and is confident that more orders will follow as attention switches from rebuilding the oil fields to rebuilding Kuwait's power supply network.
Oil giant loses £594m
RESTRUCTURING and redundancy costs of £1.02bn pushed troubled oil giant BP deep into a loss of £594m for the nine months to end-September, the company said yesterday.
The exceptional costs incurred during the three months to June comprised £472m to cover 11,500 redundancies and £544m against writing down the value of assets.
Shareholders will receive a reduced third quarter dividend of 2.1p against 4.2p previously.
Agency's new driving force
A CHESHIRE-based advertising agency has landed a new campaign, marketing Lada cars.
Quadrant Advertising and Marketing of Warrington, said to be the North West's largest independent advertising agency, has launched the new campaign which includes space in the national press and dealer advertisements in the local press.
The new campaign will appear in over 200 titles across the UK and follows another campaign earlier this year when Quadrant launched Lada's new Samara range.
Sun shines on Murdoch
MEDIA mogul Rupert Murdoch's five UK newspapers have helped his News Corporation group more than double profits.
The Times, The Sun, Today, The Sunday Times and the News of the World increased profits by 35pc in the three months to September 30, Australia-based News Corp revealed yesterday.
News Corp was further boosted by satellite television company BSkyB, which climbed out of the red during the three months.
When it comes to quality builder is a real winner
BUILDER Les Jones has won so many awards for the quality of his work that he could justify a trophy room in his show house.
This year, he's the NHBC small site winner for Wales.
Later this month he'll attend a function in London to learn whether he's won the supreme award for Britain from 20,000 builders.
If he has done, it will be no surprise because Les was the winner in 1991.
It's the third time he's been a UK finalist.
On a wall in the showhouse at Les's flagship Bryn Colwyn estate at Penmaen Head, Colwyn Bay, are the awards which he has been so proud to win over the years.
What could give a prospective house buyer more confidence?
He's won British Housebuilder of the Year awards in such categories as ‘Condition of the Home on Moving Day.’
Les likes to be a perfectionist and when he shows you around his houses he enjoys pointing out those finer details which he believes give his homes that little extra which means so much.
A succession of inspectors visit estates before recommending awards.
They look out for the organisation of sites, quality of substructure and superstructure, the finish, external works and quality control.
And, of course, they seek those features which make an estate stand out from the rest.
Welsh-speaking Les is a native of Waunfawr, near Caernarfon, and became a bricklayer as soon as he left school, working at sites throughout North Wales.
When he built a bungalow for himself at Kinmel Bay in 1971 it was the start of a house-building career which was to lead to the receiving of important awards at national ceremonies in top London hotels.
From 1977 he has been building luxury homes in various parts of North Wales, and in 1987 began a 16-home development at Deganwy which was to collect special awards.
In 1990 he began work at Bryn Colwyn, and despite the recession there has been no lack of buyers.
The 15 homes in the first phase are all sold and occupied and now he has turned his attention to phase two, which will comprise 14 homes.
Les's philosophy is that house building should never be undertaken in a hurry.
That's why time and attention is paid to every home, with quality the watchword.
The twenty workers who build his houses have been taken on because Les knows them personally and can vouch for their reliability.
Some builders on what began as prestigious estates in Britain had to compromise with the arrival of the recession, and alter their plans to include cheaper housing.
But not Les.
He promised luxury homes and he believes that to keep faith, that's what he must provide.
‘So far, we've been able to ride the recession,’ he says.
‘Like everybody else we're having to keep our fingers crossed.
But we are not prepared to change the quality of our estate.
We have kept to the original theme of our estate because we believe it is only being fair to those who have chosen to live here.’
It's a family business for Les.
His wife Georgina does the secretarial work and 21year-old daughter Sonia is a ‘girl Friday,’ acting as receptionist at the showhouse and each day making sure that all the completed houses are spotless.
The first 15 houses have been occupied, some by executive families, others by retired and semi-retired owners.
All savour the wonderful position and the advantage of living within a few minutes of the A55 Expressway, with fast journey times in both directions.
Of the 14 homes in Phase 2, have already been ordered.
One home split-level, for which there is already a great deal of interest, will sell at £200,000 and possibly boast the finest view in North Wales.
From a huge bay window in the lounge will be an uninterrupted, breathtaking panoramic view of the sea and coast from west to east.
Every house in phase 2 will, in fact, have a magnificent view.
It will consist of five large detached luxury houses and detached two and three bedroom bungalows, with prices between £130,000 and £200,000.
Among features of Les Jones homes which are not often found elsewhere are Jacobean bricks below the damp proof coursing, window sills and chimney stacks; walls and roof trusses of superior quality; with every single roof tile nailed at the top and clipped at the bottom, with a four inch overlap to the next tile.
Window frames carry a thirty year guarantee against rot or decay.
External woodwork, in addition to being pressure treated, is given a protective stain before being assembled.
All exterior wrought iron work is sent away to be galvanised.
House driveways are in decorative paving, there is strong and attractive boundary fencing, and there are burglar alarms and smoke detectors and a remote-controlled garage door.
Driveways have spaces for two cars, front and rear lawns are turfed and owners of Les Jones homes arrive at a house or bungalow which is attractive and complete in every way -and not surrounded by a mass of mud as on so many new housing estates.
Les is now thinking ahead to a third phase of the development.
That will involve, subject to planning permission, pulling down the old Knowles garage and building luxury apartments.
Consistency of standards has achieved for Les Jones a reputation as one of the finest builders in this country.
His awards list says it all:
1989.
A ‘Top 100’ award for the Marine Gardens development at Deganwy.
NHBC Wales winner for Marine Gardens, in the final seven for the UK award.
1991.
Winner of two certificates at the ‘British Housebuilder of the Year’ awards sponsored by Express Newspapers.
NHBC ‘Top 100’ winner for Bryn Colwyn development, Penmaen Head.
NHBC Wales winner for Bryn Colwyn.
NHBC UK small site supreme winner for Bryn Colwyn, from 20,000 builders.
Winner of two certificates at the ‘British Housebuilder of the Year’ awards sponsored by Express Newspapers.
Bryn Colwyn estate at Penmaen Head, Colwyn Bay.
The showhouse at the Bryn Colwyn estate Pictures: PHIL MICHEU
Builder Les Jones
CDs cheaper from the US
MUSIC lovers were yesterday told how to make ‘significant’ savings on compact discs by ordering them direct from the US.
The Consumers' Association magazine Which? said savings were as high as £3 per CD until recently, when the pound was worth about £1.85.
And even at yesterday's exchange rate the saving was up to £1.40.
Macari cleared
STOKE City football manager Lou Macari was yesterday cleared of illegally running a betting shop.
Magistrates at Devizes, Wilts, cleared him of acting illegally as a bookmaker at Crown Bookmakers at Ermine Street, Swindon, and acting while not a licence holder.
Macari, who denied the charges, was joint owner of the shop.
Human arm is found in garden
FORENSIC experts were yesterday examining a decomposed forearm found wrapped in bandages and dumped in a back garden.
South Wales Police were carrying out inquiries in the Uplands area of Swansea and checking with hospitals.
Reluctant hero
ROCK star Dave Stewart was yesterday declared a civic hero in the city he quit as a teenager after years of school bullying pushed him close to a nervous breakdown.
The ex-Eurythmics mastermind admitted very mixed emotions over his Honorary Fellowship of Sunderland's university.
Maternal ties
MOTHER knows best for men when it comes to knotting a tie, according to a survey published today.
Most men have maternal teaching to thank for showing them how to tie knots, said the Guild of British Tie Makers.
Shocked listeners hear bust-up with woman
RADIO DJ AXED AFTER ON-AIR BARNEY
By Vic Gibson
ONE of Liverpool's top radio DJs was axed from his show today after a live bust-up on air with a listener.
The furious row between Tony Snell and a woman who phoned from Ellesmere Port was broadcast on City FM's early morning breakfast show.
Snell hung up on the woman, but minutes later stunned listeners heard a security guard at Liverpool's Radio City station telling Snell that he had to leave the studio.
Suspended
The guard was heard to say: ‘I have been told by management that I have to remove you from the studio.’
After a few seconds silence a jingle cut in and a record was played before replacement DJ Brian Moore took over.
The row started when the woman phoned to complain about comments she believed Snell had made about Ellesmere Port.
He had actually defended the town after another caller had described it as the most polluted place in the world.
But when yesterday's caller refused to listen to Snelly's explanation he exploded and said: ‘You don't even listen to my show.
You don't know what I said, so why don't you just shut your face.’
As the woman continued to speak over him he said ‘Oh just shut up’ and hung up.
Tony McKenzie, City FM's programme controller, confirmed Snell had been suspended.
He added: ‘We don't believe Tony did what the caller accused him of.
‘We respect our listeners in Ellesmere Port.
‘But somehow she got through and Tony may have been a little bit tired.’
Snell left the building straight after being replaced.
Shipping firm to introduce a new Irish Sea service
By David Hope Business Staff
BELFAST-based Coastal Container Line, a subsidiary of Mersey Docks and Harbour Company, has expanded its Liverpool-Dublin service.
A new terminal has been built alongside the Port of Dublin to receive gas pipes which eventually will be laid on the seabed between Ireland and Scotland.
On completion of the project, the facility will be used to handle a new Liverpool-Dublin freight container service.
Cargo discharged from the vessel Ruth-W was the first handled by the new CCL terminal.
The facility expands the shipping line's operations because Coastal, bought by the MDHC in the summer of 1991, already has a Belfast terminal for its successful daily lift-on lift-off container service to Liverpool.
On completion of a crane refurbishment programme and the modification of lifting facilities, Coastal now plans to inaugurate a Dublin-Liverpool container service before the end of the year.
The service will initially run alternate days, increasing eventually to daily sailings in both directions.
The development, says Coastal, will further strengthen the position of the line on the important Irish Sea central corridor.
The Ruth-W discharged the first 2,911 tonne cargo of 330 concrete coated steel pipes in less than a day, a cargo which was the forerunner of four shipments a week up to the end of the year, a total of 150,000 tonnes.
The 24-inch diameter pipes are being transferred from British Pipe Coaters, of Leith in Scotland, for Irish utility company Bord Gais in Dublin to be used on the Irish Sea natural gas interconnector project.
From the end of March next year the pipes, stored on seven acres of land alongside the Dublin terminal, will be shipped out again to be laid on the seabed.
Tributes as ex-leaders bow out
FORMER Irish premiers Charles Haughey and Garret FitzGerald yesterday received tributes in the Dail on probably their last appearances on the parliamentary stage.
They are among five members of the 166-strong current Dail to signal their retirement ahead of the approaching election.
A temporary period of peace during an otherwise acrimonious debate on a motion of confidence in the government permitted all party leaders to join backbenchers in praising and warmly applauding the two men who dominated Ireland's political scene throughout the 1980s.
Charles Haughey
Garret FitzGerald
Sarah holds the key to fitness
WHEN she isn't flying back and forth from England to Australia, Sarah Key helps the rich and famous to get into shape.
As a top physiotherapist, she is more than used to stretching and flexing the muscles of people who have tortured their frail frame, or endured a bad tackle on the football field.
Among the 43-year-old Sydney woman's famous clients is Prince Charles, whom she treated after his much-publicised polo injury.
And what a model patient he was!
Sarah says: ‘I treated Charles with his elbow and knee injuries.
He is a marvellous patient.’
And he rewarded the physio/author by writing the foreword in one of her books.
But it seems he had already given reward enough with his charming behaviour.
She says: ‘The Prince is lovely; he's delicious…and a marvellous patient.
‘I really think he is an incredible man.
He is diligent and efficient and so self-motivated.
Niggling
‘If we were all as motivated as he is we would be a lot better off; I didn't have to ask him to do things twice.’
But it isn't just people like Prince Charles that the mother-of-three with practices in Sydney and London wants to treat.
She also aims to help Joe Public get rid of those niggling aches and pains.
Sarah says: ‘There's a very grey area in medicine where people suffer an extraordinary variety of low grade, aches and pains.
‘They are the sort of grumbling pains — unsexy disorders that we tend to put up with.
‘They are the things we can't be bothered doing anything about, but we should.’
She claims that by putting our Body In Action* we can get into shape and out of the ‘victim’ role.
‘She says: ‘We abuse our bodies and, when things go wrong, we don't understand why.
We know how cars work, but we don't appreciate how our skeletal machinery works; we just take it for granted that it does.’
Until there are problems.
You would imagine Sarah does more than enough to keep herself fit by jetting from one side of the world to the other frequently.
But she still finds time for an exercise class and yoga to keep her looking young.
She says we can thwart ageing by understanding our bodies and gentle exercising.
None of this ‘feel the burn’ malarky which she says can do more harm than good.
She adds: ‘By understanding our bodies and following a few simple rules, we can stay young and feel young — like a young sapling instead of an old, gnarled oak tree.’
It's up to him now, says Flynn
Gayle warning
Report by Mark Currie
WREXHAM manager Brian Flynn has thrown down the gauntlet to much-travelled striker Howard Gayle, who trained at the Racecourse for the first time yesterday.
The 34-year-old former Liverpool and Blackburn star has been unable to fix himself up with another club since the summer, but the Robins' boss is lining him up for a reserve game against Walsall next week.
‘He needs to get fit and to improve his sharpness but it's up to him to show that he can do a job for us,’ said Flynn.
‘His age is not a problem because I've never been afraid to take a gamble on players and he could give us another option.’
Preparations for tomorrow's Division Three match at Lincoln City have not been helped by injuries to defender Mel Pejic and striker Steve Watkin in Wednesday's 3-2 Midland Senior League win over Tranmere.
Operation
Neither player trained yesterday because of calf injuries, but South African John Paskin has recovered from knee trouble and has an outside chance of making the trip to Sincil Bank.
Teenage full back Phil Hardy looks almost certain to regain his left back spot after missing the last 11 games because of a foot operation, with utility man Wayne Phillips reverting to a more familiar midfield role.
Lincoln are in the middle of a good spell, having won five of their last six matches.
Flynn said: ‘Lincoln are a physically big side and they play to their strengths.
They are obviously brimful of confidence at the moment.’
Life-saving test for 999 service
AMBULANCE managers are rethinking the way they deal with emergency patients in the hope of saving more lives.
Mersey Regional Ambulance Service, which now also covers Cheshire, has been selected to help formulate a new nationwide blueprint for the care of patients with serious injuries.
Prior to this week, seriously injured victims of accidents were taken by ambulance to the nearest casualty department, regardless of their injuries.
From now on chiefly in parts of Cheshire patients considered to be in need of specialist care will go straight to the North West Regional Trauma Centre in Stoke on Trent.
By taking patients directly to the trauma unit, the ambulance service is hoping to save valuable time, often taken up by transferring patients from the emergency department of one hospital to other specialist hospitals.
‘This scheme is the first of its kind,’ said paramedic manager Peter Cokayne.
‘We are hoping it will save more lives.
All the expert help will be in one place.’
The new system will mainly affect patients in the Crewe, Congleton, Northwich, Winsford and Sandbach areas.
Once an ambulance crew has given initial aid to a seriously injured patient, a paramedic will consult a specialist at Stoke to see if the person should be taken there.
The trial is of national importance if it can be proved that seriously injured patients taken directly to a trauma unit have a better chance of survival, the policy is likely to be adopted in other parts of the country.
Church attacks polls on abortion
IRELAND'S Roman Catholic Church leaders yesterday pointed to what they called the flaws in the wording of the government's referenda attempts to change the law forbidding abortion in any circumstances.
The law is part of the country's constitution.
But the bishops stopped short of making a direct voting recommendation on the three polls expected to be held on November 25, the day of the general election.
One of the referenda urges that abortion should be permitted in cases where the life of a mother-to-be is considered at risk.
The other two polls seek to confirm the rights of Irish women to freedom of travel and access to information about abortion abroad.
The church's spokesman, Bishop Joseph Duffy, said: ‘We feel obliged to state that the wording proposed is basically flawed because it guarantees less than the total exclusion of deliberate abortion.’
But Bishop Duffy acknowleged that rejection of the government proposals would lead to legislation regularising the decision earlier this year of the Irish Supreme Court, which allowed a schoolgirl rape victim to have an abortion in Britain because of fears that she might commit suicide.
Brewery profits worth a cheer
BURTONWOOD Breweries yesterday announced a 17pc increase in interim trading profits, at £2.01m from £1.7m.
The brewery, which celebrated its 125th anniversary this year, notched up turnover of £25.7m in the six months to September, £3m more than in the same period last year.
Profits before tax and asset disposals showed an increase of 26pc from £1.2m to £1.6m but the pre-tax figure dipped 34pc to £2.02m from £3.05m caused by a marked reduction in asset disposals.
The board has recommended a dividend of 0.7p per share, broadly in line with last year.
Chairman Graeme Dutton Forshaw said properties leased from Allied Breweries at the beginning of the year helped towards an increase in turnover and volume of about 14pc but he warned: ‘Underlying trading conditions remain difficult and encouraging trends noted in earlier months look unlikely to be repeated in the rest of the year.’
Burtonwood has said it will continue its policy of increasing the size of its estate by the purchase or lease of suitable properties and will take advantage as and when opportunities arise.
Earnings per share fell from 12.1p to 7.2p, a decrease of 40pc.
When asset sales are excluded, earnings per share rose from 3.4p to 5p, a 47pc increase.
Graeme Dutton Forshaw
Scots police unite for pay fight
ALL ranks of Scotland's 14,000 police officers have joined forces to prepare to fight any future changes to their pay structure.
The Scottish forces fear payment-by-results, regional pay scales and sweeping changes in the rank structure will be introduced after the Sheehy inquiry, now going on into police pay, allowances, rank structure and conditions of service.
The Scottish Police Federation, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland presented a united front yesterday in submissions to the inquiry.
A survey of 2,000 federation members had shown that 48pc believed police should have the right to take industrial action.
TUC fury at move to scrap low pay laws
By Alan Jones Daily Post Correspondent
THE Government was last night accused of turning Britain into the ‘Taiwan of Europe’ by its decision to scrap legal protection for the low paid.
The move to abolish Wages Councils, set up in 1909 by Winston Churchill, was included in a fresh round of anti-union legislation.
It provoked a storm of protest from politicians, unions and low pay campaigners and prompted the threat of legal action from the TUC.
TUC general secretary Norman Willis accused the Government of ‘putting the boot’ into the country's poorest-paid workers.
Under the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill, members of the public will be able to challenge unlawful strikes; workers will have to give regular written consent to have union subs deducted from salaries and industrial action will have to be subject to a full postal ballot.
The abolition of Wages Councils, which set minimum pay rates for two and a half million low-paid workers, mainly women, was the most controversial measure.
Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard said the councils had no role to play in the 1990s and the time had come to abolish them.
The TUC was last night seeking legal advice and threatened to take the Government to court for alleged breach of European law, claiming that scrapping the councils discriminated against women.
Mr Willis said people would be astonished that the Government was pressing ahead with a Bill which no one, not even employers, wanted.
‘The Prime Minister, who spoke of a nation at ease with itself, is now putting his boot into a very large section of that nation.’
Chris Pond, director of the Low Pay Unit, said: ‘Scrapping the councils will turn Britian into the Taiwan of Europe and is a charter for cowboy firms.
‘They will lead to a drop in wages for many of the two-and-a-half million people, four-fifths of whom are women.’
Mrs Shephard said the councils were an example of ‘damaging, outdated practices’, claiming that 80pc of people in Wages Council industries lived in households with at least one other source of income.
‘Where companies pay above the pay levels laid down by councils, they are irrelevant.
Where the councils force companies to pay more than they can afford, they destroy jobs.’
The Institute of Management criticised the Government over the ‘insensitive timing’ of the Bill but the Institute of Directors welcomed the moves, including the scrapping of Wages Councils.
The new Bill, which goes before Parliament on November 16, says unions will also have to give written notice to employers of every worker who will be called on to take industrial action.
The 42-clause Bill gives pregnant workers the right to a minimum of 14 weeks' maternity leave.
Norman Willis
Tragedy as Lee, 8, is hit by car
MUM'S AGONY OVER BIKE BOY
By Gwyn Griffiths
THE grieving mother of a schoolboy killed in an horrific road accident today spoke of how her safety-conscious son refused to cross the road without help.
Valerie Moore is unable to understand how her eight-year-old son Lee strayed more than a mile from her home in Princes Road, Ellesmere Port, where he met his death on his brother's bike.
Lee and his pal were riding their bikes along busy Rivacre Road, in fading light on Tuesday afternoon, when the youngster strayed into the path of a Ford Sierra car.
Lee died on the way to the Countess of Chester Hospital.
His mother Valerie said: ‘Lee was very sensible and road conscious.
He wouldn't go across the main road outside the house unless someone took him.
And he would sit and wait on the other side for someone to come and pick him up when he was coming home.’
Prayers were being said today at William Stockton Primary School in Ellesmere Port where Lee was a well-loved pupil.
The collision was on a town centre route that is fast becoming an accident blackspot.
Lee Moore…sensible
Carina fights back from brink of death
Little Miss Courage
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
A MOTHER who tragically lost two daughters in separate accidents last night told how her third daughter has fought back from the brink of death.
Margaret Hamlet's daughter, Carina, has endured 10 years of painful operations with a cheerful smile and is preparing for surgery again at a pioneering orthopaedic hospital, near the Clwyd/Shropshire border.
About 25 years ago Margaret's two-year-old daughter, Dawn, was killed in a road accident outside the family's former home in Middlewich.
Just as the family was beginning to get over the tragedy, Dawn's older sister, Sheila, 6, vanished from home and was found the next day, drowned in a canal.
Mrs Hamlet, who now lives in Aldford Way, Winsford, began to rebuild her life and was delighted when she had a new baby daughter, Carina, from her second marriage to Robert.
But her happiness was not to last for long.
At the age of three, Carina ran in front of a car close to the family's home in Winsford, suffering near fatal injuries.
‘She suffered terrible brain, arm and leg injuries.
‘She was in a coma in North Staffordsire hospital for a week and we were told that she would not walk or talk again.
‘I couldn't believe it had happened again.’
But with the help of tapes sent by comedian Keith Harris and Shakin' Stevens, Carina, now 12, pulled out of the coma.
A month later, Carina was taken home in a wheelchair, but given no chance of walking again.
‘We couldn't believe it when she took her first step five months later,’ Mrs Hamlet said.
Carina, a pupil at Hebden School in Winsford, is now doing very well and is able to walk and talk.
This week she is at the Orthopaedic Hospital in Gobowen, near Oswestry, where she is undergoing an operation on her arm.
Staff there have been so impressed by Carina's bravery that they have decided to try and help other youngsters like her.
Four casualty team members have just run a half marathon to raise money for a revolutionary diagnostic MRI machine for the hospital.
The machine will help to examine patients without the need for X-ray.
Over £m has already been raised at the hospital and the £500 collected by staff members Cath Newell, Ellen Harrison, Cliff Kunne and Malcolm Morris will take the appeal a little bit nearer to its £1.5m target.
Courageous Carina Hamlet prepares for the latest operation in 10 years of surgery, comforted by her mother Margaret Picture: TEGWYN ROBERTS
Sugar offers 30p a share
ALAN Sugar yesterday bid £112.7m to buy back his Amstrad consumer electronics company from other shareholders after 12 years on the stock market.
Mr Sugar, 46, who owns 35.4pc of the company, is offering to buy the remaining shares at 30p each and take Amstrad back into private ownership.
He announced he was considering the move in September and yesterday confirmed the details.
He said in a letter to shareholders: ‘I believe that I know better than anyone what makes Amstrad operate and what needs to be done in order to secure its future.
‘In my opinion, attempting to replicate the past success of Amstrad by gambling on product ideas and building up large stocks in the hope of achieving ‘blockbuster’ sales would be putting shareholders' funds at risk and demoralising for me.’
Mr Sugar said: ‘You should remember that I have devoted my life and energies to Amstrad since the age of 17.
‘Certainly, I have benefited financially from Amstrad and could now just walk away without personal financial worries but that is not my style.
‘We can all look back and remember how Amstrad took hi-fi to the mass market, how it removed the mystique from the computer and exploded the market.’
The deal will be funded by a £19.5m loan from Mr Sugar to his own company Amshold, a £50m loan from Amstrad to Amshold and a £43.2m advance from Lloyds Bank.
The shares opened at 28p yesterday, in sharp contrast to a high of 233p in August 1988.
Amstrad recently announced losses of £71m for the year to June.
Maxwell suicide denied
ROBERT Maxwell's widow Betty last night emphatically ruled out a pathologist's theory that her husband had jumped from his yacht off Grand Canary.
Dr Iain West, a Home Office pathologist who carried out a post-mortem on the discredited media tycoon, was yesterday quoted in The Daily Mirror, which Maxwell owned, as saying that Maxwell had almost certainly committed suicide.
‘No way, no way,’ said Mrs Maxwell.
Speaking on Sky News on the anniversary of her husband's death, Mrs Maxwell, 71, also denied that she was living in luxury while victims of Maxwell's pensions' funds plundering faced penury.
She added: ‘My heart absolutely bleeds for those people of my age who have been taken in that collapse and are now suffering hardship.
Personally, I can do nothing because I have no money myself at all.’
In September, one MP investigating Maxwell's pillaging of his employees' pension funds claimed that Mrs Maxwell controlled trusts in the tax haven of Liechtenstein, where some of the missing millions are thought to be hidden.
Mrs Maxwell also denied this, saying: ‘If they want to keep on looking for pots of gold, an Eldorado in Liechtenstein, they are welcome.
I can't help them.’
Robert Maxwell
Pet dog saves owner from knife attack
A FAITHFUL dog foiled a knife attack when it bit a man on the arm as he threatened its young owner.
The 14-year-old boy was walking the alsatian along a path between Park Avenue and Penparcau, Aberystwyth, Powys, when the attacker, who was aged about 20, approached him and asked for money.
When the teenager refused, the man pulled out a knife and brandished it at the youngster.
As he waved the weapon the alsatian leapt at the man and bit his hand.
He fled in the direction of Aberystwyth Rugby Club.
The attacker is described as 5ft 9ins tall, with short dark hair.
He was unshaven and wearing a checked padded jacket.
Changes will not mean weakness, he tells world
CLINTON SEEKS TO REASSURE ALLIES
By Echo reporter
PRESIDENT-ELECT Bill Clinton today reassured the world and the financial markets that his programme of change would not mean weakness or instability in US foreign and economic policy.
Declaring America ‘has only one president at a time,’ Clinton also said US foreign policy would remain constant and in the hands of President George Bush during the transition at the White House.
Roller-coaster
‘The greatest mistake any adversary could make would be to doubt America's resolve during this period of transition,’ Clinton said in a statement outside the Arkansas governor's mansion in Little Rock, where he has lived for 12 of the last 14 years.
He told US financial markets that have been on a roller-coaster in anticipation of his victory that although he had campaigned on a message of economic growth he understood the importance of stability.
‘Today I say to our financial and business leaders that although change is on the horizon, we understand the need to pursue stability even as we pursue new growth.
The changes I seek will strengthen America's market systems, not weaken them,’ Clinton said.
Mr Clinton's emphasis on foreign policy in his first formal post-election statement was unexpected, given his campaign's drumbeat on the weak US economy, the rising cost of health care and other domestic problems.
No decision
But in his first televised interview since becoming president-elect, Clinton said he would focus ‘like a laser beam’ on the US economy as he prepares to take over the White House on January 20.
‘I haven't made a decision about what Cabinet members to name,’ he told the ABC network.
Bill Clinton…eases jitters
Move to save 72 council jobs fails
A BID to delay 72 job losses in Gwynedd County Council's road workforce failed yesterday.
Instead, the county council, at a special meeting at Caernarfon, allocated £m from its reserves to meet the cost of redundancy payments.
Last night, Tom Jones, Gwynedd district secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union, said: ‘We are sad that the redundancies are to take place, but hope that the 190 jobs left in Gwynedd Civil Engineering will now be protected.’
Labour group leader Coun Walter Jones, proposing a motion signed by 12 members, urging the council to ‘investigate all alternatives’ before axing jobs, pleaded with fellow-councillors not to throw 72 families on the dole just before Christmas.
But his bid was defeated by 27 votes to 17.
It means that Gwynedd Civil Engineering the council's direct labour force organisation, faced with a trading loss of £180,000 will shed 60 manual and 12 staff jobs at the end of this month.
County treasurer Tim Heald warned that every week's delay in reaching a decision cost the council £18,000.
Councillors heard that unless Gwynedd Civil Engineering slimmed its workforce to become profitable, there was a danger that the district auditor would close it.
Labour councillor Jill Knight, of Bangor, said the board of Gwynedd Civil Engineering had no choice.
If the whole workforce was forced to disband, the council would face a redundance bill of around £2.5m.
Coun John Rowlands, chairman of Gwynedd Civil Engineering, said talks were taking place with the unions to try to avoid compulsory redundancies.
Eye surgeon's bright outlook on treatment
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
ONE of the world's top eye cancer specialists is moving to the North West.
Opthalmologist Bertil Damato has developed techniques which often enable him to save the eyes of patients who, in the past, may have lost their sight.
He has been working at the Western Infirmary in Glasgow since 1980, but has now decided to move to the Royal Liverpool University Hospital in the new year.
The main reason for his move, he said, is the prospect of easy access to the showpiece medical cyclotron unit at the Centre for Oncology at Clatterbridge Hospital in Wirral.
This is the only machine in Britain offering treatment of eye tumours with a high-precision proton beam, which sterilises the tumours to prevent them increasing and multiplying.
He is also looking forward to working within the progressive and well-equipped eye department at the university hospital.
Mr Damato explained: ‘I specialise in the treatment of tumours of the eye, which nine times out of ten are melanomas.
‘These are malignant tumours which are very rare only about seven per million per year of the population have them.
That is equal to an occurrence of about one a day in the UK.
‘For many years, the standard treatment has been to remove the eye.
My job is to try and destroy the tumour without removing the eye, saving the sight and the quality of life of the patient.
‘There are several ways of treating eye melanomas and one of them is with proton beam therapy using a cyclotron.
‘There are only a handful of these machines around the world, and the only one available for eye tumours in Britain is at Clatterbridge.
‘It started to be used for this purpose two years ago.
I have sent many patients there and they have been delighted with the treatment and the care they have received on Merseyside.
‘For many tumours of the eye, proton beam therapy is the best hope of preserving useful vision.’
He also performs sophisticated ‘trap door’ microsurgery.
Only a handful of surgeons are able to carry out this procedure, but Mr Damato has done 300 such operations probably the largest total worldwide.
Bertil Damato
Two quizzed on riddle of Rachel
By Caroline Storah
TWO MEN have been arrested by police investigating the ecstasy riddle of Cadbury's Flake girl Rachel Brown.
The men, aged 24 and 29 from Wavertree, were interviewed in connection with allegedly supplying the drug to the Liverpool model and released on police bail pending further inquires.
Detectives have still not been able to interview the 25-year-old former Vogue girl who is described as stable in a psychiatric unit at Liverpool's Broadgreen Hospital.
They have appealed for people who were with her on the night of October 22 to contact them.
And they revealed a taxi driver may hold vital evidence about events that night.
Rachel was taken to her home in Mossley Hill by friends after saying she felt ill at a 21st birthday party in Wavertree.
She walked out barefoot and turned up at her grandparents' home in Speke with a sleeping bag wrapped around her.
Her condition deteriorated and she was admitted to Broadgreen.
Rachel Brown…stable
Law & disorder American-style
IF you want to know the time, ask a policeman.
The song may remain the same, but the advice has well passed its sell-by date.
Today we know for better or for worse that cops, like doctors and priests, are merely human.
And sometimes alarmingly sub-human.
Such a character is Officer Pete Davis (Ray Liotta): outwardly charming, inwardly evil, he hides his psychopathic tendencies behind a badge of office.
In America of course the privilege runs to being able to shoot on sight.
It's a privilege that can be abused, and Davis is your man.
Exciting
Yet even in the screwed-up mayhem that passes for Yankie suburbia, Michael and Karen Carr (Kurt Russell and Madeleine Stowe) have been raised to trust such people.
Without question.
They do so at their peril, which is the first major tenet of this exciting thriller, which resurrects some favourite old ploys not least the shower curtain, the body in a cupboard, and the inability to escape.
The latter is readily explained.
For when the Carrs have their home broken in to, it's Officer Davis who supervises the installation of a high-tech security system that would suit the Clintons when they get around to revamping the White House.
In all this, Liotta, who came to prominence in Field of Dreams and GoodFellas, plays the charming and concerned ‘instant’ buddy.
He ingratiates himself to the hapless couple, putting them completely at ease.
Which brings us to the film's second major warning: Be careful how you chose your friends.
It's enough to give every member of the audience paranoia.
And what's more, that's just the sort of communicative fear which turns a piece of fiction into a potential slice of reality.
But director Jonathan Kaplan isn't through yet.
Slightly less obvious but essential to the winding up of the nerve endings is Michael Carr's neglect of his wife.
Not a full-time neglect, but one which sets her as a decoration on the perimeter of his life as a busy executive setting up a new venture.
Our sinister cop is able to exploit that weakness by offering a sympathetic ear.
From then on the mood is as fine a crescendo of obsessive behaviour as you're likely to get this side of hell.
The chemistry between Russell and Stowe sparky, but mostly good-humoured is off-set against the cloying danger presented by Liotta's character.
He moves in with the cunningness and surety of a wild cat which so far has only played with its victims.
Now it's time for the kill, and the final twists are as clever as they are gripping.
New engine plant puts Vauxhall in the Euro driving seat
By Gwyn Griffiths
THE assembly lines of Merseyside's newest car plant are up and running, five days before schedule.
And the massive investment by car giant General Motors in the new V6 engine plant at the Vauxhall works in Ellesmere Port is a vindication, say bosses, of the efforts of a dedicated workforce.
Buoyant GM bosses have revealed that increased productivity the result of massive transformations in working practices were the sole reason why the Ellesmere Port plant beat off the competition from 13 other GM sites across Europe to win the prestigious £190m engine facility.
Werner Hackl, the Austrian hotshot who has taken charge of the new plant, said: ‘Here at Ellesmere Port the management has adopted new techniques of working and involved the employees in that process.
And not surprisingly the workforce have adapted and increased its productivity.’
Five years ago Vauxhall was losing money hand over fist and relations between management and workers was at a low ebb.
Then came the changes including the innovative reorganisation of production into small teams on the shop floor.
Since then, with the help of a strong export base Vauxhall's complex at Ellesmere Port hasn't looked back.
The Astra range has proved to be a tremendous success, with the launch of the new model after a £200m investment a year ago.
The ECOTEC-V6 engine will be churned out at the rate of 135,000 a year when the plant is on full stream.
It will guarantee employment levels for the 4,500 workforce at Ellesmere Port, despite the worsening recession that is blighting the motor industry.
Sales which should contribute £100m to the UK's balance of trade every year should start next Spring.
Yesterday, workers and bosses celebrated the dawn of a bright new era at an official opening that drew hundreds of VIP guests and GM bosses from Europe and the United States.
Unions at the car factory say they are delighted that bosses have rewarded workers for their efforts with major investment.
AEU convenor Brian Amer said: ‘It's going to secure the jobs in the plant.’
Bryan Williams cleared
OWING to an error in a report supplied by a news agency in last night's Echo, it was wrongly stated that Mr Bryan Williams, of Wye Street, Walton, Liverpool, had been found guilty of conspiracy to rob and sentenced to four years in jail.
In fact, a not guilty verdict was recorded on the judge's direction at Liverpool Crown Court after Mr Williams, 40, denied the offence.
He was discharged.
He had originally been accused of the offence along with five other men, who were jailed on Tuesday for terms ranging from four years to six years.
We apologise to Mr Williams and his family for any embarrassment caused by the error.
Mothers make the sparks fly at Marks
MARKS & Spencer has been criticised by mothers who claim that it is Britain's least parent-friendly stores group.
The mothers voted the top-rated retailer bottom in a poll to find public places which had the best mother-and-toddler facilities.
A spokeswoman for Marks & Spencer said: ‘We are concerned to learn of the poor perception people have of us but we are carrying out a number of ongoing initiatives to improve the situation.’
Kwik Saves were judged the worst supermarkets and Wimpys the worst restaurants.
Top of the mothers' list were Sainsbury's, the Early Learning Centre and John Lewis stores.
McDonald's was the most parent-friendly restaurant and Trust House Forte the best hotel chain.
The top leisure centre was the Watford Springs in Hertfordshire, the best shopping centre the MetroCentre in Gateshead.
Gatwick was voted best airport and British Airways top airline.
The best ferry award was shared by P&O European Ferries and the Sealink Stena Line.
Write-offs blow for societies
A MASSIVE 130pc jump in the level of bad debt write-offs by the Leeds Permanent building society sent a shudder through the industry yesterday.
The Leeds, first of the so-called big five building societies to report full-year results, was forced to push up provisions sharply in the face of recession.
Pre-tax profits fell 20pc to £152.7m from £190.2m, a strong result considering that provisions soared to £105m from £44m last year.
Chief executive Mike Blackburn said he was encouraged that the Leeds emerged from ‘such an appallingly difficult market in such good shape’.
But the result confirmed that building society provisions will rocket this year to cover bad and doubtful home loans.
Scratching
Mr Blackburn said the City would be ‘scratching around’ to find profit increases in the industry this year, although falling profits did not suggest societies were financially unsound.
‘You could say they have suffered a technical knee in the groin,’ Mr Blackburn told a news conference in London.
The level of provisions could begin to drop next year as fewer families fall behind in their home loan payments.
The Leeds said the number of borrowers 2-3 months behind with their mortgages fell 22pc on the previous year, roughly in line with national statistics.
Long-term arrears continued to rise as societies tried to keep families in their homes.
Repair aid hope for ‘death trap’ bridge
THE EC is today expected to announce the release of funds to repair a North Wales road bridge branded a potential death trap for children.
The ancient sandstone bridge at Bangor-on-Dee carries one-way traffic from Wrexham over the river and into the village but it has weathered badly in recent years possibly because of attack by acid rain.
Now Wrexham Maelor Coun Harold Taylor says Clwyd county highways department must repair the bridge before someone falls into the river and is swept away.
He said: ‘It is in a shocking condition.
The stonework of the parapet walls has deteriorated and you can see the river through the joints.
‘I cross that bridge quite often and I am surprised the county council has let it go so far.
Children play on the bridge and could easily fall into the water.’
A county council spokeswoman said an announcement on Euro funding for the rebuilding and refurbishment of ancient monuments, including Bangor-on-Dee bridge, was expected today.
A bridge too far…
Coun Harold Taylor shows the lethal cracks on the Bangor-on-Dee bridge
Trainees of distinction!
STAFF at the Liverpool offices of Charthouse Tilney have gained distinctions in the recent national Securities Institute exams.
The investment management division of the firm took two out of the five distinctions among 618 candidates in the UK.
Katy Miles and Duncan Brooks, both trainee investment managers with the firm, are now well on their way to becoming qualified investment managers.
Both just have one more examination to pass before gaining their Securities Institure Diploma.
On their way Katy and Duncan
20,000 Civil Service jobs ‘at risk’
THE jobs of between 10,000 and 20,000 civil servants are at risk in Wales, union leaders claimed yesterday.
The threat comes from plans to contract out services to the private sector.
A question mark already hangs over the future of 3,000 staff at the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency in Swansea, whose work could go to firms in England.
And the Civil and Public Services Association claims this is only the tip of the iceberg.
General secretary Barry Reamsbottom urged Tory backbenchers to rally to protect 130,000 government staff jobs nationwide.
‘It is not a case of causing alarm, this is real,’ he told a Cardiff news conference.
The CPSA issued a ‘hit list’ of services earmarked for contracting out including 3,000 DVLA jobs, 1,150 at Companies House, Cardiff and 275 Welsh Office posts.
Switch to new job for Ann Clwyd
By David Rose Political Editor
JOHN SMITH surprised Wales last night by moving Ann Clywd from her job as Shadow Welsh Secretary.
She was replaced by Caerphilly MP Ron Davies only a day after he filled the empty seat in Labour's top team following Bryan Gould's walk out.
Mrs Clwyd, MP for Cynon Valley, was moved sideways to become Labour's shadow to National Heritage Secretary Peter Bottomley.
Mrs Clwyd was herself surprised by her new job.
She told Mr Smith yesterday that she wanted to stay as Shadow Welsh Secretary.
The reshuffle leaves Labour's Welsh team without a Welsh speaker, as Welsh Secretary David Hunt is about to publish his Bill to strengthen the Welsh language.
Mrs Clwyd gave up her old job of Overseas Aid spokesman to take on the job after Alyn and Deeside Barry Jones lost his Shadow Cabinet seat after the general election.
But only a week ago she clashed with Mr Smith after he snubbed her request to wind up the Commons debate on the pit closures.
Labour fielded its energy spokesman, Martin O'Neill, though Mr Hunt closed the debate for the Government.
Mr Davies, 46, was Labour's shadow agriculture minister.
His job goes to Scots MP Gavin Strang.
Customer care the theme of tourist training course
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
BUSINESSPEOPLE in Clwyd are being invited to send their staff on a one-day customer care training course developed by the Canadian tourist industry.
The Welcome Host package being promoted by the Wales Tourist Board stresses that customer care is an important element for any organisation or firm, from leisure centres to High Street shops and from hotels to factories.
Staff are taught how to deal with the public both on the phone and in person.
The aim is to enable organisations to present a friendly face to visitors.
The package is modelled on a successful Canadian Superhost hospitality programme developed by that country's tourism ministry under which more than 200,000 people have so far been trained.
Service
The scheme will be launched at Wrexham Guildhall on November 23 and borough council tourism staff, who have been on the course, are enthusiastic.
Dawn Roberts, tourism officer, said: ‘It applies to all businesses throughout the borough, not just those in tourism, but all those who wish to maintain a good level of service to the customer.
‘At the end of the day, if a shop, garage or hotel does not look after its customers, they might not complain, but they may not come back.’
The training courses £35 per person will be run by Newtech at Croesnewydd on Wrexham technology park.
Tips gleaned by local tourism staff seem to be paying dividends.
The number of tourists at the town's new tourist information centre has doubled to 26,000 this year, and the policy of always trying to answer a visitor's question has undoubtedly played a part in that success.
Details of the Welcome Host programme are available from Ms Roberts at the Guildhall.
Tourism attraction operators in Cheshire will be told of the latest developments in home and overseas marketing at a forum this month.
Organised by the County Council's Tourism and Marketing Unit, it takes place at Alvaston Hall near Nantwich on November 13 and will offer expert advice to representatives of local attractions and hotel and conference centres.
Advice
Public and private sector organisations aiming to encourage visitors to Cheshire will also attend the event which involves specialist workshops, private interviews with representatives as well as general advice on how to raise finance through to sources of grant aid and legal matters.
The 1992 Cheshire Tourism Awards will also be presented during the event.
New probe on fireworks injuries to children
THE Government is to carry out a study into the number of children injured in fireworks accidents.
It hopes this will give it a more accurate picture of the actual casualty rate.
The Department of Trade and Industry, which is responsible for firework safety, said yesterday that the decision to examine how casualty figures were collated had come as a result of a meeting with local authorities.
The DTI has been criticised for underestimating the number of children injured each year by fireworks.
Earlier this week, a report by local authority trading standards officers estimated that as many as 80,000 children had been hurt in 1990.
The DTI put the figure at only 805.
The trading standards officers claimed that the DTI had failed to obtain a true picture because they had counted only children who had required hospital treatment.
Yesterday, the National Campaign for Firework Reform urged the DTI to ‘get its act together’.
The organisation's director, Noel Tobin, said the DTI should also count children whose injuries were treated by parents, GPs, first-aiders and pharmacists.
A DTI spokeswoman said the purpose of the study was to examine why there was such a disparity between Government and local authority figures.
‘We'll be looking at a particular area to see how we can try and reconcile these two sets of figures,’ the spokeswoman added.
Top salaries shocker
A QUARTER of top managers received pay rises of 21pc or more over the past year, according to a survey out yesterday.
And one in ten were awarded bonuses of 29pc or more of basic salary.
The survey by Hay Management Consultants found the rate of pay increase was slowing down but at an average of 7% rises were still comfortably above inflation.
Management was under pressure to set an example on pay restraint and increases were now being linked more closely to performance, Hay said.
Nearly 30pc of directors who received bonuses in 1991 missed out this time round.
Some 16pc received no salary increase.
Finance directors did best, with information technology, marketing and legal directors also receiving more than their colleagues.
Directors of subsidiaries of foreign companies received bigger salaries than directors of UK-owned companies.
Fury over post for minister's secretary
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
FURIOUS MPs protested yesterday at the appointment of a Welsh Office minister's secretary to a £5,000-a-year health job.
Twenty one Welsh MPs tabled a Commons motion claiming the appointment of Carolyn Jones ‘brought further disgrace on to the use and abuse of patronage powers by the Secretary of State’.
The two-year job as a member of South Glamorgan Health Authority is worth £5,000 a year, for two days' work a month.
Mrs Jones acts as a secretary to Welsh Health Minister Gwilym Jones in his Cardiff North constituency.
She is the wife of the minister's agent in April's General Election, David Charles Jones.
The new row follows uproar over Janet Sainsbury's appointment at £11,720 a year for two and a half days a week, as chairman of South Glamorgan Family Health Authority.
She is the wife of Jeff Sainsbury, Tory leader on Cardiff City Council.
Former Tory MP Ian Grist, who lost his Cardiff Central seat to Labour in April, was later made the £19,000-a-year chairman of the South Glamorgan Health Authority.
The Commons motion states that Mr Sainsbury and David Charles Jones are senior partners in the same Cardiff accounting practice and both are members of the same Masonic lodge of which the minister is Chief Steward.
It goes on: ‘This is one party political appointment too far and has brought further disgrace on to the use and abuse of patronage powers by the Secretary of State.’
It claims: ‘The South Glamorgan Health Authority will be unable to function with the proper degree of independence required if it has a spy in the camp in the personage of the minister's secretary.’
Wrexham Labour MP Dr John Marek, who signed the motion, said: ‘Party appointments bring quangos and other bodies into disrepute, which the minister has done in this case.’
Caernarfon MP and Plaid Cymru president Dafydd Wigley added: ‘Ministers have to be particularly careful with their use of patronage.’
Among MPs signing the motion were: for Labour Dr Marek, Wrexham; Alyn and Deeside MP Barry Jones; Martyn Jones, Clwyd South West; and former Labour leader Neil Kinnock, Islwyn; and for Plaid Cymru, Mr Wigley, Caernarfon; Elfyn Llwyd, Meirionydd Nant Conwy; Cynog Dafis, Ceredigion and Ieuan Wyn Jones, Ynys Mn.
The Welsh Office said last night that the minister would make no comment.
‘All appointments like this are made on the basis of aptitude and merit,’ a spokesman said.
Lee jnr's career gets a kick-start
BRANDON LEE is turning out to be a ‘chop’ off the old block.
The son of legendary martial arts star Bruce, Brandon gets ample opportunity to show off his inherited skills in Rapid Fire, which opens on November 20.
When Bruce Lee died, Brandon left Hong Kong for Los Angeles with his mother, Linda, and sister Shannon, before making his debut in the TV film Kung Fu.
The moguls are coming up with a new gimmick to get audiences to see movies they have ALREADY seen.
It's down to what they call ‘the director's cut’.
Latest is Blade Runner, a classic and dark vision of the future, starring Harrison Ford, and made by Ridley Scott 10 years ago.
But in the ‘new’ version, Blade Runner The Director's Cut, due out at the end of the month, Scott opts for a different and even darker conclusion.
We're doing vine
IF there is anyone out there who still thinks drinking wine is snobby, you're way out of touch.
We Brits now drink twice as much wine as we did ten years ago the equivalent of half a bottle of wine a week for every man and woman in the country.
In fact, as other luxury items fall by the wayside as the recession rumbles on and on, wine sales have never been better.
In 1980, the UK bought 252 million litres of wine.
Last year the figure was 558 million litres.
More than 60% of adults drink wine on a regular basis.
The 1980s was also a golden age for the quality of wine.
Strangely enough, it was the trade's New World upstarts, especially the Californians and Australians, who led the way spending millions to pioneer the new technology which has changed the face of wine beyond recognition.
Only when their blend of quality and value swept the markets did European manufacturers the godfathers of viticulture step into line.
According to new statistics, most of us buy the bulk of our wine from supermarkets and are keen on own brands.
However, while the supermarkets first appeared to threaten traditional wine shops, the merchants have themselves adapted and thrived.
Oddbins in particular have flourished with their stores reminiscent of dusty Mediterranean cellars.
Others have resorted to cynicism.
Threshers have different names for their off-licences.
Some are called Wine Shops, others Drink Stores apparently depending upon the neighbourhood.
Nevertheless, the booming market has meant plenty of scope for competition, which is healthy for the customer.
The range of wines available for under £3 is vast, and by no means is it all rough plonk.
Merchants believe there is a psychological barrier at £3, and although the wild swing in European exchange rates has pushed many French and German wines out of this bracket, most New World economies are suffering as much as if not more than ours, leading to a continued supply of cheap, good quality wine.
Despite this, we still tend to cling to the traditional.
Almost half the wine we drink is French, and claret is the most popular of the red wines on offer.
The term claret describes all wines from the Bordeaux area and dates back to our earliest encounters with wine.
In fact, during the Hundred Years War (1337 to 1453), the people of Bordeaux took the English side, and many of the vineyards were destroyed in revenge.
It was not until the end of the 18th century that the first bottle of claret as we now know it was put down for ageing at the famous Chateau Lafite in 1797.
Then came the French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars, and it was not until the famous wine classification of 1855 that the wines of Bordeaux were established as the some of the greatest of all wines in the world many believe the greatest.
The red wines of this region are practically built for winter; its deep purple colour and woody aroma make for a warming wine.
Served at room temperature they are excellent with red meats and cheese, particularly when drunk inside a warm room, while looking out as wind and rain batter at the window.
Read next week's Cheers for a chance to win a bottle of claret and the daddy of all wine diaries the 1993 edition of the Grants of St James' Wine Diary.
US and Europe set for trade war
THE United States, moving a step closer to a transatlantic trade war, plans to announce punitive taxes on European imports as early as today.
A top European Community official said earlier that Washington would kill off six years of talks aimed at freeing world trade and boosting the global economy if it went ahead with retaliatory sanctions over EC oilseed subsidies.
The New York Times said US Trade Representative Carla Hills would announce taxes of 100% or more on up to £240m worth of luxury European exports.
Wines
These would apply mainly to French white wines, following the breakdown on Tuesday night of farm subsidy talks.
Today's news will come as a blow for British Agriculture minister John Gummer, who is just back from the US where he had been fighting to prevent the breakdown of the talks.
He described the prospect of punitive tariffs as sad.
In Geneva, Tran van Thinh EC ambassador to Gatt, said any American sanctions would wreck the Uruguay Round of talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Thinh gave his warning after US officials asked the Geneva-based council of Gatt to withdraw concessions, effectively imposing sanctions, on up to £660m of European farm goods.
Crack down on Dee cockling gangs hailed a success
By Peter Saunders Daily Post Staff
A JOINT operation by Wirral Council and Merseyside Police appears to be having an impact on cockling problems in the Dee Estuary.
As police and rangers made further spot checks at Wirral coastal slipways yesterday, there were signs that the clampdown has reduced the number of vehicles on the shore.
Cockling gangs have been turned away when they arrive without council permits to take vehicles on the shore, which is owned by the local authority.
The campaign started a fortnight ago in response to residents' complaints of nuisances caused by large scale cockling operations.
The complaints included excessive speed and noise of all-terrain vehicles, disturbance to the estuary's birdlife and the dumping of rotting debris attracting rats.
Wirral Ranger Services principal officer Jim Lester said: ‘The number of cocklers in the estuary is much lower than it has been, partly due to the cockle beds being reduced.
‘But I do think the checking of permits has also had an impact on the numbers and we are grateful for the co-operation of the police.
‘This exercise has allowed the bona fide cocklers to work but hopefully it has curbed those less caring about the estuary.
‘We will review the situation and submit a report to the next meeting of the council's leisure services committee.
‘We feel the operation has been reasonably successful but the approval of by-laws to control the type, use and number of vehicles on the foreshore must be a long-term priority.
‘And in the medium-term we must see how we can monitor vehicle permits on a more regular basis.’
The Home Office has previously turned down Wirral Council's bid for foreshore by-laws but the borough solicitor's department is now submitting revised proposals.
Buddy comes to the Empire
Peggy Sue
HOLLYDAYS are here again.
Buddy is in town the show celebrating the short, yet prolific songwriting life of one of the most influential men in popular music Buddy Holly.
The Texas-born star, who looked more like a bank clerk than a rocker, defied all the critics who claimed he lacked an image.
Tragically his promising career was cut short when he died in a plane crash during a freak snowstorm.
But his music lives on 35 years after his first hit.
Buddy would have been 56 this year and no doubt raving on even now had it not been for that fateful February in 1959…the day the music died.
Now one of the biggest stage success stories of recent years arrives for two weeks at the Liverpool Empire from Thursday and the cast can't wait to play Peggy Sue, Oh Boy and 28 other Holly classics.
The man given the task of bringing the legend to life is Chelmsford-born Alex Bourne who is relishing this unabashed, foot-stomping, hand-clapping piece of rock and roll history.
Says 24-year-old Alex: ‘We have been having a great time in Blackpool and are all so excited about coming to Liverpool.
‘Playing my own idol is a dream come true.
I wanted this part so badly.
‘The Beatles and Buddy Holly had so much in common.
So it will be extra special seeing all the sights.
‘The Fab Four played the Empire stage so many times so that's an added nostalgia bonus for us.’
Alex believes that he is like his idol in one major way determination.
He says: ‘Buddy worked hard to be recognised.
I went for an audition and they told me to come back in six months time I was determined to get the part so I practised day and night to be him.’
It obviously paid off.
Buddy's original band The Crickets gave Alex their thumbs up during the American tour.
He says: ‘Essentially it's a play with music.
The Crickets told me that they enjoyed the show.
That was indeed an honour after all THEY played with the great man himself.
‘If people in Liverpool like it that will be the icing on the cake.’
Before Buddy beckoned, he worked on various sea cruises as well as appearing in the touring version of Showboat.
But now Alex, who is single and lives in London, is lapping up Buddymania from signing sessions outside provincial theatres to being recognised in fish and chip shops despite the fact he leaves his plain glass black spectacles in the dressing room as well as the replica Holly suits.
Worshipped
He is also fan worshipped by one woman in particular sporting a Buddy sweatshirt.
She even dances in the aisles during shows.
‘Yeah, that's my mum,’ laughs Alex.
‘She's a fanatic and she'll probably bring Dad and a whole coachload of relatives to Liverpool, too.’
‘I'm loving it just as much even down to the research.
I read up on everything I can about him.
‘It's coincidental, but I used to be in a band at school called The Frogmen now I'm in The Crickets,’ says Alex.
Star
He is also unique in the stable of up and coming actors who have portrayed the much-missed star.
‘I am proud to have been the first British actor to play the American rock hero in his own homeland.
‘But after Liverpool I'd love to step on stage in London's West End yeah, now that WILL be the day for me.’
Buddy, can you spare the time?
Alex teaches Peter Grant how to do look like Holly (or is it Eric Morecombe)
Fears over fishing ban
FISHERMEN in the Dee Estuary face danger in deep water because of a fishing grounds ban imposed by a river watchdog, two MPs warned yesterday.
New rules brought in by the National Rivers Authority outlaw many part-time fishermen and their small boats from traditional grounds between Flint and Mostyn.
The measures are designed to protect Dee salmon from poachers.
But two North Wales MPs estimate that around 150 regular fishermen could be affected by the regulations.
Delyn MP David Hanson and Alyn and Deeside MP Barry Jones have taken the issue to the Welsh Office.
They presented a protest petition with 4,000 signatures to Welsh Secretary David Hunt.
Mr Hanson said: ‘Fishermen are having to fish in dangerous waters and their catches are down.’
The NRA said full-time fishermen, cocklers and shrimpers in the Dee would not be adversely affected.
HUGE DIAMOND PART OF £60m HAUL
Stolen treasures sold for victims
By Alison Cameron Daily Post Correspondent
DIAMONDS, gems and jewellery recovered from one of the biggest robberies in history are to go under the hammer.
The unclaimed jewellery was part of the estimated £60m haul taken from the Knightsbridge Security deposit box robbery in 1987.
One of the more unusual items is a miniature gold sawn-off shotgun made into a pendant which is estimated to fetch up to £500.
Among the highlights of the sale at Christie's on December 8 and 9 are a number of unmounted diamonds.
One of the most important is a 23.11 carat yellow diamond expected to fetch up to £50,000.
The proceeds from the sale will go to the people who suffered financial loss.
Despite efforts by the police to trace the original owners, some jewellery has remained unclaimed.
Considered one of the most daring crimes of the century, the raid was masterminded by the Italian playboy Valerio Viccei.
On Sunday, July 12, 1987, the gang went to the Deposit Centre in Brompton Road, central London, and emptied the 121 boxes which contained jewellery, gold, cash and cocaine.
Viccei lay low in a safe house in Hampstead, north London, for one month before being caught by the Flying Squad.
He is now serving a 22 year sentence at Parkhurst prison on the Isle of Wight.
A diamond and a shotgun pendant shown by Christie's Jessica Thomas.
Inset, Valerio Viccei Picture: NEIL MUNNS
Police officers check security boxes after the 1987 raid
Hayton hops to leading role
WATERLOO LOOK TO DOCTOR FOR TONIC
Rugby Union by Keith Charlton
WATERLOO are hoping that Mike Hayton will provide just the right treatment when they bid to reach the last 32 of the Pilkington Cup by winning at Lichfield tomorrow.
Dr Mikehe qualified at Liverpool University steps in for regular hooker Paul Hackett who was dismissed in somewhat debatable circumstances against Richmond last Saturday and is still awaiting the date of his hearing.
But ex-Preston Grasshopper Hayton has plenty of big time experience for he formerly skippered England Colleges and has played several times in the first team.
Former finalists Waterloo-Gosforth are the only northern club with a better record of two final appearances will be hoping (and expecting) to cash in on their league form to edge nearer a little more cup glory.
After two successive narrow defeats games they could and should have won — Liverpool St Helens should put matters right when they entertain Nuneaton tomorrow.
The teams have never met before and LSH take the opportunity to add Neil James to their 18 man squad.
Neil another doctor is a promising centre and hails from South Wales.
Orrell have an attractive home game with Leicester although they will be without several star players.
Nigel Heslop and Martin Hynes are on England B duty, Simon Langford and Dave Cleary are playing in Bermuda for the Golden Oldies and Gerry Ainscough is rested.
So in come Carl Bibby, Paul Hamer, Martin Strett, Mark Ridehalgh and Stewart Hayter.
Widnes centre Dave Hanley will be keeping his fingers crossed that history doesn't repeat itself tomorrow.
It was just 12 months ago that he sustained a broken ankle against Leigh tomorrow's home opponents.
West Park face a stiff test at home against Heineken Third Division Wrexham.
They are strengthened by the return of Matt Kerr and Phil Houlton and will hope to carry on the momentum of one of their best starts to a season for years.
Sefton hit the cup trail tomorrow with a home tie against Metrovick in the Provincial Trophy third round.
With only one defeat in their last seven games, Sefton will be hoping that Robin Earwaker collects the eleven points he needs to top the century mark this season.
Orrell have been invited to join some of rugby's elite and take part in the Dubai Sevens on November 19 and 20.
Teams have also been invited from Wales, Russia, U.S.A., Canada, France, Sri Lanka, Bahrain, Hong Kong and Germany.
Local teams in the Pannell Kerr Forster Lancashire Plate preliminary round are: St Mary's v Colne and Nelson, Birchfield v Vulcan, Newton-le-Willows v Thornton Cleveleys, Littleborough v Liverpool Collegiate, Merseyside Police v Didsbury Toc H. Games are to be played on December 6th.
The first round draw includes: Manchester YMCA v Merseyside Police or Didsbury Toch H, Hightown v St Mary's OB or Colne and Nelson, Wigan Tech v Birchfield or Vulcan, Mossley Hill v Ashton-under-Lyne, Bay Horse or Carnforth v Southport, Burtonwood v Tyldesley, Halton v Blackpool, Old Bedians v Eagle, De La Salle v Chorley, Lucas Merseyside v North Manchester or Lancaster University, Eccles v Newton-le-Willows or Thornton Cleveleys, Littleborough or Liverpool Collegiate v Sefton, Bury v Wigan.
Games to be played December 20.
MARTIN STRETT…returns for Orrell
Man escapes arson attack
FIREMEN say a 25-year-old man is lucky to be alive today after escaping an arson attack in Linwood Road, Tranmere.
The man had fallen asleep in the lounge when he woke to find a fire at the front door of his terraced home.
Hall fire: A Huyton community centre has been attacked by arsonists for the third time in a month.
The blaze at St John's Centre in Manor Farm Road took two hours to control.
Craft aid: A craft fair in aid of the Claire House Appeal which is raising funds for a hospice for youngsters, will be held at Heswall Hall, Heswall, on Saturday Nov 7.
Euro music: The music of Brahms and Bizet will be celebrated at a Wigan festival on November 12 to coincide with the UK's Presidency of the European Community.
Pile-up:Two drivers were injured after a three vehicle pile-up in Burscough, Ormskirk.
The accident happened in High Lane when an articulated lorry was in collision with a Vauxhall Cavalier and a Vauxhall Astra.
Radio date:Radio Merseyside is to hold a thanksgiving service to mark 25 years on air at Liverpool Parish Church, Pier Head, on November 23.
Bike bobbies:Wirral bobbies Jeff Morrison and Adrian Powell have received free mountain bikes to help crime prevention in Rock Ferry and New Ferry.
Tax band:Letters will start going out in mid-January informing all householders of the band which their home is in for the new council tax.
The list should be available for inspection in the Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, next month.
Chris cross after treble tops
CHRIS O'BRIEN scored a fine hat-trick for Garston Woodcutters but finished on the losing side in an 8-3 defeat against Great Eastern in the South Merseyside MYA Junior League Under 11 division.
Alan Edwards scored five times and Marvin Grugel, Joe Robinson and Lee Madin adding singles.
APH (Dave Rowan 3, Tom Kearney, Ben Ellis, Dave Hoey) won 7-1 against Woolton (John Kennedy), Mike Windle scored four times for CADWA (Tony Purcell, Lee Begley, Dave Whitby) in their 8-0 success over Stapleton, Mossley Hill (Pond 2, Davies 2, Brown) won 5-3 against Malvern (Tottey 2, Bennett), Electric Supply (Clint Hargreaves 3, Andy Jennings, Craig Roberts) beat Out Lane (Aldridge 2) 5-2 and unbeaten South Hill (Kevin Nolan 2, Mark Ellison, Marvin Grugel) won 4-0 against Venny.
Unbeaten Pegasus (Danny Scott, Mike Molyenuex) had a five goal ace in Liam O'Connor when they won 7-0 against St. Michaels in the Under 12 division.
Unbeaten
Electric Supply (Craig Till 2, Lee Murphy 2) also stay unbeaten after a 4-1 win over AHF Video (Tommy Callaghan), APH (Stowe 2) shared four goals with Mossley Hill (Steve O'Rourke, Dean Sayer) and Malvern (Neil Marshall, Brian Gowby) also drew 2-2 with Woolton (Fisher 2).
Kevin McLeod followed up last week's six goal haul with seven goals for Garston Woodcutters in their 9-1 win over Esson (Jimmy Murray), Jimmy Gee (2) also netting.
At Under 13, APH (Danny Omar 3, Luke Delahunty 2, Neil Machin 2, John Lynd) defeated St. Michaels (Tony Nelson 2, Mark Smith).
Garston Woodcutters played a goalless draw with Mossley Hill and APH (Tommy Easton, Danny Ginley) shared four goals with Wilkies (Nick Spears, John Weaver).
NRBL (Paul Roberts, John Lee) drew 2-2 with Garston Woodcutters who netted through Dave King and Ian Johnson.
TWO fine solo goals from Colin Dobie secured a point for Marlborough in a keenly contested 2-2 draw with Derby in the Tuebrook Junior League Under 10s.
Sandstone took an early lead through Andrew Scott and after Arktel had equalised, Mark Pybis scored twice to clinch a 3-1 win.
Hat-tricks from O'Pray and Smith highlighted a superb 7-2 win for Moscow against Home and Bargain with Lewis also on target.
Fisher gained his second brace of the season for Scarsdale (Lee Myers) when they defeated Somerset 3-1 with Heckingbottom outstanding in midfield.
Sandstone won 8-0 against Somerset at Under 12, captain Scott Rawes scoring a brilliant hat-trick with John McIntyre (2), Daniel Lang (2), Bobby Cannon and a terrific effort from David Hill registering.
Moscow overwhelmed a sporting Bankburn 9-0, Andy Radcliffe scoring three times with Gary Wheeler, Mike Gough, Alan Dunkerley, Mike Roberts and Neil Jones scoring.
Scott Aldridge and Andy Summerfield starred in Moscow's defence.
Scarsdale (Seels, Quigley, O'Brien) won 3-0 against Derby and Millbank accounted for New Broadway Club 5-4.
Under 14: Priory Villa 6, Albany 1; Bankburn 6, Millbank 1; Melwood 1, Moscow 9.
CITY STORE VOTED THE TOPS FOR TOTS
But mums give M&S the thumbs down
By Echo reporter
DEPARTMENT store George Henry Lee is tops for tots.
But there were no marks for Marks and Spencer from mothers who voted it Britain's least parent-friendly shop.
Lee's of Liverpool and other John Lewis outlets topped the poll to find public places with the best facilities for mothers and toddlers.
Swedish furniture firm IKEA, which has a store at Warrington, Sainsbury's and the Early Learning Centre were also praised in the Parent Friendly Awards.
Unfriendly
Mark Effendowicz, a spokesman for Lee's, in city centre Basnett Street, said: ‘It's good to hear we've been praised.
We have a Mother and Baby Room and try to go out of our way to make life easy.’
Among others criticised by mums were cut-price Kwiksave, voted the worst supermarket chain; Wimpy, the worst restaurant, and the now-defunct Dan-Air, the worst airline.
Criticisms by parents ranged from sweets at supermarket checkouts to lack of toilets, changing facilities and unfriendly staff.
A spokeswoman for Marks & Spencer said: ‘We are concerned to learn of the poor perception people have of us but we are carrying out a number of ongoing initiatives to improve the situation.’
McDonald's came out as the most parentfriendly restaurant, with Forte as the best hotel chain.
The Parent Friendly Awards, held in support of the Tommy's Campaign to raise funds to provide better health care for babies, were presented today at St Thomas's Hospital, south London.
Mums' favourite…
George Henry Lee Thumbs down…for Marks
Schoolgirl, 11, wants ‘divorce’ from family
By Daily Post Correspondent
A SECOND schoolgirl has launched legal moves to ‘divorce’ her family.
The 11-year-old from Leeds told a judge: ‘I don't want to live with my mummy anymore.’
She wants to live with foster parents rather than her four brothers and sisters and mother.
A judge at Leeds has already granted an interim order so that she can stay with her foster parents.
The moves follow a separate case involving a 14-year-old girl who will today defend her right to ‘divorce’ her parents at the High Court.
Yesterday, James Littlehales, solicitor for the 11-year-old's mother, said: ‘The mother is determined to fight the case tooth and nail.
She will do everything she can to get her daughter back.’
The mother has written to the European Court of Human Rights in a bid to win back her child.
Mr Littlehales said the girl was taken into care in 1983 when she was two.
She also spent time with her natural mother.
In 1988 the supervision order was quashed and she went to live permanently with her mother.
Despite living with her mother for the past eight years, she saw her foster parents every other weekend and went on holidays with them.
She told social services she did not want to stay with her mother.
Solicitor Alistair Babbington decided she was mature enough to decide and the case went to court.
Judge Hoffman granted an interim order at Leeds County Court in July for her to live with the foster parents.
A further hearing is due later this month.
Mr Babbington said: ‘She is living with her former foster parents.
They do not have an awful lot of money but they want to act in the best interests of the child.’
Her mother said: ‘Those former foster parents, who she's been once a year to Spain with, they have been able to give her the luxuries that I could not afford to give her.’
Meanwhile, the 14-year-old girl continues her legal action today.
Lawyers Hart Brown and Co, of Farnham, Surrey, obtained a ‘prohibited steps’ order for the girl from a judge at Guildford County Court.
This prevented her parents taking her from the home of her 18-year-old boyfriend where she has been living.
Her divorced parents have undergone a reconciliation.
Lawyers said she did not have a good relationship with the father and the prospect that he may return to the family home prompted her action under the 1989 Children Act.
Both cases come a few weeks after a 12-year-old American boy, Gregory Kingsley, ‘divorced’ his parents in a court action in Florida.
Mercury prepares to expand at the double
WALLASEY-based same-day courier service Mercury Express has embarked on a national expansion.
The business, run by Neston man Richard Clegg, is opening a new distribution depot on Birkenhead's Woodside Business Park, as well as a new facility in Warrington which should create a total of 25 new jobs.
Franchising
Spokesman Steve Parker explained: ‘Since setting up in 1988 we have started a franchising operation.
‘So far we operate 30, but by the end of the year we estimate up to 100 franchises could be in place.’
Allen, the Wigan construction group, has announced £11.75m in new orders.
The contracts which range from a new honey processing plant for Nestl in Manchester and a factory development for Bradford Soap Works in Chesterare spread throughout the North West, Midlands and Yorkshire.
Allen Commercial Developments, which has a 50% stake in Ebor Estates, has benefitted from the £2.5m sale of an Ebor development in Wakefield.
Up to two thirds of the operating profits of owner-managed companies goes on interest payments, it is claimed today.
The survey, carried out by accountants Touche Ross suggests three reasons behind the findings: ‘
Many companies are over-geared and fail to address the problem
Bosses are over-dependent on short-term borrowings
Low awareness of alternatives.
Borrowings
Transplant girl jets in from USA
BRAVE LAURA IS HOME AT LAST
By Larry Neild
TRANSPLANT girl Laura Davies arrived home in Manchester this afternoon with a smile and a song.
The brave four-year-old beamed as she sang ‘Show Me The Way To Go Home’.
Laura, who was flown to the USA five months ago for a life-saving double transplant operation, was re-united with her two-year-old brother Louis.
Survived
And little Laura promised: ‘From now on I'll be taking care of Louis.’
The toddler, from Eccles in Greater Manchester, underwent a liver and bowel transplant at the Children's Hospital in Pittsburgh.
Without the operation, Laura, who had lived on a diet of liquid protein, would not have survived much longer.
A nationwide appeal raised money to pay her hospital bills.
The King of Saudi Arabia who personally gave £150,000 today sent his personal wishes to Laura and her family.
Dozens of photographers and TV cameramen were waiting at Manchester airport to catch a glimpse of Laura on the final leg of her journey home.
A huge, icing-covered cake with a welcome-home message from airport staff greeted the plucky youngster on her arrival and she quickly tucked into the tasty treat — something that would have been impossible for her just a few months ago.
There were hugs and tears as Laura was re-united with her brother, grandparents and other relatives.
Mum Fran said: ‘It's wonderful to be back home.
It seems as though we have been away for years.
‘Laura just wants to get home to play with Louis and live a normal life.
‘We have never given up hope, especially as everyone in the North West was fighting for us,’ added Fran.
Welcome home…
Laura and her father Les
The long wait
OVER the last number of years we, the Liverpool fans, have been accused by many (including TTW&R) of being obsessed with Manchester United.
And it was to my utter disgust that a member of the media described our game with them as a derby!
Well, excuse me, but I thought a derby was between two teams from the same town or city.
Another thing that interested me was a comment from an ex-Liverpool defender who said, and I quote: ‘If Alan Shearer had joined Manchester United, it would have been a question of who finished second!’
I beg to differ, Mr Hansen.
We are all aware of the undivided loyalty of the average United fan (Fergie-out and useless).
Methinks that the United faithful would have hounded Shearer out, simply because, as Mr Brooking pointed out, the service to the front line was dreadful (76 minutes until a shot on target).
It looks like our ‘friends’ at the end of the East Lancs could be awaiting another 25, or is it 26 years now!
Improvement plans for opt-out school
By Ray Kelly
A MERSEYSIDE council has announced improvement and consolidation plans for a school which wants to opt-out of its control.
Knowsley Council is preparing a planning application for Prescot Comprehensive to be consolidated on one site.
Ballot
It also announced plans to build a sports hall and improve playing fields at the Knowsley Park Lane school, once the Lathom Wing on St Helens Road is closed.
Next week parents are due to receive ballot papers to vote on whether they want to push for grant maintained status after years of waiting for the council to convert promises into action.
The economic development and planning committee last night agreed to put in a planning application.
Members also agreed to seek permission from the policy and resources committee, at its December meeting, for the £700,000 needed to fund the development, which would be financed by the sale of the land at the St Helens Road site.
Councillor Ronnie Round, chairman of economic development and planning said: ‘We will be able to dispose of the land at the Lathom Wing and thus finance improvements for the school with no extra cost to the school or the council.’
There will be two meetings at Prescot Comprehensive School next week to explain the choices to parents and the consequences of their ballot.
If the vote is successful, the school could achieve grant maintained status by September next year.
Giant panda faces new survival threat
By Echo reporter
ENDANGERED species like the giant panda now face a new threat, global warming, according to a report published today.
Researchers in Britain have drawn up data on climate change which warns of massive disruption to agriculture and loss of vital eco-systems in China.
The data, not previously available to Western scientists, was put together by a team at the University of East Anglia's climatic research unit.
Adam Markham, head of pollution at the World Wide Fund for Nature, said today: ‘The spectre of famine may once again haunt China.
‘Among the already endangered species directly threatened by global warming are the giant panda, blue sheep and the Yangtze dolphin.’
The report warns that the effects of an imbalance of warming greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will lead to a sea level rise of around half a metre (20 inches).
That will cause flooding of thousands of hectares of the fertile alluvial soils of the east China plains, the world's oldest sustained agricultural system after 4,000 years of uninterrupted cultivation.
Other key findings include:
Rice yields are likely to decrease significantly.
Much of China will experience a drier climate.
The new climate in Xianjiang Province in northwest China is likely to turn large areas of steppe into desert.
Protected areas of global importance, including the Wolong Panda Reserve, may experience radical changes.
Giant panda…threat
999 system hit again
THE London Ambulance Service said yesterday that it had no immediate plans to revert to its gremlin-plagued computer call-out system.
Experts are still trying to locate the fault which caused another shutdown of the £1m Computer Aided Despatch system.
A control room duty manager ordered staff to revert to the manual logging of emergency system early yesterday after the computer slowed down.
There was a 25-minute delay in sending one ambulance but the patient subsequently arrived at hospital safely.
No other calls were affected.
Last week, the computer broke down completely for 36 hours and it is claimed this may have resulted in up to 20 deaths.
Woman tortured in cash card theft
DETECTIVES last night were hunting a gang of youths who tortured a 20year-old woman into revealing the number of her cash card.
A gang of up to five youths held her prisoner forcing her to reveal her PIN number.
Then, one of them went to a cash machine to try to get money from her account.
When he failed, he returned and the youths repeated their attacks, battering the woman, not named by police, with clubs and sticks.
Detective Inspector Fred Spencer said: ‘I hope these young men are proud of what they've done.
It makes you ashamed to be British.
They left her bleeding on the ground and threatened to carry out further attacks if she went to the police.’
The woman was attacked in the early hours of Wednesday at an isolated station at Mexborough, South Yorks, as she waited for a late train home.
After the attack the woman walked four miles to a relative's home.
Three of the youths, aged 16-20, wore black duffel coats with the hoods pulled up to hide their faces.
Launch of green guide
A NEW edition of a green directory for Clwyd has been launched.
The directory is an integral part of the county council's environmental policy which seeks to promote environmentally-friendly services to its customers and develop an awareness of environmental issues.
Contained in the booklet are details of local and national organisations concerned with all aspects of the environment.
It also has information on national and local government departments, with specific environmental responsibilities.
Details are given of the Clwyd Environmental Forum, which was set up to provide locally active organisations and statutory bodies with an opportunity to discuss issues of concern to the county's environment and to promote the interchange of information and experience.
Demand for job security thrown out
COUNCILLORS rejected a call to guarantee no redundancies among the Liverpool council workforce until April, 1994.
The demand was tabled by breakaway Liverpool Labour Councillors group leader Tony Jennings as an addition to a condemnation of government plans for pit closures proposed by Liberal Democrat group leader Mike Storey.
Liverpool Labour group member George Knibb said: ‘What we are asking you to do is for what you believe in for the miners to commit yourselves to for your own workforce.’
Condemn
But Labour's deputy leader of the council, Alan Dean, said it was impossible to know what effect the level of government finance, pay settlements and competitive tendering would have on the council's ability to guarantee jobs.
Liberal Democrat and Labour councillors voted out the call by Cllr Jennings.
Cllr Storey's motion condemning the colliery closures was carried.
Cllr Dean said the council would take no action against council workers who took part in a TUC north west day of action on November 17 in protest against pit closures.
Rufford roughed up by Wright stuff
BRAD WRIGHT was a four goal marksman for Hesketh CC when they overcame Rufford 9-0 in the Craven Minor League Under 10 division, while a Steve Quirk hat-trick paved the way for Formby JSC's 9-1 win over Holborn Boys.
Deansgate (Andy Ziederman 2, Steve Davies) won 3-2 at Southport Trinity, Birkdale won 8-0 at Ormskirk West End and Dynamo won 5-2 at Hesketh Bank with Bjork (2), Stafford, Bevan and McLaversly scoring.
Ainsdale defeated YMCA 5-2.
Birkdale defeated Dynamo 5-2 in the Under 11 division, Holborn Boys won 6-0 at Deansgate with Peter Jones (2), Graham Barnes (2), Neil Platt and David Sheriff their marksmen.
Formby JSC (McArthur 2, Walkley, own goal) won 4-1 at YMCA.
Dynamo defeated Mawdsley 5-0 at Under 12, Ormskirk West End overwhelmed a sporting Town Green 20-0 with Earle (5), Roby (4) and Metcalfe (4) leading the scoring.
Litherland Jubilee maintained top form at Under 13 with a 4-1 win against Southport Trinity and Dynamo (Mark Beesley, Mark Peckham) won 2-0 at Birkdale.
Town Green (Matthew Bull 2, Brian Holland, Steve McAllister) beat Holborn Boys 4-1.
Six Under 14 games were played, Holborn (Steve Dixon 2) sharing four goals with Rufford (Ian Smallbone, Nick Bolger).
Southport Trinity (Wilde 2, Walker 2) won 7-1 against YMCA.
A medical mural…
PARTNERS in a Ruthin medical practice have sponsored the arts to create a point of interest for patients.
Sculptor and ceramic artist Maggie Humphry has completed a mural on the wall of Plas Meddyg, a new medical centre at Ruthin.
The work depicts a scene from the old Welsh traditional folk tale concerning Llyn-y-Fan and the medicinal qualities of plants and herbs.
It also includes a piece of ‘cynghanedd’ Welsh verse written by the former Mayor of Ruthin, Robin Llwyd ap Owain, a National Eisteddfod winner in 1991.
Maggie Humphry, from Llanfair DC, has had many of her plaques displayed on public and private buildings.
Artist Maggie Humphry beside her mural at Ruthin's new doctor's surgery Picture: JEFF PITT
Probe agreed over home grants
By Chris Walker
AN investigation has been ordered in a bid to discover how a private firm got hold of confidential information from the council.
The authority's internal audit division will try to identify the person who gave a building surveyor details of people who have just had home improvement grants approved.
The surveyor wrote to successful grant applicants touting for custom.
Housing committee chairwoman Margaret Clarke said she was concerned that confidential details concerning at least some of more than 100 grant applications approved last month had got into the hands of someone in business.
Liberal Democrat leader Mike Storey backed the inquiry into the passing of the information to a private company.
Nafuth to win at third attempt
By Captain Becher
NAFUTH, runner-up on both his starts to date, looks set to make it third time lucky in the EBF Dunkirk Maiden Stakes (Division One) at Doncaster tomorrow.
The Peter Walwyn, trained son of star stallion Nureyev cost £500,000 as a yearling and, so far, has returned less than £1,500 of that enormous investment to his owner Hamdan AlMaktoum.
But promising runs at Lingfield and Newmarket have suggested that the Bank of Dubai will soon be receiving a more appropriately sized cheque from racing's coffers.
His second outing was particularly encouraging, since the filly who beat him at Headquarters was none other than Henry Cecil's Felucca, already a leading fancy for next year's Classics.
Nafuth had the rest of the field well beaten at Newmarket and a first success seems assured against tomorrow's inferior rivals.
Division Two of this event is probably best left to Tom Jones's Sadler's Wells newcomer Alyakkh, about whom local work-watchers have been cooing for some time.
Alyakkh is a daughter of Jones's Irish 1,000 Guineas heroine Al Bahathri and, while she may never aspire to her dam's position in turf history, she should be capable of winning what appears a modest contest.
The Royal British Legion Stakes, a Listed race over an extended 1m 6f, is inevitably more competitive.
Nevertheless, Mark Tompkins's Glaisdale is given a confident vote following his recent third to Morley Street.
Glaisdale almost certainly needed that outing for he had been off the course for more than three months.
But he led the field a merry dance until being overhauled inside the final furlong.
He can make his newfound fitness count against these.
Council boss looks Inward
LIVERPOOL Council leader Harry Rimmer has been appointed a new director of Inward, the North West inward investment agency based in Warrington.
He joins four other new directors from around the region, taking the board from 18 to 23chairman Tom Weatherby was re-elected.
Free advice: Two free advice sessions for established Merseyside businesses are available through a Merseyside TEC-funded scheme being offered by Metel Corporate Training Services further details are available from Metel's Jeff Gardner on 051-207 2281.
Health check:A free company health check to help businesses cut costs is on offer from Barclays Commercial Services the aim is to identify and then set about solving cash flow problems.
Phone credit:GPT's Chorley Payphones Systems factory has achieved the BS5750 Part II accreditation following a seven-month drive involving the whole workforce.
Good life:Woolwich Life has completed new business worth £76.4m, compared with £25m last year, in its second financial year of operation.
WINTER OF DISCONTENT FOR MAJOR
PM wins battle but rebels say it's war now on Maastricht
By Mark Davies, political correspondent
A HUGE Tory row today broke out after the government won the crucial Maastricht debate by just three votes.
Backbench rebels put the defeat to one side and vowed to continue their battle to scupper the controversial Euro treaty.
Others were furious at what they said were government strong-arm tactics over the vote.
They said one MP was in tears, such was the pressure put on him by Tory whips.
Former party chairman Norman Tebbit warned of an ‘unhappy internal war’ among the Tories.
And leading rebel Nicholas Winterton said the ministers faced a ‘winter of attrition.’
Lord Tebbit attacked Tory whips for putting too much pressure on backbench dissidents.
He said: ‘The way in which pressure was put on rebel backbenchers went too far.
Contempt
‘The scars will take a long time to heal.’
Lord Tebbit rounded on former Premier Sir Edward Heath, who had accused him and Lady Thatcher of trying to persuade Tories to vote against Mr Major.
Lord Tebbit said: ‘That is pretty silly of Mr Heath considering the years he spent trying to persuade people to vote against Lady Thatcher.
‘I treat that with the contempt most people in the Conservatives reserve for Mr Heath.’
Meanwhile, Sir Rhodes Boyson, who supported the government last night, called for a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown said his party had saved Britain's future in Europe, by voting with the government.
He insisted that the vote was about Maastricht and not about confidence in Mr Major.
Incompetent
But Labour's Shadow Foreign Secretary Jack Cunningham slammed the claim as ‘hogwash,’ saying the Lib Dems had been conned by the government.
He said: ‘This vote was about propping up an incompetent government.
‘If it had not been for the Liberal Democrats, the government would have lost.’
Shadow environment secretary Jack Staw said: ‘This was an historic betrayal by the Liberals for which they will not long, nor lightly, be forgiven.’
Gloves off as Kendall and Clough must graft to dodge the drop
DAY OF THE STREET FIGHTER
IF Howard Kendall and Brian Clough were boxers, they would jab out a technically brilliant contest, observing the Queensbury Rules to the letter.
It shows in their football teams -both putting skill at the top of the agenda ahead of any other considerations.
Unhappily, it's time to take the gloves off (temporarily I hope) and adopt the principles of the street fighter.
Relegation dogfight
Everton and Nottingham Forest are staring a potential relegation dogfight in the face, highlighted by tomorrow's unlikely bottom-of-the-table clash at the City Ground.
Both managers are now getting towards the stage at which they have got to produce something and quickly.
And I'm not talking here about slick, glossy performances.
In all honesty, you can't afford to try and play your way out of trouble when you are down at the bottom.
Suddenly it is all about hard work, grafting for each other and scratching for the odd result that might suddenly spark your confidence.
My team talk would short and to the point.
‘Get out there, roll up your sleeves and graft your butts off!’
Any players not getting the message, would be out on their ear.
At times like this, character and togetherness is all-important.
Which is why I was disgusted to read Tony Cottee's recent comments, moaning about his current situation and looking to blame others instead of looking very carefully at himself.
When you are facing a crisis, it doesn't help when players start mouthing off.
I could have understood it in Cottee's case if he had been sweating blood for Everton.
If it had been a Peter Reid type, someone who battles and fights his way through every game as if his very life depended on it, I might have sat up and took a little bit more notice.
But I found Cottee's comments very hard to take.
He criticised a manager who has won the greatest honours in the game and has got more knowledge about football than he ever will.
And he pointed the finger at a couple of his team mates.
If that had happened in my day, those players would have had him up against the nearest wall and sorted it out.
It's easy to say he was led up the garden path by a couple of pointed media questions, but I don't accept that.
He's experienced enough to understand the consequences of such an outburst.
Howard Kendall has fined him and said that it's all over.
While accepting that, I would just like to suggest to Cottee that he will never play for a bigger club than Everton.
It hurts me to see the team so low in the table.
They could be joint bottom tomorrow if things go wrong and I know all about the Forest jinx that has haunted them in recent years.
I don't think the Blues have won a League game at the City Ground for ten years.
I can remember losing there in 1985 during an otherwise confident Championship season.
But Everton must not look back, not even to last week's defeat against Manchester City.
The first priority tomorrow must be to come away from the game with at least a point.
The Blues are three points ahead of Forest now and they must ensure that the gap is still the same tomorrow night.
This would be the first psychological blow.
It's a case of building from there, one step at a time.
A scratchy 1-0 victory would be a bonus.
Defeat is unthinkable because if you are rock-bottom, or even joint bottom, players lose confidence, the fear factor comes into it and people start to pass the buck.
As I said, it's time to put results before any other considerations.
And it's time to put the team before any individual gripes.
The challenge is here.
UNDER PRESSURE…
Howard Kendall and Brian Clough must cut the class and slug it out at street level
But how on earth did these companies get my name?
What a load of junk!
Extra report by SARAH JONES
WHY IS it that I get so much personally addressed mail?
You may believe that it is just because I am an extremely popular person.
Or perhaps I am an avid correspondent.
But no, the vast majority of it (actually all of it, bar the occasional postcard from my mum) is junk mail.
But how on earth did all these companies get hold of my name?
I decided to investigate.
My first port of call was the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA).
Potential
Caroline Crawford of the ASA explained that there are two main ways of obtaining personal information about potential customers.
The first is through what is called direct response — where people volunteer information about themselves.
For example, ordering goods from a mail order catalogue or subscribing to a magazine both mean that you disclose personal information about yourself.
Without realising it, this information can also be very revealing about the type of person you are.
However, the company will usually use your details only for their own purposes — so that they can let you know about their new products.
Occasionally, however, they may want to pass information about you on to other companies so they too can offer you things you might be interested in.
As Caroline told me: ‘Once you have indicated that you like to buy from the comfort of your armchair, other companies assume you will want to know about the products they have to sell in the same way’.
The other method for collecting facts about potential purchasers is through published lists — like the telephone directory or the electoral register.
Again, your postcode indicates the sort of area you live in and this information can also be used by companies to estimate your purchasing power.
Now I don't necessarily want to stop all of it, but I do want to control the sort of mail I get.
So how do I go about it…
Caroline explained that as well as checking claims in the advertising material you get through the post, the ASA now prevents companies from misusing any personal data they collect.
From January 1 this year, companies have had to make it clear when compiling their mailing lists if they plan to pass the list on to another company.
If they do, they must give you an opportunity to object or ‘opt out’.
Many of us find that even if we bin our junk mail, it continues to arrive.
So what other options do we have?
You could object so that you don't receive more.
If the company doesn't respond, then it's time to get tough.
The new ASA rules allow you to insist that a company takes your name off individual lists.
And if you ask, they must also let you know where they got your name.
If they don't act on your request, or if you have any problems, the ASA will investigate your complaints.
The Mailing Preference Service (MPS) can ensure that you come off mailing lists, or it can give you the option of staying on chosen lists.
Guide
The ASA's rules mean that companies must check with the MPS to ensure its lists are up to date before they are used.
A useful guide is provided by the ASA called Personally Yours.
It is available in some advice centres and libraries, and is free from the ASA.
Write to them at Brook House, 2-16 Torrington Place, London, WC1E 7HN.
Or ring 071 580 5555.
Mind you, I do have a relative who has one tried and tested way of getting rid of his junk mail.
He simply posts it all back to the company concerned — without a stamp, of course.
High prices add up to non-League boost
TAYLOR-MADE SOCCER TREAT
I WONDER if you'd agree with me that people are no longer prepared to pay £8 or more to watch top class teams such as Liverpool, Everton or Tranmere.
I watch Southport, who have been doing the business this season, and I have noticed an increase in our crowd attendances.
When I've had the opportunity to ask new supporters their reasons for coming to watch us, the main answers have been:
Not prepared to sit and watch a game
Prefer to stand, better atmosphere
Too much money to pay and watch games at Anfield, Goodison, etc.
I am starting to think Lord Justice Taylor, with his ground safety proposals, has done us and other non-League clubs one very big favour.
OVER THE TOP
As much as I want to agree with you, I can't accept that standing and watching Southport has more atmosphere than sitting to watch a major game like Liverpool's midweek clash with Spartak Moscow.
You've produced a good advert for your team, but somehow I don't think the Kop or the Gwladys Street hordes will be moving en bloc to Haig Avenue.
BOOBYTRAPGREETING FOR THE CHESHIRES
Regiment's new barracks ‘home’
CHESHIRE REGIMENT soldiers today moved into a permanent base in a desolate barracks outside the Croatian port of Split.
Brigade command headquarters were also established in the buildings, which were systematically wrecked by the former Yugoslav army.
They are also thought to have installed deadly boobytraps before leaving the region where the 100strong Cheshire contingent will soon be joined by a further 2,300 soldiers from the regiment.
Men from the Royal Engineers and local contractors have been working around the clock to make the barracks habitable.
But although new roofs have been built, many windows remain smashed and most bathrooms are nothing more than rubble.
The troops have to sleep in cramped conditions on the floor with up to 20 in a single room.
What has dumbfounded the British troops is the antagonism of the Croatian forces to their presence.
Refused
They make no secret of their anger that the British should be offering military aid to help their violent struggle against the Serbs in Bosnia rather than providing food and blankets.
A number of Croatian troops have steadfastly refused to move from the ground floor of the building from where Brigadier Andrew Cumming will command the 2,400strong British force.
Unified show…an officer tries a unicycle at the new barracks
Man cleared of twin sisters barn deaths
A MAN has been cleared of killing teenage twin sisters in a barn blaze after an alleged midnight sex session.
Rebecca and Emma Harper, 17, of Alexandra Street, Cheltenham, Gloucs, died in an early morning fire in a hay-filled Dutch barn on January 24 last year.
The prosecution at Bristol Crown Court claimed the girls were taken to the barn after a pub night out with David Harper, 21, and his friends Wisdom Smith and Daniel Winter, both 19, for sex.
Control
Harper, no relation to the girls, of Homecroft Drive, Uckington, admitted he had twice briefly lit tufts of hay to see better in the darkened barn.
But he thought there was ‘no way’ the barn would catch fire.
He was also cleared of arson.
Winter and Smith, who had faced the same manslaughter charge and a joint arson charge, were cleared on Tuesday.
‘Double’ trouble
SEVE Ballesteros may not be taking part in golf's World Cup in Madrid this week, but there is a player who bears an amazing resemblance to him.
Vassilios Karatzias, the Greek No.1 in a country with only nine professionals, said: ‘I may look like him, but I don't play like him.
‘We have just four courses and we don't get the chance to play many tournaments.
Most of my time is spent teaching the game.’
Karatzias, 39, and partner Craigen Pappas are taking part in a £700,000 event against a field that includes US Masters champion Fred Couples, and former world No.1s Ian Woosnam and Bernhard Langer.
Brass nut in cake
RATHBONES Retail was fined £350, with £270 costs after a man found a brass nut in an almond tart.
The cake had been bought from a shop in Kensington, Liverpool, the city's magistrates court was told.
Rathbones, suppliers to High Street chains Sainsbury's and Morrison's, admitted a breach of the 1990 Food Safety Act.
The company has now fitted metal detectors at its new £3m Wigan bakery.
Drug smuggler gets 40 years
BRITON Peter Heather was today jailed for 40 years in Bangkok for heroin smuggling.
Heather, 26, from Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs, said he had been set up.
Heather admitted the charges, saying he had no hope of proving he was innocent.
Trophy for Vlasman
GEMINI welter Jason Vlasman was voted his club's best boxer on their dinner show at the Devonshire House last night.
Vlasman boxed superbly before a capacity crowd and was well on top when his opponent, G Reid (Wolverhampton) was stopped with a cut eye in the third.
Results (points unless stated):
Fly: D Burke (Salisbury) bt C Toohey (Gemini).
Light: S Atkinson (Gemini) bt J Betteridge (Meanwood); J Mellor (Transport) bt J Hayes (Gemini); E Roberts (Gemini) bt R Lattisbeaudire (Meanwood).
Welter: J Vlasman (Gemini) bt G Reid (Wolverhampton) rsc.3; J Jones (Sefton) bt P Sellers (Burmantofts); B Gonzales (Preston RR) bt S Smith (Burmantofts); M Barker (St Paul's) bt D Barnett (Wolverhampton).
Light-heavy: P Davies (Gemini) bt D Muir (Droylesden); S Martin (Wolverhampton) bt G Dunbar (St Paul's); R Burns (Gemini) bt V Williams (Wolverhampton).
Trade war looms in row over farming subsidies
US POISED TO TAX EUROPE GOODS
By Echo reporter
THE United States, moving a step closer to a transatlantic trade war, plans to announce punitive taxes on European imports as early as today.
A top European Community official said earlier that Washington would kill off six years of talks aimed at freeing world trade and boosting the global economy if it went ahead with retaliatory sanctions over EC oilseed subsidies.
The New York Times said US Trade Representative Carla Hills would announce taxes of 100% or more on up to £240m worth of luxury European exports.
Wines
These would apply mainly to French white wines, following the breakdown on Tuesday night of farm subsidy talks.
Today's news will come as a blow for British Agriculture minister John Gummer, who is just back from the US where he had been fighting to prevent the breakdown of the talks.
He described the prospect of punitive tariffs as sad.
In Geneva, Tran van Thinh EC ambassador to Gatt, said any American sanctions would wreck the Uruguay Round of talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Thinh gave his warning after US officials asked the Geneva-based council of Gatt to withdraw concessions, effectively imposing sanctions, on up to £660m of European farm goods.
After blocking the US request to the Gatt council, Thinh said: ‘For us, if there is permission for the US to withdraw concessions, it does virtually mean the death of the Round.’
Gummer…back from US talks
Sybillin's smooth debut
HIGH CLASS hurdler Sybillin made a smooth debut over fences at Uttoxeter yesterday despite hitting the front far sooner than jockey Mark Dwyer intended.
Jimmy Fitzgerald's six-year-old, always held up until the last possible moment when racing over timber, was left in the lead four out in the Betting Spy Novices' Chase.
Long-time leader Badrakhani crashed out at the fence, bringing down close fourth Rochester.
Sybillin had been foot perfect up to that point and, far from being put off by the drama around him, flew the remaining fences to come home 10 lengths clear of Knight's Spur.
‘I was very pleased with him,’ said Dwyer.
‘He'd schooled very well and although I had hoped for a lead for a bit longer, we had to go on where we did.
He's always best when held up.’
Sybillin's learning curve takes him to Leicester on Monday week, but hopes of running at Kempton Park on Boxing Day look unlikely to be realised.
Although owner Marquesa de Moratalla will be present to watch The Fellow run in her colours, the only novice chase is over two and a half miles judged too far for the speedy Sybillin.
John Kavanagh, Badrakhani's pilot, was taken to Stafford General Hospital for precautionary x-rays on his left leg.
Bill Clay continued his fine strike rate with Royal cast-offs when Band Of Hope, handled by Ian Balding on the level, collected the Computercard Claiming Hurdle.
‘I have done well with horses the Queen has owned, I've had five and all have won,’ said Clay, who is confident of extending the run with another, Court Circular, bought last week.
‘He was a bit disappointing on the Flat for Lord Huntingdon, but he looks made for our game,’ Clay added.
Glen Cherry was made to fight all the way up the straight by Rehab Venture before taking the Templegate Handicap Chase.
But trainer Tim Forster's assistant Henry Daly expected nothing less of the 2-5 favourite.
‘His other wins have been by a head, so two lengths is a bit of a bonus.
He only does enough,’ said Daly.
Sillars Stalker maintained his winning ways for Lynda Ramsden in the Tom Pepper Handicap Hurdle, accounting for hard-driven Coney Dove without Adrian Maguire moving a muscle.
Switching codes holds no fears for Sillars Stalker who, having topped off his last jumping campaign with a four-timer, filled in time during the summer, scoring three times on the Flat.
Souness in the wrong
SURELY now is the time for Liverpool Football Club to dispense with the services of Graeme Souness.
The man is a huge liability and seems to delight in putting his feet right in it.
The latest error of judgment is this European ban for five matches because he abused the referee after Bruce Grobbelaar (quite correctly under the rules of the game as they stand) was sent off.
Can you imagine the likes of Shankly, Paisley, Fagan and Dalglish behaving like that?
I can't.
As soon as Liverpool appointed Graeme Souness (as a lifelong Liverpool supporter, I cringed) I thought it was a bad decision.
Brian Lloyd, Crosby.
FAIR TACKLE
When Souness was first appointed, I applauded the move.
But he has hardly had a trouble-free run since then with most of his problems self-inflicted.
Only time will tell if he is the right man for the job.
At the moment, I'm still to be convinced.
Man jailed for 15 months
A MAN who has made 15 previous court appearances has been jailed for 15 months by a judge at Liverpool Crown Court.
Anthony Killen, 28, of no fixed address, admitted burglary, receving stolen goods and asked for two burglaries to be taken into consideration.
Goal hero Hateley raps Euro warning
Milan don't frighten us
MARK HATELEY, the man who launched Rangers towards a £5 million European Cup fortune, today declared: ‘Bring on AC Milan.’
The English striker, who scored a sensational opening goal in the 2-1 victory over Leeds United at Elland Road, believes Rangers have nothing to fear from his former club.
Hateley collected a reputed £20,000 bonus along with his Ibrox teammates as the reward for their 4-2 aggregate win.
Small change
But that is petty cash to the jackpot the Rangers players and the club will earn from becoming the first British side to play under the changed European Cup format.
A meeting with Milan in the new sectional stages over the next five months could provide untold riches for the Scots and Hateley insisted: ‘We are equipped to take on anyone.
‘It is very rewarding for the club, the fans and the players to be in the last eight of the top tournament in Europe.
It's important for the prestige of Rangers.
‘We regard ourselves as one of the biggest, if not the biggest, side in Britain.
Ibrox is a stadium among the top five on the continent and hopefully we can produce football to match the stadium.’
Hateley, who celebrates his 31st birthday by facing Celtic on Saturday, added: ‘Milan would be a glamorous draw and I would relish every minute of it.
‘I still have some very good friends who play for the club and although their record speaks for itself, it's all to play for.’
Warning
Hateley, who has now scored in both European ties against Lyngby and Leeds, added: ‘Any side coming to Ibrox will find it tough against 45,000 screaming Scots.
We've also shown this season that we can go away from home and get results.
Sometimes we actually find it easier away because teams have to attack us.’
Ally McCoist salutes Rangers' second goal
Comic set to tour with his heroes
By Ray Kelly
KIRKBY comic Sean Styles is grinning from ear to ear with his latest job.
He has landed a plum role as the funnyman touring Britain with The Drifters.
Sean, 32, is pleased with the biggest break of his career and going on the road with one of his all-time favourite groups.
He said: ‘It is a real treat for me.
‘I went to see the group about 11 years ago.
Back then, I naturally never thought I would be one day joining them as the support act.
‘I can sing along to every one of their songs.
‘Everyone has a record by The Drifters and I think we have all sung one of their numbers at a wedding.
‘I was flattered to be asked to join them, any fan would be, and I know a few of my mates are jealous.
‘We will be playing posh venues, nearly all theatres around Britain, so I'll have to look a bit posh.’
Sean will hear the classic ‘Kissing In The Back Row’ and ‘Under The Boardwalk’each night of the 30-date tour but he promises: ‘I could listen to them every night for 100 nights.’
He has already been asked to join them for a 60-date tour next year.
Lead singer Johnny Moore said: ‘Sean is a very funny guy.
‘We will be listening to him in the wings every night.’
Last year, Sean was the envy of thousands of stand-up comedians when he toured the UK with the raunchy female strip show the LA Centrefolds, playing to packed houses.
The Drifters…fans of Kirkby comic
Sean Styles…fan of group
Woman found plaster in snack
By Jules Stenson
A WOMAN was horrified when she found a piece of sticking plaster in her tuna salad roll.
The grim discovery made her sick.
The case came to light at Liverpool magistrates' court when Shaw Bakery was prosecuted for a lapse in food hygiene standards.
The bakery admitted breaches of the 1990 Food Safety Act and was fined £250, with £279 costs, for suppling the tuna salad roll.
The court heard the woman bought the roll from a shop in Lodge Lane, Liverpool, for a lunchtime snack.
David Wright, prosecuting for Liverpool environmental health department, said: ‘She began to eat the roll and felt what she thought to be a chunky piece of lettuce.
In fact, it was a sticking plaster.
‘The thought of having a plaster in her mouth so revolted her, she vomited.’
Shaw said it had no idea where the plaster had come from.
It was the first time the company has been prosecuted for a hygiene offence.
Raging bull of France
GERARD DEPARDIEU is the giant, shambling bear of a man who has seemingly singlehandedly breathed fresh life into the French film industry.
The actor who has stamped his presence on 72 films is described as the Gallic raging bull, a man for whom no role is too outlandish to take on.
At some point or other in his career he has played a transvestite, a hunchback, a priest, a sado-masochist and an assortment of thugs.
He has also played the lover, as in Green Card where he played the Frenchman in search of a permit to stay in America.
For that he very nearly got an Oscar.
Honour
Now, at last, a British television station is honouring the man whose nose is continually mentioned in any interviews with him.
Channel 4 are showing a season of eight of his films, starting tonight with the superb Oscar-nominated Cyrano de Bergerac (9pm, see Today's Highlights and the Film Guide), and that kicks off with an hour-long look at the man, his private life and his celluloid career.
Gerard Depardieu: An Extended Profile (tonight, Channel 4, 8pm) offers an exclusive insight into the man and the myth, as he talks at his home in the wine-growing heartland of France about his wayward youth and his ambitions for the future.
Disco bosses lodging appeal in bid to keep licence
CLUB TO FIGHT COURT BAN ON LATE OPENING
By Barry Turnbull
A MERSEYSIDE disco is to stay open, despite losing its licence.
Bosses of Secrets in Litherland are able to continue operating while an appeal is lodged.
Sefton councillors this week stripped the club of its entertainments licence after being handed a police dossier detailing violent and rowdy incidents.
The licensing committee was told of numerous incidents involving people being attacked with bottles and glasses outside the premises.
Joe McGlory, club boss, says plans are in hand to change the image of the club.
The venue, previously called Allinsons, was once a top cabaret club for the country's star names.
Mr McGlory said: ‘We want to start up a new Allinsonsaimed at a more mature clientele and including cabaret shows.
‘Future plans also include a bingo hall on the ground floor.
‘I must say I was not aware of all the problems the police have detailed and would have done something about it had they told me.’
He said an appeal would be made against the refusal of a licence, which would prevent the club opening after pub hours.
Family heading out for memorial service in Kuwait
JOURNEY OF TRIBUTE TO GULF WAR HERO
‘Being there will mean something very special’
By Ray Kelly
THE PARENTS of a Merseyside soldier killed in the Gulf War are preparing for an emotionally-charged memorial service in Kuwait.
Helena and Patrick Keegan will visit the country where their son, Paul, died in a battle to liberate it, for the first time since his death in February 1991.
The Kirkby couple will be guests of expatriates and Kuwaiti people who are honouring the debt they owe to Corporal Keegan and other Allied soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice.
Poppy
A service at St Paul's Church, Ahmadi, will be followed by the dedication of a specially-commissioned stained glass window.
Paul's parents will bring a simple poppy wreath.
They have been told their son will be posthumously awarded another medal in Kuwait.
Recently, they developed a roll of film found in Paul's old camera, taken in the run-up to the fighting.
Photographs of Paul in good spirits with his pals in the Gulf have now been added to the treasured family album at their Northwood home.
Mr Keegan, 47, said: ‘It will be an enormous emotional strain on us but we are glad to be going at last.
‘Unfortunately, we will not be able to see where Paul died, because of the vastness of the sands.
‘Being there, where Paul wrote home such humorous, hopeful and reassuring letters to us in the middle of all the trouble, will mean something very special to us.’
The 20-year-old, who had served in Northern Ireland and Germany, died in a tragic accident when a military order was misunderstood by a driver as Paul worked on the Saudi/Iraq front line with the 40th Field Armoured Brigade.
After entering the introductory corps at Ruffwood Comprehensive School, he joined the regular army at 16 and ‘lived for being a soldier’.
Classmates joined huge crowds when he was buried with full military honours after a service St Chad's Church, Kirkby.
His sister, Keren, and brother, Anthony, will not be going to Kuwait.
Trophy
Mr Keegan said: ‘We want to personally thank the people who have contributed to this memorial and to thank everyone in Kirkby for their support and kind wishes over the months.’
Neighbours and friends collected money for the family who bought a silver trophy, inscribed in Paul's name, which is now awarded to Kirkby's best primary school five-a-side team every year.
Paul Keegan…remembered
Focus on the Scouser who suffered the nightmare all players fear
Ex-Red hopes for silver lining to injury disaster
Savage blow for Robbie
FORMER Liverpool player Robbie Savage has suffered the type of injury all professionals fear.
At the age of 30, he finds himself consigned to the sidelines without even the consolation of a drop down the soccer ladder.
Savage was playing in the Bolton midfield when his playing days were cruelly cut short.
Now he hopes to find some compensation in his forthcoming testimonial match.
Savage, whose injury was so bad he is unable to play at non-League level, is hoping for some kind of runout at Burnden Park on November 17 when Bolton face Manchester City in a joint benefit match for him and Frank Worthington.
Scouser Robbie deserves support.
Unemployed, he would love to resume a career in football, even though he knows it would have to be in an off-the-field capacity.
He said today: ‘I'm still unemployed, but it's the same for everyone.
There are a lot of us about.
‘But Bolton have been great.
As soon as I found out I had to retire, they were as good as gold and granted me a testimonial straight away.
‘Frank Worthington had been due one and he asked if we could have a joint game.
He's got a lot of pull.
‘I'm trying to get back into football, even non-League, because I miss the involvement.
‘But there are no jobs.
I help with a Sunday League side but I've been advised not to play.
‘I severed nerves in my leg and so part of my foot is dead.
If I took a knock I wouldn't feel it, and that would make things worse.
‘My family have been great in sticking with me during what has been a hard time.’
Savage vividly remembers the incident which forced him to quit the game.
‘It was against Preston at Burden Park,’ he said.
‘April 7, 1990.
‘It was a hot game.
I went in for a tackle with Brian Mooney and I came off worse because I broke my right leg.
‘My ankle actually touched my knee.
The specialist said he had seen nothing like it in a football injury.
‘I carried on training as best I could after the operation, but when the specialist told me six months later that I couldn't play again, I was shocked.
‘I never thought it could happen.
I thought I'd get over it, because I did when I broke my other leg before.’
Robbie does not blame Mooney for his injury.
He said: ‘The challenge on me was not malicious.
Getting injured is an occupational hazard.
I've had ruptured knee ligaments and hernias in the past.
Savage, who captained Liverpool schoolboys in 1974/75, spent six years at Anfield, where he played in the reserves before joining Wrexham on loan.
After returning to the Reds, he signed for First Division Stoke, making his debut at Goodison and playing his final match at Anfield.
Spells at Third Division Bournemouth and Second Division Bradford followed before Robbie moved to Bolton where a strong Manchester City side will figure in his big match.
‘I know a lot of people from non-League who are going, and there are a few buses taking friends and relations,’ he said.
‘Bruce Rioch is trying to get a few of the old lads back to play.
Hopefully it will be a good night.’
THOSE WERE THE DAYS…
Robbie Savage, above in his Liverpool days, is sharing a testimonial with Frank Worthington (top).
Former Everton star Bruce Rioch (above) is lending his support.
By Mark Davies, political correspondent
MINISTERS today put their Maastricht victory behind them as they grappled with another potentially explosive problem.
The Cabinet was meeting to thrash out the Government's public spending plans for 1993/94.
And fireworks are expected to fly as ministers battle to protect their cash plans in the light of a strict 244.5bn pounds spending limit.
The Cabinet is set to impose strict limits on public sector pay.
Unveiled
Benefits are also thought to be in the firing line.
The meeting just hours after the Government won the crucial Euro debate by just three votes is set to continue tomorrow.
And the Cabinet's decision will be unveiled by Chancellor Norman Lamont in his Autumn Statement next Thursday.
MERSEYSIDE Labour MPs today rounded on Liberal Democrat David Alton after he voted with the Government in the Euro debate.
Twenty MPs 12 of them from Merseyside signed a Commons motion slamming the Mossley Hill MP for ‘voting for the survival of this discredited Conservative Government.’
But Mr Alton accused them of ‘sour grapes.’
He said the destruction of the Maastricht Treaty would have cost Liverpool thousands of jobs.
Supporters given raw deal as clubs continue to live in land of make-believe
KEN ROGERS gives his summing up on big debate
THERE is a growing school of thought among soccer's terrace fraternity, highlighted in last week's special Echo investigation into the state of the game, that many football clubs live in a fantasy world.
They mistakenly believe they have got a God given right to survive and prosper, regardless of the state of the nation, the latest jobs crisis or more mundane matters like League standing.
The cold, harsh realities of life are for other people to worry about.
When you are a soccer club, giant or minnow, all you have to do is throw open the gates and the faithful will pour in.
Tranmere Rovers, worried by the missing thousands at Prenton Park, became the first club to react with their recent cut-price campaign to try and win back the fans.
But, in general, clubs seem incapable of grasping an elementary fact that cynicism is rife among an ever-increasing number of people who believe that many players are overpaid, overrated and out of touch.
Fans used to watch football with smiles on their faces.
Now an increasing number sneer and snipe.
Bottom of list
Football is on a slippery slope with a variety of rival activities vying for the undivided attention of the faithful.
Yet the game turns inward, relying more and more on major sponsorship deals, television contracts and executive activities that seem a million miles from the ordinary man in the street.
Instead of wooing the only people who should really matter — the fans — soccer often seems to leave them at the bottom of their list of priorities.
At least, this is what supporters feel.
If all of this is totally untrue, football needs to appoint a top class public relations officer to try and paint the game in a better light.
Players can help themselves and help the game by doing that little bit extra, particularly on match days.
Very few teams go to the centre circle when they emerge to salute the fans.
There must be closer liason between the terraces and the dressing room, beginning with young supporters.
I would like to see all players not involved on matchday, mix freely in the Family Enclosures prior to the kick-off.
Spin-offs
If it was organised and stewarded properly, they could sign autographs, pose for photos and generally encourage youngsters to get behind the team.
The spin-offs would be immense.
Whenever I watch American Football or baseball, the fanaticism of the supporters towards their own team leaps out.
But it's fan fever with a smile.
Insular
Is it because they seem to package their major sporting events in a more professional manner?
They certainly seem to fill their stadia, week in, week out, regardless of the intense competition from live TV.
Are we so insular that we cannot learn from others?
Has anybody at the English F.A.
ever considered a soccer safari to the States to study their promotional mentality?
The letters on this page suggest that the fans care.
They are looking for bold leadership.
And they are looking for it NOW.
LIVERPOOL boxing brothers Carl (left) and Paul Wright are both making their mark on the professional scene.
Carl is in action at Everton Park next Thursday when he defends his nine fight unbeaten run, while Paul boxes for the Central Area title later this month.
Jobs axe in Kirkby
UP to 200 jobs will be lost with the closure of the Granada TV Rental service centre in Kirkby, it was announced today.
It is one of seven centres across the country to be shut in the New Year.
The company have blamed the recession.
Town Hall chief in plea for European cash aid
By Chris Walker
MERSEYSIDE'S case for Euro-cash was being hammered home in Brussels today.
Liverpool City Council leader Harry Rimmer made a strong pitch for the region at a special hearing before a European Parliament committee examining the problems of large urban areas.
He was the only British politician invited to the all-day session.
Other cities represented included Dublin, Marseilles and Athens.
Vital
Cllr Rimmer stressed that Merseyside had many things going for it — including a skilled workforce, the Port of Liverpool and its strategic spot on the world map.
But he said it was vital that Euro-aid to the North West recognised those places in greatest need.
He continued: ‘The EC is pushing for aid to be given to the North West as a whole.
‘But if European funding is distributed strictly on a regional basis it will be spread so thinly it will not have an impact on Merseyside.‘
Park bid for power station
THE fight is on to include an old power station site within a country park.
Wirral Council's planning committee will tonight discuss the future of the 25-acre Bromb-orough Power Station site which has been earmarked for industrial use.
Planning director Jim Wilkie is recommending that the site stays on the market as industrial land.
But Bromborough's three Labour councillors including Labour leader Councillor Dave Jackson, say the prospects of attracting big industrialists there are remote.
They want the open land to be included in the adjoining 80-acre Eastham Country park instead.
And the Friends of Eastham Country Park are supporting their bid.
Josh Gifford…
Bradbury Star trainer
A Star in the making
BRADBURY STAR
Seven-year-old bay gelding (Torus/Ware Princess)
IF ever there was a horse perfectly equipped to take on the best it's Bradbury Star.
Josh Gifford's seven-year-old completed his novice chasing year with a tally of seven wins from nine races.
Apart from an uncharacteristic first fence fall at Ascot on his third start, the only other time he was beaten was when going down by a half length to Minnehoma in the Sun Alliance Chasethe novices Gold Cup.
Even after that tough Cheltenham contest, the gelding bounced back at Aintree three weeks later to land the valuable Mumm Mildmay Novices Chase from Jodami.
That race more than any confirmed Bradbury Star's jumping ability.
The Liverpool fences came in for considerable criticism over their stiffness — unlike the Grand National ones from trainers, with several vowing never to return until they were modified.
Bradbury Star won over distances ranging from two miles to 25 furlongs and acts on any going.
And the fact that he was able to finish sixth in the 1991 Champion Hurdle confirms a telling turn of foot.
The established chasers will need to be wary this season — he could make many of them look decidedly ordinary.
KEEP TALKING Seven-year-old bay gelding (Le Bavard/Keep Faith)
WHEN that grand old man of the turf Jim Joel died last spring at the age of 97, a condition in his will allowed the Queen Mother to choose any horse she wished from his estate.
She couldn't have made a better selection than Keep Talking, a progressive horse both in terms of form and distance.
The gelding had already struck three times out of four in novice events, two at Kempton, before going off 5/2 favourite for the National Hunt Chase at the Cheltenham Festival.
The marathon four mile trip brought out the best in Keep Talking and he rallied well when challenged by the useful Irish raider High Peak to win by four lengths.
It will be interesting to see at what distance trainer Tim Thomson Jones campaigns him this season.
He should win some more good races.
Taylor close to dream line-up
GRAHAM Taylor will welcome back at least three of his ‘famous five’ today and draw close to his England dream team for the World Cup qualifier against Turkey on November 18.
David Hirst, Paul Parker and Martin Keown have put their comebacks from injury to the Premier League test and all appear ready to take up the invitation issued by Taylor after last month's 1-1 draw against Norway.
Then he named them, along with Liverpool's Rob Jones and still injured John Barnes, as the five he believed might embellish further an encouraging performance by a Paul Gascoigne-inspired England.
Chances
‘If they come back and show anything like their true capabilities then they have to be in consideration.
They're going to be competing to get in,’ he said.
Sheffield Wednesday striker Hirst could go straight into the team as partner to Alan Shearer after a disappointing Wembley display by Arsenal's Ian Wright.
Everton defender Keown, rated one of the best man-to-man markers in the English game by Taylor, could also reclaim the England shirt he wore for nine consecutive games up to and including the European Championship.
Jones — celebrating his 21st birthday today — must be tantalising Taylor after three brief Liverpool returns this season.
Focus on a fashion cult
Just the motif to buy a new T-shirt
CULT T-shirts are taking off all over Merseyside.
More and more people are getting the standard pop music motifs off their chests in favour of designs which highlight the off-beat and individual.
Enter Reg Holdsworth!
The Coronation Street colossus is now adorning torsos across the country…thanks to the Liverpool-based D.M. (Depressed Milkman!)
Script Company.
The mail order firm, which describes its latest design as the Cult T-Shirt of 1992, is now hoping to launch an official Reg Holdsworth fan club.
‘Put it this way, if I was a woman I would like to bear his children,’ said Depressed Milkman supremo Ged Backland, who has stayed on the right side of the copyright laws by using a pencil drawing of the Bettabuys boss.
Ged has also produced T-shirts celebrating the likes of David Icke, Frank Bough and Ivy Tilsley.
‘No-one was going out in T-shirts in the late 80's but now they are back in fashion,’ says Ged.
Cads in Brunswick Street, Liverpool offers personalised T-shirts.
That precious photo of the family pet or daft design to mark a work colleague's birthday can now take centre stage.
‘We do a lot of joke stuff,’ said company co-director Cliff Horton.
Added Cliff: ‘We can reproduce virtually anything providing it is not obscene.’
The Canning Shirt Company at the Albert Dock puts transfers and lettering on T-shirts and produces its own designs, including Liverpool logos, which go down a bomb with the tourists.
POSTSCRIPT.
The creators of the million-selling ‘adult’ comic Viz have produced more than 60 T-shirt designs.
They sell 100,000 shirts a year but, unfortunately, the two examples sent to the Echo were unsuitable for use in a family newspaper.
Merseyman sentenced to life in Thai jail
A LIVERPOOL man was starting a life sentence in a Thailand prison today after being convicted of trafficking heroin worth £200,000.
Brian Mounsey, 24, who has lived in Thailand for the past three years, was arrested after being found with two kilos of heroin.
Mounsey, who pleaded guilty to the charge, has refused to give British foreign office officials any information about his family in Liverpool.
A foreign office spokesman said: ‘We know very little.
He has been living in Thailand, has a Thai wife and speaks Thai.
‘He has not asked for any help from us.
There is very little we can do.’
Mounsey is now in Bangkok's top security prison, Bangkwang.
Clay County's five star show
CLAY COUNTY put on a five star show at Kelso yesterday, returning from a near nine month absence to capture the BSkyB Handicap Chase.
The locally-trained gelding jumped immaculately and made every yard of the running to score by two lengths from Moment of Truth.
Clay County had rattled off a sequence of five straight wins last winter, two of them at Kelso, before being well beaten by Deep Sensation at Nottingham in February.
Trainer Dick Allan was delighted with the comeback performance.
He said: ‘Clay County wrenched the muscles in his quarters when dropping his hind legs in the water jump at Nottingham, so we decided to give the Cheltenham Festival a miss and let him have a long break.
‘I thought he would win today, getting a stone off Moment of Truth, but the second is a very good horse.
‘It was our horse's first run in handicap company, and the race will have put him spot on because he was still a bit rusty.
‘He had been working well with Pat's Jester at home and both have been going extremely well.’
Allan now plans to take Clay County to Cheltenham for the £8,000 Hackett Handicap Chase next Friday, while Pat's Jester, narrowly beaten by Tipping Tim at Wetherby last weekend, is on course for Haydock's Tommy Whittle Chase.
The John Hughes Memorial Trophy at next year's Aintree Grand National fixture is a likely target for Whaat Fettle, who completed a hat-trick of victories over the Kelso fences when capturing the Pat DeClermont Challenge Cup Handicap Chase.
Michael Moloney attempted to make all the running on the 5-4 favourite but lost the initiative four out to Interim Lib.
But Moloney's mount was soon back in command when his rival made a nonsense of the second last jump, from where Whaat Fettle went on to record a splendid 10-length win.
‘I could see this fellow as a Scottish National horse, but first we might have a crack at the ‘John Hughes’,’ said Richards.
‘If the going is suitable, Whaat Fettle could come back here next Thursday for another handicap chase,’ added the trainer, joining Martin Pipe on the 33 mark for the season.
Rising star Andrew Thornton is within one of last season's 10 winner total as he continues to set a blistering pace in the battle for the amateur riders' championship.
The 20-year-old scored on his only two mounts: If You Say So, 10 lengths winner of the Radio Borders Maiden Hurdle, and well-backed Strong Views, an equally decisive scorer in the Scottish Power Handicap Hurdle.
Both Thornton's winners are trained by Arthur Stephenson, who is hoping to return home at the weekend after a spell in a Middlesbrough hospital for a viral condition.
LET'S see!
I was approximately 18 months old when Shankly left Liverpool.
I don't remember Heighway running down the wing, and I never saw Roger Hunt hit the back of the net.
I've read about them all, and seen nearly every video out.
But I wasn't there, and this is to your advantage because I'm not going to harp on about my favourite Shankly saying, or pretend I was close friends with the man like certain people do.
It's pure and simple.
The man was a legend, a genius, call him what you want.
He was also a one-off.
Methods
Now I'm all for traditions.
I'd rather stand than sit on the Kop, and it's obvious that certain of Shankly's thoughts and methods are still considered and used.
After all, these methods are tried and tested.
However, things must change.
Many so-called experts will tell you how the game has changed over the last 30 years.
Therefore, methods must be updated.
Criticisms from ex-players, in my opinion, are nothing but sour grapes.
True, rather than making wholesale changes, gradual changes should be made.
But we shouldn't rest on our laurels.
We should strive for perfection.
By tonight, he'll certainly have that rosy glow
So who's the Guy in the corner?
Story: Jules Stenson Picture: Frank Loughlin
OLD sailor Harry Ward isn't looking forward to bonfire night…because his latest drinking companion, Johnny the papier mache Guy, will be burned alive.
Drinkers at Peter Kavanagh's pub in Egerton Street, Toxteth, Liverpool, say they can't tell the difference between Harry and Johnny.
And even Harry, 73, of Huskisson Street, admits there are a few similarities.
Smiling at his doomed pal, he said: ‘Blimey, he even looks older than me and that's saying something.
I didn't think there was anyone worse looking than me.
‘There's definitely hope for me yet.’
Harry has the perfect remedy to put a bit of colour in Johnny's cheeks.
‘I think he could do with a drop of Guinness to liven him up,’ he said.
‘He looks a bit pale but he'll have a rosy glow tonight.’
Johnny sits in a quiet corner of the pub with the Echo crossword and a rum and black.
Landlady Rita Smith said: ‘We are going to be sorry to see him go.
He has come to be quite a feature in the pub.’
One barman mistook Johnny for one of the regulars and apologised for standing on his foot.
The jokes have been flying thick and fast since he became a permanent fixture on Hallowe'en.
One regular was just thankful there was someone who spent more time in the pub than him.
Another moaned that Johnny was a little slow putting his hand in pocket.
But then, he's not the only drinker with that problem…
Be safe not sorry: Page 13
Jagger urged to rebuild marriage
ROLLING Stone Keith Richard today said Mick Jagger and Jerry Hall should get back together and that Bill Wyman's marriage to Mandy Smith was a disaster waiting to happen.
Urging Jagger to rebuild his marriage with the Texan model, he said: ‘I think it will be a real shame if Mick and Jerry do split up.
I hope Mick will come to his senses.’
Richard, now happily married with two young children, told Vanity Fair magazine that he feels Jagger is too old to be chasing other women.
‘Mick should stop that now.
He's kicking 50 years old and it's a bit manic.’
There have been rumours that his interest in Italian model girl Carla Bruni have shaken the couple's marriage.
He also denied there was a rift between himself and Hall.
‘Jerry and I joust but I think she's great, she's got a lovely Texas accent and she's a smart girl.’
Of child bride Mandy Smith he said: ‘I never saw that girl after the wedding.
She just never turned up.
We were working, admittedly, on the road, but for two years not once did she…well that was it.
I saw it as a disaster and it happened, but I didn't think it would be such a hello-goodbye thing as it turned out to be.’
Jerry Hall…‘smart girl’
Taxing call
A PLEA for immediate action to ensure disabled poll tax debtors can appear in court has been rejected.
Liverpool left-wingers protested when a call for a court which disabled people can get in and out of was rejected.
Policy and resources chairwoman Dawn Booth promised to investigate the idea, but said no firm commitment could be given until they knew all the implications.
Hamlet actor's trip down memory lane
HI Claudius, was the message to a top Shakespearian actor when he visited a Merseyside school.
David Burke, who plays Claudius in this week's acclaimed production of Hamlet at St George's Hall, hails from Liverpool, and is an old boy of St Francis Xaviers School.
He took time out of his busy schedule to visit the sixth form luncheon club at St Wilfrid's RC High School, Litherland, to give a talk on ‘a day in the life of an actor’.
He is pictured later discussing Othello with English students.
Picture: NEVILLE WILLASEY.
A new mum's story
ONE woman who has tested Southport's ‘drop-in’ centre is local mum Lynn Deary.
She went to the centre for a check and was given the allclear.
The following week, her own doctor's clinic referred her back to the centre because of a slight problem with her blood pressure.
She says: ‘I had been to the centre — which is really relaxed and informal.
‘They made the usual checks then, because I was allowed to go back at any time if there was a problem, they let me go home.
‘As it was, I was referred back by the clinic a week later because of blood pressure problems and the midwife kept a check on me.
‘She discovered a problem with a blood test and I was admitted to hospital.’
Three days later — on September 8 — Lynn, 26, gave birth to baby Rebecca, by emergency caesarian section at Oxford Street Maternity Hospital in Liverpool.
Lynn says: ‘Because the centre had discovered the problem they were prepared.
‘Had the centre not been there to keep an eye on me, I would have probably been admitted to hospital the previous week and kept in.’
Rebecca was transferred to Southport where she is still being looked after.
She is now doing well at 4lb 2oz.
Truth behind toll of abuse
THE number of children on Wirral's child protection register has jumped 10% in a year, according to the council's annual social services report.
But it reveals that a shortage of staff to deal with the removal of youngsters from the register gives a ‘totally inaccurate picture’ of the number of children at risk of abuse.
Jobs boom: More than 100 new staff are being recruited by the Pioneer discount store in Woodchurch Road, Birkenhead, which closes on Monday for refurbishment.
Jon gets into top gear for the RAC
By Paul Pickup
JON Joannides warmed up for the Lombard RAC Rally in the best possible way by winning the Cambrian Rally.
It featured some of the North Wales forests to be used in the international event later this month.
The Burscough driver was fastest on the opening Great Orme tarmac stage, using his continental experience to the full.
But Joannides lost time to Yorkshire driver Brian Bell when the route moved onto the gravel roads.
Joannides put the pressure on again in the closing Clocaenog stages, forcing the leader into a few close shaves.
Bell's Sierra slowed with driveshaft problems and finally stopped, so assuring the Lancashire driver of victory.
A trio of local drivers are closing in on the Autoquip North Western Rally title as the final four rounds in the series are approached.
Defending champion Malcolm Rigby from Newton-le-Willows is best placed to challenge the leader.
Hot on Rigby's heels is Little Budworth's Mike Barber who in turn has to keep an eye on Dingle's Tony Collins, just a few points behind.
Adrian Dale (Newton-le-Willows), co-driver to Rigby, leads the navigators stage rally championship.
Chester's Duncan Wild is fourth in the Autotest series.
In the club championship, Lancashire and Cheshire are locked in to combat with winners of the past two years, Knutsford.
Chester MC are in third place with Warrington sixth.
Liverpool Motor Club is running the Brenig service area near Denbigh on the Lombard RAC Rally in the afternoon of Monday November 23.
£26m record deal puts Elton in at number one
By Echo reporter
ELTON John and his partner Bernie Taupin joined the ranks of the greats today after an American company paid them the biggest advance in music history.
The £26m deal eclipses the £13m advance which Prince got in September.
Elton, who was performing in the Great Western Forum in Los Angeles, and his long-time lyricist Taupin signed the deal with Time Warner.
The deal gives music publishing arm Warner/Chappell Music the sole rights to market Elton's catalogue of music from 1974, as well as material from his next six albums.
The agreement calls for Elton and Taupin to retain ownership of the catalogue.
The advance will be deducted from royalties over the next 12 years.
Warner/Chappell chairman Les Bider said: ‘This deal is with one of the last great superstars.
‘He and Bernie Taupin are the George and Ira Gershwin of the 90s.’
Mr Bider said his company would encourage other artists to record from the catalogue.
The man born Reginald Dwight 45 years ago in Pinner, Middlesex, has had a spectacular career founded on talent and outrageous presentation.
Twenty four of his albums have gone platinum.
Elton…joins the ranks of the great
LETTERS
I WRITE in appreciation of Broadgreen Hospital for the wonderful attention and care accorded to me from all the staff during the five days I spent there.
I particularly wish to thank the Casualty department and Ward 9 from where I was released.
H. Parsons, Liverpool 13.
IN THESE DAYS of gloom and doom, how refreshing to read about the lifeguard who risked his life to save his dog.
Thankfully, the story had a happy ending.
Good luck, Mr Greer, you deserve more than a medal.
Mrs P. Reece, Crosby.
Lazy drivers
I WISH to complain about the dangerously increasing practice by many uncaring motorists to park their cars directly in front of bus stops.
Apart from the problem of elderly or disabled people having to walk around parked cars into the middle of the road to even attempt signalling a bus, there remains the difficulty of boarding a bus away from the raised pavement.
Surely such lazy car drivers who park directly beside bus stops rather than walk a few yards to a shop, should be prosecuted before a fatal accident results from their thoughtless actions.
Mrs Hilary Coyne, Aigburth.
Confusing £10
I WISH to warn people about the danger of carrying the new £10 note around this Christmas.
It is not a familiar object in our recessionary times, especially to the old and people who have been out enjoying themselves.
We got change for a £5 note from a young taxi driver recently.
You don't realise because the note is a new currency item and you're still living in the world of the old £5 and £10 notes.
A certain minority have realised the potential for confusion here.
It would be beneficial to warn people to change their ‘alien’ notes to familiar currency during the Christmas period so they know where they are and do not give the opportunity to the fast buck merchants of lining their nests.
G. Smith, Crosby.
Work never done
I WOULD like to reply to Mrs F. Taylor of Runcorn.
Yes, Mrs Taylor, Cilla Black has had a lorra luck to get out of Liverpool when she did the same as you.
If Cilla has betrayed Liverpool she is not alone.
The population of Liverpool has vastly reduced since the so-called Labour party policy took over our great city.
The Labour vote has declined because Liverpool people are fed up paying the highest poll tax in the country for a lorra lorra people who won't pay.
Pensioners and law abiding citizens are being made to pay for council work that never gets done, poor street lighting that never gets fixed, empty houses being left to vandals, cemeteries neglected.
So Mrs Taylor, if Cilla has betrayed the city so have I for I could never vote Labour if this is an example of Labour rule.
Ex-Labour party member, Liverpool 9.
In the dark
REGARDING T. Clayton of Childwall's letter stating that they have Blackpool lights on their doorsteps in Chelwood Avenue.
Maybe they would be so kind as to turn the lights around a touch and have them facing us here in Naylorsfield.
As for another Childwall resident stating she cannot sleep as it is so bright, we have the opposite trouble.
We think it is night time when in actual fact morning has well and truly broken.
Cathy, Naylorsfield.
RE THE letter complaining of the lights too bright on Chelwood Avneue, it would be most welcome if the lights there could be switched to Methuen Street.
For six weeks it has been pitch black.
It reminds us of the blackout and people are scared to go out once it gets dark.
We would swop our lights for theirs any day.
So be satisfied, Childwall.
G.H.J., Wavertree.
KIND people
WE WOULD like to thank Stephen Yip and all the staff at KIND for the care and consideration shown to a colleague of ours during her recent difficulties.
Their kindness and consideration will not be forgotten, nor will the people who kindly donate to this charity.
Appreciative Onlooker.
This was typical of the way Merseyside suffered during the war
Were these really the good old days?
WHEN PEOPLE talk about the good old days, they usually mean the 1920s to early 1950s.
We remember the good times, forget the bad.
I was born in 1934 and lived through a world war.
I had an uncle and aunt killed.
My house and school were both bombed.
The good old days?
I was born in Tatlock Street at the back of the Gem Cinema.
Our house was lit by gas when we had money to pay for it.
We had an outside toilet and one cold water tap.
The cooking had to be done on an open fire and, when we wanted a bath, we warmed the water in a pan and poured it into a tin bath in front of the fire.
The good old days?
When I was five we moved to a block of tenements in Sylvester Street called Woodstock Gardens.
The flat had a bathroom and toilet and, if you could afford to buy coal, you could have hot water.
01Soon after we moved in the war started.
From then we spent many nights in the air raid shelter.
People were killed, others saw their homes and shops destroyed.
The good old days?
Our main source of entertainment was the cinema.
The bad man always got his comeuppance, the hero got the girl.
We knew it was not true to life but it was a good way to escape our humdrum lives if only for a few hours.
We had respect for our parents, police and clergy.
I think in the old days people were more tolerant towards each other.
I have many happy memories of a time when the world was innocent as were most of us.
So if anyone wants company for a walk down Memory Lane, I will gladly go with them.
James O'Leary, Liverpool 24.
BT sympathy
I DISAGREE with the recent Echo Comment which criticised BT for offering only £20 compensation to business users in the aftermath of the serious arson attack on Wavertree telephone exchange.
I am self employed and rely heavily on the telephone, I think BT and their engineers do a marvellous job most of the time.
This attack was arson and outside BT's control.
This is surely one case where the general public, including business users, should give BT a sympathetic ear.
E. Herbert, Skelmersdale.
Make them pay
THE ECHO'S reply to Tom Roberts' recent letter forgets to mention that lots of the criminals' victims are deprived of their freedom — pensioners too frightened to go for fear of being mugged, young girls afraid to walk the streets at night in fear of being raped.
Let's be realistic, the fact is crime does pay.
So let's not pamper these criminals.
When caught make them suffer.
Television and any communication with the outside world should be banned.
Give them just enough food for them to be able to work for their keep.
And the fact is they will not want to experience it again.
T. McGuinness, Bebington.
Real villains
I HAVE no doubt that the vandals who defaced Bomber Harris's statue are feeling pretty smug and probably thinking that they had made a point for Dresden.
But let us think about what would have happened if the Allies had not retaliated to the indiscriminate bombing of this country and the dive bombing tactics of the Luftwaffe on refugees on the continent.
Perhaps we could have been celebrating the first golden anniversary of the 1,000 Reich boasted about by Hitler.
One thing is certain, though.
The Nazis were the real villains, not our airmen.
David Williams, Wallasey.
FIRE CHIEFS IN BONFIRE WARNING
Guy Fawkes message to 80,000 at risk
By Jane Croft
BE safe, not sorry, was the message from fire chiefs today as they and their crews geared up for fireworks night on Merseyside.
They urged people to keep a close check on fireworks and bonfires to minimise the risk of injury during Guy Fawkes celebrations.
The follow-the-fireworks-code warning came in the light of this week's report from trading standards officers in Liverpool claiming casualties are 100 times worse than officially estimated.
Trading Standards boss Peter Mawdsley claims 80,000 people are injured around November 5, not 800 as recorded by the government.
Merseyside Fire Brigade was expecting to receive three times more call outs than normal tonight.
A brigade spokesman said: ‘Our major message to the public is that they should build bonfires safely and well away from property or parked cars.
‘If we are called out to a bonfire which potentially could cause damage, it is our responsibility to put it out.
‘We also urge people to take advantage of the larger organised displays rather than run an event themselves.’
Richard Oswick, from Mersey Regional Ambulance Service, said that those who play with fireworks should understand the risks involved.
He said: ‘We would urge people to be aware and be alert with fireworks because your fun might be someone else's tragedy.’
He added: ‘We will be prepared for Bonfire night but we hope that no one needs us.’
The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals was also urging pet owners to keep their animals indoors wherever possible and protect animals in hutches.
Peter Mann, director of the charity's veterinary services, said: ‘The sheer noise of fireworks can shock a pet into running away and becoming lost and frightened in unfamiliar surroundings.’
Mr Mann also urged that people lighting their bonfire should check for pets like the family tortoise and hedgehogs which may have hibernated there.
Meanwhile, thousands of people will tonight attending a firework display at the King's Dock in Liverpool and other smaller displays at Sefton Park and Walton Hall Park (all at 8pm).
In SEFTON, displays are taking place at Leisure Lake, Mere Brow near Southport, Holy Family School Norwood Crescent, near Southport, Ainsdale Lido, All Souls Church, Norwood Road, Southport,(all starting at 6.30pm) and Southport Football club at 7pm.
In WIRRAL, displays were being staged at Lower Park in Birkenhead Park, Central Park in Wallasey, Leasowe Adventure Playground, Mayer Park in Bebington, Woodchurch Community Centre, Upton Park in Moreton and Lingham Park in Moreton (all at 6.30pm).
Another was being held for charity at Tranmere Rovers Ground, Prenton Park.
The fireworks were beginning at 7.30pm, though there will be entertainment from 7pm.
Other firework parties include displays at Warrington's Orford Park (7pm) and Victoria Park (6.45pm) and Sherdley Park in St Helen's (6.45pm) and at Edge Hill College of Higher Education in Ormskirk (6.45pm), and at Standish High School in Wigan (6.30pm).
Ellesmere Port displays include Capenhurst Social Club Sports Field (6pm) and Chester Yeoman in Ledsham Road, Little Sutton (7pm).
In Halton there are displays at Spike Island, Widnes and Runcorn Town Hall all at 6.30pm.
IN KNOWSLEY there is a display at Staedtmores Country Park in Pottery Lane, Whiston, at 8pm.
Olympic gold medallist Chris Boardman will set light to a bonfire and fireworks display being held by Hoylake and West Kirby Round Table at Hoylake rugby club at 7pm on Saturday night.
Peter Mawdsley 80,000 injured
Chance to be Mersey mascot
A WEEK on Saturday, Merseyside will take on Manchester at Goodison Park in Graeme Sharp's testimonial game.
How would you like to be the Merseyside mascot?
Details of an easy to enter competition, open to all youngsters 14 and under, will appear in tomorrow's Echo.
The Merseyside team will be a combined Liverpool and Everton XI with fascinating possibilities.
You could be part of the big day.
Don't miss tomorrow's Echo for full details.
Five injured in city car smash
FIVE people were taken to hospital last night after this BMW was involved in a smash with a Vauxhall Cavalier car at the junction of Great Howard Street and Lightbody Street, Everton, Liverpool.
They were treated at the Royal Liverpool Hospital for minor injuries.
One of the injured was the driver of the BMW, who was treated for chest pains by ambulance staff at the scene.
But an ambulance spokesman said the man was not seriously hurt, although he suffered shock.
Memories of an era of real skill
FOOTBALL is reaching dangerous levels of decline.
I gave up my season ticket in 1972 when radical changes in almost every phase of the game were evident.
What had once been a pleasant Saturday afternoon's entertainment was fast becoming a greedy, unskilled exercise to satisfy the demands of the uninitiated.
Players' agents must take most of the blame for this debilitating soccer illness.
Clubs lost their authority and control of players when money reared its ugly head.
Today, top players can make enough in one year to last a lifetime.
The media must also accept some of the blame.
Ordinary run-of-the-mill players are built up into footballing geniuses.
Gary Lineker is a perfect example.
Appreciative audience
In the penalty box he is above par.
Outside the box he has to be one of the worst centre forwards ever to wear an England shirt.
I can remember the skills of Stubbins, Milburn, Lawton and Tommy Taylor.
They had no agents, no TV advertising or over-the-top reporting and yet they went out and paraded their skills to an appreciative audience, receiving no more, or no less reward than any of their team-mates.
I never thought I would see the day when a game is played without the presence of visiting supporters.
Gary Lineker…media hype.
CAPTAIN DIBBLE Seven-year-old bay gelding (Crash Course/Sailor's Will)
PETER Scudamore's neighbour Nigel Twiston-Davies has got off to a tremendous start this season with 24 wins in the bag already.
The Cheltenham trainer has steadily improved his strike rate over the past five years and should eclipse his 1991/92 tally of 31.
One of the horses most likely to boost the coffers is Captain Dibble.
The seven-year-old started last season winning his first novice chase at Uttoxeter and by April had landed the Scottish Nationalan extraordinary performance for a first season steeplechaser.
Clearly it's a case of the further the distance, the better Captain Dibble gets.
He made a promising reappearance at Ascot last month, gradually making up ground under top weight of 11st 10lbs, to finish within 1 lengths of Latent Talent.
And as 7-4 favourite on Thursday, he beat Espry and Bortaceva over three miles at Wincanton.
He's a sound jumper already and can only improve with more experience.
Don't be surprised to see Scudamore aboard the gelding at Aintree next spring.
70 kidnapped in Angola
THE United Nations said that 20 Brazilian and 50 Russian workers had been kidnapped by opposition soldiers in eastern Angola, where they were working on a Congo River dam project.
Violence erupted after Jonas Savimbi, leader of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (Unita), rejected the results of UN-supervised elections in September which gave the ruling MPLA party a victory.
Iran pledge: Iran's armed forces say they are ready to help Bosnian Muslims in their war with Serb forces opposed to Bosnian independence.
Rouble weaker: The battered rouble inched back down to another record low on Moscow's tiny Interbank Currency Exchange today, changing hands at 399 to the dollar.
Under threat: Irish premier Albert Reynolds looks certain to fall today after three members of his frail coalition government resigned and affirmed they would oppose a vote of confidence.
Star perfume: Megastar Michael Jackson has joined the superstar perfume stakes, marketing Legende de Michael for men and Mystique de Miachael for women, with part of the proceeds going to aid poor children.
Family killed: Six members of a family supporting the ANC have been killed in an attack on their home in Sebokeng township, near Johannesburg.
Signals hitch: Radio signals from microwave ovens and TVs are clogging the airwaves and threatening the exploration of space, according to the Space Frequency Coordination Group.
Sitting pretty: Marion Barry, who lost his job as Mayor of Washington and served six months' jail for cocaine possession, is back in city government after winning a council seat.
Buy-out still an option
MANAGEMENT buy-outs are still a major option, even in the depths of the recession, says venture capitalist 3i.
Robert Toomey, director of 3i's Liverpool office, said large-scale buy-outs involving a syndicate of financial institutions declined by almost 40% in the last three years to 1991.
But the traditional management buyouts -with bosses taking a majority holding -only fell by 10% between 1989 and 1991.
‘We believe the longer-term trend is that such MBOs will become an even larger feature of the corporate scene,’ said Mr Toomey.
He said the recession could even encourage MBOs as large companies raise cash by disposing of subsidiary organisations.
CHEMICAL GAS CLOUD ALERT FEAR
Roads closed, trains stopped and housesholds warned after ICI plant blaze
By Philippa Bellis and Gwyn Griffiths
A GAS cloud alert caused chaos today with hundreds of families told to stay in their homes, commuter traffic diverted and trains halted.
A huge operation swung into action after a fire at a Cheshire chemical factory sent a cloud of gases drifting over the area.
More than 50 fire fighters tackled the blaze at the ICI plant at Lostock near Northwich.
Roads were closed and eight ambulances stood by as the cloud drifted towards the villages of Wincham and Lostock Gralam.
Police cordoned off the main A556 Manchester Road and diverted commuter traffic while Operation Cloudburst was underway.
Stopped
Thousands of residents were ordered to stay indoors and close all windows before the alert was finally called off.
Trains from Manchester to Chester stopped at Knutsford while Chester to Manchester trains stopped at Altrincham with a bus service running from Altrincham to Northwich.
An ICI spokesman said: ‘The fire was in a plant dealing with Alloprene which is a rubber compound added to paint.
‘It is not dangerous or toxic.
The emissions only contained one part per million of hydrochloric acid.’
One worker was treated for smoke inhalation but there were no other casualties.
The spokesman said an investigation would begin today to find out what caused the fire.
‘It was a serious fire and people were told to stay indoors as a precautionary measure.
The plant was scheduled for closure at the end of the year.’
Firefighters wearing breathing apparatus arrived just before 6am and took more than two hours to bring the blaze under control.
They dispersed the chemicals with a curtain of water.
Anne Oakes of Works Lane, Lostock, said ‘I didn't hear any warning by a loud-hailer.
I just heard it on TV.
‘My son rushed in at about seven o'clock after seeing ambulances and said that ICI was on fire.’
Ronald Taylor, who had travelled from Winsford to his daughter's house at Middlewich Road, Rudheath, said he was affected by the smell.
He said: ‘As I got out of the car I could smell the gas.’
His daughter Diane Perry said she was rung by her husband from work after he'd heard it on the radio.
‘Someone came by the house with a loudhailer but I couldn't hear it properly.
Fortunately my next door neighbour came round to tell me to stay indoors.
I haven't smelt anything and it does seem that ICI have given adequate warning.’
Toxic
Cheshire Fire Brigade who set up an emergency operation centre on site said the cloud had been taken by the prevailing wind east of Northwich.
A fire brigade spokesman said they had fed the name of the compound into a computer and the print-out said it could be toxic if it caught fire.
‘We have to take precautions to protect members of the public and we err on the side of caution.
If a fire involves a chemical compound the chances are it can be more toxic.’
DRAWING THEM IN ON THE WIRRAL
Top cartoonist turns his hand to home town humour
By Anne Harrison
INTERNATIONALLY-renowned cartoonist Bill Stott has taken a humorous look at the Wirral for his latest book.
The Funny Side of Wirral, published by husband and wife team Ian and Marilyn Boumphrey, is full of amusing sketches about day-to-day life on the peninsular where Bill has lived for 25 years.
Subjects ranging from the ferries and Mersey tunnels to the Tall Ships Race and local tourist attractions are all given a lighthearted treatment.
The invasion of travellers on the peninsula and the success of Hoylake's Olympic cyclist Chris Boardman also get a mention.
The Boumphreys, who also write and publish the Yesterday's Wirral series, approached their friend Bill to write the book.
Worked
‘Bill can put pen to paper and within a matter of seconds do a cartoon, so we thought why not have a cartoon book about Wirral,’ said Ian who runs the business with Marilyn from their home in Acrefield Road, Prenton.
Bill, also a Prenton resident, worked closely with the Boumphreys for about a month to produce the book which is now on sale in bookshops throughout Merseyside and newsagents in Wirral.
His cartoons regularly appear in national newspapers and magazines while his 15 books in The Crazy World series sell at home and abroad.
Tonight's Choice
BLACKADDER GOES FORTH (BBC2, 9pm)
SOMETIMES the best comedies also have you reaching for the Kleenex.
This is a case in point.
The last of the Blackadder adventures says more about the reality of war than a host of documentaries.
We're back in the trenches of World War One, it's raining and the men are ankle-deep in mud.
But it's different, there's a strange hush in the air and the endless rumbling of 50,000 cannon shells.
This, they all surmise, must be ‘the big push’.
Then comes the news Blackadder, George and Baldrick are ‘going over the top’ in the morning.
And it seems that nothing, not even one of Baldrick's cunning plans, can save them.
Up until the final minutes the jokes fly as fast as sniper's bullets.
But by the closing credits, you should be blubbing into your hankie.
SOUNDS OF THE 60s: 1968-1969 IN LIVING COLOUR (BBC2, 7.15pm)
NO longer black and white, television was in glorious colour.
And the bands leading the way forward, from monochrome to rainbow, included The Kinks.
Others showing the way in what was also the era of the ‘concept’ album, post-Pepper, included the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, the Small Faces and the Moody Blues.
FRANK SIDEBOTTOM'S FANTASTIC SHED SHOW (ITV, 12.35am)
FRANK SIDEBOTTOM, the man whose papier-mache head must be responsible for the loss of quite a fair amount of small coniferous growths, now has his own show.
First shown on Yorkshire Television, it's now our turn to let the starry-eyed host show off his skills.
Guests on show one include sports stars Lee Chapman and Dennis Taylor and band London Beat.
ELDORADO (BBC1, 7pm)
IT'S growing on me, I confess.
Since Fizz has gone to a better place and Bunny hasn't been around, it's improved immeasurably.
Right now the gossip in the town is that Ingrid is pregnant and it looks as though Olive King is about to become a star…about time too!
London date for Emma, 12
EMMA Joyce, 12, has won the prestigious Unilever Young Environmentalist of the Year award for her project entitled Wildlife around my home.
Emma's prizes are a lunch at London's Dorchester Hotel with her family and a week's environmental discovery holiday in Dorset.
Her winning project featured Wirral's Arrowe Park and a farm near her home in Greasby.
The competition was open to young relatives of Unilever employees and pensioners.
Emma is a pupil at West Kirby Grammar School.
Smiling nurse in car smash tragedy
By Alex Hunt
A NURSE smiled and pulled faces at a friend just before a van ploughed into the back of her car, causing fatal injuries.
Tracey Gouldsbrough's car was thrown in the air and turned 180 degrees, an inquest heard.
She was waiting in the outside lane of a busy road in St Helens to turn right when the accident happened.
Tracey, 22, of Mill Lane, St Helens never regained consciousness and died eight days later.
She was following fellow nurse Justine Glynn who was waiting in a gap in the central reservation to cross the East Lancashire Road in Windle.
‘Tracey was close behind.
I could see her in my rear view mirror.
She was smiling, waving and doing funny expressions,’ she said.
Liverpool coroner Roy Barter heard a police statement from van driver Brian Antrobus that he pulled out to overtake and was unable to avoid the crash.
Shift
Mr Barter, recording a verdict of accidental death, called for police and highways officials to stop traffic using the intersection.
The two were crossing to get a cup of coffee at the Little Chef after finishing shifts at Broadgreen Hospital in Liverpool.
The inquest heard that Mr Antrobus was facing a charge of careless driving.
In his statement, he said he was travelling at about 55mph.
He said the dead woman's car was not indicating to turn right but Miss Gynn said she was certain Tracey was.
Accident investigator PC Philip Elwood said just before the accident site there was a sign saying it was a clear way for six miles.
He added: ‘I think the intersection is there mainly for the benefit of the farm on the other side to the Little Chef.’
Calling for action to prevent a repetition, Mr Barter said: ‘I doubt at the moment that the intersection is safe.’
Has to be Asda for French visitor
FRENCH student Frederique Mace knows her onions after spending a week on work experience at Asda's superstore in Wallasey.
Frederique, 18, is among a group of teenagers from Lorient in Brittany doing temporary jobs at offices, schools and shops across Wirral.
She said: ‘I am enjoying it although it is difficult for me with the customers as I don't know the shop.’
Her trip is part of an exchange between sixth-formers from Wirral and their counterparts from Lorient.
The two areas have been twinned for 35 years.
Frederique is staying in Wallasey with the family of 17-year-old Lindsay Fardoe before returning to France on Friday.
A party of Wirral teenagers, including Lindsay, spent a week on work experience in Lorient last month.
Further Wirral schools exchanges with Lorient and its other French twin town of Gennevillers near Paris are taking place next year.
The closing date for applicants aged 1318 is November 13.
Hats off to Merseyside…
Frederique Mace in the Wirral Asda shop
Teenager's battle is poised to make legal history in High Court chambers
GIRL DEFENDS RIGHT TO DIVORCE PARENTS
By Echo reporter
A 14-YEAR-OLD girl will make British legal history tomorrow when she defends her right to ‘divorce’ her parents.
The legal action began when lawyers Hart Brown and Co, of Farnham, Surrey, obtained a ‘prohibited steps’ order from a Guildford County Court judge.
Reconciliation
This prevented the girl's parents taking her away from the home of her 18-year-old boyfriend.
It is understood the girl's divorced parents have reconciled.
Lawyers said the girl, who cannot be named for legal reasons, does not have a good relationship with her father.
The prospect of him returning to the family home prompted her action under the 1989 Children Act.
The Act allows, for the first time, children to initiate proceedings and instruct a solicitor to make court applications independently.
There will be a full hearing in chambers at the High Court before the president of the Family Division, Sir Stephen Brown, tomorrow when all parties will be represented, including the mother of the girl's boyfriend.
The girl may give evidence.
The judge will decide whether to grant a ‘residence order,’ allowing her to remain at her new home.
Such an order would be reviewed by the court in the future.
In a bid to compel her daughter to return home, the girl's mother has also sought a ‘residence order’.
She would also need a ‘prohibitive steps’ order to ensure the ‘residence order’is followed.
The final decision will only relate to where the girl lives and does not affect her parents' other rights.
The case comes weeks after American Gregory Kingsley, 12, ‘divorced’ his parents in a court action in Florida.
Best of both 4x4 worlds
Road Test by Dave Kendall
Range Rover Vogue LSE.
FLOATS like a butterfly, sings like a bee…with apologies to Muhammed Ali.
Up until now it has been difficult to have the best of both worlds when it comes to running one of the more expensive 4x4 off-road vehicles.
A suspension system that can soak up the bumps of a ploughed field or gravel road, cannot offer the smooth ride on roads and motorways that the top of the market owners would expect.
Now all that is about to change with the introduction by Land Rover of a new long wheelbase flagship Range Rover Vogue LSE, which is fitted with a world first an electronic air suspension system (EAS).
The EAS is the most technically advanced system ever fitted to a dual purpose vehicle.
It consists of four air springs, which replace the coil springs, new dampers and four height sensors at each corner.
An electronic control unit, which is fed information about the road speed, engine speed, the operation of the brakes, the auto-transmission lever position as well as information from the ride height sensors, oversees the operation of the EAS, which has five different height settings.
The Vogue LSE is also the first off-road vehicle to be fitted with electronic traction control (ETC).
It operates on the rear wheels only, by applying the brakes to the spinning or slipping wheel and transferring torque to the other side of the axle.
After only a day testing the new system, on and off road, around the Wiltshire countryside, floating like a butterfly is the only way I can describe the ride.
I can also confirm that this is indeed the most luxurious Range Rover to date.
The traditional 100-inch wheelbase has been extended to 108 inches, the extra length being donated to the rear seat passengers.
I did say ‘sings like a bee’.
That's because the engine of the Vogue LSE has also received some attention.
The 3.9 V8 has been replaced by a 4.2 V8 unit which now has a catalyst.
This gives the vehicle improved midrange acceleration and a top speed of 111 mph.
Fuel consumption for an engine of this size is acceptable with a constant 56 mph returning 24.2 miles per gallon and a constant 75mph providing 18.7mpg.
The tank holds 18 gallons of unleaded and 0-to-60 is achieved in a little under 10 seconds.
The LSE package also includes a state of the art security alarm, improved headlights, an increase in rear luggage space and an incar entertainment system with four co-axial speakers.
Land Rover has produced something more than a face-lifted Range Rover.
They have a vehicle that will now send other manufacturers back to the drawing board.
Price…in the region of £40,000.
Colts bolt as Elm Tree turn on style
TREE-MENDOUS
ELM TREE recorded a splendid 3-0 victory over Custys Colts in the Scotland Road Junior League Under 11 S and D Shield semi-finals, Marsden (2) and Doyle scoring.
Brunel also progressed to the final 3-1 against Tramways (Dreves), Rawlings, Hunphries and Williamson scoring.
In league games, Four Swallows (Wonderley, Lee Hollywood) defeated Byrom (own goal) 2-1 and Orrys (Scott 2, Kinsella 2, Collins, Atherton) beat Croxteth Cabs (Oscroft 2) 6-2.
Brunel completed an Under 12 club double with a semi-final S and D Shield 3-0 win over Four Swallows, Hewitt, Boggan and King scoring.
Annie (Fitzpatrick 2, Gallagher, Thompson, Power) reached the final 5-1 against Tramways (Smith).
The Under 13 Clarkson Shield semi-finals ended all square after extra time, Stanfield (Quinn 2, Ruby 2) overcame a 3-0 deficit to force a 4-4 draw with Tramways (Gill 2, McDonald, Barton) and Four Swallows (Carroll, King) had a 2-0 advantage but then missed a penalty allowing Athlone to hit back through Kennedy and Randalls to equalise.
The replays take place tomorrow (10 am) and (11.15 am).
Canon beat Hermitage 5-0 with Meredith (3), Lin and Aspinall their marksman.
Orrys (Brodie 4, Furlong 3, Ashcroft, Morgan) defeated Harlech (Fraughan 2) 9-2.
IN the semi-final of the Anfield Junior League Under 13 Mere Lane Social Club Cup, Claremont beat arch rivals Oakfield 2-0 with Robert Daley and Steve Pybis their marksmen.
Thrilling
In the quarter-finals of the Under 11 Cup, Homeright had a three goal ace in Mike Wildman in a thrilling 3-3 draw against Olympia (Mike Andrews 2, John Davidson).
Claremont defeated Sunbury 6-0, Tony Bowden (2), Dean Sankey, Ian Wood, Jimmy Henessey and Peter Buxton scoring.
Oakfield defeated Priory Villa 10-0, Brown (3), Hill (3), Murray (2), Murphy, Gaskell scoring.
Canon (Robert Turner) lost 2-1 against Old Barn (Paul Felmingham 2) and Copplehouse overwhelmed Vernon 12-0.
Hi-tech play area opens
By Phillipa Bellis
A £20,0000 playground opens in Toxteth today and it's all thanks to parent power.
The Parents Support Group at Grove Park Day Nursery managed to raise funds for the project in just six months.
Margaret Mellor, manager of the local authority day nursery, said: ‘The Group got a lot of support from Granby and Toxteth Task Force, the BBC's Children in Need appeal and other trust funds.
Transformed
‘They also raised money through charity events and there has been tremendous support from the local community.’
What was once an unsafe, ugly tarmac area, has been transformed into a safe, grass-covered playground with seesaws and slides for the 60 youngsters who go to the nursery.
Local author and health activist Protasia Torkington officially opened the play area today.
IT doesn't take a professional fashion pundit to work out that when it comes to glamour, Liverpool girls are a force to be reckoned with.
Your pavement philosopher can see that even when the locals aren't trend-setters, they're certainly trend-getters.
But is there a predictable pattern behind their panache?
Are the girls down Church Street just clones of their counterparts in Manchester, Motherwell and Maidstone?
Or does the legendary Liverpudlian personality shine through their style?
Distinctive
Dawn McSherry, manageress of River Island in Church Street, is convinced there's a special look which sets Liverpool girls apart from fellow fashion-seekers in other major cities.
And she should know.
For Dawn has spent much of her time in recent weeks on a woman-watching exercise.
Dawn has been eyeing up her own customers as well as the shoppers who frequent rival stores to come up with an in-vogue verdict on local tastes.
The upshot is that there certainly is a distinctive Merseyside mode.
Not surprisingly, the predominant trend trait is a taste for extrovert, over-the-top dressing, with glittery glam clothes going down a storm for evening, and hyper-smart executive-look suits being snapped up for daytime wear.
‘Liverpool is above all a party place,’ Dawn said.
‘When I compared notes with managers in places like Glasgow and Manchester, I found that women there seemed to go for more restrained, less glitzy clothes.
‘One thing in particular I noticed was that Liverpool girls don't mind shelling out the money to get what they really want.
‘Scrimping and saving goes out of the window if there's a special occasion -and women here are especially label conscious.
‘If there's a designer influence, or, even better, a designer tag, they'll pay now and worry later.’
Dawn says the evening look here in Liverpool is definitely OTT glamour verging on full-blown tarty.
Not content with vamping it up in figure-skimming frocks with plunging cleavages and ribbon straps, we opt for the full dressing-up works, with long gloves, spindly stilettos, sparkling clutch bags and gleaming jewellery aplenty.
Daytime casual is typically the leather and denim look, with close-fitting leggings and high-heeled boots.
While smart tailoring is the most popular look for the workplace, with pinstripes and boucle or moufflon suits particularly sought after.
‘Basically, the Liverpool look is really like the Liverpool personality,’ said Dawn.
‘The clothes that go down the best are bubbly, extrovert and full of character.’
Holland days
HE'S mean, he's moody, he used to be on The Tube and he can play the piano.
He's also got a strangely spelt name.
Jools Holland is back with a ‘hip’, 1990s version of the classic variety show.
Stature
The Happening (tonight, Channel 4, 12.40am) is, says Jools, a: ‘psychedlic vortex of music and love with guests and talent of extraordinary high stature lifting you all the time…and all happening around one grand piano!’
Some may also say all that's a touch pretentious, Jools, but this is Channel 4.
Guests on programme one include Chyna, Andy Fairweather-Low, Dave Gilmour and Sgt Rock.
Insect found in birthday cake
A MOTHER found the remains of a large field moth in a cake she had bought for her daughter's birthday party, Liverpool Magistrates Court was told.
She bought the ‘celebration sponge cake’ from Sayers Confectionery shop in St John's Precinct.
An environmental health officer from Liverpool City Council visited the company's bakery in Lorenzo Drive, West Derby, and found insects could get into the building through ‘voids’ around the pipework, and an insect screen had been nudged to one side.
Operatives
Sayers pleaded guilty to an offence under the Food Hygiene Act.
The company, which has 50 shops in Liverpool, was fined £500 and ordered to pay £307 costs.
Alan Jackson, Group Hygiene Officer for Warburtons, which owns Sayers, said the moth had probably touched one of the bakery's electronic fly killers and finished up in one of the baking tins.
He said it had not been spotted by one of the operatives.
Mr Jackson said the general standards of hygiene throughout the group were excellent.
Champion
JOCKEY Michael Kinane clinched his eighth Irish championship when Sinissipi landed the Eyrefield Race at the Curragh yesterday.
Kinane, making a flying visit home between last weekend's Breeders' Cup meeting in Florida and resuming his contract job in Hong Kong, was also bringing up his domestic century for the season.
Allen hits jackpot
RAIN in the hills was forcing water levels higher on the River Ribble at Ribchester as Criterion AC prepared for their day's fishing.
Not ideal conditions, yet Brian Allen still managed to total 29lb 1oz of chub ranging to 3lb.
He was drawn over a gravel bed and used a loaded waggler float with double white maggot hookbait.
Tom Morgan bagged 14lb 9oz and Paul Chapman 12lb 9oz.
Merseybus AC were on the River Weaver at Winsford where Dave Hunter won with a level 5lbs.
He was fishing on the Red Lion stretch sporting float and pole tackle with maggot for an all-roach catch.
Dave Hunter and Peter Jones won the two Merseybus AC places in the Echo Clubman final.
Taking the strain out of shopping
CHAMPIONS of the disabled are launching a £30,000 appeal to help fund a new shop mobility scheme in Birkenhead.
Wirral Association for Disability starts the scheme to take the strain out of shopping for the disabled next March.
Now they are calling on local businesses to offer support.
The £30,000 will buy electric wheelchairs and tricycles to help disabled people shop in the Grange Road area.
Suitable
WAD general secretary Margaret Williams, said: ‘At present, a lot of disabled people are unable to go to Grange Road because it involves too much walking.
‘But when the scheme starts they will be able to travel here by Merseylink, Wirral Community Tranport or their own vehicle and then borrow a suitable wheelchair or scooter from us.’
Stars pool their skills
ROOKIE TRIO POCKET A SUPER BRONZE
THREE pool players from Wirral have returned from Doncaster with a team bronze medal in the European Championships, writes Ian Hargraves.
Sales manager Fraser Herald from Chester and his friends Colin Brocklehurst from Ellesmere Port and Chris Littler, the professional at Knotty Ash, entered as part of the six-man Suzy-Q team, and enjoyed unexpected success.
The three have only taken up American pool, which uses larger pockets and larger balls than the British version, a matter of eight months ago.
‘Too defensive'
But they are now in with a chance of making the Olympic Games at Atlanta where the sport is being included as a demonstration event.
‘British pool is going nowhere,’ said Fraser Herald.
‘It is far too defensive and not nearly as appealing as the American version.
‘We were one of four British teams competing in an event that attracted 19 teams in all and about 2,000 competitors, and we have had a really good time.’
Bronze medal winning team…
Fraser Herald, Colin Brocklehurst and Chris Littler
Toiling away in the Citadel
By Neil Hodgson
BRITAIN'S top expert in the restoration of priceless manuscripts is toiling beneath the Liverpool streets towards the recreation of a jewel in the city's historical crown.
Tim Gabler, conservation officer with the Hydrographic Office in Taunton, Somerset, was sent to Liverpool for the week to oversee the installation of original wartime maps in The Citadel.
Situated many feet below Derby House The Citadel was the wartime nerve centre from which service chiefs plotted victory in the North Atlantic and smashed the German stranglehold.
Originals
Tim is installing massive wall charts in the original operations room of the Western Approaches and Combined Operations wartime command HQ.
Some are originals from the 2 million documents dating back to the early 1600s which are stored in the Hydrographic Office, and some are sophisticated copies made from the originals used 50 years ago.
Tim admitted his task is one of the most unusual he has undertaken.
He said: ‘It is certainly very different, to say the least.
‘I usually work on restoring the 50 original survey manuscripts drawn by Captain Cook.’
Work is well under way on the complete restoration of the headquarters, known by servicemen during World War II as The Citadel, and an April 3 opening date is planned, said project director Jim Fox.
A formal launch of the permanent exhibition, created by Liverpool's Walton Group, will take place next May to coincide with a magnificent modern armada of more than 40 warships to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Battle of the Atlantic.
Organisers claim that the event will rival, if not eclipse, this year's Tall Ships extravaganza.
Mr Fox said that original fittings, including Winston Churchill's hotline and the phone booth housing it in the Admiral's offices, will be installed early next year.
A formal visit by Admiral Sir Roy Newman will also take place near the end of November, he revealed.
Mr Fox said: ‘The Admiral, who is flag officer Plymouth and supreme commander of southern defences, will inspect the war room and view a premier of the Battle of the Atlantic film we have produced.’
He paid tribute to the vital co-operation of all three services and the Hydrographic Office in the prestigious project.
Hard at work…
Tim Gabler (top), and the ops room in action (above)
White House race winner
A LUCKY Merseyside punter is toasting new American President Bill Clinton after winning thousands on a bet backing the Democrat.
The un-named man bet £3,000 at odds of 4-1 last Aprilhe won £12,000, plus his original stake.
Community cop: One of the first duties of Netherton's new community officer, PC John O'Neill was to guide local children around Copy Lane Police Station.
Road link: Work on a £11m road link to relieve traffic congestion in Warrington will start in just over a year say Cheshire County Council.
Dole march: As TV's Michael Palin travels from Pole to Pole, Skelmersdale Unemployed Workers Centre is staging a Dole to Dole march, between offices in the town and Ormskirk on December 19.
NVC awards: Trainees at Rock Ferry-based CTF Training are being presented with National Vocational Qualifications in catering, business administration and commercial horticulture today.
Euro stunner
HOLDERS Barcelona crashed out of the European Cup after squandering a two-goal lead at home.
The Spanish champions were beaten 3-2 by CSKA Moscow to go out 4-3 on aggregate.
Barcelona looked safe at 2-0 up after 31 minutes but the Russians scored three times in 16 minutes to steal the tie.
AC Milan, European Cup winners in 1989 and 1990, underlined the strength of this season's challenge with a 4-0 win over Slovan Bratislava of Czechoslovakia for a 5-0 aggregate triumph.
Croat midfielder Zvonimir Boban put them ahead with further goals from Dutchman Frank Rijkaard, French striker Jean-Pierre Papin and Marco Simone.
Surprise sales rise boosts stalled car industry
By Echo reporter
THE recession-hit motor industry received a much-needed boost today, with figures showing new sales last month were up by more than 8%.
The total was 109,373 compared with 101,107 for the same period last year, said the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
The 8.18% rise was the highest since April 1992 and took the overall 1992 new car sales total to 1,406,796just 1.86% down on 1991.
The figures were particularly good news for Vauxhall, whose Cavalier knocked the Ford Escort off the top selling spot.
Vauxhall's market share rose to almost 19%, compared with under 16% in October 1991.
Importers took a 54.86% share of the market last month compared with 57.95% in October 1991.
Importers' share so far this year is now 55.44% compared with 56.11% for Jan-Oct 1991.
But despite the good domestic news, SMMT president Sir Hal Miller warned there were ‘signs of growing difficulties in the export markets.’
He went on: ‘Companies have warned that this trend, if it continues, may result in revised production schedules.
If this is to be avoided we need to restore confidence in the UK economy.’
The October 1992 rise is a surprise following only a modest increase in August and a 4% fall in September.
But the SMMT was heartened by good attendances at the Birmingham Motor Show last month and this renewed interest in the industry may have helped boost the October sales.
Prices of Vauxhall's 1993 cars and light commercial vehicles will rise by an average of 3.25% from November 29.
The Luton-based company blamed the increase on the effects of the sterling devaluation which has had a ‘significantly adverse impact on overall costs.’
Welsh look to Widnes connection
By Nick Walker
WIDNES' Welsh quartet are gunning for England.
Jonathan Davies, John Devereux, Paul Moriarty and Adrian Hadley have all been selected in the Welsh squad announced today to face the old enemy on Friday, November 27, at Swansea's Vetch Field.
Davies, who has been told he must have an operation on his troublesome groin, must decide when he is to have the surgery.
But he will skipper the side if fit.
The quartet's choice may cause the Widnes home game against Wakefield Trinity on Sunday, November 29, to be postponed.
With Great Britain coach Mal Reilly again likely to pick Gary Connolly and Alan Hunte for his side, St Helens may also have to switch their fixture with Sheffield Eagles at Knowsley Road with Jonathan Griffiths and Anthony Sullivan in the Welsh squad.
Kevin Ellis and Allan Batemen are joined by on-loan forward Rowland Phillips as the Warrington contingent.
The players will train at Bradford next week and have three days together in Wales prior to the game the first between the countries since England won convincingly at Ebbw Vale eight years ago.
SQUAD: R Ackerman, P Ford, D Young (Salford), A Bateman, K Ellis, R Phillips (Warrington), D Bishop (London Crusaders), G Cordle (Bradford Northern), J Davies, capt, J Devereux, A Hadley, P Moriarty (Widnes), J Griffiths, A Sullivan (St Helens), M Jones, I Marlow, I Stevens (Hull), P Kennett (Swinton), M Moran (Leigh), G Pearce (Ryedale-York), B Williams (Carlisle).
First division Leigh could be forced out of Hilton Park after being served with a High Court writ.
Chief executive John Stringer said: ‘If we lose, Sunday's match against Keighley could be the on the ground.’
Top brass hold talks to save doomed shipyard
By Anne Harrison
TOP-LEVEL talks to help save the closure-threatened Cammell Laird shipyard are set to be held in Wirral tomorrow.
Among the high-powered list of people expected to attend are Noel Davies, chief executive of Laird's parent company VSEL, local MPs, trade union leaders and Merseyside Development Corporation chief Chris Farrow.
They will join representatives from the Department of Trade and Industry, Wirral Task Force, Merseyside Task Force, and councillors for the forum arranged by Wirral Council at Wallasey Town Hall.
Historic
The aim of the meeting, tomorrow afternoon, is to review the yard's current position and draw up a survival plan.
The historic yard faces closure next summer unless a buyer can be found.
Labour economic development spokesman Councillor Colin Dow said: ‘We are hoping to get all the people concerned to agree to best and most progressive way forward for Laird.’
But Laird's trade unionists are still bitter about the council's decision to object to the proposed Point of Ayr gas terminal the development that could offer a lifeline to the yard if it wins approval.
Laird's convenor Ken Morris said today: ‘We are hoping something positive will come out of this forum.’
Tonight's Choice
Innocents in Ireland
CRITICAL EYE: LOYALTY ON THE LINE (CHANNEL 4, 9pm)
THE Birmingham Six and Guildford Four…
Now another name and number to add to the list of people wrongly convicted: The UDR Four.
They are the four soldiers of the Ulster Defence Regiment who were convicted of the murder of a Catholic man in Armagh in 1983.
Three had their convictions quashed by the Appeal Court earlier this year — the fourth had his appeal turned down and is still serving a life sentence.
The case is unusual because unlike other cases of miscarriage of justice connected with Northern Ireland the convicted men are Protestants.
In a disturbing report the documentary questions why the statement of one witness was accepted as central to the case when that of another eyewitness was disregarded.
And, even more disturbingly, the three men now at liberty talk at length— for the first time since their release — about being wrongly imprisoned and reveal how they were beaten into signing confessions.
Jim Hegan, one of the three, says of the day he was convicted: ‘Everything that I was brought up to believe in respect for law and order and the RUCwas shattered.
My faith in justice was zero that day.’
Passion on the farm
EMMERDALE (ITV, 7.30pm)
AT last, it seems that the farming soap has been pulled by its wellies into the 20th century.
Two controversial storylines continue to dominate the childhood abuse of Lorraine and the budding affair of Kim and Neil.
The first has been handled sensitively, and actress Nicola Strong has given some powerful performances as the daughter coming to terms with her past.
The second storyline is going for the wider market, and some might argue, a little too near-the-knuckle for such an early evening show.
Tonight Kim and Neil take the plunge and spend their first night together.
Comedy hour…
SMITH AND JONES (BBC1, 9.30pm)
MORE stunning comedy from the twosome who have elevated the genre to new heights.
There's more of the giant baby who has a neat vocabulary but still can't manage to stay upright, more discussions and observations on life in general, and yet another head-to-head where talking at cross purposes is turned into an art form.
ONE FOOT IN THE GRAVE (BBC1, 10pm)
AGAIN on the comedy front comes the continuing saga of life with the Meldrews.
The two have returned from a disastrous holiday in Greecebut the worst is yet to come.
On arrival home they find their house has been destroyed by fire (how writer David Renwick manages to get a laugh out of this has to be seen to be believed) and they then have to do battle with the insurance company.
Eventually they settle in to a new home — but life can't be that easy, can it?
Late night horror
SCIENCE FICTION: THE STORY OF FRANKENSTEIN (ITV, 11.35pm)
TO round off the night, what about a touch of horror?
This focuses on the fascinating story of Mary Shelley, the woman who, at just 18, penned the horror masterpiece Frankenstein.
She had a chequered past, and like the star player in a Jackie Collins' novels, began an affair with the poet Percy Shelley when she was just 15.
The two had to flee England to avoid the scandal.
This programme takes a scientific approach to the story by looking at the advancements in science, like the discovery of electricity, that inspired her to pen it.
Survey spotlight on birth control clinics
HALF the country's birth control clinics open their doors just once a week to women seeking contraceptive advice, a major survey shows today.
And only 2% are open at weekends the most convenient time for teenagers and working people to get help.
As a result increasing numbers are relying on their GP for family planning services, according to research by the Family Planning Association.
The study will be a blow for the government which earlier this year pledged to reduce the number of under-16 pregnancies by half.
Teenage
Based on a survey of 1,633 clinics, it shows that while most offer a wide range of services including smear tests and advice on unplanned pregnancy, access is severely limited.
Almost four out of 10 require an appointment, and only 54% offer evening sessions.
The study comes at a time when many health authorities are reducing the number of clinics and there has been a 35% rise in teenage pregnancy rates over the last 10 years.
It has prompted calls by the FPA for GPs and family planning clinics to work more closely together to improve services.
FPA director Doreen Massey said: ‘When one in three of all pregnancies is unwanted and one in five ends in abortion, GPs and clinics must work together to ensure that their combined services are reaching this huge area of need.’
Brain disease doubt
By Echo reporter
A LINK between Alzheimer's disease and aluminium is in doubt after new research published today.
The devastating disease, which causes memory loss and personality changes, is now recognised as one of the commonest forms of dementia in old age.
It affects half a million people over 65, one in 20 of those aged 65 to 70, and one in five of those aged over 80.
There have been growing fears that aluminium could be responsible for causing the disease, with leading experts calling for reductions in the metal in drinking water.
But a team of Oxford scientists put the link with aluminium in serious doubt in new research published today in the scientific journal Nature.
The team says it has found no evidence of aluminium a characteristically found in the brains of Alzheimer's patients in brain tissue samples tested under a new method of ‘nuclear microscopy’.
FOR three years Irene Macaulay pleaded with the Army to let her visit the spot where her son Donald was murdered by the IRA.
On Monday she finally knelt on the ground where he was killed and placed a wreath to his memory.
Later at the inquest she listened to the tragic details of how her Donald serving with the 3rd Battalion Parachute Regiment had died.
Irene talks to RACHEL HALLIWELL…
‘WHEN I knelt at the spot where Donald died I felt a knot that has been tied up inside me for three years slowly unravel.
‘For a few minutes I was at peace with myself.’
Irene Macaulay has been searching for peace for a long time.
At her son's funeral she refused to cry in an act of defiance to the IRA.
Her hatred towards the Provos who blew up her son in Northern Ireland constantly eats away at her.
She has even received death threats from IRA sympathisers who, in hate-filled letters, have said her son deserved to die.
‘I see him sometimes,’ says Irene.
‘It sounds daft doesn't it?
But sometimes Donald comes to see me.
‘No-one wanted us to go to the spot where he died it's right in the middle of what they call ‘bandit’ territory.
‘We knew the dangers and my husband Sammy and son Neil didn't know for sure we would come back.
‘But before we left I saw Donald.
I think he came to tell me that we should go to Ireland and that we would be OK.’
Tomorrow would have been Donald's 23rd birthday.
In less than a fortnight it will be the third anniversary of his death.
And this Monday Irene finally learned, in a Irish Coroner's Court, exactly how Donald died.
‘November is one hell of a month anyway,’ says Irene.
‘And Monday was just a nightmare.
Consoled
‘For three years I've believed that Donald died instantly.
For three years I consoled myself with the fact that one minute he was laughing and joking the next it was over.’
Wracked with grief, Irene breaks down in tears.
‘It wasn't like that.
My Donald had terrible injuries, yet for a few minutes he lived.
‘Those minutes seem like a lifetime to me,’ she sobs.
‘My son died like that and the bastards that murdered him were never caught.’
Irene left the court when evidence was given of her son's last moments.
Sammy stayed in the room.
‘Poor Sammy had to hear it, he just had to.
We can put Donald to rest in our minds now because there's nothing else left to know.
‘But deep down inside I always thought he was coming home one day.
I thought he was coming back to me.
‘I can't kid myself anymore.
Donald's dead…he's never coming home.’
I ask Irene if she will get better if the grief will subside.
‘No it won't.
It's not like it was at first.
I can go to sleep now and I can laugh and go out.
But I'm like the walking dead.
I don't feel, I just function.
Maybe I just don't want to get better.’
At Donald's inquest the coroner, Daniel Thompson, described the young soldier's death as an ‘appalling attack of savagery motivated by the hatred of the past.’
He added: ‘The IRA's actions are as irrevelant as they are violent.’
He did not record a verdict in accordance with the usual practice when dealing with soldiers killed in action in Northern Ireland.
‘He is a brave man,’ says Irene.
‘He stood up and said what they did was wrong and he may well be a marked man now.
‘He has to live amongst these people may God help him.’
On Remembrance Sunday Irene will march with the Para's to St George's, where the raising of the regiment's standard will be a particularly poignant moment.
The Macaulay's bought the standard in memory of Donald when they heard the regiment wanted to replace the old one.
Irene is in a great deal of pain at the moment her bad back is giving her trouble and she finds it difficult to walk.
But she has vowed to be there on Sunday.
‘Even if I'm on crutches, I'll be there.
I want to see Donald's flag blowing in the wind.’
Since Monday, Irene has relived Donald's last moments over and over.
She describes in precise detail the deserted country road in Mayobridge, County Down, where a mine blew up the Land-Rover he was travelling in.
You can see how much it hurts her to visualise what happened, but through stifled sobs she continues.
‘It's such a quiet, lonely road.
You'd never have thought anyone would plant a bomb there.
Lonely road
‘The bastards who planted it were hiding in the trees, so Donald didn't see them and couldn't have expected what was about to happen.
‘I only pray that we never pull out of Northern Ireland it really has to be ‘No Surrender’.
‘If we do give up, Donald and all the other boys who have lost their lives there will have died for nothing.’
On Remembrance Sunday last year strangers came up to Irene in the street and asked to shake her hand.
She says: ‘People think I'm brave and on the outside I am brave that's the message I've put across since Donald's funeral.
‘But inside I'm a mess.
He died at the hands of cowards who hide behind masks and get away with murder.
‘Each year there will be the anniversary of his death to get through and birthdays that we can't share with him.
‘But tomorrow and every birthday after I'll go to his grave and tell him: ‘Happy birthday Donald No Surrender’.’
Part-time crews needed to back up villages
FIRE BRIGADE CALLS FOR WOMEN HELPERS
By Larry Neild
HOUSEWIVES in Cheshire have been urged to step forward to provide vital back-up for the county's fire service.
Firefighters are urgently seeking part-timers.
Problems faced by Cheshire Fire Brigade in trying to recruit part-time officers, particularly in rural areas, have been highlighted by county fire officer Dennis Davis.
He said: ‘Over the past 10 years we have been striving hard to maintain the numbers of part-time firefighters which are needed for this vital community service.’
Daytime
One of the biggest problems is that many of Cheshire's towns have now become commuter areas which has meant that the traditional stalwarts of the service have declined in numbers.
‘We really do need to find daytime firefighters who can provide a mainstay to their local fire station when others in the locality have to work away,’ Mr Davis added.
Three women two of them housewives with children have already joined the ranks of the firefighters in Cheshire.
Now the brigade wants more women to come forward.
‘Providing they meet all the requirements 5ft 6ins, good eyesight and physically fit, we would love to hear from them.
They will find it very rewarding work,’ Mr Davis said.
Part-time firefighters carry a paging unit which alerts them to make the dash to the fire station when a 999 call is made.
They receive a retainer fee of £1,300, £10 for each turnout and an hourly rate of pay.
‘Firefighting has traditionally been a male preserve but we do expect to see more women joining our ranks,’ said a brigade spokesman.
A special recruitment helpline has been set up on 0244 318990.
DOUBLE TAKE ON THE TERRACES
DEVELOPERS are planning to clone an historic Liverpool terrace which has just undergone the first phase of a multi-million pound facelift.
Seymour Street is a flagship project within the Liverpool City Challenge Area.
London-based developers Inner City Enterprises spearheaded the £4m project which has transformed the former listed Georgian terrace into Liverpool's latest prestigious business address.
Solicitors
Eight properties have been completed as part of the first renovation phase.
ICE have taken one unit as a base for its own Liverpool office, and solicitors are handling the sale of seven other houses, said ICE spokesman Duncan Sutherland.
The second phase will bring the rest of the terrace back into use as part of a scheme which has created 55 construction jobs and five trainee positions.
Up to 185 jobs could be supported in the completed development.
But Mr Sutherland revealed further plans for Seymour Street to revert to its original two-way traffic configuration, with a grassed central reservation, and an identical ‘Georgian’ terrace built opposite.
‘If the response we have received to the first phase continues we will embark on the creation of a ‘mirror scheme’,’ he said.
Improve
The original terrace was demolished in 1983 as part of the aborted ring road scheme.
ICE also own a number of properties in nearby Nelson Street and plans are under way to improve those, possibly housing the London Road Development Association which has been created to oversee the regeneration of the nearby shopping area.
ICE is involved in the proposed regeneration of Shaw Street.
Tribunal decision must stand, GMB told
FRESH BLOW ROCKS JOB ROW UNION
A UNION demand for a review of an order to reinstate a Liverpool councillor sacked after she helped a police probe has been turned down.
Industrial Tribunal chairman Edward Connolly has written to the GMB union's lawyers confirming the order to reinstate Councillor Frances Kidd next Monday.
Cllr Kidd was awarded £7,850 in back pay and given her job back last month.
The tribunal ruled she was unfairly dismissed from her £14,000-a-year job at the union's regional headquarters in Edge Lane, Liverpool.
The tribunal had heard allegations of a hate campaign against the councillor after she backed a council job cuts package which affected GMB members.
She was sacked after allegedly giving police information on union membership details.
But the union has said it is going ahead with a formal appeal to the Employment Appeals Tribunal.
A spokesman said: ‘The Industrial Tribunal chairman says he sees no reasonable chance of success in a review.
‘But he has taken the unusual step of giving the declaration before the reasons because the tribunal ordered the reinstatement by next Monday.
‘It would now appear that avenue of appeal is closed, but we will press ahead with our appeal on the overall findings.’
He said it appeared that the union would have to lodge its appeal before Monday.
He added: ‘That would appear to be the case because, other things being equal, we would have to give her the job back.’
Cllr Kidd said: ‘I can only echo my solicitor's comment — when will they ever learn?
‘I would expect them to do the honourable thing and give me my job back.’
Cllr Kidd…reinstated
Jolly good sports
By Ray Kelly
KNOWSLEY Sports Council is set to be resurrected, with councillors to kickstart a scheme to encourage more young people into an active life.
The aim is to provide a forum for sports clubs to advise Knowsley on improving services.
It will also provide a ‘feedback’ role, where customers at sports centres and swimming baths can voice their opinion on the standard of services.
The former Knowsley Sports Council was started in 1975, but funding problems coupled with a dying interest in it, led to it being wound up.
The new council would take a higher profile, advising clubs on grant aid, first aid training, and work closely with the education department to draw more Knowsley schoolchildren into club sports.
Leisure committee chairman Paul O'Hanlon said: ‘Reviving the Knowsley Sports Council would be an excellent way of helping residents of all ages to get more out of sport, particularly our younger people.’
Leisure services director John Bell warned that Knowsley had little spare cash for the project but could ‘pump prime’ it initially, and could hopefully give better support when budget problems lifted.
Revival is all talk
LET'S be honest about it, the great Kendall revival is not going to happen.
All the talk, all the expectations have come to nothing.
It has all been a fantastic myth exploded by grim reality.
How long will it be before Everton's board stop playing their violins while Goodison Park is consumed in dejection and delusion.
It is not being wise after the event to say it was a mistake to appoint Colin Harvey on his own in the first place and it was another mistake in re-appointing Kendall.
It took something near a miracle to get the Everton bandwagon rolling in 1983 and it would take a miracle to start it going again.
I happen to believe in miracles, but it would be sheer folly to depend on them.
Joe Royle should have been appointed two years ago.
If he can do what he's done with Everton's rejects, why not give him the whole lot?
Rob Molyneux, Lydiate.
Mistakes
I ENJOY the Football Echo every Saturday, reading all the views from fans and ex-players.
Now I feel I must write about what is going on at Everton FC.
Every week we read about Howard Kendall going on at his players.
He is the one who paid the money for them and has made some bad mistakes, e.g. Mo Johnston, Paul Rideout, Alan Harper and Barry Horne.
Gareth Culshaw, Wrexham.
Scapegoat
AFTER Everton's poor performance at Arsenal, Howard Kendall expressed that a number of players had let themselves, the club and, more importantly, the fans down.
He promised changes against Wimbledon.
However, when the squad was announced the only players that were dropped were Ian Snodin (naturally) and Tony Cottee (who was being a scapegoat for the umpteenth time).
To his credit, Tony scored a hat-trick for the reserves on the same night that the first eleven where jeered off the pitch.
Tony Cottee spoke to the press to express his disappointment at being dropped and said that Everton needed a playmaker in midfield to create chances for the strikers.
What TC said, most people have been saying for the last couple of seasons.
Surely this must be Howard's concern instead of looking for another striker.
Mark Jackson, Childwall.
FACE OF CONCERN…
Howard Kendall after the defeat at the hands of Manchester City last week
Fruity ‘n’ low fat
THE new Low Fat Cheesecakes from McVities (pictured right) are a long-awaited treat for all those trying to cut down on their fat intake and on their calories.
Available in two flavours — Summer Fruits and Tropical Fruits — the cheesecakes contain 65% less fat and 25% fewer calories than standard McVities cheesecakes.
The cheesecakes include a crunchy, low fat digestive biscuit base covered with a smooth, low fat filling and topped off with fruit.
The Summer Fruit Low Fat Cheesecake has juicy strawberries, raspberries and blackcurrants, while the Tropical Fruit Low Fat Cheesecake includes mandarins, pineapples and peaches.
And if you can't wait to taste them, you'll be pleased to know that they can be defrosted in a microwave!
The Echo and McVities have got together to give 150 readers the opportunity to try one of these Low Fat Cheesecakes (worth £1.99) for free.
Put your name and address on the back of a postcard (or sealed down envelope) and send it to: Cheesecake Offer, Liverpool Echo, Dept.
C, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB.
The first 150 names drawn after November 17 will each receive a McVities Low Fat Cheesecake voucher which can used to buy a Low Fat Cheesecake at your nearest stockist.
The heights of technology
IT'S a small world.
Or it was for the production crew working on the new children's series The Borrowers.
Mary Norton's classic story about a family of miniature humans who live under the floorboards of a house has been adapted for the small screen and starts tomorrow (BBC1, 5.40pm).
Real-life husband and wife Ian Holm and Penelope Wilton star as the parents Pod and Homily, with Rebecca Callard (daughter of actress Beverley Callard, who plays Liz in Coronation Street) stars as their daughter Arietty.
The family live under the floorboards of a house and their life is simple, until Pod is spotted by a boy, George, and the routine of their lives is broken for ever.
Filming
For the production crew, filming the six-part series meant spending much of the time crawling around on the floor.
‘We decided to film the whole series from the perspective of The Borrowers family just six inches from the floor,’ says director John Henderson.
‘It was very hard work.
We used to joke that we almost got nose bleeds when we stood up to our normal size because we spent so much time at floor level.’
The series features spectacular sets and uses the latest digital techniques to create a realistic backdrop.
John even goes as far as to boast that The Borrowers is breaking new ground: ‘In fact, some of the things we can now do make the special effects in Star Wars look prehistoric.’
Old folk benefit from gift fifty years on
By Anne Harrison
A LEGACY bequeathed more than 50 years ago to help Birkenhead is at last giving benefit to its elderly folk.
The Duke of Wesminster has officially opened the new Frank Murphy wing of the Abbeyfield old people's home in Prenton.
The £300,000 extension providing an extra eight rooms at the home in Prenton Road West, is named after First World War hero Frank Murphy who died on the battlefield at Ypres.
And £120,000 of the building costs were covered by a legacy from his father, John Murphy, a ship-owner in the south of England who married Birkenhead woman Emma Crowder in 1887.
John Murphy left a legacy in 1936 with instructions that the money should benefit Birkenhead, including paying for a hospital bed dedicated to his son's memory.
But it was not until recently that Birkenhead Abbeyfield Society heard from the Public Trustee Office, a government department, that it was among local charities to benefit from the legacy and would receive £120,000.
Wexford puzzle
WILL Wexford discover who the phantom bike pusher is?
And will he manage to get to the bottom of the death of widow Ivy Wrangton?
The dogged Chief Insp Wexford nears the end of the trail, but there are a couple more deaths along the way, in the second and final part of the Ruth Rendell Mysteries: An Unwanted Woman (tomorrow, ITV, 7.45pm).
Susan Wooldridge plays Hilary Stacey in the drama, a woman torn apart by love for her daughter and her second husband.
Fortunately the actress hasn't ever faced the situation for real.
‘It's a situation I have seen happen but I am grateful never to have been in that position myself!’ says Susan, who lives with actor-turned-writer Andy de la Tour in a house they have just bought in London.
Market report may be ready next week
REPORTS on efforts to find a new home for Liverpool's threatened meat and fish markets could go to councillors next week.
City council policy and resources chairwoman Dawn Booth said officers had already inspected a number of premises to see if they would be suitable as a temporary home for the wholesale markets now housed on the Stanley industrial estate, Old Swan.
The markets have been earmarked for closure because it will cost more than £6m to bring them up to new EC hygiene standards.
Weather turn on
ALL right.
I'm not really in to the weather if the truth be known.
If it's sunny, fine, and if it's raining, it's a chore to walk the dogs.
That's about it.
So the idea of Weather Watch, a series devoted to the British obsession, didn't really grab me.
However, it has turned out to be a bit of a gem.
Craig Charles (left) presents the short, 10minute programmes (tomorrow, BBC1, 6.10pm), and with a fast-paced editing style, interesting snippets of information and dramatic footage of storms, it's good fun.
This weekend's show looks at man's attempts to predict the weather.
Ocean depths link for Mersey museum
A SCIENTIFIC probe in the depths of the Atlantic Ocean will be relayed by satellite to Liverpool's Maritime Museum.
A live link-up will give local audiences an ocean eye view of scientists studying grey whales off the Mexican coast.
Spectators will also be able to talk to the scientists working beneath the waves.
The link was devised by American scientist Robert Ballard, who first surveyed the shipwreck of the Titanic.
Schools
Marion Cross, of the Centre for Continuing Education at Liverpool University, which is organising the event with the Maritime museum said: ‘The digital link will be the first time that the Jason project will be seen in Europe.’
There are three day schools at Liverpool Museum on November 14, December 5 and January 16 in preparation for the link up next March.
Families are now priced out…
WHY IS it so expensive to watch your local football team?
I have four sons and cannot afford to take them to a first team game (£10 each to get in!)
A reserve game cost only 50p per child and £1 adult.
If reserves play in the first team they still charge first team prices.
Why are they ripping us off?
FAIR TACKLE
Fans face an almost impossible task coping with present day prices, especially those with families.
I think clubs should take a radical look at the whole question of junior supporters and come up with some answers NOW!.
Putting value on style…
ELAINE SMITH
ACCORDING to her friends, Elaine Smith is one of those people with the annoying habit of always looking good no matter what she wears.
Elaine is too modest to admit that, but it is clear that she's a woman with a special style all of her own.
Simple, smart and sophisticated.
The 35-year-old is chief valuation assistant for Liverpool City Council, which means she always has to look smart for work.
But comfort is a key word too.
Elaine, who is married and lives in Heswall, says: ‘When I went on site more often, I made sure that I was comfortable and my shoes, in particular, were practical.
‘Now I am more office-bound, but I still like to look smart yet feel comfortable.’
She wears little make-up for work and says: ‘It goes back to the time when I started in the job.
‘I am a chartered surveyor and only around 6% of us are women.
When I started, we were even more rare.
‘So I wore little make-up, because I had to blend in.
‘It is definitely a man's world, but there are more women coming through.
Which is good news for me!’
What is your personal style?
Comfortable and practical.
I like to look smart so I tend to wear a lot of jackets with trousers or skirts.
I hate fussy clothes.
I prefer a classic and uncluttered look.
What do you wear for work?
As I said before, a lot of jackets with skirts or trousers, or suits.
Now it is coming up to winter I have a lot of black and white outfits.
I still wear little make-up, just a bit of lipstick and mascara and perhaps some eyeshadow.
What do you wear when you go out?
It varies.
If I'm going out for a professional dinner, something formal, I will wear an evening dress.
However, I don't like the long dress.
I tend to wear something mid-length.
If I'm going out for a meal with friends, I wear Richards Shops-type suits that are flowing, or have a fluid look.
Generally, though, I will wear things like leggings with a polo jumper.
Which shops do you buy your clothes from?
Marks & Spencer, mainly.
Because I'm 5ft 7in I find a lot of jackets in other shops are too short in the sleeves.
M&S is fairly reliable.
I buy a couple of outfits a year from Country Casuals and T. J. Hughes is good for bargains like Alexon jackets and Planet clothes.
Which is you favourite/least favourite item in your wardrobe?
At the moment, because it is coming up to Christmas and I have already started going to dinners, it is a Principles' jacket.
It's black with green, blue and red jewels and it can be teamed with with so many things.
My least favourite item has to be my glasses.
I wear contact lenses usually, but I have a pair of glasses which are now about seven years old.
I have got to the stage where I totally dislike them, so it is off to the opticians next week.
Which style do you particularly dislike?
Frilly blouses.
They look great on other people, but not on me.
How much do you spend on clothes?
I go out on a blitz and then tend to spend nothing for months.
It averages out at around £100 a month, I suppose.
Who is your favourite designer?
Chanel.
The line is often simple, but outfits are trimmed with velvet or gold buttons.
It is the attention to that detail which makes them stand out.
Winston tips scales in his close battle
A HANDY-sized roach could have turned the Chester Winter League result upside down.
For there was a scramble for individual honours with just two ounces separating the leading four.
Winner was Winston Duckers (Jones Tackle) with 1lb 11oz 8 drams from the Dee at Chester.
Drawn in the deeper water upstream of the suspension bridge on the Groves section and facing the boathouse, Winston used a small swimfeeder rig looking for fall-back bites on double maggot from the dace and roach.
First prize
Upton AC won the team event and now go into joint top place with Buckley AA.
Des Lancaster took first prize in the sell-out St Helens AA Open at Carr Mill Dam with 9lb 7oz.
He was on permanent peg 2 in Hollinhey Bay where he tipped with an open-ended swimfeeder and gozzer maggot in six feet for a netful of skimmer bream.
A nice net of roach gave Bill Newson (Hot Rods) 15lb 5oz and first place in the Winsford Winter League on the Weaver.
Bill, fishing in 10 feet of water with steady glide, tackled it with a 4 gram float and pole.
He used bronze maggot for fish to 12oz and a pools payout of £130.
Pole
Punch bread and squatts worked a treat for Derek Bibby (Complete Angler) as he took just 4lb for first place in the Warrington AA match.
The competition covered the Moore stretch of the Bridgewater, and local man Derek pole fished at 11 and 14 metres.
He tried punch bread with sloppy groundbait for small roach, but when he changed to double squatt he added five skimmers and a few small perch.
Dream Echo Bingo win for Joan
By Will Rolston
ECHO reader Joan Frost spent a sleepless night hoping against hope that she was a £1,000 winner in our great Bingo Mania game.
Joan, who is 70 and lives in Formby, filled in her last number at 10.05pm but had to wait till 9am the next day to check if she had won.
She said today: ‘I lay there thinking someone must have got there before me.’
But the decisive telephone call had the right result: Joan was a winner!
‘I was over the moon,’ she said.
And her thoughts went straight to Christmas.
Husband Arthur, six children, eleven grandchildren and three great grandchildren will all feel the result of Joan's success.
‘I've never won anything before.
Now I'll be able to splash out for Christmas,’ she said.
Jen's yen for senior GB bow
Eastern promise
By Paul O'Brien
JENNY CLAGUE, the Liverpool Harrier who finished fourth in last winter's World Junior Cross Country Championships, is set to make her senior Great Britain debut in Japan this month.
The 19-year-old Walton girl is in a squad of seven named for the six-stage Ekiden Relays, in Chiba, Japan, on November 23.
Jenny, whose summer track activities were curtailed by injury, will be joined in the British team by Suzanne Rigg from Warrington, who gained her first international in the recent World Half-Marathon championships.
Suzanne is back in full training following a complete two-week break, while Jenny plans to run as a guest in the North West cross-country league meeting at Hyndburn this weekend to help her preparations.
Award
The British team, which also includes Annette Bell, Marion Sutton, Vicky McPherson, Una English and Joe Deering leaves for Japan on November 18 for the race on November 23.
Apart from the Master Coach Awards for Ernie Gallagher and Mike Holmes (reported in Tuesday's Echo) it was nice to see a similar award going to Charlie Kelly, the leading Midland region coach now based in Kenilworth.
Mr Kelly was a member of the Liverpool Pembroke club in the immediate post war years, and an All Ireland and Lancashire 880 yards champion.
In the 1960s he served Warrington AC as coach, secretary and chairman.
In recent years he has coached many leading Midlands runners, including three times Olympian Lorraine Baker.
Forms will be available shortly for the Hale 5 road race on December 20, which has become a popular pre-Christmas outing for runners, serious and not so serious.
This year the charity to benefit will be the Newborn Appeal, although the organising Speke 10k Committee are still looking around for a main sponsor for the event.
Section
Entry forms are available for the seventh Picton five-mile fun run, organised by the City Athletics Development section in aid of the Liverpool Lions charity, at Wavertree on December 13.
The fee is £2 (£2.50 on the day) and entries should be sent, with a stamped sae, to Harry Greenwood, Picton Fun Run, Picton Sports Centre, Wellington Road, Liverpool L15 4PL.
Baydon Star dilemma for Nicholson
By A Special Correspondent
TRAINER David Nicholson was left with an enviable dilemma when Baydon Star underlined his great potential at Newbury yesterday.
The five-year-old, switched from Jenny Pitman's yard by owners Dale and Shirley Robbins before the start of the season, is now hot favourite for the £25,000 Ladbroke Handicap Hurdle at Aintree's new meeting on November 23.
Baydon Star is unpenalised for his victory in yesterday's Tom Masson Trophy Hurdle and looks something of a snip with a weight of 10st for the two mile race.
But Mighty Mogul, another Robbins' horse to join Nicholson, is in the same Liverpool race and Nicholson is hedging his bets.
‘The race wasn't on Baydon Star's agenda and we'll just have to see,’ he said.
Nicholson's horses have been in sparkling form this season since he moved to his new yard and Baydon Star was sent off a surprisingly generous 13-8 favourite.
As early leader Diamond Cut quickly threw in the towel three out, Sweet Duke and Baydon Star went clear.
But Richard Dunwoody always appeared to be going the best and Baydon Star was a comfortable four-length winner, with the third horse Mailcom 30 lengths away.
Nicholson, however, was refusing to get carried away.
‘Baydon Star is a nice young horse but these weren't the fastest in the world today.
Being a half brother to Rubstic and Kildimo, the further he goes the better he will get.’
Compensation
Country Member gave Andy Turnell some compensation for the disappointing defeat of Katabatic at Exeter.
Sketchy jumping had let down Country Member on a number of occasions last season but he fenced soundly this time, quickening well between the last two to take command.
Turnell has entered Country Member for the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup but he is well out of the handicap and extremely unlikely to run.
Fragrant Dawn, disappointing since making a winning debut over fences in January, benefitted from a lenient mark to land the Winterbourne Handicap Chase.
Trainer David Elsworth said: ‘He won for me first time last season and perhaps he is a horse who doesn't want running too often.’
Munka, a relation of former Champion Hurdler Bula, sprung a 20-1 shock in the EBF Novices Hurdle.
He grasped the initiative after leader Yorkshire Gale unseated his rider at the second last.
Trainer Philip Hobbs said: ‘The dam is a half sister to Bula but unfortunately many of the others have been disappointing.
‘Munka wasn't able to run last year because he was lame but there is no problem with him now.
I wasn't totally surprised by this and hopefully he can go on from here.’
Declan Murphy, the rider of Yorkshire Gale, was taken to hospital for precautionary x-rays after trapping a nerve in his back.
Dunwoody moved level with Peter Scudamore at the top of the jockeys' table when completing a 20-1 double on My Senor (7-1) in the Cold Ash Novices Hurdle.
Police in swoop on former councillor
FORMER Knowsley councillor Tony Beyga was among three people arrested by fraud squad detectives.
Mr Beyga, 47, of Queens Drive, Childwall, was arrested along with a 63-year-old woman and a 49-year-old man.
All three were charged with conspiracy to defraud, conspiracy to commit forgery and two offences of false accounting.
They were given police bail and are due before Liverpool city magistrates on November 30.
Mr Beyga, a former school caretaker, served on Knowsley Borough Council for 14 years.
He was chairman of the economic and development subcommittee until 1986 and served on six committees in all.
Two years later he left the council.
WHEN John Major spoke at the Conservative Party conference last month, two themes were picked up by his supporters and tormenters.
One, the most dominant, was Maastricht.
The other, which seems to be an obsession for the Prime Minister, was his odd crusade to get a fair deal for the oppressed users of motorway service stations.
Well, last night, after talking long and hard about Maastricht, Mr Major got his Welcome Break.
Thanks to just three votes, Mr Major could sit back and relax for a few moments.
His speech in the Euro debate was hardly stunning.
There were shouts and sniping all the way way through and even the odd cry of ‘pull the other one.’
Tory rebels sat stern-faced, clutching brightly coloured anti-Maastricht manuals.
Occasionally, much to their glee, Mr Major allowed them to intervene.
When that happened, the sceptos threw their arms in the air, relishing the chance to hear something they liked.
But others looked as though they were desperately trying to find a way out, gazing to the ceiling deep in thought.
Meanwhile, Labour's noisy squad perched on the edge of their seats, making sure their views were heard at least every 30 seconds.
Mr Major won the day but he still has a problem.
He just can't say the word ‘want.’
He uses it often enough, but just can't say it properly.
He gets to the ‘w’ but it's downhill from there on.
One MP even tried to put him right last night.
Labour leader John Smith's speech was far more entertaining.
John Major, he said, had the exact opposite of the Midas touch.
Nothing he touched turned to gold, said Mr Smith.
What then?
Probably grey.
When the main speeches were over and, after Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown and Sir Edward Heath laid into Labour, the House emptied out.
Outside, there was arm-twisting and heavy pressure as the Tory whips rounded on potential rebels.
One MP was even said to be in tears.
By 10pm, they were all back in the House to hear that the government had won by three votes.
Labour fingers jabbed at the Liberal Democrats, while Tory order papers were waved in the air.
But John Major knows that despite this victory, he still has other problems.
So it will be some time before he can turn his full attention to his hobby-horse Britain's motorway service station crisis.
Dramatic vote…excited MPs wave their order papers
Happy…
Major and Heseltine
Angry…
Smith and Cunningham
Blues' tonic for key clash
GOOD news from an Everton camp which has not had too much to cheer recently, is that Howard Kendall has all his first team squad fit for selection against Nottingham Forest, with the single exception of Mark Ward, writes Ian Hargraves.
The Blues boss said today: ‘I am not saying anything about our actual selection until we have had a couple more training sessions.
‘We had a free day yesterday, and we have had no matches this week, so everyone should be fresh for what is obviously a very important match.’
That includes striker Tony Cottee, who would have played against Manchester City but for an outburst reported in all the Saturday papers which led to disciplinary action.
‘That incident is now closed,’ Kendall said firmly today.
‘Tony is back in contention.’
THE NEEDY ‘ARE LIVING OFF CRISPS’
Hard-up parents can't afford food, says report
MILLIONS of families caught in the poverty trap are unable to afford a healthy diet, according to a major food report today.
And many parents are forced to feed their children crisps, biscuits and sweets instead of more nutritious foods, the National Consumer Council claimed.
Urgent
It said there was growing evidence that a healthy diet was impossible for many in Britain where, according to European Commission definitions, one in five people were classed as poor.
NCC chairman Lady Wilcox, speaking at the launch of a new book Your Food: Whose Choice? said urgent steps were needed to tackle the problem of poverty and poor nutrition.
‘Otherwise, we may condemn whole generations of children to stunted growth and to illnesses in later life known to be linked with poor nutrition, such as heart disease and some cancers,’ she said.
In the book, author Suzi Leather says it is not ignorance that forces many families to cut their food bills, but the impossibility of paying for all essentials out of‘woefully inadequate’ state benefits.
And she blasts supermarkets for failing to pass on profits to customers by cutting prices.
The book reveals:
One in five parents and one in 10 children in homeless families had gone without food in the past month because of lack of money.
47% of families asking for help from the Family Welfare Association did not have enough money left to feed themselves.
Mothers tend to give the most nutritious food to the rest of the family, while existing on tea or toast.
Best
And the TV companies also came under fire for targetting children's prime time viewing with ads for fatty and sugary foods.
Lady Wilcox said it was not surprising that children did not want to eat good food.
The NCC urged the government to review school meals and called for the supermarkets to be closely monitored to ensure consumers were not being exploited.
Top of the Pops ‘under threat’
THE future of Britain's longest running chart show, Top Of The Pops, was in doubt today.
The BBC would say only that any speculation was premature, adding: ‘It is the highest rated chart-based show on any channel with a loyal audience of seven million.’
The programme first went on the air 28 years ago and its DJs have included Jimmy Savile, Tony Blackburn and Kenny Everett.
Replaced
But they have been replaced in recent years by unknowns.
BBC1 controller Jonathan Powell has admitted that the show was a ‘pale version’ of its former self.
A national newspaper reports today that the programme will be formally axed later this year.
ENGLISH football has many qualities.
Rough, tough, fast and furious, it has no comparison on the Continent, and many such teams have suffered when pitted against it.
But within those qualities there are shortcomings.
Liverpool learned last night that blood and thunder is insufficient when facing quality opponents, paying the price for their frantic approach -and their moments of madness in Moscow.
Second half goals from Dmitry Radchenko and Andrei Piatnitski rounded off a comfortable Spartak Moscow performance to deny the Reds a place in the Cup Winners' Cup quarter-final.
And their misery was complete when Mike Marsh became their third player to be dismissed in Europe this season.
I honestly believed Graeme Souness' men would overturn their 42 first leg deficit and go on to win a tournament desperately lacking in class participants.
But Spartak proved to be much better than I and, no doubt, Liverpool, imagined and deservedly earned their passage after being the more accomplished side over both legs.
Souness may have been banished to the stands, but it did not stop his side from assaulting the Russian goal as early as the second minute when Don Hutchison drove Steve McManaman's cross over.
Within seconds, David Burrows forced Stanislav Cherchesov into a fine tip-over save, the keeper later brought into action by Ian Rush.
Dangerous
Spartak, cool and composed, frustrated the Reds in a passionate first half, their slick counter-attacks threatening to produce that much-feared goal.
However, apart from Piatnitski's drive from Valery Karpin's short free-kick, Mike Hooper was untroubled before the break.
The Reds, desperate to open the scoring, fought well and pressed hard, with Hutchison and Marsh testing Cherchesov again.
A McManaman drive which flew inches wide, Burrows' rising blast and a Hutchison header which rolled off target further underlined Liverpool's domination.
But despite the promptings of Jamie Redknapp, it was all too frenetic.
How the experienced and calm Jan Molby would have revelled had he been fit.
Opportunity
The well-organised Russian rearguard should have been pierced five minutes into the second half when Michael Thomas found himself just six yards out, only for Dmitri Khlestov to clear off the line.
Spartak responded immediately and Liverpool were grateful to Hooper for saving Piatnitski's low shot one-handed before turning Khlestov's effort over the bar.
From the resulting Igor Lediakhov corner, Hooper was at it again, diving to clutch a Piatnitski header on the goal line.
With Ronny Rosenthal providing belated support for an isolated Rush and the Reds committed to attack, Spartak profited from the space to strike their decisive 62nd minute blow.
Vladimir Beschastnikh broke down the right and crossed low for dangerman Radchenko to beat the advancing Hooper with impressive ease.
Aided by the occasional dubious refereeing decision, the visitors continued to resist the Reds' raids, and Radchenko even managed to trouble Hooper again.
The talented striker, whose double sunk Real Madrid in the Bernabeu two seasons ago, certainly made his mark in this match.
After being on the receiving end of the challenge which brought Marsh's late dismissal, he allowed Piatnitski to complete a night which showed the strides the home side must make if it is to re-establish itself as a European force.
LIVERPOOL (4-5-1): Hooper; Marsh, Wright, Nicol, Jones (sub Rosenthal 57); McManaman, Thomas, Redknapp, Hutchison, Burrows; Rush.
Subs (not used): James, Tanner, Kozma, Harkness.
SPARTAK MOSCOW (4-4-2): Cherchesov; Khlestov, Chernishov, Onopko, Ivanov; Karpin, Piatnitski, Lediakhov (sub Bakschev 86), Pisarev (sub Rusjaev 64); Beschantnikh, Radchenko.
Subs (not used): Mamedov; Stauche.
GOALS: 0-1: Radchenko (62); 0-2: Piatnitski.
BOOKINGS: Onopko, Burrows, Chernishov, Pisarev, Beschastnikh (all fouls).
SENDING OFF: Marsh (foul).
REFEREE: Mr. Manuel Diaz Vega (Spain).
ATTENDANCE: 37,993.
ENTERTAINMENT (Out of 10): 7.
Enniskillen five years later
IT is five years since 11 civilians were blown up by the IRA bomb at Enniskillen's Remembrance Day Service.
It was a crime that shocked the country and shattered the community.
Last year the rebuilt Memorial to the Fallen was unveiled in the centre of the town and on it, as well as the names who had served in the military were those of the 11 whose lives were lost.
The last in the War and Peace series, Splendid Hearts,(tomorrow, BBC2, 8.15pm) goes to Enniskillen to hear the stories of some of the people who live in the town that still grieves.
One man, Ivan Masterson, talks about how he helped pull people from the rubble and says: ‘It must have been the second body I helped to take out…it was an awful shock seeing my uncle there with his wife beside him.’
PUPILS at De La Salle RC School, Carr Lane in Liverpool, will tomorrow be awarded a certificate from a health charity to reward them for their hard work in fundraising.
The pupils raised £150 through a sponsored walk and the raffle of a Liverpool FC football.
Spokesman Roy Butler from the Preston-based charity Heartbeat which helps victims of heart attacks said: ‘We are very grateful to the pupils at the school.’
SMITHY SAYS
NO MATTER what I say on the Everton debate, I'm going to get stick.
If I make a few constructive points, it will be looked on as a Liverpudlian poking his nose in.
If I sit on the fence or back Howard Kendall, I will still get slagged off because people will say I'm patronising the Blues.
You will just have to make your own mind up on my views.
I am a regular visitor to Goodison and so I'm in a position to assess the situation.
I believe they need a more direct winger, someone in the Gordon Strachan mould who will get into crossing positions and put the ball in first time.
The Blues also need someone who is a little bit cuter in centre midfield.
And they need a striker who knows where the net is.
I don't accept that they are nearly there.
I believe they still need three or four players and they need them sooner rather than later.
Confidence is a key factor in any football situation.
The longer Everton are in the danger zone, the more difficult it will be to cast off the self-doubts and flow with confidence.
I have backed Kendall to get it right in this column down the months.
I'm still prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt because he is a decent manager who knows the ropes and who has been there before.
It's only 18 months to two years since he was being bandied about as a possible England boss.
He hasn't become a bad manager overnight.
All of the qualities are still there.
But he cannot afford to sit back on the basis that Everton are too big a club to go down.
They will sink unless they make positive moves to arrest the slide.
I believe he must cut his losses on a number of individuals.
It's the only way he will get some cash flow to bring in a couple of new faces.
I believe Tony Cottee and Mo Johnston should both be sold.
Both have had their chances and failed to produce the goods.
If I was Kendall, I'd also take any sensible cash offer for latest arrival Paul Rideout.
Sometimes you have got to hold your hands up and accept that certain players are not right for you.
Liverpool did it with Dean Saunders, who was a British record buy.
The Blues need a change of direction.
It's up to Kendall to show he has still got the leadership qualities to climb the ladder back to the top.
Quit call to officers over coal dust row
By Jane Gallagher
ANGRY councillors demanded the resignation of two senior officials over a row with Powergen.
They claimed a report advising against fighting a costly appeal with the electricity giant should have been discussed in closed session.
The row erupted as Sefton's Environment committee discussed Powergen's appeal against demands for environmental protection measures costing £12m.
Health
Councillors had ordered that all coal-laden rail wagons leaving Gladstone Dock in Bootle be fully covered and washed down.
Powergen say the cost of introducing the changes is too high.
They want to install a £30,000 spray system at the terminal to dampen coal.
As Liberal Democrat leader John Pugh began to speak on the issue at Southport Town Hall he referred to a note from chief executive Graham Haywood.
Mr Haywood backed chief public protection officer David Jones who said Powergen would be likely to win the appeal.
Cllr Joe Stanton said: ‘It's a sham.
I think you, Mr Haywood, and you, Mr Jones, should resign tonight.
You have played right into Powergen's hands.
‘You have shown our hand to the other side by saying we have no chance.
‘We might as well fly the white flag outside the town hall.’
The item was deferred until the full council meets on November 26.
Enjoying the frog experience
LARK LANE has always considered itself a little French.
Beret-clad students ride around reeking of garlic, Breton-smocked social workers drive around in Citroens listening to Edith Piaf, wine-soaked alkies block the pavement like revolting farmers and jobless actors loll around in cravats striking Alain Delon poses.
I like it.
Make a habit of the place and you'll fall asleep but wander down there every now and again and you'll find an edge most other Liverpool drinking streets lack.
It serves the odd good meal too.
Take L'Alouette.
Now I'd often pushed my nose against the window and thought what a classy joint it looked but as someone who would rather spend £50 on a coat than a meal, the prices had come between us.
It doesn't seem to put off others as the night I visited, the place was heaving.
Unlike some foreign restaurants that try and transplant you to distant shores by piping out Zorba, Pavarotti or the Bombay sitar quartet, thankfully L'Alouette doesn't bother.
I had a complaint straight away though.
A huge sheet of plastic was handed to me called a menu, which took a good five minutes to de-code.
It wasn't the French that threw me but the arty design which was about as easy to follow as the plot of Twin Peaks.
Eventually a headline from The Sun's sports pages leapt out at me and I had to try it: Frog's Legs.
Three of them floated in a sea of garlic and tomato and although I found them no better than chewy chicken my wife told me they were well up to scratch.
And she's been around.
She used to work near Chester.
As usual I just wished I'd ordered the same as her: a bowl of smoked bacon and Roquefort cheese salad with garlic croutons.
It was warm, crisp, fresh and set the taste buds up nicely for the main event.
Again the one who's been around (you can tell her type a mile off — they always find something to send back, even if it's the salt) ordered the better meal: a pan-fried fillet steak topped with tomato and served with a Madiera sauce, while I went for fresh halibut wrapped in vegetables surrounded by creamy mustard sauce.
Both dishes were served with an excellent side dish of fresh vegetables and both were definitely melt-in-the-mouth, compliments-to-the-chef material.
My wife finished off with a creme caramel dessert while I just finished off the litre bottle of house white, which was well worth its £8.95 price tag.
L'Alouette is the place to go if you like your food to be high on taste, low on stodge, to demolish your hunger but leave room for your thirst.
I sauntered back into Lark Lane and into one of the fine hostelries to round off.
A jobless actor was annoying an off-duty bouncer, announcing loudly that he was due for a break.
He didn't mention which limb though.
Vive la difference!
Quick-thinking pals save woman in flat smoke trap
FIRE HERO DARREN TO THE RESCUE
By Gwyn Griffiths
HAVE-A-GO hero Darren Dyer just couldn't wait to be a fireman.
Just three days after taking an intensive training course for civilians he leapt into a blazing flat to rescue a pensioner with his pal, James Hodson.
And after the rescue drama at The Butts flats, on Runcorn's Castlefields estate, Darren says the taste of part-time firefighting has made him even more determined to earn his retained fire officer status.
Saw smoke
The two men were standing on the balcony outside James's flat when they saw smoke billowing out of the 75-year-old woman's home below.
Quick-thinking James, 20, switched off the gas and collected a damp cloth, while Darren used the fire-fighting techniques he'd been learning on his weekend course in Surrey to tackle the blaze.
Darren, 21, said: ‘The smoke was very dense, so I got down low on the floor and pushed the kitchen door open.
‘James put a damp cloth on the pensioner's face and we both dragged her out.
‘I'd been doing the course and the basic thing they teach you is to take care when you're ventilating a fire in a confined space, because you could get a flash-over,’ he explained.
Within minutes of the rescue, Runcorn firemen arrived to deal with the fierce blaze, which had started when a chip pan overheated.
Brigade officers said that but for the two men's prompt action the woman almost certainly would have died.
Both could be in line for commendations.
Alert neighbours…
Darren Dyer, right, and James Hodson
Don't miss Cab
CAB ON TARGET
Six-year-old brown gelding (Strong Gale/Smart Fashion)
WATCH out for Cab On Target in long distance hurdle races this term.
Mary Reveley's stable star was one of those affected by the virus last February, which meant he missed the big Cheltenham and Aintree meetings.
His season was cut to just four races, the first three of which he won impressively before going down to Forest Sun in the Rendlesham Hurdle at Kempton already suffering from a bug.
He made no mistake before that though with victories at Wetherby, Newbury and in Cheltenham's Spa Hurdle in which he beat champion stayer Nomadic Way and tough Winnie The Witch.
Three miles plus seems Cab On Target's distance.
Don't miss him.
Les is handed shock England call-up
Ferdinand surprise
LES FERDINAND is the big surprise in England's squad for the World Cup qualifier with Turkey at Wembley on Wednesday week.
The Queen's Park Rangers forward is called into the senior party for the first time after one previous summons as a stand-by player.
The 26-year-old's ability to run with the ball and poach spectacular goals has been one of the major factors behind QPR's impressive start to the season.
His inclusion for Glasgow Rangers' injured midfielder Trevor Steven is the only change from the squad originally selected by manager Graham Taylor for the Wembley clash with Norway last month.
Steven is one of several players who miss out because of lack of match practice following injuries.
Taylor said: ‘Trevor hasn't played many games and neither have Rob Jones, of Liverpool, Everton's Martin Keown and David Hirst, of Sheffield Wednesday.
They all need more games.’
Leeds midfielder David Batty is included although he missed the European Cup defeat by Glasgow Rangers last night through injury.
Taylor explained: ‘I haven't tried to contact the Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson today for obvious reasons, but with the international a fortnight away I think Batty will be available.’
There is no prospect of Taylor closing the door on his World Cup party, although he has limited changes this time.
He said: ‘It was always my intention to spend a couple of years looking at everyone with international potential, qualify for Sweden and then settle the squad down for the World Cup.
‘That's where we are at the moment.
But it does not mean others cannot come in.’
Taylor added: ‘The atmosphere among the squad for the Norway match was very good.
‘What we have to do this time is to maintain that atmosphere, produce another good performance against Turkey and this time get the result we deserved against Norway.
Only the result was missing.’
Dressed to kill at any price
WE asked five city fashion shops to provide us with clothes which they considered epitomised Merseyside style:
RIVER ISLAND'S own selection was a sharp pinstripe suit teamed with crisp white shirt and polka dot tie pinched from the men's section, for daytime.
The after dark choice was a sleekly sophisticated black velvet dress complete with cutaway shoulders and a de rigueur slit skirt.
MISS SELFRIDGE manageress Jenny Beckett largely agreed with the River Island theories.
‘The girls here are extremely style-conscious and dress to kill,’ Jenny said.
Miss Selfridge in Church Street came up with a Western casual outfit comprising leather ranchero jeans and waistcoat, worn with a denim type shirt and white body, and a sparkly short chemise in dark green sequins.
NEXT manager Billy Gilbertson endorsed River Island's's comments about cost being no object, even for casual clothes.
‘Our big patterned sweaters at £69.99 are our best selling item,’ Billy said.
‘I would agree that Liverpool customers like smart casuals and very glamorous clothes for evening.’
Camille Aryeetey, buyer at WADE SMITH in Mathew Street, says Versace and Ozbek numbers are being snapped up regardless of the three-figure price tags.
‘I think women in Liverpool are very concerned about quality and will certainly pay investment dressing prices to get exactly what they want.’
The Rifat Ozbek military-inspired shorts suit, teamed with a contrasting body, sums up what Camille perceives as Liverpool style.
At the PAUL SMITH & VIVIENNE WESTWOOD shop in Clayton Square, manager Lisa Muscatelli revealed that even in the upmarket fashion echelons the glamorous casual look is what Liverpool women go for in the daytime.
CAMPAIGN TRIBUTE TO TRAGEDY BABY
Couple hope to raise £10,000 for Alder Hey
By Val Woan
A MERSEYSIDE couple has launched a £10,000 fund raising campaign as a tribute to their baby son's short life.
Little Sam Howard-Murphy was just three weeks old when he died from massive heart problems.
Now his parents, Albert and Carla, are hoping that some good can come out of their heartbreak by buying vital equipment for Alder Hey Hospital.
Albert, a Merseyside police constable from Crosby, said: ‘It's a way of showing our gratitude and also a way of ensuring Sam will never be forgotten.
‘We lost him but because of him other parents may be able to take their babies home.’
He said that even though they had been given advance warning of Sam's health problems during a scan three months before he was born, nothing prepared them for the shock.
Albert added: ‘He weighed 9lb 4ozs.
He was a beautiful strapping lad.
He looked perfect.
We couldn't believe he could not be but the heart abnormalities were all there.’
Sam underwent three heart major heart operations and one smaller one and spent all his life on a life support machine.
Albert said: ‘In the end it was all too much.
Sam was a very, very sick little boy.’
Around £2,000 of the target figure has already been banked much of it following the fund raising activities of Albert's colleagues.
On November 12 is a sponsored raft race on the Mersey.
Baby Sam…died after only three weeks on a life support machine
Watchdog's blast at the big banks
By Echo reporter
BANKS and building societies are still providing a service of ‘monumental incompetence’ despite the introduction of a strict code of practice earlier this year, it was claimed today.
The Consumers' Association said one in 10 people was unhappy with the running of current accounts, the same figure as a year ago when the association condemned high street banks for ‘breathtaking arrogance’.
Criticism centred on insufficient information about charges and interest rates despite a requirement in the code that banks must offer customers a ‘price list’ of charges, said the latest edition of the CA magazine, Which?
The new Which? survey disclosed:
An ‘astonishing’ one in 10 were charged incorrectly by their bank or building society.
One in five had wrangles over a direct debit or standing order.
One in seven had money incorrectly removed from their account.
Lloyds, Midland and NatWest came in for most criticism overall, while Abbey National, the Co-op Bank, FirstDirect, the Royal Bank of Scotland and the Yorkshire Bank came out best for overall satisfaction.
Association director Dr John Beishon said: ‘With a few honourable exceptions, banks and building societies are still providing a service of monumental incompetence to too many of their customers.
‘The recession has not dimmed the banks’ high-handed, bungling attitude to customer relations.’
Hooper's high hopes
MIKE HOOPER hopes to have gained some consolation for last night's defeat by Spartak Moscowa Premier League place.
The Reds' third-choice keeper, who made a successful return to senior action, is keeping his fingers crossed that Graeme Souness was impressed enough to select him against Middlesbrough this Saturday.
Hooper, chosen ahead of David James because of his experience, could not be faulted for either of the Russians' goals and desperately wants a chance to make the Anfield number one shirt his own.
He knows, though, that with first choice Bruce Grobbelaar approaching full fitness after his hamstring trouble and James eager to impose himself in the top flight, that Souness faces a difficult choice.
Hooper said today: ‘I felt quite settled out there, although everything falls flat because we were beaten.
‘If I'm not picked on Saturday, I've got a lot of hobbies outside of football!
I don't feel I did anything wrong, really.
‘I enjoyed the atmosphere and I wasn't intimidated.
I just hope it was more often.’
Stars on the shore
BIG cash prizes with £300 for the winner will make Saturday's Super Match the most valuable shore fishing event on the River Mersey.
It takes place at Alexandra Dock wall from 6-10pm on Saturday evening and entry fee is £10.
There is a strict limit of 50 anglers.
Bookings must be made in advance by calling 051-920-0998.
It's a busy time on the Mersey for sea anglers as the winter whiting and cod come within casting range.
Catches
There have been good match results such as the 10lb 8oz winning catch from Seaforth angler Mick Higgins in the Sharpe Tackle open.
Tony Mottram included an early codling in his catch of whiting to win the North West Association Winter Team League match at Seaforth Rocks.
It was a pegged-down contest and Tony, whose weight helped the Personal Members Red Team into top spot, fished from rocks close to the ‘T’ junction using lugworm and mackerel.
Record
Paul Stephenson bagged his third 30lb pike at Llandegfed Reservoir.
The Pensby big fish specialist has enjoyed an outstanding autumn on the South Wales trout reservoir, including a fabulous 38-pounder, and during his latest stint hooked a 31lb 8oz pike on spinner bait.
He completed an outstanding session by catching a second pike scaling 28lb.
But his performance was upstaged by London angler Roy Lewis who broke the British pike record the same day with a 46lb 3oz specimen.
Star guests
DAVE HICKSON and Brian Labone will be back in ‘action’ at Goodison Park on November 12 as guests of the Liverpool Lions Club.
They will be joined by ex-Red Phil Thompson at a fund-raising night for local charities.
Guest speakers will be Mickey Stewart (the ex-England and Surrey cricket manager) and comedian Harry Black.
Ticket details can be obtained from Peter Hart (051-424-2508).
Thumbs up to taste of France as schools go Continental
Picture: Lloyd Wright
A TASTE of France was on the menu for youngsters from Merseyside schools today.
Around 100 15-year-olds were combining the excitement of a French experience with the reality of the hotel and catering trades in a novel combination designed to boost their success in school exams.
The Whitbread Education Partnership has organised a series of ‘French Fiesta’ events with their prestigious Landsbury Hotels providing the setting for a three-day French food project.
The boys of Pensby High School will be going French at the Parkgate Hotel, Wirral, the South Wirral High School will be at the Cromwell Hotel, Bromborough, while pupils at St Ambrose Barlow School in Netherton will be working alongside staff at the Blundellsands Hotel in Crosby.
Guided by their teachers and the team at each hotel, the youngsters will have created and co-ordinated the entire event, from poster design to preparing and serving the food.
Going French…
Nicola Dale (left) Jeanette Elliott and Kevin Thompson (centre) from South Wirral High School
Neat machine for the Nouveau run
By Judith Moss
SPORTS cars don't come any smarter than this.
The zippy Toyota MR2, generously supplied by Northway Toyota of Bootle and Maghull, is a neat machine with a built-in ability to turn heads.
Just watch the looks from passers-by as you drive into town in the stunner with power-assisted steering ideal for parking in the city.
And, fortunately for us at least, it's the motor that will be taking the Liverpool Echo/NatWest Bank driving twosome to France on the Beaujolais Nouveau run.
Myself and Mike White of NatWest will be driving an MR2 when we take part in the Merseyside Challenge along with more than 100 other Merseysiders.
The teams set off from Liverpool for Beaune in France on the sponsored run that will raise thousands of pounds for the Macmillan Nurse Appeal, now nearing its target to fund four new hospital support Macmillan Nurses on Merseyside.
The teams will leave Liverpool on the first leg on Sunday, November 15, but the actual challenge begins on Wednesday, November 18.
Then the teams set off for home bringing this year's Beaujolais Nouveau by the shortage mileage from Beaune to Liverpool.
The finish is in the Texas car park in Edge Lane on the afternoon of Thursday, November 19.
The teams will again parade through the city with a police escort back to the Albert Dock, before returning to the Blundellsands Hotel in Crosby for the evening awards party.
Those who are supporting the Challenge include Littlewoods, who have supplied £10,000 worth of leisurewear for the competitors, and Whitbread, who have already contributed £2,000 and will be sending three teams.
Sponsors are still needed for the event.
If you can help contact the Merseyside Challenge Press Office, tel: 051-709 2715.
Read Arthur Johnson's verdict on the Toyota MR2 in next week's motoring column.
ALL-CHANGE IN SPECIAL CLASS
Councillors to close Finchlea School
By Michael Huggins
SPECIAL education for those with physical disabilities and severe learning difficulties is to be reorganised.
This will include the loss of a centre for 16 to 19-year-olds.
Amid bitter debate, councillors agreed late last night to the closure and sale of the Oakfield Centre in Gateacre and Finchlea School in Dovecot, and new uses for present special school buildings around the city.
Alliance
Separate primary and secondary schools for people with physical disabilities, and two schools each for primary and secondary pupils with severe learning difficulties will be set up.
The plan was carried by an alliance of Liberal Democrat councillors and the breakaway Liverpool Labour Councillors group.
Labour plans to reduce the number of special schools to five, with one all-age school for children with physical disabilites were rejected.
The council must now apply to the Education Secretary for approval for the changes.
Liverpool Labour Councillors group education spokeswoman Sue Hogan said: ‘Don't make these children a cost-cutting exercise, give them a future.’
But Labour's education chairman, Gideon Ben-Tovim, said keeping two separate age-group schools for those with physical disabilities would mean two half capacity schools when one could house all pupils.
He said: ‘It will put money into buildings, rather than into services, into the pupils.’
A working party is to look at the provision for 16-plus age groups with special needs.
Sextuplets parents Jane and Graham Walton are pictured accepting a cheque on behalf of the Newborn Appeal for £340.00, from Tommy Kaye of St Christophers Social Club, Stapleton Avenue, Speke, after fund-raising by members.
The appeal aims to raise £m for special care units at Oxford Street, Fazakerley and Mill Road.
The Humane Research Trust raised £160.30 during a collection in Huyton recently, and wish to thank the people for their generosity.
Regulars at Davinia's Music Bar in Southport, raised £115.00 for Walton and Fazakerley Hospital's Sunshine Radio.
Landlords are taken to task over standards
‘GRUBBY’ BLASTIN NEW PUB GUIDE
LANDLORDS were taken to task today for running ‘dirty, grubby and unfriendly’ pubs.
Complaints about bad service and housekeeping were running at an ‘alarmingly high’ level, said the 1993 edition of The Good Pub Guide.
The guide analysed more than 1,000 complaints from readers who visited 567 ‘thumbs down’ pubs premises where they would not return.
Of these, a quarter took exception to general unfriendliness among the staff and management, while 16% found the staff ‘offhand, indifferent, surly or even downright offensive and insulting’.
Animals
Guide editor Alisdair Aird said: ‘This is really a shocking finding in an industry which depends above all on good customer/staff relationships for its success.’
Drinkers also moaned about dirt and smells in pubs, bad toilets and ‘down-at-heel’ gardens.
Some complained about hostile or dirty animals in pubs.
Disappointing food and premises came next on the list of complaints, with some saying the food was ‘poor, obviously frozen or reheated’.
About three times as many people complained about high food prices as about high drink prices.
The survey was conducted outside London, but a comparable investigation within the capital found there were more complaints about prices, beer quality and the general character of the pub, but fewer about service.
The guide found pub price rises this year were running at just over 6%, down from 16% last year.
Mr Aird said this suggested anti-monopoly reforms forcing the big brewers to reduce the number of pubs tied to them were working, but there was ‘still a long way to go’ before pubgoers felt the full benefit of increased competition.
This year's Pub of the Year award went to the Bear at Crickhowell in Powys.
Patients to get new-look welcome at hospital
A NEW ‘front door’ will open to patients, staff and visitors at Wirral- ‘s biggest hospital on Monday.
Work is being completed on a £350,000 scheme which has transformed the main entrance to Arrowe Park Hospital.
It provides a new information and reception desk, an improved waiting area, a coffee shop and a small parade of shops and kiosks.
These include a supermarket to be run by the hospital's own League of Friends.
The focal point will be a direction board linked to a sign system which will take people through the 860-bed hospital.
The information desk will be staffed between 8am-8pm.
The Wirral Hospital Trust says the shops will generate an income of £100,000 a year which will be used to support the staffing costs of a vital new service, a body scanner.
Chief executive Frank Burns said: ‘We would have had to spend 50pc of the cost on fire precautions in any case, so we have taken this opportunity to provide what is the most important building in Wirral with an entrance that gives patients, staff and visitors a welcoming and efficient first impression.’
In a statement yesterday, NUPE said it had recently learned that the hospital trust planned to borrow £300,000 from its capital programme to finance the development.
The union added: ‘Management have to spend £50,000 in the near future to comply with fire regulations.
‘They are trying to claim that the refurbishment is part of this process and is cost-effective.
They are taking a risk in borrowing the cash.
‘They claim they can pay it back over a three to four-year period.’
Young tennis ace in final
REBECCA FOSTER, from Southport, has claimed a place in the Volkswagen National Division Five Tennis final at Telford.
The 14-year-old Lancashire player beat Dianne Grundy, from Woodbridge, Suffolk, 7-6, 6-3 in yesterday's semi-final and now meets Ruth Spencer, of Bournemouth, in today's final.
Foster qualified for the Telford finals having won her division for ‘middle club’ rated tennis players in a LTA Volkswagen Nationals county qualifying tournament during the summer and then a regional final in September.
Almost 5,000 players have competed.
Redmond's TV snub
BROOKSIDE bosses have refused a chance to talk about Liverpool's image on Granada's Up Front programme tonight.
The soap's creator Phil Redmond, chairman of Mersey Television, has turned down an invitation to take part in a televised debate on the effect the show has had on the image of Liverpool during the last 10 years.
He has told Up Front it would be ‘futile’ because the debate is based on the false assumption that Brookside was designed to reflect life in Liverpool.
‘It wasn't, never has been and never will,’ he said.
He added: ‘The purpose was, is and always will be to reflect life in Britain for a national television channel.’
Up Front 's producer Christine Ruth said they were disappointed at the reaction from Mersey Television but that the item would go ahead regardless.
Ulster hospital guard wounded
A BELFAST hospital security guard was shot and badly wounded last night.
The guard was standing outside the Mater Hospital in Crumlin Road when he was hit.
Also in Belfast, police arrested a man after an arms cache was found in the Protestant Donegall Pass district.
Major and Delors issue call for further talks with Americans
EURO BID TO AVERT TRADE WAR THREAT
By Echo reporter
JOHN Major and EC Commission President Jacques Delors moved swiftly today to try to avert a disastrous trade war between Europe and the United States.
The two issued a joint statement calling for the continuation of negotiations between the two blocs.
The statement, issued by Downing Street, stated: ‘The president of the commission has said that commission negotiators should re-engage, without delay, in negotiations with the United States in order to resolve the oil seeds dispute and the Gatt Uruguay round in a balanced way.’
The statement also said: ‘The Prime Minister and the president of the commission today had a discussion covering a number of subjects relating to the Edinburgh summit as well as the present difficulties in reaching agreement on the Gatt Uruguay round and the oil seeds dispute.
‘The president of the commission and the Prime Minister agreed that the negotiations must continue to avoid a trade war.’
The statement was issued after Mr Major called in the commission president, who was already in London to give a lecture.
Mr Delors has been widely blamed for causing the latest crisis.
Urgency
The Prime Minister's dramatic move was virtually a direct order to him to make contact and shortly afterwards it was announced Mr Delors would go to Number 10 at 12.45 pm after speaking at the London School of Economics less than a mile away.
The urgency with which Mr Major acted left MPs in no doubt he would have some harsh words for Mr Delors.
The meeting followed the shock departure of Gatt chief negotiator Ray MacSharry, the EC agriculture commissioner.
This came with time running out to stop the 200% US trade tariffs on £200 million of imported European goods.
As Mr Delors stepped from his car outside Number 10 he waved away reporters' questions about whether he had sabotaged the talks.
When Mr Major and Mr Delors emerged from their talks they shook hands and smiled but said nothing to reporters.
The Prime Minister was asked whether he and Mr Delors were still friends but he disappeared inside Number 10 without speaking.
The statement, agreed by the two men, was issued by a Downing Street official almost immediately after Mr Delors swept through the gates at the end of Downing Street in an official car.
quizzed over killing
A 48-YEAR-OLD man was being questioned by West Yorkshire detectives yesterday in connection with the death of schoolgirl Lesley Molseed in 1975.
The case was reopened after Stefan Kiszko, who was convicted of the murder of the 11-year-old schoolgirl in 1976, was freed by the Court of Appeal in February this year.
West Yorkshire Police said yesterday: ‘A 48-year-old man is being questioned by West Yorkshire Police, in connection with the death of Lesley Molseed, whose body was found on October 8, 1975.’
The schoolgirl, who was from Rochdale, Greater Manchester, was found stabbed to death on a desolate Pennine moor.
She had disappeared after setting out to buy a loaf of bread from a shop near her home.
Police said later that the man who was helping with inquiries had been detained as he was released from Armley jail, Leeds.
He was being questioned at a police station in Bradford where the investigation is based.
Man beaten by raiders
THREE masked men armed with baseball bats burst into a flat and attacked a 27year-old man as he watched TV.
The attackers then fled and their bleeding victim, not named by police, managed to stagger to Bootle's Marsh Lane police station.
Police said the assault, which occurred in the early hours of yesterday morning at Chesnut House in St James Drive, Bootle, had been brutal and apparently without motive.
Acting Detective-Inspector John O'Neill said: ‘The man was beaten badly and was taken to Walton Hospital after staggering into Marsh Lane police station.
‘He was given stitches to his cuts and suffered extensive bruising.
This was an appalling attack on a man in his own home.’
School shut by new arson attack
By Ray Kelly
PUPILS were turned away from the gates of one of Merseyside's most troubled schools today after a devastating Bonfire Night arson attack.
Disbelieving parents shook their heads when they arrived at Overdale County Primary School in Northwood, Kirkby.
The third strike by firebugs in 11 days wrecked three rooms.
Last night, after smashing windows, the culprits set fire to a library room and flames spread to highly flammable materials in a store room.
Kirkby firemen prevented flames reaching the lower school annexe and nursery school, where classes continued close to normal for 140 youngsters.
More than 300 children, aged seven to 11 were told to stay at home.
Head teacher Marcus Thacker said he hoped the Roughwood Drive schoolwhich now tops the Knowsley table of arson-hit schools will finally get the £70,000 security fence it first requested four years ago.
He said: ‘You should have seen the look on the faces of the children this morning.
‘They were really upset that school was cancelled.
Apart from the health risk, it would have been disturbing for them to see the damage.
‘It is a happy school.
There is a lot of parental involvement and we have made several improvements to give it a better image.
The morale of the teachers is very low after everyone has tried so hard for the school.
‘We are at the lowest point in my 12 years here.
‘The parents are horrified and I am totally disgusted.
I hope we get the security fence soon.’
After a weekend cleanup operation Mr Thacker hopes to re-open the school on Monday.
NEW LIFE FOR TINY DOG LEFT TO DIE
Dumped puppy rescued from skip
AN ABANDONED puppy has found sanctuary in the Wallasey RSPCA Dogs' Home after being dumped in a skip at Princes Dock, Liverpool.
It owes its second chance of life to an alert dock worker.
He was shocked to find the puppy's legs had been tied up with string before it was placed in a bag and dumped.
Gertrude Hauser, superintendent of the dogs' home, is accustomed to such examples of man's inhumanity to dumb creatures.
But she said it re-emphasised the need for the spaying of bitches to avoid litters of unwanted puppies facing a cruel death.
She said: ‘I think it is terrible that puppies can be dumped and left to die when the RSPCA is giving so much help to people who cannot afford the vet's bill for sterilisation.
‘We have a scheme to financially assist people who are unemployed, on invalidity benefit or pensions.
‘And anybody who comes to the dogs’ home for a bitch will find that the price includes spaying.
‘We only release bitches who have been spayed and if they are still only puppies we give the new owners a date to take them to the vet.’
RSPCA assistant Ann Hauser cuddles her latest guest Picture:JASON ROBERTS
Baby hurt as firework hits her on head
A BABY girl was recovering today after being hit by an exploding firework.
Sarah-Jane Paynter, six months, was saved from more serious injury by her mother.
Mum Debbie ran for cover cradling her baby as the firework sent a shower of fire towards bonfire night revellers in Litherland.
Sarah-Jane was rushed to Alder Hey Hospital for emergency treatment but was back at home today.
Protected
Debbie, 23, of Blisworth Street, said: ‘If I hadn't ran away when I saw the balls of fire coming towards us it might have been much worse.
‘Out of all the people watching she was the only one to be hit, even though I protected her as much as I could.
‘The firework burned the top of her head but it was lucky it wasn't her face.’
Dad Michael had lit the Mines of Serpents firework which spluttered before sending out its shower towards onlookers across the street.
Firemen attacked: Page 4
Fall in jobless boosts Irish PM's poll hopes
By Chris Parkin Daily Post correspondent
IRISH Prime Minister Albert Reynolds received a general election campaign boost last night, just 24 hours into his bid to retain office, when figures highlighted an improving unemployment position.
Government statistics showed the number of people without work fell last month for the first time in more than two years
But at 281,500, the jobless total was still close to 20% of the workforce.
Fianna Fail leader Mr Reynolds claimed a drop of 5,600 on the previous month indicated that the government's jobs policy was starting to produce results.
The figures were released soon after Fine Gael, the main opposition party, had identified unemployment as a key issue for the election.
Party leader John Bruton, launching the first of the campaign manifestos, said the Reynolds' government had still left unemployment at a near-record high level.
He pledged that, given a say in government, Fine Gael would shift the bias of society in favour of creating more jobs through tax concessions.
Mr Reynolds called an election for November 25 last night, after losing a confidence vote in the Dail, the Dublin parliament.
A long-running tribunal of inquiry into allegations of malpractices within the Irish meat processing industry was adjourned yesterday for the period of the election campaign.
The inquiry provided the arena last month for Mr Reynolds' allegation of dishonesty against his then cabinet colleague, and Progressive Democrats party leader, Des O'Malley a remark which finally shattered the fragile coalition administration.
Tribunal chairman Mr Justice Liam Hamilton said matters being investigated ‘regrettably become the subject of political controversy’.
The five main party leaders contesting the general election united to express dismay at the breakdown of the Gatt negotiations.
A joint statement called on the European and American representatives to meet as often as necessary to work out a balanced and global agreement.
Pain of a Royal…the sombre features of the Princess of Wales during her visit to South Korea this week
By James Hardy and Heather Tyrrell Daily Post Correspondents
THE PRINCESS of Wales last night spoke out for the first time about the ‘untrue and hurtful’ allegations about friction between her, and the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh.
Buckingham Palace took the highly unusual step of issuing a statement, on behalf of the Princess, publicly condemning the ‘recent wave of misleading reports’ about rifts in the Royal Family.
But newspapers responded by saying they had nothing to apologise for, and described the statement as ‘astonishing.’
The move demonstrated the irritation felt by the Prince and Princess of Wales over the media barrage they faced during their tour of South Korea this week.
The Prince, who began a visit to Hong Kong as the Princess returned to Britain early yesterday, is said to have ‘warmly endorsed’ the decision to speak out.
However, there was no direct reference to the state of their marriage in the statement.
It said: ‘The Princess of Wales would like to single out from the recent wave of misleading reports about the Royal Family the assertions in some newspapers this week directed specifically against the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
‘The suggestion that they have been anything other than sympathetic and supportive is untrue and particularly hurtful.’
The 50-strong media entourage accompanying the Royal couple in South Korea subjected their marriage to the closest scrutiny on the four-day trip.
A number of newspapers claimed the Princess was forced by the Queen to go on the tour against her will, as a way of demonstrating there was no rift between her and the Prince.
It was said she wanted to play no part in a cosmetic exercise designed to put a happy face on the marriage.
It was also reported that a new chapter in Andrew Morton's controversial biography of the Princess would include details of a letter from the Duke warning her of the damage she was causing the Royal Family.
The tour has been portrayed as a public relations disaster in many newspapers, with the emphasis placed on the apparent failure of the Prince and Princess to acknowledge each other 's presence in public.
The coverage angered the royal entourage on what was supposed to be a high-profile visit to a close trading partner, and a country where British servicemen died in the fight against Communism in the early 1950s.
Senior Palace sources were last night still insisting the trip had served its primary purpose, but there has been little effort during the week to disguise their growing frustration.
The Prince and Princess are always kept in close touch with coverage of their activities, and the past few days have been no exception.
However, no one newspaper was singled out for criticism.
The tour, which ended on Thursday, gave royal journalists the opportunity to scrutinise closely the couple together on 12 occasions within four days.
Many saw it as an ideal opportunity for the Prince and Princess to put on a united front, quashing speculation over their marriage.
Reporters and photographers recorded the images presented to them of a couple who smiled and carried out their duties professionally, but barely exchanged a word, a touch or a glance.
Palace spokesmen continually insisted: ‘We have no intention of dignifying any of this speculation going on at the moment.’
However, the Palace did deny a report that senior royal officials had admitted for the first time that the marriage was in difficulty.
Stuart Higgins, duty editor at The Sun, said the paper had nothing to apologise for.
He said: ‘It is significant that this astonishing statement is released on the day the Princess of Wales returns from an important official visit to South Korea which has been completely overshadowed by renewed speculation over the couple's marriage.
‘The stories were only generated because of the couple's behaviour towards each other.
The Sun has not been one of the newspapers which has in any way suggested that either the Queen or the Duke of Edinburgh have been other than supportive to the Princess of Wales.’
Di ‘wanted to walk out’ says new book
THE Princess of Wales seriously considered walking out on the Royal Family, according to royal biographer Andrew Morton.
He makes his claim in the updated paperback version of Diana: Her True Story, which went on sale today in the United States.
Morton said it was only the intervention of the Queen which stopped her leaving public life for good.
Split
The new claim comes on the day the princess returned home from a disastrous tour to South Korea only to hear that the baby son of a close friend had died.
The tour also fuelled fresh rumours of a marriage split.
According to the author, the princess's lowest ebb came with the publication earlier this year of the so-called Dianagate tape — allegedly the recording of an intimate telephone conversation with her longtime friend James Gilbey.
‘At the height of the Dianagate scandal the princess seriously considered packing her bags and leaving,’ writes Mr Morton.
‘Several friends who spoke to her have confirmed she felt ‘destroyed’ by the coverage.
‘'If this is the price of public life, then it is a price I am no longer willing to pay,’ the anguished princess told one friend.’
The book says the princess is now determined to remain and to persevere until she reaches a working relationship with the Royal Family.
The postscript, entitled A Princess Alone, covers the events of last summer.
It says that at first the princess was ‘almost jolly’ the truth was out.
MDHC chief welcomes four-year ACL deal
SHIPS GIANT PUTS FAITH IN THE PORT
SHIPPING giant ACL today pledged to stick with Liverpool at least for the next four years after a new contract was hammered out between the Swedish-owned company and Mersey Docks and Harbour Company.
The agreement has quashed speculation that the line could quit the port after setting up container services here 24 years ago.
Doubts emerged over ACL's commitment to the port following news that the line's Swedish parent company, Bilspedition, had decided to sell its entire shipping portfolio.
But executive vice-president ACL Wieger Koornstra, speaking in Liverpool today, revealed that ACL cargoes handled by the port could increase by up to 4% over the next year.
Clause
He claimed that the new contract would be seen as a valuable asset to any new owners.
‘I am sure the new owner will be pleased with the arrangement that ACL has in Liverpool and the option to continue this favourable contract if they so wish.’
However, he did admit that there is a get-out clause written in to the contract involving Hapag Lloyd who share facilities at the Royal Seaforth Container Terminal which has been negotiated on cheaper terms than the previous agreement.
Central to an increase in through cargoes is the proposed Trans-Atlantic Agreement.
The deal involves 11 other major shipping lines on the North Atlantic route and will allow them to take space and swop slots on vessels belonging to fellow member lines.
‘You might not see new vessels in the port, but their cargoes will be here,’ said Mr Koornstra.
Trevor Furlong, MDHC managing director and chief executive, welcomed the deal announced today.
Important
‘We are confident we can meet ACL's requirements and provide a very high level of service, not only to ship owners but also to hauliers,’ he said.
MDHC spokesman Ken Wharton added: ‘This contract is also very important for the North-West and Midlands industries.
‘The more services we can get into the Port here, the more in added benefits there is to our own industries.’
Wary Hall sounds Wallaby warning
MIKE HALL, who nearly quit international rugby after Wales' savaging in Australia in the summer of 1991, is urging his B team colleagues to beware the wounded Wallabies in Cardiff today.
The Cardiff centre was so disillusioned after the 63-6 thrashing by Australia in Brisbane 17 months ago that he was on the verge of walking out on his country.
But since then, 27-year-old Hall capped 21 times has become a central part of Wales' dramatic recent resurgence.
Beaten 21-6 by Swansea on Wednesday, the world champions have reacted by picking virtually their Test-strength pack.
Only giant lock John Eales who is rested and the injured David Campese will be missing.
Hall's experience will be vital to the Welsh second string but he warns: ‘We have to try to keep the Aussies down as they won't repeat their Swansea mistakes.’
Wales B: M Rayer; I Jones, N Davies, M Hall, W Proctor; C Stephens, R Moon (capt); R Evans, D Fox, H Williams-Jones, S Roy, J Wakeford, M Morris, M Perego, S Legge
Australia: M Roebuck; D Junee, R Tombs, L Walker, D Smith; T Wallace, A Ekert; D Crowley, P Kearns (capt), E McKenzie, R McCall, G Morgan, W Ofahengaue, D Wilson, T Gavin.
GATT TALKS AGREEMENT
Agreed statement between Mr Delors and Mr Major issued directly after one-hour 20-minute meeting said: ‘President of Commission and Prime Minister agreed negotiations must continue to avoid trade war.’
It added: ‘President of Commission said Commission negotiators should re-engage without delay in negotiations with United States in order to resolve dispute.’
See Page 2
Pocket money now being hit by recession
THE recession is beginning to affect even children, says a new survey.
Hard-up parents are giving them less pocket money.
The average weekly amount received by teenagers fell to £4 this year, compared with £4.20 last year.
Rates have fallen most sharply in the South East, where the going rate now averages £3.80 a week, £1.40 less than last year.
Children in Greater London still get the most pocket money, £4.80 a week, while those in the East receive the least, only £3.40 a week.
Scottish parents are the second most generous, giving an average £4.50 a week.
About a third of the teenagers surveyed had part-time jobs with average weekly earnings of £13.10, an increase of 3pc on last year.
The most popular jobs were paper or milk rounds (36pc), shop-work (23pc) and babysitting (11pc).
The most popular items to spend money on were going out (52pc girls and 35pc boys), clothes (49pc and 22pc) and books or magazines (43pc and 30pc).
More than half of those in the survey continued to say they saved all or most of their money with holidays the most popular target for saving.
For the first time boys received more pocket money than girls 10p extra on average a week and had higher average weekly earnings than girls by 20p a week at £13.20.
More than 4,000 12 to 16year-old members of the Halifax Building Society Quest Club filled in questionnaires for the latest survey.
‘The recession has hit the pound in teenagers’ pockets,’the Halifax's chief executive, Jim Birrell, said.
The fall in pocket money received for this age group contrasts with a rise from £1.40 a week to £1.48 shown in a Halifax survey of the under-12s last month.
Cash helps revitalise job slump areas
ALMOST £4m in European Community grants will soon boost job-starved areas of Clwyd.
David Hunt yesterday welcomed the first 42 projects in a package of aid worth a total of £21.8m.
More than £1m goes to Clwyd County Council for road improvement, including £554,000 for the Salop Road-Bridge Street section of the Wrexham inner ring road.
Another £89,00 goes towards the promotion of the Eisteddfod Field International Arena at Llangollen.
Also, £97,500 is earmarked for repairs to Bangor-on-Dee bridge.
And £22,730 will be used to help pay for repairs to bridge steps down to the riverside at Llangollen.
The walls of Dinas Bran castle, the 13th century historic fortress which overlooks the Dee Valley, are to be rebuilt with help from a £38,500 grant.
Deeside Enterprise Centre is getting a 40pc grant worth £99,840 for four additional workshop units and the refurbishment of an old school building.
Rhuddlan Borough Council will receive £1.4m towards the children's village on West Promenade in Rhyl.
The European Regional Development Fund and European Social Fund grants are available to the areas of Shotton, Flint, Rhyl and Wrexham designated as seriously affected by industrial decline.
Other grants are: New bridge on B4579 at Pant Hafodgynfawr, Glyn Ceiriog (£100,750); A5105 Pontybodkin bridge and junction (43,750); Improvement of bridge at Pant Rhyd-y-Ceirw, Rhydtalog (£38,250); and A5152 Chester Road-Price's Lane junction improvement (£17,230).
Tories call for ‘save it’ solution
WIRRAL Tories have called for a massive re-cycling drive to provide a realistic alternative to waste incineration.
Tory group environmental protection spokesman Coun Derek Robinson said: ‘The country is running out of holes in the ground for landfill sites and the public do not want incineration.
‘Therefore the answer must be re-cycling.’
Tories say the way forward is to work closely with the private sector to set up a scheme similar to that undertaken by Halton Council, which is aiming for 90% recycling.
Solutions will be discussed at the next meeting of the council's environmental protection committee.
End of an era as link is axed
THEY said the sun would never set on the Gateway to Wallasey.
Victoria Place home to Seacombe's ferry terminal radiated life, echoing to the daily sound of ferries, buses and trains which bustled out across the region.
When they replaced the ten-minute peak-hour ferry services with 20-minute sailings, in 1975, it was chaos.
Hundreds were crammed into two narrow gangways to board ferries.
Many missed the ferry, such was the crush.
The Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive promised to look into the hold-ups.
Last night, it shouldered a graver problem.
The ferry terminal was facing the fate of other former coastal landmarks, including New Brighton pier, the Tivoli Theatre, New Brighton baths, the Derby Pool and Mother Redcap's.
Ironically, the terminal's death knell sounds at a time when Seacombe's fortunes have taken an upturn.
Cash from Wirral Council's City Lands initiative is being pumped into major regeneration work, including a facelift operation at Victoria Place.
The earliest mention of a ferry at Seacombe dates back to 1515 but its advancement came in the latter part of the last century when the ferry rights were taken over by the Wallasey local board.
A floating stage to accommodate two steam vessels was opened in 1880 and a floating roadway was added in 1926.
Two years later, a floating stage capable of taking three steamers was put in place.
During the 1920s a terminal building was built, with capacity to deal with 10,000 passengers an hour.
Plan to close Seacombe ferry terminal
EXCLUSIVE: By Vic Gibson
SHOCK plans to close Seacombe Ferry terminal recently-revamped by Mersey Ferries are being drawn up in secret by transport chiefs.
The proposal to close Seacombe Ferry comes a week after the revitalised service won a top tourist award for the second successive year.
Management were meeting staff this afternoon to reveal details of the closure plan, which would mean job losses.
They say the ferries are still losing money despite a recent surge in passenger numbers.
Seacombe is singled out as the biggest loss-maker, ahead of Liverpool's Pier Head and Woodside in Birkenhead.
Around £300,000 a year has been spent patching up its ageing landing stage.
And they warn that up to £12m may soon have to be invested in major work.
Stunned
Friends of the Ferries were stunned when the ECHO broke the news.
They pledged to launch a campaign to save the terminal.
Spokeswoman Joan Roberts said: ‘They can't do this.
It would be disastrous.
‘They have just spent all that money on an aquarium and restaurant.
It is crazy.’
The plans have been put forward by the ruling Labour group on Merseyside Passenger Transport Authority, which runs the ferries.
They are due to go before the Mersey Ferries board in two weeks.
But Cllr Dave Jackson, leader of Wirral's Labour group, said: ‘We will oppose the closure.
‘The people without cars in that part of Wallasey have no other link with Liverpool.
It is their lifeline.’
Ferries manager Ian Thompson was unavailable for comment.
Voluntary redundancies and natural wastage are expected instead of sackings.
Last month, the ferries won Merseyside Tourist Board's best visitor attraction of the year.
Civic loss
A FORMER mayor has died at the age of 86.
Percy Taylor, ex-mayor of Rhuddlan, died on Thursday after a brief illness.
Mr Taylor was born in Prestatyn, served on the former Flintshire County Council and was a prominent member of Prestatyn Golf Club.
His funeral service will be held at St John's Church, Prestatyn, on Monday at 1.30pm.
£3m DEBT FORCES TRANSPORT CHIEFS TO SINK CENTURIES-OLD SERVICE
Cash crisis kills Mersey ferry route
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
PLANS to axe the historic Seacombe Ferry sent shock waves rippling across Wirral last night.
The chief executive of Merseytravel, which operates the service, emerged from a crisis meeting and conceded a crippling financial burden was forcing it to back closure plans.
But a three-point plan for Mersey Ferries does create hopes that a new jetty could be built at New Brighton for cruise vessels to berth.
Seacombe faces a rising financial burden, including projected losses for the present year totalling £3m.
A new landing stage needed in five years will cost £10m and a new ferry boat will cost £8m to £10m the projected life of the existing three boats is five years.
Proposals by Merseyside Passenger Transport Authority will have to be endorsed by Merseytravel, which owns and operates the ferries.
The present workforce of 112 would be cut to 60.
Staff were called to a special meeting last night to be told of the proposed changes.
Merseytravel chief executive Roy Swainson said after the meeting: ‘We have to balance our commitment to the future of the Mersey Ferries with our responsibility to the community charge payers of Merseyside who support the service.
‘The changing economic climate means we have to be flexible.
We will be seeking consultation with external bodies as soon as the proposals have been ratified internally.’
Labour Coun Gordon Paterson, a member of the MPTA, said last night: ‘We are not advocating any compulsory redundancies.
But as a commuter service, Seacombe ferry had outlived its usefulness.
‘Only 200 people a day were using the ferry at its peak, compared with hundreds of thousands in the past.’
The MPTA proposes:
A bus service from Seacombe to Woodside and the introduction of an all-in ferry-bus ticket.
An overhaul of the Woodchurch ferry boat at a cost of £1.5m.
One of the two remaining ferry boats would be kept as a stand-by vessel and the other would be stripped of its engine and berthed at Canning Dock for possible shopping or leisure purposes.
Talks are taking place with Merseyside Development Corporation over the reconstruction of New Brighton pier.
A refurbished Overchurch ferry capable of sailing well out into Liverpool Bay.
Seacombe Submarine -an aquarium project featuring Mersey marine life in huge tanks -would be switched to Woodside and expanded.
Seacombe councillor Janet Jackson said the ferries still provided a lifeline for many people who used them to travel to work and back.
A ship sails out through the mist from Seacombe
The famous Victoria Place ferry terminal facade
SCHOOL SHUT BY NEW FIRE ATTACK
Arsonists strike three times in 11 days
By Ray Kelly
PUPILS were turned away from the gates of one of Merseyside's most troubled schools today, after a devastating Bonfire Night arson attack.
Disbelieving parents shook their heads when they arrived at Overdale County Primary School in Northwood, Kirkby.
The third strike by firebugs in 11 days wrecked three rooms.
Upset
More than 300 children, aged seven to 11 were told to stay at home.
Kirkby firemen prevented flames reaching the lower school annexe and nursery school, where classes continued close to normal for 140 youngsters.
Head teacher Marcus Thacker said he hoped the Roughwood Drive school which now tops the Knowsley table of arson-hit schoolswill finally get the £70,000 security fence it first requested four years ago.
He said: ‘You should have seen the look on the faces of the children this morning.
‘They were really upset that school was cancelled.
Apart from the health risk, it would have been disturbing for them to see the damage.
‘It is a happy school.
There is a lot of parental involvement and we have made several improvements to give it a better image.
‘The morale of the teachers is very low after everyone has tried so hard for the school.
‘We are at the lowest point in my 12 years here.
‘The parents are horrified and I am totally disgusted.
I hope we get the security fence soon.’
Flammable
A team of high intensive cleaners was ready to descend on the school today for a mammoth weekend operation before Mr Thacker hopes to re-open the school on Monday.
Last night, after smashing windows, the culprits set fire to a library room and flames spread to highly flammable materials in a store room.
Christmas plans ruined by raiders
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A MOTHER-of-four has been left devastated by burglars who ransacked her home and stole Christmas presents she had bought for her children.
Linda Parkinson, 36, says she is stunned by the crime which has badly affected her youngest daughter, Elizabeth, 4.
The burglars struck at Mrs Parkinson's Oxford Road, Waterloo, home on Thursday.
The break-in was discovered by her two sons, Peter, 17, and Neil, 15, when they came home from school.
Among the items stolen were Christmas presents, already wrapped.
‘I don't know how anyone could have done this.
The burglars have been into every room and have turned our house upside down,’ said Mrs Parkinson.
‘What's particularly upsetting is the fact that the Christmas presents have gone.
I had chosen and wrapped them with care.
They also took clothing and videos.
I will now have to start all over again.’
Mrs Parkinson added: ‘The children have been badly affected.
Elizabeth hasn't left my side since the burglary.
They even stole my husband Anthony's retirement presents and the telephone.
‘The whole place feels dirty because they have been in.’
Anyone who can help the police with their inquiries is asked to contact Crosby CID.
Springbok win could be route to Union elite
Test of strength
Preview by TERRY COOPER
MANAGER Graham Smith has spelled out the rewards to his England B team of a convincing display against the Springboks at Bristol today.
Smith told them: ‘If you play really well against what looks like a near full-strength side, some of you will face them in next week's Test and others will go higher in the national rankings.’
It is easily the toughest assignment England B have faced in recent seasons.
Future
Smith said: ‘Seasoned internationals like Brian Moore and Jeff Probyn are seeking a re-entry into the senior England team after missing the Canada match last month.
‘There are others who have a future if they are good enough.
Scrum-half Steve Bates is playing the best rugby of his life and wants to add to his one cap.
‘The captain, Stuart Barnes, has done everything asked of him this year.
He still hopes for another opportunity at Test level.
‘And in the back row, Tim Rodber and Ben Clarke can justifiably think of themselves as England candidates.’
The Springboks want to take the basis of their lineup into the Twickenham Test, with full-back Theo van Rensburg and forwards Drikus Hattingh and Keith Andrews on the verge.
Eleven of the team that started against France in the second Test last month are in action.
Tougher
Captain Naas Botha said ‘We want a repeat of our match against the Midlands in midweek when we played effective rugby for the full 80 minutes for the first time on tour.
‘We know that England B will be a much tougher proposition, but I am now more hopeful that our aim of reaching a peak against Englandat Twickenham will become a reality.’
Smith added: ‘We have to get in behind them.
We need to take the ball wide and use the finishing pace on the wings of Tony Underwood and Nigel Heslop.’
BACK IN BUSINESS?
England's Jeff Probyn (above) and Brian Moore
UNILEVER PROFITS UP 9%
UNILEVER, which manufactures such basic items as washing powder and margarine, emphasised its resilience to the recession in today's third quarter results.
Pre-tax profits in the three months to the end of September rose 9% to £571m from £525m in the same period last year.
For the first nine months of the year taxable profits at the group, whose brands range from Persil to Flora, were ahead 10% to £1,459m from £1,331m.
The Anglo-Dutch group has extensive local interests and employs almost 4,000 Merseyside staff.
Unilever subsidiaries are based in Port Sunlight, Bromborough, Warrington, Bebington and Liverpool, including John West Foods.
Shareholders will receive an interim dividend increased from 5.03p per share to 5.2p.
Jasoorah set to deny Daru
JASOORAH, the filly that gave South African-born jockey Michael Roberts his 200th winner of the season, is tipped to overturn hot favourite Daru in the William Hill November Handicap at Doncaster today.
The Sadler's Wells filly is evidently coming into her own in the twilight of the 1992 Flat season.
A winner of her last two races, she was ridden confidently last time at Chester and cantered clear of nearest rival Anchorage to win by 12 lengths.
Alec Stewart's charge has a stiffer task here, but is getting 6lbs from the favourite which gives her a sporting chance of stopping Daru's unbeaten run of four victories.
Daru has only been beaten once in six starts this season, when starting slowly in a moderate handicap at Ripon, and he will be a tough nut to crack.
But punters are unlikely to get much value for the grey in this competitive 25runner handicap and, as Daru had to be ridden out for his last two victories, he is worth opposing.
Keen Hunter should be able to open his account before the turf Flat season ends on Monday.
Unbeaten last term, he has run well in good races this term, notably when finishing two lengths second to the ill-fated Mr Brooks in the Group One Prix de L'Abbaye at Longchamp last month.
The John Gosden-trained five-year-old looks the class contender in the Listed Remembrance Day Stakes.
Dutosky is another filly in form and appears well treated in the El Alamein Nursery.
She is likely to follow up on her solid victory over previous winner Ribhi at York in October.
There are a number of likely contenders for the Coalite Dragon Stakes, but victory here could go to the relatively unexposed Highland Dress from the Michael Stoute stable.
Cautious choice
As well as being related to the high class Opera House, Colorspin and Bella Colora, Highland Dress won a maiden at Newbury last month in a manner which suggested that further improvement will be forthcoming.
Lawnswood Junior, partnered by experienced amateur Teresa Spearing, is the cautious choice in a particularly tricky-looking ladies' race.
The gelding show-ed he was in good heart this week by winning at Edinburgh on Thursday.
Planting for future
CHILDREN are to preserve the character of a landmark in a tree-planting ceremony.
Pupils from Speke Comprehensive will plant oak, ash and sweet chestnut seeds in the grounds of Speke Hall as part of a National Trust initiative.
Report on police ‘was suppressed’
HOME Secretary Kenneth Clarke was yesterday accused of suppressing a report on the future of police funding.
Shadow home affairs minister Alun Michael called on Mr Clarke to publish the report which forms part of a Home Office review of the organisation of police authorities.
‘It is totally inappropriate for a subject of this importance to be discussed behind closed doors,’ said Mr Michael.
He said there were widespread fears that the Home Secretary wanted to replace locally-elected police authorities with Government-appointed boards.
‘It raises the spectre of a police force increasingly controlled by the Home Secretary.’
Mr Michael said the report, by senior civil servant Richard Kornicki, had not even been made available to police authorities which co-operated in its production.
A Home Office spokesman said: ‘It is an internal document and was never intended for publication.
No decisions have yet been taken.’
Major launches tough bid to avert trade war
CRUNCH TALKS WITH DELORS
By Mark Davies
PRIME Minister John Major was holding crisis talks today with European Commission president Jacques Delors over the looming world trade war.
President Delors, in Britain to give a lecture at the London School of Economics, hurried to Downing street at noon for a meeting aimed at avoiding a tit-for-tat trade war with the United States.
Mr Major, currently president of the European Community, met Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd and president of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine to discuss the crisis this morning.
And he was also planning to speak to German Cancelor Helmut Kohl, Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers and other leaders.
The prospect of a deeply damaging trade war increased when the Americans threatened 200% tariffs on certain EC products.
The move came after the Gatt talks, thought to worth billions of dollars to world trade, broke down in Chicago earlier this week.
Resignation
And President Delors was thrust into the centre of the row when Commissioner Ray MacSharry resigned and accused him of backing French interests instead of Europe as a whole.
Mr Major wants to impress on President Delors the importance of the Commission exercising its authority over the Gatt crisis.
He believes it is time to re-group and try to get back to the negotiating table.
But Downing Street sources said no blame was being attached to anyone for the breakdown.
They said Mr Major was deeply concerned as a trade war loomed large.
He received an update on the situation from Agriculture Minister John Gummer by phone from Stanstead, where Mr Gummer's plane had arrived late.
Housing tour by minister
HOUSING Minister Sir George Young was in the North West yesterday to see new urban housing developments.
Sir George Young saw three schemes before attending a presentation on Liverpool City Council's housing policy.
Speaking at the presentation, Sir George said: ‘Councils have to show that they are doing the best they can with the money and other resources which they can use.’
Sir George visited the Cookson Street area of Liverpool, where he saw a row of empty houses which are to be converted into bungalows and flats by Liverpool Housing Trust.
Homes for sale and rent are being created with £15m Housing Corporation aid and £17m from the private sector, as part of the Vacant Dwellings Initiative to renovate 1,300 council properties.
Sir George's tour began in St Helens, where he visited the Grosvenor Housing Association's Care in the Community scheme.
He then visited Sefton Council's Rimrose estate.
Sir George Young
Single-sex service means safer travel
BUS BOOST FOR WOMEN PASSENGERS
By Anne Harrison
A WOMEN-ONLY bus service takes to the road on Monday.
Home Safe offers door-to-door book-in-advance travel on special buses from 6pm to midnight.
It aims to give women more confidence in travelling after dark, whether to work, evening class, or social events.
Troublemakers
Male drivers, all carefully vetted, will drive the three Home Safe buses.
A survey revealed that the overwhelming majority of women felt a man behind the wheel would be more able to deter troublemakers.
The scheme is being run by Merseytravel in partnership with the Wirral Safer Cities project.
If successful it will be extended throughout Merseyside.
Badly needed
Wirral Councillor Janet Jackson, Labour's equal opportunities spokesperson, welcomed Home Safe.
She said: ‘It is a service badly needed in Wirral and throughout Merseyside.
‘We have wanted something like this for a long time.’
The phone line for women to book a place on the Home Safe service opens today.
Women wanting to book on the service, operated by Crosville and Red Rider, should phone 051 643 1773.
TV STAR TOASTS VINEYARD'S BUMPER HARVEST
A very good year
A CHESHIRE vineyard is expecting a bumper crop as the grape picking season gets under way.
Yesterday, television Masterchef host Lloyd Grossman launched three days of grape picking at Carden Park, near Chester.
Over 60 pickers converged on the ten-acre vineyard to gather a harvest which promises to double Carden's output of its Chablis-style wine.
‘The vintage for this year's crop should push Carden's annual output to around 30,000 bottles,’ a spokesperson said.
‘The wettest August in six years and a record for rain in September have not diminished the chances of the finest crop to date.’
The vineyard was planted by entrepreneur John Broome.
Carden is Europe's most northerly commercial vineyard and in the four years since it opened has already established itself in the wine market.
In its very first vintage, Carden Park became the holder of the English Vineyard's Association's coveted Gold Seal in 1990.
TV presenter Lloyd Grossman launches three days of grape picking at Carden Park Picture: CLIFF BRETT
CAR CRASH victims trainer Steven Kettlewell and his jockey Scott Taylor were sidelined as their horse Mr News sprang a 33-1 shock in the seller at Market Rasen yesterday.
Kettlewell and Taylor escaped unhurt after the accident outside Middleham on the way to the races.
But they were unable to make it to the Lincolnshire course and leading northern jockey Peter Niven stepped in for the ride.
The diminutive three-year-old, bought for just 1,050 guineas at Doncaster last month, survived a last-flight error to beat Loxley Range by five lengths.
Girl starts bid to ‘divorce’ her parents
THE first case to reach the High Court of a child seeking to ‘divorce’ her parents began today behind closed doors.
Sir Stephen Brown, President of the Family Division, was hearing arguments from lawyers representing the 14-year-old girl, who cannot be named, her parents and the mother of the 18-year-old boyfriend who she has been living with.
It was understood the girl, who may give evidence, and her mother were present in court.
The case began when the girl's lawyers obtained an order from a judge at Guildford County Court, which prevented the parents taking the girl from the boyfriend's home.
The girl is said not have a good relationship with her father and the prospect that he might return to the family home, after a period of estrangement from his wife, prompted her action under the 1989 Children Act.
ICI blaze firemen run out of chemical suits
By Dave Banks Daily Post Staff
FIREFIGHTERS must borrow equipment from neighbouring brigades while tests are carried out on supplies feared damaged in a major chemical fire.
Cheshire Fire Brigade is awaiting the results of tests on chemical suits and breathing equipment, after the fire at ICI's Lostock factory, Northwich, Cheshire.
More than 100 firemen battled with a fire at the company's Alloprene plant and had to brave clouds containing hydrochloric acid to try to extinguish the fire.
Twelve-man teams worked in 30-minute shifts to make their way to the source of the fire.
The acid released by the fire may have contaminated 40 special chemical suits and 26 breathing apparatus sets.
It may have damaged rubber seals on the equipment, rendering them unsafe.
The suits and breathing equipment have been washed and set aside to dry properly and will be tested early next week.
Fire brigade spokesman Evan Morris said: ‘We'll know better on Monday.
By then they'll be completely dry and we'll see if they fail standard tests.’
If the equipment is damaged it is unclear who will pick up the bill for its repair or replacement.
When a large amount of equipment was contaminated dealing with an explosion at Shell some time ago, Shell replaced it for the fire brigade.
ICI expects to be able to resume production of Alloprene at the site, even though the fire affected all five storeys of the building containing the drying oven at the centre of the blaze.
The plant is due to close next month as one of the solvents used in the process there, carbon tetrachloride, is being phased out under an international agreement to limit use of chemicals which damage the ozone layer.
The 40 workers employed there are being redeployed by ICI.
The investigation into what caused the fire at Lostock was continuing yesterday, with officials from the Health and Safety Executive and Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution both looking into the matter.
Police review blasted
HOME Secretary Kenneth Clarke was today accused of suppressing a report on the future of police funding.
Shadow home affairs minister Alun Michael called on him to publish part of a Home Office review of the organisation of police authorities.
He said there were widespread fears that the Home Secretary wanted to replace locally-elected police authorities with government-appointed boards.
The Home Office denied the report had been suppressed.
Brigade helps Eastern Europe
CHESHIRE'S fire fighters are to help colleagues in Eastern Europe by providing them with advice and equipment.
The move follows a visit to the fire department in St Petersburg by a group of Cheshire firemen.
The brigade previously donated a quantity of outdated equipment to the city's fire department and received a request from the Russian firefighters for technical help.
County Coun John Herbert, Conservative fire brigade spokesman said: ‘The visit led by the County Fire Officer to St Petersburg highlighted the lack of modern technical equipment which is available to fire services in the former Eastern block countries and even the provision of outdated equipment from this country is an extremely worthwhile and valuable improvement.
‘I am very pleased indeed that a quantity of equipment has already been sent by the Cheshire Fire Brigade to the fire department in St Petersburg and that the county fire officer is pursuing the possibility of extending the scheme with technical help.
‘The aim would be to help fire services throughout the former Eastern block countries.’
Man quizzed on Lesley killing
A 48-YEAR-OLD man was being questioned by West Yorkshire detectives yesterday in connection with the death of schoolgirl Lesley Molseed in 1975.
The case was reopened after Stefan Kiszko, who was convicted of the murder of the 11-year-old schoolgirl in 1976, was freed by the Court of Appeal last February.
West Yorkshire Police said yesterday: ‘A 48-year-old man is being questioned by West Yorkshire Police today, in connection with the death of Lesley Molseed, whose body was found on October 8, 1975.’
The schoolgirl who was from Rochdale, Greater Manchester, was found stabbed to death on a desolate Pennine moor.
She had disappeared after setting out to buy a loaf of bread from a shop near her home.
Police said later that the man who was helping with inquiries had been detained as he was released from Armley jail, Leeds, after serving a sentence.
He was being questioned at a police station in Bradford where the investigation, which is being headed by Detective Superintendent Trevor Wilkinson, is based.
A hug of joy for hit and run crash baby
By Philippa Bellis
A MUM today hugged the new-born baby she feared might might have been injured in a hit and run car crash when she was eight and a half months pregnant.
The crash happened as Deborah Gould was driving with her three-year-old son in the car along Borough Road in Birkenhead.
But her fears that the baby was damaged were unfounded when she gave birth to a healthy 8lb baby boy.
She said: ‘The doctors have told me he's 100%.’
The 28-year-old barrister from Oxton gave birth to the baby in Arrowe Park hospital, Wirral.
In the accident, her Ford Escort collided with a Nissan Micra.
She got out of her car and though the men in the other car saw she was pregnant they pushed their car into a side street and drove off.
She was left with bruising and whiplash injuries and her son Aaron was also bruised.
‘Immediately after the crash I couldn't feel the baby moving and he was normally a quite active baby.’
Ms Gould is hoping to return home with her new son today to join his older brother.
Fears unfounded…
Deborah Gould with her new-born baby
Euro-cracy gone mad
EC in a cucumber pickle!
By Chris Moncrieff Daily Post Correspondent
THE myths, scares and lunacies of Brussels bureaucracy were highlighted yesterday by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd with the case of the curving cucumber!
According to Mr Hurd, an EC ruling on the colour and curve of the cucumber presumably to avoid discord in Europe's salad bowl is a fact and falls in the category of a Euro-lunacy.
He was listing, in a speech at Chipping Norton, Oxon, the Euro-myths (always entertaining, though never true), Euro-scares (stories resulting from a misunderstanding of what has been agreed), and Euro-lunacies (genuine examples of unnecessary or intrusive Community rules).
Included among the Euromyths are:
The Euro-lavatory, limiting the amount of water cisterns may flush.
False.
These requirements arise from UK water by-laws.
An EC ban on round cheeses.
No basis in fact whatever.
Fishermen must wear hairnets and fishing vessels must carry condoms.
No, on both counts.
The Euro-scares include:
Jams and cakes sold on charity stalls must comply with EC labelling requirements.
Not true.
An EC ban on soft cheeses.
Not true but specific hygiene rules do apply.
EC ban on prawn cocktail crisps.
Not true.
Bath buns, Cheddar cheese, York ham, Brussels sprouts would have to be made or produced in these places.
Not true.
And some Euro-lunacies:
Cucumbers must be a certain shape.
New rules set criteria on colour and curve to promote efficient packing and marketing.
EC insists that carrots are classified a fruit to enable the Portuguese to continue using carrots to make their jam.
Mr Hurd said: ‘The positive stories about Community action of real benefit to Britain get buried, the scare stories get screaming headlines.
‘The Community is often used as a whipping boy for the sins of others.’
Douglas Hurd
Bard a man of our time
By Philip Key Daily Post Arts Editor
IT is billed as a comedy but director Ian Forrest admits when he first read the play he thought it ‘very bleak with not a lot of laughs.’
But on closer inspection he realised the writer had actually turned out quite a nifty show.
The writer in question was William Shakespeare and Forrest realised the play was well worth exploring.
But theatre-goers expecting a regulation production of Measure for Measure at Chester's Gateway Theatre will be in for a surprise this is in modern dress.
The decision to go modern reflects York-based Forrest's view that it is a play for contemporary audiences.
‘It is about government, the uses and abuses of power, the nature of mercy and government attempts to control sexual morality all very relevant today.’
He also considered the play ‘beautifully structured full of quick-moving events and with a great speed of narrative.’
Forrest even found the laughs.
‘It is by no means a universally bleak play.’
The tale of a cold-blooded government administrator who demands sexual favours from a would-be nun in exchange for her brother's life certainly poses some problems for modern audiences.
The girl, for example, places her own chastity above that of her brother's fate.
‘Well, she is quite young and not conversant with the ways of the world,’ Forrest explains.
Together with designer Juliet Watkinson, however, he has set the comedy in what he says is a recognizably modern world, 1992 or ‘it could be 1995.
It is full of politicians, brothels and policemen.’
Modern-day Measure for Measure cast members Geoffrey Banks, Barbara Dryhurst and Mark Spalding Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Now make your own!
IF YOU don't want to buy crackers, you can always make your own.
And it is easier than you think.
Because you can actually buy kits which contain everything you need.
Then it's simply a case of filling them with whatever you want.
Oxfam sell Crakapax (they have ordered them for this Christmas and are waiting for deliveries) which contain pre-cut cracker shapes in metallic foil.
Plus there are adhesive strips, banger strips, mottos and hats — everything you need for a cracking cracker.
The best thing about them is that you can personalise your gifts.
A friend fills hers with miniature whisky bottles for the men and lace handkerchiefs for the women.
At least then you know that whatever gift you choose it will be welcomed.
Plus your own gifts are far more useful than a plastic moustache, or a magnifying glass that doesn't work.
The crackers come in foil rectangles.
These are folded along creases to form a cracker tube and sealed with an adhesive strip.
A piece of elastic is wound around one end; a banger strip is pulled through and the whole lot is stuck down.
In through the cracker's open end go hats and gifts.
Then the end is tied off as before.
If that sounds at all complicated, rest assured you do get full instructions and diagrams.
Full of fun: Youngsters at Abercromby Day Nursery in Toxteth try out our crackers
Prisoner fights ban on jail poppies
LOYALIST prisoners have been banned from wearing Remembrance Day poppies inside a top-security jail because of fears it could provoke republican violence, the Northern Ireland High Court heard today.
The governor of the Crumlin Road jail in Belfast said wearing poppies outside was both laudable and worthy.
But in the context of the jail, republicans considered them symbolic and provocative and, therefore, they could create trouble.
The court heard that the governor was aware that Protestant and Catholic men died side by side in the two world wars, but republican prisoners were violently opposed to any Irish people being members of Her Majesty's forces.
Threat
‘Therefore I believe there would be a threat of disorder,’ he said in an affidavit.
The hearing in Belfast today was called after a loyalist remand prisoner, Samuel McCrory, 27, was refused permission to wear a poppy at a Remembrance Day church service inside the jail.
McCrory is awaiting trial on a charge of conspiracy to murder.
(Proceeding)
An awkward kiss first hint of the Royal couple's rift
By Sally Weale Daily Post Correspondent
IT was only a kiss, but it spoke volumes.
The Prince of Wales kissed his wife in public in February the first time in four years as she presented prizes to players in his polo match on their Indian tour.
The peck landed somewhere around her right ear, accompanied by an awkwardness of movement that implied they would have rather avoided the situation.
It was a far cry from the loving kiss they shared on the balcony of Buckingham Palace after their wedding 11 years earlier.
Within months of the February peck, newspapers were predicting that the couple would separate to escape a ‘loveless’ marriage.
The almost unceasing speculation of a rift culminated this week with reports that the couple were finding life together unbearable as they toured Korea.
The crisis was sparked by the publication in June of a biography of the Princess, alleging her unhappy marriage had driven her to attempt suicide.
The book, by Andrew Morton, created a stir because it was assumed it was written with her implicit approval.
Some of her friends and family contributed.
The book alleged the Princess suffered from bulimia and felt she would never become Queen.
It claimed there was friction between her and the Prince's friend, Camilla Parker Bowles.
Friends of the Prince, speaking without his authority, told the Sunday Times the breakdown was such that ‘a divorce is not out of the court’.
None challenged the claim that his marriage was a sham.
The Princess broke down in tears during her first public engagement after Mr Morton's book went on sale.
During the Royal family's annual holiday at Balmoral, a string of scandals broke the most sensational being the ‘Dianagate’ tape.
It was a recording of a phone conversation allegedly between the Princess and an admirer, who professed his love for her.
The existence of the tape, had been known for two-and-a-half years, as copies were sent anonymously to newspapers.
The Palace dismissed it as a fake, but within 24 hours Royal officials appeared to add weight to its authenticity by failing to reject it outright as a hoax.
When the couple arrived in South Korea on Monday, speculation flared up again, with reports of fresh claims in a new edition of Mr Morton's book.
By Thursday, some journalists were reporting that a Royal aide had told them the marriage was ‘clearly not made in heaven’.
The Palace denied any official confirmation of marital troubles.
£40,000 tickets fiddle suspected at club
EXCLUSIVE: By Caroline Storah,
FRAUD squad detectives are investigating an alleged £40,000 tickets fiddle at Liverpool Football Club.
It follows the discovery of a shortfall in the Anfield books which was spotted by the club accountant.
Chief executive Peter Robinson was alerted and the club called in the police.
It is believed the money allegedly went missing over a long period, dating back to last season's Cup Final.
A woman ticket clerk has been arrested and released on police bail.
Breakdown
A senior detective said: ‘The club called us in and an inquiry is going on.
We expect to make progress over the next couple of weeks.
‘There is a substantial amount of money which is unaccounted for.’
Police are awaiting a detailed breakdown of finances from the accountants before they can put an exact figure on the amount missing.
But it is believed to be in the region of £40,000 although it could be higher.
Chief Executive Peter Robinson said today: ‘I can confirm we have called the police and the matter is in their hands now.
It relates to ticket sales.
‘Our club accountant discovered the shortages and we called in the police.’
£4m Euro factory is launched
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
A BUSINESS which began in a New York loft 35 years ago opened its European headquarters yesterday on the day Clwyd's Euro-Week began.
Secretary of State for Wales David Hunt performed the official ceremony at Nice-Pak International's £4m factory at Flint.
The plant, which produces baby wipes, already employs 72 and the figure will rise to 100 by the middle of 1993 when more production lines are introduced.
Company president Robert Julius said his father began the business in 1957, with a 5,000 dollar investment in a used packaging machine, and now Nice-Pak is the world's biggest manufacturer of pre-moistened wipes.
The search for a European base began in 1986 and the company was about to choose Telford when Flint was recommended by Adrian Breger of disposable nappy manufacturers Breger Gibson, who have a factory at Greenfield.
Mr Julius praised officials of Delyn Borough Council, Clwyd County Council and the Welsh Development Agency for support, as well as the local workforce.
After being shown around the factory, Mr Hunt said that as a father of four he had had cause to be thankful for the company's products.
Later, the Secretary of State visited Shotton Paper Mill on Deeside, where he presented a quality accreditation certificate.
‘The mill has the reputation of being one of the most energy-efficient in the world,’ he said.
He then went on to open Deakin Electrical Supplies' new premises in Old Colwyn, where he stressed the importance of established companies growing and the need for inward investment.
Referring to Deakins' recent links with a buying group with members in France, Mr Hunt commented: ‘This is a marvellous example of Welsh enterprise at work, taking full advantage of the opportunities presented by the single European market.’
David Hunt with Nice-Pak employees Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Diana almost quit, says author
THE Princess of Wales seriously considered walking out on the Royal Family, according to controversial royal biographer Andrew Morton.
He makes his claim in the updated paperback version of Diana: Her True Story, which went on sale yesterday in the United States.
In an added postscript, Mr Morton said it was only the intervention of the Queen which stopped her leaving public life for good.
According to the author, the Princess's lowest ebb came with the publication earlier this year of the so-called Dianagate tape allegedly the recording of an intimate telephone conversation between the Princess and her long-time friend, James Gilbey.
‘At the height of the Dianagate scandal, the Princess seriously considered packing her bags and leaving the Royal Family and public life for ever,’ writes Mr Morton.
‘Several friends who spoke to her have confirmed she felt ‘destroyed’ by the coverage.
‘If this is the price of public life, then it is a price I am no longer willing to pay,’ the anguished Princess told one friend.’
Mr Morton goes on to say it was the Queen who persuaded her not to try to end her marriage and to accompany her husband on their official visit to South Korea.
Alert over muggings
By Graeme Wilson Daily Post Staff
POLICE and universities yesterday warned students about the ever-present danger of crime after a spate of muggings on Guy Fawkes night.
In one incident a student was attacked by two men and then forced at gunpoint to hand over his £250 mountain bike.
Student union leaders at both Liverpool and Liverpool John Moores Universities stressed that students should not make themselves a target by going out alone.
Emmanuel Guhirwa, the student affairs officer at Liverpool John Moores, said: ‘At the start of each year we have a campaign to get the message about personal and home security across.
‘In particular we stress that students should try to go around in groups or with friends.’
The warnings follow a number of muggings on Thursday evening in which two students and a lecturer were robbed.
The theft of the mountain bicycle happened at 5pm as the student was cycling along Princes Avenue in Toxteth.
Two men attacked him and forced him from the bike.
As they made their escape one produced a handgun and warned the student not to follow them.
Several hours later, a Liverpool University lecturer was mugged by two men as he walked home from the fireworks display in Sefton Park.
He was set upon and punched as he walked near the park's tennis courts and the robbers made off with his wallet and jacket.
At 11.15pm another student was mugged by a single attacker who punched him twice before making off with £7 in cash.
Supt Howard Parry said yesterday: ‘Each year we are conscious of the problem of new students arriving in the city.
‘We do send crime prevention officers to halls of residence to give advice but at the same time we do not want to alarm them as the number of street offences is not increasingly dramatically.’
Vandalism no joke
ALTERNATIVE comedian Alexei Sayle is out to show that vandalism is a serious problem.
The Liverpudlian is to use his street credibility to try to get the anti-vandalism message across to schoolchildren in Wrexham Maelor.
Alexei features in a 20minute video bought by the borough council for a major anti-vandalism campaign to be launched early next year.
Vandalised bus shelters, street name plates, street lights, windows and other property have cost the council almost £120,000 in the past year.
In 1989-90, the bill was about £300,000.
The reason for the sharp reduction is more security doors, screens, lighting, and alarms.
But the council's director of works, Chris Leech, said the problem was far from beaten.
Alexei Sayle
Government condemns those behind scandal
BCCI Briton dies in jail
By Len Freeman Daily Post Correspondent
A TORY MP yesterday in the Commons attacked the Abu Dhabi authorities after a British citizen connected with the failed BCCI bank died while in detention.
He later named the man as Arjumand Naqvi, 45, of Stanhope Heath, Stanwell, Staines, Surrey.
David Wilshire, MP for Spelthorne, told the House Mr Naqvi's body had been flown in to Heathrow yesterday morning.
Mr Wilshire said he had been trying to secure his release.
‘One of my constituents who worked for BCCI, after 14 months in detention without charge, without access to proper lawyers, without access to proper medical care died in detention in Abu Dhabi on Monday.’
He said he had remained silent about Mr Naqvi being held but would now speak.
Mr Naqvi, a UK officer for BCCI, was married with three children.
He moved to Abu Dhabi when the bank moved its headquarters there.
On September 8 last year he was one of a number of British citizens detained by the Abu Dhabi authorities.
Mr Naqvi, who was a diabetic, was not, it was understood, given proper medical assistance, said Mr Wilshire.
The only communication between him and his family had been letters smuggled out.
The Foreign Office had said this was in accordance with Abu Dhabi law.
He urged the Government to make the strongest protests and redouble efforts to obtain the release of other British citizens held.
The men behind the BCCI scandal were condemned by the Government in the Commons as ‘calculating and cynical’.
Treasury Economic Secretary Tony Nelson, opening a debate on Lord Justice Bingham's report on the BCCI collapse, said the disaster was ‘the largest and most wide-ranging fraud in the history of banking’.
He spoke just before Opposition spokesman Alistair Darling and Labour's Keith Vaz, MP for Leicester East, the leading campaigner for BCCI creditors and staff, said Governor of the Bank of England Robin Leigh-Pemberton should have resigned.
BCCI was closed in July last year in an operation led by the Bank of England.
Its crash left 120,000 people in the UK alone facing losses of £2bn.
Mr Nelson responded to interventions by MPs on both sides who claimed that if the Bank of England had acted sooner fewer depositors would have lost cash.
He said the bank's prime purpose was to protect depositors.
Although the Bingham report made serious criticisms of the bank, it had been dealing with a unique situation.
The Government accepted all the report recommendations and would bring forward legislation to strengthen the bank's powers to deal with such cases.
Britain would also urge EC action to improve banking supervision.
Mr Nelson insisted: ‘Responsibility for the collapse of BCCI rests with those who devised the fraud.
There is no justification for taxpayers’ money being used to provide recompense.’
He said payments to those who lost money deposited in the bank were a matter for liquidators.
Deposits by UK residents totalled £240m at the time of the crash.
From the Opposition front bench, Mr Darling said Mr Leigh-Pemberton should have resigned when the report was published.
Alan Beith, Treasury spokesman for the Liberal Democrats, said he was perturbed that ‘so little acceptance should have been shown by the bank of the scale of failing which is brought out in the report’.
Winding up, Mr Darling said every speaker had found fault with the Bank of England's role and the Governor ought to take responsibility.
David Wilshire
Union man in court
A LEADING city council Nalgo official appeared before Liverpool Crown Court today.
He faced 18 charges of theft and three charges of deception involving a total of £4,560.
Anthony Gavin, 34, of Briar Drive, Huyton, pleaded not guilty to all 21 charges.
Gavin faces 18 counts of theft from the Liverpool Council Life Insurance Welfare Scheme involving a total of £3,930.
Mr Antonis Georges, prosecuting, told the court they were specimen charges.
Gavin also faces three charges of obtaining a total of £630 from Nalgo by falsely pretending the money had gone to the Transport & General Workers Union.
The case was adjourned for a fortnight.
Training council chief retires
THE search is on for someone to fill a top training post.
Don Stewart, chief executive of Normidtec, the North and Mid Cheshire Training and Enterprise Council, is to retire.
The training council is now trying to recruit someone to fill the £45,000-a-year post.
Mr Stewart is staying on as chief executive until his successor is ready to start and after that he will remain on the board.
Bill Woods, chief executive of Vale Royal Borough Council, and a board member of Normidtec, paid tribute to the work carried out by Mr Stewart.
‘I believe we were very fortunate to have Don's service because of his managerial competence and determination.
‘He will be, as they say, a hard act to follow, but the board will rally round whoever is chosen for this difficult and very important job.
The good news is that Don is prepared to stay on as a board member.’
Normidtec covers Halton, Vale Royal and Warrington and has been in operation for 18 months.
In its first year it provided training opportunities for more than 4,500 people and invested in a wide range of small and medium-sized businesses.
New health card launched
A NEW health card is to be launched in Cheshire with the aim of helping doctors and paramedics to treat a patient more quickly in an emergency.
The personal health record card has been launched by Cheshire Family Health Services Authority.
It provides an important reference to medical history in case of emergency.
Village to get sports centre
A SPORTS centre is to built, courtesy of a £125,000 grant, it was revealed yesterday.
The Foundation for Sport and the Arts provided the money needed to secure completion of the £409,000 centre which is to be built in Weaverham, Northwich, Cheshire.
The new centre is to be built in Withens Lane, near the site of the old youth club.
When it is completed it will boast an indoor hall large enough to take two full-size tennis courts, social rooms, a bar and a synthetic outdoor playing pitch.
The project is also being funded by Vale Royal Borough Council, the parish council and the Sports Council, who have also provided the design for the centre.
The project was launched by PC Pat Barry, founder of the Weaverham Community Association and John Bellamy.
PC Barry said: ‘The facilities available available in the village are extremely limited at the moment.
We only have a small concrete building used as a youth club and the only sport that can be played is table tennis.’
‘Everyone in the community will benefit from the new facilities, we are all delighted with the news and very excited.’
Building work is expected to start in April.
The cheque was presented yesterday by local Conservative MP, Alistair Goodlad, at the invitation of Sir Desmond Pitcher.
Sir Desmond created the Foundation for Sports and the Arts in 1991 to support arts and sports projects throughout the UK.
To date, awards totalling £70m have been made by the foundation.
IF YOUR name happens to be Ebeneezer Scrooge you may think otherwise, but a Christmas without crackers is one that passes with a whimper rather than a bang.
Not having the familiar jolly holly accessories on the festive table is rather like serving the turkey without cranberry sauce, leaving the fairy lights off the tree, or forgetting the mistletoe for those Christmas kisses.
There's a traditional magic about that gunpowdery whiff, the squeals of delight as the cracker breaks open, and the discovery of the tissue crown and the old chestnut joke inside.
But with the spiralling expense of Christmas, crackers are coming to be regarded as more and more of a luxury.
There's little hope of much change from a fiver once you've splashed out on a basic box of 12.
And most of the cracker collections we found in Liverpool City Centre cost considerably more than this.
Choosing crackers can be a real luck-of-the-draw lottery, too.
There's no way of telling how tawdry the trinket contained inside might be and the tackiness is not always related to the price.
But the biggest unknown is the ‘pull-ability’ factor.
There's no way of testing whether the strip of card which holds the cracker's ‘bang’ is easy to grasp; no indication if the whole cracker is easy to break, or tough as last year's turkey; and no clues as to whether the cracker makes a loud, emphatic noise.
We put five brands of cracker through the toughest test of alla children's party at the Abercromby Day Nursery in Toxteth.
A right raucous time was had by all…and the session ended in a sea of holly-sprigged wrappings and crumpled paper hats.
But the results of the Christmas consumer test will give new heart to anyone browned off by the festive ripoff syndrome.
Because we found that the fun factor in pulling the crackers bore no relation to their cost.
In fact, the cheapest crackers of all were the easiest for four-year-olds to pull.
And they burst with the loudest bang!
Two hurt in crash
TWO women were taken to hospital yesterday after a crash involving a bus and a car.
The accident happened on the old Wrexham road from Chester, near the Pulford roundabout.
Ford Fiesta driver Constance Baxter, 78, of Parkgate Road, Chester, was seriously injured and her passenger, Margaret Farra of Andrew Crescent, Queen's Park, was slightly hurt.
Rhyl line up cup revenge
Preview by Andy Morris
REVENGE is an extra spur for Rhyl as they face Gresford in the Allbright Bitter Welsh Cup today.
Table-toppers Rhyl lost their 100 per cent record in the Manweb Cymru Alliance when they were beaten 3-2 at Gresford in September.
Important
Manager Mark Ferguson warns his side to expect another tough battle but says: ‘You can throw the form book away before this match; it's been shown at all levels that the cup has no respect for league positions.
‘Our priority is to win the league but this match is our most important so far.’
With Lee Congerton (knee injury) and Ian McMullen (kidney problem) still out, assistant boss John Kerr is again named in a 15man squad.
Gresford include 16-year-old Castell Alun schoolboy Shaun Jones in their squad.
Jones, younger brother of Wrexham's teenage defender Kevin, takes a midfield berth in the side which shows just one change from last weekend's defeat by Ruthin.
Simon Harrop comes into midfield as Colin Whettam reverts to the bench.
Athletic manager Alan Jones said: ‘We are looking forward to the trip to Belle Vue and I'm sure my players will respond.
We've no reason to fear them, after our early season win.’
Rhyl (from): Lichfield, O'Neill, Rob Jones, Espley, Griffiths, Steve Jones, Adrian Jones, Lacey, Scott Taylor, Norman, Marriott, Kerr, Cooke, Lee.
Gresford: Taylor, Crowe, Wilson, Dowling, P Jones, Mason, Roberts, Shaun Jones, Harrop, Gittens, Hughes; subs: Whettam, Stokes.
The third round tie will be the first of the Daily Post's new Welsh Match of the Day series, focussing on the top game in North and Mid Wales every weekend.
See Monday's edition for top coverage with pictures from Belle Vue.
Gun police kill raider
A MAN died in hospital yesterday after being shot by police during a raid on a country post office in the Irish Republic.
Two other men were wounded in the shooting, which happened as three men, one armed with a sawn-off shotgun, were leaving the post office at Tara, Co Meath.
The building was being watched by police after a number of raids in the area.
One detective was armed with a sub-machine gun.
A fourth man fled in a car and a search was continuing for him.
In view…
Chief Insp Vic Williams, top, at the wheel of the car with the camera fitted at the top of the windscreen.
Bottom, the unmarked Rover
‘Secret plot’ on police
THE elected North Wales police authority was to be scrapped under a secret Government agenda, an MP claimed yesterday.
Labour's Shadow Home Affairs Minister, Alun Michael, said Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke wanted to centralise the 43 police forces in England and Wales.
He claimed a new report on the future of police funding had been suppressed because Mr Clarke did not like its findings.
Mr Michael is demanding publication of the report.
‘There are widespread fears that Mr Clarke wants to replace locally elected authorities with Government boards,’ said the Cardiff South and Penarth MP.
Clinton gets to work on government team
PRESIDENT-elect Bill Clinton kept a careful distance from world problems yesterday as he worked with aides to plan the administration that will take over the world's most powerful country when he takes the oath of office on January 20.
The Democratic governor of Arkansas, who easily beat President George Bush in Tuesday's election, talked to world leaders, including Russian President Boris Yeltsin but was careful not to hint at any policy stances or initiatives.
He declined to comment on a looming trade war between the US and the European Community, stressing that such problems had to be dealt with by Bush, who Clinton insists is the US's only president for the next two and a half months.
Earlier, the US announced it planned to slap tariffs of 200pc on white wine and other produce from the EC because of its refusal to cut subsidies to its farmers on oil seeds.
A Russian official in Moscow said that in their telephone conversation Yeltsin proposed a new agenda for relations with Clinton.
But Clinton was non-committal, merely saying: ‘We just talked about what he was doing.
I said I supported democracy and free-market economics in Russia.’
Clinton said he talked to other world leaders including John Major, Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, and South African anti-apartheid leader Nelson Mandela.
‘They were all just welcoming me,’ said Clinton, 46, elected 42nd president by a wide margin over Republican Bush.
Clinton will spend the next few days meeting a wide range of individuals but will not announce any appointments to his administration until he feels comfortable, said spokeswoman DeeDee Myers.
Hoarse from the final days of furious campaigning, Clinton celebrated his victory at a party with campaign staff on Thursday night.
He squeaked out brief remarks then walked round shaking hands and wearing badges reading: ‘Sorry I can't talk’ and ‘You did a good job.’
Bill Clinton hoarse after victory
Army halts Bosnian evacuation
MORE than 6,000 Bosnians trying to flee the fighting in Sarajevo were left furious yesterday after Red Cross evacuation convoys were suspended.
Pava Barisic, head of the local Red Cross, said the army had cancelled the convoys to Belgrade and the Croatian port of Split even although the departure of about 6,300 refugees already had been approved.
‘The army thought there were men in this convoy who were able to fight,’ Ms Barisic added.
The army later gave permission for women, children under 18 and men over 60 to leave Sarajevo next week.
However, a few hundred men aged between 18 and 60 who have been trying to leave on grounds of illness were told they must obtain a certificate from an army doctor.
Able-bodied men and women between 18 and 60 have been prevented from leaving Sarajevo so that they can be available for military or wartime government service.
It all left yesterday's would-be refugees furious at the latest delay in an evacuation that has taken two months to negotiate.
Dock display draws 30,000
THOUSANDS of people turned out to watch a spectacular firework display at Liverpool's Kings Dock last night.
Liverpool City Council's leisure services department believe more than 30,000 people turned out for a thrilling 20-minute extravaganza.
The display was delayed for five minutes to allow the queues of cars to park.
Council spokeswoman, Judith Feather, said they were delighted with how well the event had gone.
Between 5,000 and 10,000 people turned out to the council display at Walton and 15,000 to 16,000 were reported at Sefton Park.
Hitler's era ‘had its good points’
NEARLY one German in three believes the Nazi era had its good points and that Jews were partly to blame for their own persecution, according to a new poll.
The survey was conducted against a backdrop of spreading racial violence in the reunited Germany, including attacks on Jewish Holocaust memorials, and only three days before the 54th anniversary of the notorious ‘Kristallnacht’ Nazi pogrom against Jews.
More than 80,000 people, including Chancellor Helmut Kohl, are expected to take part in a special anti-racism rally in Berlin on Sunday.
Meanwhile, Germany's employer, trade and industry associations said they had formed a committee to fight xenophobia, which is now said to be putting off foreigners from investing in the country's impoverished East.
In the survey by the Infas polling institute of 3,000 Germans, 32pc agreed with the idea that Hitler's 1933-45 Nazi regime had its good aspects before launching World War II.
Infas said 10pc of West Germans and 4pc in the formerly Communist East agreed wholeheartedly with the statement: ‘It is the Jews’ own fault that they have been persecuted so often in their history.’
Another 28pc in the West and 27pc in the East said there was ‘a bit of truth’ to that view.
But Infas chief pollster Hans-Juergen Hoffmann said it was wrong to assume that the sudden explosion in neo-Nazi violence meant Germans as a whole were reverting to past attitudes.
Both Nazi sympathies and anti-Semitism had declined in the past decade, in part reflecting the deaths of Germans old enough to remember Nazi Germany before the war.
Germany's Jewish Council, noting Monday's anniversary of the Nazis' 1938 Kristallnacht (Night of the Shattering Glass) pogrom, said the Right-wing resurgence obliged Germans more than ever before to stand up for democracy and tolerance.
DEESIDE DRAGONS ice hockey team face Humberside tomorrow, with coach Bryn Roberts confident of success.
He said: ‘This is the best squad we've had since we re-formed the club a year ago, and we are hopeful of the title this time.
Bradford and Gosport are the two teams to watch out for, and we lost by only three goals away at Bradford.’
Deeside have two new signings in Michael Clancy and Gary Shaw.
Both Shaw and new net-minder Clancy played for the club last season and have agreed to re-sign.
The game is at Deeside Leisure Centre (5.30).
Squad: Davenport, Clancy, Jackson, Glyn-Owen, Roberts, Titmuss, Steele, Thomasson, Hough, Kennedy, Richie Amos, Morgan, Davies, Barry, Hughes, Parry, Shaw, Founds, Fellows, Roger Amos.
GATT deal ‘on course’
FORMER EC Gatt negotiator Ray MacSharry yesterday insisted a trade deal with the Americans was still on course.
‘As far as I am concerned an agreement could be signed in five minutes,’ said Mr MacSharry, Ireland's EC agriculture commissioner who bowed out as a GATT negotiator yesterday.
Mr MacSharry, speaking at Dublin airport on his return from Brussels, said: ‘My only interest is to ensure we get this agreement the world economy badly needs it.’
Labour slams ‘failure’ of PM
LABOUR leader John Smith last night attacked the ‘signal failure of leadership’ by the Prime Minister during the UK presidency of the European Community.
He declared: ‘Under the Conservatives, Britain's attitude to Europe has been confused, suspicious, reluctant and ambivalent.
‘Instead of leading the way in the Community, Britain has trailed along behind whilst others have taken the lead.’
Mr Smith used the opening speech of Labour's first European conference in Brighton to criticise John Major for his handling of events since the UK took over the presidency of the European Council of Ministers in July.
Instead of using the British presidency to initiate Europe-wide action to counter recession and attack unemployment, Mr Major had been engaged in ‘word games about subsidiarity’, said Mr Smith.
He added: ‘This signal failure of leadership has minimised our influence over our EC partners, weakened our ability to steer the future direction of the Community, and severely reduced the benefits to our people that whole-hearted participation in Europe would undoubtedly bring.’
John Smith
EC chief summoned to Downing Street
Major tackles Delors over trade war threat
By Chris Moncrieff Press Association
THE Prime Minister yesterday ordered Jacques Delors to increase his efforts to head off a catastrophic transatlantic trade war.
John Major summoned the President of the Eurpean Commission to Downing Street for what many MPs assumed was a carpeting following the breakdown of the EC-United States GATT trade talks and the walkout by Euroagriculture commissioner, Ray MacSharry.
Mr Delors abandoned a semi-social engagement in Watford to return to Brussels after a brief visit to Oxford, with accusations ringing in his ears that he had sabotaged the talks.
He now has less than a month to ‘re-engage’ the negotiations before the United States imposes a savage and crippling 200pc trade tariff on £200m of imported European goods.
Meanwhile, John Gummer, Agriculture Minister, claimed an agreement was ‘tantalisingly close’ before the talks collapsed in chaos.
And although he refused to criticise Mr Delors, he dropped enough hints to imply the Prime Minister had some stern even harsh words to address to him.
The unspoken allegation against Mr Delors is that he sabotaged the talks because of his support for French farmers who oppose any reduction in EC agriculture subsidies.
Mr Delors could be a candidate in the next French presidential elections in 1995.
In Geneva, GATT leader Arthur Dunkel called an urgent meeting for next Tuesday to discuss the threat to the world trade talks.
‘People are clearly in earnest and want desperately to find a solution to keep the round on course,’ a GATT official said.
The day started in bizarre fashion.
With the spectre of a ruinous trade war looming which could spread like wildfire round the world.
The Prime Minister called Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, and President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine to Downing Street for urgent talks.
Then a hue and cry was mounted for Mr Delors to get in touch urgently with the Prime Minister either in Downing Street or on the telephone.
Mr Delors was at the London School of Economics, less than a mile away, delivering a lecture.
There were extraordinary scenes when he arrived at the LSE.
Dozens of journalists blocked his path, almost knocking him over at one stage, and firing non-stop questions at him.
The principal inquiry was whether he planned to resign.
‘No, why?’ he retorted.
And his troubles did not end there.
He was jeered and cheered in equal measure by a group of about 100 students at the entrance.
Mr Delors also fiercely denied any question of sabotaging the talks.
‘I have always expressed my solidarity with my colleagues even when after discussion in the commission my point of view has not been retained,’ he explained.
‘I have never interfered in the negotiations,’ he asserted.
Later, he spent more than one hour with the Prime Minister and afterwards a bland joint communique was issued.
The statement said: ‘The president of the commission has said that commission negotiators should re-engage, without delay, in negotiations with the United States in order to resolve the oil seeds dispute and the Gatt Uruguay round in a balanced way.’
Jacques Delors, left, speaking to a student at the LSE yesterday Picture:FIONA HANSON
Star gives stamps a first class start
CHEEKY Coronation Street star Ken Morley turned perfect angel yesterday to launch the Post Office's set of Christmas stamps.
Ken, who plays supermarket manager Reg Holdsworth, launched the festive stamp set with the help of schoolchildren at St Paul's Cathedral, London.
The five stamps depict Nativity scenes from stained glass church windows and go on sale on Tuesday.
The 18p stamp the most popular for cards features the angel Gabriel from a window of St James's Church, Pangbourne, Berkshire.
Mary and the infant Jesus from the north chancel window of St Mary's Church, Bibury, Gloucestershire are depicted on the 24p stamp.
The 33p stamp depicts three shepherds from a window at All Saints' Church, Porthcawl, Mid Glamorgan, and the 28p and 39p stamps, showing scenes of the three kings bearing gifts, are from the Church of Our Lady and St Peter in Leatherhead, Surrey.
Meanwhile postal workers are getting a 3.3pc wage rise backdated to October under an agreement between the Royal Mail and the Union of Communication Workers.
The deal will affect 140,000 postal and clerical workers.
Average weekly earnings of a postman will rise from £263.48 to £272.25.
Paternity leave is also being increased from three to five days.
No connection
WE have been asked by the owners of the Lal Qila restaurants in Bath Street, Southport and Red Lion Buildings, Liverpool Road North, Maghull, to make it clear that they have no connection with a takeaway of the same name which was the subject of court proceedings reported in Wednesday's Echo.
‘One in three tries narcotics’
Child drug use shock
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
ONE in three schoolchildren in Wales has experimented at least once with drugs by the time they reach the fifth form, a conference heard yesterday.
The shock statistics reveal a sharp rise in drug abuse of all kinds among teenagers over the past two years.
Prof John Catford, executive director of the Health Promotion Authority for Wales, said: ‘There has been a marked increased in the percentage of fifth formers reported to have used various drugs, from one in five in 1990 to one in three this year.
‘I think the figures are alarming.
It is clear we do have a problem here in Wales.
We should look not just at the actual drug taking itself, but also at what makes people want to take drugs.’
Figures compiled from a survey among 2,000 pupils at secondary schools throughout Wales show a doubling in the numbers trying marijuana and a four-fold increase in the numbers dabbling with the hallucinogenic drug LSD.
More youngsters are also sniffing glue or solvents, taking amphetamines, and experimenting with ‘magic mushrooms’.
Two years ago, use of the rave-dance drug Ecstasy was virtually unknown in Wales, but now 5pc of the fifth formers questioned said they had tried it.
The percentage admitting to have tried at least one type of drug has risen from 21.4pc in 1990 to 36.6pc this year.
Perhaps the only glimmer of hope is that there has been no increase in the use of heroin, cocaine and crack just 1.2pc admit to trying them, the same as in 1990.
Prof Catford chaired yesterday's Wrexham Medical Institute conference which was called by Clwyd Health authority to update researchers and professionals from across Wales on developments and trends.
He said that while some of the pupils may have only experimented with drugs, there was always the worry that they would go on to try other, harder drugs.
Peer pressure was a key factor in understanding the problem, he said.
There was evidence, he added, that some children from one-parent families, those exposed to heavy use of alcohol and those who began smoking early were at greater risk from drugs misuse.
A greater proportion of Welsh boys than girls seemed to be trying drugs, although figures from the Wirral suggested that girls were more at risk there.
One paper read at the conference and based on research conducted at Oxford suggested that Ecstasy may cause brain damage.
Heseltine in call for Euro-US talks to resume
TARZAN WARNS ON TRADE WAR
By Mark Davies
A DAMAGING tit-for-tat world trade war loomed today with trade supremo Michael Heseltine warning of serious consequences.
Mr Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, said it was vital that talks between the European Community and American resumed.
He was speaking before meeting European Community trade ministers.
The informal meeting, in Hertfordshire, has now become crucial as the prospect of a trade war heightens.
The Gatt trade talks broke down earlier this week because of a long-running dispute over EC oilseed subsidies and the volume of EC exports to the US.
And EC Commission Ray MacSharry brought the row to boiling point when he resigned his negotiating role yesterday.
Mr MacSharry accused Commission president Jacques Delors of sabotaging the talks and fighting solely for French interests.
President Delors also came under fire from Tory MPs.
Agriculture Minister John Gummer has now taken over the negotiating role.
He said: ‘A trade war would damage Europe, Britain and the world.’
Tariffs
The US is threatening 200% trade tariffs on 200m pounds-worth of EC goods.
Initial action, which will begin in 30 days unless the dispute is resolved, will be taken on rape oil, wheat gluten and white wine.
The action will not, at present, hit British products.
Mr Heseltine said: ‘Once you get a breakdown of this sort, recriminations fly.
‘But this must not influence those involved, who have now to ask the critical question — how do we get out of this mess?
‘The only way is to get the talks resumed.’
Heseltine…vital to resume dialogue
£25,000 boost for athletics
WELSH athletics has been given a £25,000 grant towards the development of SportsHall Athletics.
It has come from the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, and will be used to buy sets of SportsHall equipment for all eight counties.
Wales' Athletics Association aims to hold eight county championships, with the winners taking part in the Welsh Regional Championship in Cardiff next March.
Wrexham's Neil Emberton runs for Wales in the Inter Area Cross Country event in Margate on November 15.
More than 900 youngsters gather at Dolerw Park in Newtown to contest the TSB Welsh Schools cross-country titles tomorrow.
The competition is open to boys and girls between 12 and 19.
Sport is a loser
GOING to pubs is still the most popular leisure time activity in Wales, says a new Sports Council for Wales survey.
But sport is fighting an uphill battle against the recession and competing leisure time activities ranging from videos to computers and home shopping, the survey adds.
However, Gwynedd still has the highest percentage of active sports-people, despite a drop of more than 6pc over the past two years.
On average, 60pc of the county's population took part in sport in 1991-92.
Clwyd showed one of the biggest falls in sports participation, almost 9pc.
And sports participation throughout Wales has fallen by more than 5pc since the last SCW survey in 1989-90.
Di's grief amid rumours of a growing royal rift
THE baby son of a close friend of the Princess of Wales died while the princess and her husband were touring South Korea, it emerged today.
As the princess arrived back in London, amid new rumours of a marriage rift, it was disclosed that 11-month-old Louis Lonsdale, the only son of Laura and James Lonsdale, died on Tuesday in his cot.
Mrs Lonsdale, daughter of shipbroker Carron Greig, is a lady-in-waiting to the princess and a long-time friend.
They once shared a flat in Chelsea.
The princess was at Mrs Lonsdale's wedding in 1984 to former Royal Navy lieutenant James Lonsdale.
The couple have two daughters.
Although the princess has returned to Britain the prince has stayed on in Hong Kong.
Buckingham Palace has denied a report that senior royal officials said the marriage had run into difficulties.
But it was confirmed that aides urged the media to concentrate on the royal couple's four-day tour rather than speculating on their relationship.
The alleged comments were made during a conversation with royal correspondent James Whitaker.
He said an official came over to him and asked: ‘why all those stories had been written.
‘He said ‘I am not saying that they are happy but the treatment has been unfair and exaggerated in the papers’.’
Another royal correspondent, Simon McCoy, added: ‘Senior figures have now admitted the couple are not happy.’
Tearful…
Diana peers out of a plane window
Grief for Di as pal's baby dies
THE baby son of a close friend of the Princess of Wales died while the princess and her husband were touring South Korea, it emerged today.
As the princess arrived back in London, it was disclosed that 11-month-old Louis Lonsdale, the only son of Laura and James Lonsdale, died on Tuesday in his cot.
Mrs Lonsdale, daughter of shipbroker Carron Greig, is a lady-in-waiting to the princess and a long-time friend.
They once shared a flat in Chelsea.
The princess was at Mrs Lonsdale's wedding in 1984 to former Royal Navy lieutenant James Lonsdale.
The couple have two daughters.
Marriage rift: P5
Di…heartbreak
Champion Nigel looking to bow out in style
Street fighter Mansell's pole perfection
NIGEL MANSELL clocked the fastest lap ever seen on the streets of Adelaide to secure provisional pole position for Sunday's Australian Grand Prix.
The world champion elect, seeking his first victory in Australia in his final Formula One race before switching to Indycar racing in the United States next year, dominated the session as he clocked a best time of one minute 13.732 seconds on the 3.78km track in his Williams Renault car.
Mansell's time, using race tyres, outstripped Brazilian Ayrton Senna's pole time of 1:14.041 set in 1991 on qualifying rubber.
Brazilian Ayrton Senna, in a McLaren, was second fastest in 1:14.202 to claim the other front row position on the overnight grid.
Italian Riccardo Patrese, in the second Williams, was third quickest, ahead of Austrian Gerhard Berger in the second McLaren.
German Michael Schumacher in the Benetton was fifth and Frenchman Jean Alesi in a Ferrari sixth.
Martin Brundle was eighth in 1:16.562 in the second Benetton, while Johnny Herbert was 12th in his Lotus.
Leading qualifying times after opening practice session
1:
N Mansell (GB) Williams 1 min 13.732 secs,
2:
A Senna (Bra) McLaren 1:14.202,
3:
R Patrese (Italy) Williams 1:14.370,
4:
G Berger (Aut) McLaren 1:15.114,
5:
M Schumacher (Ger) Bennetton 1:15.210
6:
J Alesi (Fra) Ferrari 1:16.091,
7:
A de Cesaris (Italy) Tyrrell 1:16.440,
8:
M Brundle (GB) Benetton 1:16.562,
9:
E Comas (Fra) Ligier 1:16.727,
10:
M Hakkinen (Fin) Lotus 1:16.863
11:
M Alboreto (Italy) Footwork 1:16.937,
12:
J Herbert (GB) Lotus 1:16.944,
13:
O Grouillard (Fra) Tyrrell 1:17.037,
14:
P Martini (Italy) Dallara 1:17.047,
15:
S Modenda (Italy) Jordan 1:17.231
Fine performance by six free spirits
Diversions Dance Company
THEATR CLWYD
Review by Noel Lacey
VIBRANT strains of aboriginal sound created a musical background for the premiere of Spirit Catchers, choreographed by Diversions' artistic director Roy Campbell-Moore.
An enthusiastic audience was immersed in an exploration of primitive mystery recounting the vastness of Australia's outback and its enigmatic history.
An ingenious set was complemented with costumes designed by Gilles Morias The set incorporated human hair and added an extra dimension to this probing piece.
Inspired by a chance viewing of some primitive paintings, the choregrapher wove movement around tradition, viewed through personal reminiscences.
Six dancers utilised a variety of costume changes, arguably too many, to journey through the enormity of the past.
This montage involved a combination of movement which progressed from a short solo performance to interweaving by the sextet.
Perhaps demonstrating ancestral sexual stereotyping, the dancers often performed in male and female groups.
Traditional steps were incorporated into warlike foot movements surmounted by expressive hand gestures.
Police crackdown on lane dodgers
By Caroline Storah
TWO hundred motorists were trapped by Mersey tunnels police in an rush-hour blitz on lane dodging today.
Officers with radios were on duty throughout the Birkenhead tunnel watching traffic heading into Liverpool between 8am and 9am.
The registration number of any vehicle seen swopping lanes was recorded and radioed ahead to the entrance where they were stopped.
Discipline
Names and addresses of 200 motorists were taken.
They will be reported for prosecution if they are caught lane-dodging again.
More random checks are to be held over the next few weeks.
Inspector Dave Jenkinson, said:’ We had had a lot of complaints about drivers with no lane discipline.
‘Crossing lanes before reaching the end of the tunnel is very dangerous.
Many were starting to get into lane well down the tunnels.’
BUSY Wigan face more foreign raiders at Central Park today as their frantic season continues.
The British triple title holders, who lost their club crown to Aussies Brisbane a week ago, embark on the latest leg of a marathon campaign with a Regal Trophy tie against French champions Carcassonne.
Coach John Monie is still without a host of stars as the Lancashire Cup holders prepare for their 14th match of a season which is only 11 weeks old.
Phil Clarke, Andy Platt, Martin Dermott, Steve Hampson and Jason Robinson are already out of the televised first round encounter, while Joe Lydon is struggling with a twisted ankle.
But good news for Monie is that Test prop Kelvin Skerrett is back.
Neil Cowie goes into the second row, Billy McGinty to loose forward and skipper Dean Bell returns to centre.
Ace goal-kicker Frano Botica will be at scrum-half for the first time as Martin Crompton fills in for Dermott at hooker.
The visitors will not have been encouraged by last weekend's abrupt exit from the French Cup by second division Cannes.
St Helens welcome back ‘flu victim Chris Joynt for their home tie against Leeds on Sunday.
Saints’ coach Mike McClennan also hopes Kiwi George Mann, who has missed the last five matches with a back injury, will be fit to resume.
Test centre Gary Connolly returns at centre, Tea Ropati is switched to stand-off and Ropati an Griffiths replaces Gus O'Donnell at scrum-half.
Sheffield Eagles stick with the 15 which did duty at Wigan last Monday for their clash with Warrington at Wilderspool.
Widnes have signed Brisbane Broncos' 19-year-old full-back Julian O'Neill on a short-term contract.
He could make his debut in Sunday's Regal Trophy first round tie with Ryedale York at Naughton Park.
Sunday's fixtures (3.00 unless stated): Regal Trophy First Round: Batley v Hunslet (2.30); Bradford v Barrow; Bramley v Carlisle (3.30) Doncaster v Workington; Halifax v Nottingham; Hull v Dewsbury (3.15); Hull KR v Whitehaven; Leigh v Keighley; London Crus v Wakefield Oldham v Castleford; Rochdale v Catalan XIII; Salford v Featherstone; St Helens v Leeds; Warrington v Sheffield; Widnes v Ryedale-York.
Pit decision ‘political’
CLAIMS that the future of Point of Ayr colliery lay in the hands of local management were refuted yesterday by Delyn MP David Hanson.
Following a meeting with Energy Minister Tim Eggar, Clwyd North West MP Rod Richards said he was convinced it was now up to the colliery management to present a strong enough case for the pit to be taken off the Government hit-list.
But Mr Hanson, who has a 16,000 signature petition to save the pit, said he was still convinced that it was a political decision.
‘British Coal have made it clear that it is not up to them,’ he said.
Hanson admits takeover defeat
LORD Hanson has admitted defeat in the takeover battle for Mr Kipling-to-Hovis group Rank Hovis McDougall.
He said his company did not plan to raise its £790m hostile bid for RHM, effectively leaving the way clear for industrial conglomerate Tomkins, best known for Smith & Wesson guns.
Sacking sparks strike threat at Jonker home
By Jules Stenson
STAFF at Liverpool's Victims of Violence charity home are to be balloted over strike action in support of a sacked colleague.
Care assistant Sarah Owen, 20, claims she was unfairly dismissed by campaigner Joan Jonker for recruiting workers to a union.
Miss Owen, of Norris Green, Liverpool, was the Transport and General Workers' Union shop steward at the Kensington home.
She said she was sacked from her job on Wednesday after trying to help another member of staff she said Mrs Jonker had threatened to sack.
She said: ‘I like my job and want it back.
‘The reason they sacked me was because I joined the union and I was the shop steward.’
TGWU spokesman John Hannigan said the six union members would be balloted over strike action if Miss Owen was not reinstated.
Mrs Jonker, of Southport, said Miss Owen had been sacked for gross misconduct after written and verbal warnings.
The McCarthy Lodge home was set up by Mrs Jonker to care for vulnerable elderly victims of crime.
Mrs Jonker said: ‘I have no feelings against the union whatsoever.’
She said she had been threatened with hundreds of pickets if she did not reinstate Miss Owen.
She added that Miss Owen had been sacked for asking the elderly residents their views about another member of staff.
Joan Jonker…sacking row
Sweet dreams for sleepy Couples
Report by Mark Garrod in Madrid
STAYING awake proved harder than staying out in front for American superstars Fred Couples and Davis Love at golf's World Cup in Madrid yesterday.
The top two money-winners in the United States this season converted their two-shot overnight lead over Spain into a three-stroke halfway advantage but admitted afterwards the six-hour crawl had taken its toll.
‘It's hard to stand up for that length of time,’ said Couples, who had two double-bogeys in his 71.
‘I didn't get much sleep last night and I came out pretty groggy.
I guess the travelling caught up with us.’
Love managed his second successive 68, adding: ‘We were warned that play would be slow here but I couldn't believe it would take six hours.
‘My legs kinda left me.
You start day-dreaming just to kill time.
Once it was my turn to hit but I was just sitting on the ground and was thinking about something else.’
The Americans are on the 15-under-par total of 273 after two rounds but have still not shrugged off Spaniards Jose Rivero and Miguel Angel Jimenez.
They continue to do well as stand-ins for Seve Ballesteros and Jose Maria Olazabal, both shooting 70s to put the hosts on 12 under 276.
Adrift
Holders Sweden moved into third place at 11 under, while Wales are joint fourth with Australia a shot further back.
But England are 11 behind, Scotland 13 adrift and Ireland 19 back.
Ian Woosnam added a 69 to his opening 67 and Mark Mouland, taking inspiration from his partner after a miserable season, produced a 70.
‘It's difficult not to get inspired playing with Ian,’ said the 31-year-old from Kenilworth.
‘He makes the game look so simple and could easily have shot 63.’
Woosnam now lies joint third in his defence of the individual title, one behind Australian Brett Ogle and two behind Swede Anders Forsbrand.
Forsbrand came home in 30 for a 66 that put him on ten under par 134 but said: ‘I've never shot 29 for nine holes and I missed a four footer on the last.’
MR INSPIRATION: Ian Woosnam's 69 helped pep up Wales' World Cup challenge
Tourism cash aid for flood victims
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
FLOOD-hit caravan parks on the North Wales coast were given a £175,000 fillip last night.
The Wales Tourist Board approved the extra cash to aid holiday operators who suffered in the disastrous Towyn floods of 1990.
The move is in addition to £200,000 earmarked to QUEST (Quality and Upgrading Environmental Strategy Towyn) by Welsh Secretary David Hunt last year.
The new tourist board chairman, former England cricket captain Tony Lewis, will formally unveil the package on Tuesday during a fact-finding mission to North Wales.
He said the ‘green’ scheme to upgrade caravan and leisure parks around Towyn had been so successful, a similar approach may be adopted in other tourism sectors in Wales.
The pilot scheme guaranteed half the cost of improvements carried out by operators in Towyn, Kinmel Bay and Belgrano worst hit during the floods when the sea breached defences in the resort towns.
‘The environmental improvements will have a substantial impact on the area and complement other improvements in the locality undertaken by the Welsh Development Agency,’ Mr Lewis said.
The extension of the scheme showed the board's commitment to Towyn.
Work eligible for grant aid includes environmental improvements, landscaping, additional facilities and bilingual signs.
More than £170,800 has already been allocated under QUEST at five holiday home parks at Towyn.
Mr Lewis will visit the Inter Leisure Park on Tuesday as part of meetings with 50 representatives of the tourist industry in North Wales.
Gas leak is probed
By Gwyn Griffiths
ICI investigators were today examining the wreckage of the Alloprene plant in Northwich, the scene of yesterday's gas cloud alert.
ICI is probing the cause of the fire which sent a gas cloud drifting over the eastern part of the town and outlying villages.
Thousands of residents were warned to stay indoors, and others reported suffering sore throats from the effects of the gas.
At first ICI's factory controller on the Lostock site Roy Faragher believed that potentially lethal phosgene gas had escaped as the Alloprene burned.
But later on-site tests showed that a low concentration of hydrochloric acid had escaped.
ICI claimed this was not harmful to residents in the area and they had only received a small number of complaints from people who had inhaled the gas.
The plant is due to close later this year and ICI is unlikely to restart production.
Peerless Durie still a class apart
DEFENDING champion Jo Durie underlined the yawning gulf separating the pretenders to her crown at the Volkswagen National championships in Telford.
The British number one gave another exhibition of power play to sink Valda Lake 6-1 6-3 and clinch her seventh final appearance in ten years.
Durie, who has already lamented the standard of British women's tennis on show at Telford this week, has now dropped only 16 games in four matches.
Lake, the 24-year-old from Torquay, who was runner-up to Sarah Loosemore in 1988, had precious few chances against an opponent in determined and dominant mood.
Durie was occasionally caught flat-footed at the net, but Lake's winning lobs and passing shots were few and far between.
Durie plays the winner of the second semi-final, between Brighton's Julie Salmon and Manchester's Amanda Grunfeld, in tomorrow's final.
An historic vacuum task
Hoovering up to save ancient site
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
AN archaeological site's management officer has been making a clean sweep of Clwyd's ancient monuments.
Andre Berry switches on a standard domestic vacuum cleaner powered by a petrol generator to collect material to repair an historic mound.
He sucks up fine scree (loose stones), gravel, plant debris and wild flower seeds from the top of Gop Cairn in Trelawnyd.
The materials collected are used to repair and re-seed eroded areas of the site, the second largest man-made mound in Britain.
‘The cairn's surface is composed essentially of limestone screes stabilised for the most part beneath a shallow, fragile turf,’ said Andre.
‘Susceptible to summer drought and sun scorch, this turf is easily damaged by visitor pressure.
Once grass cover is broken the steep slopes render the screes unstable and they slip.
It is made worse by wind, rain and frost resulting in erosion.’
He has been asked to draw up plans to stabilise the site for Welsh historic monuments body Cadw which is responsible for the preservation of Wales' archaeological heritage.
That will mean re-establishing and keeping a turf cover on the site which supports a species-rich limestone grassland with plants such as cowslip, common rock rose and early purple orchid.
Peter Gibson, Clwyd's director of development and tourism, said: ‘Andre sought to achieve re-vegetation of eroded areas using plant material native to the site and this has been achieved through the use of the vacuum cleaner to collect natural seed from the site.’
Sweeping change Andre Berry with his vacuum cleaner Picture: VIC CLEVELEY
Castle on course to defend his crown
by Nick Robinson
ANDREW CASTLE overcame the toughest hurdle yet in defence of his Volkswagen National championship in Telford yesterday with a gritty quarter-final victory over Chris Wilkinson.
The fifth seed from Taunton needed two hours 10 minutes to win 6-7 6-4 6-4 so taking another important step towards his seventh successive final.
Castle, who announced earlier this week that he is to quit full-time tennis, was given a stiff examination by the British number two from Southampton.
‘There is nothing harder than playing your own countrymen, but I enjoy playing here,’ said Castle.
‘There's a lot of money and prestige at stake.’
Folded
Wilkinson, who won the first set tie-break 7-3, lost his way in the second when he was twice broken to trail 1-4 and although he retrieved one of the breaks, Castle had little trouble squaring the match.
And the 25-year-old Hampshire player folded at the death as Castle, serving for the match, delivered a love game to book a semi-final date with Chris Bailey or Nick Adams.
‘I was happy with the way I played and I don't think there was much more I could have done, but my second serve was not good enough.
Andrew had the edge because he served so much better than me,’ Wilkinson explained.
Davis Cup player Neil Broad, the ninth seed, lost 67 6-7 to 11th seed Paul Hand from Berkshire, but revealed afterwards that he had been hampered by a groin injury.
Hand will play three-times former champion Jeremy Bates or qualifier Mike Wyeth for a place in Sunday's final.
Father's anguish at death of sex heiress
SOHO pornography entrepreneur Paul Raymond was ‘shattered’ last night following the death of his 36-year-old daughter, Debbie.
Ms Raymond was being groomed to take over her Liverpool-born father's £80m entertainment, publishing and property empire.
Coroner's officer Kerry Lovegrove said Ms Raymond died in hospital after collapsing with breathing difficulties at a friend's flat in London on Thursday.
The news came as a devastating blow to her 67-year-old father, the Mossley Hill-born grandson of a Liverpool police superintendent.
‘He was very close to her and he is very, very upset as you would expect,’ a family spokesman said.
Ms Raymond's death came just a month after the break-up of her marriage to her second husband with whom she had a 10-month-old daughter.
Expelled from public school for smoking and drinking cider, Ms Raymond joined her father's organisation 10 years ago.
A wealthy woman in her own right, her personal fortune was recently estimated at £37m.
Once engaged to Olympic champion swimmer David Wilkie, Ms Raymond had a six-year-old daughter by rock musician Duncan MacKay, formerly of 10CC.
Debbie Raymond with father Paul and daughter Fawn
Birthday parade is ‘not fit for Queen’
By Rowan Dore Daily Post Correspondent
THE standard of the Queen's Birthday Parade as a spectacle fit for a monarch was threatened by cuts in troops available for ceremonial duties, a Tory warned in the Commons yesterday.
Dr Charles Goodson-Wickes, MP for Wimbledon, who served as a medical officer in the Life Guards and was recalled in the Gulf war, protested at a reduction in the number of Foot Guard battalions.
The ceremonial changes were announced last month under the Army cuts programme.
They mean 170 fewer troops lining the route for the Birthday Parade.
They will have to stand nine paces apart, instead of six.
Dr Goodson-Wickes warned: ‘The high standards which have been foresaken elsewhere are at risk because of the reduction in battalions from eight to five.
Spectacle
‘The very existence of the Queen's Birthday Parade as a proper spectacle worthy of a monarch is now in doubt.’
He said such ceremonies were popular with tourists and it was likely people would notice the ceremonies were not as spectacular.
Armed Forces Minister Archie Hamilton defended the changes.
The cuts would be noticeable only to the expert onlooker and there was certainly ‘no cause for alarm’, he said.
Rough ride for locals as council backs lorry plan
By Anne Harrison
A MULTI-million pound development which could create around 400 jobs in a Wirral unemployment blackspot has won council backing.
But the proposal to build 12 industrial units to rent out behind the Park Foods complex at Bidston has caused uproar among local residents who fear an increase in heavy traffic in Gautby Road.
They say their homes are already being ‘shaken to bits’ by the lorries travelling to and from the existing industrial estate.
Approved
The residents have presented a petition to the council calling for the plans to be shelved until an alternative access to the site can be found.
But last night's planning committee approved the proposals submitted by Brothertons Limited of Alderley Edge, Cheshire.
North Birkenhead residents' spokesman Robin Newport, of Gautby Road, said: ‘We don't want to stop the development.
All we want is to get rid of the juggernauts.’
He claimed that, one Monday, 146 juggernauts had unloaded at Park Foods, shaking his house 292 times.
City Lands director Peter Coffey said alternative access routes were impractical or too costly.
City aim for seventh heaven
A FORTNIGHT into his new role and Chester City caretaker-manager Graham Barrow admits -This job never leaves you.
Victory over Swansea at the Deva Stadium today would guarantee Barrow and Chester seven points in a week after a defeat at Fulham in his first match in charge.
And that would leave City free to concentrate on their first round FA Cup tie with Altrincham in a much happier frame of mind.
Chester were alone at the foot of the second division last Friday with just six points.
A 2-1 win over Brighton and a 3-3 draw at Rotherham, however, have lifted spirits considerably.
Said Barrow: ‘What we must do is take confidence from those results.
We were in a hole and aren't out of it by any means.
‘But three points against Swansea would give us seven for the week and make the draw at Rotherham a better result.
‘People are commenting on the spirit we have shown but I think we have also played some good football.’
Barrow admits his new job occupies his mind far more than in the past.
‘I was heavily involved before, but now the job is on my mind a lot-it never leaves you.’
He will take nothing for granted against a Swansea side who are only three points off the top of the table.
‘By this time of year the table doesn't lie and they are there on merit.
‘But we have players who are capable of winning games in this division and they have started to perform.’
Barrow is likely to play today as John Kelly returns, while Neil Morton and Barry Butler are ruled out through injury.
Swansea manager Frank Burrows adds Reuben Agboola to his squad after an injury to Keith Walker in a 0-0 draw with Plymouth this week.
CHESTER (from): Stewart, Preece, Comstive, Lightfoot, Garnett, Thompson, Barrow, Kelly, Rimmer, Ryan, Pugh, Whelan, Goodwin, Limbert
GRAHAM BARROW: Bid
Southport's rally in support of the miners has been postponed because it clashed with the regional rally at St Helens.
Further information is available from Southport Labour Party's Mike Graham on 051 933 6067.
A stall was set up in Liverpool's Church Street today to ask the public to sign the national TUC petition to save the British Coal Industry.
The stall, staffed by unemployed volunteers from the Merseyside Trade Union Community and Unemployed Resource Centre, will be available every Friday.
Hotpoint overtime ban over pay freeze
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
WORKERS at Hotpoint in North Wales have started industrial action over a pay freeze.
An overtime ban started at 7.30am yesterday and will affect the company's factories at Llandudno Junction and Bodelwyddan.
But last night union officials said they were optimistic that negotiations could soon re-start to resolve the dispute.
A ballot of the workforce resulted in a 2-1 vote in favour of industrial action.
There had been hopes that the workforce would agree not to press ahead with the step if management agreed to reprieve 70 jobs until next April.
But workers rejected that offer and the matter was referred to the national executive of the Amalgamated Engineering, Electrical Union, which ruled in favour of the action.
AEEU's regional officer, Alwyn Rowlands said workers are angry that they did not get a cost of living increase in April despite the company making a healthy profit.
One angry worker explained: ‘They said they did not have sufficient money to sustain capital investment and pay shareholders, so somebody had to draw the short straw and it was us.’
Staff are still coming to terms with the decision to close the main part of the Junction factory within two years, making 100 workers redundant.
Only 125 staff will be kept on at the Junction making washing machines.
The remaining 475 will transfer to Bodelwyddan.
Meanwhile, efforts to save the Llandudno Junction factory are continuing.
Next week union representatives and shop-floor workers will travel to London to lobby Parliament.
No one from Hotpoint was available to comment.
City inquest hears of catalogue of errors
LEGION VICTIM'S FAMILY TO SUE
THE FAMILY of a woman who died of Legionnaires' Disease victim are to sue health chiefs at the Merseyside hospital where she was a patient.
Lilian Ormerod, 63, died on October 8 last year after being treated in the then just opened Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre at Broadgreen at the end of August.
An inquest heard that a catalogue of faults and errors were detected in valves, hot water sensors and the heating return system in the new building.
It had earlier heard that the legionella bug was found in the centre's hot water system after Mrs Ormerod was a patient.
Her husband, David, said today: ‘It was not until yesterday's hearing that the centre said it was not challenging the fact she died of Legionnaire's Disease.’
Shocked
MP David Alton said the family had been treated monstrously.
He said he was shocked that the building could have been built with the same design as similar buildings that had suffered Legionnaire's Disease outbreaks.
The family's solicitor Rex Makin said: ‘I have been instructed to start proceedings for compensation.’
He has asked Mr Alton to take the matter up with health ministers.
Mr Alton says he has toured the centre, where trials are underway on a system to minimise the risk of a outbreak of the disease.
A pathologist told the inquest Mrs Ormerod died from pneumonia caused by the legionella bacteria.
Mrs Ormerod became ill with the bug after treatment at the centre for heart and liver disease.
The inquest had been adjourned in August after the hospital insisted on a independent pathologist's report but Ian Gilmour, QC, for the Cardiothoracic Centre NHS Trust, said that the post mortem findings were not being challenged.
The jury returned a verdict of accidental death.
Mr Makin is also acting for 71-year-old David Bullock, who contracted the disease at the centre around the same time but recovered.
He said: ‘It is an absolute disgrace that a new hospital should have so many faults and defects in its water systems.
‘Only two months ago there was another suspected case at the same hospital.
Clearly the danger is still there.
‘There is a real fear of further outbreaks.’
A spokesman for the trust said: ‘The centre very much regrets that Mrs Ormerod may have contracted Legionnaie's Disease whilst a patient at this hospital.’
BBC turns off mag ads
THE BBC yesterday agreed to curb the promotion of magazines tied to its television programmes in response to a report by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
From tomorrow trailers will be restricted to still pictures detailing only the name, price, publisher and availability of the magazine.
Widow accused
WIDOW Sandra Wignall appeared in court yesterday, accused of plotting to murder her 55-year-old husband.
Wignall, of Addlestone, Surrey, appeared with two co-accused, Terence Bewley, a 41year-old jobless chauffeur, of Ruislip, north-west London, and unemployed Harold Moult, 42, of Hockley, Birmingham.
Mr Wignall's body was found in woods near his home.
Priests ready for close finish
NEXT week's vote on the ordination of women priests could be too close to call, a poll shows today.
A two-thirds majority is needed in the General Synod when voting takes place next Wednesday.
Fighting talk
BOXER Frank Bruno said he would ‘pull no punches’ in his campaign to help underprivileged young people when he joined more than 400 youngsters being given a new chance in life by the Prince's Trust at a special promotion in Ayr yesterday.
Hell hath no fury
THE wife of a senior council official saw red when she spotted her husband's car outside the home of a woman, police said yesterday.
The 28year-old blonde jumped into his Hregistered Mercedes and rammed it into the front doors of Gosport town hall in Hampshire.
Court fight to help part-time staff fails
THE Equal Opportunities Commission yesterday failed in its Court of Appeal bid to stop what it views as unlawful discrimination against part-time workers.
It accused the Government of failing to comply with European Community obligations to protect part-timers, 90pc of whom are women, from less favourable treatment than fulltimers.
But, by a 2-1 majority, the Appeal Court upheld a Divisional Court decision last year rejecting the EOC challenge to the legality of national legislation dealing with qualifying conditions for receipt of redundancy pay and compensation for unfair dismissal.
Lords Justices Kennedy and Hirst agreed that the challenge had not been properly brought.
Lord Justice Dillon disagreed and said he would have granted a declaration that the UK was in breach of its obligations under the Treaty of Rome and European law.
The ruling means an employee working fewer than eight hours a week still cannot qualify for redundancy pay or unfair dismissal, regardless of the number of weeks worked.
Bottomley orders inquiry into 999 computer failures
AN INQUIRY is to be held into the operation of the London Ambulance Service, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley announced yesterday.
The move is aimed at restoring public confidence following the breakdown of the computer emergency 999 call system.
It has been claimed the computer failure on October 26 and 27 and again on Wednesday led to the deaths of some patients.
Mrs Bottomley wants to find out what went wrong and see if staff relations problems can be improved.
The three-month inquiry will be led by Don Page, chief executive of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.
His team will include Paul Williams, a specialist in computer systems, and Dennis Boyd, formerly chief conciliation officer at the Acas arbitration service.
It has to report to the South West Thames Regional Health Authority by next February and to highlight any necessary action for the chief executive of the London Ambulance Service.
Mrs Bottomley told MPs in the Commons reply: ‘The report will be published and the chairman of the RHA will report to me on its outcomes and will keep me informed of progress in improving service performance during the inquiry period and beyond.’
National Union of Public Employees' senior London officer Chris Humphreys said: ‘It is essential the inquiry reports quickly and that any additional resources required are available.
‘The staff are fully committed to providing the best possible public service to the capital and will look to the new management in LAS and the inquiry to provide the basis for the most effective emergency service.
‘We are looking for a new partnership with the LAS and believe that together it is possible to ensure this vital lifeline goes from being the worst in the UK to being the model service.’
Shadow health secretary David Blunkett welcomed the announcement of the terms of reference of the inquiry.
He said: ‘It is vital that this inquiry should not only tell the full story of the computer system debacle but also thoroughly examine the long-standing difficulties of London's ambulance services.’
The Government had been warned repeatedly about problems in the service before ‘the tragic events of last month’, he said.
He called for the inquiry to accept submissions from outside the service, for the final report to be published in full and for more resources to be provided if the report said they were needed.
New revolt fears as Tories poised to make cuts
By Mark Davies, political correspondent
MINISTERS hoping to head off another revolt over expected public spending cuts are to hold a series of meetings with Tory MPs to try and win support.
A public sector pay freeze and a squeeze on benefits are thought to be among the main items in the package.
But Chancellor Norman Lamont may try to soften the blow with a cut in interest rates.
Every Conservative MP will be briefed before next Thursday's Autumn Statement by Mr Lamont.
The Cabinet ended its marathon session to work out 1993/94 spending yesterday.
A further meeting had been pencilled in for today, but ministers emerged after a two-hour meeting with the plans agreed.
The plan falls within the 244.5bn pounds spending ceiling and is expected to include a pay freeze, a squeeze on benefits, the cancellation of some capital spending projects and limited cash help for the introduction of the ne council tax.
Speculation that it will also be a ‘mini-budget’ is increasing.
That could mean tax relief to encourage investment, a rise in National Insurance payments and increased duties on cigarettes and alcohol.
Prisoner loses legal fight to wear poppy
By Daily Post Correspondent
A LOYALIST remand prisoner in Ulster has lost a court battle for permission to wear a poppy at a prison remembrance service on Sunday.
Samuel McCrory, 27, claimed in the Belfast High Court yesterday that the governor of Crumlin Road jail had refused his request because republican prisoners might be offended.
But the governor said that was not the reason and that the decision was aimed at preventing clashes between the two factions.
He said the wearing of poppies laudable and worthy in the outside world was considered provocative by republican prisoners who perceived them to be a loyalist symbol.
For similar reasons there was a ban on republicans wearing shamrocks as loyalists considered them provocative.
Mr Justice Sheil said it was sad and regrettable that both the poppy and shamrock, which were worn by both traditions with pride throughout the world and by many in Northern Ireland, were capable of being used in the prison as a means of provocation to other prisoners.
He emphasised that in dismissing McCrory's application for judicial review he was not imposing a ban on the wearing of poppies in prison.
The judge said he was merely holding that McCrory, of Belfast's Shankhill Road, who is on remand on a charge of conspiracy to murder, had failed to establish that the governor's decision was unreasonable.
Loyalist paramilitaries yesterday threatened a new outbreak of bloodshed in republican areas of Northern Ireland.
The Ulster Freedom Fighters said the offensive would be in revenge for IRA attacks on Protestant communities.
Bangor, Co Down, Glengormley, Co Antrim, and a housing estate in south Belfast have all been blasted by huge IRA bombs.
The UFF warned retaliatory action, similar to a shooting which left five Catholics dead in an attack on a Belfast betting shop last February, would begin at midnight last night.
It said: ‘To counteract these sectarian bombings we will redirect our campaign against the republican community as a whole.
Response similar to Teebane will be the consequence and the IRA will have to bear that responsibility.’
The Teebane outrage saw the IRA bomb a workers' bus, killing eight Protestants near Cookstown, Co Tyrone, in January.
Loyalists retaliated with the gun attack on a bookmaker's office at Ormeau Road, Belfast.
Yesterday's warning came just 48 hours after a Catholic was shot dead by UFF gunmen in Belfast.
Meanwhile, a republican splinter group torn apart by a savage feud over drugs money has agreed to disband.
The Irish People's Liberation Organisation decision came after the IRA shot one of its Belfast leaders and wounded up to 20 other members.
Talks on the future of Northern Ireland are to carry on next week.
All sides agreed last night to meet again on Monday and Tuesday, when the process is expected to end.
The Ulster Unionists have warned they will withdraw once preparations begin for a meeting of the Anglo-Irish Conference on November 16.
British and Irish ministers, as well as the leaders of the various political parties involved, met separately at Stormont yesterday to discuss the current state of the negotiations and a programme for the immediate future.
But it is now clear the discussions are entering the final stages, at least for the forseeable future.
Pegasus set to fly again
BUSINESS services company Pegasus Group said yesterday it was looking forward to the future despite difficult trading conditions at the moment.
Pre-tax profits slumped by more than 50pc during the year to July 31 to £655,000 from £1.7m in the previous 12 months.
The group, based in Kettering, Northants, slashed the dividend to shareholders to 7p per share from 12.1p as earnings per share slipped to 7.6p from 19.9p.
‘Trading conditions are slow, but we are now moving into the strongest sales period of the year,’ the company said.
Baldwin swallows Simpsons
RESTAURANT group Simpsons of Cornhill is on the verge of being swallowed up by holiday and printing company Baldwin in a deal worth £1.7m.
Simpsons' directors yesterday recommended that shareholders accept Baldwin's offer in what is expected to be the conclusion of a bitter struggle for control of the group.
In the summer dissident shareholders announced plans to oust Simpsons' Nottingham-based management.
The group has a number of restaurants in the capital and one in Oxford.
Its most famous eating houses are Simpsons Tavern and The Jamaica Wine House in the City of London.
Quality counts at Pochin
POCHIN's construction division of the Cheshire based building and civil engineering group has attained BS5750 quality assurance approval and is now using the package on the £24m Tesco dry goods distribution warehouse being built at Middlewich.
The division has followed in the footsteps of Pochin's mobile concrete pumping division who achieved the accreditation last year.
Snub for Major by old school
PARENTS of pupils at the Prime Minister's old school have voted against opting out of local authority control.
The result of the vote at Rutlish School, Wimbledon, south London, of 61pc against and 39pc for, was more decisive than expected.
‘No’ campaigners at the 900-pupil comprehensive heralded the outcome as a significant one for the Tories' flagship education policy.
Janet Fearnley, who is also chairman of the Parent Teacher Association, said: ‘We are both relieved and delighted by the result.
‘It's a significant result.
Despite the links with Mr Major, people are very uncertain of what's going to happen to education funding in the future.
‘There is nothing to suggest grant aided schools will fare better in the future,’ she added.
Mr Major left Rutlish, now under Labour-controlled Merton Education Authority, at 16, with few qualifications.
German firm's export challenge
CAR component maker Behr, which makes air conditioning for Mercedes and BMW, is giving Welsh suppliers a chance to win orders from the company.
An agreement signed during a two-day visit by senior purchasing staff from Behr appointed the Welsh Development Agency's source team to select Welsh companies capable of supplying air conditioning system components such as wiring harnesses, precision castings and turned parts.
Behr employs more than 9,000 people in the manufacture of car heating and air conditioning and engine cooling systems for a host of class motoring firms including BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Porsche and Volkswagen and has a turnover of £460m a year.
Philip Head, Chief Executive of the WDA, said it was the first time the agency had been asked to source Welsh suppliers for a company based in Germany and resulted directly from the WDA campaign to build business links with the motor regions of Europe.
Mr Head, second left, and members of the Source Wales team with Behr executives Sabine Hasler and Norbert Gruber, centre
HOME SWEET HOME FOR BRAV ELAURA
Transplant girl gets kick out of autumn
LITTLE Laura Davies played happily at home yesterday morning after waking in her own bed for the first time in more than five months.
The four-year-old who flew home from the US on Thursday after her lifesaving liver and bowel transplant operation was awake bright and early.
As she kicked the autumn leaves in the sunshine in a park near her home in Eccles, Greater Manchester, she said: ‘I like being home.
I've been playing with my best teddies.’
Laura, who until a few weeks ago was unable to eat solid food because of her liver and bowel condition, added: ‘I had Frosties for my breakfast.’
Her aunt, Lesley Burns, said: ‘Laura had a good night's sleep.
Her mum and dad are still jet-lagged but she seems fine.
‘We will probably have a party for her at my house over the weekend with some fireworks.’
Laura's parents, Fran, 27, and Les, 46, were spending the day quietly.
The youngster, who had the operation in America after a public appeal raised the £350,000 needed, was being taken to visit her grandparents nearby.
In the next few days the family will arrange for her to have a check-up at the Royal Manchester Childrens' Hospital, where she will become an outpatient.
She will need twice-daily doses of an anti-rejection drug which she will have to take for the rest of her life.
Laura plays in the leaves at her home yesterday
Company failures reach a new high
By Andrew Stevens Press Association
COMPANY failures in England and Wales have soared to their highest level since the recession started more than two years ago, according to new figures out yesterday.
Businesses are collapsing at the rate 76 a day with a total of 7,014 company insolvencies in the three months to the end of September, according to the British Chambers of Commerce.
The number of businesses going to the wall was 21pc higher than the previous quarter and 20pc up on the same period a year ago, underlining the renewed strength of recession since the spring.
Individuals becoming insolvent also jumped 9pc to 9,470 in the third quarter a rate of 103 a day.
The BCC said the figures on company failures, drawn from the Department of Trade and Industry, ‘underlines the deep sense of instability in the business community’.
Good companies as well as bad were going under as a result of falling markets and bad debts, said BCC policy director Richard Brown.
One in 38 companies actively trading in England and Wales failed to survive the past three months.
‘This pattern reflects recent business surveys which confirm a further downturn in the economy,’ said Mr Brown.
He warned that the implications for job losses were ‘clearly severe’ and a ‘further nail in the coffin of confidence.
‘With the number of firms working to full capacity still fewer than one in five it is difficult to be optimistic about any improvements in the short term,’ he added.
The BCC estimates more than 19,000 companies have been placed in liquidation this year.
Crew attacked at blaze scene
FIREMEN STONED IN YOB GANG AMBUSH
FIRE CREWS took cover after they came under attack from stone-throwing youths last night.
Firefighters tackling a serious blaze at a former children's home in Kennelwood Avenue, Northwood, Kirkby, were pelted with broken bricks and stones.
One fire engine was damaged as crews used it as a barrier while they tried to extinguish the fire in the building's upper floor and roof.
One firemen was slightly injured after slipping on the roof.
Serious
Arsonists have been blamed for the fire which kept crews busy from 9.30pm until 1am.
Merseyside fire brigade spokesman Ken London said: ‘It is bad enough having to tackle a serious fire without having stones thrown at you as well.’
Firefighters were stoned at Harris Street, Bootle, where a fire had been lighted on a railway goods line.
Station Officer Rob Tulloch said: ‘There were around a dozen youths aged about 14 throwing stones at us and the appliance.
Dented
‘Fortunately we were on the bridge and they were underneath.’
None of the crew was injured but the fire engine was scratched and dented.
A third fire engine was hit by bricks thrown by youths on its way to a call out in Southport Road, Bootle.
Whiston fire station officer Phil Brammeier blasted pranksters who fired a rocket firework through a letterbox in Scott Avenue.
He said: ‘We had to break down the door to reach the lady in the house — she was terrified.
‘Fortunately, there was little damage but there was a lot of acrid smoke and it was a very frightening experience for the owner.
In another incident a 12-year-old Newton-le-Willows boy suffered minor burns after falling onto a bonfire and in Halewood a 40-year-old man went to Whiston Hospital after suffering slight burns.
Satisfied
Mr Oswick said: ‘Mersey Regional Ambulance deals with 2.4m people and last night we had just four calls relating to bonfires.
There were no incidents in Cheshire and Wirral.
‘On the whole we have to be reasonably satisfied — we cannot be too disappointed with less than half a dozen call-outs.’
Birkenhead firemen had a busy bonfire night, attending 30 calls.
Super show…a spectacular firework show lights up the night sky at Wallasey's Central Park.Picture: TONY KENWRIGHT
Child ‘too young to decide own future’
A 13-YEAR-OLD girl who wants to leave foster care and return home to her father was told by a High Court judge yesterday she was too young to decide her own future.
‘She must be told with sympathy and kindness that the decision rests in other hands,’ said Mr Justice Waite.
‘A loving home will be found for her.
She will be sad, of course, but she must learn to make the best of it.’
The judge stressed that the girl would retain close contact with her 64-year-old father, who was in poor health.
The girl, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was in court to hear the judge dismiss her father's appeal against a magistrates' order placing her in the care of London's Southwark Council under the 1989 Children Act.
Care proceedings over the 13-year-old were started after social workers became concerned about her relationship with a woman in her 20s who had three men friends, including a convicted sex offender.
She said one of them the sex offender made her and the woman get into a bath of cold water fully-clothed.
The judge said the father had failed to heed warnings about the relationship.
But the girl was unhappy with her foster parents and was determined to go home to her ‘bitter and lonely’ father.
The local authority opposed her wishes.
Mr Justice Waite said the girl was bound to suffer whichever way he decided.
The judge said: ‘She is too young to carry the burden of decisions about her own future.’
Girobank manager appointed
ALAN Wall, pictured, is the new area manager of corporate banking at Girobank's North-West regional office in Dale Street, Liverpool.
A Southport man he will liaise with the bank's major business customers.
Retail
He will also be endeavouring to increase its corporate market by increasing Girobank's coverage of the retailer sector.
Girobank handled £47m in retail deposits and transactions last year, which the bank says works out at £1 in every £3 which passed through the nation's tills.
New contract boost for port
By David Hope Business Staff
ATLANTIC Container Line and Hapag Lloyd have signed a new four-year contract with Mersey Docks and Harbour Company to use the Royal Seaforth Container Terminal even though ACL is for sale.
A current three-year agreement ends in December and MDHC dropped its fee an undisclosed figure as a result of the new negotiations.
But MDHC is optimistic it will make up the lost revenue by increased levels of freight.
The signing also indicates a renewal of confidence in the Port of Liverpool since ACL is still actually for sale.
The shipping line believes the Seaforth facility is necessary to the maintenance of the line as an asset.
ACL, together with Hapag Lloyd, has used the Port of Liverpool for a joint North Atlantic container service since 1987 when the two lines reached an agreement to share cargo space on each other 's vessels.
Now that joint approach is expected to be extended to the 11 members of the Trans-Atlantic Agreement (TAA), prompting the possibility of more trade for the port.
ACL ships will continue their twice-weekly call at Seaforth inward bound on Mondays and Tuesdays and outward at the weekend.
Liverpool is the sole UK port for the North Atlantic service and is ACL's major European port for cargo from Halifax Nova Scotia, New York, Portsmouth and Baltimore.
Seaforth also tops the line's efficiency league, ahead of European ports of call, and ACL uses it as the first and last calling point to take advantage of the growing links with the Mediterranean, Northern Europe, the Baltic States and Ireland.
The MDHC sees the thrice-weekly links to the Mediterranean, Haifa and Limassol connecting to the US service as part of its ‘UK hub port’ strategy.
The region's motorway network puts the heavily populated industrial heartland of Britain within a day's drive of Liverpool.
Surprise decision as girl, 14, fights for a ‘divorce’
Court ‘adopts’ teenager
By Jan Colley Daily Post Correspondent
THE 14-year-old girl who launched an action to ‘divorce’ herself from her parents was yesterday placed under the guardianship of the High Court.
The girl, who cannot be named for legal reasons, wishes to remain with her 18-year-old boyfriend's family rather than return to her own home.
It was expected that her counsel would ask Sir Stephen Brown, President of the Family Division, for a ‘residence order’, allowing the girl to remain with her boyfriend.
But after a day of submissions, in private, by lawyers acting for the girl, her parents and the mother of the 18-year-old boyfriend, the judge told the Press in open court that the girl's mother had instituted ward-of-court proceedings in relation to her daughter.
Accordingly, the court had now assumed responsibility for the welfare of the girl and the Official Solicitor had become her legal guardian.
It was hoped there would be a speedy hearing of the case, at which the girl would continue to be represented by her own solicitor and counsel, the court was told.
Reporting restrictions on the girl's identity would remain in force.
Sir Stephen said: ‘The primary concern of the court throughout is the welfare of the girl.’
The girl and her family were ushered out through a judge's exit before reporters were allowed into court.
The case began when lawyers Hart, Brown and Co, of Farnham, Surrey, obtained an order from a judge at Guildford County Court which prevented the parents taking the girl from the boyfriend's home.
The girl is said to have a poor relationship with her father and the prospect that he might return to the family home, after a period of estrangement from his wife, prompted her action under the 1989 Children Act.
The Act allows children, for the first time, to initiate proceedings and instruct a solicitor to make applications to court.
This week it was revealed that an 11-year-old girl, who wants to stay with foster parents rather than live with her mother and four brothers and sisters, has launched a similar legal action.
The cases come weeks after a 12-year-old boy, Gregory Kingsley, ‘divorced’ his parents in a court action in Florida.
‘Silver lining’ bonus in slow crawl to recovery
By Mark Currie Deputy Business Editor
BRITAIN is heading for a period of economic growth sustained by low rates of interest and inflation.
And the United States can also look forward to better times ahead, according to investment house Midland Global Markets.
Roger Bootle, MGM's chief UK economist, said UK progress would be slow but the gradual recovery would be soundly based.
A 2pc cut in base rates coinciding with the Chancellor's Autumn Statement next week has been widely anticipated and Mr Bootle said he believed the downward trend would continue through to next year and stabilise at 5pc.
High levels of consumer debt and fears of unemployment would continue to inhibit confidence, restricting growth through 1993 of just 0.5pc.
With mortgage rates falling in line with base rates, Mr Bootle said headline inflation would drop below 1pc early next year with underlying inflation moving up slightly to around 3pc at the year-end.
The situation was vastly different compared with the high-inflation 1970s.
Then, growing consumer demand had to be restrained, but the opposite now applied, he claimed.
‘The current difficulties may have a silver lining,’ added Mr Bootle.
‘Pain in the housing market should finally kill off the British obsession with housing which has so distorted resource allocation in the last 25 years.
‘With consumer demand suppressed, the resources will be available for a slow recovery based on net exports and investment, accompanied by low inflation and low interest rates.
‘On this basis, economic recovery, though slow at first will be soundly based and sustainable.’
The brighter UK picture should be mirrored across the Atlantic, following the Presidential success of Democrat Bill Clinton, according to Bill Fabbri, chief US economist at MGM.
Economic growth would improve by 1pc in 1993, fuelled mainly by an immediate jump in consumer confidence as a result of the election victory.
‘The nation is banking upon Democratic promises of old fashioned pump priming to get the economy started,’ said Mr Fabbri.
‘A Democratic President and Congress are a potent political combination that is expected to enact a rash of pent-up legislation in the first 100 days.’
Minister dodges reporters
WELSH Office minister Gwilym Jones yesterday refused to answer questions about the appointment of his secretary to a £5,000a-year health job.
Mr Jones, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Wales, was in Llandudno to address the annual conference of the Welsh Association of Health Authorities and Trusts at the St Georges Hotel.
Twenty one Welsh MPs have tabled a Commons motion protesting at the appointment of his secretary, Carolyn Jones, to a two-year job as a member of South Glamorgan Health Authority worth £5,000a-year for two days' a month work.
She is the wife of the minister's agent in April's General Election in his Cardiff North Constituency.
After his speech, the Daily Post sought to speak to Mr Jones but was asked what questions would be put by a Welsh Office press officer.
As Mr Jones left, reporters were prevented from putting questions to him.
The Minister later said he had nothing to add to a previous statement which said appointments were made on the basis of aptitude and merit.
Drinkers' high spirits make our pubs top
By Will Rolston
CHEAP pints!
Good cheer!
Merseyside's pubs are the best value and friendliest in Britain and that's official.
The 1993 Good Pub Guide singles out Liverpool and surrounds in the 976-page book for the good ‘crack’ in bars.
‘I go all over Britain putting the guide together and I can tell you that Liverpool people really are the friendliest,’ said editor Alisdair Aird.
Lavish
The Philharmonic is the Liverpool pub with the big mention in the guide yet again.
Readers are told about its lavish loos and majestic frontage.
Landlord Phil ('armonic) Ross, was delighted at the pub's annual reappearance in the 974-page guide and the compliment to his friendly regulars.
‘I'm sure he's right,’ he said.
An his wife Carol Ross said: ‘We can't change much to do with the pub because it's a Grade A listed building.
‘But, then again, we wouldn't want to.’
Mr Aird who has visited nearly all the guide's 5,000 hang-outs reckons beer in Liverpool is between 15p and 20p cheaper than anywhere else in the country.
Grubby
But he fired a warning at landlords across Britain clean up your act.
Complaints of bad service and grubby pubs are at an alarming all time high, he reveals.
Another Merseyside pub to make the grade is Terry and Margaret Nelson's Seven Stars in Thornton Hough.
Southport scored well with four pubs The Windmill, Prince of Wales, Scarisbrick and Ship in the guide's Lucky Dip section.
Simply splendid…the Philharmonic's ornate bar rates a mention in the I993 Good Pub Guide
Unilever profits move ahead by 9pc
UNILEVER, provider of such basic items as washing powder and margarine, continued to show its resilience to recession in the third quarter of the year, according to figures out yesterday.
Pre-tax profits in the three months to the end of September, rose 9pc to £571m from £525m in the corresponding period last year.
For the first nine months of the year, taxable profits at the group whose brands range from Persil to Flora, were ahead 10pc to £1,459m from £1,331m.
Chairamn Michael Perry noted that results for European detergents and food operations had been maintained by the Anglo-Dutch group.
Beverages had advanced following a successful expansion of ice tea in southern Europe, while results from ice cream, in which Unilever leads the UK market with Walls, had been below last year's exceptional levels for the quarter.
‘Personal products and speciality chemicals performed well,’ added Mr Perry.
‘Total European volume increased after allowing for the disposal of our animal feeds and packaging operations.
‘In north America, profit performance was less satisfactory, but the market share gains of earlier in the year were consolidated in most categories.’
Earnings per share in the third quarter rose from 17.4p to 18.77p and for the nine months from 45.82p to 48.84p.
Shareholders will receive an interim dividend increased from 5.03p per share to 5.2p.
Meeting on Snelly
TOP Liverpool radio DJ Tony Snell was due to meet station bosses today after being taken off the air over a live bust-up with a listener.
Snell was escorted from his City FM studio following yesterday's heated exchange on his breakfast show.
A spokesman for the station confirmed that the 27-year-old Anfieldborn DJ was meeting City FM chiefs.
He has been suspended until next Tuesday.
Stag bid succeeds
BATHROOM and kitchen specialist Spring Ram expanded its range yesterday with an agreed £12.35m takeover bid for Stag Furniture.
The deal fits in with Spring Ram's belief that bedroom, dining and living room furniture is an important growth area.
It has only a small interest in furniture at present, having built up an enthusiastic stock market following with an unbroken record of sales and profit growth in bathroom and kitchen equipment since its was founded in 1979.
Spring Ram, based at Birstall, near Batley, West Yorkshire, is bidding 160p per share.
On October 30, the day before Spring Ram's interest was revealed, Stag shares stood at 75p.
Stag directors have pledged their near-34pc stake, taking acceptances to 49.52pc a fraction below the 50pc Spring Ram needs for control.
Hepburn is recovering
ACTRESS Audrey Hepburn was described as being ‘very chipper’ after surgery to remove a cancerous tumour from her colon.
A spokesman for Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles, said the 63-year-old film star was scheduled to leave hospital at the weekend.
The Belgian-born Hepburn is best known for her roles in such classics as My Fair Lady and Breakfast at Tiffany's.
Region can gain from Maastricht ratification
THE GOVERNMENT's success in the Maastricht Treaty vote has generally been welcomed in the region as a step in the right direction towards improving the North West's business confidence.
North West deprivation can expect some relief through the Treaty's plan for a Euro-Investment Bank which would have 24 members, including two from the region.
In addition, a planned Committee of the Regions would give the NW a further strong voice in the EC an alternative from the UK Government which in itself might be no bad thing for the NW, and Merseyside in particular .
Maastricht supporters include the NW coast branch of the Institute of Directors, Liverpool Chamber of Commerce and Liverpool Walton MP Peter Kilfoyle, who is angered at the Government's insistence on dropping the Social Charter from the Treaty.
The Chamber, through its European Business Development Group, recently produced a very helpful ‘idiot sheet’ for those who don't fully understand ‘subsidiarity,’let alone have the opportunity to read the full, weighty Maastricht Treaty tome.
THE EBDG group's chairman, Paul Bennetts, has welcomed the Commons vote and followed it up with a plea to quickly rejoin the ERM.
He said: ‘The completion of the Single Market is an ongoing process.
Although not dependent on Maastricht the vote is welcomed by business people.
‘Sixty per cent of British trade now goes to EC countries and the UK is the most attractive country for direct inward foreign investment after the States.
‘The advantages of a single market without exchange controls or currency fluctuations between members must be quickly regained so as not to throw away our achievements and the attractiveness of our island for investment.’
Russell Thersby, the IOD's NW branch chairman, representing more than 600 business leaders in the region, said of the vote: ‘It's good news, the committee stage can now start and analysis of the treaty can finally take place.
‘We have already urged the Government to clarify 20 key points in the Treaty to clear away ambiguity and uncertainty about its impact on business and the benefits to be gained from ratification.
‘We wanted analysis of the Treaty and we believe every board of directors should get a copy so they can ask their lawyers exactly what it means for their business.’
Merseyside freelance journalist DEREK MASSEY was associate producer of Comrades, tonight's Cutting Edge documentary on Channel 4.
Here he exclusively explains to the Echo the background to this fascinating TV profile of the political movement known as Militant.
THE park boating lake was an eyesore full of rubbish, prams and the inevitable supermarket shopping trolley.
Even the ducks seemed to be giving it a miss.
The city council decided it had to be cleaned up, the union demanded exceptional payments deadlock.
After protracted negotiations, it was agreed that a day a week would be devoted to the task.
Both sides had saved face with this compromise, but it meant the clear-up would not keep pace with dumping and the work was unlikely to ever be completed.
The losers were Liverpool citizens who continued to be denied access to a public facility.
It was the kind of story that had brought an endless succession of journalists and film crews to Liverpool throughout the turbulent Militant-in-control years of the 1980s.
That period had made the city a fertile news ground for freelancers such as myself.
However, I began to steer clear of such stories.
When the cameras had long since departed, I was left to carry the can and answer any angry participants who felt they had been given a raw deal.
‘You've sold us down the river,’ became a familiar shout from across a crowded bar.
Sometimes they were right, news crews rarely had the time or the inclination to pursue the finer points.
The motivations of the middle-aged housewife or the young man with good career prospects who joined Militant, remained unexplored.
Myths
Instead the myths developed, and the media's idea of ‘a Militant’ became a youth in a shell suit who had two heads and ate babies.
Only one of the characters in tonight's film would turn even the occasional head in the street Mick Daley from Bootle.
With his dyed hair, multiple earrings and parachute boots, he might present a formidable sight to some, but he's one of the most amiable punks you could wish to meet.
During the political campaign to elect Terry Fields he ran the creche for the ‘Tiny Trots’, while their parents were out campaigning.
He comes from a family that does not do things by halves.
His sister is a Jehovah's Witness, his mother is a fortune teller and his girlfriend is obsessed with the occult.
His previous interests have been science fiction and drugs, and I suspect his present passion for radical politics will pass.
Julie McCann is the idealist who believes that there will be everlasting lightbulbs and cars that run on water after the revolution.
It's tempting to laugh maybe, but as a single 21-year-old shouldn't she be allowed to dream?
The rest of life can be awfully serious.
It was sheer desperation that led to Nancy Roberts becoming a member of Militant.
Her pregnant daughter Jeanette was living in a semi derelict block of flats and was suffering regular intimidation by drug addicts who forced their way inside.
She had an arm permanently bruised from protecting herself from beatings.
It was a Militant councillor who found her alternative accommodation where she was later to give birth to her daughter, Claire.
Nancy had been at her wits' end and nobody seemed able to help.
She needed no persuasion to join the party after that.
Tonight's programme has been made with the benefit of time and I think with the best of intentions.
It will no doubt have its critics and I would have to admit that there are elements of it I am not happy about.
But given the opposing demands made on film productions before they are shown, I believe it's as close as we may get towards an insight into the rank and file members of a movement that had a profound influence on Liverpool politics for a decade.
Mick Daley: ‘One of the most amiable punks you could wish to meet.’
Nancy Roberts (right) with daughter Jeanette and baby Claire outside the flats where Jeanette was harassed by addicts.
Pink and perky it's the new glam Spam
By Alex Hunt
SPAM makers in Liverpool are planning to spend thousands of pounds to give the tinned meat a new up-market image.
Newforge Foods, who sell 50 million tins a year, want to rid the product of its school dinner and war rations image.
Thanks to Monty Python's ‘Spam, Spam, Spam’ sketch, there is no problem with people knowing the name.
But now the firm which employs 150 people in Belle Vale Road, Gateacre, wants people to see it as a classy and versatile product.
Marketing manager Guy Sabini said: ‘It is a slightly fun product and there is nothing wrong with that.
‘We have benefited from Monty Python but we want to remind people that it's not a joke brand -it is a tasty, nutritious, quality product.
‘We are looking at a number of exciting ideas from advertisers, it will be rather different.’
Asked how high upmarket it might go he said:’ Spam and champagne go well together but then spam goes with most things.
‘I would be delighted if it was a fixture at parties but I think it is stretching it too far to say Spam will be on the end of cocktail sticks.
‘But we all eat Spam sandwiches during management meetings — we are not forced to and everybody enjoys them.
‘Sales are holding up extremely well and people are realising what good value the product is,’ added Mr Sabini.
Spam — its name comes from SPiced hAM — was invented in America in the early years of the century.
Newforge are the only Spam makers in Britain.
Their Spam recipes, built up since 1957, include Spam kebabs, Spamish omelette, Spam pizza, Spam moussaka, Spam stirfry and Spam stroganoff.
Spam bonanza…
Guy Sabini shows off another soaraway Spam exclusive
Police use cameras to catch the car maniacs menacing the roads around Merseyside
‘Drivers who persistently drive over the limit should think how they would feel if a speeding motorist kills one of their loved ones’
YOU'VE BEEN FRAMED!
THEY'VE been framed but they won't be winning any prizes from Jeremy Beadle.
They're heading for the courts.
For these are the drivers who bring death to our roads.
And the police are catching them — on camera.
Chief Inspector Vic Williams says: ‘People take more care making a cup of tea than they do driving.
‘These tin cans are killing machines,’ he adds,’It's time we treated them with respect.
‘For some reason people think they're invincible when they climb into a car.
But I always think so many mums, dads and children who set off for work and school in the morning won't be coming back.’
His words of warning come after 16-year-old Norris Green boy Tony Atkinson was hit on the East Lancs Road, on his way to school this week.
And it follows yet another appeal for help to trace the killer driver who ploughed into 12-year-old Paul Hartley in Fazakerley, a year ago.
‘We get sick of hearing the excuse ‘I didn't stand a chance’, I always think the kid definitely didn't have one and that makes me angry.
Amazed
‘If they were driving more slowly and carefully then the child might have escaped and that's what matters.’
Since the cameras were installed the outrageous stunts pulled by don't-care drivers have amazed police.
They include:
A motorbike with 8ft planks strapped width ways across his bike in Liverpool city centre.
Speeds of more than 100 mph on the M62.
Traffic light dodgers jumping red lights several seconds after they've turned to stop.
Overtaking on the inside and on a pelican crossing.
Driving too close on motorways.
‘I know speed limits can be boring and frustrating but they're there for a reason,’ added Ch Insp Williams.
‘Drivers who persistently drive over the limit should think how they would feel if a speeding motorist kills one of their loved ones.’
Risk
Police believe the cameras will be most successful at weeding out incidents of dangerous driving not just speeding.
A driver will be tempted to take a risk while there is no apparent police presence.
The whole idea is awareness not punishment.
They want to re-educate people on their driving weaknesses.
And in most cases a caution — with points on a licence — is handed out along with constructive advice rather than a prosecution.
A car overtakes a parked transit.
Passengers stand in the road as it approaches.
The huge lorry is forced to mount the kerb to avoid a collision with the oncoming car.
Frightening speeds of up to 102mph are often recorded on a stretch of the M6.
On the M62 a mini is followed by a Citreon at 82mph…just 8ft from its bumper.
Thatto Heath face cup giant-killers
Amateur RL round-up
SALFORD JUNIORS again proved to be the giant killers in last weekend's quarter-finals of the Burtonwood Brewery Lancashire Cup.
Having already beaten Premier League side Crosfields, Salford travelled to Widnes and beat Farnworth in a thrilling game.
But they have been drawn away again in the semi-final at Thatto Heath, while Oldham St Annes have home advantage over the unbeaten Woolston Rovers.
Woolston have two players in the Opencast National Form team of the month.
They are prop Vinny Webb, last year's player of the year, and hooker Gary McKean, while Leigh East also have two players mentioned.
They are winger Alex Partington and stand-off John Gunning, who has also been named player of the month.
John, who is in great form this season, has already captained the Lancashire open-age team in their two friendly warm-up games recently.
In the under-19 league of the British Coal Youth section, Blackbrook fullback Phil Montgomery has been named, as has Woolston hooker, Stuart Pilat.
Blackbrook Recs maintained their form last week with a fine win at Simms Cross.
Making a comeback in the amateur ranks after a distinguished career in the professional game was Ian Potter, the former Warrington, Wigan and Leigh forward.
Ian led the pack in fine style, well supported by second rower Warren Aspinall until he retired with a damaged shoulder.
In the backs, international fullback Steve O'Neill was in fine form kicking five goals and adding a drop goal, while 19-year-old stand off Paul Emery scored the try of the match.
For Simmies, none tried harder than centre Andy Parle, who made three try-saving tackles, while second rower Keith Murphy, a new signing from the IBIS club, looked a star for the future.
Crosfields are still without a league win this season and now occupy bottom place in the league after their defeat at Rosebridge.
Injuries have hit the club, and coach Billy Lomax had to come on as a substitute midway through the second half.
Concern for the future
AUSTIN Rawlinson remains remarkably forward-looking.
‘I was a bit concerned by the performance of our national team at Barcelona,’ he admits.
‘I am delighted the A.S.A. has launched a special enquiry into it, and I shall be very interested to see what conclusions they come up with.
Shortage of money is an obvious problem, but then it always has been.
‘Perhaps we should pay more attention to the American way of doing things.
Their sports scholarships are excellent, because they allow the athletes tremendous opportunities to train and compete against the best.
‘Most young swimmers find it terribly hard to do all the training that is required and also live a normal life.
A lot of travelling is involved and a lot of dedication from parents as well as children.
‘I don't think it is any surprise that some of our best swimmers, like Andrew Jameson, have reached their peak through training at an American college.’
So far as the actual preparation is concerned, Rawlinson believes there is a need for greater flexibility.
‘It is easy to forget that people are individuals, and do not necessarily require the same kind of preparation.’
Remember these men?
THE six smart young men on the right were once buddies on the old Cunarder ‘Scythia’ which became a troopship in the last world war.
Arthur O'Flaherty of Kendal, who sent this picture, says it was taken after her arrival at Algiers in November, 1942, just after the invasion, carrying 5,000 troops and damaged by a bomb.
The group, all from Liverpool, are (left to right): Tom Knowles, Bob Jones, Tom Moss, Arthur O'Flaherty, Chris Brierley and John Brady.
Arthur, who used to live in Darwin Street, Kirkdale, now lives at 10 Weston Houses, Endmoor, Kendal, Cumbria (05395-67475).
POLICE, PLEASE HELP ME
BILL COCKROFT, of Ainsdale, author of The Albert Dock and Liverpool's Historic Waterfront, makes an appeal on behalf of a descendant of one of the old Liverpool chief constables.
Says Bill: ‘He was Maurice M.G. Dowling, a playwright and composer, who was dismissed from London's Metropolitan Police Force by Sir Robert Peel in 1829 and from the Liverpool Force in 1852.
‘His descendant, Margaret Dowling, is seeking relatives of Edward Banner (1820-1892), son-in-law of Maurice Dowling, who lived at Blacklow House, Roby (now Knowsley Leisure Centre offices).
‘Margaret's address is 25 Maltings Court, Hoe Lane, Ware, Herts.
SG12 9LS.’
Swift lesson in dockside diplomacy
Don't make monkeys of us
CHRIS PICKERING, of Aintree who is now nearly 80 recalls a dockside incident which taught him a lesson in diplomacy!
Chris arranged for a lorry to load 12 tons of hickory wood billets in bundles at Gladstone Dock, starting at 8am.
When the load failed to arrive at his firm's nearby timber yard by 11.30am, he went to the dock to investigate.
‘The foreman and his gang were leaving for dinner and the lorry wasn't fully loaded,’ he says.
Apologise
‘I was so annoyed that I blurted out: ‘Good God!
The PG Monkeys would have loaded it quicker!’
‘The foreman said: ‘O.K., you get the PG Monkeys in for one o'clock.
We're not coming back.’
‘I've never been so near to causing a dock strike,’ says Chris, who adds: ‘I couldn't apologise quickly enough and I was forgiven.
‘But whenever I see that PG tea advert on TV I think how close I was to real trouble!’
New blow to Kirkby as rental firm wields the axe
PLUG IS PULLED ON 200 TV JOBS
By Paul Byrne
WORKERS at a Merseyide firm were today coming to terms with the news that they will be out of work in the New Year.
Up to 200 jobs are being axed at the Granada TV Rental service centre in Kirkby.
It is one of seven centres across the country which will close with the loss of up to 1,000 jobs.
But company chief executive Graham Wallace, who blamed the decision on the recession, said staff at Kirkby and the other axed sites may be eligible for transfers to other centres.
Sick
One member of staff at the Abercrombie Road site, who did not want to be named, said: ‘Everyone is sick here.
It is yet another big firm pulling out of the area.
‘Why is it always Merseyside that gets the chop?’
Granada managers were locked in talks with union leaders in London yesterday as staff heard the stunning news.
Granada UK Rental chief executive Mr Wallace, based at the firm's HQ in Bedford, said the closure programme was due to rationalisation.
‘We will now have 40 centres, which will be bigger, employing more people, and more economical and will increase productivity.’
Referring to the current recession, Mr Wallace said: ‘Like at lot of other businesses we are under pressure at the moment.
It is not an easy life out there.
‘There will be some job losses but these will not take effect for two to three months.
‘We are talking to our employees telling them of our plans in a very detailed way.’
76 crash every day and figures soar to new high
GRIM TOLL AS FIRMS GO BUST
COMPANY failures in England and Wales have soared to their highest level more than three an hour since the recession started more than two years ago, according to new figures out today.
Businesses are collapsing at the rate 76 a day with a total of 7,014 company insolvencies in the three months to the end of September, according to the British Chambers of Commerce.
The number of businesses going to the wall was 21% higher than the previous quarter and 20% up on the same period a year ago, underlining the renewed strength of recession since the spring.
Individuals becoming insolvent also jumped 9% to 9,470 in the third quarter a rate of 103 a day.
The BCC said the figures on company failures, drawn from the Department of Trade and Industry, ‘underlines the deep sense of instability in the business community.’
Downturn
Good companies as well as bad were going under as result of falling markets and bad debts, said BCC policy director Richard Brown.
‘This pattern reflects recent business surveys which confirm a further downturn in the economy,’ he said.
He warned that the implications for job losses were ‘clearly severe and a further nail in the coffin of confidence.’
TODAY brings the 90th birthday of one of Liverpool's most remarkable sportsmen, swimmer extraordinary Austin Rawlinson.
The only person to have both competed in and managed a British Olympic team, to have become that sport's national president, and to have held virtually every administrative office from keeper of the records to team coach, and from time keeper to national selector.
With all that history of service and success behind him, Austin remains as sharp and on the ball as ever, having only stopped swimming himself some three years ago.
And his interest in the sport is intensely forward-looking.
Here, IAN HARGRAVES talks to swimming's former Wonder Man about the highlights of a truly astonishing career.
Coach firm boycotts schools in cash row
By Jules Stenson
HUNDREDS of children missed out on trips after a coach firm boycotted 15 Liverpool schools.
Garston-based Village Group Tours claims it is owed up to £30,000 by the schools.
It may lay off up to 20 drivers if the bills are not settled.
The firm staged the one-day boycott yesterday to put pressure on Liverpool City Council to pay up.
Among hundreds of pupils affected were special needs children who missed swimming lessons.
Paying
Village Group director Paul Hunter said he had been forced to ‘rest’ drivers until his firm Liverpool's largest coach independent was paid.
He claimed the firm had had previous difficulties in getting paid by the council, with one school not paying for five months.
He said: ‘The schools refuse to sign invoices giving clearance for payment.’
A council spokesman said: ‘We have got a duty to ensure payments are justified, so we have to make checks which can cause delays.
‘We take a serious view of any company failing to comply with the terms of the contract they have been awarded.’
MR SWIMMING
From Chariots of Fire to 1992, Austin's in a league of his own
AUSTIN Rawlinson's finest hour as a competitor came at the famous 1924 Chariots of Fire Olympics in Paris, where he finished fifth in the final.
‘Funnily enough I was only third choice, but did better than the other two British swimmers,’ he says.
‘It was a fantastic experience, and I remember taking a photograph of Harold Abrahams at the start of the 100 metres race that he won.
You could do that sort of thing then.
Third in the trials
‘I just missed out on two other Olympic Games.
Because of the shortage of money, we only sent two backstrokers to Antwerp in 1920, and I came third in the trials, which were held in the open air pool at Southport, now a children's playground.
‘By coincidence I missed out on Amsterdam for the same reason.
I came third in the trials and only two swimmers were sent.
Ironically I was also third in the trials before Paris, but was sent that time and, as I have said, did better than the other two.’
Unlike so many other top sportsmen, Austin Rawlinson continued to play an active part after his retirement.
Coach to British team
In 1958 he was chief coach to the British team which produced our best post-war results in the European championships, with gold medals from the likes of Ian Black and Judy Grinham, and two years later he was appointed manager of the British Swimming team for the Olympics in Rome.
Apart from the delight of seeing Anita Lonsborough carrying off a gold in the individual medley, he was also honoured by being chosen to manage the combined European team in the festival that followed the Games.
Questioned closely, Austin also reveals that he should have been directly involved in the 1948 Olympics at Wembley.
‘I was one of five candidates to be the official starter, and one of only two to have my own pistol,’ he explains.
‘The other pistol owner wouldn't lend out his gun, so four of us used mine.
I won, was appointed starter and even bought my official blazer.
‘But my chief at Liverpool CID would not let me take part, because he was away on holiday himself at the time, and required me to stand in for him.
‘Those trials took place at Scarborough, and it is interesting to note that was the last trial to be held outdoors.
Damage
‘The open air pool there was built into the cliffs, and the trials were hit by an Atlantic gale that washed away most of the seating and did a lot of damage.
‘When I used to compete, the individual trials were held at different places, according to which area bid for them.
‘You could be competing in the backstroke at Southport, and then have to travel to Cleethorpes or Torquay for the free style or breaststroke.
It is only comparatively recently that they have all been brought together.’
Since then, Austin has done virtually every job connected with swimming, including being centenary president of the A.S.A. and a national selector for many years.
He was the natural choice to open Liverpool's newest swimming pool, at Everton Park in 1985, and by way of a change is also the A.S.A's unofficial historian.
Mayor has job down to a ‘tea’
By Ann Todd
THINGS are always on the boil at Liverpool's Town Hallbut only because Lord Mayor Cllr Rosemary Cooper likes a cuppa.
She says: ‘The Town Hall staff say I am wear-ing out their kettle.
But they don't mind because it's fun having lots of people in.’
Half-way through her term of office, Cllr Cooper is getting a reputation for having ‘Open House’ at the city's famous landmark.
She is always giving out her official gilt-edged card, with the invitation to: ‘Call in for a cuppa.’
She added: ‘The Town Hall is for the people.
I don't want to turn anyone away.
‘This place is theirs.
It's the same when I go round the schools.
‘I wear my chain of office and show it the kids and say ‘This is yours.’
I tell them they could be wearing it one day.’
Cllr Cooper has also directed that Town Hall visitors can now look at the silver room with its valuable collection and history of the city.
Trouble
She said: ‘We are trying to re-establish the Lord Mayoralty as it was before the city had its pantomime period,’ a reference to the time the Militant-dominated council abolished the position of Lord Mayor and replaced it with a Labour chairman.
But trouble is brewing for the present Lord Mayor.
The Town Hall will be closed for refurbishment after Christmas and she is moving out with her staff to offices in St George's Hall.
She said: ‘It means the Town Hall will be unavailable to the people for anything up to three years.
‘So on that basis I am really encouraging as many people as possible to call in to look round.
Cllr Cooper, a buyer for Littlewoods, said: ‘I have taken a year off work to do this and there is no point if at the end I have made no difference at all.
‘I am trying to take the Lord Mayoralty out to the people, reach out to as many as I can.
‘I tell the kids the Lord Mayor is part of Liverpool.
‘I have a part to play, but so do they, and we are all on the same team.’
Brew's that?…
Cllr Cooper milks the moment PICTURE: STEPHEN SHAKESHAFT
‘I don't remember learning to swim, it just happened’
TIMES have changed considerably since a youthful Austin Rawlinson attended his first swimming gala, well before World War 1, and realised his love of the water had helped him develop an outstanding talent.
‘I can't remember ever learning to swim; it just happened,’ he recalls.
‘I do remember buying books of halfpenny tickets, so I could practice on my own in addition to the visits with the school.
‘When I was 12 I won the one length freestyle, backstroke and breaststroke events at the local schools gala, but after that I concentrated on the backstroke most of the time.’
It is a matter of history that Austin became the first Englishman to regularly employ the new-fangled back crawl, which all swimmers use today but was then regarded as something of an eccentricity.
Crawling early
‘There is some doubt over who was the first person in the world to swim the back crawl, but arguably it was actress Rita Tushingham's uncle Thomas, who also swam for the Garston club,’ he explains.
‘An American, Harry Hebner, was the first man to use it in major competition when he won a gold medal in the 1912 Olympics, and I was the first British title holder.
‘I had repeated arguments with my coach Harold Howcroft, because I preferred a straight arm recovery, but that suited my style better than the alternative.
British backstroke champion five years in a row, Austin Rawlinson swam in very different conditions from those applying today.
He remembers competing at the national championships at Cleethorpes in 1923, when the water lay only three foot deep above a foot of solid mud, and having to touch a mud-smeared wall at each end.
‘Something else that people forget is that in the twenties swimming was strictly segregated,’ he recalls.’
The boys and girls were kept strictly apart at the Garston baths, where I trained, and there were times when my mother had to take me in.
‘Screens were erected, so that although boys and girls could see each other, they couldn't climb out on the same side.
The boys had the use of a 25 metre pool, but the girls had to train over 19 metres, though that didn't prevent three of them winning a silver medal at the Olympics in Antwerp.
‘Hilda James, Charlotte Radcliffe and Grace McKenzie teamed up with Connie Jeans from Nottingham in the medley relay, and they were only beaten by the Americans.
Because cash was short, Britain only sent five girls to the Olympic swimming, and three of them were from Garston.’
AUSTIN leaves the pool after the 1924 Olympic final in Paris
DIAMOND DAYS…
Austin and Edna Rawlinson at Garston Church, the scene of their wedding 60 years earlier
Hunt on for Mersey's top businesswoman
ORGANISATION is the name of the game for businesswoman Lauren Sterling.
She moved from a successful career in London to set up an events-arranging company in Liverpool back in 1989.
And, just two years, later she was heralded as Merseyside Businesswoman Of The Year.
Working closely with Merseyside Conference Bureau, Lauren has helped to promote the area as a main conference venue.
And that means she has brought thousands of pounds into the region's hotels.
But she has also campaigned for better facilities.
Airport
Lauren, 29, says: ‘More business would come here if we had a proper exhibition and conference centre and the right facilities out at the airport.’
Now Lauren is preparing to pass on her title to the 1992 Merseyside Businesswoman Of The Year.
The award, sponsored by the Clayton Square Shopping Centre in conjunction with Merseyside TEC, and supported by Liverpool Chamber Of Commerce, aims to recognise the success and achievement of local women in business -and to highlight their contribution to the region's economy.
Arnold Wilcox-Wood, manager of Clayton Square, says: ‘We are expecting a high response to this year's award.
‘In 1991, entries came from women in many fields.’
The winner will receive a £1,000 training package courtesy of Merseyside TEC and a £1,000 executive wardrobe.
Judging will take place in December with the winner selected from four finalists at a special awards dinner early in 1993.
Linda Bloomfield, chief executive of Merseyside TEC, adds: ‘Merseyside women are showing the flair and enthusiasm needed to stimulate the revitalisation of the region.
‘I would encourage every woman running a Merseyside-based business, whether as a director or a manager, to enter this year's award and get the recognition they deserve.’
Entry forms can be collected in person from Clayton Square Shopping Centre or Merseyside TEC.
Or ring Williams Barber & Bird PR on 051 709 4441.
The closing date for entries is December 14.
Sterling success…last year's Businesswoman Of The Year, Lauren Sterling
SAINTS DEFEND FINE TROPHY RECORD
ST HELENS will be defending an impressive Regal Trophy record when they take on last year's beaten finalists Leeds at Knowsley Road tomorrow in what looks like being a tremendous clash of the giants.
Just a couple of weeks ago this game looked to be a certain home banker.
But what a difference a few days can make Saints crashed badly at home to Bradford Northern on the day when Doug Laughton's men were giving arguably their best performance of the season in running up a convincing score against his old club Widnes.
Both sides have a point to prove Saints that they can bounce back quickly from the Bradford disappointment; Leeds that they are on a consistent run of wins.
It promises to be an intriguing clash with Saints aiming to extend their magnificent Regal Trophy record of not having lost a first round match for 11 years the best run in the competition which they share with cup kings Wigan.
The last team to knock out Saints at this stage were Barrow in 1981-82 when they forced a shock 16-16 draw at Knowsley Road then won the replay 17-0.
Now the pressure is back on St Helens tomorrow.
They need a good win to put the Bradford experience behind them.
Meanwhile, one St Helens star is also looking for a ‘new start’.
Powerful New Zealand Test forward George Mann has hardly had the best of luck with injury, but he is now back in action and ready to challenge for a regular first team place again.
The strong-running Kiwi has been out for around five weeks after a trapped nerve in his back.
He said this week: ‘It has been frustrating.
I have only had three or four games.
Now I am looking for a new start and go on from there.’
Paul Groves and Paul Forber are also back after injury.
HUDDERSFIELD boss and former Saints coach Alex Murphy has been showing interest in Knowsley Road forward Ian Connor.
George Mann…back in action
Sally's plea on concert tickets
By Ann Todd
SALLY Atherton is feeling brassed off about her big band spectacular.
So far, she has only managed to sell around 600 tickets for tomorrow's charity concert by the Royal Marines at the 1000-capacity Liverpool Philharmonic Hall.
Sally, area organiser of the King George V Fund for Sailors, said: ‘For the same event last year, there wasn't a seat to be had, but this year we are having trouble selling tickets.’
Best
The fund supports the Mariners Park Home in Wallasey for ex-mariners and their wives, the Royal Liverpool Seamen's Orphanage and the Mersey Mission to Seamen, and other local seafarers' organisations.
It also pays pensions to some of Merseyside's ex-Merchant Navy men.
‘It will be a really smashing concert, with the Sound of the Sixties, including the best of the Beatles and Glen Miller music.’
The concert starts at 7.30pm and tickets can be bought from the Philharmonic Hall or on the door.
Lowly Ryedale-York face Naughton Park backlash
Widnes aiming to roar back
Rugby League scene by Les Woodhead
THIRD DIVISION table-toppers Ryedale York come to Naughton Park tomorrow and could catch the backlash of that off-key Widnes display against Leeds.
Widnes will open their defence of the Regal Trophy determined to wipe out the Headingley memory and make it up to the fans who travelled over to Yorkshire to support them in that disappointing performance.
Half-back David Hulme said after the game: ‘We were disappointed for the spectators.
We want to make amends to them.
We just didn't perform on the day.
‘Our defence against Wigan and St Helens was tremendous, but this time it just fell apart.’
Defence has been one of the big strong points of Widnes performances this season.
Coach Phil Larder also pinpointed shortcomings in the Widnes tackling at Leeds when he said after the match: ‘Some of our defence was unbelievably bad.
I have never seen Widnes this season miss so many tackles.’
For Ryedale York tomorrow it will be like walking into the lions' den.
Widnes will come out determined to show their fans that last week's match has been pushed firmly into the background and turn on the kind of display which will carry them into round two in convincing style.
The Yorkshire outfit have been producing some good results in their own division, and have lost only one of their eight league games so far, but we saw the big gulf in scoring power between some of the first and lower division clubs in the county competitions and York look to be facing something of a Mission Impossible.
That's not to say that Widnes will be complacent.
One of their players said: ‘There is no room for complacency.’
A Quick question
‘WHO was ‘Quickstep’, who wrote a weekly dance feature for the Wednesday Echo in the 1930s?’ asks Tricia Jenkins, of Liverpool University.
Tricia is researching dance bands of that era and would like to hear from anyone who remembers this columnist-and from anyone who played in a band in those days.
‘I have been told that ‘Quickstep’ was a dancer and possibly an MC at the Grafton Rooms,’adds Tricia, who is research co-ordinator, Leverhulme Project, Institute of Popular Music, at the University.
JUDITH MOSS talks to former Page 3 girl Kathy Lloyd
Made-up!
IF YOU'RE suffering from SAD syndrome, you need a tonic…and here's just the thing.
From this Thursday until Saturday, Yves St Laurent at George Henry Lee will play host to top make-up artist Richard Hawkins.
Richard will give customers a complete make-over and advise them on colours.
He'll even reveal some ‘tricks of the trade’.
The price of the make-over is £10deducted from any YSL products bought.
For further details, contact Sue Griffiths on 051 709 7070 (ext 4631).
Free service on training help
A DATABASE of more than 14,000 training courses is being marketed by a Merseyside information service.
NorthWest TAP Training Access Points is acting as a central clearing house for courses being run by some 400 local training providers.
Based in South John Street, Liverpool, the free service is also available on TAP computers in 11 other stations around Merseyside, such as careers offices.
The service is provided on behalf of local Training and Enterprise Councils Merseyside TEC, CEWTEC and Qualitec.
About 32,000 people used Northwest TAP's services last year.
East Germans at Chamber talk shop
FOLLOWING the success of three previous seminars Liverpool Chamber of Commerce is holding a fourth talk shop on trading with the former East Germany.
Set for next Thursday afternoon in the Chamber's Old Hall Street conference room, the seminar will include a party of East German managers who are in the area on language and business training courses.
Chamber chiefs claim Contact Point East Germany IV will particularly benefit companies trading in such sectors as architecture, chemistry, computers, management consultancy, transport and education.
Games boom
THE recession may still be biting, but video games company Nintendo continues to buck the trend.
They claim sales, on the all-important run-up to Christmas, are set to soar.
By year-end industry sales will reach £500m almost twice the 1991 level.
Brum for sale
BIRMINGHAM CITY is for sale following the collapse of club chairman Samesh Kumar's business empire.
Kumar's company, BRS Kumar Brothers, has gone into receivership and its 84% stake in the first division club is part of the assets put up for sale by the receivers.
NEWDUST-UP OVER COAL BASE
By Barry Turnbull
ELECTRICITY giants Powergen say the future of a controversial coal terminal at Bootle may be under threat if proposals for new operating conditions are upheld.
Councillors in Sefton have demanded rail wagons from the site be enclosed adding £12m to the company's costs.
However, Powergen says it is confident of winning if the matter goes to a public inquiry.
Spokesman David Sharpe said: ‘We are quite confident that the environmental protection measures we are proposing are sufficient.
‘If it does go to a public inquiry I am sure our case would be upheld.
Prohibitive
‘In the event of that not happening the operation of the facility would have to be reexamined given the prohibitive costs of covering wagons.
‘However we feel that spraying the coal to dampen it will prevent dust nuisance.’
A row erupted at a council meeting over the issue this when Sefton's chief executive Graham Haywood urged councillors to back down over the strict conditions.
Labour councillors demanded the resignation of Mr Haywood and public protection chief David Jones for revealing the council's weak case should the matter go to an inquiry.
Cllr Eddie McEvilly, Labour, said: ‘It is really quite disgraceful for chief officers to show our hand like this and reveal we would not have a strong case.’
Business shocker
COMPANY failures in England and Wales have soared to their highest level more than three an hour since the recession started more than two years ago.
New figures out today from the British Chambers of Commerce show that businesses are collapsing at the rate of 76 a day.
Full story: Page 47
Now see the show yourself
Now here's your chance to have a Hollyday.
We have two pairs of tickets to see the show at the Empire.
Just answer the following question and send your entry to Buddy, Liverpool Echo Features, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
Your entries must reach us by midday on Tuesday, so hurry!
The song American Pie was a tribute to Buddy Holly, Who sang it?
Usual Echo competition rules apply
1,000 stopped in first month
Some offenders face heavy jail sentences
AROUND 1,000 Mersey traffic offenders have been trapped on tape since cameras were installed in patrol cars a month ago.
Around a third of them have been cautioned, fined and received points on their licences.
Most of the rest have been advised on what they were doing wrong and how to correct it.
Amazing
But the worst offenders go to court on charges of dangerous driving and they face stiff fines and a possible jail sentence.
PC Chris Eden said: ‘It's amazing how drivers’ attitudes change when we ask them to look at the recording.
‘Some try to talk their way out of the predicament.
‘Then their jaws drop open when they see their excuses are exposed.
‘A lot are amazed at how bad their driving is.
‘If we didn't have the video as back-up people would never believe us.’
The cameras are installed alongside the rear view mirror in five unmarked cars across Merseyside.
The aim is to bring calm to the streets and reduce the death toll on the roads which costs millions of pounds every year.
Fifty two people died in traffic accidents in the first eight months of this year on the roads of Merseyside.
Around 700 suffered serious injuries and 6,488 received minor cuts and bruises.
Nationally there are more than 5,000 fatalities and 300,000 injured.
Trial
Home Office figures show each death costs us £750,000 in hospital treatment, police time, pensions, and insurance money.
The six-month long video trial has been paid for by a £120,000 grant from the Urban Crime Fund.
The trial will be assessed by boffins at Manchester University in March.
The specially-adapted unmarked cars will be compared on a day-to-day basis with a marked police car to see if they are giving value for money.
If they are given the green light then the running costs will have to come from the police authority.
Camera trick…
Chief Inspector Vic Williams with the camera at the top of the picture
Rally of hope in bid to stop pit closures
10,000 TO MARCH FOR COAL JOBS
By Jules Stenson
UP TO 10,000 people are expected to parade through St Helens tomorrow in a Coal Not Dole rally.
THey will march through the town centre in protest at pit closures, hoping to win a reprieve for Parkside Colliery Lancashire's only remaining mine and save 730 jobs.
The colliery at Newton-le-Willows is on a hit-list of 10 pits the government says cannot be saved because they are uneconomic.
Tomorrow's event is organised by Lancashire NUM and North-West TUC with top speakers.
Mike Graham, of the North-West TUC, said: ‘'We believe we can change the government's mind.’
The St Helens rally is one of a series of events in the North-West during the 90-day consultation period over the planned closure of two-thirds of Britain's mines.
On November 17, the TUC is organising a regional day of action and on November 25 a torchlight procession is being held through Bootle to the expanding coal terminal at Gladstone Dock.
Importation of subsidised coal has been blamed for the closure of Parkside.
Tomorrow's rally will assemble at 10.30am in Binchley Street and leave at 11am for a noon indoor rally at Queens Park Sports Centre, Boundary Road.
Miners are taking the battle to save Parkside Colliery to the European Parliament.
A delegation from the North-West is going to Strasbourg later this mont to urge EC commissioners to take action against the dust from coal imported into the terminal at Gladstone Dock, Bootle.
Residents say it is a health hazard.
‘Madness'
North-West TUC spokesman Mike Graham said: ‘We will be seeking the support of the European Parliament against the importers of coal because of the risk to the local environment.’
Ten coal-burning power stations are set to close, the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union warned.
AEEU spokesman Cliff Dawber said: ‘Under this government's energy madness, we are heading towards disaster.
It will inevitably result in massive closures of coal-fired power stations.’
Blaze drama at Ashworth
PATIENTS at Ashworth secure hospital in Maghull were evacuated from a ward after a fire broke out.
Staff and fire crews moved 30 patients to safety — there were no injuries.
Charity night: The Merseycats, Debi Jones and Wally Scott are topping the bill at a charity night in aid of the Macmillan Nurse Appeal at the Police Club, Fairfield, next Wednesday, details from George Todd on 051 228 2352.
Drugs haul: Dangerous drugs have been stolen from the house of a doctor in the Alexandra Drive area of Aigburththieves escaped with 80 pain-killing tablets and 30 sedatives.
Task force: The Bishop of Chester, the Right Rev Michael Baughen, has launched the Bishop's Networkers, a new association for young Christians, as a task force for special projects.
Brigade boss: David Blake, from the Bebington Company, is to take over from Brian Clarke as Commander of the first Chester Battalion of the Church Lads' and Church Girls' Brigade.
Fast work: Hundreds of Merseysiders were taking part in a national day of fasting designed to raise money for Oxfam.
Water con: Two men posing as water board officials stole £80 from a 72year-old pensioner's home in Banner Street, St Helens.
Arson attack: A storage caravan parked off Birkenhead Road, Meols, was destroyed in a fire started by arsonists.
Armed raid: Gun raiders escaped with £1,800 from the Birmingham Midshires Building Society in Chapel Lane, Formby.
‘Maid Marion’ to the rescue!
THERE's nowt so queer as folk.
And nowt better than the theatre to see the variety of behaviour…
Good and bad.
On and off stage.
I'd been lucky to book one of the two wheelchair spaces with adjacent seats for my family for last Saturday's final night of the spectacular Robin of Sherwood musical.
It was a treat to be savoured…
But for 15 minutes before the curtains went up the audience must have thought that the obnoxious Sheriff of Nottigham was sitting immediately behind me…
The Playhouse do a fine job, accommodating wheelchair-users WITHIN the audience.
Several end-of-row seats are removed enabling people to remain in their ‘chairs beside their partners.
But when I tried to position my wheelchair next to my wife I found that the outstretched leg of the bearded chap behind came between us.
‘Excuse me,’ I said, ‘Any chance you could move your leg a few inches.’
‘What?
D'ya mean that thing is going to take up all this space?’ he bellowed.
‘No chance, mate.
I can't move as it is,’ he snorted, pointing to three full shopping bags between his legs.
I suggested he pass the bags to his two lady friends sitting next to him.
‘No!’ he stormed.
‘I've told you once.
I'm bloody not moving.
Not for you or for no-one.
‘I've got a sore foot, too,’ he moaned.
‘I've been on it all day and it hurts.
Besides I have paid £14 for this seat so you've had it.
I'm not moving!’
Silence…
The stalls were gripped with shock.
Having been confined to a wheelchair for 18 years I had been in similar situations to this.
And handling them doesn't get any easier.
But at least it wasn't quite my fight…yet.
An usherette appeared, listened to more tantrums, tried unsuccessfully to reason with him and then disappeared.
Hopefully to get help.
Perhaps Robin and his merry men would come hurtling through the theatre any moment now…
Five minutes later, no Robin or Little John.
Better than that…
Maid Marion, in the guise of the blonde duty manager, with intercom in hand.
It was then that I knew I could have a fight on my hands: If the manager sided with him and asked me to move a few feet away then I'd have no choice but to join in the squabble.
But what could I really have done about it, anyway?
My family were angry and embarrassed.
I was powerless, almost humiliated: my plight highlighting the sort of situation disabled people do sadly sometimes find themselves in.
The audience held its breath…and I secretly prayed that the manager would support me — unlike her counterpart at the Philharmonic Hall who earlier this year asked a young disabled woman to leave the hall because she ‘offended’ the visiting conductor.
Mercifully, two minutes later, after much gentle persuasion, the villain of the piece rose to his feet, shopping bags and friends in toe, blurted out what a selfish person I had been, and was relocated…further along our row, next to our parents!
I smiled appreciatively at the manager.
Thankfully, my faith in human nature was restored…
As too my faith in an even greater power when the same man, just two hours later, miraculously leapt to his sore, aching feet and gave the Robin Hood cast a thoroughly deserved five-minute standing ovation…
Palace denies hint at marriage rift
BUCKINGHAM Palace has denied a report that senior royal officials said the marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales had run into difficulties.
But it was confirmed that aides urged the media to concentrate on the royal couple's four-day tour of Korea rather than speculating on their relationship.
The response followed a report by royal correspondent Simon McCoy.
Pressure
He said: ‘Senior figures have now admitted they are not happy.
‘Members of the royal entourage said the press were putting enormous pressure on the prince and princess.’
The alleged comments were made during a conversation with royal correspondent James Whitaker.
He said an official came over to him and asked: ‘why all those stories had been written.
‘Eventually I said angrily that ‘surely you cannot say that this is a happy marriage?’
‘He said ‘I am not saying that it is happy but the treatment has been unfair and exaggerated in the papers’.’
Whitaker said the official emphasised that the prince and princess were staying together.
The royal couple flew out of South Korea last night, the prince bound for Hong Kong.
The princess flew back to Britain as an ordinary passenger aboard a British Airways scheduled flight.
Princess Diana…home alone today
Billiards aces take centre stage for title
THE Merseyside Association's Championship season re-opens tomorrow at the Liverpool Billiards and Snooker Club, Derby Lane, Old Swan with the Merseyside Senior Billiards Championship.
Twelve of the big entry of 40 cue off at 11am in the preliminary round as follows: Steve Blundell (Hindley) v David Pye (Prescot); John Hughes (Widnes) v Peter Sheehan (Widnes); Paul Mather (Wigan) v 15 year old Phil Johnson (Widnes), Arthur Johnson (Widnes) v Will Jerram (Southport); Nigel Warren (Liverpool) v Denis Marr (Liverpool) and Brendan Carroll Birkenhead) v Trevor Gent (Widnes).
The recently formed English Amateur Billiards Association are first in the field with details of the National Championships.
Their programme includes the English Amateur Billiards Championship at £10.
The British Isles Under-19 and Under-16 Billiards Championships, for those under-18 and under-15 respectively on January 1, cost £5.
Closing date for entries is November 30 to Albert Hanson, 4 Lansbury Close, South Bank, Middlesbrough TS6 6LN (Tel 0642-456418).
Please show date of birth for Junior Championship contenders.
Leading positions
The leading positions in the four divisions of the Bootle Snooker League after six weeks of the new season see Liverpool Billiards and Snooker Club leading the first division with 24 points from Corals (22) and Corals B team (Bootle) on 18 from four completed matches.
The highest break is 62, shared by professionals Nicky Fruin of Corals, St Aloysius's John Burns and the youngest contender, 16-years-old Francis Keeley (Liverpool Billiards).
Aintree and Fazakerley have opened up a six point lead in the second division with 35 from six matches.
Corals E have 29 and Quadrant Park 28 from six matches.
Robbie Wilson (Corals D) is in pole position for the top divisional break with 54.
Liverpool Billiards C lead division three with 37 from Parkside Century Club (33) and Corals F (26) from six matches.
Dave Stevens (Liverpool Billiards), with a break of 52, is leading contender for the divisional break prize.
In the fourth division the lead is jointly shared by Stanley Social and Waterloo CMS, both on 27 points, with Netherton Activity Centre on 24.
Brian Jack (Littlewoods), with a break of 42, leads the divisional race.
Garston Snooker League are now approaching the half way stage with Woolton Village Club leading the first division with 23 points from eight games closely followed by Mossley Hill Legion (22).
St Christophers have 22 with a match in hand.
Hunts Cross A and St Bernadette's share top spot in the second division on 26 points, but Hunts Cross have a game in hand as do Aigburth P.H. (22).
Division three sees St Charles lead with 27 from nine matches from Aigburth Legion and Garston Woodcutters (25).
The latter have two matches in hand on the leaders.
United Services are clear leaders of the fourth division with 40 from nine matches, ahead of L.M.S.
(28 from 8) and Metal Box C (25 from 9).
Hunts Cross B lead division five with 29 from 9 matches, followed by Kensington Snooker Club (25 from 8) and Beresford (24 from 8).
The Billiards Setion is topped by Garston Snooker Centre (33) from St Christopher's with 31 and Garston Woodcutters on 22.
After the finals of the Benson & Hedges Masters Tournament at Glasgow this weekend, the professional circuit transfers to the North West for the UK Snooker Championship at Preston's Guild Hall starting on Friday.
The event this year is worth £375,000.
Move for restaurant group
RESTAURANT group Simpsons of Cornhill was on the verge today of being swallowed up by holiday and printing company Baldwin in a deal worth £1.7m.
Simpsons' directors are recommending that shareholders accept Baldwin's offer.
Today's move is expected to be the conclusion of a bitter struggle for control of the group.
This guy's in luck…
By Jules Stenson
PUB regulars admitted today: ‘We just didn't have the heart to burn Johnny the Guy.’
Drinkers at Peter Kavanagh's in Egerton Street, Toxteth, Liverpool, became so attached to their papier mache guy featured in last night's Echothey launched a petition to save him.
Within a few hours they had 50 signatures.
Now Johnny will continue to prop up the bar with a rum and black and the Echo crossword.
No one was happier about Johnny's last-minute reprieve than his drinking companion Harry Ward, 73, of Huskisson Street, Toxteth.
Barman John Meakin said: ‘We just couldn't face chucking him on the bonfire.
Guy Fawkes would have been proud of us.’
Grinding down the poor
JOHN Major proudly proclaimed that he wanted to lead a classless Britain when he became Prime Minister.
But, two years later, he is presiding over a government which is clobbering the poorest in our society harder than anyone else.
Benefit cuts are expected to be a critical part of the autumn public spending statement to be made by Chancellor Norman Lamont next week.
And Mr Major has confirmed that wages councils, which set basic pay rates for 2.5 million low paid workers, are to be abolished.
The government says the move will help to create jobs and improve the competitiveness of the economy.
Wages councils, set up in the early 1900s, have no role to play in the 1990s, ministers argue.
But those workers struggling to make ends meet on basic wages of barely more than £100 a week are likely to see things very differently.
The wages councils' minimum rates are far from a pathway to comfort and security, but they do often make the difference between keeping a family's head above the water and going under.
The overwhelming majority of the British people do not want to return to such Victorian values as jobs at any price.
They know that the rich did very nicely during the Thatcher years and believe it is they not the poor who should make any sacrifices necessary to get the country out of recession.
Suspicion confirmed
JACQUES Delors, president of the European Commission, is the Frenchman many Britons love to hate.
He is an ideal bogeyman for those who are convinced that our national interests and identity are under savage attack from Brussels.
The collapse of international trade talks between the EC and the United States will be more grist to their mill.
Mr Delors is accused of sabotaging any chances of a deal because it would hit French farmers and as a result agriculture commissioner Ray MacSharry has resigned as the EC's chief negotiator in the talks with the US.
A bitter trade war, with tough US sanctions against a range of European goods, now looms.
Mr Delors should be told in no uncertain terms that his job is to stick up for the whole of the EC not just for France.
Schools make the French Connection
Picture: Lloyd Wright
A TASTE of France was on the menu for youngsters from Merseyside schools today.
Around 100 15-year-olds were combining the excitement of a French experience with the reality of the hotel and catering trades in a novel combination designed to boost their success in school exams.
The Whitbread Education Partnership has organised a series of French Fiesta events with their prestigious Landsbury Hotels providing the setting for a three-day French food project.
The boys of Pensby High School will be going French at the Parkgate Hotel, Wirral; the South Wirral High School will be at the Cromwell Hotel, Bromborough; while pupils at St Ambrose Barlow School in Netherton will be working alongside staff at the Blundellsands Hotel in Crosby.
Guided by their teachers and the team at each hotel, the youngsters will have created and co-ordinated the entire event, from poster design to preparing and serving the food.
Going French…
Nicola Dale (left) Jeanette Elliott and Kevin Thompson (centre) from South Wirral High School
Panthers strike in top style
WIRRAL Panthers trailed 4-0 before hitting back superbly to gain a thrilling 5-4 win over Glenavon in the Wallasey Junior League Under 12 division.
John Lovelady netted the winner with Peter Doyle (2), Russ Higgins and Richard Lucas also netting to take Panthers to the top of the table.
At Under 10, Wallasey Albion won 3-2 at Wallasey Wanderers, Paul Casey scoring twice with Steve Upton alo on target.
Meols Athletic (Simon Charlton 2) beat Glenavon 2-1 in a second round Cup-tie.
Shrimper dies after sea rescue drama
By Jane Gallagher
A LIFEBOATMAN today described a dramatic attempt to rescue a shrimper.
A three-man crew from the independent Southport Lifeboat Service was called out following reports that a shrimp rig driven by Joe Ross was heading out to sea.
Crewman Keith Porter, of Birkdale, said the coastguard's amphibious craft was already at the scene but unable to reach 54-year-old Mr Ross's rig.
Keith said: ‘If a wave had caught it it would have smashed the craft to pieces.
‘We got as close as we could to the shrimping rig, then Neil Henshaw and myself climbed aboard.
Collapsed
‘We found the man inside the cabin, which was full of water.
‘He was blue in the face and appeared to have collapsed, but the vessel had carried on out to sea.
‘We managed to get him out on to the deck and gave mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and cardiac heart massage.’
A paramedic crew was waiting on the beach.
Mr Ross, of Squarehouse Lane, Crossens, was rushed to hospital, but died shortly after admission.
Woman driver abducted
POLICE are hunting a man who attacked and kidnapped a woman after forcing his way into her car.
Detectives are warning lone women drivers to be on their guard after a 21-year-old woman was abducted in Manchester and beaten about the head, after she had stopped to ask directions.
The woman suffered an hour and a half ordeal in her car, which only ended after the Ford Fiesta broke down on the A559, near Cromsley Private School in Great Budworth, Northwich.
IT was a classic case of ‘a game of two halves’ when Warrington Town's eight-match unbeaten record came to an end in a 3-2 defeat at Great Harwood Town on Wednesday.
After arriving only 20 minutes before kick-off due to heavy traffic, Warrington were caught cold and trailed 2-0 after just eight minutes, with Great Harwood adding a third goal before the interval.
But manager Derek Brownbill explained: ‘We rolled our sleeves up in the second half and showed a lot of character.
‘We pulled back two goals and they were kicking the ball anywhere to keep us out.’
Gavin McDonald and Neil Cook were on target for Warrington.
HAIL THE LAW FIRM CHAMPION
JULIE Morris has been hailed a champion of young solicitors.
For the first-year trainee with Liverpool law firm Alsop Wilkinson has been judged the winner of the Liverpool Educational Foundation prize awarded by the Liverpool Law Society.
The annual award is for the trainee deemed to have made the greatest contribution to the Trainee Solicitors Group.
Julie, 23, pictured, who lives in Mossley Hill but is originally from Sunderland, has just completed her first year at Alsop Wilkinson after law studies at Birmingham Polytechnic and Chester Law School.
Knowsley home in on Vase
KNOWSLEY UNITED have been handed a home draw against Nottinghamshire outfit Arnold Town when they open their FA Vase campaign in the second round a fortnight today.
The Alt Park club reached the fifth round last season before bowing out to Sudbury Town, and Max Thompson's men will feel they can open this season's Wembley trail with a win against an Arnold side in the Supreme Division of the Central Midlands League.
Meanwhile, Knowsley have been made to wait 10 days before they can attempt to put last weekend's disappointing 2-1 defeat at Alfreton behind them.
The Alt Park club were originally due to face North Shields today, but the demise of the north-easterners at the start of the season left Knowsley with a free date.
Reshuffle
And United must now wait until next Tuesday, when they travel to Radcliffe Borough, to try and get the result out of their system.
‘We would have preferred an earlier chance to get back on the rails,’ admitted Thompson, whose side's defeat ended a run of six consecutive wins.
Thompson was forced to reshuffle his side because of injuries, work commitments and one player missing the team bus and indeed the manager had to name himself as one of the substitutes.
But he did not make what would have been his first competitive appearance for several years.
‘I was thinking about coming on for the last five minutes when we were 2-0 down, to get a bit of glory, but the legs wouldn't let me,’ he joked.
Oz scousers ready for big Echo party
By Arthur Johnson in Sydney
MERSEYSIDERS were gathering in Sydney, Australia, today for the first ever meeting of ‘Scousers Down Under’, organised with the help of the Echo.
Many are driving more than 500 miles for tomorrow night's event.
Gerry Marsden, the organisation's president, will attend the meeting which is being held before one of his concerts.
One of the stars of the concert will be the Liver Bird from Liverpool FC's Kemlyn Road Stand.
It was given to the Echo and has been donated to Scousers Down Under as their mascot.
Concert
The bird will be brought on stage by Arthur Johnson, marketing editor of the Echo, and Brian Hall, PR Executive of Liverpool FC.
They have flown over by Qantas Airlines specially for the event.
The Sydney meeting and concert is being filmed for a special video to be sold on Merseyside and across Australia.
Part of the film has already been shot at Albert Dock when families with relatives in Australia gathered to sing local traditional songs.
Part of the profits from the video will be donated to round-the-world cyclist John Bishop's Child Ride Appeal to raise funds for the Echo's NSPCC family centre in Liverpool.
Kettle's cup target is some Blyth spirit
SOUTHPORT boss Brian Kettle is keeping his feet firmly on the ground as his side prepares for next Saturday's FA Cup first round trip to Blyth Spartans.
With the Sandgrounders unbeaten for 20 games before today, Kettle, who last weekend won his second successive HFS manager of the month award, insisted: ‘We are capable of beating anyone.’
But the Haig Avenue boss is refusing to take anything for granted as he lines up his first game as a manager in the first round proper.
‘We must make sure we keep on our toes and concentrate,’ said Kettle, who watched Blyth score a convincing 7-0 victory over Northern League bottom club Ferryhill on Tuesday night.
‘Blyth are a quick, young side and they will make it very difficult for us, but we are all looking forward to the game,’ said the Southport boss.
Meanwhile, Kettle admits it was at his request that next Tuesday's HFS home game with Horwich was arranged.
Far from seeing a midweek game as a hindrance immediately before a big FA Cup tie, Kettle insisted: ‘We are getting too far behind Morecambe, who have played six games more than us, and I thought it was important to play it.’
Assistant Southport boss Steve Joel has finally decided to hang up his boots.
Joel, 38, who won Gola League title honours with Runcorn 11 years ago, said: ‘I have had a good time as a player and I have decided that enough is enough.
I am now enjoying being part of the scene at Southport.’
Only school to close
PLANS to close the only Catholic mixed secondary school in Anfield and Everton are to be discussed.
Staff and governors at Our Lady of Fatima Upper School, Anfield, have organised a parents meeting on Monday.
Disabled shop: A Christmas shopping evening for the Merseyside disabled is being held at Marks and Spencer's in Church Street, Liverpool on Tuesday, November 17 from 6pm.
Bowled over: Supermarket staff plan a marathon bowling bash at Megabowl on Sefton Retail Park, Netherton on November 15.
The Morrisons staff, from Southport, hope to raise £2,000 for Cancer Research.
Keep fit: Liverpool Keep Fit Association is to hold a sponsored keep fit for the Sunshine Bus Appeal at New Heys Comprehensive School, Heath Road, Allerton on November 14.
Cleric change: Canon Cecil Clarke, vicar of Thornton Hough, replaces Canon Peter Christensen, now Chaplain at Arrowe Park Hospital, Birkenhead, as Rural Dean of Wirral South.
Making music: A percussion and music workshop for children takes place at Liverpool's Philharmonic Hall tomorrow at 11.15am.
On the job: Long serving worker Lavinia Vale has won an unfair dismissal case against Warrington firm Stubs Welding Limited after 28 years service.
Mrs Vale, of Carrington Close, Locking Stumps, was also awarded £1,500 and her job back.
Flag day: A flag appeal held in Wirral in aid of Clatterbridge Hospital League of Friends raised £7,600.
Linnets fans have their say in special meeting
Clearing the air
John Carroll…the Runcorn player-boss meets the fans
RUNCORN fans were tonight sitting down with club officials at Canal Street in what chairman Dave Robinson described as a ‘clear the air meeting.’
Recent protests by disillusioned supporters calling for the dismissal of player-boss John Carroll have prompted the club to get both sides together to discuss the club's situation.
And Mr Robinson explained: ‘The meeting was called to let the fans have their say and also to put them in the picture.
‘We have not got a lot of money and we have got to just get on with the job of trying to sort things out on the field.
The manager has the board's full support and we have got to try and get everyone working in the same direction.’
Mr Robinson admitted he could understand the frustration of fans in the light of the Linnets' run of four successive defeats before today's visit of Kettering Town to Canal Street.
But he added: ‘Displaying banners calling for the manager to be sacked will do nobody any good, and it is best that we all sit down and talk things over.’
Representatives from the board, the management and the playing staff were due to meet the fans in tonight's discussion.
Meanwhile, defender Graham Hill, sidelined since the start of the season by knee ligament damage, has resumed full training.
He joins midfielder Ian Brady, who returned to action in a midweek friendly after a lengthy lay off.
Brought to book
By Jane Gallagher
A BEST-SELLING Merseyside author has released her fourth and final book.
Failing eyesight which left writer and poet Joan Rimmer blinded for three months, delayed publication of the long awaited sequel to My Formby, Formby Remembered.
Her previous three books charting a century of change in the former rural village in words, pictures and verse were complete sell-outs.
This time instead of relying on her own memories stemming from her childhood centred around the home in Priesthouse Lane where she was born and still lives, Miss Rimmer armed herself with a tape recorder and interviewed the town's oldest residents ranging in age from 70 to 99.
Sketches from local artist Muriel Sibley and photographs from local newspapers including the Liverpool Echo, illustrate the growth of Formby from a sleepy village of 7,000 to a suburban town, now home to almost 30,000 people.
Miss Rimmer, 57, will be at Pritchard's Bookshop in Formby Village all day tomorrow to sign copies of her book.
New book…author Joan Rimmer (left) with artist Muriel Sibley
Mariners on alert with top warning
MARINE'S FA Cup heroes went into today's HFS home game against Gainsborough Trinity with a clear warning from manager Roly Howard ringing in their ears.
The Mariners take on Third Division Halifax Town at College Road next Saturday in a first round tie which the Crosby side are quietly confident of winning.
But Howard insisted: ‘Anyone who believes he can cruise along and think he will automatically be in the side against Halifax will be in for a shock.
‘An attitude like that will make sure that he is NOT in the side.’
The long-serving boss was adamant that he wanted total commitment and effort in the build-up to the tie, which is expected to attract a 2,500 all-ticket crowd to College Road.
Very dangerous
‘Once you start saving yourselves for big games and ducking out of tackles, you get into the wrong frame of mind and that is very dangerous,’ warned Howard, who is hoping to steer his side through to the second round of the FA Cup for the first time for 17 years.
But likely to be ruled out of the action is full-back Keith Proctor, who has suffered a reaction to his first game back after a six-week injury lay-off he played for the reserves last weekend and is now likely to have to see a specialist about his troublesome knee.
Meanwhile, Howard was delighted with the success of the Marine contingent in the HFS League's representative match victory over an FA XI at Leek on Tuesday.
Brian Ross and Chris Camden were both on target in the 3-2 win the duo also scored in last year's victory over the FA and Howard said: ‘They have come up trumps again, and it is another excellent boost for Marine.’
Skem's aces climb clear
SKELMERSDALE, quite superb in their defeat of Glossop, are out of the bottom two.
Equally pleasing to boss Dave Maloney was the confidence-boosting display, achieved in spite of questionable sendings-off that saw Skem end with nine men.
REVENGE was sweet for Peter Henerty's Formby last week, when they beat K-Chell 2-1 at Brows Lane.
Seven days before they had gone down 5-3 to the same opposition, despite playing the superior football.
THE BEST unbeaten run in the second division came to an end last week when Maghull lost at Maine Road in the Vase.
Arthur McCumiskey's men, the team of September, and very nearly of October, finally went down in match 14.
Stoke are potty over Perkins!
TEENAGE striker Stephen Perkins has just returned from a week's trial at Stoke City and the Potters have expressed great interest.
Perkins, 17, schoolboy son of Burscough boss Russ, impressed Stoke manager Lou Macari and is all set for another week in the Potteries over Christmas.
‘By all accounts he did very well indeed,’ said a delighted Russ who gave Stephen his first taste of Bass NWC football last season and has seen much to justify his brave decision.
‘He's still at school, which is important, but there is nothing to stop Stephen pursuing a football career, initially during the holidays.’
Perkins senior, a former Macclesfield and South Liverpool striker, was pleased with Stephen's rapid rise into senior football.
He said candidly: ‘Stephen's got more soccer skill than I ever had.’
The precocious young Perkins promises every bit as much as team-mate Ian Owen, a teenage defender of rare composure, who is also attracting the League scouts.
Jane's fighting for local customs jobs
By Mark Davies
BROADGREEN MP Jane Kennedy is bidding to make sure jobs at Liverpool's new customs offices go to local people.
Mrs Kennedy wants positive discrimination in favour of Merseysiders to apply when the Queen's Dock development opens.
The Customs and Excise Department is being moved from London to Liverpool, with the new office housing 1,800 staff.
But it is not yet clear what new job opportunities the development will mean.
In response to a Parliamentary question, Paymaster General Sir John Cope told Mrs Kennedy that 1,100 posts will be moved from the south-east to Liverpool.
Extra
Some of the remaining 700 posts already exist on Merseyside.
But the others will be extra posts created by moving customs and excise work from other parts of the country.
Some will be filled by civil service workers from outside Merseyside and by staff already employed in the area.
Sir John told Mrs Kennedy he could not give precise figures of what job opportunities would arise from the transfer.
Mrs Kennedy said: ‘It is still early days.
‘What I would like to see is the Customs and Excise department develop a policy of appointments which assist local people.
‘They should seriously consider Liverpool people and give them a chance, particularly as it is an area of high unemployment.’
Jane Kennedy…‘early days’
DALE LOOK TO BARRY
BARRY WILSON turned in a star performance as Stantondale increased their lead at the top of the second division last week -and afterwards his managers furnished him with the same compliment: ‘He's class.’
Dale beat second-placed Burnley Bank Hall 3-1 and Wilson, though he only played an hour, turned in a splendid defensive performance, much to the delight of joint bosses Roy Grundy and Tommy Lawson.
Wilson received an injury in the third minute, but that didn't hamper his stand on the game.
On the contrary; he seemed to get better as the game progressed, winning tackles as if to order, losing little in the air.
He finally bowed to the inevitable after 61 minutes, when he was visibly hobbling around.
His team-mates, dominant in a thrilling second half, completed the job as he looked on in agony from the dug-out.
And after the game, struggling off the pitch, Wilson replied to glowing praise with a modest quip.
‘Yes, but we played better when I went off!’ he said, referring to the fact that Dale were camped in the opponents' penalty area in the final half hour.
LUCKLESS St. Helens Town, better than their record of one win in 15 games suggests, had to thank a last-minute goal by nomadic striker Steve Cannon for a deserved point at Darwen in a 1-1 draw last week.
SOUTH LIVERPOOL old boy Kevin Hawkins started the late onslaught that brought down Bootle's gallant efforts at North Trafford last week.
The combative veteran gave his side the lead on the hour, and then helped them to a flattering 3-0 win.
A WIND of change has swept Ellesmere Port Town that isn't good news.
After two excellent wins 8-1 at Nelson and 3-0 at first division Atherton — Dave McArdle's men have since gained just one point from two games they deserved to win.
MANCHESTER UNITED's promising defender of the 1980s, Billy Garton, has handed Prescot striker Dave Massett a massive boost by calling him one of the best players in the Bass North West Counties League.
Billy Garton, the manager of Salford City, played 41 games for the Old Trafford club before injury cut short his career in 1990.
He led his side to victory over Prescot in the FA Vase last week, and was happy to give credit where it was due.
‘He was a very good, sharp player, with excellent control,’ said Garton of Massett.
‘He is without doubt their greatest danger and he gave us a few problems last week.’
Massett has been in great form all season, a fact not lost on his boss Joe Gibiliru.
But a sending-off two weeks ago will give the talented striker his second suspension of the campaign.
Also among the compliments was defender Dave Billows who, said the 26year-old Garton, ‘was a tower of strength in a side that defended well.’
Garton puts Prescot among the leading lights in the division.
‘It wasn't difficult to see why Prescot are so high in the division.
‘We were certainly quite lucky to beat them last week.’
Stuart finds new life in music game
STAND by for the romantic mechanic…
Stuart Wolfenden — Coronation Street's former garage hulk Mark Casey — is about to reveal his double A side.
And there's the paradox not least because he will be singing at Liverpool's Paradox Club tonight.
‘I'm looking forward to showing Liverpool that there's more to me than an oily spanner.’
The singing took a back seat while he concentrated on his soap career.
‘Music got neglected for more than two years,’ he says.
‘But it wasn't wasted time.
‘Now's the time to prove that I am a singer and not a singing soap star.’
Talking of which, Neighbours' twins Gillian and Gayle Blakeney (pictured above, although which is which is anyone's guess) in Liverpool to prepare for this year's Empire panto, Dick Whittington, say they hope to have a single cut by Christmas.
The girls who play Christina and Caroline in Neighbours have been putting together an album.
Although the title is still undecided, we believe it may be taken from a track called Mad If You Don't.
The Blakeney twins
Like a goldfish bowl
LIFE at the top in local government can be decidedly damp.
Especially in the municipal buildings in Dale Street, Liverpool, where there's been flooding.
All of which prompted the following official question from Liberal Democrat housing spokesman Frank Doran: ‘That in view of the danger which faces council members from drowning and/or mugging, arrangements be made to provide members with wet suits and powerful torches to enable them to visit the amphibious staff on that floor of the building.’
And the official answer?
Pirhanas
‘The conditions on the top floor are designed to prevent members from putting in council questions and motions.
Obviously this has not worked in your case.
More measures will be needed to be put in hand prior to the next council meeting.
‘For instance, there is at present an order outstanding for two dozen piranha fish.’
Boy cleared of WPc attack
A 15-year-old schoolboy has been cleared of a sex attack on a policewoman.
The prosecution at the Old Bailey had alleged the boy attacked her yards from the London police station where she worked.
She marched him to the station where a colleague came to her aid.
But Annette Henry, defending, said the 24year-old officer ‘overreacted’ after he made a suggestive remark.
Morris Bros.
DO any Echo readers have information about the firm Morris Bros., Liverpool-based manufacturers of eiderdowns?
We believe they started up in the mid-1930s, but by 1970 seemed to have closed down.
Would readers also know anything about the Art Quilt Co., which could have been part of, or an offshoot of, Morris Bros?
Dr Martin Stacey, 136 Petersham Road, Richmond Upon Thames, Surrey TW10 6UX.
Sisters search
I AM trying to trace two relatives the sisters Dolly Tasker (formerly of Myrtle Gardens, Liverpool 7), and Margaret Coppick (of Wavertree?).
I would be grateful if they will contact me.
Mrs Bridget Richards (nee Bridie Jones), 55 Croxteth Road, Liverpool, L8 3SY (734-0111).
Family trace
I AM trying to trace the family of Patrick Gordon, who lived in the St Johns Road/Brasnose Road area of Liverpool.
Patrick married my father's sister, Catherine Conboy, but I only discovered the relationship after they had both died.
If any of Patrick's family are still around, I would be grateful for any information they can give me.
Frank Conboy, 9 Andrew Avenue, Melling, Liverpool L31 1BL.
Birthplace
I AM trying to trace the birthplace of Henry Purcell (father, Thomas), born in 1872/3 and married from 116 Towson Street.
He then lived in Pagewood, Paley and Pugin Streets until he moved to Old Bidston Road to work for Cammell Laird as a French polisher.
He had six daughters.
S. Clinton (tel: 051-928-6372).
Motorists attacked
HOLIDAY motorists have been warned to avoid a major Florida highway because of sniper and stone-throwing attacks.
The warning, from the American Automobile Association, came after reports of cars being hit by bullets or chunks of concrete on a 10-mile stretch of motorway around Jacksonville.
TOURISM TICKLER ONE:
Are we in the wrong jobs?
It would seem so after we received a phone call from a North Wales resident who was bringing some American pals over to our fair city to sample some entertaining nights out in Liverpool.
‘Can you help me…
I've tried everywhere,’ said the desperate caller.
‘The Tourism Office told us to try The Echo.’
Well, we don't mind helping out readers, but don't you think a brochure of forthcoming events including details on the vibrant club scene would be a handy item to send out to similar inquiring minds?
TOURISM TICKLER TWO:
Someone rang The Beatles Story exhibition to point out there was an error on their brochure: ‘It says you're open eight days a week,’ said the uninitiated person obviously missing the joke.
STEVE CHETTLE and Ian Woan return for Nottingham Forest tomorrow against Everton.
The return of Chettle, who has been out of favour for a month, will enable Roy Keane to revert to his more accustomed midfield position from the centre of defence.
Gary Crosby is dropped to accomodate Chettle, Tobbi Orlygsson moves to the right-wing, while Kingsley Black makes way for Woan.
IRA will not win police chief
By Echo reporter
THE IRA's current bombing campaign is failing to influence public opinion, according to Commander George Churchill-Coleman, former head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist squad.
In a tough speech to the Crime Reporters' Association he said the IRA would cease their evil trade if they could see the level of public support given to the police — much of it from the Irish community.
‘They want no part of it and do not give it their support.
‘I know this feeling extends beyond the boundaries of this country,’ he said.
‘What heroes they are leaving a bomb in a pub during a busy lunchtime in London's West End, costing a very caring man, who made his living as a nurse helping others, his life.’
Mr Churchill-Coleman said he believed the IRA would suffer further setbacks as a result of new intelligence gathering resources including the involvement of MI5.
Mersey giant beats off the recession
UNILEVER IS CHEERED BY 9% PROFITS
UNILEVER, which manufactures such basic items as washing powder and margarine, emphasised its resilience to the recession in today's third quarter results.
Pre-tax profits in the three months to the end of September rose 9% to £571m from £525m in the same period last year.
For the first nine months of the year taxable profits at the group, whose brands range from Persil to Flora, were ahead 10% to £1,459m from £1,331m.
The Anglo-Dutch group has extensive local interests and employs almost 4,000 Merseyside staff.
Laboratory
Unilever subsidiaries are based in Port Sunlight, Bromborough, Warrington, Bebington and Liverpool, including John West Foods.
More than £40m is being invested in new laboratory facilities at the company's manufacturing technology centre in Port Sunlight, due to open mid-1994.
The headquarters of Unilever's Van den Bergh Professional Foods company is also being set up in Bromborough and scheduled to open early next year.
Group chairman Michael Perry noted that results for European detergents and food operations had been maintained, in today's figures.
Beverages had advanced following a successful expansion of ice tea in southern Europe, while results from ice cream, in which Unilever leads the UK market with Walls, had been below last year's exceptional levels for the quarter.
‘Personal products and speciality chemicals performed well,’ added Mr Perry.
‘Total European volume increased after allowing for the disposal of our animal feeds and packaging operations.
‘In North America, profit performance was less satisfactory, but the market share gains of earlier in the year were consolidated in most categories.
Strong
‘In the rest of the world, profits continued to grow, with strong performances in south America and south east Asia.’
Earnings per share in the third quarter rose from 17.4p to 18.77p and for the nine months from 45.82p to 48.84p.
Shareholders will receive an interim dividend increased from 5.03p per share to 5.2p.
Win a book…
HERE'S a chance to win a copy of the Guinness UK Data Book (from Guinness Publishing, publishers of authoritative, popular reference books for all the family) if you correctly complete our Giant Crossword.
The senders of the first five correct puzzles opened next Friday will each be sent a copy of the book.
Send the completed puzzle attached to a piece of paper giving your name, address and telephone number to: Prize Crossword, Department C, Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB.
The closing date is Thursday, November 12.
Normal Echo competition rules apply.
Fireworks back with a bang
A FIREWORK show which fizzled out two years ago will burst back to life tomorrow night.
For Prescot Round Table is preparing to light up the sky at Rainhill Hospital.
The long-running spectacular was extinguished when the hospital began preparing for closure and the future of the site was uncertain.
Now, organisers are ready to announce the display's return with a £3,000 pyrotechnic presentation.
Organiser Ian Fitzhenry said: ‘We know a lot of people have missed it.
‘We picked a Saturday night so the children can stay up late to enjoy themselves.
‘It will be a show to remember with a Scots piper, a funfair, Punch and Judy show, refreshments and entertainments.
‘It will be a big welcome back to everyone who missed the display.’
Entertainment is due to start at 5.30pm, with the fireworks due from 8.30pm.
Admission is £2 for adults, £1.50 for children on the gate, or £1 in advance from local shops.
There will be further displays tomorrow night at Chester Zoo car park at 7pm and at Capenhurst Social Club Sports Centre, Ellesmere Port, at 6pm.
Watchdog warns of short time as Vauxhall announces price rises
CAR PLANT FEARS OF WORK CUT
By Gwyn Griffiths
WORKERS at the giant Vauxhall plant in Ellesmere Port could be on short-time working early next year, a motor industry watchdog has warned.
The stark warning from the London-based Automotive Research Unit comes in the week car workers at the Mersey plant celebrated the opening of the new £190m V6 engine plant.
And it follows the announcement that Vauxhall intend to increase prices on all ranges from between three and five per cent at the end of this month.
Raising prices in depressed markets both in Britain and in Europe, where 50% of the company's car sales are made, could have disastrous consequences, warned Arthur Way of the research unit.
Car sales this year have been hit hard by the recession, falling to £1.5m, when analysts had expected them to grow five per cent to £1.7m.
But the Ellesmere Port complex has been able to ride out the recession by exporting its highly-successful Astra/Opel range, particularly to the buoyant German economy.
Last month, sales increased by 30% compared to last year and workers are working flat out to meet impressive schedules of up to 48 cars per hour.
But Mr Way said it will not be long before Vauxhall workers are laid off for part of the week because of the company's dependency on its export market.
He said: ‘Vauxhall's German market is showing drastic signs of weakening.
The big question is whether it's export offensive can be maintained at such a high level.
‘I doubt it and there's a strong likelihood that the plant will go on short-time working like Ford in Halewood and Rover.’
Raising prices in the present climate would be difficult.
Vauxhall bosses admit that the threat of short-time working at Ellesmere Port still remains a possibility.
Spokesman Andrew Andersz said: ‘Our sales have been encouraging, but our exports are the only reason we are working at full capacity.
‘If we were to rely more on UK sales, then we'd be stockpiling cars and laying men off,’ he added.
Meals ‘n’ squeals
MY husband got PMT in a bad way this morning…
It started as baby Thomas was lowered into his high chair — and ended when a dollop of Ready Brek left his plastic spoon mid-grapple to go flying over both breakfast-time combatants.
Definitely a case of Pre-Meal Tension.
To eat or not to eat is our 11-month-old son's dilemma.
If he comes out against, then it's war.
First comes vigorous head-shaking to escape the spoon.
Then there's the gentle pushing it out of his mouth and curling of the food back over his bottom lip.
Next it's a violent spluttering action and, finally, much squirming to grab the spoon from you.
The ‘no vote’ usually happens when you're least expecting it and that's where the tension comes in.
His grandparents usually chip in at this point.
His grana cross between God and Mavis Riley (all-knowing, yet all-worrying) 'suggests' that if he had good-quality, home-made, vitamin-oozing broths all the time, there'd be no problem.
She gave me them all the time when I was little, she recalls.
(But I've also heard her telling people what a baddie I was, too).
His grandad usually advocates something very nourishing like choccie biccies dunked in condensed milk and swilled down by draught-flow Boddingtons!
You just can't win.
But sometimes a tin of Heinz's best seems to reach the parts my homemade mash, carrots and gravy fails to reach.
And for that I'm very thankful.
Yet they're one of the few products not advertised on TV, probably because their appearance is far from viewer-friendly.
They'll put cat food, car oil and sanitary towels on screen, but I can't recall ever seeing tinned baby food.
Nor can I see the day when Lovejoy sails off into the sunset down the Seine spooning Chicken & Sweetcorn Stew down a tot.
To be fair, a friend did once confess to liking them.
But then she also thinks Eldorado is full of gritty realism!
THERE are some great kiddies' books around for Christmas.
With titles like Roaring Billy, The BIG Crocodile Book, Marmaduke And The Scary Story and Bear In The Air they're brilliant, funny and colourful.
But most bizarre is one which arrived in the office this week.
It's called My First Batteries And Magnets Book.
I don't know which age group it's aimed at.
Suffice to say, it has ended up in my husband's D-I-Y box.
In a stew?
Lovejoy (Ian McShane)
A NEW management consultancy is going for broke.
We received notification of advice sessions for Merseyside businesses.
According to the release sent out on behalf of Liverpool-based Metel Corporate Training Services: ‘Most owners and managers of small firms are too close to their businesses to see the overall picture.
They're too BUST making their product…‘
We can only presume they mean too BUSY
Calls to pick a winner will boost aid for Mersey violence victims
GET VOTING FOR THE SCOUSE SUPERSTARS
AMERICANS have decided for themselves at the polls now it's your turn to vote, vote, vote for the winners of the 5th Whitbread Scouseology Awards.
Now the people of Merseyside can choose their top Scouse personalities in seven different categories.
For the next two weeks 21 vote lines will remain open so that Echo readers can have their say in the celebrities who will receive the prestigious prizes at a star-studded lunch next month.
The Awards, devised by Phil Young and held in conjunction with the Liverpool Echo, will also help raise money for a local cause.
A simple vote for your fab favourite will cost no more than 10p and profits from the phone-in poll will be donated to this year's designated charity The Joan Jonkers Victims of Violence Fund.
Lucky Draw winner David Owen of Waterloo and his partner will be rubbing shoulders with the stars and sharing anecdotes no doubt with the big names and personalities at the awards lunch taking place at the Blundellsands Hotel.
So who are the 21 top guns who have fired their way into our finalists league?
Now, in alphabetical order, are the ever-popular contenders:
COMEDY: Nominations included Jimmy Tarbuck and Stan Boardman, but 1992 sees a surprise contender nine year old Lois Waters, daughter of last year's comedy finalist Denny Waters.
KEN DODD:
FREDDIE STARR:
LOIS WATERS:
MUSIC: The Scouse pop scene produced a lot of bright new bands and artists, and this year readers nominated three names who have been flying the flag not only locally but nationally.
THE CHRISTIANS:
THE FARM:
SONIA:
RADIO: Billy Butler takes on the challenges offered by Radio City's Tony Snell and one man celebrating 25 wavelength years John Peel.
BILLY BUTLER:
JOHN PEEL:
TONY SNELL:
SPORT: For the first time soccer is not represented in a final although there were plenty of nominations including John Aldridge, Peter Beardsely and Steve McManamann.
CHRIS BOARDMAN:
PAUL HODKINSON:
CURTIS ROBB:
TELEVISION: Telly favourites from all walks of life were put forward from Jean Boht to Peter Sissons.
But these three were the biggest switch on with readers.
CRAIG CHARLES:
JOE McGANN:
PATRICIA ROUTLEDGE:
THEATRE: Bill Kenwright, Alan Bleasdale and John Doyle were just a few of the names who received rave reviews but here's the top nominated trio.
MARK McGANN:
WILLY RUSSELL:
ANDREW SCHOFIELD:
PERSONALITY OF THE YEAR: There was a wide range of personalities including: Ken Dodd, Chris Boardman, John Parrott, Sonia, Norman Thomas, Johnny Kennedy, Graeme Souness, Rita Hunter, Billy Butler and Alan Bleasdale, but here's the top three:
CILLA BLACK:
BRUCE GROBBELAAR:
MARK McGANN:
So get phoning and voice your vote for the Scouseology superstars.
Booze warning for wine run
DRIVERS taking part in the ‘Bye-bye to Beaujolais’ run this year have a drink problem, so to speak.
They may be in the heart of France's wine-growing region collecting the plonk by the caseload to bring back home, but with some serious driving involved, la boozing is out of the question we hear on the grapevine.
Generous French hosts have planned celebrations for the Merseyside teams taking part including TWO wine tasting tours, a reception and a pre-Challenge Party.
But those wanting to keep on the right side of the law will have to steer clear of the grape.
One of the 100 Merseysiders who will be going on the trip, whines: ‘We definitely won't be drinking before we have to drive back but I'm sure we'll have the odd glass or three when we make it back to Liverpool.’
And we will be raising our glasses to this Merseyside Challenge, which is raising money for the area's own Macmillan Nurse Appeal.
Of course, it isn't a race the winners will be those covering the shortest distance on the return trip from Beaune in France to Liverpool.
Vicky is reunited with her pet friend
By Jane Croft
A HANDICAPPED girl is set to be reunited with her rare pet dog which disappeared on Saturday, thanks to two Echo readers.
Vicky Hoey, 17, who has the mental age of a child and suffers from epilepsy, had been heartbroken and suffered two epileptic fits after her rare Tibetan spaniel Penny escaped on Saturday from the family home in Morecombe Street, Tuebrook in Liverpool.
Thrilled
Mum Pat Hoey, 48, said: ‘Vicky is thrilled to bits after the dog was found by two women who had seen the story in the Echo and looked for our house in Tuebrook.
‘In the excitement of getting Penny back I can't didn't get their names but would like to thank them for their kindness.’
‘Vicky is thrilled to bits that the dog has been found.
Penny means so much to her.
‘We took her back to her Cheshire boarding school earlier this week after the half-term break but she was heartbroken as she did not know what had happened to the dog.
‘It is the only thing in life that she is interested in.’
Mrs Hoey now plans to reunite the two when she visits Vicky at the weekend at school with Penny.
Reunited…
Vickey Hoey and Tibetan spaniel Penny
Legal loophole closed
THE House of Lords has blocked a legal loophole which cleared boxing promoter Frank Warren of a drink-driving charge.
The decision closes the doors on to hundreds of potential appeals by convicted drink-drivers.
But Mr Warren will not be affected by yesterday's ruling.
The prosecution did not seek a re-hearing of the case against him.
Mr Warren was arrested in Mayfair, London, in May 1990 after a roadside breath test proved positive.
He was cleared at Bow Street Magistrate Court in January last year because he was not asked whether he would prefer to give a urine or blood sample at Vine Street police station.
Under the 1988 Road Traffic Act, a driver can be required to give a blood or urine sample only if breath tests prove impossible or inappropriate.
In Mr Warren's case, the intoximeter at the police station did not function correctly and so samples were required.
Yesterday, Lord Bridge of Harwich allowed a prosecution appeal and ruled there was no question of the driver having an option as to what kind of sample he provided.
THE Football Supporters' Association is asking Liverpudlians their views on ‘seating the Kop’.
‘The plans have existed for three years and no-one has asked the supporters for their opinion,’ says a spokesman.
‘We have regular meetings with the directors of Liverpool FC and we will take the results of this survey to them.
For the first time they will know what the fans think.’
The FSA branch meet at the Bradford Hotel in Tithebarn Street the second Monday of every month at 8pm.
Take it as red…
TWO Liverpool trainees are investing in a secure future after excelling in their latest exams.
Katy Miles and Duncan Brooks achieved two of only five distinctions awarded from 618 UK candidates in the recent national Securities Institute Exams.
The two trainee investment managers at Charterhouse Tilney's Liverpool office in the Royal Liver Building now have only one more of three exams to pass before qualifying for their Securities Institute Diploma.
Managing director John Mitchell said: ‘I am glad all their hard work has been rewarded.’
Hard work rewarded…
Katy Miles and Duncan Brooks of Charterhouse Tilney
FISHING SHARKS POACH STOCKS
Angler policeman leads the crackdown to net thieves
By Caroline Storah
RIVAL anglers are poaching each other 's fishing stocks in a bid to catch the big one.
Fish traps have been discovered at two sites in St Helens.
It is believed anglers are catching fish at night and transferring them to their own waters.
Now Fishwatch the first scheme of its type in the country has been launched by angling policeman sergeant Tony Biggs.
Anglers from the St Helens and Newton-le-Willows areas are already signed up for the waterfront beat.
Reputation
Mr Biggs, an angler for 20 years, said: ‘Some anglers are a bit unscrupulous and are taking fish from one stretch and putting them in their own waters so they can make big catches.
‘And if a stretch of water gets a good reputation for big fish then it will attract more members and more membership fees.’
He reckons poachers can catch several hundred pounds of fish in one trap.
They then ferry them away to different waters in tanks in the back of transit vans.
Carp and bream are among the most sought-after and a special target for poachers.
One North-West carp fishery paid out £5,000 for three large fish and an average 20lb carp can fetch £700, or £35 for a ten pounder.
One local club has 7,000 members each paying £10 a year to fish its water.
Other clubs can attract membership fees of up to £250.
One trap was discovered on Mill Dam, St Helens, and another at Lennon Stretch on the canal at St Helens.
A fish rustler was recently before magistrates in Blackpool and put on probation.
Sgt Biggs is urging all anglers to keep an eye open for anything suspicious.
‘It has been going on for a while — but not on the scale it is happening now.
‘Big carp are few and far between.
People will pay a lot if they think the big ones are in a certain stretch of water.’
For more information, contact him on 051 709 6010 ext 4070.
Angry angler…
Tony launched Fishwatch
Turned out nice
GEORGE Formby is in the news again.
Tomorrow night's South Bank Show will profile the great man himself 30 years after his death.
And we can exclusively reveal that it's turned out nice again for The Liverpool George Formby Society who will have their first ever meeting on Friday, November 13th.
Says member Tom Bailey: ‘Our emphasis is on George; the ukelele and entertainment in general.’
The venue for the first George get together is the Broad Green Conservative Club from 7.30pm.
CHURCH IS HIT BY SLUMP
Collections drop for the first time in a decade
By Echo reporter
CHURCH collections have fallen for the first time for more than a decade, it emerged today.
A Church of England report showed the recession is hitting church income.
Latest figures showed parish church councils netted £237,571 in 1990 down £1,000 in real terms on 1989 and the first fall for 14 years.
The average churchgoer gave £2.50 a week, 30p more than in 1989.
The report said: ‘The deepening recession has no doubt hit people's pockets.
Training
‘But an average of just over £2.50 per week, the regular giving of church-goers, even in these difficult times, suggests potential for further improvement.’
The figures also showed more men and women are training for ordination.
There was a one per cent increase on the previous year in the number of people taking communion at Easter, but a slight fall in those doing so at Christmas.
Sunday congregations have fallen by around one per cent, with under-16s, in particular , deserting services.
There were 1.142 million regular Sunday worshippers in 1990, compared with 1.154 million in the previous year.
The report, based on figures from 13,000 parishes, included statistics relating to the clergy, lay workers, religious houses and schools.
England call up Anfield starlet Jamie
MIDFIELDER Jamie Redknapp today received some compensation for Liverpool's early exit from Europe when he was called up for England's Under-21 international against Turkey at Brisbane Road on November 17.
Redknapp, son of West Ham assistant boss Harry, has forced his way on to the England scene after establishing himself in the Liverpool side this season.
Redknapp became England's most expensive 17-year-old when Kenny Dalglish paid Bournemouth £350,000 for the Barton-on-Seaborn player in June 1990.
He made his Liverpool debut in a UEFA Cup tie against French club Auxerre a year ago.
‘That was a dream move for him and meant a big transformation for a lad of his age to suddenly be pitched in with the stars at Liverpool,’ said England Under-21 boss Lawrie McMenemy.
McMenemy added: ‘He handled it well and emerged with credit from Liverpool's European campaigns.
Jamie has a lot of skill and I'm pleased to give him this opportunity.’
Although they were near-neighbours in Hampshire, McMenemy first met Redknapp in Italy when he visited father Harry in hospital after a serious car crash during the 1990 World Cup finals.
Squad: Walker (Tottenham), Hoult (Leicester), Wright (Blackburn), Small (Aston Villa), Ehiogu (Aston Villa), Sutton (Norwich), Whelan (Ipswich), Awford (Portsmouth), Hendon (Tottenham), Froggatt (Aston Villa), Bart-Williams (Sheffield Wednesday), Impey (QPR), Redknapp (Liverpool), Clark (Newcastle), Parlour (Arsenal), Heaney (Arsenal), McManaman (Liverpool), Sheron (Man City), Barmby (Tottenham), Allen (QPR).
Stand-by: Watson (Barnsley), Minto (Charlton), Howey (Newcastle), Sutch (Norwich), Watson (Newcastle), Stewart (Bristol Rovers), Cole (Bristol City).
LIVERPOOL hope to have both Torben Piechnik and Mark Walters back in their side for the visit of Middlesbrough.
The Dane was ineligible for the midweek European Cup Winner's Cup defeat by Spartak Moscow, while Walters was a late casualty with a leg injury.
Major faces a tough test as his old school decides
THE GOVERNMENT'S flagship education policy of opting out faces a key test today at the Prime Minister's old school.
Parents are voting on the future of the 900-pupil comprehensive Rutlish School, south London.
The result is expected to be close.
Critics claim the grant maintained initiative is losing momentum with only 309 schools, out of 24,000, opting out in three years.
Rutlish would become the first school to break away from Labour-controlled Merton education authority.
Road blockade group set to lose fight
RESIDENTS who blockaded a road after a child was injured look to have lost a fight for traffic safety measures.
Highways chiefs say there is no evidence to justify action being taken in Lily Road, Litherland.
Proposals for a Play Street Order and Privileged Parking scheme have been recommended for rejection.
Sefton's Chief engineer Geoff Cowie said ‘There has been one recorded injury accident on the road in the last three years.
‘The flow of traffic, the majority of which travels within the speed limit and many less than 20mph, would indicate a low priority rating for this road.’
But Mr Cowie recommends the road be included in the next review of sites for traffic calming measures.
Brave Laura enjoys comforts of home
LITTLE Laura Davies was spending her first full day back at home in Britain today.
It is five months since she flew to America for a lifesaving bowel and liver transplant.
Four-year-old Laura bubbled with health yesterday as she arrived at the family home in Eccles, Greater Manchester to cheers from neighbours.
She was carried down the drive by her grandmother and rushed into the lounge to play with her toys, with a bonfire night cake waiting for her.
Dreaming
Earlier, with parents Fran and Les, she arrived at Heathrow Airport from Pittsburgh, before flying on to Manchester and then a drive home to Eccles.
Her exhausted mother said: ‘Pinch me, I must be dreaming.
‘Laura is well and we are back home.
This is what everything has been all about.’
On the flight home, Laura tucked into smoked salmon, fillet steak and raspberries — proof that her double transplant was a success.
Welcome back, boys
ONE of the most popular Liverpool 60s bands, The Dennisons, are to reform for a one-off tribute to their late bass guitarist, Terry ‘Tex’ Carson, who died of multiple sclerosis last year.
The memorial gig, at New Brighton's Floral Pavilion on November 15, is being organised by Merseycats, the musicians from the Cavern era who now operate as charity fund raisers.
A lot has happened since The Dennisons were chart contenders with songs like Walking the Dog.
Not least, their drummer Clive Hornby seen in our picture next to Tex, who is on the extreme left has gone on to be better known as Jack Sugden of TV's Emmerdale.
Former Cavern DJ Bob Wooler recalls: ‘The Dennisons were one of the groups who deserved to make it really big.
‘But somehow, they became rooted in the reserves, whereas we felt they should have zoomed into the premier league and joined the elite of beat.’
After the band split up, Tex became a railway clerk for British Rail at Garston freight depot.
Also in our flashback picture are Ray Scragg, Steve McLaren and (seated) lead vocalist Eddie Parry.
Taking part in the tribute night will be Billy Kinsley and Liverpool Express, Geoff Nugent's Undertakers, Karl Terry and The Cruisers, Clouds, The A Team, Colin Areety, Adam Fenton and Micky Finn.
The compere will be Billy Butler.
Debbie Raymond found dead
THE daughter of Liverpool-born sex entrepreneur Paul Raymond has been found dead at her luxury home.
Debbie Raymond who called herself the Princess of Porn was one of Britain's richest women and had been groomed to take over her father's £80m-a-year business.
Her death comes just one month after she split from her second husband by whom she had a daughter less than a year ago.
Cancer
The 36-year-old who was editor-in-chief of the top-shelf favourites, Men Only, Model Directory and Men's World is believed to have suffered a heart attack in her London apartment.
She had been suffering from cancer.
A colleague said: ‘We do not know exactly what happened.
No-one can believe she is dead.
She was so bubbly.’
She joined her father's business empire at the age of 19 after earlier working as a Bunny Girl for the rival Playboy Group.
Her grief-stricken father, who was born in Mossley Hill, was too upset to comment on tragedy last night.
Debbie Raymond…dead
Rangers avoid Milan
GLASGOW Rangers avoided star-packed Italians AC Milan when the European Cup semi final draw was made in Geneva today.
Instead of facing Ruud Gullit, Jean-Pierre Papin, Marco van Basten and company Rangers were drawn in a slighter weaker group along with French giants Marseilles, Bruges of Belgium and dark horses CSKA Moscow.
The other group features Milan, Swedish champions Gothenburg and Dutch giants PSV Eindhoven.
In both groups the teams play each other home and away on a league basis.
The group winners meet in the final on May 26.
UEFA Cup third round: Ajax Amsterdam (Hol) v Kaiserslautern (Ger), Borussia Dortmund (Ger) v Real Zaragoza (Spain), Paris St Germain (Fra) v Anderlecht (Bel), Standard Liege (Bel) v Auxerre (Fra); Dynamo Moscow (Russia) v Benfica (Por), AS Roma (Italy) v Galatasaray (Tur), Vitesse Arnhem (Hol) v Real Madrid (Spain), Sigma Olomouc (Czech) v Juventus (Italy).
Matches to be played home and away on November 25 and December 9 with first named teams at home in the first leg.
Cup Winners' Cup quarter-finals: Sparta Prague (Czech) v Parma (Italy), Olympiakos Piraeus (Gre) v Atletico Madrid (Spain), Steaua Bucharest (Rom) v Antwerp (Bel) or Admira Wacker (Aut), Feyenoord Rotterdam (Hol) v Spartak Moscow (Russia)
Matches to be played on March 3 and 17
European Cup semi-final series: Group A: Marseille (Fra); Club Brugge (Bel); CSKA Moscow (Russia); Glasgow Rangers (Sco).
Group B: IFK Gothenburg (Swe); Porto (Por); PSV Eindhoven (Hol); AC Milan (Italy).
Group A: Nov 25 Club Brugge v CSKA Moscow, Glasgow Rangers v Marseille, Dec 9 Marseille v Club Brugge, CSKA Moscow v Glasgow Rangers, Mar 3 CSKA Moscow v Marseille, Club Brugge v Glasgow Rangers, Mar 17 Marseille v CSKA Moscow, Glasgow Rangers v Club Brugge, Apr 7 CSKA Moscow v Club Brugge, Marseille v Glasgow Rangers, Apr 21 Club Brugge v Marseille, Glasgow Rangers v CSKA Moscow
Group winners meet in final on May 26.
UEFA Cup final (two legs): May 5 and 19.
Cup Winners' Cup final: May 12.
Eyes right, it's our Peter
EYES right!
And that goes for YOU and HIM.
For the guy on the right of our picture above keeping a popeye on Hawkeye is none other than our very own Mr Peter Postlethwaite, late of the Everyman Theatre.
Pete, who honed his career up at Hope Street in productions like John McGrath's The Bofers Gun, now finds himself in the thick of more flak in the new movie, The Last of the Mohicans, which opened last night.
In this case, our intrepid ex-Liverpool thespian plays Captain Beams, one of the English officers charged with keeping the troublesome Hawkeye (Daniel Day-Lewis) under wraps during the American frontier wars of the 1750s.
As it happens, the Brits end up with egg on the face, while the native Indians come up trumps.
Actor Russell Means, who plays Hawkeye's buddy Chingachgook (on left of picture), tells us: ‘This film has revolutionised the way Indians are played on screen.’
Mr Means, who in real life seized Wounded Knee on behalf of the American Indian Movement (AIM) in 1973, and held it under siege for 71 days, knows what he's talking about.
‘The Europeans marched through the woods.
We were part of the woods.
We were superior.’
Meanwhile, Mr Postlethwaite could not be located for a comment.
On this day
1814
Adolphe Sax, inventor of the saxophone, was born.
1869
Diamonds were discovered at Kimberley, South Africa.
1918
The Republic of Poland was proclaimed.
Ill wind
EUROPE'S former top coal shipping port at Blyth, Northumberland, is switching to windpower as the trade which was once its mainstay goes into decline.
M-way survey
ONE in four of all motorway accidents in some parts of the country is caused by driver-fatigue, according to a BBC2 Public Eye programme to be transmitted tonight.
Top pop show escapes axe
TOP of the Pops, TV's longest-running music show, is not being axed, the BBC insists.
Rumours have swept the television world that it may be dropped because of falling ratings.
But the Corporation said: ‘Its future is assured and these stories are absolute rubbish.’
Hanglider tragedy
A MAN was killed when his hanglider plunged into the sea after taking off from a 100ft cliff at Holywell Bay, near Newquay, north Cornwall.
The 30-year-old man, who has not been named, died despite the efforts of coastguards and ambulancemen, who tried to revive him after a failed rescue attempt by surfers.
Women priests vote hangs in balance
By Echo reporter
NEXT week's vote on the ordination of women priests could be very close a new poll shows.
The results are a blow for women who thought their long and hard-fought campaign would guarantee success.
A two-thirds majority is needed in each house of the General Synod when voting takes place next Wednesday.
A survey by BBC Radio Four's Today programme says it is still very uncertain that the majority will be reached in the House of Clergy and the House of Laity.
And it suggests the centre of the struggle lies in the House of Laity where the women's cause risks defeat.
Some 75% of bishops who replied to the survey said they would vote in favour of the ordination of women.
Favour
However 68% of the House of Clergy surveyed said they would vote in favour, and only 66% of members in the House of Laity were for.
The poll based on replies from 431 out of the 574 members of the General Synod was carried out during October.
A-team takes the worrying out of waiting
AS A clinical specialist at one of Merseyside's busiest hospitals, Janet Walters realises that most women will do anything to avoid an overnight stay.
It can cause disruption for their family and worry for those around.
And most people would rather sleep in their own bed, anyway.
Now Southport and Formby National Health Trust has started a new Ante-natal Assessment Centrewhich is good new for many local mums-to-be.
Says Janet: ‘Our new Ante-natal Assessment Centre allows us to monitor the mother and baby on an out-patient basis without having to admit them to hospital.
‘It means the women can come in then still go home to pick the kids up from school, or be with them in the evening.’
GPs and clinics usually refer women to the centre if there is a problem.
And very often that problem is raised blood pressure.
But whereas the mum-to-be would normally have found themselves admitted for a spell in hospital for monitoring, the centre can do it in a day.
Hospital
Janet adds: ‘Before the idea of the ‘drop-in’ centre, we would have been forced to admit the mother and she would have been in hospital for a few days.
‘Now we can keep an eye on her here knowing that usually the blood pressure will soon settle.’
Midwife Robin Rootes monitors the women from the moment they arrive.
She says: ‘I check the women's blood pressure on the hour for five hours.
And I do urine and blood tests and monitor the baby.’
The centre is informal — and if you're worried about something then you don't always need to make an appointment.
Robin adds: ‘A lot of women come into us, or call, if they haven't felt the baby move that day.
We can reassure them that everything is alright.
‘But, of course, if there are problems in any of the cases, we will admit them.’
Monitor: Midwife Robin Rootes'We can reassure them that everything is alright'
Closure plan a shock for mentally ill
ANGER OVER MOVE TO AXE CENTRE
By Ray Kelly
A SOCIAL services chief has slammed plans to close a mental illness centre.
Knowsley Council social services chairman Councillor Derek Long said proposals to axe the Halewood community mental health centre was more like cruelty in the community than care in the community.
He said the Kenton Road unit was vital to the 30 adults who have regularly relied on it for help since it began as a pilot project two years ago.
Vulnerable people were now threatened with struggling without the day care help they now rely on, he added.
Pilot project
Staff at the pilot project provide counselling, help with depression problems and everyday tasks facing clients, such as filling in poll tax forms.
Cllr Long said there were worries for centre users, as no alternative care scheme had yet been agreed by St Helen's and Knowsley Health Authority, which is winding up the project.
‘This is the only mental illness facility in the entire Halewood community,’ he said.
‘There are 25,000 people in Halewood and they have been short-changed since the psychiatric services were based in Rainhill Hospital and Whiston.
‘Since Rainhill was closed, what has happened to the money which was to be spent in communities such as Halewood?
‘This is a community-based facility which does great work for people who depend on it.
It should be kept going.’
The closure was announced in September and is due to come into effect in January.
St Helen's and Knowsley Health Authority was unable to comment.
Bluesman Raphael in a national spotlight
RAPHAEL Callaghan, singer and slide guitarist who has played on the Merseyside blues scene for more than 25 years, has had his original approach to blues music recognised by winning a national award.
His song Someone Else's Blues won the UK Contemporary Blues Song Of the Year award organised by the annual Great British Rhythm And Blues Festival at Colne.
Judges included the Chicago bluesman Eddie Burks and Dave Shannon, who produces the Radio Two blues show hosted by Paul Jones.
Raphael, who lives in Liverpool, is currently in a duo with bass player Christine Purnell.
Their upcoming concerts include a show with Mississippi blues legend Honeyboy Edwards at Padiham Town Hall, near Burnley, tonight and a concert in the International Guitar Festival of Great Britain at Birkenhead Town Hall on Thursday where they open for another US visitor, Catfish Keith, the new ‘king’ of the slide guitar.
Now some sweet talk…
Blowing her own…euphonium!
WENDY Picton can go one better than blowing her own trumpet.
She has a euphonium named after her.
The Merseyside musician acknowledged as one of today's finest brass players had the instrument specially made in her honour by the Miraphone Company.
And next Thursday she'll be heard playing it the length and breadth of the country.
For Wendy is the guest of Adrian Love on Classic FM, and will be performing an extremely varied programme between 11am and midday.
One of the pieces is a jazz concerto by the legendary trumpet player Harry James.
Another is a concerto written for her by the British composer Derek Bourgeois.
Future dates for Wendy include concerts in the Middle East and America.
Motor show boost for hospital funds
MOTORISTS will have the chance to see car manufacturers' latest models at a motor show being staged at Clatterbridge Hospital this weekend.
About 11 car dealers will have stands at the show, displaying a wide range of popular vehicles from Fords and Vauxhalls to Alfa Romeos and Mercedes.
The two-day event, arranged by Clatterbridge transport manager John Caulfield in the hospital grounds, will raise funds for hospital equipment.
The show will run from 10am to 4pm tomorrow and Sunday.
A message of love to liver op girl Kelly
By Barry Turnbnull
LIVER transplant girl Kelly Prosser is only a few smiles away from home, thanks to caring friends.
The five-year-old confined to a London hospital bed has been given a postal pick-me-up with get well cards from school pupils.
Dozens of youngsters at St George's RC Primary, Maghull, have sent cards with smiling faces to cheer her up.
Kelly has also been remembered in prayers at school assembly.
Head Edward Norris said: ‘Our thoughts and prayers are with Kelly and her family at this time.
‘The children decided it would be a nice gesture to send her cards to show everyone is thinking of her.’
Kelly, of Gainsborough Avenue, Maghull, was given a new liver in an operation at Kings College Hospital a week ago.
Medics are keeping her under intensive care but say she is making satisfactory progress.
All our love…teacher Pat Nightingale and pupils send their message to Kelly
Kelly Prosser
Royal snooker boost is on cue
By Jules Stenson
LIVERPOOOL sporting hero John Parrott has welcomed one of city's best-known companies into the world of snooker.
Royal Liver Assurance is sponsoring the £375,000 UK Championships which start at the Guild Hall in Preston a week today.
Parrott, the world number two, is hoping to retain the title he won last year.
He said he was delighted a Liverpool-based company were sponsoring the tournament.
Speaking on the roof the Royal Liver Building, Parrott recalled that the UK championship was the first he saw live as a boy.
He said: ‘I was 14 when my dad took me across from Liverpool.
‘To return there 12 years later and win the tournament will always mean something special to me.’
He said the top players love the UK Championships format because the longer matches usually mean the best player wins.
Champion feeling…
John Parrott at the Liver Building with Royal Liver Assurance marketing director John Plant
Transplant patients' winning volley
TRANSPLANT athletes will be putting their fitness to the test in a national tournament on Merseyside tomorrow.
Teams from all over the country who had life-saving heart and heart-lung transplants will compete in the National Transplant Volleyball Tournament at Bootle Sports Centre.
Among them will be three Warrington men who all had transplants at Wythenshawe Hospital in Manchester.
Wythenshawe will be fielding two teams of six players including Tom Clare, Ernie King and John Starkey, all from Warrington and Neil Macdonald from Chester.
The tournament starts at 10am.
Convention boost for career hopes
HUNDREDS of local youngsters attended a careers convention held at Hugh Baird college, in Bootle.
The Merseyside Enterprise Council and representatives from several local and national companies were on hand to provide information abour training schemes and career prospects.
Students from Croxteth Community Comprehensive are pictured chatting about training courses with the TEC's Tony Griffiths, Anne Marie Wareing and Stella Curran.
New eye op could mean an end to glasses
BRITISH eye surgeons are to carry out a pioneering implant operation which could mean short-sighted people throwing away their glasses.
It involves making a small incision in the cornea and ‘threading’ a clear plastic ring through the deeper tissue layers.
The tiny ring ‘flattens’ the curvature of the cornea, correcting vision for people with short-sightedness.
A variety of ring thicknesses may ultimately assist in meeting patients' differing requirements the thicker the ring, the greater the reshaping of the cornea.
The ring is virtually invisible around the central cornea which is the critical area for clear vision.
Volunteer
A team of Bristol University surgeons is soon to carry out the ring trials at Bristol Eye Hospital with volunteer patients.
But patients from all over the country are to be considered for the trials, mostly after referral from their GP or from other eye hospitals.
The planned operations follow clinical trials in America.
Bristol leads a multi-centre European programme investigating the ring procedure.
The operation takes around 15 minutes under general anaesthetic.
LETTERS
Bunkered by a spot of tee-time trouble!
Scots missed!
I HAVE just returned home after my first visit to Glasgow.
Its city centre has many more pedestrian areas than Liverpool yet the great difference is that I was not surrounded by litter and street traders' stalls unlike Liverpool (or should I say Litterpool).
How nice it was to be able to use all of the pedestrian walkways and see the beauty of them just as the planners visualised.
We have four main areas all spoiled by litter and stalls.
I wonder how many visitors to Liverpool can say the same of us as I can say of Glasgow?
Well done that city — Labour controlled I believe.
Can we please have our walking space back and not be restricted to ‘pavement space’ imposed on us by the stalls?
Black outlook is making us see red
I WRITE with reference to the two letters from concerned residents of Chelwood Avenue, Childwall, who complain about their street lights being too bright, too effective and thus keeping them awake at night.
How very lucky they are that, as poll tax payers, they do have lights.
We residents and poll tax payers of Everton have to endure little or no street lighting at all.
Over the past six or seven years we have been victims of the city council's urban regeneration strategy.
We have, however, worked very closely with council officers, architects, planners etc, on the development of Everton Park.
A monthly forum was set up to deal with all issues appertaining to Everton Park and each time, on top of the agenda, was the inadequate lighting within the park and surrounding neighbourhoods.
Unfortunately no council officers have attended these forums for several months.
Can we assume they got lost in the dark on their way?
The Echo recently featured an article about a young man who was mugged and robbed at the entrance to Everton Park on Netherfield Road.
This is just one of the many incidents which local residents have warned about all this time.
We only wish our insomnia was due to our street lights being too bright or, at the very least, being in existence rather than concern about our families, friends and neighbours walking through our dark paths and streets.
Starving children
Audrey Hepburn with a hungry Somalian child
HAVING JUST read the article by Audrey Hepburn on the starving children in Somalia (they need £10m just until Christmas), wouldn't it be a wonderful gesture to donate the proceeds from the Children in Need Appeal to this cause just for this year?
No child in this country is in such desperate need of help as those in Somalia.
Brian bonus
I BUY THE Echo every Wednesday for one reason only: Brian Reade.
Therefore I'm sure you can imagine the upset felt by this 69-year-old lady to see that young man missing from this week's issue.
I'm afraid that unless Mr Reade's smiling face and witty wisdom is not restored forthwith, you will lose this Echo reader and most of her friends in the Wallasey Bridge Club.
We hope this picture of Brian will make up for your disappointment.
I COULDN'T agree more with the recent letter regarding the menace of people playing golf in parks and open spaces.
I have lived adjacent to Bootle Grammar School in Netherton for 25 years and have been plagued with these golfers for most of that time.
Lately it has got completely out of hand.
It is really bad at the weekends.
I have windows broken at regular intervals and suffer a lot of abuse and foul language when I ask them to move.
I think a lot of these golfers are probably too mean to pay the fees at the golf course which is only 200 yards away.
I READ the Echo reply to the letter regarding golfing practice in public places.
There are a few inconsiderate people whose golfing practice may be a nuisance.
I suppose your generalisation of ‘poor’ golfers likely to hit the ball anywhere does include me.
But I, and many others like me, take great care not to cause any danger to others or cause damage to any ground, turf or shrubbery etc.
Trading places
HAVING JUST read Ian Hargraves' article on the city centre stallholders, I don't believe London Road by itself is the answer.
There are already stallholders in London Road, opposite T.J. Hughes.
I agree that we have to stop turning Church Street, Lord Street, Clayton Square and Williamson Square into markets.
Some years ago when St John's Market was being restored after a fire, the market traders were given temporary sites underneath St George's car park on the large paved area near the Lime Street underpass.
Surely this would be the ideal place to locate these stall holders — still in the town centre but not causing obstructions.
Helping hand
I WISH to thank the very kind gentleman who gave me money when my purse was stolen from my handbag while I was shopping at Dunn's store, St John's Precinct.
I will now donate the money to charity.
His kindness was much appreciated.
J.H., Liverpool 14.
Going into debt
YOUR EDITORIAL writers need reminding that our campaign of non-payment of the poll tax led to its abolition and substantially contributed to bringing down Mrs Thatcher.
What is clear is that those who are being dragged through the courts cannot afford to pay.
No wonder national reports indicate many of the poorest sections are going into debt to pay for food and clothing.
All their other income is taken away in repaying debts such as the poll tax.
If this official Labour council gave a clear commitment to write off the debts of those on benefit and income support, then those who could afford to pay would settle their debts.
, Secretary, Merseyside Anti Poll Tax Federation.
Smokers' poison
I ENDORSE everything said by Mrs J. Banner of Liverpool 13 (Echo, November 2nd) regarding smoking on buses.
But I think conductors would not be the answer because what happens when the driver is smoking as has happened to me three times in three weeks.
I have complained to Merseybus and the answer is: Nothing we can do.
I have a heart problem.
I don't object to people smoking in the privacy of their own homes but I am a non-smoker.
I have never smoked and I object to being poisoned by other people's indulgence.
Holiday hauntings
GET READY for the holiday blitz.
It will probably start on Boxing Day when we are right in the middle of winter.
The glossy brochures will pour through the letter box, the TV screen will be inundated with sunshine offers.
Isn't it all a little too much?
MOTHER knows best for men when it comes to knotting a tie, according to a survey.
Most men have maternal teaching to thank for showing them how to do it, says the Guild of British Tie Makers.
Fewer than a quarter of 500 men questioned in the survey knew how to do up a bow tie and under half knew the name of the knot in their tie on the day they were interviewed.
The guild found Mr Average had up to 30 ties in his wardrobe, but wore just four favourites.
BERT WAREING has been appointed to lead a 1.75m fund-raising campaign.
He is to spearhead a bid to raise cash for a new hospice, hospital and day centre in Hindley, near Wigan.
Mr Wareing, who recently retired as a chief executive of Speke Training and Education Centre, was Merseyside Citizen of the Year in 1989/90.
Mr Wareing, who lives in Green Acre Drive, Bromborough, Wirral, is also the liaison officer for the Duke of Edinburgh scheme.
WIRRAL rail passengers are facing up to a Sunday on the buses this weekend.
Maintenance work means coach links for all stations between Hamilton Square and New Brighton and a shuttle bus between Birkenhead North and Hamilton Square for West Kirby passengers.
Trains under the river will be subject to a revised service.
Regional Railways planner Andrew Pennington said: ‘This work must be carried out.’
HEADACHES during or after sex are still a mystery after more than 2,000 years because of a lack of study, researchers said today.
They say the pattern of pain that happens during or after intercourse cannot be predicted with any accuracy by doctors.
This was despite the condition being known for more than 2,000 years, says a British Medical Journal report.
Formal research into the headaches began in 1970 and, until now, no-one has followed up patients for long enough to determine the natural course of the condition.
A study published today describes 26 patients — 19 of them men — who were monitored for up to 14 years.
Migraine
It was discovered that the headache is unpredictable.
Some patients may have only one episode of headache while others have several but in some cases these are separated by up to 10 years.
It seems people who suffer from migraine and who have had one attack of headache during or after sex are at risk of future attacks.
Running across the barriers
THE New York marathon turned out to be exactly what they say it is the greatest sporting spectacle in the world.
Runners from 100 different countries, speaking 40 different languages, each with their own story to tell of what achieving the marathon distance meant to them.
For this one day a year, the usually gridlocked streets of New York were closed to traffic and lined with nearly three million people who proved that when the craziness and complexity is forgotten for 24 hours, they can be among the most decent and welcoming supporters of the human spirit they were witnessing and cheering in the runners thronging their streets.
For part of the way we linked arms with Fred Lebow who thought up the race 23 years ago and who now has brain cancer and wanted to run it.
Holding hands with him was also Grete Waitz, a running legend who has won the race nine times.
When my injured back threatened to give up the ghost completely after 17 steady miles, I couldn't have bought more encouragement and warmth from the people of Harlem and the Bronx who spotted the slogan on my T-shirt and never stopped yelling ‘All the way, Linda, looking good Liverpool maternity hospitals, you can do it, go…‘
I've never seen the sort of breathtaking squalor I witnessed there but give them a day when their neighbourhood is shown to be worth the world running through it, gratefully accepting water and candy from them at the roadside, and it's amazing the way mutual mistrust can disappear.
Pushers
At one end of Fifth Avenue, people were living in rat-infested hovels in conditions only drug pushers want.
By the time I'd run to the other end of the same streets, I was passing Jackie Onassis’ front door and unbelievable opulence.
By the time they'd put a medal round my neck in Central Park and we could visualise the noughts on the cheque to present to Oxford Street, Mill Road and Fazakerley Hospital's Newborn Appeal, 25,000 runners had learned a lot more about how painful running 26 miles can be.
But it will never be as insufferable as political, social and cultural ignorance.
Trident sub goes down for the first time
HMS VANGUARD, the UK's first Trident submarine, completed her maiden sea dive yesterday off the Isle of Arran, said a Royal Navy spokeswoman.
Vanguard arrived at the Clyde submarine base 11 days ago and left her depot at Faslane today for further sea trials with Commander David Russell at the helm and a full crew.
Trials are expected to continue for three months.
Carol cares
CAROL Jones has been appointed Carers' Support Officer (Mental Health) with the Disablement Resource Unit (MCVS), Self-Help Support Team.
Based with Knowsley Social Services in Kirkby, Carol's role is to provide information, advice and support to those caring for a relative or friend with a mental health problems in the Knowlsey area.
Carol will also liaise with statutory and voluntary agencies/groups in the borough to promote as broad a range of services as possible.
She can be contacted at 1-3 Norbury Close, West Vale, Kirkby, Merseyside L32 0US (tel: 051-443 4274), or DRU, MCVS, Mount Vernon Green, Hall Lane, Liverpool L7 8TF (tel: 051-709 0990 ext 242).
MOTOR Neurone Disease: The Merseyside group meet Thursday, 8pm, at Walton Hospital Outpatients Dept.
Guest speaker: Dr Yung, consultant neurologist at Walton Hospital.
Details: Carmen Kendrick 709 0990
POSTBAG
Our fight to save this helpful centre
DEAR Tom: Regarding Knowsley Social Services opening the new Crossroads Care Unit for a couple of hours a day.
I must inform you that the same department are about to close the only respite centre (Astley House in Huyton) for children and young adults with special needs in the borough, so they can introduce what they call foster caring.
We as parents strongly object and will fight to keep this centre open.
We look forward to at least one week's break, so we can wind down.
As you know it is a 24 hours job looking after a child/young adult with special needs.
Astley House has a very good working relationship with parents, children and young adults.
They know the history and needs of every young child/young adult that attend the centre, and staff are very caring.
Most important we as parents can leave our children/young adults in confidence at Astley House.
Concerned Parent
School's new garden gets green light
CHILDREN have helped create a green oasis in the heart of an industrial pollution blackspot.
A nature garden has sprung up at a Bootle school where youngsters once had to play out in gas masks because of coaldust clouds.
The site at St Joan of Arc RC School has been recognised with a top environment award.
Landscaping of part of the playground includes a wild flower meadow area, sand dunes with coastal plants, a herb garden and trees.
The £10,000 scheme has lifted spirits at the school which is close to imported coal mountains at Gladstone Dock.
Other improvement measures include a playing field and recycled and painted border railings.
Head Steve Sanderson said: ‘We have had severe environmental problems and as a result have a lot of asthmatic children.
‘The nature garden has given everyone a lift and will be somewhere that the children can enjoy.’
The school has also been awarded the Queens Bronze Certificate for the Environment.
Digging for victory…
David Murphy, 7, Samantha Heron, 8, Helen Mushrow, 7, Nicola McKenna, 7, and head teacher Steven Sanderson work on the new garden
Just a bunch of crazies
ROSS PEROT'S wife breathed a huge sigh of relief.
‘I'm sure glad he ain't gonna be President,’ she said.
‘I didn't want to move to a smaller home, And in such a bad neighbourhood too.’
But while Mr Perot had the ear of the nation, to add to his own outstanding pair, he did spout a remarkable number of home truths.
‘We're all just a bunch of crazies,’ being one of them.
Leaving aside Washington, which does hide a truly dreadful crime and poverty problem beneath its glittering facade, the craziest and most complicated example of American life is undoubtedly New York.
With 64,000 people crammed into every square mile, the most utterly bizarre happenings raise barely a shrug of the shoulders.
A few days ago a woman woke up just as she was about to be stuffed with the previous day's New York Post and varnished with embalming fluid by an undertaker.
Doctors had been unable to find a pulse as they hurried to their next Medicash-insured mugging victim.
The ‘dead’ woman was merely hypothermic, it turned out.
‘Ah just accept what they send me,’ said the undertaker, asked why he didn't spot anything odd.
‘Anyway ah wasn't lookin' at the corpse, ah was watching TV.
Ah had 50 bucks on Rodrigo de Triano…‘
Next day a joyrider who drove his dad's car 31 blocks for an hour and a half was locked up in a psychiatric hospital.
He's FIVE-YEARS-OLD and can't even draw a car.
On radio, in final few days of the campaign to elect America's 42nd President, they still found time to talk to Stephen Kaplin, a vampire and head of the oldest vampire institute in the world.
‘Ninety-nine percent of vampires are real nice people,’ he said, ‘But we want to crack down on phoney vampires who are getting us a bad name.’
Wanda from New Jersey phoned in to say her need for the taste of blood was a clinical necessity without which the withdrawal symptoms were ‘just awful, ya wouldn’ wanna go through it Jerry,’she told her host.
Wanda signed off after illuminating Jerry and his listeners with the fact, backed up by Mr Kaplin, that you can tell your neighbours is a werewolf if their urine is purple…
On Channel 2, the unctuous host of the Gerry Springer chat show had apparently taken a serious oil overdose as he presided over a freak show of truly terrible cases of giantism and dwarfism by telling his goggle-eyed studio viewers they were each of them there ‘so that next time we may understand and empathise when we meet a woman 7ft 10ins tall.’
‘Jeez, how on earth d'ya take a bath and how is your love life’ were presumably part of the empathy process from Gerry and his audience almost comatose with voyeurism and in need of splints for drop-jaw.
They and Gerry were almost bulimic with curiosity when a 2ft 11ins girl who'd had herself stretched to 5ft came on.
Idly flicking over, there were riots outside a Brooklyn court as a black youth was acquitted of the murder in New York of an Hassidic Jew.
This was despite the fact he had confessed, was found with a knife and several dollars all stained in the victim's blood.
Oh, and the victim, Yankel Rosenbaum, a lawyer, had identified him as the killer before he died.
All proof, American lawyers were saying this week, that the judicial system in Brooklyn is ‘as crooked and suspect as the one in Simi Valley, Los Angeles.’
On another New York TV chat show, meanwhile, they were discussing the murders, by snipers over the last few months, of children, one as young as three, on their way to elementary schools.
Children in the studio said guns were on open sale in state schools.
Many of them bought them and would not walk to school in the mornings without one in their Bart Simpson satchels.
No wonder Americans have decided that it's time for an end to non-interventionalist government.
Time for a boy from Hope.
Bid to tackle noise blight of jets
MORE use of flight simulators by the Ministry of Defence could cut low-level flights by jets which cause disturbance and damage the environment, a report said today.
The ministry spends £55m on low-flying training because it does not have realistic simulators, the National Audit Office said.
The report urged the MoD to take advantage of a new Harrier GR5 simulator to be introduced later this year.
But the Comptroller and Auditor General Sir John Bourn also pointed out that current simulators for the Tornado GR1 the main low-flying aircraft are of limited value because they have no visual display.
Plans
His report noted the benefits of the machines for enhancing safety and costing just a tenth of ‘live’ training, saving millions of pounds.
Low-flying will be reduced by a third over the next three years anyway with plans to cut some operational squadrons and introduce the propeller turbine aircraft for training.
The MoD plans to spend £700m on simulators over the next 10 years, but the report urged them to study the effectiveness of simulator training, and said some are old and outdated.
Another simulator, costing £25m, is languishing in storage at a rate of £95,000 a month, because of delays in preparing its new site.
Hospital shopping mall set to open
BOSSES at Merseyside's biggest hospital are proudly preparing to unveil their controversial new shopping mall next week.
The row of six shops have been created as part of the £350,000 revamp to Wirral Hospital's main entrance at Arrowe Park.
And hospital chiefs are confident the shops will turn in healthy profits that will be used to improve patient care.
But health union leaders remain sceptical, and fear services could be hit if the mall fails to take off.
Scanner
The mall has six shops, a small supermarket to be run by the hospital's League of Friends, a newsagents, florists, gift shop, records and CDs shop, and cafeteria, all run by external contractors.
The estimated £100,000 profits a year will be an added bonus and will go towards the running costs of the hospital's first whole body scanner, due to arrive early next year.
The shops will start trading on Monday and will be open from 8am to 7pm.
JUST SWINGING…that was the verdict of these youngsters when a £20,0000 playground opened in Toxteth.
The Parents' Support Group at Grove Park Day Nursery managed to raise funds for the project in just six months.
Local author and health activist Protasia Torkington is pictured declaring the fun well and truly under way.
Stars in Reds return
Piechnik and Walters set to roar back
LIVERPOOL hope to have both Torben Piechnik and Mark Walters back in their side to face Middlesbrough at Anfield tomorrow, as they seek to regain momentum in the League after the midweek defeat in Europe.
Manager Graeme Souness said today that Piechnik will definitely play and that he is hopeful Walters will also return, after missing the Moscow Spartak game.
‘It was a hell of a blow losing Mark on the morning of the match,’ he explained.
‘He was OK until after training, when he came in and said he was feeling his kicking muscle.
‘We were relying on him and Steve McManaman to attack them down the flanks, and when Mark dropped out it reduced our attacking options.’
Souness added that he accepted Liverpool had lost to a better team, but still wondered how the Russians would have reacted had the Reds accepted one of their early half chances.
‘They are a very good side, and remind me of our old Liverpool team in that they could sit back and hit you on the break,’ he said.
‘They were very skilful technically and we lacked experience against that kind of thing.
‘We know now that we really lost the tie in Moscow, when we made the mistake of trying to chase the game instead of playing it tight.’
Looking ahead, Souness said he was confident his side can bounce back in the League after the reverse at Tottenham.
‘We played some pretty football there but lost,’ he pointed out.
‘Before that we were on a bit of a roll.
‘Now it's a matter of rolling up our sleeves and getting back to basics.
Our spirit is fine and I am confident we can soon improve our position.’
Middlesbrough bring back Robbie Mustoe for Tommy Wright, but are otherwise unchanged, fielding most of the players who helped them win promotion last season.
There will be a collection inside the turnstiles at Anfield in aid of the lung cancer research unit.
Join the Football Echo's top line-up
IT'S an action-packed day on the Mersey Soccer beat tomorrow and the Football Echo will be bringing you first reports of how our teams fared.
Everton travel to Nottingham Forest for a vital relegation battle, Liverpool aim to bounce back from their European exit at home to Middlesbrough while Tarnmere have an attractive top of the table clash at Leicester.
PLUS
YOU have your say in the best letters pages around.
This week Football Echo readers tackle Smithy on subjects ranging from the crisis at Goodison, the Euro ban on Graeme Souness and how football can win back the fans.
PLUS
The top columnists in football bring you their views with Andy King, Denis Law and John Aldridge.
PLUS
ALL the regular columns from the worlds of non-League soccer, amateur football, Rugby League and boxing that keep the Football Echo at the top of the League.
Holly's big test
PROMOTER Mickey Duff last night signed up an experienced Mexican, Jesus Rojas, to box Andy Holligan in the top-liner at Everton Park Sports Centre next Thursday, writes Syd Dye.
Holligan, Liverpool's British and Commonwealth light-welter champion, has won all his 18 contests, but has only half the experience of Rojas, who has lost 10 of his 39 bouts.
The Mexican knocked out Ismael Diaz in two rounds on his last ring appearance in July.
Other Liverpool fighters on the bill are light-welters Carl Wright and Dave Maj, super-feather Floyd Churchill and lightweight Joey Moffatt.
Wright, unbeaten in nine paid bouts, faces former Central Area champion Kevin Spratt (Bradford); Maj looks for revenge over Mark Verikios (Swansea); Moffatt tackles Jimmy Vincent (Birmingham) and Churchill meets a selected opponent.
Classic film from the Deep South
SIDNEY POITIER and Rod Steiger star in In The Heat of the Night (BBC2, 10.25pm), a powerful five Oscar-winning story with a subplot of racism in a small southern town.
Poitier plays a homicide cop from a big city who inadvertently finds himself caught up in a murder investigation in the town where he is staying.
Yet Steiger, the bigotted southern sheriff, is at first loathe to enlist his help and the two form a somewhat uneasy alliance.
King's war cry
TRANMERE travel to Leicester tomorrow for an early test of their promotion credentials, with boss John King demanding ‘more ruthlessness’ from his players.
‘It's all very well people telling us we are a really attractive side to watch,’ he said, ‘but we have been conceding the odd soft goal and that's got to stop.
We need to defend as a unit.
‘It's ironic that they beat us twice last season playing with a flat back four while we played a sweeper.
Now they play with five at the back and we have the two wingers.’
Leicester lie sixth, with Tranmere in fourth.
Manchester United skipper Bryan Robson starts a Premier League game for the first time this season at Aston Villa tomorrow.
Lee Sharpe is also back in a 15-man squad.
Shooting boots!
Why Aldo needs to ‘change’
By David Prentice
JOHN ALDRIDGE is hoping his Echo-sponsored shooting boots are falling off his feet by the end of the season.
For that will mean the Tranmere marksman has enjoyed a goal-laden campaign.
Aldo is highly superstitious about his football boots and if a new pair hasn't yielded a goal after only three or four games they're consigned straight to the dustbin.
‘It's amazing how often it works,’ he said.
‘The first time I felt I needed a change this season was when I played against Latvia for the Republic of Ireland.
I scored a hat-trick.’
Aldo's not alone in his boot superstition.
Gary Lineker is another top-class striker who clings keenly onto boots he's enjoying a scoring spell with.
When Everton's title aspirations exploded at Oxford in 1986 he blamed two misses on a new pair of boots, switching back to his worn favourites and slamming a hat-trick past Southampton!
Aldridge is perfectly happy with his present footwear they've shot six goals in seven games and will be hoping to continue the run at Leicester City tomorrow.
Full-back Steve Mungall wants to join him on the score-sheet after bookmakers Stanley's gave special odds on his scoring feats.
Hat-trick!
After a consistent 14 goals in 14 seasons for Tranmere, Mungall broke the mould this term with his second goal of the campaign against Birmingham.
That prompted Stanley's to offer 14-1 odds on him scoring in any named game, 100-1 to score twice and 300-1 for a hat-trick!
But Mungall will be content with a decent result tomorrow.
‘We owe Leicester one from last season,’ he said.
‘They beat us at Filbert Street with a goal that shouldn't have stood.’
Leicester lie sixth in the First Division after a midweek defeat at Charlton and may make a change of captaincy.
Skipper Steve Walsh was sent off, and manager Brian Little is contemplating a change of armband after that.
Midfielder, Steve Thompson, is likely to miss his second successive game, while his replacement, Simon Grayson, and striker Phil Gee have minor knocks but should recover.
TRANMERE ROVERS:(probable) Nixon, Higgins, Brannan, Irons, Mungall, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Malkin, McNab, Nevin.
Subs from Cooper, Hughes, Martindale, Muir, McGreal.
LEICESTER CITY:(from) Poole, Mills, Platnauer, Smith, Walsh, Hill, Oldfield, Grayson, Davison, Lowe, Gee, Ormondroyd, Gordon, Joachim.
Tranmere Rovers reached the second round proper of the FA Youth Cup with a 2-1 win over Blackpool at Bloomfield Road with goals from Mick Edwards and Rob Williams.
John Aldridge…with shooting boots
They know because they asked
SECRETS, boredom, relationships, obsessions and looks.
Crushes, cosmetic surgery and collectors.
Apparently topics like these are just what the teenage television-viewing public want.
Who says so?
The team behind the award-winning Ipso Facto series.
Now the programme that turns the cameras on teenagers and let's them do the talking and the interviews has packed its newest series with just the subjects their viewers want.
The fourth series (starting on Wednesday, BBC1, 4.35pm) covers plenty of ground quizzing people about relationships, models about their looks and one teenager with an obsession that led him to wash his hands until they bled.
But how do the team know that this is what their viewers want to see?
They asked!
In an unusual move, the production team went out and about asking questions before they committed anything to camera.
They chose the teenagers and topics after group discussions at 26 schools in northern England, firstly speaking to children from the programme's target age-range (the 11-13s) to find out what interested them then they met teenagers from the presenters' target age range (1416) to find out more ideas for topics and to choose the reporters.
For this latest run there are 10 young reporters, sometimes investigating in pairs, which allows for some of the ideas examined to be dramatised.
The youngest person on air is thirteen-year-old Kate Johnstone, who so impressed the team with her views on relationships that she was asked to star in front of the cameras.
Series producer Madeline Wilstshire explains: ‘We have more drama in this series but the reporters are not actors, they're just ordinary teenagers who are interested enough in a subject to want to make a television programme about it.’
Simon Holt (left) and Howard Smith investigate for Ipso Facto 
Be a Mersey mascot
CALLING all Everton and Liverpool youngsters aged 14 and under.
How would you like to lead out the Merseyside Select XI at Goodison Park a week tomorrow when they take on the pride of Manchester in Graeme Sharp's testimonial game?
Today the Echo offers you the chance to become one of the big match mascots.
The occasion will be a star-studded affair, a day when red joins with blue to take on the pride of Manchester.
All you have to do is answer two simple questions linked with Merseyside derbies.
The first appears tonight and the second tomorrow.
When you have solved BOTH, write the answers on a postcard or the back of a sealed down envelope, remembering to include your name and address and your age.
Question A is: What was the score in the all-Merseyside Milk Cup Final replay at Maine Road in 1984?
Question B will appear in tomorrow's Echo and Football Echo.
Put both answers on the same postcard and send it to: Sharp answer, Liverpool Echo Sports Desk, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, L69 3EB.
Normal Echo competition rules apply.
To help make it a big Merseyside day, Sharp has reduced prices for adults from £7 to £5 with youngsters at just £2, all pay-at-the-gate.
For the price of a matchday programme (£1), fans will receive a free testimonial brochure worth £2.
Graeme Sharp…big day
Reds tickets
LIVERPOOL have some stand tickets (£13) for their League match at Queens Park Rangers on Monday, November 23 (7.45pm).
These will be available to season tickets holders on production of spare voucher No.37 from tomorrow until next Tuesday.
Any remaining will go on general sale on November 11.
Admission to the terraces (£8) is by payment at the turnstiles.
Over here over there opens his win account
OVER HERE OVER THERE, a real streetfighter of a horse, opened his account under National Hunt Rules in characteristic style at Uttoxeter yesterday.
Having slugged it out with Rufus in the Bowmer & Kirkland Novices' Chase, the lead swapping several times, he survived a blunder at the second last to power his way to a three and a half length victory.
‘He lives in a field as he is allergic to everything like straw and paper in the stables,’ explained owner-trainer John Upson.
‘There is a shelter for him, but he never uses it.
Sometimes when we go in the field, his mane and tail are frozen solid.
He's as hard as nails.’
Overhereoverthere, well ridden by Robbie Supple, has been with Upson for six years, but his only previous successes were between the flags in Ireland.
A relation of one of that country's most freakish talents, Arkle, showed ability to match his pedigree when beating Milford Quay in the Arlington Series Qualifier.
Cherrykino, carrying the colours of Anne Duchess of Westminster, is a highly progressive chaser and turned over odds-on Milford Quay when running on gamely from the last to prevail by a length.
Winning trainer Tim Forster said: ‘I am very pleased with Cherrykino, this is the first time he has really had to race over fences.
‘The Duchess bred him, and he is the last one with three spots of Arkle's blood in his veins.’
As stylish as ever despite his 51 years, Jeff King took charge with David Nicholson's Dreamers Delight three furlongs out in the ‘Golden Oldies’ charity challenge.
‘It's nice to ride a winner for David, as he gave me plenty during my career,’ said King.
Nicholson himself has clearly not considered a return to the saddle, remarking: ‘There is not enough brandy in France to get me up again.’
Nigel Twiston-Davies, on target with Captain Dibble at Wincanton, continued his tremendous season when Gaelstrom romped home in the Clive Lewis Classic Novices' Hurdle.
Sankey set for big-time finale
By David Jones
SARA Sankey has earmarked the next Commonwealth Games in Canada as her swansong in international badminton.
The England girl, who competed in the Barcelona Olympics with Gill Gowers, has now teamed up with Julie Bradbury.
Sara from Southport will compete with her new partner in the Lancashire Open later this month and hopes their displays will lead to 1994 Games selection.
The previous tournament in New Zealand was one of the major highlights in a 60-cap career.
She said:’ I won two golds in the team and doubles event and a silver in the mixed.
‘I would like to play through to the Canada tournament then call it a day, hopefully going out in a blaze of glory.’
Sara admitted she had not played as well as expected in Spain where she and Gowers were second round casualties.
But she was surprised Gowers had renewed her partnership with Gill Clark, another former Sankey partner.
And she did not hide her feelings over the split with Gowersor her previous partner.
‘They have a lot of ability and are good players, but they need some tact.
‘They may feel they will be the number ones, but I am very pleased with my new partner.
It will be a grudge match when we meet, and probably it will be the Nationals.’
Liverpool League players have made a fine start.
Liz Clark won the singles in the Lancashire Restricted championships, Karen Salt was a losing semi-finalist and Mike Kellett reached the quarter-finals.
And they have led the Liverpool League's first team to victories over Blackburn (9-2) and Southport II (6-5) in the Lancashire League.
Liverpool seconds started with wins over Warrington II and Lancaster, while the thirds beat Manchester IV but lost 6-5 to Wigan.
Another local player, Alison Finnegan, has been selected to play for Lancashire fourths.
Maguire collects whip ban
YOUNG riding sensation Adrian Maguire misses the last two days of Cheltenham's Mackeson Gold Cup meeting after being handed a four-day whip ban by the Wincanton stewards yesterday.
The suspension tarnished the day for the Irishman who joined Peter Scudamore at the top of the jockeys' table mark after landing a double.
Maguire, 21, who has rocketed to the stardom in the last 18 months, was punished for incorrect use of the whip on Playing Truant, short head winner of the Hopeful Novices' Hurdle.
His ban, which begins on November 14, means he misses the Mackeson Gold Cup and the first Sunday jumps fixture.
Maguire struck Playing Truant 14 blows after the second last with most coming after the final flight as he pulled out all the stops to hold off Angelo's Double.
The number of times Maguire used the whip made suspension virtually inevitable but the horse did look a difficult ride, drifting right after jumping the last.
Maguire, who was also banned for misuse of the whip on Gold Cup winner Cool Ground in March, took the decision philosophically.
‘I try my best to abide by the rules and to win the races,’ he said.
‘But in the end it is all up to the stewards.
Hanging
‘They told me that I should have put my whip down and tried to stop my horse from hanging.’
Maguire had been expecting to ride the Richard Lee-trained Space Fair in the Mackeson Gold Cup.
The jockey went on to a second success for Playing Truant's trainer David Gandolfo, partnering Ballyroe Lady to victory in the Tattersalls Mares Only Novices' Chase.
The double puts him equal top on 35 winners with Peter Scudamore.
Last season's Scottish National winner Captain Dibble staked his claim for another of jump racing's most important handicaps when defeating Boraceva by one and half lengths in the Badger Beer Handicap Chase.
His victory gives him a 4lbs penalty for the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup at Newbury on November 28, putting him on 10st 4lbs.
Trainer Nigel Twiston-Davies is quite happy with that weight and said: ‘The softer the better for him.
He will run at Newbury unless it becomes good to firm or firmer.’
Top Ten Merseyside
supplied by HMV Shop, Church Street, Liverpool
1.
Charles & Eddie: Would I Lie To You?
2.
Arrested Development: People Everyday
3.
Boyz II Men: End Of The Road
4.
Felix: It Will Make Me Crazy
5.
Undercover: Never Let Her Slip Away
6.
The Christians: Father
7.
Bizarre Inc: I'm Gonna Get You
8.
Rage: Run To You
9.
The Chippendales: Give Me Your Body
10.
Crush: Walking On Sunshine
Heliopsis adds to Hammond's purple patch
By A Special Correspondent
FORMER jump jockey Micky Hammond is steadily establishing himself as one of the top dual purpose trainers in the North.
Heliopsis continued Hammond's purple patch, enjoying his second victory in 19 days at Edinburgh yesterday to give Hammond his ninth Flat success of the year.
The stable reached the same total over jumps when Dominant Serenade won at Kelso.
Heliopsis snatched a dramatic late verdict under George Duffield in the Tennents Special Handicap as the curtain came down on the 1992 Scottish Flat racing programme.
Hammond was delighted at the jockey's performance, saying: ‘Well done Mr Duffield.
He's some pilot, isn't he.’
The stewards, however, were not so impressed and banned User Friendly's jockey for four days (beginning November 14) for excessive use of the whip.
Fortunately for Duffield he will not miss the ride on User Friendly in the Japan Cup as that race is staged on November 29.
Heliposis, bought unraced out of Guy Harwood's stable for 7,400 guineas last year, will now attempt to improve Hammond's jumps total.
‘He'll want a trip, and a strong jockey.
But we've got one of them in Peter Niven,’ said the Middleham trainer.
‘The horse won over hurdles for us at Ayr last February, and I think he will continue improving, both on the Flat and at the jumping game.’
Hat-trick
Duffield initiated a double when Salu completed a hat-trick with an emphatic triumph in the Tennents 80 Shilling Ale Claiming Stakes.
Trainer Jimmy Etherington, who submitted a ‘friendly’ claim of £9,354 to ensure taking the filly back to Yorkshire, is now looking forward to a long winter's break when the turf season closes on Monday.
‘I'm not planning any runners on the allweather tracks nor will I have any jump runners this winter.
I leave that job to my son Tim,’ said Etherington.
Walk The Beat was left with a lot to do in the Tennents LA Maiden Auction stakes after swerving left leaving the stalls.
But he came from last to first under a powerful ride from apprentice Andrew Tucker to hit the front a furlong out and score by three quarters of a length from favourite Sylvan Starlight for Rod Simpson.
This could well be the last winner Simpson sends out from Foxhill Stables at Wanborough, Swindon.
He moves at the weekend to the Bourn House Stables in Lambourn, an establishment previously used as an overflow yard by Nicky Henderson.
Jenny Barons, the wife of trainer David Barons, is setting up as trainer in her own right at Simpson's old yard.
Warwickshire-based Lawnswood Junior is developing into an Edinburgh specialist and the grey clinched his third success this year when gamely beating Military Expert in the Tennents November Handicap.
Trainer John Spearing will now bid for a quick double with Lawnswood Junior who runs again in the Forte Ladies Stakes Handicap Final at Doncaster on Saturday where he will be ridden by Spearing's daughter Teresa.
SPORTS cars don't come any smarter than this.
The zippy Toyota MR2, which has been generously supplied by Northway Toyota of Bootle and Maghull, is a neat machine with a built-in ability to turn heads.
Just watch the looks from passers-by as you drive into town in the stunner with power-assisted steering ideal for parking in the city.
And, fortunately for us at least, it's the motor that will be taking the Liverpool Echo/NatWest Bank driving twosome to France on the Beaujolais Nouveau run.
Myself and Mike White of NatWest will be driving an MR2 when we take part in the first Merseyside Challenge along with more than 100 other Merseysiders.
The Mariners take on Third Division Halifax Town at College Road next Saturday in a first round tie which the Crosby side are quietly confident of winning.
But Howard insisted: ‘Anyone who believes he can cruise along and think he will automatically be in the side against Halifax will be in for a shock.
‘An attitude like that will make sure that he is NOT in the side.’
The long-serving boss was adamant that he wanted total commitment and effort in the build-up to the tie, which is expected to attract a 2,500 all-ticket crowd to College Road.
‘Once you start saving yourselves for big games and ducking out of tackles, you get into the wrong frame of mind and that is very dangerous,’ warned Howard, who is hoping to steer his side through to the second round of the FA Cup for the first time for 17 years.
But likely to be ruled out of the action is fullback Keith Proctor, who has suffered a reaction to his first game back after a six-week injury lay-off he played for the reserves last weekend and is now likely to have to see a specialist about his troublesome knee.
Meanwhile, Howard was delighted with the success of the Marine contingent in the HFS League's representative match victory over an FA XI at Leek on Tuesday.
Brian Ross and Chris Camden were both on target in the 3-2 win the duo also scored in last year's victory over the FA and Howard said: ‘They have come up trumps again and it is another excellent boost for Marine.’
Strum or hum…
THINK big is the word from the Wirral.
They are calling their latest event ‘the greatest celebration of the guitar that the world has seen.’
The International Guitar Festival Of Great Britain starts on Monday and continues for two weeks.
And there will be plenty for fans as well as for musos, with events ranging from big shows at Birkenhead Town Hall and the Floral Pavilion to Sunday brunches at the Mersey Ferries booking halls and late-night concerts at Birkenhead Priory.
Biggest name is Chuck Berryappearing this side of the water at the Empire on November 16.
Look out, too, for visitors from Spain, Germany and the United States as well as local performers and styles ranging from jazz and blues to flamenco.
This week's music includes flamenco group Jaleo, LA country artist Jerry Donahue, and Iowa bluesman Catfish Keith.
Going live
A NEW night for rock fans in Southport.
The Manhattan Club is booking rock bands, with FM playing next Thursday.
The Prodigy release their new single Out Of Space next week their maddest offering to date.
And their live show reaches Liverpool on Thursday with a date at the Royal Court.
ESSEX act Sy-Kick, who have just released their The Knowledge EP, are the support.
THE first heat for Splash Promotions' NorthWest Battle Of The Bands takes place at the Cavern on Monday, with heats every Monday this month.
GOOD news for fans of live music.
The Cumberland Tavern — now under new management — is back in business as a rock venue.
New band Bazooka Joe, which includes ex members of Emily's Suitcase and Matrix, are there tomorrow night.
DANCE fans in Warrington who have been going to the Groover night at Mr Smith's club now have a two-in-one dance night instead.
Groover Records are now putting on a Monday night club at two different venues.
Strictly Hardcore is at Legends, and Happy House at Zig Zags.
The new night — or is it nights?— starts this Monday.
Jones Girls are back
EIGHTIES soul band The Jones Girls are back in business with an album titled suitably Coming Back.
You can see them at the Southport Soul Weekend on Saturday and signing their new single You Threw Our Love Away at the HMV shop on Tuesday lunchtime.
Runcorn bid to stop the rot
By David Bassett
RUNCORN bid to end a run of four consecutive defeats when fellow GMV Conference strugglers Kettering Town visit Canal Street tomorrow.
The Linnets are desperate for a win which would drag them away from the lower reaches of the table, and Kettering's record of only two points from their opening eight away games suggests a home win.
But Runcorn will be without two players through suspension, with midfielder Gary Brabin's original three match ban having been extended to six games after he reached 21 disciplinary points in the recent F.A.
Cup defeat by Marine.
Defender Ian Harold starts a three-match ban, while player-boss John Carroll is again doubtful with the Achilles injury that has sidelined him in recent games.
With long-term injury victims Graham Hill and Ian Brady only recently back in full training, and not ready for a competitive return, Carroll admits: ‘The situation does not leave us with many options.’
Marine bid to make up lost ground in the HFS League when they take on Gainsborough Trinity at College Road.
Two successive league defeats in the middle of last month have been followed by pre-occupation with cup action for the Mariners, who as a result have slipped to sixth in the table.
Midfielders Jon Gautrey and John Roche are both expected to have recovered from injuries suffered last weekend, although they may not be risked in view of next week's F.A.
Cup clash with Halifax.
Reaction
But defender Keith Proctor has suffered a reaction to his knee injury after playing for the reserves last weekend and is now due to see a specialist.
Southport take an impressive 20-match unbeaten run to Leek Town, where the Sandgrounders will be looking to extend their 100 per cent away record in the HFS to seven straight wins.
But manager Brian Kettle must await fitness checks on defenders Ian Baines (bruised toe) and Derek Goulding (knee) and midfielder Mark Brennan, who is suffering from a recurrence of his knee injury.
Warrington Town bid to bounce back after their first defeat in eight games in midweek when they take on Alfreton Town in the HFS First Division at Cantilever Park.
Knowsley United are without a game.
Gary Brabin…extended ban
Ground switch
BECAUSE there is no ground available in the Bolton area, tomorrow's Alder Cup under-14 tie between Bolton and Liverpool has been switched to the MYA Ground, Long Lane, Liverpool (10.30am).
Trophy draw
LIVERPOOL have been drawn at home to Chorley in the fourth round of the English Schools Trophy, but Kirkby Knowsley have a tough journey to Gateshead.
Winners of tomorrow's Chester/Wigan third round game entertain Rotherham.
A new survey shows Liverpool girls are going for the ‘tarty’ look
WHAT will you be wearing to hit the Merseyside pubs and clubs tonight?
A recent national survey by a leading High Street chain store showed that when it comes to Merseystyle, it's pinstripes for the day and the ‘tarty’ look at night.
So we asked some of the other Liverpool stores to come up with their definition of Merseystyle…
Find out whether you're in or out on pages 30 and 31.
Prescot aim to thwart Billy
By Gareth Jawad
A MANCHESTER United starlet of the 1980s is plotting the downfall of Prescot for the second time in seven days.
Billy Garton, now player-boss of Salford City, is hoping his side can add to their 1-0 FA Vase win over Prescot when they meet in Manchester in the Bass North West Counties League tonight.
‘Playing Prescot so soon after the Vase game last week has great implications for tonight's game,’ said Garton.
‘It will be a different game than last week's, hopefully a better one for both sides.’
Garton, 26, who played 41 times for United before injury cut short his career in 1990, is full of praise for Prescot.
‘They were strong and we were lucky to get a result against them last week.’
Prescot player-boss Joe Gibiliru, who says the battle for promotion is paramount, takes an unchanged squad, while Garton is suspended.
Burscough, at home to Chadderton tomorrow, have had mixed luck, recording their best and worst results of the season.
After beating Netherfield in the Vase Burscough lost 6-2 at Blackpool Rovers.
The squad will welcome back Tommy Knox.
Skelmersdale United, boosted by the home debuts of Peter Smith and Fran Ventre plus a fine 2-1 win over Glossop, visit Kidsgrove Athletic.
St.Helens Town boss Mick Holgate will pick from an unchanged squad for the visit of Darwen.
The sides drew 1-1 last week after Steve Cannon had equalised for Town in the last minute.
Division two leaders Stantondale are at home to Westhoughton Town, who they earlier beat 6-1, but are without striker Steve Walmsley.
On-form Formby travel to Castleton, while Bootle are away to Ashton Town.
FORMER Liverpool player Robbie Savage has suffered the type of injury all professionals fear.
At the age of 30, he finds himself consigned to the sidelines without even the consolation of a drop down the soccer ladder.
Professional Footballers' Association leader Gordon Taylor spoke out about this type of body blow in last week's ‘Soccer In Crisis’ investigation when he was asked by the Echo over spiralling players' wages.
He spoke powerfully about the insecurity of football and the potential dangers behind every challenge.
Savage was playing in the Bolton midfield when his playing days were cruelly cut short.
Now he hopes to find some compensation in his forthcoming testimonial match.
Savage, whose injury was so bad he is unable to play at non-League level, is hoping for some kind of runout at Burnden Park on November 17 when Bolton face Manchester City in a joint benefit match for him and Frank Worthington.
THOSE WERE THE DAYS…
Robbie Savage, above in his Liverpool days, is sharing a testimonial with Frank Worthington (top).
TAYLOR WARNING…
Gordon Taylor points out in last Friday's Echo Soccer in Crisis investigation that not all players enjoy rich rewards from the game when their careers can be cut short.
Now here's a prize worth barking about
DID you know that the famous HMV dog originated in Liverpool?
The 19th century painting a dog listening to a gramophone which provided the inspiration for the HMV logo was painted by artist Francis Barraud.
And it was based on a photograph of his brother's pet, taken in Liverpool in the 1880s.
Meanwhile, back in the 20th century, Liverpool's new HMV shop opened yesterday — just in time for the Christmas shopping.
The old Church Street shop has now trebled its size — bringing it in line with the superstores in Manchester and Birmingham.
There are now two floors of music and video, with separate departments for singles and for classical music.
A new Videozone and games department as well as in-store radio station and ticket shop add to the new offerings.
£700 up for grabs
And HMV have offered a massive spending spree in the new shop to be won by Echo readers.
The first prize winner will get £500 to spend in the shop, and there are two second prizes of £100 spending sprees.
Ten runners up will each get a £10 HMV voucher and all the winners will also get an exclusive HMV Liverpool T shirt.
You could be a winner by answering the following questions:
1.
What is the name of the HMV dog?
Is it Toby, Nipper, Shep or Rover?
2.
What does HMV stand for?
Send your answers (and name, address and phone number) on a postcard to HMV Competition, Dept C, Penny Kiley, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
Closing date is next Friday.
WIN a night with Roy
HE doesn't have hit singles.
But he sells out every time he plays a show in Merseyside.
Roy Harper is one of those cult figures who never seem to lose popularity — and his eccentric and entertaining stage presence explains why.
He's back in the area next week with a gig at the Adelphi on Thursday 19 November.
And we have two pairs of tickets to give away.
You could win one by answering the following question:
Which rock group wrote the song Hats Off To Roy for Roy Harper?
Send your answers (and your name and address) on a postcard to Roy Harper competition, Dept C (Penny Kiley), Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
Closing date is next Friday.
Lifters to take advice
WEIGHTLIFTERS Andrew Davies and Andrew Saxton have decided not to seek compensation from the British Amateur Weightlifters' Association for their Olympic drugs ordeal.
The news came as British Olympic chiefs demanded that confusion over the status of clenbuterol the drug at the centre of the controversy should be quickly cleared up by their international counterparts.
The lifters, sent home from Barcelona for failing drugs tests, said they absolved the governing body of any blame.
But Welshman Davies and Oxford-based Saxton, both 25, have not dropped their bid for compensation.
They are taking legal advice as to whether any other organisations have a case to answer.
Mark's filly looks best
By Captain Becher
HIGHBROOK, a horse tipped to make a name for herself at the winter game, catches the eye tomorrow as Flat racing grabs the attention for the last time this year.
Trainer Mark Tompkins is predicting a big future over hurdles for this strapping filly, but in the meantime has his sights firmly set on Doncaster's £30,000 November Handicap.
The contest is traditionally a brainteaser for the form-book pundit but Highbrook appears to have the ideal credentials to topple the poor value favourite Daru.
Much improved this season, she is still reasonably handicapped, will get every yard of the trip and acts well on the likely softish ground.
Highbrook will be at longer odds than she should be as a result of her defeat last time out at Newmarket.
She finished fifth about five lengths behind Walimu -but may have troubled the winner had she got the run of the race.
In a slowly-run affair, Highbrook was given a lot to do and was staying on strongly at the death.
Given a more positive ride on her previous outing -again at Newmarket -she stayed on gamely to fend off the well-handicapped Kiveton Kabooz.
Daru has been a revelation in the latter half of the season, winning his last four races off the bounce.
However, he is climbing up the weights and may find this trip a shade on the short side.
As the Flat turf season draws to a close Folkestone stages the last fixture on Monday Daru's trainer John Gosden can continue to add to his laurels.
He has had by far his best season since moving to Newmarket from California three years ago and can add another to his tally with Keen Hunter in the Remembrance Day Stakes.
Sheikh Mohammed's colt ran a cracking race in the Group One Prix de L'Abbaye to finish second to the ill-fated Mr Brooks and it will be a major surprise if he fails to deliver in this Listed contest.
Feature race at Chepstow, the £20,000 Tote Silver Trophy, looks tailor-made for Mighty Mogul.
He was switched to trainer David Nicholson along with Wednesday's Newbury winner Baydon Star -from Jenny Pitman's yard by owners Bill and Shirley Robins in the autumn.
Running for the first time for his new trainer, Mighty Mogul easily brushed aside Kaytak over an extended two miles at Newbury last month.
Tomorrow's distance of two miles four and a half furlongs should suit Mighty Mogul even more.
Record breakers
BRITAIN'S highest mileage man and its most enduring production motor have launched a hunt for the UK's best travelled car.
Both John Westley, who walked more than 9,000 miles around the British coast, and the Morgan 4/4 already hold a place in the Guinness Book of Records.
And although the competition only got underway at the NEC event, organisers Reed Automotive have already been flooded with calls from owners.
However, the world high mileage title looks safe.
It's held by a 1963 Volkswagen Beetle from Pasadena, California, which has covered an incredible 1,402,515 miles.
Stepping on the gas
ENVIRONMENT Minister David Maclean has stepped on the gas in Britain's greenest police vehicle powered by natural North Sea gas.
After test driving a Ford RS2000 police car he praised the UK motor industry for developing more environmentally friendly vehicles, including the use of alternative fuels.
Natural gas provides a viable alternative to petrol and diesel, offering a large cost saving per gallon.
New parts initiative
PEUGEOT has launched a new parts initiative they believe is unique among car manufacturers.
It guarantees to deliver parts overnight or the customer gets the part FREE.
VAUXHALL has won its biggest ever contract with the Ministry of Defence worth over £17 million at showroom prices for 1,947 diesel-engined Novas and Astras.
PLANNING for the 1994 British International Motor Show has taken a step forward with confirmation that it will again be held at Birmingham's NEC.
This year's attendance showed a 45 per cent increase on 1990.
Shirley Valentine at Liverpool Playhouse
FELICITY NEWSON:
IT'S a daunting prospect following Pauline Collins' movie footsteps in the sand as Willy Russell's own housewife megastar.
But Pauline Daniels has created a whole new interpretation of the uproarious soliloquy.
And in the process she has developed a character who is a real Valentine card.
Earthier and more brash than the screen Shirley, Pauline puts across with panache the vulnerability and the verve of the woman who has lost her more spirited self somewhere among the saucepans.
Enslaved by the mindless dullness of fixed routine, Shirley has taken literally the realisation that she may as well talk to the wall.
And in her musings, she wrings out her heart along with her dishcloth, pouring out a torrent of disillusionments and dreams.
The secret of Shirley's success lies in the fact that the tears she sends rolling down the cheek are prompted by laughter, but tinged with the searing kind of sadness associated with unfulfilled hopes.
Pauline Daniels is adept at the quicksilver changes of mood which one minute have you guffawing at Shirley's gutsy humour and the next have you gulping back the sobs.
We may never see husband Joe, kids Brian and Melandra, and the other characters who have unwittingly contributed to seal Shirley's domestic destiny.
But through gesture, parody and dialogue, Pauline Daniels ensures that we have a vivid imaginary picture of everyone in Shirley's world.
Pauline Daniels' ability to keep the audience absorbed, entertained and moved owes much to her background as stand-up comedienne and her rapport with her home city.
The only fault which can be levelled at this production is its brevity in comparison with its cinema counterpart Shirley's Greek idyll is compressed at break-neck speed into a second half which lasts less than 45 minutes.
However, it is a production overflowing with rugged warmth and rueful wisdom.
WHAT will you be wearing to hit the Merseyside pubs and clubs tonight?
A recent national survey by a leading High Street chain store showed that when it comes to female Merseystyle, it's pinstripes for the day and the ‘tarty’ look at night.
So we asked some of the other Liverpool stores to come up with their definition of Merseystyle…
Find out whether your style is in or out on pages 30 and 31.
TRES BIEN…
L'Alouette in Lark Lane
England win
AN experienced England side overcame a determined home team 39-24 in the first round of the World Rugby Classic tournament in Hamilton, Bermuda.
Cowan out
BARRY COWAN, from Ormskirk, missed out on a quarter finals place in the Volkswagen Nationals Tennis Championships at Telford yesterday.
The 18-year-old was beaten 3-6 6-4 3-6 by Michael Wyeth (Middlesex) in the third round.
Quiz night
TEAMS wishing to enter a knockout sports quiz at the Bull and Dog pub, in Burscough, are invited to apply.
The quiz, for teams of four, will be held each Sunday evening and entry is £2 per team.
Anyone interested should contact Jim Gardner (Burscough 893828) or the Bull and Dog pub (Burscough 894418).