

FRONTLINE
The power of the bee, and the powers that be
You don't know unless you ask, the saying goes.
When we asked buyers on your behalf, about products you would like Sainsbury's to sell, we discovered all sorts of interesting things.
For instance, we are about to introduce proprietary contact lens solutions into stores.
This is great news for those of us suffering from the triple affliction of myopia, vanity and an aversion to handing out vast amounts of cash.
We also discovered that loose sausages are making a comeback!
Full story on page 14.
Something else making a welcome return is the bumble bee.
There has been scant evidence of our garden friendly pollinator in recent years as their constitutions cannot withstand the chemicals abounding in pesticides.
But Sainsbury's is reversing the trend with integrated crop management systems which are kind to animals and humans, as well as insects.
For a lesson in the birds and the bees, turn to page 12.
Our annual photographic competition is launched in the next issue, but we are giving advance notice of one of the categories.
There will be a special prize for the best picture taken at Alton Towers' Sainsbury's days on Saturday July 31, and Sunday, August 1.
You can order your tickets on page 24 and save £5 on an adult ticket, as well as benefiting a children's charity by £1 on every ticket.
We notice that the SSA has been advertising inflatable sumo wrestling kits to hire.
Now, this we would like to see.
The Journal will be eternally grateful if those groups who decide to practise the ancient Japanese art of belly bouncing would take some photographs so we can all have a good laugh.
As we are bound to say in order to secure our continued employment, now for something completely different.
Inside this Journal is a poster guide to top management.
We hope you find it useful in putting faces to names.
Anyone needing extra copies should contact the Journal office on .
Journal in double triumph
Roy Castle takes a break from record-breaking and relaxes with a good read.
JS Journal editor  and designer  were visiting Torquay for the British Association of Industrial Editors [BAIE]Editing for Industry awards dinner.
Roy, who is fit and well after recovering from lung cancer, presented Yvonne with a trophy for best Employee Report of 1992 and Helen with a certificate of merit for design of the JS Journal 1992.
Both awards were won for the second year in succession.
HEADLINES
Media reports strong JS performance
Sainsbury's financial results were announced on May 12 when presentations were held at Stamford House for retail analysts from City financial institutions and for representatives from the national press.
Press coverage recognised another solid performance — sales of over £1O billion and a 17 per cent rise in pre-tax profits to £735.2 million consolidated Sainsbury's strong financial position.
Though M&S; were to announce slightly higher profits the following week, analysts high-lighted the strength of the JS performance compared with competitors.
Since the results were announced, our share price has risen.
The presentations of the results followed the same format as last year and journalists invited to Blackfriars were given the opportunity to sample some of the own brand products introduced into stores in 1992/93.
These included Fresh Soups, Part-baked Ciabatta and Tikka Bread, and fruit Top Desserts.
When the results were first announced at 7.45am, they heralded a busy day for chairman David Sainsbury.
The Journal was given a privileged look at his diary, and this graphic presentation shows how those important appointments were slotted in.
APPOINTMENTS
NICK ALLEN has assumed responsibility as Charlton depot manager.
He has been at Charlton for ten months after completing a period of secondment at Shaw's in the USA.
JOHN PERMAN, the former depot manager at Charlton, has taken over responsibility for the primary distribution project from BOB PARLE to enable Bob to take up his new duties as departmental director, distribution operations, when Derek Graham retires in August.
JAMES FULLER has been appointed to take over from John Hammond as general manager, JS restaurants, with full profit responsibility for the JS coffee shop business.
He reports to David Clapham, chairman of the JSR Management Committee, of which he is a member.
James joined the company on May 17 from Forte plc where he was executive director responsible for a group of restaurant businesses.
ANDREW CORNISH is to head up the Group risk management and insurance department reporting to Nigel Matthews.
Following a period of induction, he will take over the insurance function currently managed by the assistant company secretary and will also be responsible for developing and coordinating a risk management programme for the Group, to reduce losses in all parts of the business.
Andrew Cornish was formerly divisional director risk services division at Sedgwick UK Ltd.
Russian bakers visit Savacentre
Four Russian bakers visited Calcot Savacentre at the beginning of May as part of a fact-finding tour to help develop the market economy in russia.
The bakers were the star pupils of courses with which Ken Payne, Savacentre's bakery specialist, was involved when he visited Russia to teach Western techniques of bread production.
The four ladies found the whole hypermarket shopping experience an immense contrast to the very basic counter service shops that predominate in their home country.
They were so engrossed asking questions and spending their Sainsbury's gift vouchers that they were too late to visit their next port of call — Windsor Castle!
HEADLINES
Pension scheme communications earn Golden Pen
JS has been presented with a Golden Pen Award from the National Association of Pension Funds Ltd [NAPF
The award was given for the Pensions Special report, produced for members of the pension scheme in May 1992 by the pensions department.
The publication gave official notification of changes and improvements to the structure and benefits of the scheme.
Commented NAPF: ‘It seemed to represent the pinnacle of a well thought out programme of communication between the scheme and the members, providing plenty of notice of change and the opportunity to request further information.
It was extremely effective.
Central and Western opens riverside area office
Not to be out-done by the opening of Northern area's new office in September, Central and Western moved into their new premises in Uxbridge's Cowley Business Park on May 7.
The ground floor of the two storey building is principally devoted to new training facilities while the first floor provides spacious and airy office space for the 1OO staff.
The building sits beside a river and is surrounded by carefully landscaped lawns — a far cry from the old office above the Uxbridge JS, only a mile down the road.
David Quarmby, joint managing director, took an informal tour and commented in his opening address: ‘A quality business deserves a quality environment for all those who work hard to support Central and Western stores, and that is what this office represents.’
A bit of a brew
Sainsbury's first ever beer tasting for members of the press was held on April 27 at the Hop Cellars near head office at Blackfriars.
There has been a large increase in the range of beers available and interest is high.
Beer is currently at the stage wine was at ten years ago.
Twenty journalists, including Oz Clarke of The Telegraph and Michael Jackson of The Independent, attended the tasting.
The 25 own label beers offered to taste were praised in reports which subsequently appeared in the press.
Beers included premium lagers such as Sainsbury's Czech Pilsner and specialised beer styles such as Old Growler Porter.
Based on a London Mild recipe from 175O, the latter was originally drunk by London fish and market porters and was named after the brewer's dog!
In total, JS sells over 25O different brands of beer [Savacentre carries a further 3O]and there is a regional beer policy which allows stores to offer up to ten regional products.
Sainsbury's is the only retailer to use ‘price per pint’ unit ticketing and was at the forefront of multi-pack development in the UK.
Areas present bumper cheque to Children in Need
On May 21, David Dahms, area services manager on the South Eastern area, and vice president of the SSA, went to the BBC headquarters in White City, London, to present a cheque for £295, OOO on behalf of the company to television celebrity Sue Cook for the Children in Need Appeal.
The money was raised by customers and staff throughout the country with collections, raffles and many other activities.
Boots will fit perfectly
Boots The chemist are to open pharmacy concessions for the first time in seven JS branches in late July.
Boots staff will operate the concessions which will offer photo processing, a dispensing pharmacy and stock similar to any small Boots store, but not food.
They will occupy shop space within the existing building, in some cases within the shop floor and at others in a vacant coffee shop.
Almost 3O branches already incorporate chemists either as sub-lets or concessions, but this is the first time JS has teamed up with Boots.
Sarah is latest own brand MBA success
After almost four years' hard study in addition to her job, Sarah Blackburn of group internal audit was congratulated on May 26 by David Quarmby, joint managing director, on attaining an MBA.
The company sponsored Sarah on her MBA course which was run jointly by Henley the management college and Brunel University.
She started the course in July 1989 and chose to study by the distance learning method, which meant working in her own time.
Every three months she returned to Henley to meet with other students — some international — also doing the course.
Sarah chose to look at contract distribution and information systems division in her dissertation.
David Quarmby helped her in choosing these topics and assisted her with some of her coursework.
Sarah commented: ‘All the hard work was well worthwhile but I have no intentions of sitting any more exams in the foreseeable future!’
Staff listen to exotic tape
A new product knowledge training aid, introduced this month, will positively encourage staff to listen to tapes while they work.
The tapes are played on the store's cassette player and will encourage staff to explore particular products on the shop floor as part of their on-going training.
The first 3O minute tape focuses on 13 exotic fruits, suggesting the listener touch and smell them.
The recording is interspersed with music and is narrated in a relaxed and upbeat style that is intended to help staff deal with customers queries on such products as pitahayas and paw-paws.
Future tapes will provide information on wine and then meat and it is intended that ultimately all specialist areas will be covered..
Boots occupies a similar position among chemists to that of JS in grocery retailing.
This picture from around 1954 shows a Boots sandwiched between 41 and 45 Heath Street in Hampstead, 41 being an extension to number 45 which opened in 1892
HEADLINES
Children win a lesson at School of Food and Wine
Following the successful launch of the Sainsbury's Book of Children's Cookery, the company sponsored a Today newspaper competition in which children were asked to answer questions about food and cooking.
The senders of the first six correct entries attended a cookery course run by the book's two authors, and , at Leith's School of Food and Wine.
Faith treads carefully in the presence of royalty
How did Faith Gauld, the off-licence's marketing and product development manager, come to be crushing grapes with her feet in front of Prince Edward?
The answer is the National Wine Week Festival.
The festival took place on May 9 at Chelsea Harbour as part of the National Wine Week, and Prince Edward was in attendance.
Events included a race comprising various stages such as carrying trays of wine and treading grapes.
Sainsbury's sponsored the grape-treading stage and Faith gave a bare-footed demonstration before the Prince.
JS also entered and won a speed boat race to Tower Bridge to collect a bottle of port.
As part of the week, JS held wine tastings in 15 stores and selected five wines to go on special offer.
JS sponsors agriculture lunch
On April 29, JS sponsored a lunch at Stationers' Hall in the City of London held to honour the person identified by the horticultural industry as having made the biggest contribution to commercial horticulture in 1992.
The Norah Stucken award, named after the life president of Grower Publications, was presented to Colin King of Kinder Gardens Plants Ltd in Spalding.
JS representatives at the lunch included trading director David Clapham, who addressed the guests, and departmental director of produce buying Allan Cheesman.
All guests received a brochure on Sainsbury's integrated crop management systems and customer recipe leaflets for a variety of produce.
Stars are a feature of magazine launch
The launch party for Sainsbury's the Magazine, held at Les ambassadeurs on Park Lane, was a glittering affair.
Showbiz characters rubbed shoulders with politicians, famous food and wine writers, and fashion designers.
Christopher Biggins, Lorraine Chase, Lord Owen, Oz Clarke, Delia Smith and Bruce Oldfield were among the glitterati.
The first issue of the magazine enjoyed tremendous sales, with some branches selling in excess of 3, OOO copies.
Watch out in the Journal for news of a Sainsbury's the Magazine competition for staff.
SABRE cuts losses
The company is saving millions of pounds thanks to the new SABRE — Sales Based Replenishment — system.
Phase 1 of SABRE introduced the laser handsets used in all stores.
For the first time we can measure the true amount of perishable food we throw away and establish which lines are most often wasted because their sell-by-date has passed.
A recent branch initiative is currently focusing greater attention on the losses caused by these ‘out of code’ products.
The company now believes it is saving money thanks to this initiative as Irene Leech, section manager, systems, Chadwell Heath told the Journal.
‘We're more aware of the disposals because they're on paper, and the amount is going down.
There's a general reduction across the board.
It means we're losing less money and this system also saves time and is more accurate.’
Those highly accurate perishable goods — such as salad items — that have always been most commonly wasted are now being targeted for special attention.
The benefit is underlined by Ray Garson, reception manager at Stockport: ‘I reckon we are throwing away 3O per cent less.
On produce such as lettuce and tomatoes disposals have reduced dramatically.
With SABRE we can monitor more clearly and precisely and there's less room for error.
With fewer throwouts, we're saving money and that increases our profit sharing.’
SABRE Phase 11 is now in almost every store and introduces the use of computer-calculated stock known as inventory.
For many perishables goods this provides even more information on which accurate orders can be based.
The system will to increase the opportunities for reducing losses still further and the Journal will keep you updated.
A conference for SABRE district coordinators was held in April at Dartford.
The 26 coordinators learned about what Phase 111 of SABRE will achieve.
The first branch will have the new system in August, and one branch in every district will have the system by October.
Part of the conference was spent on the tennis court as top coaching tutor Sir John Whitmore showed the delegates how sports coaching may be adapted to management training.
Distribution charter makes way for smooth talking between depots and branches
John Major has made one for citizens, British Rail has done it for their passengers, the banks have formulated one for their customers and now the JS distribution division has done it for the branches.
‘It’ is the new distribution division service charter, which is being phased in this month.
It clearly sets out to branches delivery goals that depots intend to achieve and it sets out how, in return, the branches can aid the delivery process.
The charter incorporates a formal statement of three standards: accuracy, punctuality and delivery turnaround.
They each have stringent but achievable targets such as a commitment that 99 per cent of deliveries will be case-accurate — no easy matter when ten million cases are delivered each week.
The other major aspect of the charter is the establishment of a formal communications system between branches and depots.
There are inevitable disruptions to deliveries such as vehicle breakdowns which have knock-on effects to delivery schedules.
Similarly, branches may be short-staffed thereby increasing loading and unloading times.
The new E-mail and V-mail based communication system should do away with the need for constant phone calls between warehouse and depot when such hiccups occur.
Constant updating of the information available will allow branches in particular more time to plan their schedules and hopefully avoid problems.
The charter is part of a continuing modernisation of the distribution division that has included the reorganisation of the previous five administration regions into four.
The intention is to further raise the quality of service across the branches, though many already exceed the new targets.
Branches will now be able to monitor progress through weekly reports and will receive statements of performance from their regional office at the end of each period.
Baker wins lucky draw
Congratulations to  of Hadleigh Road — Ipswich bakery.
He is the winner of the latest SSA Lucky Draw for £1OOO.
WRITELINES
WILL STAFF TRUSTEES CARRY ENOUGH CLOUT?
Tony Gafer, veteran.
It is good to know that employee trustees have been introduced within the JS pension scheme, but I would nevertheless question whether ‘ordinary employees’ are likely to affect the deliberations and decisions of the present high-powered trustees, all of them JS directors, either currently or ex?
Would it be better for employees and pensioners to elect equally high-powered trustees from the outside world as the equivalent of non-executive directors, of which the JS board has made full use for many years now?
John Adshead, personnel director, replies:
The company is very confident that our new employee trustees will make an effective contribution to the running of our pension schemes.
They have undertaken an independent training course and induction programme, and are now preparing for their first meeting.
As long serving employees they will be able to bring a wealth of company experience and represent the views of members more effectively than outsiders.
The new trustees have exactly the same powers and responsibilities as existing trustees and will, I am sure, have no difficulty making their views known and felt in their new roles.
NOW YOU SEE IT, NOW YOU DON'T
Rebekah Young, personnel manager, Great Yarmouth
Being a crossword fanatic — like many other JS staff — I eagerly open the latest monthly edition of the Journal and try to find the crossword.
Some months it is there — other months it is not.
Can there be some regularity in the publication of a crossword?
You might answer that pressures on existing JS Journal staff prevent the crossword being a regular monthly item — but there must be many JS staff [like myself]who have experience of compiling crosswords, and I am sure that we could provide a steady supply of crosswords ready for publication — with the proviso, of course, that the person who has compiled that month's crossword is not eligible to send in an entry to the competition.
Editor replies:
We are lucky to have secured a reliable supply of crosswords and will try to include a crossword in every other Journal — starting with this one: turn to page 17
NOT TOO CRAZY ABOUT THE PRIZE
Beryl Green, Blackpool.
Recently I entered a competition in the JS Journal, the prize being two tickets for Crazy for You in London.
I was delighted to be informed that I was one of the prize winners, but my delight turned to disappointment when I realised just what accepting the prize would involve.
Because the show is performed in London I would incur the cost of train or bus travel, plus overnight accommodation and the need to take a day's holiday entitlement from work.
As you can perhaps appreciate, this rather took the edge off my initial delight.
I enquired about the possibility of the tickets being changed for a show nearer to my home town.
However, my enquiry was met with the response that I should not have entered the competition if I was not prepared to travel etc.
I was disappointed with the attitude because I feel that Sainsbury's employees should have equal advantage when entering JS Journal competitions, no matter where they live in Great Britain.
Perhaps for future competitions consideration could be given to the fact that anyone entering these competitions from areas a distance from London should not be disadvantaged and venues arranged so that extra cost is not incurred and the prize could then be truly enjoyed by everyone.
Editor replies:
I was sorry to hear of your disappointment in winning our Crazy For You competition.
Most of our competitions offer moderate prizes which may be taken advantage of by staff in all parts of the company.
We are grateful to accept prizes such as this one from a theatre promotions agency.
Initially, because of the London venue, we considered including it only in our head office newsletter.
We subsequently decided that a great many staff from parts of the country other than London would appreciate the opportunity to win tickets.
Seats were available for matinee performances so that an overnight stay was not essential.
We believed, however, that many people who entered the competition from further distances would wish to plan a weekend break around the show.
Although we have been seeking similar promotional competitions with northern theatres [and we haven't given up yet]we do not have the facilities to run a comprehensive programme of regional competitions.
We would welcome any further views on the subject
CASH AND CREDIT REFUNDS ARE NOT CONSISTENT
Roy White, Pitsea.
Like most employees of any successful company we are in the front line for friends, family and neighbours' criticism.
One of the most recent queries highlighted our local Savacentre store as giving credits instead of cash refunds.
While this may or may not be a policy from the early days of the store's formation, it is a contentious policy when these credits are not transferable between JS stores, which happened when offered at our local East Mayne, Basildon store.
I acknowledge there are certain anomalies in policy regarding employees between the two companies, but I feel strongly that there should not be any regarding customers and they should be seen to act as one.
I would like some clarification on this issue so that I can pass it on.
Mike Broomfield, managing director of Savacentre replies:.
As a result of the vast range of clothing and household goods that  Savacentre sells, it receives far more customer returns than the average JS branch.
The policy for returns of non faulty goods is to give a refund for any item where proof of purchase can be provided.
For items returned over £1O and where the proof of purchase cannot be provided by the customer, Savacentre issues a credit voucher.
We have to use credit vouchers rather than gift vouchers, since the accountancy and administration of controlling the latter, would be cumbersome and impractical.
Savacentre and JS branches currently accept gift vouchers issued by one another, but without a method of local reimbursement.
Since the value of credit vouchers issued exceeds the sale of gift vouchers approximately six to one, it is felt unreasonable to expect the nine branches local to Savacentre to take a disproportionately high cost.
As a result, the decision was taken to redeem only at Savacentre.
Our customers appear quite happy with the rules regarding redemption of credit vouchers, but in exceptional cases, where the customer might have difficulty using the credit vouchers, some alternative means of reimbursement will be found.
INVITATIONS TO BIRTHDAY FUN
Shirley branch has now been trading for 3O years, and to celebrate its birthday a dinner-dance is being held at the Novotel Hotel in Southampton on October 16.
All past and present employees of the branch are invited.
Anyone interested in joining the party should contact .
Hitchin is celebrating its 2Oth anniversary.
On Saturday July 24 a party is to be held in Hitchin, and any members of staff and management, past or present, who would like to go along should contact .
PRODUCTIVITY BONUS ON CHECKOUT TEN V
Steve Fryer, manager, Newbury
It all happens at Newbury; pregnancies that is.
And we have found the cause — checkout chair number ten.
It was a number of weeks ago I had cause to sit on it to do some paperwork; I then found out I was to be a father again.
The wives of both branch deputies have given birth recently with two members of management pregnant and six members of staff all in the ‘Newbury club’.
I was prompted to write when a customer sat on checkout ten following a dizzy spell.
We warned her not to sit on the chair, but she said she didn't mind.
The next week she came in especially to tell us she had joined our special club.
WITH THANKS
Tammy Reynolds, customer services manager, Camberley Homebase
I have always thought that the staff of Camberley Homebase are a great bunch.
We organise social events and often go out together.
This creates a good working team spirit and everyone helps everyone else out.
It's due to this team spirit and thoughtfulness that I would like to thank everyone.
I recently had some bad news and everyone helped me through it and gave me great support.
Thank you Camberley, you're the best!
Mary Teasdale, Woodhall Farm.
I would like to give my thanks to all concerned with the pre-retirement course at Fanhams Hall which my husband and I recently attended, and to recommend anyone invited to accept the invitation.
The course is very enlightening and informative and Fanhams Hall is a most relaxing venue for a break.
They do convince you there is life after work, and make one look forward to staying with JS as a veteran.
My daughters introduced me to JS as each started at Hemel Hempstead branch on leaving school.
One moved to Woodhall Farm which I joined 11 years ago.
They have since left and had families and now as I am retiring they are all back.
Pat at London Colney Savacentre, Lucy and Sue at the New Apsley Mills, Hemel Hempstead.
So the best of luck to JS, ‘the family firm’ in more ways than one.
Good luck and best wishes to all my former colleagues and friends wherever they are.
CUSTOMER LETTERS
To Bradford from Helen Craig: ‘How pleasant and easy it is to shop at Sainsbury's in comparison to other supermarkets…please don't change anything, just keep it simple and pleasant as it is.’
To Kings Lynn from Margaret Fife who, following an injury to her arm was helped with her shopping by two assistants: ‘It was a great help to me and most refreshing in this day and age to be treated with such consideration.
To Shorehead, Huddersfield, from Margaret Shaw who suffered temporary loss of vision during a migraine attack on a shopping trip: ‘I could not possibly have been offered greater kindness — which went beyond mere service.’
BAGS OF IMAGINATION
Pam Cooper, staff restaurant, Ladbrook Grove.
Just to show that the JS carrier bag is doing well and holidaying in Spain.
Mark Anderson, PA to Peter Ibbotson.
It would appear some of our customers have developed a new method of claiming a penny back for re-using a JS carrier bag!
Walter McKinlay, customer, Ardleigh, Essex.
I thought you might be interested in this photograph of two of my wife's lambs feeding with a cleverly conceived use of one of Sainsbury's carrier bags.
How about this for re-use!.
LETTERS ARE WELCOMED AND SHOULD BE SENT THROUGH THE INTERNAL POST TO THE EDITOR, JS JOURNAL.
OR BY ROYAL MAIL TO THE ADDRESS ON PAGE TWO.
SUPERMARKET OPENING
APSLEY MILLS — HEMEL HEMPSTEAD
The new Apsley Mills store has opened in one of the biggest ever JS developments covering 16 acres on the outskirts of Hemel Hempstead.
The development currently boasts only the second car wash after Hedge End, and a petrol station, and it will include a new Homebase by early autumn.
The scheme is likely to generate extra traffic so the building work was coordinated with the council and the new King's Langley bypass opened the day before the store.
Not all customers are expected to come by road — new mooring points and landscaping on the neighbouring Grand Union Canal welcome any barges that may need re-stocking.
Store manager Paul Ainger and retail director Colin Harvey welcome the first customers at the front door.
Only 15 minutes to go and a final team talk before the opening.
Helen Hards, produce section manager, worked at Bishops Stortford store for two years, left to work for a competitor and returned to JS at the new Apsley Mills branch.
June Makepeace, customer service assistant, lives up to her title
The steel dates adorning the outside of the store are the old construction dates salvaged from the paper mills which previously occupied the site.
FROME — SOMERSET
The opening in Frome of one of the new smaller style stores provides local residents with the only modern supermarket in the town.
The store already has strong links with the community, and this is shown in the special features on the outside of the store.
A 15ft long bronze sculpture on the wall next to the store entrance depicts the history and main occupations of the people of Frome from the late seventh century until the present day.
The architecture in the background shows some of the best known buildings in Frome.
On the side of the store are display cabinets built into the wall.
These will be used initially for displays of work by pupils of Frome Art College and displays giving information on the history of shopping in Frome and special events and attractions in town.
The store's bronze sculpture gives customers an insight into the history of Frome.
Ruth Smith and Lyn Saunders check the noticeboard to see when they are scheduled to take up their positions on checkouts.
Part-time checkout assistants,, enjoy a break in the staff restaurant.
It was half-term for schools and local children were much in evidence at the opening; some even queued for the chairman's autograph!
KEEPING THE BEES BUSY
ICMS stands for Integrated Crop Management Systems and, unless you are involved in produce growing, it is an expression you have probably never heard.
But, thanks to ICMS, a Sainsbury's tomato, not to mention lettuce, potato or any other JS salad, fruit or vegetable, is not just good value for money, it is also helping to save the earth.
ICMS is a combination of ways to manage crops in order to conserve and enhance the environment for wildlife and people while at the same time producing quality crops of economic yield.
Sainsbury's set out to develop this policy as concern for the environment and the safety aspects of pesticide usage increased.
Dr Geoff Spriegel, director of scientific services, explains: ‘Every gardener knows that pesticides can be very useful and they have their place — even in organic growing.
Our scheme reduced the range and volume by using alternatives to chemical pesticides and by taking a holistic approach to growing.
This includes training, using varieties resistant to certain pests, forecasting and biological control, using pesticides only in response to problems, not as a matter of course.
It means that when pesticides are used, and it is only as a last resort, then the most environmentally friendly are chosen.
Bob Hilborn, chief food technologist, primary agricultural products, reveals a further advantage of ICMS: ‘In many ways the increased use of chemical pesticides in recent years was an easy option for growers, but not a cheap one.
Now that natural methods are taking the place of chemicals, many of our growers are reporting unexpected cost savings.’
ICMS works on the basis that there are optimum natural conditions for every aspect of the growing process, and it studies the knock-on effect of every action.
It covers not only growing but also post-harvest activities including storage, processing and packing as well as managing waste generated by the growing process.
JS specifies that machinery such as that used for harvesting should be energy efficient, and that waste must be neutralised prior to disposal.
Practices like the last one protect the health of our rivers and countryside.
And here, ICMS goes even further than prevention; it encourages growers to take positive action to enhance the environment by, for example, establishing wildlife strips to harbour natural predators or creating wildlife ponds to encourage wildlife diversity.
Training is vital to maintain the systems and the latest technological advances are employed — this is no simple return to pre-industrial days.
Growers trained to use the latest technology may very accurately predict disease or infestation and, by taking prompt action, can prevent problems from occurring.
All the crop management methods are set out for growers in a document compiled by JS with the help of experts from all over the world.
Says Dr Spriegel, ‘We have contacts with all the major research institutes and associations in the UK and overseas.
We also have links with companies producing the insects used to control pests, and with the agri-chemical industry which is developing more environmentally friendly chemical pesticides.’
Bob Hilborn adds: ‘We pool knowledge with the National Farmers Union, the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, the Horticultural Development  Council and, most importantly, with our growers.’
A team of three technical managers under Bob has organised the JS growers into crop groups known as clubs.
Each club of growers, be they of lettuce, tomato, carrots or some other crop, meets with the project manager to discuss how the basic ICMS methods can be applied to their particular crop.
A more detailed growing policy is then formulated.
Says Bob, ‘It's amazing how much co-operation and support there is between these growers.’
The first meeting was held in January 1992 for tomato growers and it is hoped that clubs will be established for all crop groups by the end of 1994.
But this is just the beginning.
The clubs meet at least once a year and there is continual development as both technology and knowledge advance.
And what is in development now?
Dr Spriegel: ‘Much biological pest control is carried out in greenhouses; open field growing still relies heavily upon chemical pesticides.
But now a lot of work is being carried out in this area; in future the use of biological agents for control will be far more widespread and the use of chemicals reduced even further.’
That's good news for us, good news for the growers and good news for the bumble bee.
The Whitefly, The Aphid, The Wasp and The Bumble Bee
The interaction of the aphid, the whitefly, the wasp and the bumble bee in a greenhouse in which tomatoes are grown is a good example of the principles of Integrated Crop Management Systems [ICMS].
The tomato plant attracts a pest called whitefly which causes harm by feeding off the tomato and leaving sugary deposits, disfiguring the fruit and causing it to go mouldy.
Whitefly also encourage aphids which feed off the sugary deposits.
The aphid has a proboscis which it inserts into the tomato in order to suck out its juices — a vampire-like attack which cripples the growing tomato.
The growers objective is to control the whitefly.
BEFORE ICMS
Chemical pesticides were sprayed on the tomato plants to kill the whitefly.
The chemicals upset the balance of the environment and killed not only the whitefly but also other wildlife including the bumble bee.
The absence of the bumble bee meant that pollination had to be carried out artificially, using an electronic vibrating rod.
This was labour intensive, more expensive and less effective than employing the bumble bee.
FOLLOWING ICMS
The grower introduces the Encarsia formosa wasp into the greenhouse.
The wasp lays eggs inside the eggs laid by the whitefly, thereby destroying the whitefly eggs.
The wasp has no other effect on the environment and the bumble bee is left to busy himself among the plants, pollinating the flowers in a naturally effective way.
Monitoring crops in order to take preventative action is an important aspect of ICMS.
Senior chemist and co-ordinator for ICMS Jayne Gilbert and produce buyer Gary wilson visit tomato supplier John Hall at Chichester.
Hanging from the plant is a tag containing Encarsia formosa eggs, introduced to control whitefly in the greenhouse.
Behind can be seen bee hives.
Because of the absence of chemicals the bees survive happily and are used to pollinate the flowers.
A nuisance to every gardener — this aphid, Macrosiphuym rosae is found on rose leaves; The Whitefly adults with eggs.
The Bombus terrestris or the Buff Tailed Bumble Bee is the most efficient pollinator of flowers.
The Encarsia formosa wasp parasitises the whitefly eggs.
VOX POP— Products of your imagination
IS ANYBODY LISTENING?
Well yes, we are.
And after asking some of you what new products you think Sainsbury's should introduce, we made sure the buyers were listening too.
We visited Darnley, near Glasgow, East Filton near Bristol, and Blackpool in the Midlands.
Here is a selection of your suggestions and comments from the buyers.
VALERIE HOARE, DRY GOODS CONTROLLER, EAST fILTON:
‘Slices of pizza in boxes, hot and ready to eat, would go down really well here with all the people that come in at lunch times from the colleges and offices around.’
We discovered that, unfortunately, our stores do not have the facilities to comply with health and safety regulations relating to hot food.
JAMES EDE, chief display assistant, East Filton: ‘We should make something of all the hype around the release of the Jurassic Park film and have dinosaur shaped foods.’
The Jane Asher dinosaur cake was introduced recently and buyers inform us that dinosaur shaped canned pasta is now a possibility, together with existing canned lines of this kind.
‘Why don't we sell own brand contact lens solutions which would be cheaper?’
As a result of a recent Monopolies and Mergers Commission decision, we are now allowed to sell proprietary contact lens solutions.
There could also be an own brand product in the very near future.
CONNIE COOK, chief display assistant, Blackpool: ‘What about selling variety packs of pop like we have for fruit juices?
It would be great to have a couple of little plastic bottles or cans of each flavour.’
Buyers are currently working on this one with suppliers and will need to get the mix of flavours to suit as many customers as possible.
JEAN HALVIN, checkout/replenishment, Darnley: ‘I'm a keen gardener and would love to see Sainsbury's sell garden seeds, compost, fertilizer and a whole range of gardening tools.’
We don't sell gardening tools because of demands on space, but composts and flower pots etc, are now being looked at.
JACQUELINE MOOR, Supermarket assistant, Blackpool: ‘Whatever happened to the Sodastream range?
We used to sell it but now it only seems to be Boots — I know it is still popular.’
The answer is that we do sell Sodastream, but in selected stores only due to limited demand; but this is always under review for signs of change.
BERNADETTE STANLEY, grocery manager, Blackpool:.
‘I think hats would sell really well.
There could be summer hats and baseball caps.
Sunglasses would be popular at this time of year too.’
We were told that sunglasses would not fit in any department of the store, and the carousel and mirror required would take up too much space.
‘We should sell more baby requisites such as bibs, dummies, bottles and baby cups.’
We have launched a range of baby textiles, including body suits, vests and reusable nappies, in 35 stores.
If this is successful it will almost certainly be extended to other stores.
JACQUELINE McKEE, provisions, Darnley: ‘The other day I served a rather distressed customer.
She was a diabetic and couldn't understand why Sainsbury's don't sell any diabetic food.’
The British Diabetic Association says diabetics should eat a normal healthy diet, low in sugar and fat and high in fibre.
There is no need for diabetics to eat modified food.
Our existing nutritional labelling gives a full description of sugar, fat and fibre content.
MICHELLE RICHARDSON, RTS student, Darnley: ‘I'd like to see Sainsbury's selling a whole range of tapes, CDs and records.
I'd buy all my CDs here, especially if they were a wee bit cheaper!’
Buyers are currently looking at stocking these items.
ANN McGREGOR, kiosk assistant, Darnley: ‘My mum is always complaining about the range of tights on sale at Sainsbury's.
She's a size 18 and we cater up to large only.
She likes to wear bright colours too and would love to see emerald green, cobalt blue and purple tights on the shelf in extra large sizes.’
Fuller figure tights are sold in selected stores.
The buyer tells us that bright colours are not sold because sales estimates are low.
JULIE WHITE, clerk, Blackpool: ‘Cutlery would sell really well, say in packs of two of knives, forks and spoons.’
Buyer said although space considerations make this difficult, it is being looked at.
MARILYN MORGAN, section manager, in-store training, East Filton: ‘We sell batteries but not watch batteries — they don't take up much space.’
Apparently, watch batteries are just too small to be practical on our shelves.
‘Could we sell boxes with flip lids for customers to put their recyclable rubbish in?’
Such containers are available but we are told we don't stock them because of lack of space.
The whole area of recycling is, however, under review and the situation could change in the future.
GRAHAM NEWALL, RTS student, Darnley: ‘Any chance of some good quality electrical equipment?
Asda sells hi-fis, TVs, videos, alarm clocks and other electrical goods, so why can't Sainsbury's?’
Buyers believe sales on these items would not be high enough to justify the space they would take up.
Savacentre stocks these products because they have more space.
SUSAN MURPHY, petrol station manager, Darnley: ‘Inner soles!
I go through a pair week, and we don't sell them.
I walk from the petrol station to the store roughly 14 times a day and if I didn't have a pair of inner soles in my flat shoes I'd cry!’
Buyers are currently looking at packaging of inner soles which would need to be changed if we were to stock them.
JOHN GRIFFITHS, trolley retrieval, East Filton: ‘On holiday in New Zealand I ate a fish I thought was cod but it was slightly different.
The waiter said it was John Dori.
We sell all sorts of air-freighted fish like joki, so why not the John Dori?’
The fish buyer was also on holiday in New Zealand recently and sampled John Dori.
She was very impressed and there is a possibility we may stock it in the future along with other similar species buyers are currently investigating.
SANDRA MOORE, deli assistant, Darnley: ‘The delicatessen counter often discontinues lines which customers regularly ask for.
Peppered beef, vegetable lattice bake and herring in tomato sauce are just a few that have been requested lately.
I'd like to see Links sausages sold loose and dumplings — which go with a traditional Scottish fry up, and bring back cottage cheese.
‘Also, any chance of larger tubs for salads?
If a customer requires llb I usually have to use two tubs — and it would save on waste — good for the environment too!
We could also introduce more salads during the summer.
I know they'd sell well with our customers.’
Lines are discontinued because of company wide sales.
Loose sausages are already stocked in 2O branches on the deli counter.
If successful, this will be expanded.
The other suggestions will be looked into by buyers.
NEW HOMEBASE UNIFORM
TWELVE YEARS OF WEARING GREEN DUNGAREES ARE ABOUT TO COME TO AN END FOR HOMEBASE STAFF WITH THE INTRODUCTION OF A NEW UNIFORM.
The new design retains the predominantly green colour of the original uniform and adds cheerful orange trim and piping to collars and cuffs.
The dungarees depart on the strength of comments from staff and customers, who thought they were a little outdated.
This was shown by research conducted in 1991 and 1992 which took in over 5O stores, involving over 1,3OO staff questionnaires and 4OO customer interviews.
Those questioned considered that a more professional image would be conveyed by a choice of trousers, skirt or culottes for female staff and trousers for men.
The uniform is topped by a T-shirt and sweat shirt for men and women.
A jacket is available from a pool and the trousers/skirts/culottes incorporate a colour co-ordinated belt.
This design was chosen from a number of options because it was smart yet casual, making staff more approachable to customers.
Staff will also benefit since the new garments should be more comfortable and practical than the current version, especially in a DIY environment.
Wandsworth was the first new store to open with staff wearing the new design, as seen in the last issue of the Journal.
Wandsworth joins five other stores: Wakefield, Northampton, Catford, Bath and Willesden, which are trialling the uniform until August.
The new uniform will then be evaluated and minor changes possibly made to features such as pockets and the shirt material.
The new uniform will then be phased in so that Homebase and Sainsbury's staff will be able to present a smart new image for 1994.
NEW MAGAZINE IS AT HOME AT HOMEBASE
First we had Sainsbury's The Magazine, then appeared our new format Journal, and now Homebase is in action.
The first issue of At Home at Homebase magazine has been published by the DIY and garden centre subsidiary.
The magazine retails at 8O pence, but is free to all Spend & Save cardholders.
Announces  Homebase chairman and managing director, at the start of the magazine: ‘Twice a year we will be publishing information on the latest products and ranges at Homebase, together with helpful hints and tips around your house and garden.’
The magazine also includes competitions and special offers for Spend & Save cardholders.
The spring/summer magazine appeared as Spend & Save cardholders numbered more than one million.
The card offers Sainsbury's vouchers to regular spenders.
Picture your dream coming true
If you have always fancied the idea of being a cover girl, this could be an accessible way to live out your fantasy.
Cover Girl International is a make-over and photographic studio based in London.
It specialises in giving everyday people a glamorous look that would do the cover of any top fashion magazine proud.
They are offering all JS staff a session at their studios for the discounted price of £55 [normal price £95].
Photographs are taken by a professional photographer and the prices start at £4O plus VAT for a 1O″ x 8″ print, although it is not compulsory to purchase any of the photographs taken.
Interest free credit is available.
This could be the perfect gift for a special occasion.
If you would be interested in taking advantage of this offer contact  .
Company Golf Day
The superb Belfry was once again the venue for the company Golf Day, held on May 31 and attended by 143 people.
Gale force winds could not blow away the players' enthusiasm but they did make it very hard work.
Tee off times ran according to plan, allowing players time for some quick refreshments at the 19th hole before dinner.
The day started off on a bad note for Jess James from Charlton depot, his car broke down just 15 minutes from The Belfry.
When the AA van arrived they informed him they could not take his car home unless he or his girlfriend were in the recovery van.
So, Jess was chauffeur driven to The Belfry while his girlfriend went home with the very nice man from the AA in the recovery truck.
Jess was one of the many who were very pleased to reach the 19th hole.
The Journal's editorial assistant Kerry Cohen joined the 143 players.
In gale force winds, and weighed down by a camera around her neck, she just missed bringing us back a prize but she managed to capture some winning shots.
After a delicious meal, the day's organiser, district manager Rod Brooksby, announced the winners, and area director John Phillipson presented the prizes.
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD SPORTS DAY
The darts tournament usually dominates the day's events at the annual sports day held at the Dacorum Sports Centre in Hemel Hempstead each year.
And this year was no exception, with a mammoth 2OO entrants.
Every contest had its own small drama, not least in the women's singles final.
Karen Rowbottom from Cobham branch was cruelly deprived of the winner's title again this year, not only in the singles but also in the doubles final — virtually identical to her results for each of the last four years.
She was pipped by reluctant newcomer Jane Lester of Basildon Savacentre who was so doubtful of her abilities that she virtually had to be carried up to the oche.
Maybe we will find out next year if it was just beginners luck.
The men's singles final was an all West Green affair, as it was for Woodhall farm last year.
Woodhall farm were able to console themselves by retaining the Arcade team trophy.
Regular stars of the contest, Alan Crossthwaite and Tony Dance, both fought hard in the singles final, but it was Alan who was able to draw on the experience of his many double successes to come out on top.
Jonathon Hymas of Stafford continued his domination of the Dacorum men's squash despite the finest efforts of young pretender Robert Hensley, a student from Dartford.
Similarly, in the women's competition, Sandra Smith of Letchworth held her winner's title from newcomer Geraldine Robinson of Lincoln.
The SSA would particularly like to thank Crispin On of Dulwich for his fine efforts in organising the squash competition.
In addition, it would be nice to see a few more women entering for squash next year.
The badminton men's singles threw up a new champion from a new store this year — Andy Peacock from Apsley Mills — who took the title from the holder, Phil shaw of Charlton depot, in two convincing sets.
Avanda Hopwood from Blackfriars traded in her 1992 plate title for the 1993 women's singles shield which she took in even more convincing fashion than Andy.
She narrowly missed adding to the silverware in both the mixed and women's doubles too.
FIVE-A-SIDE AT HIGHBURY
Four days after ‘The Gunners’ narrowly beat Sheffield Wednesday on Highbury's main pitch, Islington romped home to a 2-O defeat of Cardiff's Thornhill team on the astroturf at Highbury's indoor pitch.
The prestigious venue was host to 46 teams on a muggy Sunday.
They fought tooth and nail through an initial series of leagues and finished in seven knockout matches.
Two South Wales teams, Thornhill and Newport, made it to one semi-final, and two London teams, Central and Western area office and Islington, met in the other.
Area director Terry Wigley was on hand to present the new trophy to Islington.
Islington JS followed in the footsteps of their all-conquering home team, FA Cup winners Arsenal, when they raised the winner's trophy at the first Central and Western area five-a-side tournament on May 23.
‘The whole event was organised to replace the old family day tournaments and was a runaway success.
It was such an excellent atmosphere that I hope we can make it an annual fixture.’
Organiser, Jim Rooney, Watford Branch Manager.
CHECK THIS OUT
Sheila's second service
The more things change, the more they stay the same.
This is certainly true of JS stores as Sheila Farmer knows.
Sheila worked at 97 Kingston on the cheese and butter counter from 1955 for 11 years until she left to start a family.
She then returned to work for JS in 1992 at Watchmoor Park, on the deli counter, having been a customer throughout the decades which saw the development of supermarkets into the modern stores of today.
Sheila said: ‘It's funny how times change.
I used to work on a service counter in the 5Os, and here I am back at JS still working on a service counter in the 9Os’
Pump up the volume
Opening Larkfield's petrol station was Ray Hayne's first official function as district manager on South Eastern area since he took over from Alan Rowland on his retirement.
The tape was cut by Ray and Debra Mason, petrol station section manager, allowing the first customers in to take advantage of the low priced JS petrol.
Lord Sainsbury cheques in with Nine Elms
Everything in the garden was lovely when Lord Sainsbury of Drury Lane visited trinity Hospice in Clapham with members of Nine elms.
Lord sainsbury and representatives of the store gathered in the hospice's gardens to present a cheque for £2, OOO raised through the Penny Back Scheme, collections in the foyer and a sponsored walk.
Stephen Benson accepted the cheque on behalf of the hospice.
District raises funds in memory of Leonora
On April 29, Michael Goodman, district manager, South Western area, launched his district fundraising activities in aid of the Leonora Children's Cancer Trust.
The money raised will fund the training of a MacMillan nurse, who will nurse terminally ill children in their own homes.
The Trust was set up by Lord and Lady Romsey after their eight year old daughter died of cancer.
The next six months will see plenty of activity, with the main fundraising event being a raffle.
Prizes will total £17, OOO — a Ford Mondeo car will be the first prize, with further prizes of camcorders, holidays, colour televisions and JS gift vouchers.
Tickets are 5Op each and may be obtained from Stuart Willis, branch manager of Feltham.
The raffle will be drawn on November 6, at the district's racing evening, to be held at Thorpe Park.
The funds from the raffle, along with those from the facing evening, cricket day, and auction evening are expected to reach £75, OOO.
Knockout victory for South Eastern team
Victory was sweet for the Sainsbury's team at the National Grocers Benevolent Fund ‘It's a Knockout’ held on May 16.
The competition was held at thorpe Park and 2O teams competed from companies such as Asda, Kwik Save, Safeway, Tesco, Golden Wonder and many more.
the JS team was made up of 23 staff from Ray Hayne's district in the South Eastern area.
The event lasted all day, with two heats of ten teams, the top three from each going on to the final.
JS won the first heat comfortably, under the captaincy of Nick Keyte, manager of Gravesend.
Team manager Mike Bantin, manager of Folkestone, said: ‘The team won the South Eastern area fun day competitions on the last two occasions, so we relished the opportunity to compete on behalf of the company in a national event.’
The team certainly lived up to its reputation as it whipped first place from under the noses of the Golden Wonder team at the end of the last game.
The Big Breakfast with six side orders
A ‘Big Breakfast’ it may have been, but when Chris Evans left after the show on April 18, what followed was a case of scrambled identity, not scrambled eggs.
For there in front of him were six lookalikes, and one of them was none other than our own Chris Stocks, provisions manager at Farlington.
Chris Stocks was set up by a friend when The Sun newspaper asked readers to send in photographs of Chris Evans lookalikes.
Chris [Stocks]was a little surprised to say the least when he arrived home from his holiday to be told that The sun newspaper had been trying to contact him, asking him to go to London to play a practical joke on the king of practical jokers Chris Evans.
The six best lookalikes chosen by the newspaper waited outside the lock keepers' cottages in East London where the Big Breakfast is filmed.
Chris said: ‘As Chris Evans left the studio the look on his face was as if he was hallucinating.
There he was face to face with himself — times six.
He was really shocked.’
After photographs were taken, Chris Evans commented: ‘I don't think even I know which one is me.’
The picture appeared in the centre pages of The Sun on April 21.
5O golden years
April 26 was a very special day for Edie Parson, a packer at Salisbury.
as she and her husband Eddie celebrated their Golden Wedding anniversary.
Edie has worked for JS for almost four years and at the age of 69 is very active, enjoying walking, gardening and travelling.
A party was organised for the couple by their family, and several of Edie's colleagues attended.
CHECK THIS OUT
Matthews make a run for it
Matthew Smith, evening display assistant London Road, was one of the thousands of people who ran the NutraSweet London Marathon on April 18.
His report gives an insight into how it feels to take part.
‘It was the biggest day of my life.
Standing waiting to start was the most incredible feeling.
‘It was my first marathon, so I didn't know what to expect.
I wanted to prove to myself that I could finish the race, and I didn't want to disappoint those who had sponsored me.
‘I was at the back of the line up at Blackheath which was a little disconcerting.
when I finally got to the start line at 9.41 am I started to pick my way through the crowd, with difficulty.
‘At nine miles I felt fine, but kept thinking that I was only one third of the way round the course.
At 16–17 miles my hamstrings were starting to burn slightly, and I knew the pain barrier was close.
‘At 18 miles I saw my parents standing in the crowd and this lifted me tremendously.
At 19 miles I was greeted by some close friends from college and again this gave me the extra energy I needed.
‘Once I hit the 2O mile mark I started to feel stronger and my speed picked up slightly, but as I ran up the Mall towards Buckingham Palace I discovered a new meaning to the word pain.
Without the spectators cheering me on I don't think I could have had such a good race.
The last 385 yards across Westminster Bridge were unbelievable.
I watched the clock ticking away as I approached, and when I passed through the finish line I held my arms up to heaven and with my eyes closed said ‘Thank you god.
It's over.’
‘It's an experience I will always remember, and I shall relive those memories of the finish line next year when I hope to break the three hour barrier.’
I raised over £4OO in total, which I gave to Cancer Research and the Multiple Sclerosis Society.’
Congratulations to Matthew who finished the race in three hours 17 minutes.
Matthew Brady, senior butcher from Walthamstow, was another of the brave who endured 26 miles of sweat and pain to complete the London Marathon.
Matthew raised over £1,1OO in sponsorship money, which he donated to the Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Fundraising goes swimmingly
Central and Western area office entered a team into the National Swimathon and, hedging their bets, called themselves ‘The Sainsbury's Sinkers or Swimmers.’
The team of five swam 1, OOO metres each at the High Grove Swimming Pool in Ruislip and in doing so raised over £9OO, to be distributed between The British Red Cross, the NSPCC and The Spastics Society.
Stockport rocks around the clock
Stockport enjoyed a swinging time on April 3, when a 5Os and 6Os disco was held to raise money for Guide Dogs for the Blind.
The disco, held in a local hall, raised almost £1OO.
The dancing was to good old rock and roll music, and even those who were just a twinkle in their father's eye in the 6Os joined in with the jiving fun.
Glenis' award gets community cooking
Glenis Pike, customer services manager at Swansea Homebase was delighted to receive a £5OO Sainsbury's Community Service Award, and said: ‘The money will be used to buy a much needed new cooker for my local community centre in Waunarlwydd, Swansea.’
Pool final decides six month competition
Pool players from Central and Western area had already achieved much to reach the annual pool competition final.
District competitions were held over a period of six months and finalists and runners-up from these matches went on to represent their district at the area competition.
Over 1OO staff were at the Springlakes Country club in Aldershot, all competing to become champions.
There were four competitions: men's singles, women's singles, women's doubles and mixed doubles.
Doug's nomination wins through
Douglas Groom, checkout assistant at Bramingham Park, was delighted to learn that his nomination for the Good Neighbour Scheme had been successful.
Doug is a committee member of a local day centre, which desperately needed the new computer furniture the money was able to buy.
Doug said: ‘We had the equipment but not the furniture in which to store it.
These new terminals make everything so much tidier.
Doug would like to hear from any other wheelchair users working in JS stores to exchange working experiences.
Brighton or bust
At 7.
OOam on a crisp Spring morning, 2O staff from Wallington set off on a 46 mile sponsored bike ride from Wallington to Brighton.
The ride was in aid of the Queen Mary Hospital for Children, just a mile away from the branch.
The trip took six hours and lots of energy, but raised over £1, OOO.
Branch manager Richard Fairhurst took a back seat for the day, as he rode along on the back of a tandem.
Majella makes light of eight hour Feathers walk
Majella Carroll spent eight hours walking through hills and dales in Wales to raise money to support a workshop for people with mental disorders.
Majella, assistant personnel manager at Charlton depot, raised £213 for the feathers Workshop in Greenwich by completing the 15 mile walk.
People can go along to Feathers, which is run solely on donations, for a day and become involved in all sorts of activities.
The money was used to buy equipment for the garden.
Pennies raise sounds
Customers who donated their pennies to the Penny Back Scheme at Archer Road have helped to provide sound waves at Sheffield's Children's Hospital.
The £798 raised was donated to the hospital's radio station Crystal Radio.
Deputy manager Philip Ronan presented the cheque to Herold [Bomber]Graham, former European and British Middleweight Boxing Champion, who accepted it on behalf of the hospital.
CHECK THIS OUT
Splashing out in Surrey
Over 15O staff from around the London area spent Sunday April 25 getting bruised and muddy while shooting each other in a Surrey wood.
Surprisingly enough, the eight teams were doing this for fun, as part of a ‘paintball’ tournament.
the combatants — from JS head office, Homebase head office and six London branches — battled it out through games of sharp-shooting and endurance in jungles, streams and forts to reveal Streatham Common branch the all-conquering heros.
The combined Staines/Nine Elms team somehow managed to finish with a negative score, which earned them the title of ‘most sporting team’, and saved head office teams from occupying the last two positions!
Get yourself a ticket to ride
The excitement is mounting as the Sainsbury's fun weekend at Alton Towers gets closer.
On Saturday, July 31, and Sunday, August 1, you can enjoy all the thrills and chills of Alton Towers for just £7.99 adults, £7.5O for children [under 14]and £5.
OO for veterans — children under four are free.
The usual adult ticket price is £13 and children's £9.99 so the Sainsbury's offer really does represent good value.
All members of JS, Savacentre and Homebase, as well as their families and all Group veterans can take advantage.
For every ticket bought, £1 will be donated to a children's charity, chosen by you.
The Haunted House dark ride, set in Gloomy Wood, the Congo River Rapids and the Runaway Mine train, are just a few of the exciting rides that will keep you and the children amused all day.
There are several restaurants and snack bars in the park to choose from, or you could take a picnic and relax in the beautiful gardens.
There will be a special category in this year's Photographic Competition, to be launched next month, especially for those who attend Alton Towers fun weekend, so stock up on film now.
Get the children to take their autograph book as there should be an opportunity to do some celebrity spotting.
And watch out for the Sains-berries on the day.
If you haven't already sent off your booking form do so today, and see the next Journal for more details.
Until sanity returns
Delivering provisions is a job familiar to Rob Tucker.
As a driver at Buntingford depot, he does it every working day.
Earlier this year, however, the same task took on an extraordinary aspect when he delivered much-needed supplies to Zagreb in Croatia.
Rob, along with locals Vic Cope and Phil Harper, spent three long, hard days and nights driving a TK Bedford 2,271 miles from Royston to Caratis in Zagreb and back as part of a Friendship Link between Great St Mary's Church in Cambridge and St Mary's Parish in Caratis.
When the three met with Father Vinko, the parish priest at Caratis, they found him to be a cheerful ‘hands on’ worker.
Rob reported: ‘His prime consideration is for people, regardless of religion, colour, nationality or political persuasion.’
At the time of their arrival, 7OOO, OOO refugees were being cared for but nearly 1, OOO more were arriving every day.
These people had been driven from their homes with nothing but the clothes they stood up in and had struggled through a war-torn countryside, sometimes in sub-zero temperatures, to reach a refuge where food, shelter and warm clothing were in very short supply.
As Rob said: ‘Our contribution hardly scratched the surface of what was needed out there, but it's essential that every effort is made to make life bearable until sanity returns.’
‘Father Vinko told us they really need food, in the form of hampers, electrical goods, pots, pans, plates, knives, forks and spoons.
They also need furniture, bedding, towels and clothing, separated for men, women, children and babies and labelled as top clothes, undergarments, jumpers etc. and, as he is trying to organise some basic schooling for the many children, he needs paper, pens and pencils.’
If you can spare any of the above, or if you would care to make a donation towards a further trip, please contact Rob on .
Customers can and Ali Can
Customers of Tamworth can now dispose of their rubbish at the same time as doing their shopping, as there are now recycling facilities in the car park.
The mayor of Tamworth was there to officiate the opening of the facilities, and was encouraging the younger generation to help the environment by recycling.
The Mayor with a local school girl, handing her empty cans over to Alcan mascot, Ali Can.
NEW LINES
Supermario Rolls into Stores
Sainsbury's likes to keep up with children's computer crazes and, following the success of the SuperMario party cake designed by Jane Asher, SuperMario Mini rolls have now been launched.
SuperMario Mini rolls are chocolate flavoured mini rolls, covered in real milk chocolate, with a chocolate buttercream filling.
Each mini roll is individually wrapped and features a character from the SuperMario computer game.
They retail at £1.55 for 12 and are available in most branches.
THIS SEASON SALADS ARE FLOWER DRESSING
JS has launched a new range of salads, all in the style of a particular country or region.
New tray pack salads with dressings come in five varieties: Caribbean with Tangy Lemon Dressing; Chinese with Sesame Oil Dressing; Indian with Mild Curry Dressing; Mediterranean with Vinaigrette Dressing, and Mexican with Mild Chilli Dressing.
All are 99p in over 2OO branches.
Alongside these, the seasonal range of edible flowers is back on the shelves of stores causing great media and customer interest.
The nasturtium salad provides a deliciously spicy flavour, with trumpet shaped blooms which come in a variety of colours; the Mixed Edible Flowers contains marigold, nasturtium, pansy, viola and borage flowers along with nasturtium leaves, and Sainsbury's Speciality Salad contains a variety of flowers as well as lamb's lettuce and feuille de chene.
Flowers can transform the appearance of drinks, desserts and salads when they are sprinkled with petals, or garnished with whole flowers.
All these products are available in selected stores at £1.
O9.
THE STATIONERY RANGE THAT DOESN'T STAND STILL
There have been thousands of words written on recycled paper and now there will be even more as JS has launched a new range of recycled stationery.
These products extend the range of JS Revive products which previously comprised tissues, toilet tissues and kitchen rolls.
A selection of products is available: envelopes, two pads — scribbling and writing, reporters notebook, subject dividers and document wallets.
All are made from 1OO per cent recycled paper with a packaging design that presents a strong graphic green message.
These retail from 45p up to £1.15 and are available in 19O stores.
ONCE UPON A SHELF
‘Mirror mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?’ is just one of many lines that will keep children enthralled in the new Sainsbury Book of Fairytales.
The book, available in most stores at £3.45, contains ten of the best known children's tales, including Puss in Boots, Snow White, Rapunzel and Cinderella.
All are simply written with beautiful illustrations.
UNITED COLOURS OF JS ITALIAN SANDWICHES
Sainsbury's has launched two new Italian bread sandwiches into 125 stores.
Italian Style Black Olive Bread Sandwiches are filled with egg, tomato, marinated peppers and onions with a caper and garlic mayonnaise.
Italian Style Tomato Bread Sandwiches are filled with Mozzarella, Fontina, Bel Paese and Parmesan cheese and tomato.
These sandwiches offer exotic alternatives to the already extensive sandwich range, and were introduced in response to the recent popularity of speciality breads and the wide appeal of Italian food.
Both retail at £1.49.
JS has also launched its first sweet dessert sandwich — Banana Date and Raisin Sandwich made from a honey and sunflower seed bun loaf — which is in 125 branches and retails at £1.29.
All three of these sandwiches are exclusive to JS.
SCENTS OF SUMMER
Tropez, Infinity, Yanice and Ravenna are the names of four new body sprays introduced by JS.
Tropez is warm and magical, Infinity is timeless and floral, Yanice is an exotic blend of rich fragrances, and Ravenna is a classical fine fragrance.
The sprays contain a gentle but effective deodorant for day long freshness.
All four represent excellent value for money at £1.29 for 1OOml.
For men there is the new Reflex Maine Body Spray.
An exciting fragrance with a hint of ocean breeze, it will particularly appeal to younger men.
Reflex retails at £1.59 for 15Oml.
Both body sprays are available in larger JS stores.
DESIGNER TOMATOES
JS has launched two new British grown tomatoes — Momotara and Flavia — which join the Sungold and Manhattan tomatoes, launched last year, to make a total of four British grown, named varieties.
The Momotara is a large pink-fleshed tomato, with an attractive appearance and delicious flavour.
The Flavia is a small tomato, which is left on the vine longer to develop a fuller flavour.
Both will be in season from April to October, and available in most stores.
They currently retail at £1.29 per lb for the Momotara and £1.39 per 4OOg for the Flavia.
Another new addition to the range is a mixed pack, containing three yellow and three red tomatoes.
The yellow tomatoes have a standard tomato flavour and provide an excellent colour contrast in salads.
They retail for 95p for a pack of six, and are currently in selected stores only.
LIFESTYLE CHICKENS
As customers express a growing interest in how farm animals are reared, JS has sourced a new chicken.
West Country chickens are raised on small farms in the West of England, and have access to the outdoors during the day.
This freedom together with a diet of high cereal and whole wheat, and the JS combination of traditional methods of maturation with modern chilling and packaging methods, produce these full flavoured, succulent and tender chickens.
They retail at £1.19 per lb and are available in almost all stores.
ARCHIVES
PACKAGING FOR SELF SERVICE
With the changeover from a counter service to a self service style of shopping in the 195Os, a great revolution in packaging techniques was required.
In the early days, the salesman behind the counter had served to promote the merits of different products, and to wrap them carefully for the customer's homeward journey.
With self-service the product had to work hard to sell itself, and it had to withstand the new phenomenon of customer handling.
By the end of rationing in 1954, most foods required some kind of packaging.
Many factors had to be taken into account in the design of packaging for this new style of shopping: the package had to be sufficiently strong and protective of its contents, and able to withstand handling; it had to offer the customer information about the product with clear and concise labelling; it had to be easily identifiable from any angle; it had to be quick, easy and safe to stack and to look attractive both on its own and in bulk displays.
consideration had to be given to what were convenient and acceptable quantities to offer customers, and to the cost of the packaging both the company and to the customers.
Own brand packaging was also a useful vehicle for promoting a strong corporate image, and in 195O Leonard Beaumont was appointed as design consultant to JS.
Through the use of consistent graphics on shop fascias and vehicles, as well as packaging, Beaumont created an image which reflected the firm's reputation for quality and cleanliness.
Advances in packaging technology paralleled the growth of self-service shopping, particularly in the field of transparent wrapping materials.
However, when JS opened their first self service shop in Croydon in 195O, there were only two types of film available — a permeable film and a moisture-proof film that could be used to wrap products such as biscuits.
Polythene was still unheard of.
While card was cheap and readily available in the 195Os, transparent cellulose film was relatively expensive and therefore designs were economical in its use.
A JS walnut pack from 1951 had a cellulose window on one side so that the nuts were visible, but featured a half-tone image of the walnuts on the bottom of the pack.
Many foods had never been pre-packaged before the advent of self-service.
Eggs, for example, were traditionally sold loose from wooden crates or boxes, and the customer took them home with great care in paper bags.
In 1953, when eggs came off the ration, Sainsbury's introduced a four-egg pack.
It was attractive with a fresh, clean image but was not sufficiently robust to withstand stacking on shelves and customer handling and was replaced three years later by the ‘France Oeuf’ carton.
This was a considerable improvement, providing good visibility and protection for the eggs as well as being sturdy enough to withstand machine-filling.
‘Advances in packaging technology paralleled the growth of self service shopping, particularly in the field of transparent wrapping materials.’
Part two of the archives' look at the history of packaging at Sainsbury's.
Croydon again, showing egg boxes on shelves.
Egg basket, 1953.
Walnut pack with cellulose window, 1951.