

Cost control key to '93
Courtaulds chief executive Sipko Huismans speaks frankly about the year ahead.
Full interview on page 4.
COURTAULDS is coming through a difficult trading period in reasonable health.
But costs will have to be squeezed in 1993 to ensure we stay in good shape.
That's how chief executive Sipko Huismans views the year ahead.
‘If there is anything that will be the theme for Courtaulds in 1993 it will be ‘costs matter’,’ he told Courtauld News in a New Year interview.
‘We must never lose sight of what a tremendous weapon being cost competitive is for ensuring the survival of jobs and businesses.’
The company has had to face an ‘extremely hostile’ trading environment, but will now gain some benefit from the stronger dollar, he said.
All UK businesses exporting to continental Europe or farther afield — fibres, chemicals and films among them — should find the exchange rate movement to their advantage.
But Mr Huismans sees little sign yet of a consumer-led recovery in the American economy giving a significant boost to Courtaulds' operations there.
Among the hardest hit has been Aerospace, which faces a tough time over the next two to three years.
Against that, fibre factories and others at the ‘heavy end’ of the business are back in full production and Tencel, Courtaulds' new solvent-spun cellulosic fibre, is going well.
Mr Huismans, who attended the Tencel plant opening in Mobile on December 2, said: ‘The potential for a real breakthrough is there.
‘It would be very appropriate for Courtaulds — the first company in the world to exploit viscose rayon — to repeat history at the end of the century and be the first to exploit this new technology.’
If it goes as well as expected, decisions will have to be made this year on how best to scale up the operation and where to site the next expansion, he said.
Looking further ahead, he added: ‘Much of what matters for Courtaulds in the next century will be decided between now and 1995 — what kind of company we're going to be and what the balance between the businesses will be.’
Mr Huismans reacted strongly to the Euro-rebels who oppose Britain's growing involvement in Europe.
Any move to isolate Britain from Europe would be ‘extremely damaging’ to Courtaulds and could reduce the size of our UK activities, he warned.
Number 1
STUDIOS created for Courtaulds' luxury flooring company Amtico have won a top design award.
The Design Effectiveness Award in the interior design, office and commercial category of the scheme organised by the British Design Business Association, was presented in London in December.
The Amtico studios were judged on their commercial effectiveness rather than aesthetic content.
New look
PART of a Courtaulds business in France — supplying packaging materials for fresh fruit and vegetables — starts off the year under new ownership.
The Primeurs division of Fournier, based in Avignon, has been sold to local producer Gattini.
Thirty employees were transferred in the deal and another 35 lost their jobs.
Still retained under the Fournier operation is a business supplying flexible packaging materials for snack foods, dry goods and confectionery, which employs 70 people.
Milestone
EMPLOYEES at Courtaulds' acrylic fibre plant in Spain have celebrated the company's 25th anniversary.
The Barcelona company, established in a joint venture between three companies under the name Cyaneka and acquired by Courtaulds in 1984, marked the occasion with a series of events.
These included taking 25 of the Courtelle manufacturer's major domestic customers on a trip to Holland and then to the Expofil exhibition in Paris.
Top prize
A STUDENT has won a £500 human resources prize from Courtaulds for his work on recruitment techniques and reviewing performance.
Desmond Oliver, a student at Cranfield School of Management, was presented with his award by Courtaulds chief executive Sipko Huismans.
The award goes to the Cranfield student presenting the best dissertation relevant to Courtaulds' activities.
A new age dawns
THIS is the moment history was made.
The ribbon is cut to mark the official opening of the Tencel plant in Mobile, Alabama, USA.
Performing the honours are Courtaulds chief executive Sipko Huismans and Alabama governor Guy Hunt, accompanied by other company executives and guests.
Full story and more pictures about Courtaulds' newest business on pages 2 and 3.
TENCEL
WHAT THE PAPERS SAY
TENCEL came under the media spotlight in December, with television, radio, newspapers, magazines and trade press covering the Mobile opening.
Here's what some of them said:
Home Furnishing Design:
If it feels like cotton, wears like polyester and holds  color like cotton, it must be — Tencel, the new Courtaulds fibre that's been 10 years and $200 million in the making…
…
It's expensive, and there are some kinks to be worked out with dyeing and finishing.
But there is growing sentiment that, once these areas are ironed out, Tencel can become a big player in the better home furnishings and apparel markets.
Daily News Record:
The environmental factor is playing well with mills and converters…
Women's Wear Daily:
…the jury is still out on just how successful the new cellulosic fibre from Courtaulds  Fibers Inc might be.
European Chemical News:
The opening ceremony represented Courtaulds' opportunity to rededicate itself to a business in which it has been a world leader throughout most of this century…
…
The fact that the solvent is totally recycled, together with the use of a renewable raw material — woodpulp derived from managed forests — affords Tencel a valuable environmentally friendly tag over which the textile industry is particularly enthusiastic.
Chemical Week:
Even as it formally commissioned its $100 million Tencel  fibers plant…
Courtaulds was planning additional investments in its cellulose  fibers business.
Long and winding road leads official launch of new fibre
Global attack moves faster
AS TENCEL garments begin to appear in more top stores across America, the assault on global markets is spreading wider, and moving faster.
Co-ordinated campaigns will spread the message to manufacturers, retailers and consumers through the rest of this year, with the object of selling every piece of fibre that comes out of Mobile.
‘1993 will be the year when we really hit the market,’ said Robert Feil, vice-president and general manager of Courtaulds' Tencel business.
‘Demand for fibre is already outstripping our ability to supply.
We're shipping to Japan and the US and we'll start sending fibre to Europe as soon as the demand there grows.’
Progress
Mr Feil declared himself ‘ecstatic’ with the plant's progress in Mobile, coming through its commissioning phase with no serious technical hitches and moving well on the way towards full production.
‘A year ago we were really nowhere,’ he told Courtauld News.
‘With some very good marketing campaigns in the US, Europe and Japan, the awareness of Tencel has jumped quite high.
‘We have people asking for information about it every day.
The mills seem to be well pleased with it and we're now getting interest from clothing manufacturers and even consumers.
‘I think the Tencel image is developing the way we envisioned.’
After focusing on denim initially, new piece-dyed fabrics are being developed in 100 per cent Tencel and blends with cotton, wool and linen.
Knitted goods are also coming through.
In the industrial area, good headway is being made with backing fabrics for abrasive cloth and printers' blankets, while nonwoven uses include floppy disk liners and pads for medical and hygiene products.
A key objective since Tencel was launched has been to position it at the top end of the market, working with the best mills, converters and manufacturers and attracting a premium price for the fibre.
The aim is also to carve out new market areas — like denim — which do not compete directly with rayon.
Targeting the right potential customers has been the job of Tencel's marketing team, led in the US by , director of textile marketing.
‘You have to choose the correct mill to begin with and work very closely with them as a partner,’ she said.
‘That's exactly what we have done with innovative textile producers like Burlington Denim.
‘I speak at customer sales meetings to help them understand what Tencel is all about as well as prepare trade advertising or even a video to assist our mill customers launch their Tencel fabric collections.’
The next marketing broadside will be an education programme aimed at leading US retailers such as Saks Fifth Avenue and Neiman Marcus.
Special promotions, catalogue advertising and in-store events are planned, as more Tencel garments like jeans, blouses and jackets begin to appear in the shops.
Leading designers working with the fibre include .
Retail
‘So far we have been very trade oriented in our advertising,’ said .
‘Consumers don't really know Tencel yet but once merchandise is available at retail stores and our in-store events begin they will become aware of Tencel as a luxury fibre.’
She works closely with , Tencel's international director of marketing, on a global plan which takes account of the different approach needed in each country.
The American market is more volume oriented — very price sensitive and driven by major chains and large department stores.
Europe is more speciality-oriented, with smaller mills and converters.
Courtaulds' challenge is to tune into the demand and drive it forward fast enough to translate technological lead into sales success.
It's green for go!
WE'RE UP, we're running and we're on our way.
That was Courtaulds' buoyant message to the market when it launched Tencel on the latest stage of its pioneering journey in December.
Customers and journalists didn't have to take the company's word for it.
They were given a grandstand view of how the world's first new man-made fibre for 30 years is manufactured.
Production had been building up at Courtaulds' $85 million plant near Mobile, Alabama, since June, 1992.
But the official opening on December 2 was the first time outsiders had been allowed to see Tencel rolling off the spinning lines.
Bathed in glorious sunshine, the plant looked an impressive sight as Guy Hunt, governor of Alabama, cut the ribbon that signalled: ‘We're in business.’
Guests
There to watch him were more than 200 invited guests, including textile designers, producers, analysts and journalists from America, Europe and Japan, and a clutch of local dignitaries.
Welcoming them, Courtaulds chief executive Sipko Huismans hailed the event as a second start for Tencel, following its research beginnings 12 years ago in Britain.
‘We've travelled a tremendously long road and this is a great day for us,’ he said.
‘I am proud of Tencel.
It's our own technology, totally-owned.
What gives me greatest pride is that it means Courtaulds will end the century in the same business it started.
Very few companies can claim that.’
He thanked all who had helped to make Tencel a success — scientists working in the Coventry laboratories, people who developed the technology at Grimsby and those who built, started up and were now running the Mobile plant.
Enormous thanks were also due to company people and customers — especially in Japan, USA, Spain and Italy — who were developing products for the market, he added.
Gordon Campbell, Courtaulds director responsible for fibres, predicted an exciting future for Tencel, saying that extensive market development work had confirmed its potential in textile applications.
During the opening ceremony Governor Hunt paid special tribute to Courtaulds' long association with Alabama — it has been making viscose rayon there for 40 years — presenting a ‘birthday’ proclamation to David Duthie, head of the company's Cellulosics business.
‘We want to be an on-going part of Alabama's growth,’ said Dr Duthie in reply.
Later visitors had a chance to look round the factory.
About 20 groups toured the plant, stopping at strategic points for an explanation of the process.
They were impressed by the eco-friendly solvent spinning operation, which starts with harvested woodpulp and uses chemicals which can be totally recycled.
Fashion
An evening fashion show demonstrated Tencel's exciting impact in fabric and garment form.
Men's and women's clothing on parade ranged from denim jeans and skirts to jersey dresses and chambray shirts, produced by top designers such as.
Buyers' verdicts
THEY came from four continents — a cross-section of customers covering the whole textile chain, from yarn spinners and fabric producers to dyers, finishers and garment manufacturers.
These are the people Courtaulds has to please if Tencel is going to take off.
Courtauld News carried out a spot check of opinions.
‘We're switching into Tencel and cotton fabrics for the whole of our next collection — that's lifestyle contemporary sportswear for women.
‘The apparel industry has been searching for something new for a long time and this is something which will be exciting.
‘Tencel reminds us a lot of gaberdine slacks.
It looks good, travels well, you can wash it and the environmental aspects are very impressive.’
‘As greige weavers, we're using Tencel for strength and other properties.
‘It's enabling us to get the effects we need in blends, primarily with wool, mainly for women's wear.
‘We have some fabrics out but no major programmes yet.
We expect to get more into it for late winter and next spring.
So far we're very encouraged.’
‘When I saw Tencel early on and heard the story about it I thought it was a great breakthrough.
Texturing it was the big challenge.
‘After I became involved we came up with denim products, which had great success for ladies’ fashions.
This gave me confidence to go ahead and develop other things.
‘As president of a manufacturing company, I was very impressed by the degree of computerisation and automation at the Tencel plant and I envy Courtaulds for this.’
‘Through our Ecocollection, we are researching alternative ways of doing business, with environmental, social and cultural criteria as primary concerns.
‘Tencel, in cellulosics, is leading in the environmental aspects.
For me as a designer, the feel is similar to rayon, with lustre and drapeability.
‘We used it for shirting in 1992 and we're using it in blends with linen for suitings for spring 1993.’
‘We are spinners and weavers and have been customers of Courtaulds for 20 years.
‘Tencel is something that all the high fashion companies in Italy now are asking about.
They are very curious.
‘Maybe we can give them the opportunity to do something new, to wake up a little bit of the market.
This can be a good opportunity also to make the final consumer curious.’
‘I have been involved with Tencel since the early '80s.
We developed the solvent for the process.
‘It blows my mind to see it come through like this.
It's absolutely fantastic and it's a vindication that we can still do something new technology-wise.
‘I think it says a lot about creativeness, ingenuity and that the inventive spirit is not dead.’
‘I am using it in yarn-dyed form for things like Tencel/rayon chambray for jackets and dresses.
‘Tencel's main appeal for me is the strength of the fibre, the way it drapes, the way it handles and the finishing effects you can get.
‘It's a beautiful fabric to work with.
People love to touch it and feel it — I've had tremendous response from my customers.’
BRIEFING
How we're going to stay strong
LIKE most companies, Courtaulds has had to combat difficult trading conditions over the past 12 months.
How well is it taking the strain?
And what lies ahead in 1993?
Chief executive Sipko Huismans gives his view from the top in this interview with Courtauld News.
Q. If you were a doctor, what would be your verdict on Courtaulds' state of health?
I would say that Courtaulds is reasonably healthy in an extremely hostile environment.
Imagine you were living in Mexico City, one of the most polluted environments in the world.
If you were a weak patient you would die.
If you were strong you would put up with it, even if you had to cough and splutter because of the bad air around you.
That's Courtaulds.
We're spluttering but we're surviving.
Economic circumstances have been poor and for the chemical industry they were absolutely diabolical by the middle of the past year.
We took a hit in line with others.
I don't see much evidence of an upturn yet but at least Courtaulds has had a break with the strengthening of the dollar.
Things we make in the UK are much more readily exportable than they used to be because of this.
Q. Which of our businesses benefit from the stronger dollar?
Primarily fibres, UK and Spanish acrylics, UK chemicals, Italian yarns and to a lesser extent films.
All those businesses exporting from the UK to continental Europe gain some benefit.
Those exporting to markets beyond the European Community gain quite considerably — improving their competitive power by 15 per cent or so, which is dramatic.
Q. Aren't there signs of improvement in the American economy?
I read about that in the papers.
I don't see much of it in our own businesses at the moment.
There's no doubt we will benefit if the American economy recovers and consumer confidence starts to build.
What's important for us is that people should move houses, repaint them, put new windows, carpets and curtains in, change cars and fly in aeroplanes.
Those things will help Courtaulds and they tend to come when the economy improves.
Let's see.
Q. Is this the worst recession you have seen?
Not by any stretch of the imagination.
It's not as bad as the early 1980s was for Courtaulds.
That's partly because the company is much healthier and more robust now.
There's much less flaky stuff that falls off when the pressure comes on.
I'm afraid a lot of bits fell off during the '80s.
What's left now is much more solid.
Q. Is there a message there for other businesses in Courtaulds?
Yes, it's that we can never over-emphasise the importance of being cost competitive.
It's a tremendous weapon for ensuring the survival of business and jobs.
After the threats of the early '80s we may well have relaxed a bit.
I think the '90s are going to be a period again of straightforward cost competitiveness, making quality products at prices that make us a profit.
If there is anything that will be the theme for Courtaulds in 1993 it will be ‘costs matter’.
We've had some benefit from devaluation of sterling.
We don't want to squander that through lax cost control, irresponsible pay increases and things like that.
Q. So this is the treatment you prescribe for Courtaulds to stay healthy?
Absolutely.
The only way I would qualify that is by saying that to stay a sound company you have to do lots of things.
We have to walk and chew gum at the same time.
Cost control will serve us well for a single year but it won't give us a company that will survive into the next century.
We have to stay with product innovation, drive forward our successes, carry on improving and carry on being a better company to work for.
Q. Do you see any benefits coming through as a result of actions already taken?
I think we will have a much healthier position in our North American viscose business.
Closing the small, high cost facility in Canada and reducing our operation to two viscose plants will enable us to address a better market with a smaller quantity — I see that as positive.
In the various operations where we are making ourselves more efficient we ought to see margins — the difference between selling price and manufacturing costs — improve.
This is still a key financial objective.
Single digit margins are simply not acceptable in a company like ours.
Q. What changes are planned that will make a difference in 1993?
The most noticeable will be the consequences of reorganising the top management structure in Coatings.
We now have two Group Executive members responsible for two key parts of the world — looking after the Americas and Australia and  looking after Europe.
These will lead to other moves and I have quite positive hopes for what that will bring us in terms of focus and, again, costs.
Q. How do you see the outlook for Courtaulds' markets this year?
I'm not making forecasts.
If I could do that sort of thing I would be writing books and making a fortune from them.
Going back to the medical analogy, no matter what the atmosphere, if you are a strong, healthy patient you will survive whatever the environment throws at you.
If current predictions of a recovery in the economic fortunes of the world come through, we shall be lucky.
If they don't we will tough it out because we are healthy and strong and can go at it with determination and gusto.
Q. What about the problems in Aerospace?
The market is very poor.
We've recently seen the cancellation of a large order for Airbus in the United States.
Everyone of those planes would have been sealed by our materials and painted by our paints.
I think we'll have a tough time for two or three years, but we'll stick with it because it's a good business and it's our kind of business.
Q. What significance do the European single market and GATT world trade talks have for Courtaulds?
I think they have a huge bearing on our activities.
If Britain is determined to creep into an isolationist, single country, stand alone mode, that will change quite drastically our ability to trade with the rest of Europe.
As to GATT, a trade war between America and Europe would be bad for people's stand of living in the long run but it wouldn't have much direct effect on Courtaulds.
What would be extremely damaging to us would be Britain becoming isolated from the rest of Europe.
It would reduce the size of our UK operation, I'm pretty sure of that.
After the Edinburgh summit, that looks much less likely than it did and that can only be good news for Courtaulds.
Q. Are you pinning a lot of hopes on Tencel for the next century?
No, that sounds as if I'm passively waiting for something to turn up.
I'm realistically assessing it and I'm aware of what it could mean to the company.
I see Tencel as something where the company is at its best.
It's what lies at the root of Courtaulds — the manipulation of cellulose.
I don't want to over-hype it, but it would be equally wrong to underestimate what Tencel might be, which is the beginning of a new industry that could be both material to Courtaulds and change the world fibre industry completely.
The potential for a real breakthrough is there.
And it would be very appropriate for Courtaulds — the first company in the world to exploit viscose rayon — to repeat history at the end of the century and be the first to exploit this new technology.
Not many have achieved that.
Q. Are you pleased with customer reactions to Tencel?
I can answer that by telling you what happened to me during the Tencel plant opening at Mobile in December.
On the way to my hotel room I was dragged into a meeting between some Japanese and Spanish weavers.
They were arguing about who had the softest fabric and I was called in as arbitrator.
It struck me that all these people were getting excited about something we had made.
That was the highlight for me.
The key thing that matters now is how rapidly we drive forwards.
Because the more successful we are the more we'll attract competition.
That's why 1993 will be the year in which Tencel proves itself one way or the other.
Much of what matters for Courtaulds in the next century — what kind of company we're going to be and what the balance between the businesses should be — will be decided between now and 1995.
Q. Any final message?
Yes.
Even though we cover 20 businesses in 39 countries, Courtaulds is a pretty close knit company.
We tend to know each other pretty well, and to share a lot of things — goals, objectives, commitments.
It's because we're like this — because of our people — that Courtaulds is successful.
Compared to many companies, we don't have much bureaucracy or formality.
That makes times like this, when we have to cut costs to stay competitive, all the more difficult.
I would like people to know that I understand that and how difficult it can be.
I would like them to know also that this is still first and foremost a people company, and that it will stay that way.
NEWS
Powder champions
HOLIDAYS in Thailand, Greece and London were among the prizes in the Danish Powder Coatings Championship, co-hosted by Courtaulds company International Farvefabrik.
The competition brought together 36 large and small users of powder coatings for the two-day examination of their application skills.
Participants had to coat objects, including garden tools, with powder, aiming for high quality coverage to a specific thickness.
The items were then examined by a judging panel which included , service manager for International in Denmark.
Organising the event, the second of its kind, with International director  was , managing director of Gema Volstatic, suppliers of coatings plant.
Hosted
It was hosted by Egon Munk, managing director of one of Denmark's largest users of Interpon, Dan-color.
The first prize of a holiday to Thailand was won by Per Hougaard from high-pressure engine suppliers Nilfisk Gerni.
Pipe coating company employee Henning Jensen won a trip to Greece while Per Beck, from coatings firm Castella Industrialakering, scooped a weekend in London.
Nilfisk Gerni also received 100 kilos of Interpon free of charge.
Sleek look to Porter
GEARING up to sell Intersleek coatings can be a slippery business.
The paint that puts the skids under barnacles is being adopted by Porter International for protective coatings in the United States.
But first the Louisville-based company — part of Courtaulds Coatings Inc — has to train its salesmen in how best to handle the product.
‘This is a critical exercise for us because of the relative complexity and sophistication of Intersleek,’ said , vice-president, marketing.
‘Training our sales force properly and thoroughly about the market applications is going to make or break our marketing effort.’
Intersleek works by preventing water-borne organisms from sticking to steel and concrete surfaces.
It doesn't kill them, it merely makes them slip off — a feature which can have important environmental advantages.
Marine
Developed originally by International in the UK, the paint has been used successfully by marine businesses for about 10 years.
Porter International is adapting it for power plants, inland waterway structures, any place which is exposed to raw water, where plant or animal life can choke up intakes or block piping.
The Great Lakes area, for instance, is infested with zebra mussels, which stick to anything they can get their suckers on, while certain waters in the Gulf of Mexico suffer from clinging sea grasses.
Porter International is staging a series of two-day training sessions for its salesmen in six cities across America, starting mid-January.
Colour clue to future fashions
LATEST colour ideas from Courtelle UK provide a tantalising glimpse into what next year's fashion-conscious shopper might be buying.
According to Bradford-based marketing executive Caroline Powell, the trend is towards mixed colours with a more natural emphasis.
Instead of solid primary shades, we'll be looking at bluey-greens, pinky-reds and golden yellows, she predicts.
Caroline started working on Courtelle's 1994 colour range last summer, talking to yarn spinners about how the fibre could be used in their upcoming collections.
European spinners were included and , of Courtelle, Paris, provided the French connection.
Now the exercise has moved a further step forward, with yarn ranges presented to knitwear manufacturers and retailers.
First trade showing was at the Expofil exhibition in Paris.
Next will be the British Yarns Show.
By the time garments go on sale next year, the Courtelle colour cycle will have gone through almost two years of planning and development.
Celomer in $5.6m bonanza
INTERNATIONAL Celomer in France has landed its biggest ever paint contract — a massive 1,200,000 litres worth $5.6 million (£3.7m).
The order is for five gas tankers being built in France by Chantiers de L'Atlantique for Malaysian shipping company Petronas.
Although largely secured by the efforts of , Celomer's contact with Chantiers, the four-year contract is the result of worldwide co-operation by Courtaulds companies in France, the Far East and the UK, where the paint is made at Fellings.
Below
Intersmooth tin-free anti-fouling is being used below the waterline and Interfine for the superstructure.
The choice of Interfine is unusual for the tanker industry.
One of its key properties is to hide unsightly rust deposits and is popular with cruise ship and ferry operators.
‘It suggests tanker owners are becoming more concerned about the cosmetic appearance of their fleets,’ said , Celomer's yacht operations manager for southern Europe.
While the marine division of Celomer is celebrating its latest coup, so the aerospace arm is hoping business will take off with Deutsche Airbus, major German player in the European airbus project.
The aerospace team in Celomer has been working hard for the last nine years to get Deutsche Airbus approval for paints supplied from Celomer, and one year ago Celomer secured the first 100 tons contract.
The Celomer factory in Gonfreville has been approved by Deutsche Airbus after top executives carried out a quality audit.
Following the recent acquisition by Courtaulds of the ICI aerospace and defence coatings operation, Deutsche Airbus will be keen to source from Gonfreville, and Shildon in the UK, coatings previously obtained from ICI in France and Germany, said , Courtaulds Aerospace France business manager.
With Courtaulds already powerful in the United States, the Far East, France and Australia, the ICI deal was seen as a way of strengthening the position in Europe, and in particular in Germany.
Within two years International Celomer aims to have all its major operations on one site.
Currently most departments, including sales, accounts and laboratories are based near the centre of Le Havre in premises built in the early 1900s.
But the production unit is about 15km away on the outskirts of the town at Gonfreville.
Negotiations are under way to acquire an additional 41,000 sq metres of land at Gonfreville to accommodate the town centre operations.
‘There are difficulties with a split site and this will make us more efficient,’ said .
Former director dies
FORMER Courtaulds director Donald Entwistle, once head of the company's research operation, died on December 12 aged 75.
He had been retired since 1979 after completing 42 years' service — 12 of them on the main board.
Mr Entwistle spent his early years working in the Coventry laboratories, mainly on viscose development.
He rose to head the research division, became a director in 1967 and continued to be responsible for Group research until the mid-1970s.
He also headed a number of Courtaulds' textile businesses at different times but it was mainly his knowledge of viscose which earned him a reputation as a leading world authority on the fibre.
SUCCESS
Colodense No1 in top UK survey
But there is no room to be complacent, says director
COURTAULDS Packaging Colodense has come top in a prestigious survey of major flexible packaging companies in the UK.
Delighted UK flexibles chief executive Neal Crowe said: ‘It's great news and a vindication of many years of hard work by all employees throughout the company.’
Colodense director and general manager Tino Savvas added: ‘The key issue now is to remain number one and make further progress with our continuous improvement programme.
There is no room for complacency.’
Independent
The survey, by independent researchers Maurice Palmer Associates, analysed the performance of 19 packaging converters.
It reflected how customers considered each company performed in 14 areas of the business.
The Courtaulds company scored 962 out of a possible 1,177 points — almost 200 points clear of some rivals.
In comparison with its direct rivals, the larger general converters, Colodense was placed number one in nine out of the 14 business areas.
The nine included product quality, technical back-up, innovation and environmental awareness.
The company was second in four categories with just one area, delivery reliability, in a still respectable fourth place.
Colodense expects to improve on this fourth place in the next survey, following the introduction of a £3 million 10-colour gravure press in June which provides extra capacity.
Tino Savvas said: ‘The problems with delivery reliability were because customers were stretching our capacity to the limit.
Now we have adequate capacity that should no longer be the case.’
Mr Crowe emphasised the achievement was no flash in the pan but the result of continuous improvement over several years.
Placed
In 1985 the survey placed Colodense 13th.
The next survey put it in 10th position and by 1990 the company was fifth.
Contributing to the progress was a series of initiatives including the QuIC quality improvement campaign, obtaining the BS5750 quality standard and the ‘Courtaulds Way’ continuous improvement programme (CIP).
This programme was organised by Courtaulds' operational development department in London.
Video hits gold
A VIDEO produced by Courtaulds overcame hot competition to strike gold at the 35th New York Festival competition for non-broadcast media.
Called Did You Know? the video is a light-hearted introduction to Courtaulds products which has been seen by Group businesses all over the world.
It won the gold award for employee communications at New York, competing against 1,600 entries.
A total of 12,500 entries was received from 19 countries in all categories of the competition, which was judged by a panel of people picked from all areas of US life.
Awards were due to be presented in New York on January 15.
Tubes plant on right lines
IT'S QUICKER by tube, ran the advert for the London Underground — and Courtaulds Packaging Betts Tubes' site in Stevenage is certainly beginning to set a cracking pace.
Confidence is growing at the UK factory which was acquired by Courtaulds 15 months ago.
The market for high quality, innovative plastic tubes is strong and the company is now well placed to seize the opportunity.
Charles Dudgeon, operations director at the Stevenage plant said: ‘Following the acquisition many changes were introduced and performance suffered as the market reacted with apprehension to the unknown but now the wisdom of the shake-up is evident.’
He added: ‘A plastic tube production line was moved from Betts Colchester to augment the six already at Stevenage.
The line was uprated to be capable of manufacturing a complete barrier five layer plastic tube and is currently supplying the free standing Colgate tube recently launched in the UK.’
Colgate toothpaste in the new tubes has been extensively advertised on British television.
Mr Dudgeon added: ‘We have invested heavily in automation and process improvements and the business has been re-focused to supply the best levels of service and quality to customers in the personal care market.’
A major step forward, he said, was the introduction of cellular working systems which involves groups of five people taking responsibility for two production lines.
Cell leader  said: ‘It has made the job more varied and interesting.’
Another cell leader,, added: ‘It has made a big difference — people are more involved in the whole production process.’
Plans are being drawn up for a new production line that will provide additional capacity of 60,000 tubes per day at the factory currently making 317,000 tubes per day.
Profits double in falling market
THE UK Cromadex paint operation, which provides industry with fast deliveries of small quantities, looks set this year to double its profits, despite a shrinking market.
Sales have pushed ahead, and improvements in efficiency have meant that in November 1992, 40 per cent more paint was produced per employee, compared with January 1991.
Variety
Ben Stocks, Cromadex UK general manager and group marketing manager, attributed the improvements to a variety of factors.
‘We have a better balanced business,’ he said.
‘There are good people here and we have good sales management.
‘We looked closely at some of the more successful sales and customer organisations — typically found in consumer rather than industrial markets.
Operation
‘By adapting best practice observed elsewhere we have developed a distinctive operation in our market place.’
This means, for example, that sales area managers have clear weekly objectives incorporating new accounts, new business from existing accounts, call rates and margin requirement.
New products are introduced every quarter to give the sales force fresh impetus.
Stylish
The consumer-oriented image has been enhanced by stylish new brochures and a credit card ordering system — devices that owe more to the commercial sector than to industry.
And to check customer service levels, Cromadex writes to its customers regularly, and asks them to grade the service they get across 11 key characteristics.
The results are published quarterly — and taken very seriously.
Scots treble turnover
A MAJOR investment is under way to ensure Buckhaven, the Scottish jewel in Courtaulds Chemicals' crown, continues its impressive performance.
Bought four years ago from Johnson Matthey, it has since trebled turnover and is now making healthy profits.
That achievement has been rewarded by a further undisclosed but substantial injection of capital by Courtaulds to strengthen its position.
The cash will be spent on ‘de-bottlenecking’ the production line — bringing in new equipment to speed up manufacture.
With greater productivity will come a more consistent product, improved site safety and reduced emissions.
Buckhaven manufactures intermediates for a pharmaceutical industry largely unaffected by the recession and the belief within Courtaulds Chemicals is that it can continue to develop rapidly.
Roger Snowden, managing director of the Fine Chemicals division, said ‘Buckhaven has been a true success story.
‘The skills were there when we took over and Courtaulds's role was to act as an enabler — to allow those skills to be unleashed.
‘The pharmaceutical industry now recognises Buckhaven as a top quality professional operation.
It is thriving on its capabilities.’
The site in Fife, which employs 63 people, comes under the wing of business director , who is also responsible for Leek.
News wins UK award
COURTAULD NEWS has won an award of excellence from the British Association of Industrial Editors.
It came second among newspapers over 10,000 circulation in the BAIE Midland Region's 1992 Editing for Industry competition.
Editor  received the award at a presentation in Solihull on December 4.
FOUR-PAGE FOCUS ON TRAINING
Learning skills by design
COMPUTER-AIDED experimental design has become the order of the day in the research and technology department of Courtaulds' Interpon powder business.
Experimental design is today's tool for reducing the number of experiments required to establish optimum coating formulation criteria in new product development.
As a laboratory technique, it significantly accelerates the pace of development — particularly in an industry such as powder coatings, where end-use requirements vary widely and changing customer needs require rapid technical response.
Effective training is a critical part of the success of this new initiative.
The Interpon group powder products technology manager,, told Courtauld News:
‘So far we have trained about half of our powder development team in experimental design techniques, helped by , of the Courtauld New Coatings Technologies Group.
‘A key part of the training programme is transferring skills and expertise by tackling ‘real life’ case studies.
‘With Jim's assistance, we have now established many areas of use, ranging from optimisation of additive and polymer levels in powders through to statistical treatment of accelerated weathering data.’
Training — a key way to gain an edge
A WELL-trained workforce is one of the key ways in which Courtaulds can gain the edge over its competitors.
But the impetus for achieving this target must come from line managers at the heart of our operations, not some central department, says Patrick White, director of human resources.
‘Training should be a mainstream responsibility for every employee — just like quality and safety,’ he told Courtauld News.
‘The onus is on line managers to develop the people who report to them and not leave it to the human resources professional, or anybody else.
They should be a coach to everybody around them.’
Courtaulds' attitude to the training of employees is embodied in a set of ‘people principles’, which the company sees as essential to building a winning team.
These principles set out the desired aims of:
Sharing Courtaulds' vision for the future.
Listening and responding to employees.
Dealing with people fairly, honestly and openly.
Continuously seeking to develop people to their full potential.
Encouraging flexibility, teamwork and initiative.
Having pride in achievement and the will to win.
Initiatives such as NEBOSH and the Du Pont awareness programme have pushed safety right into line responsibility and improved performance by 30 per cent in 12 months, Dr White pointed out.
‘The same thing can happen in other areas through training if everybody gets involved in the right way.’
What the centre does is to set standards and help Group businesses achieve them, he explained.
‘We have some important targets in areas such as productivity, personal development and communications style, which we are trying to achieve.
‘Attitude surveys have identified certain needs and more information is coming from the introduction of appraisals, which have involved about half of Courtaulds’ employees so far.
‘We are still in the early stages of a learning process which will eventually lead to a training plan for every individual.’
Many initiatives are focused on specific DRB requirements, but some are also being spread more widely around the Group.
An example of the latter is Integrated Training Education & Development, the standards-based training programme for managers, which has been developed with involvement across the Group, pioneered especially at Grimsby in the UK and is now going forward to other sites.
During 1993 ITED will be introduced for accountants in most of Courtaulds' US and UK operations, he said.
Appraisals are being extended actively across the Group and attitude surveys will have sounded out employees' views at all sites by the end of this year.
A cliff-hanger!
ABSEILING, log-walking and rafting were part of Operation Challenge, a three-day adventure to develop team-building at Taubmans in Australia.
The activities brought together 18 senior members of the newly restructured operations group comprising all the east coast and New Zealand sites.
Personal risks, such as abseiling, were related to the challenge of business and there was a strong emphasis on joint problem solving and collaboration.
From the adventure emerged action plans to enable individual sites to develop the new culture, with techniques learned on Operation Challenge being cascaded down through employee ranks.
Porter gets it taped
HOW do you cope with training when your staff are scattered hundreds of miles apart across 140 different locations?
Porter Paints' answer in the US is to make a video and send tapes to every local team.
The Courtaulds Coatings Inc company used the technique to tell sales people at its trade paint stores about a new super gloss enamel called Advantage 900.
A 20-minute interactive video was produced in Louisville, covering product benefits, specific applications, target markets and how to handle potential problems.
This formed the basis of a two-hour training module, run by store group managers and sales managers in the field.
A hundred tapes and more than 800 workbooks were sent out to cover the 300-plus employees in company-owned stores.
They were also made available to independent dealers selling Porter products.
‘Using video was a new approach for us,’ said CCI training manager .
‘We set it up as a pilot programme to answer the call for more training in the field.
‘Hundreds of our employees, including outside sales reps and store people, need to be trained on new products but we can't always bring them into Louisville.
‘Some of them are 1,000 miles away in Florida and as far west as Wichita, Kansas.’
Training ideas at a glance
Courtaulds Aerospace at Littleborough in the UK is hoping to become the first business in its industry to gain an award under the new Investors in People scheme which recognises training to national standards.
Employees at Courtaulds Coatings in Louisville, USA, visited suppliers to learn about new machinery before the equipment was delivered to their own site.
Managers at Courtaulds Packaging's Scotcell operation in Glasgow, Scotland, have been developing their team-building and leadership techniques via a training course that included rock climbing, diving and caving.
A programme to develop environmental auditing is planned for Courtaulds businesses in the USA following the success of a pilot course at Courtaulds Aerospace in Berkeley, California.
Video is being used to build up a library of training films to keep new employees at Thatcher Tubes in Washington Court House, Ohio, USA, informed about process techniques.
, a senior operator at Courtaulds Chemicals in Stretford, UK, has received a new national qualification for demonstrating a detailed understanding of the sulphur recovery process.
Team briefings are being introduced this year at the Courtaulds Packaging UK sites in Colchester, Stevenage and Wrexham to keep employees better informed.
A regime called Training By Assignment, which involves a period of learning followed by practical application, is being used increasingly at Courtaulds Fibres in Grimsby, UK.
Two-thirds of the 63-strong labour force at Courtaulds Chemicals in Stretford, UK, have been trained as forklift truck drivers.
Technicians at Courtaulds' new USA Tencel plant in Mobile, Alabama, went through a 17-week training programme before they were hired.
Three steps to progress
The Cromadex fast-paint operation has introduced a three-tier strategy to train its entire workforce.
The system has been born out of rapid expansion in recent years as the business has opened new centres and employed more people.
‘A couple of years ago we realised we had to invest in our own training programme,’ said Ben Stocks, UK general manager and group marketing manager for the business, part of Courtaulds Coatings.
The first step was to issue employees in all the Cromadex territories with a basic introduction pack, The Cromadex Primer, plus companion video.
Produced in different languages, the easy-to-follow pack answers important questions about the business and its products.
This foundation course is followed by the three-tier concept comprising shelf-help, in-house training and external courses.
Self-help centres round modules developed by the company in collaboration with an outside training agency.
They are guides produced in bite-sized sections, covering various aspects of the business, such as product knowledge, colour matching, computer systems and commercial procedures.
As part of annual appraisals, employees agree individual training objectives.
‘If everyone takes just a small step forward the overall effect is quite dramatic,’ said Mr Stocks.
, manager of the Northampton Cromadex centre, said: ‘All the managers feel the modules are excellent quality with good content.
The comments of the staff, too, are very encouraging.’
All 150 UK employees are training by module and France and Germany are to follow.
The second tier of the programme is in-house training.
Four times a year Cromadex designates training days when sales people from various centres get together.
Issues such as product knowledge, lead generation and customer service are tackled.
The sessions feature fun elements, such as a Cromadex version of the TV quiz show Mastermind, where the specialist subjects are related to the business.
Ben Stocks said: ‘We try to create an entertaining and constructive atmosphere.
People can't learn if they are not relaxed.
They must feel able to ask any questions they like.’
The final tier, external courses, involves hiring the expertise of outside agencies for training in matters as diverse as sales skills, credit control, first aid, fork lift truck driving and foreign languages.
This last aspect has yet to be fully developed but training agencies have been short-listed for courses scheduled for later this year.
Backing ‘team’ concept
A RECENTLY introduced teamwork concept is a key feature of the training programme at Courtaulds Performance Films in Martinsville, Virginia, USA.
Integrated business units have been established, each accountable for manufacturing, sales, technical service, profitability and cash flow.
A two-day workshop covered topics such as planning, leading and managing the business, and identifying goals of the business units.
Focus
, vice-president human resources, said: ‘We believe the focus, teamwork and business results will be substantial.’
But he warned there were potential risks and pitfalls because the new working methods could come as a culture shock.
The training had been successful, he said, in bringing about alignment of different skills and improving business understanding.
Business unit development is part of a wide-ranging training schedule designed to achieve continuous improvement.
The company has worked with a local college to help employees with basic English and mathematics skills.
The college is also providing higher level training, funded by CPF.
Multi-skilled workforce
FUNDAMENTAL changes to production methods, involving team building and creating a multi-skilled workforce, resulted from a comprehensive skills training programme which is on-going at Courtaulds Films Polypropylene.
Teams comprising individuals with inter-changeable skills now run the production lines at the Swindon, UK, site.
The new titles of process technician, craft technician and materials controller, each covering a wide range of abilities, have replaced all previous job titles.
Money
Financial incentives were introduced so the more a worker expanded his repertoire, the more money he earned.
But cash carrots alone could not make the system successful.
‘It was recognised that to achieve the objectives there had to be a comprehensive training programme,’ said Tim Holton, training and recruitment manger.
The idea was that each member of the team would pass on his particular skill to colleagues.
They would reciprocate until everyone was skilled in all areas.
But to enable these skills to be transferred there needed to be a catalyst — the workforce needed to be trained how to train.
Consultants were brought in to coach team leaders, themselves working members of the unit, who then passed on their new-found knowledge — the cascade concept.
Astra from Letchworth advised on instructional techniques.
The British Polymer Training Association educated employees on how to assess progress.
Coverdale worked on generating team spirit and inter-dependence — including manoeuvres on Salisbury Plain that involved treasure hunts and making rope ladders.
Appraisal
MAST (Management and Skills Training) was recruited to establish the Performance Development Review (PDR), an appraisal system cascaded down from shift managers to team leaders.
Throughout there has been a high profile given to safety procedures, under the control of safety manager .
Consultant  arranged customer awareness training, taking employees into end-user sites to further their knowledge.
Tim Holton said: ‘We have achieved a great deal in a short time but there is still a long way to go.
Now we have to consolidate what we have done.
‘But there are definite gains.
We no longer have an expensive production line standing idle if one man is absent.’
The 200-plus production workforce is organised into a shift pattern for the 24-hours-a-day, seven days a week operation.
And the shifts are structured to ensure one shift is always receiving on-going skills training.
Employee reaction
THE training programme and team-style working has generally been well received by CFP employees.
These were some reactions:
Shift manager : When we started there were an awful lot of sceptics who said ‘How can we train and run the factory at the same time?’
‘Now everyone looks for ways to solve problems.
Overall the system is working well.’
Team leader : ‘We no longer work as individuals but as a team.
We have learned to communicate.’
Team leader : ‘We are now involved in the whole process, from the start of the line to the end product.
There is much more variety.’
Team leader : ‘There is no doubt the operation is more efficient.
People are definitely pulling together.’
Process technician : ‘I have learned three new skills and that has meant more money.
I can see no drawbacks.’
Process technician : ‘Being multi-skilled makes life more interesting.’
Swiss boost to efficiency
PRODUCTION workers making toothpaste tubes in Kentucky have been travelling as far as Switzerland to keep abreast of new technology.
The inter-continental training exercise doesn't come cheap.
But it has more than paid for itself in improved factory efficiency, said Bob Pruitt, operations manager of Thatcher Tubes, Florence — part of Courtaulds Packaging.
About 20 technicians have made the trip so far, visiting in groups of four or five at a time to learn about the Swiss-made AISA machines they use.
They spend a week doing classroom work and hands-on training.
And the lessons are not all one-way.
Thatcher trainees have been able to teach their hosts a thing or two about how their machines behave as well.
‘They go by the book and that is not always the best way to do it,’ said , a technician at Thatcher Tubes for seven years.
‘After you have run a machine you know the best way and we showed them quite a few things.
I think our quality standards are head of theirs.’
One thing which did impress  was the cleanliness of everything.
‘You didn't see a cigarette butt laying in the street,’ she said.
‘But I didn't like the food.
I prefer my hamburgers.’
Lead technician  said the training trip had given her more confidence about how to handle the machines.
‘We took machines apart several times and I learned a lot about the controls and the electrical cabinet.
But we had to tell them about some modifications that needed to be done.
‘The thing that surprised me most was that they didn't know how to make a quality tube at AISA and we showed them.’
now puts her knowledge to good use, training others at the Florence factory as part of a new programme for people qualifying as technicians.
Another who has benefited from the visit to Switzerland is maintenance supervisor .
He is one of Thatcher Tubes' longest-serving employees, having worked originally for the electrical contracts who wired up the machines when the plant started in 1984.
‘I have got more knowledge and a better attitude as a result,’ he said.
‘The main thing I learned was the electronics.
‘Machines are getting faster all the time and the new ones have different features like an automatic splicer that we have to learn about.’
Motivation — a vital element
INTERNATIONAL Celomer in France is a disciple of the equation ‘people's performance = competence and skill × motivation’.
And it is a deficiency of the final element that can cripple achievement, believes Eric Varlan, one of 13 executives on the Comité de Direction, the body that steers Celomer's policy.
As part of a comprehensive training programme that has touched the Le Havre company from top to toe, special emphasis has been given to improving motivation.
‘It is a vast subject,’ said M Varlan.
‘It is about how to react in different situations, how to help careers develop, how and when to sanction people — how to manage people.’
Celomer drafted in French consultancy Creci, the organisation that became familiar to laymen after helping the French national soccer management.
The soccer involvement has a parallel with business.
‘We want people to develop a sense of fun at winning, rather than a fear of losing,’ said M Varlan.
First top Celomer management went on a two-weekend course.
Then came the next tier of management.
By Christmas 61 people out of the workforce of about 240 had been trained in motivation.
It will continue until every employee managing at least one person is Creci-trained.
‘In today's affluent society money is increasingly becoming less of a motivation,’ said M Varlan, Celomer's yacht division manager for southern Europe.
‘People must enjoy the job, have a sense of fulfilment and achievement.’
Although considered a key element, motivation training is just a part of the Celomer programme.
Every employee, for example, has attended a course called ‘How to solve a problem’.
There is now a quality circle within the company called IER — Innovation, Entrepreneur and Reussir (to succeed).
And 12 people representing various departments within Celomer have formed a Training Commission.
Accident rate falls
A SAFETY training campaign has been very successful in driving down accidents at Taubmans' coatings plants in Australia and New Zealand.
Since monthly courses were introduced towards the end of 1991, accidents costing more than three days' lost time have plummeted by 80 per cent.
The training sessions lasted five days each and were based on Australia's equivalent of NEBOSH — the national examination body for health and safety in the UK.
More than 200 people, mainly managers, took part in 12 courses spread over a year — ten in Australia and two in New Zealand.
‘They went particularly well and I was very pleased at the high level of participation and enthusiasm,’ said Taubmans' group safety manager .
‘It has had such a marked effect on our safety performance that we are now organising shorter courses focused on specific needs, for example trade centres and the sales force.’
Major safety programme at Chemicals
INVESTMENT in safety has scaled new heights at Courtaulds Chemicals in the UK with a massive 6,000 man days per year now devoted to training.
Spondon was one of 12 Courtaulds sites where safety management was evaluated by Du Pont, acknowledged as world leaders in industrial health and safety matters.
Advice from Du Pont, coupled with Chemicals' own initiatives, have resulted in a rigorous campaign to train the workforce in safety matters, co-ordinated by group training manager Allan Hicks.
His objective is clear: ‘We want everyone to return home safely to their families at the end of their day's work,’ he said.
The core of the training programme is a three-pronged attack, starting with the Environmental Health Officer's basic safety training certificate.
By September 700 employees out of Chemicals' 2,300-strong workforce will have completed the two-day EHO course and sat an examination.
All managers are being trained up to the standards of NEBOSH, the national examining body for health and safety in the UK, and by September 300 will have completed the full NEBOSH course.
Slotted in between EHO and NEBOSH is a course specific to Chemicals, dubbed Son of NEBOSH.
Quality
This intermediate step, devised by the business with the assistance of NEBOSH experts, is aimed at supervisors and 300 are expected to qualify by September.
But this three-tier core is just part of the overall picture.
Du Pont trained 180 managers in safety auditing and this is now cascading down through the workforce.
The beginning of the year saw the introduction of new legislation governing the manual handling of goods and materials.
Chemicals has been ahead of the legislators, with 60 people already trained as manual handling assessors after completing a course devised with the help of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents.
There are 30 courses dedicated to specific safety issues, such as handling portable gas cylinders, food hygiene and accident investigation procedures.
Cellulose flake manager  was 46 when he obtained his NEBOSH qualification — the first exam he had sat for 26 years.
‘I approached it with some trepidation but the satisfaction of passing was immense,’ he said.
‘The course has been invaluable in terms of awareness and spotting hazards.’
Chargehand electrician , who holds the Son of NEBOSH certificate, said: ‘It highlights your responsibilities as a supervisor.’
Scheme for apprentices
IN TIMES of dwindling apprentice training, one Courtaulds factory has kept the flag flying with a scheme admired by many companies in the United States.
Courtaulds  Fibers Inc puts craft trainees through a four-year, 8,000-hour programme at its viscose rayon plant in Mobile, Alabama.
‘It's a highly regarded system — other companies are always asking us why it's so good,’ said Julius Robertson, engineering planning supervisor.
‘All I can say is that it has been tried and tested over many years.
The unique thing is the involvement of the Apprenticeship Committee, who take a personal interest in all the participants.’
Fifteen apprentices are going through the scheme at the moment, ranging in age from 22 to 38.
On-the-job training familiarises them with work in the factory's four main departments — viscose, spinning, finishing and production services.
They also complete a correspondence course, studying more than 100 workbooks in their own time to learn about things such as air conditioning, wiring, circuitries and the technical detail of production processes.
At the end of four years, successful apprentices will have all the skills of a first class mechanical and be ready to take on a full role in the factory.
‘We don't have many drop-outs,’ said Mr Robertson.
One of the present group,, is already proving her talent as an electrician.
When she got married she was able to take on the job of rewiring her house.
It's a talent that obviously runs in the family.
's sister  is an electrician at the factory and they have three brothers all qualified in the same job.
Spot-on system
A TRAINING system introduced at Courtaulds Packaging Baricol under the intriguing name of Domino is helping present a vibrant new face to the business.
And the improvements it has produced at the Bridgwater, UK, company, which makes high technology flexible packaging material, have already impressed several key customers.
The training, involving all personnel, revolves around changing attitudes to work situations and regarding each member of the workforce as both a customer and a supplier.
The Baricol team have studied the implications of how the actions of one individual effects another — hence the Domino description.
‘It has resulted in the realisation that you achieve improvements only by continuous training,’ said general manager .
Move set to boost centre
A MOVE to new premises has put Courtaulds' training centre at Coventry, UK, on course for further success.
Self-help is still the emphasis, with people using computer, video and audio aids to learn-as-they-go.
‘It's very much the mixture as before but we are always adding new courses and improving the ones we have got,’ said manager .
Three-quarters of the ‘open-learning’ training is about computer-related subjects — mainly how to use software.
The rest deals with foreign languages and other skills useful to people in their jobs.
More than 3,000 employees, retired company people and relatives have used the centre's facilities since it opened in 1988.
Attendances had been hit by the rundown of main site activities last year but the centre is now rehoused in an area full of potential clients.
Its new home is Courtaulds' technical library, where training sessions have been going on since mid-November.
By February more room should be available for tutor-led group sessions and workshops.
Service
It is hoped the move will lead to the development of a combined service with the library — a kind of one-stop resource for information and learning.
is also keen to link up more closely with Courtaulds' Research, offering training on computer systems, project management and other subjects.
‘It's a great opportunity to get in there ahead of the need, which is what we always try to do,’ he said.
AROUND THE WORLD NEWS
Iran contract
Dubai, UAE: International Paint (Gulf) has secured a contract in Iran worth more than US$1.5 million to refurbish an oil refinery and supply depots.
The vast Kharg Island refinery and its associated depots at Bander' Bushehr in the northern part of the Persian Gulf are the major oil loading facilities for Iran.
Novel concept
Genoa, Italy: International has supplied paints above and below the waterline for the hi-tech yacht Jules Verne in which Frenchman  aims to beat the fictional record established in Verne's classic novel Around the World in 80 Days.
Competing for the record are  and , who have also chosen anti-fouling from International's VC Systems range for their UK-based catamaran Enza.
Tintas link-up
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: The operations of Tintas International and Supertintas Litoverti are being combined under the new title Courtaulds International (Brazil).
Films revamp
Martinsville, USA: The three industrial products businesses within Courtaulds Films, covering dyed films, vacuum coating and coating/laminating, have been decentralised and now operate as closely linked but separate businesses.
Flake contract
Coventry, UK: Courtaulds Engineering has won a £750,000 contract in connection with a new cellulose flake plant for Courtaulds Chemicals at Spondon.
Waste not…
Houston, USA: Contaminated solvent and resin pipes were cleaned and sent for recycling during a plant upgrade.
The operation made financial and environmental sense by eliminating the need to use a hazardous waste site.
Feedback flow
Felling, UK: A workshop designed to improve the understanding of rheology, the science dealing with the flow and deformation of matter, produced ‘excellent feedback’ from delegates, said workshop organiser .
Pocket yachts
Southampton, UK: Model yacht importer Ripmax has produced 100 boat kits in the livery of the British Steel Challenge yacht Courtaulds InterSpray.
NEWS
Course passes with honours
THE quality of Courtaulds' finance graduate training in the UK has won approval from the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants.
Courtaulds gained a certificate of merit in the CIMA's annual training awards, presented in November.
Graduate finance trainees joining the company go through a three-year training programme.
They study for the CIMA's highly respected qualification by distance learning in the evenings, topped up with full time revision courses.
They make an important contribution to the finance team in the businesses in which they work throughout the UK.
The scheme has been running since 1986 and won a similar CIMA award in 1988.
This year's award was presented to , Spondon-based head of Financial Management and Audit Services, who organises the programme.
Success in store…at the double
A PIONEERING store concept that combines Taubmans household paints and Cromadex industrial coatings is exceeding expectations in Perth, Western Australia.
‘It's the swishest-looking store in the whole group,’ said , general manager of Cromadex, Australia.
The 10,000 sq ft purpose-built premises in Perth suburb Kewdale opened in November.
From the front it appears as two separate stores, each with its own entrance and service counter.
But behind the scenes it is one operation, with Taubmans and Cromadex staff interchanging job functions.
The idea of this joint venture is to reduce overheads and the whole set-up is run by a staff of just seven.
The savings are not just confined to sharing overheads like accommodation, services and phone system.
Much of the Cromadex paint is manufactured at the Taubmans site in Perth, so lorries can bring house paints and Cromadex industrial coatings on the same delivery run.
Often house paints need to be delivered to building sites so Taubmans and Cromadex products can also go out on the same vans.
Although the sales staff operate independently their regular contact with each other has led to the swapping of leads.
‘So far the centre is trading beyond expectations,’ said .
‘There is a captive market in Perth with a lot of small industrial coaters who want small quantities in a variety of colours and quick delivery.’
Running the Perth centre is British-born  — for whom emigrating may have saved his life.
When he applied for immigration into Australia he had to undergo a routine medical examination.
, who had felt perfectly well, was astonished to discover he had the early stages of tuberculosis.
After 18 months of treatment he was clear of TB and able to complete the immigration procedures.
‘If the condition had not been diagnosed  might have discovered he was ill when it was too late to do anything,’ said .
Perth is the third Cromadex centre in Australia, following Melbourne and Sydney.
Brisbane is targeted as the next location in 12–18 months but  would not speculate on whether it would be another dual function site.
New aims
A CLAY pigeon shoot helped to keep Chinese visitors entertained during a recent stay in England.
The break from business discussions — about Courtaulds' new paint factory in Shanghai — also included a visit to Goodrich Castle.
From the left:
Toyota means business
A NEW Toyota factory in Australia means a huge increase in business for Courtaulds Coatings, which is hoping to become a leading supplier.
The Taubmans plant at Sunshine in Melbourne has already secured 100 per cent of the business for electrocoating — the first coat on to bare metal — and the primer coatings.
By the middle of this year it will know whether it has also captured the topcoat business at the car plant, in Melbourne suburb Altona, due to begin production in mid-1994.
Increase
, automotive business manager at Taubmans, said: ‘It is very exciting.
The increase in business is substantial and may well result in more jobs being created.’
The 100,000 cars per year plant, from which Toyota aims to export into Asia, will mean the eventual closure of its two existing plants in Melbourne.
At one of these plants the coatings are dominated by ICI and at the other Taubmans supplies the metallic topcoats.
But Taubmans, using Japanese technology, has convinced Toyota it can deliver the quality and service required at the new factory.
The result will mean increasing output to Toyota from 250,000 litres per year to around a million.
The electrocoat will be water based, as would the topcoats — a breakthrough in the motor industry.
Only the primers will remain solvent-based.
With this additional business Courtaulds will be well positioned as a major supplier to the automotive market in Australia.
SPOTLIGHT ON COURTAULDS FILMS, MANTES
Specialists make a big impression
MANTES, caught up in the coils of the Seine in northern France, has a rich history and is proud of its association with the great Impressionist painters.
Today if Renoir could visit the region his palette would be greyer, reflecting the presence of industry.
Money counts more than Monet in the 1990s.
It is in this area of contrasts, where the autoroute to Paris rubs hard shoulders with 9th century castles, that Courtaulds Films is creating its own impression.
Acquired from Rhone-Poulenc in 1984, the business 35km from Paris is making waves after a period struggling for direction.
Under the stewardship of managing director , it is now established as a successful manufacturer of speciality films — leaving the large volume runs of classic lines to big brother at Swindon, UK.
The progress has been as dynamic, and certainly more precise, than anything produced by those great painters.
Factory reorganisation, cost-cutting, team working, training and improved communications contributed to an immediate upturn in fortunes.
Within a year of Courtaulds' takeover of the ailing business, heavy losses had been transformed into a FF3m (£375,000) profit.
Underpinning ambition and progress was a FF20 million (£2.5m) investment in modernising the plant in 1987.
The money went into upgrading the two main production lines and creating a ‘mission control’— an area resembling a ship's bridge — from where the whole process is monitored by computer.
The pay-back is more evident year by year, as increasingly the focus is on speciality films.
In 1988–89 Mantes produced no speciality films — it was merely a weak echo of Swindon.
This year more than 75 per cent of production will be specialised, geared to short-run, high added-value markets.
In 1986–87 it produced just seven different products.
This year there are 40-plus.
The customer base has been dramatically expanded and Mantes exports 70 per cent of its output.
This expansion has been achieved as the payroll has contracted.
Mantes now employs 136 people and productivity per head has increased by well over 20 per cent in one year.
admits he has taken risks to make progress.
‘To keep ahead you have to be brave.
If you risk nothing, you achieve nothing.’
From this platform new OPP — oriented polypropylene — products have been launched.
Mantes has continued the development of SCF — a film that will seal at low temperatures so it can run in faster production lines.
The packaging industry is turning away from paper labels glued to polypropylene tubs.
Mantes is able to produce  an OPP film for labels that accepts ink well and bonds to the packaging.
Matt film for laminating with paper is another winner.
Have pilot, will travel!
WITH the Mantes operation committed to specialist and innovative products, it made sense to move the OPP pilot line to France from Bridgwater in the UK.
When it was transferred last year with it went pilot line supremo  on a three-year secondment.
‘Working in a foreign country in a foreign language with French colleagues took a bit of getting used to,’ said .
If  is a relative newcomer, two other Mantes employees, and , have witnessed the company's transformation first-hand.
, born in Croydon in the UK and a qualified teacher, has lived in France for 17 years.
She moved there with French husband  and, after failing to persuade the French authorities to accept her English teaching qualifications, she has pursued a career as a bilingual secretary, joining Courtaulds seven years ago.
‘Working for a multinational company opens your eyes to the outside world,’ she said.
Accountants administrator  was with the Mantes operation in the Rhone-Poulenc days, moving to Mantes from Paris to enjoy the countryside.
‘The company is becoming more successful and this is good for the future of the people who work here,’ she said.
Role of ‘mission control’
WITHIN the production area at Courtaulds Films in Mantes is mission control, a kind of ship's bridge built at the centre of the plant.
Here everything that goes into making a roll of film is monitored, recorded and automatically adjusted.
It is the heart of a system that has helped revitalise Mantes and push it to the forefront of Europe's high technology film manufacturers.
Making OPP film — coextruded oriented polypropylene — is a precise art that calls for careful handling.
Granules of polypropylene and other materials are melted, extruded into film, stretched by length and breadth, treated again, wound on to big rolls, slit into small ones, packed and despatched.
At every stage machine speed, temperature and many other factors must be exactly right if product quality is to be achieved.
If temperatures rise too high or machine speeds fall too low, an alarm sounds a warning before the system breaks down.
While all this is happening the computer compiles an historical record of what goes on — a valuable data base from which lessons can be learned.
NEWS
Proof that safety and emergency training produces results
Top marks in mock drama
A MOCK emergency proved Courtaulds Fibres in Spain is in good shape to deal with a major accident.
The simulation involved a chemical spillage — in reality blue-tinted water — during the unloading of a tanker.
Because an accident of this kind could have repercussions beyond the Courtelle plant in Barcelona, internal and external emergency plans were activated.
These involved road blocks, interrupting rail services and police controlling the route to the airport.
Courtaulds Fibres commercial director  said this was the first time such an exercise had been held in Spain and the Courtaulds site was chose because it was the first in the country to have an emergency plan approved by the civil protection authorities.
The response team included Courtaulds fire-fighters and medical staff working with the public fire and ambulance services.
They stopped the leak from the tanker, the spillage was covered with foam, people affected by the ‘fumes’ were taken to hospital and 20 employees were evacuated from the premises.
said the performance of the Courtaulds staff was outstanding and, had the emergency been real, there would have been no consequences for the general public or the environment.
The exercise was observed by more than 200 experts from all over Spain who were in Barcelona for a conference.
, head of safety for Courtaulds, who was invited to watch, said he was very impressed with the planning and the response.
First aid training in Middle East
A PROGRAMME of safety training has been introduced for employees at Courtaulds Coatings sites in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
Staff at International Paint (Gulf) in Dubai attended a one-day course covering first aid and fire-fighting.
Meanwhile, colleagues at International Paint Saudi Arabia in Damman have also been trained in first aid, with fire-fighting instruction to follow this year.
Tuition at both sites was by , an independent trainer qualified in the UK.
Soplaril milestone
CONCERTED efforts to improve health and safety have been rewarded with an accident-free period of 100 days at Courtaulds Packaging company Soplaril.
A series of improvements at the site in Barcelona have resulted in the annual rate of three day lost time accidents being reduced by a third.
The campaign to improve the Spanish company's safety record began just over 18 months ago with inspections and recommendations from Courtaulds Health Environment and Safety Services, based in Coventry, UK.
Safer
An external consultant was called in and the first steps towards a safer environment were taken with the installation of signs indicating emergency exits and fire extinguishers.
Then came a series of measures including:
A health and safety handbook for all staff.
Development of safe working practices.
An awareness programme.
Fire extinguisher training.
Drills involving local firemen.
First aid courses.
Instruction on handling flammable products.
Guards fitted to all machines.
Installation of fire alarms.
Chemicals plans to cut workforce
COURTAULDS Chemicals plans to shed 84 jobs in the UK out of a workforce of just over 2,400.
The measures are designed to improve competitiveness and to help ensure the businesses within Chemicals are in a strong position to take advantage of the eventual upturn in the market.
The proposed job losses will be at .
Wherever possible the cuts will be achieved by voluntary redundancies.
Late last year Chemicals' chief executive  warned of difficult times ahead when he said: ‘I would hope we will come through the next six months or so without losing more than 100 jobs.’
He added: ‘Nobody has a secure job, not me, not people on the operations executive.
We all have to get on and do the best we can.
‘What we cannot afford to do is to sacrifice our core investment programme in Chemicals which is so important to the long-term future.’
Appeal fund to help disabled employee
A DISABLED Courtaulds employee somewhere in the world will benefit from a fund set up for tragic computer expert .
More than £6,000 was raised by Group employees around the globe in a united gesture of compassion for , who suffered from motor neurone disease.
The money was required for a specially adapted vehicle so that, data processing manager at Courtaulds Aerospace in Shildon, UK, could continue working.
Sadly he died in August, aged 41, from the disease that causes progressive deterioration of the nervous system, before he could take delivery of the car.
‘The money was raised by Courtaulds employees around the world and it was  's wish that, in the event of his death, it should go to another disabled employee who needs special equipment,’ said , one of the trustees who administers the fund.
‘If there is more than one nominee, the money could be split.’
Donations have come in from several UK sites plus business in .
Nominations should be faxed to  on .
PEOPLE AND PLACES
Back to Back
Courtauld News talks to two secretaries working for Coatings companies on opposite sides of the world.
Tobacco road to Porter
GROWING up on a tobacco farm was enough to convince Cheryl Boston that she was not cut out for the agricultural life.
‘Sometimes I had to sit on the tobacco setter, putting plants in the ground, but one summer was enough for me,’ she recalls.
So Cheryl went to business school, learned things like shorthand and typing and joined Porter Paints — now part of Courtaulds Coatings — in Louisville, Kentucky in 1970.
In 1975 she started to work as secretary to Tom Horton, in finance.
In 1985 they both moved to Porter's house paints division, where Mr Horton is vice-president.
The job involves work for six different people, with lots of letters and reports to keep up with.
Cheryl also handles all car phone arrangements for the sales team, negotiating rates with the phone companies.
Now divorced, she lives with her two children, aged 10 and 15, but finds no problem of combining the role of mother with a busy job.
‘When the children are out at school I couldn't stay at home all day,’ she says.
‘But I like to be there with them at night.
‘I've always enjoyed the job and the products we make.
I use Porter paints on my own house and I try to convince other people to buy them.’
Cheryl has not forgotten the tobacco fields.
She often visits her parents — her father still works on the farm seven days a week at the age of 72 — but she has no plans to swap her desktop computer for a tobacco setting machine.
Friends matter to Lina
A FRIENDLY face can do a lot to ease the pressures of a busy working day.
Which is why Lina Hsieh likes working for Courtaulds Coatings in Kaohsiung, Taiwan's second largest city.
‘There's a good spirit in this company and people get along with each other very well,’ she says.
‘We get together out of work sometimes and we go out to eat together every month.’
Aged 38, Lina has been secretary to the general manager for three years.
Before that she worked for several companies in Taiwan, the last one being Coca-Cola.
‘I was always looking to join a foreign company because I speak a little bit of English and wanted to practise it.
I learned it at a college for foreign languages in Kaohsiung.’
Lina spends a lot of her time working on sales documents, using a computer for word processing and Lotus 123.
Born in Kaohsiung, she lives there with her husband, who works in quality control for China Steel, Taiwan's biggest company, and their ten-year-old son.
Traditional family gatherings happen at festivals like Chinese New Year and the Moon Festival, when the moon is round and everyone comes together, no matter how far away they live.
Lina likes music — any kind of music as long as it's not too noisy — and especially likes to listen to her son playing classical music on the piano.
She also swims, plays ping pong and has ambitions to ‘do a lot of travelling’.
Carers join aid mission
BY A strange coincidence, two Americans from the same Courtaulds site went abroad on a mission of mercy at the same time.
Neither knew the other had gone and they never met.
But both returned having learned some lasting truths about themselves and the country they call home.
The two are Brian Holton, a sheet metal maintenance man, and Aprilia Graves, a statistical process control facilitator, of Courtaulds  Fibers Inc, in Mobile, Alabama.
Brian — better known as BK to his friends — went to the Ukraine in November on a visit organised by the Life Church of Mobile.
While the church was preaching and teaching, Brian sang with a Christian music group called Shekinah (Hebrew for ‘the presence of God’), performing at schools and universities.
He also helped to hand out Bibles.
The trip was a humbling experience.
‘It really made me appreciate what I have — my job, my family and my home,’ he said.
‘The economic conditions there shocked me.
There was a lot of poverty and some people had no running water or electricity.
They couldn't believe we had come to give without asking for anything in return.’
Aprilia came back with similar feelings.
Travelling on a mission trip sponsored by the Cottage Hill Baptist Church, she helped distribute 35,000 Bibles in Moscow and attended church services.
She also spent some time in her home country, Romania, which she left 20 years ago to live in the United States.
‘Most people in Russia were delighted to have the Bibles and some had tears of joy in her eyes,’ she said.
‘It was a wonderful trip and a very rich experience.’
In Romania, though, she was said to see the poverty.
‘It was a lot worse than I remembered.
Food is highly expensive and you could see what a hard time people had been through.
But some small buds of hope were beginning to flourish.
‘I always appreciate that US but nw even more so.
It's the best country in the world to live in.’
Just child's play
MAKING toys is child's play for Courtaulds employee Ted Richards — and he ensures a perfect finish by using paint from International.
Ted, based at Research in Coventry in the UK, is involved in environmental work, studying emerging methods of pollution control and considering how they can be applied to Group businesses.
But out of hours he heads for his workshop and turns out wooden toys including trains, kiddie pushalong trolleys and nursery name plates.
‘I have always been interested in woodwork but don't have the artistic skills or patience to make fine furniture,’ he said.
‘Toys seemed like a good alternative.’
The toys are painted in International's Japlac, a fast-drying high gloss paint that complies with the stringent safety standard demanded in the toy industry.
A big fan of the toys is Ted's young son, Sean, who attends Courtaulds' creche, in Coventry.
Ted has now branched out into making clocks in the shape of different countries, and formed a small business to sell them to ex-pat communities around the world.
Flippin' great
LOUISE BORDUAS and dancing partner Bob Massé proved rock, n, roll is here to stay with a flippin' marvellous performance.
Louise, supervisor in the customer service department at International Paints in Canada, and Bob backflipped their way to first prize in a rock, n, roll dance competition in Montreal.
The dynamic due, who wiped the floor with 35 other couples, first teamed up in 1981 and have twice represented Canada in competitions.
Hotshot Ed nets $17,000
BASKETBALL fan Ed Leard is $17,000 dollars richer after scoring a basket in front of a 17,500 crowd.
Ed, information technology manager at Courtaulds Aerospace at Woodlands Hills, California, said: ‘The stadium exploded, it was deafening.’
The chance to net the cash came during the half-time break at a televised Los Angeles Lakers team game.
Ed had entered a draw run by a local record store.
Winners selected in the draw had one chance, and one only, to net a basket from the half court line during a Lakers match.
Offer
As people tried and failed, the cash on offer accumulated until it reached $17,000 on the day Ed went on court.
He said: ‘I play basketball twice a week and I had four days’ notice that I was to get my chance, so I had four days' practice.
‘I also had four days to be nervous and by the time the big day arrived I was all nervoused out.
When I picked up the ball I didn't see the crowd, just that basket.’
He said colleagues had greeted his windfall with ‘a lot of elation’.
Ed, who lives in rented accommodation, plans to use the money as a down-payment on a house.
Ice in the sun
RUSSELL WRIGHT'S hobby takes some beating — he plays ice hockey in the desert.
The technical services representative for International Paint *Gulf) is based in Bahrain and when an ice rink opened there last year Russell got his skates on and went along.
As a youngster 28-year-old Russell was a member of the Whitley Warriors junior team in his home town of Whitley Bay in the UK.
He first taste of competition in the Gulf was against expat teams in Dubai.
In the first match against Riyad a disaster seemed on the cards when his side trailed 3–0 after five minutes.
But the team coach announced he would buy the drinks if Bahrain won — and they romped home 11–9.
Fitness champs
COURTAULDS' International Paint site at Felling in the UK has two fitness champions.
Richard Hirst, personnel manager for marine and yacht, and receptionist/telephonist Jean Heron, were named fittest people on site after employees were screened by the local health authority.
Health education experts spent a week at Felling making fitness assessments based on weight, body fat, blood pressure and stamina.
Richard said: ‘It's a little embarrassing because I know of at least 20 people at Felling who are fitter than me.
But the assessment suited me because much of it depended on riding an exercise bike and I do a lot of cycling.’
Jean said: ‘I try to keep as fit as I can, mainly by doing aerobics and swimming.’
Meanwhile another Felling employee has chalked up a different achievement.
Manufacturing operator Jason Hailes has completed a 60-day  Prince's Trust programme which involves community projects concerned with caring and the environment.
Jason was part of a team involved in producing a mural for a nursery school playground.
The perils of hashing
TECHNICAL director Brian Sykes gets his kicks from hashing and twitching — off-beat cross-country jogging combined with bird-watching.
Brian, who covers North Asia for Courtaulds Coatings from his base in Taiwan, is head of the Kaohsiung Hash House Harriers.
Hashing, which takes its name from a Malaysian eating house where the hobby originated before World War II, involves running or walking in pursuit of‘hares’— volunteers who act as the quarry.
The pastime, which appeals to the Taiwanese as well as British, American and Australian expats, is rich in traditions and customs.
Brian, as head of the Harriers, presides over the ‘Downs, Downs’.
If a participant is celebrating a birthday, for example, he is required to sink a can of beer accompanied by a count-down by his fellow Harriers.
Hashers are also assigned nicknames.
Brian rejoices in the title Lay Tex, and colleagues include Slap Dash, Blaat Splat and Wicket Wacker.
The Courtaulds man explained: ‘Hashing serves the needs for expatriate communities to relax and work off the frustrations of life in a foreign land.’
Brian combines the runs with his other hobby, ornithology, while taking care to avoid Taiwan's less welcome creatures — the 22 varieties of snake.
‘These include four species of cobra but I have only seen a cobra twice,’ he said.
Bandsman joins top brass
THOUGH not one to blow his own trumpet, 24-year-old Lee Rigg was delighted to be awarded one of the top brass band honours in Britain in December.
He was voted Bandsman of the Year by the famous Black Dyke Mills Band — the first to have his name inscribed on a new silver trophy.
Lee, a fork lift truck driver at Courtaulds Aerospace, Littleborough, plays B-flat cornet, rehearsing twice a week with the band and appearing in concerts regularly.
He can also be heard on Black Dyke's latest compact discs, Broadway Brass and Slavonic Brass.
‘This was a new award and I'm the first to get it,’ said Lee.
NEWS
Tribute to workforce as rayon plant closes
EMPLOYEES of Courtaulds Fibres, Canada, gathered for a Christmas party in December, just weeks after the viscose rayon plant closed its doors for the last time.
It was the end of an era, said site manager , who paid tribute to people's efforts in helping to keep the factory going for so long.
Production ceased at the Cornwall, Ontario, site on November 23, following a decision by Courtaulds to reshape its viscose fibre operations.
Viscose prices had been falling, affected by new fibre capacity in the Far East and increased exports of textile goods into North America.
Cornwall was the smallest, and highest cost, of Courtaulds' three viscose factories and operations in future will be centred on Mobile, in the United States, and Grimsby, in the UK.
Since the closure announcement, an active job search programme has been mounted to help the 360 people made redundant.
was full of praise for the way employees continued to make top quality product right to the end.
Centre
Between 60 and 70 a day have been attending the job help centre on site and quite a number have found other work.
A skeleton site has been retained to handle decommissioning and removal of equipment.
The closure brings to an end 67 years of rayon activity at Cornwall, making it by far the Group's longest surviving manufacturing unit.
Production of filament yarn began in 1925, following the start-up of Courtaulds' rayon activities in Britain and the United States.
Major expansions took place over the next decade and in 1949 the factory started making staple fibre, which soon overtook filament yarn as the principal rayon product.
Diversification in the 1950s and 1960s saw Cornwall move into a number of other product areas.
Nylon yarn was made there for a time along with Cellophane packaging film, carpets and circular knitted fabrics.
But rayon staple fibre was the only survivor in the end, as Cornwall continued to play a full part in Courtaulds' worldwide cellulosic operations.
Airlift beats the drought
ONE of the wettest areas on earth has been having problems with drought.
At least that's what they call it in the remote and rugged Star Mountains of Papua New Guinea.
Two weeks without rain gave the region its longest dry spell on record.
The Fly River — main transport route in the area — began to dry up and 24 boats were grounded along its 500 kilometre course.
The drought also created extra problems for the Courtaulds Coatings team in Papua New Guinea.
Taubmans (PNG) had just secured a contract to supply specialised protective coatings for a US$24 million project for OK Tedi Mining when the rain stopped.
Fabrication work being carried out with parts from all over the world was on tight timing and penalties.
‘It caused some anxious moments as we worked out how to keep up supply to this project approximately 1,200 kilometres from our manufacturing centre in Rabaul,’ said PNG general manager .
‘We had 5,000 litres on the water, going from Rabaul to our distribution centre in Port Moresby, and approximately 2,500 litres stuck on the Fly River.’
The only solution was to fly in the required paint from Port Moresby to the mining project site, where Tabubil Engineering was heading the fabrication effort.
Effort
‘This required a great effort from our whole team,’ said .
‘We pulled out all the stops to produce extra stock needed to meet the charter flights, so the paint could be flown in over the weekends.’
The good thing about the airlift was that pilots had clear visibility all the way into Tabubil — a rare happening in an area where rain is often measured in feet over a 24-hour period.
OK Tedi is typical of the remote and difficult locations to which Courtaulds paints have to be delivered in this part of the world.
Taubmans (PNG) has an excellent market position with protective coatings in Papua New Guinea, where there is considerable construction activity in the oil, gas, gold and oil palm industries.
Dream trips for winners
THE two winners of round-the-world holidays in our exclusive Courtauld News competition are finalising plans for their dream trips in February.
Don Smith, export manager at Courtaulds Coatings in Auckland, New Zealand, and Steven Sharpe, manger of the trade and retail paint division at Courtaulds International (Brazil) hit the jackpot in our British Steel Challenge competition.
Don and Steven made the most accurate estimates of how long it would take Courtaulds InterSpray, the Group's entry in the race, to reach Rio de Janeiro from Southampton on the first leg.
Don and wife Barbara will travel to Hobart in Tasmania to watch the start of the third leg on February 13 and then fly on to London via Sydney and Los Angeles.
The couple plan to hire a car and explore England, calling at International Paint in Southampton.
They will then take a ferry to France to visit Paris before flying to Honolulu via San Francisco.
Steven and wife Roberta will visit Sydney en route to Hobart for the start of the third leg.
From Tasmania they will head for London and then New York before returning home.
Meanwhile InterSpray struggled in the second leg, Rio to Hobart, to maintain the form that earned her second place in the first stage.
She came in eighth on January 6 after encountering unfavourable winds and suffering a broken forestay — part of the rigging that holds up the mast — in common with other competitors.
Chance
However the first leg performance means InterSpray is third overall and still in with a fighting chance with everything to play for in the third and final legs.
The InterSpray crew includes Courtaulds Fibres employee , the only Courtaulds employee in the race.
His wife  said from their Humberside in the UK: ‘I spoke to Ricky on Christmas Day and they were cooking the mince pies.
They were in good spirits and coping well.’
Jane and children  plan to fly out to Cape Town when the boats dock there at the end of the third leg in April.
Paint contract for Polynesia
WHO says little countries can't have a shipbuilding industry?
French Polynesia insists it can.
Courtaulds paints are being used on three 25-metre trawlers built by Chantier Naval du Pacifique Sud in record time.
Two vessels were completed in December and the third will be launched in March.
Coatings were supplied by International Celomer in France and Courtaulds Coatings (New Zealand).
Through its Export Division, Courtaulds Coatings (New Zealand) covers most of the Pacific islands of Polynesia, Melanesia and Micronesia, where a large proportion of its sales are for marine and yacht paints