

NEWS
MAJOR CONCERNS OF THE YOUNG
A recent survey of schoolchildren revealed that more than half their major concerns are environmental.
Key issues include the ozone layer, global warming, ‘pollution’ and rain forest destruction, clearly showing the concern young people have for our environment.
Indeed, some appear more environmentally aware than their parents, although perhaps not surprisingly considering that the new national curriculum — recognising the importance of an environmental education — has adopted this as a cross-curricular theme for all age groups.
Environmental Issues, which spotlights this and other surveys on page 11, is well aware of young people's interest in green matters and so has introduced a section specifically for them.
Teachers may find the information useful too!
There is an idea for a classroom project, an easy to enter prize competition plus a special cartoon.
Turn to page 10 and see for yourself.
And remember, make sure you take home a copy for the young environmentalists in your family.
Corrosion Caused Cloudburst
Corrosion in pipework has been blamed for a gas escape which triggered the operation cloudburst emergency plan in February.
A report on the incident which closed the Arcton 113 plant at Runcorn also recommends procedures to ensure the main site alarms are sounded after the company was criticised for failing to activate the siren.
Although atmospheric measurements showed the gases, including chlorine, would not have adverse health effects, the scale of the incident and lack of warning caused major public concern for which the company publicly apologised.
Six C&P employees were treated at the occupational health centre before returning to work and two members of the public attended hospital but were later discharged.
A preliminary report by North West Operations general manager Geoff Wynne said the incident was ‘extremely well handled’ by plant staff and ICI and Cheshire emergency services.
Investigation progress reports were issued to councillors, regulatory authorities and emergency services and public complaints were handled on a one-to-one basis.
Revised operating procedures follow C&P pollution offence
A faulty isolation valve which caused carbon tetrachloride [CTC]to leak into the Weston Canal at runcorn landed C&P before Widnes magistrates.
The company was fined £10,000 after admitting the water pollution offence, which was discovered during routine sampling.
Revised operating procedures, including more stringent equipment checks and greater routine monitoring, have been introduced since the accident.
John McManus, Mersyside production manager.
said: ‘This regrettable incident happened in the run-up to the closure of the CTC plant.’
CTC is a feedstock for CFCs and the plant was due to close end of March in line with C&P's policy to phase out CFC production by 1995.
A Royal seal of approval
Teesside ecologists Ken Smith and Bob Walters received the royal seal of approval for their environmental training work.
Prince charles presented them with three accolades — including his special patron's award — at the National Training Awards organised by the Department of Employment.
Data to be made available on ICI wastes
Data for liquid, solid and gaseous wastes from sites is to be made publicly available in summary form.
It forms part of the overall ICI group data published in the 1991 annual report.
C&P's main sites will also publish more comprehensive reports about their operations, which will be generally available.
The data produced will provide more information than legally required.
Release of this information is a key step in monitoring progress towards the Group's target of 50 per cent waste reduction by 1995.
C&P helps breathe life into waterways
C&P is a major sponsor of the Mersey Basin Business Foundation.
Launched by Environmental Secretary Michael Heseltine, the foundation is the business arm of the 25-year £4 billion Mersey Basin Campaign to breathe life back into the region's waterways and surrounding land.
Phil roberts, C&P's environment adviser, is pictured at the launch with campaign chairman Sir John Tavare, Mr Heseltine, campaign representative Pat Patel and Dominic Boot from Shell.
The campaign has already received £130,000 from ICI, enabling 250 community-based maritime improvement projects to be carried out.
A further £80,000 has been pledged.
Special filters reduce emissions
Special fibreglass filters which will reduce ammonium nitrate emissions to the atmosphere by 90 per cent are to be introduced into the ‘Nitram’ tower at Severnside works, near Bristol.
The £6 million project, due for completion in December, is part of ICI's environmental programme to cut waste production by half by 1995.
Environmental Issues wins award from The Guardian
Environmental issues has won an award in a competition sponsored by The Guardian newspaper.
The magazine — redesigned last year — received a certificate of merit in the competition which attracted entries from companies throughout the north of England.
Guardian northern editor John Course headed a judging panel of senior journalists in the competition organised by the British Association of Industrial Editors.
Authorisation received for boilers
Billingham's steam raising boilers have received ICI's first integrated pollution control [IPC]authorisation — the license to operate required under the Environmental Protection Act.
Apart from general operating conditions, it has set emission limits for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide.
Data on these emissions must be submitted monthly to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution [HMIP].
IPC authorisation came into force a year ago and initially covers large combustion plant such as boiler houses and power stations.
Hillhouse gardens bloom again
Hillhouse International gardeners are hoping their efforts will flourish once again into an award-winning display to catch the eyes of the local Britain in Bloom judges.
Last year the main entrance flower display — pictured in all its colourful glory — won C&P first prize in the large business section.
New plant is to be built in Japan
A third plant to produce C&P's ozone-benign refrigerant Klea 134a is to be built in Mihara, near Hiroshima, Japan.
The £50 million development will make C&P the only manufacturer with plant in each of the three major markets, with Runcorn already serving Europe and a plant in Louisiana being built to supply the American market.
New fluorocarbons are being phased in to replace CFCs.
WASTE NOT WANT NOT
Tony Young [Teesside's Waste Disposal Manager]delves into the UK's waste and looks at how we dispose of it in Environmental Issues' latest feature on major environmental matters.
Everything we use comes in one form or another from the earth, its oceans or atmospheric gases.
As we mix and mash, divide and develop all these natural resources into man-made materials we produce waste — something which has no further use.
How we throw this away can have a major impact on the environment.
Waste can be classified by its place of origin — agricultural, industrial, clinical, domestic — as well as whether or not it is hazardous.
In an ideal world we would be recycling and re-using everything, but this isn't possible and we have a long way to go before we can turn all our waste into a resource.
Three quarters of UK waste comes from agriculture, mining and quarrying.
Industrial and municipal follow on with far less quantities.
[See chart].
A variety of disposal methods are used, some more effective than others.
On the domestic front, disposal tends to mean throwing rubbish in the bin.
But that's not real disposal; our waste doesn't disappear.
Other times we burn it either on the coal fire or garden bonfire and that produces ash and gases.
Occasionally we think of recycling or re-use.
For industry, incineration can be the ideal solution when dealing with organic compounds — particularly those containing carbon, hydrogen and oxygen which need to be completely destroyed.
High temperatures are fine for certain compounds but metals form ash which then has to be disposed of.
Gaseous oxides formed from sulphur, nitrogen and other substances also have to be scrubbed out and neutralised.
Modern equipment is extremely complex and some systems have up to seven separate cleaning stages before any gas is released into the atmosphere.
Another much used method is landfill.
Archaeologists have learnt a great deal about man's evolution by digging up and analysing our historic waste, but if mishandled today's rubbish could be tomorrow's pollutant.
Within a landfill most materials decompose in time.
Bacteria eats away the waste, producing gases such as carbon dioxide and methane and leaving behind rotting materials which make good soil conditioners.
Methane can be re-used as an energy source.
The danger with landfill is that waste not treated correctly before burial can produce a liquid run-off or gas that's not environmentally friendly.
Landfill is most suitable for immobile and non-soluble waste, and is a good way of restoring disused quarries and clay pits while costing relatively little compared to incineration.
Waste can, of course, mean big business for companies specialising in processing industrial and agricultural materials into saleable goods.
Oil producing seeds pressed together produce a solid cake that animals — particularly cattle — can eat.
Animal feed is also made in a similar way from sugarbeet pulp, which also produced soluble sugar.
Whether at home or work, we are all responsible for producing waste.
Various schemes are being put in place to make us think carefully about giving our waste a new lease of life.
Collection points for paper — from quality photocopier paper to newspapers — aluminium cans, glass and plastic waste have been set up in towns and cities as well as industrial sites and offices.
But although recycling and reuse are extremely important and something we can all support, the real solution to the waste problem is to try not to produce any in the first place!
What we do at C&P
Although all new plant is designed to minimise waste, current operations invariably produce more.
C&P disposes of its wastes in a variety of ways including landfill and incineration — but it also reuses and recycles wherever possible.
One waste with a new use is flyash from power stations.
Dry flyash can be used to make specialist concrete products and conditioned flyash is a filler for large civil structures like roads and building foundations.
Atactic polypropylene, a waste no longer produced, used to be stored as landfill but was subsequently recovered and sold for use in the manufacture of water repellent materials such as roofing felt.
When recycling or re-use is not practicable, C&P's waste is sent for landfill or incineration by professional contractors who are authorised and policed by the regulatory bodies.
The company also carries out its own audits to ensure waste is being correctly handled and disposed of.
ICI group-wide policy is to try to eliminate all off-site disposal of environmentally harmful wastes.
Landfill or incineration — the facts
Landfill
Some advantages:—
relatively low cost
can restore quarries and clay pits
methane gas can be used for energy
Some disadvantages:—
can look untidy when worked
sites not available where needed
decomposition can produce pollutants
decomposition takes at least 50 years
careful preparation and engineering needed for some ground conditions
Incineration
Some advantages:—
reduces the landfill volume
safest way of destroying complex and difficult compounds
designed to produce clean emissions
can achieve nearly 100 per cent destruction of waste
energy can be recovered
Some disadvantages:—
needs high temperatures
may need fuel to support burning
people have shown concern over emissions
HOW C&P ARE HELPING THE NRA TO BUILD A BRIDGE OVER TROUBLED WATERS
The rivers of England and Wales are in a worse condition than ten years ago, according to a detailed survey by the government's water pollution watchdog, the National Rivers Authority.
Environmental Issues looks at the results and some of C&P's initiatives to help clean-up the waterways.
Sewage works, farming, industry in general and drought are blamed for the declining quality of our rivers, canals and estuaries.
The NRA assessment also believes that increased monitoring, providing more accurate information, has led to some stretches of water being downgraded even though they are probably no worse than ten years ago.
RIVER REGRADING
This is the NRA's first survey and comparisons have been made with a similar exercise five years ago by the Department of the Environment, Welsh Office and the regional water authorities [which took into account data recorded in 1980].
Since then:—
15 per cent of rivers have been downgraded — 11 per cent upgraded.
15 per cent of canals down-graded — 7 per cent upgraded.
3 per cent of estuaries down-graded — 1 per cent upgraded.
Major deteriorations in the Thames and South West regions, with more than half attributed to increased monitoring, have heavily influenced these national figures.
The other eight regions recorded significantly smaller changes — some good, some bad.
The North West and Northumbria showed  slight deterioration, around three per cent, although no change to the Mersey or Tees estuaries.
Improvements, according to the survey, are due to better treatment of wastes, the closure of industries and the impact of the NRA's legal consent agreement with dischargers.
Despite considerable reductions in pollution into the estuaries such as the Tees, Northumbrian region did not achieve the expected upgrade.
NORTH WEST INVESTMENT
There is no change in the North West estuaries either but extensive new sewage treatment and industrial treatment works on the estuary will mean cleaner water in future.
The investment in sewage disposal and tighter industrial standards will, says the survey, result in a steady improvement in this region.
NORTH EAST IMPROVEMENT
Better grants for farmers and more NRA staff to carry out pollution control activities should also help.
In the North East the commissioning of treatment plants and other pollution control measures will lead to a drop in discharges.
Major sewage discharge from the Middlesborough area into the Tees estuary will reduce when improvement work is completed on Cargo Fleet sewage works.
Further improvements are also planned for Portrack sewage treatment works.
The NRA believes that the small numbers of migratory fish which have returned to the Tees in recent years will continue to increase as pollution levels fall.
Improvements reduce C&P discharges
C&P's sites have steadily reduced their liquid discharges thanks to a series of improvement programmes which first began in the 1970s.
Over the next three years Teesside's discharges of biodegradable compounds [BOD]will continue to drop as improvement plans come to fruition.
A major contribution will be Billingham's £5 million reed bed.
Similar trials are now underway on Wilton's nylon works.
Ammonia loads, now less than half the 1970 level, are set to fall further too, thanks to the new £66 million sulphuric acid recovery plant, which will be up and running within the year.
The plant will also cut BOD.
On Merseyside mercury discharges are less than half the 1987 levels.
Methanol levels have continued to drop.
compared to 1987 there has been a tremendous decrease.
A £3/4 million stripping column installed during 1990 is already having an impact.
There has also been a marked reduction in suspended solid discharges and in alkalinity levels — achieved through several initiatives.
Improved monitoring, better operation, and plant modification and closures have all contributed to C&P's improving performance.
Plans in the pipeline include:—
Further use of alternatives to chromium, used for corrosion control in cooling water systems, on Merseyside and Teesside.
Cutting copper releases from Wilton to a quarter of their 1990 level.
In line with these projects, C&P will continue to run environmental awareness courses for employees, and further improve its monitoring and procedures.
CHARTING OUR FUTURE COURSE
Far-reaching proposals published by the NRA call on the government to set legally-binding quality standards for not only rivers, estuaries and canals but lakes, groundwaters and coastal stretches.
The consultation paper outlines how objectives for water quality could be set on a statutory basis and determined by actual use, for example fisheries, sport or water supply.
A new framework is needed, say the NRA, because many consents are no longer relevant to the increasing demands being placed on the waterways.
Standard definitions of use would be of significant value when considering consents.
The proposals also describe how the traditional river assessment methods, as used in the survey, could be substantially improved by drawing on information about the water's biological state.
I am a catalyst for change.
We have our finger on the environmental pulse, but teamwork is essential for…
ACTION
A life in the day of environmental Manager Mike Valman.
Crackers and flares take on a whole new meaning when you work for the Olefines business.
A ‘Cracker’ is a thermal process where feedstock is steamed to produce a series of smaller molecules.
These include ethylene and propylene [to make plastics such as polythene or PVC]and ethylene oxide,[a building block for detergents], butadiene [for synthetic rubber tyres]and butanes and other gasoline products like petrol.
‘The cracker and its offsites are equipped with flare stacks for safety of operation,’ explained Mike.
‘These are our safety valves and cause most concern to the public because the flames are so visible and noisy.’
Over the past few years tremendous efforts have been made to explain to the outside world just what the Olefines business is all about and the reasons for flaring.
Along with senior managers, Mike hosts site visits for all sorts of groups including schools and colleges and goes out to speak to local community groups.
Communication is an important part of his job.
‘This year I'm starting a programme for managers, supervisors and operators to keep them up-to-date with environmental improvement progress,’ said 30-year-old Mike.
This isn't just a words and slides job either.
He has developed a package which includes a plant tour so people can see first hand all the measures to control pollution and minimise waste.
Mike took on the role of environmental manager in 1990 and like most others wears two hats…his other is process investigation manager.
‘The two jobs go hand-in-hand and nearly everything I do is directly or indirectly related to the environment,’ said Mike, who joined the business four years ago.
Wearing his environmental manager's hat, Mike's responsibilities are to monitor, audit and minimise the environmental impact of the business.
it is up to him to make sure the best available tools and techniques are introduced and used.
‘I see my role as being a catalyst for change, for getting the job done, so that means working as an integral member of the production team: joining the morning production meeting and taking my turn on the duty rota.’
said Mike.
‘After all, to do the job properly I need to thoroughly understand what's involved.’
He works closely with plant managers, process investigation engineers, research and development, Teesside Operations analytical services and the site environmental team.
‘People carrying out the work are often the best judge of where environmental improvements can be made.
It is up to us to encourage them to come forward with ideas, then follow them up.
This is why Olefines runs a suggestion scheme.’
Ensuring that all the necessary  environmental rules and regulations are met is also Mike's responsibility, so close liaison with official organisations is another aspect of his daily workload, as is organising and ensuring routine waste monitoring and, if a problem crops up, resolving it.
‘I've no set routine apart from the daily production meeting.
some days will be spent in the office, others out and about on site.’
C&P's environmental managers also help with investigations into the cause of abnormal discharges, plant malfunctions and complaints — and look into all environmental improvement proposals.
Mike said: ‘It is up to us to keep a finger on the environmental pulse of the plants and to seek continuous improvement.
We can't do this on our own — it takes good planning and communications, the right data, money and, above all, teamwork.’
success of the five year plan
One of Mike's main responsibilities is the five-year rolling environmental improvement plan and it is this that dictates much of his workload.
Continuous improvement on Olefines — whether minor changes to record keeping systems or major projects — is the driving force.
Among the milestones achieved are:—
£30,000 for new effluent monitoring station
improved management of waste generation
oil/water sludges cut by half
detailed inventory of all wastes & emissions
environmental impact assessments
improved olefines flare system and new jetty flare stack at Teesport
£400,000 for improved corrosion control of the cooling water system
.
C&P's environmental managers are at the forefront of the improvement process.
Action — not reaction — is the name of the game.
Mike Valman, a qualified chemical engineer and one of eight environmental managers at Wilton, talks about his work with the Olefines business
ICI SCOOP SHELL AND TESCO IN POLLS SURVEY
ICI came top of a MORI poll when journalists nominated a company which takes its environment responsibilities seriously.
Scooping previous winners Shell and Tesco, ICI was mentioned by a third — more than double last year's survey.
Nearly all felt British companies didn't pay enough attention to the environment although they no longer regarded the chemical industry as the main threat, and recognised recent efforts to minimise damage.
While one in ten agreed ICI was doing a fair share to reduce its impact and using its scientific skills to develop ‘greener’ products, the environment journalists still rated the company among the worst polluters — alongside British Coal, Fisons, British Nuclear Fuels and Powergen.
In general, the journalists were most concerned about global warming — like most schoolchildren interviewed in an ICI poll.
The public however, according to another recent survey, was more worried about river and water pollution.
The public survey echoed the journalists' views on British companies — but only one in 20 thought ICI was doing enough to reduce its effect on the environment.
Among the schoolchildren questioned in the ICI poll, Greenpeace, the World Wide fund for Nature and the National Trust proved to be the most popular environment and conservation groups.
Some 15 per cent were members of these or other similar organisations.
A third have also carried out environmental improvement work, mainly teacher instigated.
CHLORINE: The facts…
Confusion surrounding chlorine and its derivative products is being eased thanks to a new public information service.
Launched by chlor-chemicals, the service has been set up to increase awareness and understanding of chlorine's role in society.
Recent surveys had revealed that although 59 per cent of the public were concerned about environmental pollution and its effect on human health and safety, 41 per cent admitted they didn't fully understand environmental issues.
Of the 55 per cent who knew of chlorine's everyday uses, only three per cent were aware of its use as a hospital disinfectant and one per cent of its function in plastics manufacture.
CONFUSION
Chlor-chemicals general manager Bob Hunt said: ‘Results like these indicate the degree of confusion that exists around the use of chlorine and its natural presence in the environment.
‘The chemical industry has a responsibility to provide information on issues which affect us all.
We felt we had to take the initiative and hope the Chlorine Information Service will prompt other organisations to follow our lead.’
PHONE FOR HELP
Information, based on publicly available material, can be obtained from Name; & phone number;.
This includes papers published by industry, academics and organisations such as Greenpeace on a variety of issues [ie dioxins and other chlorine compounds, and uses and benefits of chlorine.]
FM21 technology to be licensed
C&P is planning to license a new process — based on its widely used FM21 electrolyser technology — to recover sodium hydroxide and sulphuric acid from sodium sulphate waste streams.
Developed in response to customer demands, the process is currently being adapted to suit individual industrial needs.
Pulp, paper, viscose and fine chemical industries generate huge volumes of sodium sulphate byproduct.
With traditional markets declining, disposal costs rapidly increasing and environmental pressure mounting, C&P's process will enable valuable acid and alkali to be recycled — bringing industry one step closer to closed loop production.
‘It offers them an environmentally responsible means of handling sodium sulphate while providing overall economic benefits,’ said product development manager Sarah Galbraith.
The process highlights C&P's lead over others in the research and development of electro-chemical technology.
Up in Dounreay, Scotland, AEA Technology is using the FM21 to develop a ‘silver bullet’ to destroy toxic organic materials in waste streams.
The process, which has a silver catalyst at its heart, also cleans up organic liquids such as aromatic solvents found in the waste.
A pilot scale rig dedicated to the exploration and development of the silver bullet process has been fully operational for some months.
Tough line on Wilton discharge
Tough new controls on Wilton's effluent discharge into the River Tees have been welcomed by C&P.
Although difficult to meet, the consent limits set by the National Rivers Authority are consistent with ICI; s plans to cut discharges by half by 1995 but call into question the viability of some Teesside plants.
Twenty-two years ago the Tees estuary was one of the most polluted in the country but significant improvements have seen this level reduced by 70 per cent.
The new discharge limits will add to the clean-up campaign and ensure that the Tees becomes a recognised salmon river once again.
MESSAGE ON VIDEO
C&P has been spreading environmental messages for many years in many ways.
Indeed, films like ‘The Living River’ are as much in demand now as when first produced five years ago.
But in today's world, where there is a tremendous thirst for information, these efforts are not enough.
Groups like Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth have been campaigning long and hard to put across their views.
In some cases we are sympathetic to their ideals and share their concerns.
In others we must have a different view, one that must be made public.
C&P's greatest asset for getting its message more widely heard is its people who, if properly informed, are the best possible ambassadors for the company.
Building on its employee information package, C&P has introduced a safety, health and environment [SHE]information system and a video covering many of the SHE issues facing the company.
2 The system, continually updated, is available to anyone with access to Stratos — via CP-ENV in the document library.
Complementing the existing C&P SHE slides catalogue, it will provide up-to-date facts and figures throughout the company.
2 The 19-minute video, ‘Earth, Water, fire and Air’ presented by TV botanist David Bellamy, highlights the company's environmental policies and illustrates some of the benefits brought to the community.
This is available for group showing, talks etc from publicity department, Runcorn Heath.
The next piece of the information jigsaw will be the C&P environmental brochure, due out this summer placing the company in an even stronger position to drive home its environmental messages, redress misconceptions and help quench the thirsty world.
Shutdown planning reaps rewards
An overhaul strategy and training sessions reaped rich rewards for Hillhouse International's VC4 [vinyl chloride]shut down team.
Compared to the last major overhaul three years ago, there was almost a 90 per cent drop in ethylene dichloride discharge and around 80 per cent in vinyl chloride.
Plant manager Ian Stockdale said: ‘We saw this as an ideal opportunity for testing the possibilities of environmental improvement management.’
Prior to shut down tighter specifications covering each effluent stream were introduced.
Updated refresher training sessions were held for plant operators and new reporting procedures brought in to cover routine monitoring.
A shut down strategy was drawn up highlighting possible problems areas, with specific environmental instructions including extensive monitoring from preparation to start-up.
‘The success of the over-haul has given us the incentive to improve the plant systems and procedures even further,’ added Ian.