

NEWS
WELCOME TO A NEW LOOK AND A NEW EDITOR
Environmental Issues has a new look — and a new editor, Mike Moss from C&P's environmental department at Billingham.
Wirral-born Mike joined the company in 1979 from Newcastle University where he gained a chemical engineering degree.
Having worked at Billingham for a few years he was appointed as a commissioning engineer for an ammonia plant in Canada before moving in 1985 to manage the leading concept ammonia [LCA]plant at Severnside, Avonmouth.
In July, last year, he took up the post of environmental adviser.
Mike takes the editor's chair from Allan Olleveant who has retired from ICI after 41 years service.
Allan was involved with Environmental Issues from its start and much credit for its success must go to him.
The magazine is now firmly established with demand for copies at an all time high.
Most readers won't realise just how wide a circulation Environmental Issues has.
Its print run is not a few thousand — but 54,000!
It goes not only to C&P employees and pensioners but to MPs, opinion formers, educational establishments and representatives from the chemical industry.
It was also distributed to shareholders at the company's 1991 annual general meeting.
Manchester design company Lord & Bowes has developed its new look, including an editorial column and news roundup, and we intend continuing with our lengthier informative features.
Monitoring of nitrogen oxide
Equipment to monitor nitrogen oxides has been installed at a number of sites, including Wilton recreation club, in a jointly funded venture between ICI, Langbaurgh Borough Council, Enron and British Steel.
Nitrogen oxides are an important measure of air quality and results from the monitors will be added to the data on sulphur dioxide and smoke currently collected by the borough council.
Mystery of marshland aircraft wreckage solved by ICI electrician
When aircraft wreckage was unearthed at a remote ICI waste disposal site near Billingham the rumours began to fly.
But aviation enthusiast David thompson — an ICI electrician — searched the site at Cowpen Bewley for clues and soon solved the mystery.
The remnants were not from a Second World War Spitfire, as some believed, but from a Hawker Hunter jet which crashed on a routine flight 33 years ago.
The pilot ejected safely before the plane nose-dived into what was then marshland.
Eye opener for media following Brixham tour
A party of Teesside journalists have recently been on a fact-finding tour of ICI's Group Environmental Laboratory at Brixham, Devon.
The group, including newspaper, TV and radio reporters, looked at the various ways ICI is working for a cleaner environment.
Sue Drummond, Environment Correspondent of the Middlesbrough Evening Gazette, said:
‘The visit was an eye-opener.
ICI has a high reputation for its commitment to research, but even so I was surprised by the wide range of high-powered work going on at their Brixham Laboratory.’
Reporters were fascinated by the methods ICI uses to monitor the effects of chemicals in the air, on the ground and in rivers, lakes and seas.
They also looked at waste minimisation and treatment processes.
The results-seen and heard by the majority of Teesside on TV, radio and the newspapers — proved the journalists had been genuinely impressed by the work of the laboratory.
Bellamy judges Wyre centre competition
TV botanist David Bellamy will help judge the competition backed by Hillhouse International to find a name for the new Wyre riverside centre.
A financial partnership between Hillhouse, which donated £50,000 and the local authority enabled the £100,000 centre to be built.
Now local schoolchildren are being invited to play their part by naming the centre, a focal point of environmental activities in the Wyre Estuary Park.
The winner will receive a £25 voucher plus £100 for an environmental project at his or her school.
Wyre Borough Council's community services department is running the competition.
The centre will house exhibitions on the local heritage and wildlife and have facilities for lectures and talks.
project to protect
Hillhouse International has launched a £135,000 project to protect water flowing into the River Wyre at Thornton.
Two sluice gates and ancillary equipment will be built to safeguard the water quality of Royle's Brook, which passes through the site into the River Wyre.
Hillhouse lab gets prestigious NAMAS stamp of approval
The highest quality is guaranteed at Hillhouse International's environmental services group laboratory…and that's official.
For the laboratory — which analyses emissions on and off site — has been given the prestigious NAMAS [National Measurement Accreditation Service]stamp of approval for its quality assurance system.
It is the first ICI works laboratory to receive NAMAS accreditation.
Assessors scrutinised all aspects of the laboratory's activities from receipt of a sample through to the final report.
NAMAS, specialists in the field of laboratory techniques, was set up by the government to raise and maintain the standards of laboratory work.
Hillhouse assistant site manager Ian Henderson said: ‘This award is the culmination of a lot of hard work by all the team and they are to be congratulated on bringing their quality assurance scheme to the high standard recognised by this presentation.’
Equipment failure leads to prosecution
The National Rivers Authority is to prosecute C&P on Merseyside for three breaches of outfall consents earlier this year.
In February, control equipment failure on a lime dosing system, coinciding with blockages in the back-up caustic system, led to an acidic discharge from a lagoon.
A failure of a centrifugal pump, also in February, resulted in a small release of carbon tetrachloride.
In March a failure of a pressure release device on the VC3 Plant led to a release of ethylene dichloride.
Brian Poslethwaite, Laboratory and Environmental Services Manager, said: ‘We have investigated all three events and taken action to prevent a recurrence.
Investigations reinforced the point that immediate action must always be taken to contain any spill that might enter the drains, and that effective emergency procedures are key to this.’
Going gling gone
Going, going, gone…one of the three brown plumes at Wilton has disappeared.
The nitric acid 1 plant, which emitted a plume of nitrogen oxides [NOx], has closed down reducing the NOx produced on site by more than half.
There are plans to eliminate the two remaining plumes, by-products from the adipic acid plants.
This forms part of the company's long standing commitment to reducing atmospheric emissions from its Teesside operations.
In 1989 nearly £2 million was spent eliminating the largest brown plume at Wilton.
Bibby's brainwave for Badger's bins
Redundant storage bins at Wilton have a new use — as havens for badgers.
Melinar safety officer Ken Bibby, a member of the East and North Yorkshire badger protection group, had the brainwave to turn the bins into living chambers for homeless badgers.
Made from ICI Propathene, the bins, up to five feet high have stood redundant since the Terylene plant was closed some three years ago.
The group, which has been given 18 bins, is building setts to replace those dug-up by badger-baiters.
Badger-baiting is at an all-time high in East and North Yorkshire and it is estimated that each year in Great Britain as many as 9,000 badgers meet a premature death.
CoastGuard gets the all clear from Brussels…
Holidaymakers may be puzzled by the blue flags flying along a stretch of English coastline this summer.
That's because, around Britain's rain-lashed resorts, they're about as rare as two weeks of continuous sunshine.
But for visitors and residents at Weston-super-Mare, and its neighbours, Burnham-on-Sea and Clevedon, the flags are an assurance that all is well with the world, or at least the sandy bit between the town and the sea, for they show that the beaches meet European standards of cleanliness that seem to elude their bigger rivals.
The blue ensign also flies the flag for ICI chemicals and Polymers whose water treatment product, CoastGuard, helped the shoreline gain the all-clear from Brussels.
Scare stories about Britain's beaches have abounded since 1976 when an EEC directive laid down the acceptable limits of sewage pollution, the year Wessex Water set about turning the tide of increasingly dirty beaches.
They have been helped along the way by CoastGuard, a treatment for the micro organisms contained in sewage discharged into the sea launched by Chlor Chemicals' Watercare business last year, and a newspaper story comparing Weston's beach favourably with a Barbados resort favoured by Princess Diana.
While it was the Today newspaper that focused national attention on the fact that the Princess did not have to travel half way round the world to find clean water, it is the aptly-named CoastGuard that has kept up the high standards of cleanliness for royalty and commoners alike.
Results of trials conducted by Watercare and Wessex Water underline the business' claims for [CoastGuard and its ability to clean-up the coastal environment.
Gareth Jones, director of science and quality, for the water company says the C&P product is the ideal short-term solution to sewage problems.
‘Because of the success at Weston-super-Mare we decided to extend the treatment to other sites, at Burnham and Clevedon.
We know that Coastguard works, because beaches on the opposite side of the Bristol Channel estuary which are covered by the same water, did not receive the EC approval.’
Careful monitoring by Wessex Water, C&P and the independent National Rivers Authority all confirm Gareth's conclusion.
The official report says: ‘Disinfection with CoastGuard proved effective at dramatically reducing coliform and streptococci [the bacteria that link stomach and other illnesses with sea bathing], not only in the sewage outfall but also in the bathing waters.’
‘There was also little or no environmental impact.’
Tests by the Severn Trent laboratories proved Coastguard to be three times as effective against viruses as its nearest rival-yet much less expensive.
Mike Williamson, Watercare's technical manager, adds that the CoastGuard type system has been used widely in America to keep coastlines clean for tourists.
He hopes it will not be long before the same can be said of Britain.
The effects of raw sewage on British beaches has earned much of the country's coastline condemnation from European inspectors whose tests have shown unacceptably high levels of bacteria.
But in the Wessex resort of Weston-super-Mare, where two million visitors take their holiday each year, blue flags are replacing the black marks as the water company sets about cleaning up the beaches, with help from C&P.
New emission law is positive move in the right direction
New legislation means ICI and other manufacturers in the UK must obtain authorisation to run or substantially modify existing processes — and to start up new ones.
Integrated Pollution control — part of the Environmental Protection Act — came into force in April, this year, and initially covers large combustion plant such as power stations and boiler houses.
C&P has already completed its application forms for these, which has been received by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution [HMIP].
The forms include details of the process and quantities of waste discharged to land, water and air.
Mansel Jones, Hillhouse International power station manager, said: ‘I personally feel this law is a positive move.
It is a starting point with a long term view of significantly reducing emissions that could be harmful to the environment.
‘However, as a power station manager, it will mean a considerable amount of extra work because increased monitoring will be required.
For a company with older power stations introducing new technology to make major reductions in emissions could be very costly.
‘I can see tremendous benefits but hope that realistic targets are set for industry to comply.’
Most large industrial processes in the UK — some 5,500 — must be authorised within the next five years.
Nearly all ICI plants will require authorisation, most of them in 1993 and 1994.
ICI believes that the Environmental Protection Act represents a major opportunity for good environmental performance in the future.
However, the full implications of the Act in terms of capital expenditure, existing plant life and product costs will not be fully apparent until industry has a clearer idea about how the new law will be enforced.
Applications submitted to HMIP have been made available to the public and other regulatory bodies for comment.
When the HMIP have reviewed these they will give their decision.
ICI will end up with an authorisation which will include a maximum emission limit and conditions for monitoring these.
Results will be available so our performance can be seen to conform.
ICI to publish emissions facts following right-to-know fight
As part of its commitment to improving environmental performance, ICI is currently collating detailed data on its discharges on a site by site basis.
Details of 1990 perormance will be made public later this year and will include information on solid, liquid and gaseous emissions.
Last November ICI announced a new set of environmental objectives aimed at making its environmental performance measurably better:—
all new plants will be built to the best environmental standard.
a 50 per cent reduction in wastes will be achieved by 1995.
the company's already good performance on energy and resource conservation will be improved.
the company will establish new policies and procedures for recycling materials.
Disclosure of environmental information is an essential element in monitoring the progress towards achieving these objectives.
2 In the past, certain data has been collated by the regulatory authorities, such as the National Rivers Authority and Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, who monitor industry's performance and this data is available from their public registers.
However, ICI's new initiative will provide more comprehensive information than that required by law or by the regulating authorities.
ICI gives the highest priority to the proper management of all wastes arising from its activities and is committed to providing more detailed information on its discharges.
ACID RAIN Environmental Issues explores the facts
One of the objectives of Environmental Issues is to highlight — and put into perspective — major environmental concerns.
In a previous issue we featured global warming.
Here we explore the facts about acid rain.
Natural rain has always been slightly acidic — brought about by unavoidable causes like plant and animal respiration, organic decay, volcanic eruptions or lighting.
Mankind has increased the acidity of rain through activities like burning fuel, which gives off oxides of carbon, sulphur and nitrogen, the most damaging being sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide.
However, it is not these emissions alone that raise the acidity but a complex inter-action of oxides with other oxidants such as ozone created by sun-light and the presence of volatile organic compounds of ammonia.
As it takes time for these reactions to occur, one country's acid rain may be the result of another's emissions.
So sulphur oxides emitted from English power stations may fall as acid rain in Norway and emissions from Poland and Holland may contribute to the haze seen on fine summer days inn England.
Although research has mapped out many of the inter-active processes that cause acid rain, the details are complex and not yet fully understood.
What is clear though is that by reducing man-made emissions the level of acidity will improve and this will reduce the impact on the environment.
But the reduction of one type  of emission or controls in just one country is unlikely to significantly reduce the world-wide impact of acid rain.
Nor will it give the environment a chance to restore water quality.
International agreements must be made if there is to be a steady reduction of all major contributing compounds.
Members of the European Commission [EC]have reached an agreement to control and reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides and the UK has taken a step towards this with new legislation governing all industrial processes [See page 5].
This legislation will ensure that the UK can meet its international obligations to significantly reduce the national emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxides over the next decade.
Other international agreements, for example on the control and reduction of volatile organic compounds, are currently being discussed by a variety of authorities and organisations.
All these moves will help, but there is something that we as individuals can do — if we want to.
It is largely our need for electricity and transport and our demand for consumer goods that ultimately leads to acid rain.
As a society are we prepared to spend to regain our natural environment?
We could, for example, on a personal level reduce the need to generate so much electricity by improving home insulation or by fitting more efficient and energy-saving light bulbs.
Or we could leave it up to the electricity generators to reduce the impact, at the expense of higher bills.
Other sources of acid rain may not be so easy to control.
Reduction of nitrogen oxides from cars will need more expensive vehicles — or mean less use.
Clearly there is still much to be done, but whatever choices are made we all have a small but important part to play.
The level in Britain is less than lemon juice
The rain that falls in Great Britain poses no direct threat to human health — with an acidity level less than lemon juice or vinegar — but it does affect our environment in a number of ways.
Acids in the air:—
damage stonework and cement
dissolve natural metals in the ground and these are then carried inn acidic water to rivers, poisoning fish
damage food crops and forests
reacts in the atmosphere with ammonia from agriculture to form haze
Our largest source of sulphur dioxide is the power station where fossil fuels containing sulphur are burnt to provide electricity.
Power stations and road traffic are the major sources of nitrogen oxide, together accounting for more than 80 per cent of the UK total.
ICI's power stations put out only about 1.3 per cent of the UK's sulphur total and 0.5 per cent of the nitrogen oxide total.
Much progress has been made countrywide to reduce sulphur dioxide levels, which have fallen by nearly half since 1970.
Action, instigated by the government, has also been taken to start to reduce nitrogen oxide, although the increase in traffic is hindering this.
Volatile organic compounds come from a wide variety of sources, both man-made and natural.
The largest single man-made source is road traffic, accounting for 30 per cent, with the use of solvents, ie in paint, printing ink and adhesives, adding a further 25 per cent .
Natural sources include farmland and forests — do you recall the smell of a sunlit pine forest?
Emissions from ICI factories, although not fully quantified, are only a fraction of a percentage of the UK total.
The effects of ammonia, released by livestock farming and naturally from the ground in rural areas, are not fully understood and are currently being investigated.
MERCURY Significant reductions
Environmental groups and local angling associations have expressed concern over the mercury levels in fish caught from the Mersey.
C&P's chlorine production plants are among the industries releasing mercury into the Mersey.
Phil Edwards from C&P's environmental department has appraised the current situation.
Environmental Issues reports.
Mercury in Liverpool Bay fish presents no real cause for concern to consumers, for the content is well below the limit set by the European Community [EC].
The mercury content in fish from this area has been extensively monitored since 1970 by the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food [MAFF], ICI and North West Water — and more recently the National Rivers Authority.
Data shows that the level fell from 0.6 parts per million [ppm]in 1970 to 0.3 ppm in 1973, but remained the same for the next decade despite a huge 95 per cent reduction in the release of mercury into Liverpool Bay from ICI.
‘Over the years ICI has made significant reductions in its mercury emissions,’ explained Phil Edwards.
‘In 1974 these totalled about 70 tonnes, at around the same time dentists were using about 30 tonnes per year to fill the nation's teeth.
Emissions today are down to about two tonnes per year.’
Not all of this enters the Mersey because the majority of aqueous mercury losses, which is discharged to canals as the highly insoluble mercuric sulphide and settles near the factory, is removed by dredgers for landfill before it gets there.
Phil said: ‘Recent monitoring shows that a further gradual improvement is taking place, with the level for 1990 recorded at 0.2 ppm — substantially better than the EC standard of 0.3.
‘So the current appraisal is that the level of mercury in fish presents no significant risk to consumers.’
Although the levels of mercury in fish in the Mersey is well below the legal limit, industry and the statutory authorities will continue to monitor the situation.
Vegetables, meat, cereals and fruit all contain mercury but it is fish that provides the most significant input to the human diet.
In 1970 the world Health Organisation established a ‘tolerable weekly intake’ of mercury and, although reviewed a number of times, this remains the same.
MAFF, which has been monitoring the mercury levels of UK residents, has identified those most at risk as fishing communities living near water where the mercury content of fish is above average.
In all the highly exposed individuals examined 96 per cent had a level in the blood less than one tenth of the toxic threshold — with the highest still only a fifth of this.
C&P has invested heavily in plant to reduce its mercury emissions.
Between 1973 and 1985 it spent £25 million pounds on a process to remove  about 95 per cent of the mercury from its runcorn effluents, which has an annual operating cost of £1.5 million.
‘The economic consequences of having to achiee ‘zero’ emissions are, however, quite severe.
The cost of achieveing this at the chlor-alkali plants in runcorn by installing new technology was estimated in 1986 to be about £200 million,’ said Phil.
Today North West industry meets all the Mercury quality standard and load discharge limits set by the regulatory authorities and the UK fulfils all the requirements of the EC mercury directive.
It is felt that tighter controls on mercury emissions are unnecessary because the existing emissions to the aquatic environment are not harmful to human health,’ said Phil.’
‘It should be noted, for instance, that the level of mercury in the Mersey waters is comparable to the EC limit for drinking water.
‘Looking to the future further controls on mercury ought to follow the path it takes before accumulating in the fish.
There could be links with historic discharges found in estuary sediments, which could mean restrictions on fishing in certain areas or even on fish consumption.’
But the mercury content of the sediment could soon improve if Liverpool Bay follows the pattern of the Manchester Ship canal, where there already been a significant decrease and a corresponding decline of mercury in the estuary's surface sediment.
Said Phil: ‘Whatever moves are made or decisions taken, ICI's policy will be to continue reducing mercury emissions.’
thirty years of aquatic polluting evidence
Concern over mercury's potential for polluting the aquatic environment began more than 30 years ago.
It stemmed from the outbreak of Minamata disease among the Japanese who had eaten fish and shellfish containing substantial quantities of organic mercury compounds — found to have originated from the direct discharge of factory effluent.
Swedish scientists subsequently traced the decline in their country's population of seed-eating birds and their predators to the use of alkyl mercury seed dressings.
These and other factors led to world-wide steps being taken in the 1970s to reduce the discharge of all mercury compounds to the aquatic environment.
These included a limit — ranging from 0.3 ppm to 1.
O ppm — on the amount of mercury permissible in fish sold for human consumption and the ban of commercial fishing from a number of waters.
Said Phil: ‘At the time the key uses of mercury, apart from chlorine production, were in the manufacture of batteries, paints, seed dressings and electrical equipment.’
Mercury occurs naturally from volcanic eruptions, ground de-gassing and erosion.
The earth's crust contains approximately 0.
O7 ppm although naturally high concentrations of mercury have been found in a number of locations, including Lake Windermere where mud dating back to the last century contains 0.7 ppm.’
Chlor-Chemicals launch recycling initiative
A unique nationwide initiative to help thousands of customers meet their environmental obligations has been launched by Chlor-Chemicals.
Manufacturing industries using chlorinated solvents for cleaning applications can now call on a team of specialists to collect used solvent for recycling or safe disposal.
This service, available regardless of amount or UK mainland location, completes Chlor-Chemicals' plans to provide a total business package for solvent users.
Dr Bernard Whim, technical marketing manager, said: ‘We have previously provided the process, plant and technical support and are now closing the loop by offering this safe, environmentally acceptable recovery and disposal route.’
It is part of ICI's solve-care product stewardship which ensures start-to-finish total care for customers.
Dr Whim said the service would be offered with future new products or processes and reflected ICI's waste minimisation policy for its own and other industries.
trials show reed beds are the natural way
Reed beds are growing in popularity as a natural method for treating effluent, following the successful £5 million project at Billingham.
A £660,000 pilot project is now underway for the nylon area at Wilton.
Greenhouse trials have already shown the reed bed potential in treating liquid effluent from this area and the pilot will enable more detailed studies to be carried out.
Five small scale reed beds have been built and these will operate continuously over a minimum 12 months.
The main purpose is to evaluate the suitability of this treatment and determine the size of a full scale system for Wilton.
Reed beds offer a highly effective treatment because bacteria living within the root system breaks down the effluent into water, nitrogen and carbon dioxide.
Oxygen supplied to the roots via the reed stems encourages this bacterial process.
Whatever moves are made or decisions taken, ICI's policy will be to continue reducing mercury emissions.
‘Mercury level in the Mersey is comparable to EC limits for drinking water.’
Facing up to recycling targets
To meet its target set out in forthcoming European Community [EC]legislation, the UK must recycle 80,000 tonnes of plalstic packaging each year.
There is a long way to go as only 350 tonnes were collected during 1990 — but plans are already underway to gear up collection across the country.
One of the prime movers is Recoup [RECycling Of Used Plastic containers], a non-profit making company set up last year by resin manufacturers, bottle blowers and machinery manufacturers, fillers and users of plastic bottle packaging.
ICI is a founder member of Recoup, which currently has 15 sponsored schemes in place or ready for launch including kerbside and supermarket collections serving thousands of homes.
It is actively looking for more pilot schemes to identify the greater efficiencies needed and the best options available for waste collection.
ICI believes that if the UK is to meet its EC target then a whole new infrastructure of plastics collection, cleaning and separation is needed and that an industry-led response is preferable to one operated by government.
There is no easy solution.
Providing collection bins might appear an easy step but this could lead to more problems than it solves!
For just 20 PET lemonade bottles, weighing a total of one kg, can fill a single household dust bin.
expand this to a neighbourhood and it is easy to see that collection and transportation costs would turn this into an uneconomical exercise.
There are other difficulties.
Bottles and containers can be made from a variety of plastics which, like coloured glass, must be separated into pure and therefore more economically viable batches or be down-graded and have restricted re-use.
Recoup is working on these problems and collaborating with Reprise International Plastics Recycling Ltd which is making a substantial investment in a plant to clean and separate plastics.
This could well provide many of the solutions.
The plant will ultimately provide recovered PVC, polythene and PET for applications such as strapping tape, fibre fill, pipe lining, detergent bottles, wood substitute and other non-food applications and even, perhaps, back into packaging.
Recoup, Reprise and ICI
Since its formation two years ago ICI's plastics environmental affairs group has been working closely with recoup and reprise.
Three of the team are actively involved with Recoup.
Barry Overton is chairman of the board, Gordon Head is Yorkshire and Humberside regional manager and Bob Dye, regional manager for Hertfordshire and Essex.
Barry Overton was appointed to set up and head the plastics environmental affairs group with Gordon Head and Sue Ward in charge of polymers [Melinar PET and Propathene PP]and Bob Dye in control of PET and PP film.
In these early days the role of the team is largely education — liaising and working with schools, local communities, industry and, of course, ICI itself.
Also a focal point for technical and commercial information on a number of ICI ventures, the team acts as co-ordinator for the various plastics businesses within the company.
It also helps represent ICI in its involvement with Recap, a multi-material project for the recovery and rescue of plastics from scrap cards.
Let's ltake a look on the bright side for once…
COMMENT
The chemical industry receives a lot of criticism for its impact on the environment — but the benefits of the industry are rarely praised.
Pollution, however, comes from a wide range of sources other than industry, such as domestic refuse and sewage, farming, mining, transport exhaust fumes and electricity generation.
The advantages of using your own transport or having electricity available at the flick of a switch are obvious, but are the benefits of the chemical industry really recognised, or do we take for granted the improvements it has brought to our life-style?
What about our own company?
What part do ICI C&P products play?
They are used to produce everyday items such as clothes, paint, carpets, food packaging, disinfectants, life-giving medicines…the list is endless.
Just about everywhere you look you can see the influence the chemical industry has on our lives — clean drinking water, fresher and cheaper food, better clothing, improved medicines.
Our consumer society demands these, yet takes them for granted.
I suspect that if you asked your family and friends to list every day items which could have been made from C&P products they would find it difficult.
Why not try it and see…look at our list below.
*
It is too easy to dwell on the environmental down-side of the industry and I believe it is about time we brought home to people the improvements we bring to their life-style.
After all, our world would be a very different place without the benefits brought by ICI and the chemical industry.
* C&P's products are used for, or help make, thousands of every day items:— medicines; plastic fizzy drink, wine & beer bottles; rigid food containers & tubs; disinfectants for home, hospital & swimming pool; car bumpers, brake fluid & anti-freeze; paint & paint containers, road markings — including double yellow lines!; carpets, inks washing machines & food mixers; fertilisers; clothes & dry cleaning products; soaps, washing-up liquid and washing powders — to name but a few!
Investigations lead to £250,000 saved
A prime example of waste minimisation leading to significant savings — both of cash and materials — has been made at Wilton's Chlor-Chemicals plant.
This is thanks to work by a corrective action team set up in January last year to investigate high and variable losses of caustic soda to the drain.
The team identified the main cause as fluctuating caustic concentrations which affected the type and size of salt crystals.
This in turn affected how well the crystals could be separated from the caustic liquor and, ultimately, the effluent quality.
Changes to back washing of caustic filters has improved control of the concentrations and cut sodium hydroxide losses by more than half:— from 7.6 tonnes per day on-line in 1989 to 2.
O tonnes per day on-line in the first half of this year.
The savings are estimated to be more than £250,000 annually.
Delight at Teesside as site gains ICI's first mark of quality
C&P has achieved ICI's first quality assurance accreditation for waste management.
It was awarded to Teesside operations following a two-day audit by Yarsley Quality assured firms.
Environmental services employees responsible for waste management at Teesside's four disposal sites were delighted to hear their quality system had been awarded BS5750 part 2/ISO9002 registration.
The accreditation reflects C&P's commitment to environmental objectives set up to make the company's environmental performance ‘measurably better’.
One objective is to reduce waste by 50 per cent by 1995, particularly substances harmful to the environment.
ICI has more than 40 chemical plants on Teesside.
Last year solid waste totalled 227,000 tonnes but this is forecast to fall to 206,000 tonnes this year.
The waste disposal sites are:— Cowpen, Billingham, and Wilton's landscaping mounds — for inert industrial, dry factory, construction and demolition waste.
Bran Sands and Teesport — both licensed to deal with 270 special chemical wastes which are buried in sealed cells lined with protective clay.
Chemical wastes not covered by ICI's licenses are sent for external treatment, disposal or incineration.
Win one of these great Bellamy books
Here is your chance to journey through England's last wilderness…
Environmental Issues has five copies of David Bellamy's new book called England's Last Wilderness — a journey through the North Pennines.
They have been signed by Professor Bellamy and co-author Brendan Quayle.
Simply answer the following six questions.
There is a choice, but if you need a clue look back through the five editions of Environmental Issues!
Send your answers, along with your name, location and, where possible, a telephone number to:—
OPSIS system throws up interesting facts
Trials of state-of-the-art technology to monitor air quality in and around Wilton have been producing some interesting data.
The OPSIS system — using a beam of light, transmitter and receiver, fibre-optic cable and a computerised spectrometer — can detect and measure the concentration of gases in the atmosphere.
A team, set up by Teesside operations environmental services, has conducted a number of tests on OPSIS to evaluate its performance in monitoring organic compounds.
Air quality manager Peter Shawcross said the results were currently being examined and evaluated and that interesting facts were already coming to light.
‘Levels of nitrogen dioxide recorded in the air on Wilton site were similar to or less than those you would find in a town or city centre,’ he said.
Other substances monitored during the trials included sulphur dioxide, ozone, toluene and paraxylene…
OPSIS — Greek for clear vision — is widely used in Europe for monitoring pollution, particularly in urban air where results can be linked with the movement of traffic.
Each gaseous substance has its own ‘fingerprint’ and absorbs a certain pattern of light.
OPSIS' beam of light defects these substances and conveys its findings to the spectrometer.
This data is then analysed by a computer.
Already 10 systems have been sold in the UK, mainly to local authorities, and another 140 have been installed in mainland Europe.
CFC recovery venture
A joint venture to recover CFC gas from domestic fridges has been launched by Teesside operations and Langbaurgh Borough Council.
2 And if the scheme proves a success it could spread throughout Cleveland and parts of North Yorkshire and South Durham.
Teesside operations put up £2,000 — half the cost of the special portable pump and generator — and provided technical advice.
The council is running the scheme.
It takes only minutes to clear a fridge of CFC gas, which is then stored in a secure container and returned to ICI at Runcorn.
The fridge body is recycled as scrap metal.
New teesside initiative praised for ‘lion's den’ approach
Teesside Operations has been praised for entering the ‘lion's den’ in its campaign to improve communications with the local community.
A team attended a public meeting about the River Tees and North Sea in Redcar organised jointly by environmental pressure group Teeswatch and the local fishermen's association.
The same team had earlier met Teeswatch representatives at Wilton to talk about ICI's environmental improvement plans and policies and to introduce the newly formed Teesside community affairs group, led by Bill Perfitt.
Although some criticism was levelled at the company, ICI was praised for entering the ‘lion's den’ and for its efforts to improve environmental performance.
When Teeswatch visited Wilton, Mr Perfitt spoke about the work of the community affairs group and its aim to improve communications between ICI and the local community.
Teesside operations environmental manager Tony Lewis gave an overview of ICI's environmental policy and performance.
The visitors were also given an insight into Billingham's £66 million sulphuric acid recovery project by Allan Clements, acrylics production area manager.
This will eliminate the disposal of waste acid in the North Sea and significantly reduce discharge to the River Tees.
Following the meeting the Teeswatch visitors were shown round Wilton's Chlor-Chemicals production site by production area manager Bill Brown and his team.