

ISSUE NUMBER 7 RECOGNIZING ACHIEVEMENT Internal and international quality awards
INTRODUCTION
As the cover illustration suggests, the theme of this issue of Q magazine is awards.
And not just the C&P quality Awards which were such a success in their inaugural year.
It is sadly not practicable to feature all the 200 plus entries to the competition so we have concentrated on the four teams who received gold awards in the finals.
This may give an unbalanced impression of the competition as a whole and of the enthusiasm generated throughout at local level.
The C&P site at Baleycourt, for instance, put in 24 entries from just 100 personnel.
Plans for the 1992 scheme are well advanced and it will be launched in July.
The other awards, featured on page 15, may be more prestigious but they certainly won't be more hotly contested.
The EFQM Award and the potential new UK National Quality Award show that the importance of the ‘Involve and Recognise’ step in the Quality Improvement Process is not lost at national and international level either.
Awards, though, are not an end in themselves and are only of value if they stimulate the improvement process.
On a personal note, this is the last issue of Q magazine which I will edit as I'm leaving ICI soon.
When the magazine was launched three years ago, the quality ethos stood nowhere near the acceptance level it has now reached when, as Mike Brogden says, it's recognized in C&P as the only way to do business.
I suspect we don't realize how much the quality culture has affected not just our language but our attitudes too.
I'm sure it will play an important part in pulling C & p through its current problems.
Q Magazine Editor Veronica Lawlor interviews Mike Brogden.
‘THE BEST MEANS OF HARNESSING OUR CAPABILITY’
C & p 's new Chief Executive Mike Brogden is no stranger to the quality process.
‘When I was setting up the Fine Chemicals Manufacturing Organization [FCMO]in the early '80s, there was no doubt quality was the main way to compete more effectivey and raise performance.
It wasn't formalised but the main threads of quality management were there.
In the three years I've been here, and because C&P was one of the first ICI groups to move into quality, the value of the quality ethos has taught me that it's the only way to do business.
By broadening our view of quality from the early days, we've come to realise its importance as the framework for everything we do.’
Mike Brogden is anxious to promote this message in C&P.
‘Although we're currently in the trough of the cycle, there's no doubt we have assets at our disposal across all our businesses which will allow us to take on and beat the best of the competition.
Positions in the market place, products, marketing and sales organization, sites and plants, technologies, people skills, intellectual property — tremendous assets.’
FRAMEWORK IN PLACE
Did Mike Brogden believe that framework was in place throughout C&P?
‘Largely, yes — but we need to use it more effectively.
the quality concepts are understood, the benefits are widely enough known to convince even the sceptics about the importance of using the framework.
But there's room for considerable improvement in the way we build quality into day-to-day, hour-to-hour management.’
‘We have to create new horizons for our businesses.
Substantial changes are needed in order to restore the performance of the businesses to an acceptable level and ensure each one has a sound future.’
Here Mike Brogden admits to some concern about the quality process being seen as the evolutionary, gradual improvement of everything.
‘There are some things we need to move on big and fast, to achieve radical changes.
For instance, we must know and understand the total cost structure in multi-product businesses from raw materials through to the customer.
We have a very large fixed asset base of £5 billion, producing £3 billion of sales.
We must focus on the profitable deployment of every aspect of that asset base.’
Did the new Chief Executive see C&P continuing mainly as a European business?
‘We're picking those businesses where the market opportunity and our competitive position justify an expansion on a global basis.
PTA and ‘Klea’ have already crossed that hurdle; others such as Katalco, ‘Melinar,’Watercare and Forest Products are under consideration.
On our non-global growth businesses, we have more restructuring to do, there's no doubt about that, but the majority of these businesses have the capability, resources and assets for a sound future.’
APPLYING QUALITY EVERYWHERE
Mike Brogden wants to see quality principles extended to what he calls the software side of the business.
He believes management processes and teamwork are just as amenable to the quality approach as the hardware of products and plants.
‘The power of quality is all-pervasive and accessing some of the softer sides of the business will give hidden but important gains.’
He also wants to see non-financial indicators being used more widely.
‘We must set up processes of measurement which give us the basis for improvement targetting and monitoring progress.
Techniques like customer surveys, checking on the quality of our team-working, the quality of communications to staff.
Do they feel informed?
Do we do a quality job on involvement?’
MARKET FOCUS
One of the main communications challenges will be achieving an understanding by everyone in C&P of Market focus, Mike Brogden thinks that Market Focus and quality are totally complementary concepts.
‘Market focus is around what we have to do to deliver our promise to the customer, what we have to achieve to be successful.
The quality framework is much more about how we are going to deliver a highly competitive performance to ensure business success.
The very difficult challenge is to break down the Market Focus concept into components which can reach every individual on the shop floor and in every function.
It'll take time, there'll be years more learning but my priority is to define an action plan and to get it done.’
Mike Brogden wanted to emphasis one point very clearly in relation to market and customer focus.
‘If these two concepts are interpreted too simply, there's a danger that people will believe we have to ensure only that the customer is satisfied or delighted.
Clearly that's crucial — but it only gives us the opportunity to make profit.
We only actually make profit if we carry out all the other operations in the running of the business more effectively than our competitors.
We sometimes lose sight of that.’
IMPORTANCE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
Like his predecessor Ralph Hodge, Mike Brogden spent some years at Millbank as Personnel General Manager.
It was there that he gained an appreciation of the significance of teamwork, of the importance of identifying individual contributions and creativity.
He believes the quality process must be applied in a quality way.
‘It can become over-bureaucratic and ritualistic so that the words and the jargon take over.
It's people's thoughts and creative contributions which are the key.’
He cites some of the outstanding performances in C&P —‘and we have quite a number to our credit.
the setting up of the ‘Klea’ Business has been a world-class performance.
Take the new catalyst plant at Clitheroe; the whole project team has met unbelievably difficult performance standards.
In the fertilizer business, we've reshaped and changed the whole way the business is run so it's now profitable in a way we'd have hardly believed possible when we started.’
‘When you ask these people ‘What were the most important factors in your success?’, they all say the main aspects were the importance of teamworking between all contributors, the clear identification of what had to be achieved for success.
But they'll say the most important of all was the skill and creative contribution of individuals within the team.
You can unmistakably identify that as making the difference between outstanding success and mediocrity.’
‘I never cease to be struck by the extraordinarily high performances individuals can turn in when faced with a challenge properly identified and given the means to deliver.
That's why I have added that most important fifth principle to the C&P Quality Policy Statement: ‘Every member of C&P staff has an important contribution to make’.’
In a refreshingly different customer/supplier relationship, teams from the Wilton sales office regularly spend evenings Ten-Pin bowling with their counterparts from the Trafford Park plant of FMC.
Meeting socially has strengthened the already good relationship between the two companies.
‘It means a lot from our point of view,’ says FMC senior purchasing officer Sheila Purdy.
‘Meeting the voices at the end of the phone for a good night out outside work really helps — as well as being very enjoyable!’
BOWLING THE CUSTOMERS OVER
Production day supervisor Bob Hodson illustrated the point: ‘ICI phoned earlier to say the tanker with the morning delivery of phenol had broken down on the motorway and wouldn't be here until four o'clock.
It could have been turned away if we hadn't been told.
What's more, someone will have to stay to receive it but there's no problem getting one of the tank farm operators to do that because they know the tanker driver.
The drivers represent ICI and we rely on them — we have to work together.’
ICI supplies phenol from Billingham to the Trafford Park plant, which also buys adipic acid, propylene and small quantities of glycols from Wilton.
Until recently, the plant was part of the Additives Division of Ciba Geigy.
Now it has been acquired by US-based FMC corporation and its businesses will complement FMC's existing line of phosphate esters made in West Virginia.
The three businesses at Trafford Park are phosphates, water treatment and esters and polyesters.
‘The phenol goes into a flame retardant product.
When we had an exchange visit from ICI operators at Billingham, they were surprised to learn that their safety suits contained materials which we'd made from their phenol,’ said Bob Hodson.
BUILT ON CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
According to purchasing manager Roger DaForno, this excellent relationship has taken some time to build and there's no doubt that both organizations' commitment to a process of continuous improvement has helped immensely.
‘In the early '80s, we were buying most of our phenol from two other suppliers.
When they quit the market and ICI became our main supplier, the relationship took time to bed down but ICI's performance now is excellent.’
FMC take between 10 and 15 tankers of phenol a week and three or four of propylene.
Bob Hodson phones the Wilton sales office on a Thursday and places his order for the following week.
‘ICI's rating under our vendor rating system is very high,’ says Roger Da Forno.
‘We trust your product quality and only do one retrospective test — for critical moisture content.’
This high rating, plus the good personal relationship and understadning, mean ICI is one of the companies which FMC will work with in its quest for MRPII Class A. ICI C & P's dictionary of Total Quality Management defines MRPII as ‘Manufacturing resource planning: a method for the effective planning of all resources of a manufacturing company,’ As project manager, Phil Coughlan thinks MRPII is an unfortunate name for what MRPII does.
‘It's not just about manufacturing but about the whole business.
That's why our project is called Resource Planning or RPP.
We didn't want people to think it was only for production and engineering.
In its truest sense, it must be a change in philosophy for the whole business.
We use MRPII as a fundmental mechanistic approach plus what we call continuous improvement, which is how we do what we currently do in a much better way.’
PURSUIT OF QUALITY AND EXCELLENCE
Ciba Geigy, as it then was, started its Pursuit of Quality and Excellence programme four years ago.
An extensive education programme took everyone offsite on a two-day course, which was built around the Tom Peters philosophy.
The programme resulted in a lot of initiatives and was, according to Phil Coughlan, very successful in making people aware of why quality matters in today's business.
It faltered, though, because the initiatives were taken by individuals and were not particularly well focussed.
‘People asked ‘What is it we're supposed to improve?
What are the dangers if everyone tries to improve everything?’
So the activity tended to peter out for a numbr of very good reasons.’
Phil Coughlan had kept a watching brief in MRPII for some time.
‘We were a little complacent so we had a fundamental audit carried out by external people.
It showed that our formal control and planning mechanisms fell far short of what we would like.
We needed a single set of business figures and measures we could monitor so we could focus the quality initiatives.
We were busy overcoming problems inherent in the system so as to service customers — but no-one knew at what expense.
Was it a good decision to airfreight an order because we'd messed things up on the plant?’
What was needed was a good control system which would tell them where in the organization the problem lay so they could tackle it at source.
Having achieved senior management commitment to the resource Planning Project in the summer of 1991, Phil Coughlan's small team came together.
‘RRP will be introduced slice by slice so we can learn as we go along; the risks are too big to put it in all at once.
The process of acquisition by FMC has inevitably meant delay but the mechanisms are in place so we can press the button quickly.’
EFFECT ON SUPPLIERS
As RPP is about putting in place a single mechanism for demand management, it will have a significant effect on suppliers.
‘Production planning will be much clearer.
We will use that information to generate a material requirement plan which we will give to our suppliers.
So they'll be looking at the same information as we are.
That material requirement plan will contain fixed production plans for periods of one or two weeks.
In that way, you'll know well in advance exactly what deliveries will be required.
That will help you in your production planning.’
QA AND OPPORTUNISM
Quality systems have naturally been around within Ciba Geigy for a long time and all aspects of manufacturing on the site have been registered to ISO 9001 since 1987.
Now they are going for a more ambitious target — one company-wide registration to include safety, personnel and management services.
This will mean a fully integrated quality system across the site.
While implementiong RPP in each product group, FMC will also be looking for what Phil Coughlan calls ‘opportunistic continuous improvement.’
‘I mean removing the obvious, stupid ways of doing things which grow up within a business.
The other grades of quality problems are more difficult to eliminate unless you have the data and the culture to help you tease them out.’
Ciba Geigy had invested heavily in personal and team development traininng over the past decade and the benefits can be seen among all the changes.
The external audit showed an openness to change among the employees and no instant desire to blame other departments when things went wrong.
‘With such a positive workforce,’ says Phil Coughlan, ‘there's real enthusiasm for RPP.
Everyone can see the benefits even before we start.’
Late last year, the methanol business ran a very successful quality day at Billingham.
Norman Healey of BSI presented General Manager Nick Carey with the ISOP 9002 certificate for methanol trading and distribution.
Businesss Manager John Stoney explained that this meant the whole methanol business was now registered — the first supplier in Europe.
The plant and sales office had been registered in 1990, and distribution services department back in 1988.
‘As most of our customers and suppliers are also registered, there is an unbroken line of quality assurance from beginning to end of the products's life.’
One of those customers is Dow Corning: European Area Purchasing Manager Maurice Melloul gave a presentation about their supplier quality management programme.
METHANOL FOR DOW CORNING
Silicones are one of the most versatile groups of chemicals around.
They can be produced as fluids, rubbers, resins, sealants or compounds.
They all have high electrical resistance, stability in heat and cold, water repellancy, resistance to ageing and good lubricating characteristics.
Undisputed world leader in silicones is Dow Corning Corporation of America.
The company was founded in 1943 when Corning glass works teamed its organo-silicon research with Dow Chemical Company's experience in manufacturing chemicals.
Dow Corning created an entirely new industry whose products are used today by industries as diverse as medical and construction, transportation and chemical processing, personal care and electronics, food processing and paper finishing.
In Europe, Dow Corning has a basic plant at Barry in South Wales to which ICI has been supplying methanol from Billingham since 1955.
With a recently announced expansion, won in competition against plants in the USA and Japan, methanol usage at Barry will more than double over the next five years.
Dow Corning has a reputation as a pace-setter in Total Quality Management, having launched its policy in 1983. the purpose of this policy is to ensure that the company provides products and services that meet or exceed the requirements of its customers.
The company began rating suppliers in 1984 and 1990 moved to a more sophisticated system with the introduction of its supplier Quality Management Process.
European area purchasing manager Maurice Melloul says the process starts from the premise that the most satisfying and successful business is built on partnership.
To achieve the status of ‘Preferred Supplier,’ a company must demonstrate that it can provide products and services which are uniform, consistently meet requirements and show an on-going commitment to quality.
‘In other words,’ says Maurice Melloul, ‘our Preferred Suppliers are those which help us most to be preferred suppliers to our own customers.’
A SEARCJOMG SCJEME
A supplier is evaluated under seven criteria.
The first is continuous assessment of its performance in communicating and sharing information, in innovation, in after-sales support.
‘We value highly those companies with a quality culture and their own TQM programme,’ says Maurice Melloul.
Criterion number two is the quality of product or services, with registration under ISO 9000 being the minimum acceptable standard and Statistical Process Control in use to determine product consistency.
Dow Corning staff carry out a systematic programme of external audits, including on-site visits, to check that these standards are in place.
Reliability and security of supply, with advance warning of potential supply disruption or shortage is the third criterion.
the four others cover packaging, labelling, paperwork and pricing.
‘We expect highly competitive prices with cost reduction opportunities which come through innovation by the supplier.’
Each of the seven criteria is weighted on an assessment grid with product and delivery carrying the most marks.
Each criterion is broken down further into a number of different categories with varied weighted values.
Take delivery as an example: each of the requirements of material, quantity, time, location and documents is marked and when added together these make up 30% of the total.
ICI's methanol and ammonia business manager John Stoney says the Supplier Quality Management Process is an excellent programme ‘because it shows that everybody in ICI has an effect on the relationship with the customer.’
Maurice Melloul says ‘Obvously, we only build this sort of special relationship with a limited number of selected suppliers but it is mutually beneficial.
Suppliers thank Dow Corning Europe for telling them how they rated on the grid.’
Partnership is a stage on the road to Dow Corning's ultimate goal of World Class Manufacturing.
At that point, suppliers will be integrated into Dow Corning's quality process and operations.
That will allow Dow Corning to simplify its work processes and concentrate on continual improvement and on integrating into its customers' quality process and operations.
Maurice Melloul's guidelines for the success of the purchasing agent in Dow corning sum up the professionalism that lies behind the words: ‘The agent must: exercise close cost control build long term relationships bring negotiations to a ‘win-win’ conclusion promote and sell the best image of his company be knowledgeable about the supplier's market and end-use applications.’
In that way, the purchasing function becomes a source of profit.
The Gold Award Winners CLEANING UP ‘FLUON’ G201
Ian May, Fluoropolymers Business QA Manager at Hillhouse, reports on how the ‘Fluon’ G201 contamination reduction team delighted customers.
‘Fluon’ G201 is a ten-year old grae of PTFE used for moulding and machining into engineering components.
Market research had shown that our customers still found it technically excellent, with good mechanical and flow properties.
But sales were waning because the discerning customer found the contamination levels in the product unacceptable.
For ‘contamination,’ read ‘little black specks.’
They didn't affect performance but, in the white PTFE, they stood out.
It may have been only perception — but the customers were put off and that's what mattered.
In both senses, the improvement goal was clear.
The contamination level had to be brought down dramatically to achieve full capacity sales.
The large catch was that it had to be done quickly and with no capital expenditure on new equipment.
That was a tall order.
The process and equipment is ten years old and manning levels had recently been reduced by 25%.
Earlier proposals for capital investment had been turned down because the line had been considered beyond further improvement.
There was far more handling by operators in ghe G201 process than for any other ‘Fluon’ grade.
It seemed obvious that all this operator handling must be contributing to the black specks.
Generally, though, management's view of the process had become ‘it's as good as it's going to get.’
Added to all this, the existing quality control contamination test didn't effectively measure the true contamination level.
GETTING DOWN TO IT
All in all, the task looked pretty impossible but we were determined to have a go.
The likeliest place for the specks to get into the product was in the ‘Fluon’ finishing Room so we set up a multi-disciplinary CAT of operators, supervisors, QC, QA and maintenance personnel headed by Finishing Room manager Jim Fairhurst.
Cross-functional quality circles were put in place to decide how to tackle the problem.
Priority number one was to develop an accurate quality control test for consistent and quantifiable measurement of contamination.
If we couldn't measure it, we couldn't improve it.
the QC lab quickly developed a test so we could begin gathering information in earnest.
Using FMEA [Failure Mode and effect analysis], we identified and quantified the main places where contamination was getting in.
Then we used Pareto analysis to categorise the findings  and decide which areas should be tackled to optimise effort.
THE IDEAS COME IN
At this stage, Finishing Room and Maintenance personnel began an orchestrated campaign of cleaning re-organizing the Finishing Room and the process route.
This would improve the quality of the product.
This team effort involved all five shifts and cut through the 10-year old manufacturing practices.
They came up with solutions like extra operator-led controls and different product handling.
These ideas transformed the way the Finishing Room operates.
Some examples: part way through the process, the PTFE ‘cake’ is now bagged up to stop contamination getting in.
Operators decided to clean down equipment regularly, not just superficially, but by taking it to pieces.
To everyone's amazement — and delight — the ideas worked and contamination levels came down.
Even more challenging was the decision to make G201 on newer and cleaner equipment normally dedicated to other ‘Fluon’ grades.
There were plenty of voices muttering dire threats of cross-contamination — but it worked!
There were no significant production scheduling problems or cross-contamination.
It was ironical that the high level of operator handling thought to be the biggest problem was actually the main part of the solution!
THE RESULT
The May 1991 and all subsequent G201 manufacturing campaigns brought dramatic reductions in black specks, down by a factor of ten.
Our customers were delighted — sales to one of them doubled and now the G201 production line is operating to full capacity.
Sales generated £1/4m extra turnover in the last two quarters of 1991 and there's real potential to generate £1m extra in 1992.
We're holding the gains by effective communiucation between the process and QC operations and by charting the improvement so that everyone can see what has been achieved and can react quickly if they see any deterioration.
This pioneering work on G201 has led the fluoropolymers business to apply the same techniques to other ‘Fluon’ grades.
The old G201 grade, which everyone thought had had its day, has become a clear success!
THE JUDGES' VIEW
C&P Commercial manager Philip Felcey presented the award and said it was particularly appropriate that he should do so.
‘I was in charge of‘Fluon’ for a couple of years and I failed to make any impact whatsoever on that particular problem.
They've driven the project totally from the shop floor through plant operators across five shifts.
It's even more impressive because it was helped and driven by management through the provision of no capital whatsoever and a 25% drop in manpower!’
The Gold Award Winners DRIVING HAULIERS ON THE ROAD TO TQM
Distribution services department gained a Gold Award for the improvements which it had brought about in road haulier performance.
By the end of 1991, savings from initiatives with hauliers came to more than £4 million.
Phil Browitt, C&P's Distribution Services Manager, was in at the start:
From the beginning of our Quality Improvement Process, we studied a number of customer surveys and carefully analysed customer complaints.
Delivery performance far outstripped any other cause of complaint by internal or external customers.
The department spends more than £300m every year on distribution services so, obviously, here was a key area for improvement.
First, we had to set up a structure so we could record all the non-conformances and make sure corrective action was taken.
The non-conformances took a variety of forms — late delivery was the worst but for some customers, early delivery was just as bad.
Then there were safety related incidents like spillages, plus other problems such as product contamination, wrong documentation or wrong equipment.
Chart 1 shows how the non-conformances have been reduced since 1989, when we were dealing with over 300 different hauliers.
In 1988, distribution was one of the first Departments in C&P to gain ISO 9000 accreditation.
At conferences that year and in 1989, we told hauliers that, without a quality accreditation, they would not be enployed by ICI Chemicals & Polymers Ltd.
This was to ensure they had the correct commitment and were prepared to organize for quality.
We gave assistance, advice and training to help them meet the requirements.
Now all UK hauliers and 70% of European hauliers have an accreditation.
The other 30% will be there by the end of the year.
The first UK haulier to be accredited, in June 89, was voted ‘Quality haulier of the Year’ two years later by the Motor Transport Industries.
HAULIER PARTNERSHIPS
Quality partnerships offer huge benefits to both parties and Distribution Services is actively  progressing them with hauliers.
We have established eight so far and will increase them steadily.
Working in partnership means each partner gains confidence in the other.
The hauliers become preferred suppliers to ICI C&P, so they are prepared to put in capital and training.
This effectively reduces the number of hauliers required and Distribution Services has reduced its supplier base by over 50% in two years [chart 2].
All Distribution Services staff had taken the Quality in action workshop training by the end of their drive to TQM — and to make sure they speak the same language of improvement — we're now presenting the QiA workshop to them, too.
We began with our partnership companies and have now moved on.
By mid 1992, over 40 hauliers will have shred the QiA workshop and will be taking the training down to their drivers working on ICI contracts.
TARGETING COSTS
As well as monitoring haulier performance, we initiated many projects where we knew savings could be made.
Here are two examples:
caustic soda payload improvements
Problem: Vehicle carrying capacity not fully utilized.
Solution: Form CAT involving distribution, customer service and plant operators.
Plan of action:
1
Monitor payloads being achieved.
Average was 21.10 tonnes.
2
Review customer ordering sizes and increase where possible to 24 tonnes.
3
Inform haulier of need to supply correct equipment to carry new loads.
4
Monitor payloads again.
New average 23.20 tonnes.
Increase of 9.9%.
Saving £350,000 per annum.
Improving rock salt distribution
£350,000 saved by:
Reducing number of suppliers from 75 to 11.
Introduction of a regional scheme with one haulier responsible for all orders to that region.
Introduction of automatic haulier allocation, automatic transmission of orders via telexing system coupled with automatic haulier payment.
Establishment of agreed standards of service.
Monitoring systems set up and haulier's performance reviewed on regular basis
Haulier seminars/training packages to bring suppliers closer to the business
Sub-contracting limited.
All hauliers to be accredited to BS 5750 by end 1992.
All hauliers audited for safety and operational procedures.
Completing these and other joint improvement activities gave us a total of more than £1m saved in 1991, making some £4m since we began our haulier performance improvement programme.
We believe we have a very soundbase on which to build, with the partnerships and service agreements providing a platform to continue cost reduction, raise our operational efficiency and reinforce the continuing drive for customer satisfaction.
THE JUDGES' VIEW
Presenting the award, Peter Ibbotson, construction and Engineering Director of Sainsburys, said: ‘We were particularly impressed in the haulier improvement programme by the measured level of quality improvement and the fact that it has been sustained.
The effort and the approach were exceptional and the degree of involvement of the team.
The dramatic reduction in complaints and, of course, the high value placed on the quality improvement itself can only be a good thing for the business.’
The Gold Award Winners REDUCING ‘MARANYL’ WORKING CAPITAL AND IMPROVING DELIVERY PERFORMANCE
The ‘Maranyl’ business manufactures high specification engineering plastics for the automotive, electrical and domestic appliance industries.
Companies like Nissan, Ford, Bendix, Swish and Black and Decker are customers.
The ‘Maranyl’ manufacturing improvement team on the Billingham Plant was a gold Award winner in the 1991 C&P Quality Awards.
Here manufacturing engineer Cahal Devlin tells their story:
The Manufacturing Improvement Team was formed because the plant had to improve its manufacturing capability to survive.
It had to react more flexibly to the needs of the ‘Maranyl’ business.
We created the team — not overnight — by pulling together a multi-disciplinary squad of ‘value-adders’— operators, tradesmen and supervisors who represented the plant organization.
They were ‘volunteers’ who between them had vast experience of how ‘Maranyl’was manufactured on our five extrusion systems at Billingham.
They all spent a few weeks with me, a manufacturing engineer, to set objectives, to create a manufacturing improvement strategy and policies and then to drive them.
MANUFACTURING EDUCATION
The squad had to be moulded into a team with its own common objective and stragegy.
We developed these through clear business education.
MIT members were shown, in detail, the market which they had been trying for years to service.
They were then shown, market segment by market segment, that their plant was totally incapable of providing this service unless the business held large stocks of raw materials and finished products — in other words, large working capital.
Even with these stocks, we still had a poor customer delivery performance due to our long manufacturing lead time.
Having seen all the data, MIT members understood why change was necessary.
They saw that our business was suffering because our plant's manufacturing capability was by its nature inflexible, cumbersome and slow.
So the MIT's objective was clear:
‘reduce working capital tied up in stock from £12.3m to £6m and improve customer service within 12 months.’
Given that the MIT was formed on 13 May 1991, we had until 12 May 1992 to achieve the objective.
We now had to create a manufacturing improvement strategy to let us do it.
By playing some specially designed manufacturing ‘games’ for a day, the team developed the following strategy:
1
Reduce grade change over time
2
Reduce batch size
3
reduce stock [working capital]and Improve customer service/
The driver for achieving our objective was reduced batch size, so that it fell closer to order quantity.
Reduced grade change-over time was the driver to enable the plant to run with reduced batch size or reduced economic batch quantity.
We had to find a way of reducing those change-over times by between 75 and 90% and to make the change stick.
We also had to do it without spending a lot of money.
There was no fresh capital, the project did not have a specific budget so any money had to come from existing tight maintenance and operating budgets.
CUTTING CHANGE-OVER TIMES
Once the MIT was educated, members had to be trained to become expert in grade change-over time reduction techniques, the key to improving manufacturing capability.
Again, by playing the right manufacturing ‘games,’ the team quickly became an authority on SMED [Single Minute Exchange of DIE].
This is an improvement technique developed by Shiego Shingo for Toyota in the 60s.
Using SMED with the policies of ‘Working Smarter not Harder’ and ‘Eliminating Waste,’the MIT launched itself into grade change-over time reduction with tremendous success.
Reductions of between 80 and 93% were achieved within a few weeks.
The MIT continuously measured itself against clear performance standards.
It monitored and analysed its performance in relation to grade change time [chart 1 left], batch size, working capital and manufacturing lad time.
By November, six months into the project, the MIT was confident enough of the sustainability of the new plant performance to give the business a new grade change-over time matrix with which to plan and schedule production.
By then, approximately 92% of change-over times were three hours or less.
This gave the ‘Maranyl’ business the tool it needed to drive down batch/run size.
In turn, this smaller batch production ability has meant a change in stock replenishment policy, reducing working capital tied up in stock from £12.3m to £9.3m by end January 1992 and to £6.2m to end April 1992.
In the same period, the Due Date Delivery Failure rate fell from about 11 percent to 6 percent.
This was due again in the newly found ability to run with reduced batch size.
Everyone on the plant feels it has, and is continuing, to improve the quality of what it manufactuers and the systems it uses to do it.
There have been five main areas where the transformation has taken place:
Organization Based on the MIT's analysis of the plant since May 1991, production teams are now formed differently with a new role for some operators.
New job descriptions hasve been written, personnel selected and trained for the new roles.
Hardware Many hundreds of simple, cheap modifications have been made to enable maintenance and operations teams to ‘Work Smarter not Harder.’
The first modifications allowing the achievement of three hour change-over time cost £5,500 [not a lot!].
Teamwork This has clearly improved as each function understands the problems faced by the others and they all work to break them down together.
Attitude Not easily measurable but has clearly improved as everyone sees a definite objective and a defined route to achieving it.
Ongoing improvement The MIT and everyone on the plant are well aware they have built the foundation for future improvement.
there's much more to do but they're ready, prepared and able to do it.
THE JUDGES' VIEW
Mike Evans, Managing Director of Pacplas, summed up the judges' view: ‘First, they've achieved a great deal and the spirit of the team means they'll get better and better.
The motivation is extraordinary.
Secondly, the problems with the business were well defined.
The team was well focused, the results were well measured and very well fed back.
Enthusiasm from shift operators down to the management was absolutely superb.
They've pushed back the boundaries which were limiting the business.
They've proved you don't need a team of PHDs or a pot of money to make a massive improvement.
COMMENT MORE POWER TO THE PEOPLE
In the ‘Maranyl’ MIT, we've blended quality, safety improvement and manufacturing improvement to add value and reduce waste.
No one would argue that manufacturing excellence, quality and safety are carved from the same stone but quality can be seen as a sombre, dull and lifeless topic.
The MIT proved it doesn't have to be like that.
As well as transforming the operation fast, we had a lot of fun.
What we were trying to do was to give our business a ‘new’ manufacturing tool that has a sharper edge with which to attack competitors and chop off more market share.
We believe that without a flexible, robust manufacturing capability, driven by a team with the right attitude, the business is handicapped, will wither and eventually die.
We believe now we're getting it right!
A vital element in that success was the MIT members were empowered with the responsibility and authority to drive changve themselves.
This will never be an easy concept for people who have always been led [and perhaps not very well led!]but who are very capable of leading themselves.
It is a concept which can only be developed slowly.
there must be a realistic view of what can be achieved but it shouldn't hinder the improvement process nor stunt enthusiasm.
The members of the ‘Maranyl’ MIT would be the first to admit they're not unique.
they're no different from any other ICI employee — energetic, enthusiastic, ingenious and deeply committed to the future of their business and of ICI as a whole.
These qualities have been recognized, released and blended within the ‘Maranyl’ MIT and directed as a common goal.
They're still looking for improvements.
There's no reason why these qualities cannot be released from all of ICI's ‘value adders,’ company-wide, to produce similar results in a similar timescale.
The people who add value are all around us, we've got to find them and empower them to drive the changes which will make ICI a stronger player in all its businesses.
Can we afford not to?
Can you?
The Gold Award Winners SAFETY FIRST IN OVERHAULS
Another Gold Award went to the Rubber Chemicals section at Hillhouse for the achievements of its shutdown safety team.
In the 1991 shutdown of the R1 Plant, there were no injuries at all.
This compared with 13 in 1987, including six classified injuries.
Section Engineer Chris Garton explains how it was done:.
The two Rubber Chemicals plants R1 and R2 at Hillhouse are operated by ICI people on behalf of Akzo.
Each plant handles a range of highly explosive, corrosive and toxic raw materials.
Reactions are carried out at high pressure and temperature and the processes involve large scale filtration, drying, milling and packing.
Every two years, the plants are shut down for major overhaul.
In recent years, the outage has been used to construct or commission major capital projects to extend the plants' capability.
Each overhaul involves a team of more than 200 contractors who augment the permanent section engineering team of 20.
A capital project can involve an additional 100 men.
THE KEY PROBLEM
The work involved during shutdowns has an inbuilt potential for accidents to happen.
These are typically chemical burns, cuts and bruises and eye injuries.
The problem was that there was a belief among both contract tradesmen and ICI management that, during an overhaul, some accidents were inevitable.
Despite the strenuous efforts that were made each time to prevent them, accidents would happen.
This belief was reinforced by the setting of non-zero safety targets, so that accidents were tolerated.
Not surprisingly, targets were rarely met.
In 1988, I established the vision that all accidents on overhauls would be eliminated.
That was the goal for 1989 but, despite our best endeavours, the contractor work force didn't believe it could be done.
There were still 11 minor injuries during the 1989 R1 shutdown.
2 This only served to make us redouble our efforts and two years later we proved it was possible.
INVOLVING EVERYBODY
Eliminating accidents involved every single person — management and workforce — employed on the overhaul and the major capital projects.
The approach was to build one committed team from a group of total strangers.
The research we carried out in the Rubber Chemicals section identified that improved written systems were the key to preventing Lost Time Accidents and Classified Injuries like chemical burns.
Minor injuries are mainly prevented by personal awareness which is a question of commitment and involvement.
Safety hinges on getting these three cornerstones of quality — management systems, commitment and involvement — in place and in balance.
We realised we'd been depending too much on verbal instructions so we concentrated on producing written safety procedures, including training and planning.
Forty percent of those procedures were written for the '89 shutdown and the other sixty percent for the 1991 overhaul.
Even so, there are still more being made ready for the 1993 shutdown.
All those coming onto the plant for the overhaul had to know exactly what was required.
For the 1991 overhaul, everyone attended a full day's safety induction course, held away from the plant.
The day concentrated on personal awareness of accidents, on the theory and practice of prevention and on the written procedure that had been produced to eliminate major injuries.
There were practical aspects, too, including plant tours, showing where the exits were, what the alarms sounded like.
During the 1991 R1 plant overhaul, everyone was involved in ensuring their own and their colleagues’ safety.
Unsafe act audits were carried out by the management, by the weekly staff and by the contractors.
They showed that potentially unsafe conditions were still being generated.
It was prompt corrective action which prevented accidents.
We'll continue to improve our strategy until we eliminate these potentially unsafe conditions — we're already working on getting it right for the next overhaul in 1993.
THE JUDGES' VIEW
Alan Anderson, Monsanto Quality Manager, presented the award and made these comments: ‘I had a personal interest in this one because I've been working on the application of quality to safety management which is what the Rubber Chemicals Safety Improvement team is all about.
What the team demonstrated first of all was that there are attitudes to safety such as‘accidents will happen’ and, when contractors are involved, ‘accidents will definitely happen.’
They managed to prove that that attitude isn't the right one.
They created a balanced approach to improving safety by working on management systems and on involvement and commitment.
By involving the contractors, they brought about a real sustained improvement in safety which is the number one priority.’
When ICI Chemical Product and Petrochemicals conducted a survey of its customers in 1986, it received the proverbial shock to the system.
No one denied that ICI gave them first-class products.
What it wasn't giving them — and they were quite clear about this — was first-class service.
WHEN A TOP QUALITY PRODUCT IS NO LONGER ENOUGH
‘The feedback was pretty negative,’ said Anthony Goddard, UK sales manager for Industrial Chemicals.
‘Customers thought we were dictatorial, imperial and didn't show much interest in them.’
Yet four years later C&P was winning awards for service — the Formica Supplier of the Year award [1990], the Kodak Quality First supplier certificate [1990]and silver award [1991], the Exxon Chemical [Fawley]Butyl Polymers Supplier of the Year award [1990].
‘We were also voted supplier of the year two years running by the Association of Chemical Distributors,’ said Anthony, ‘and we now consistently receive excellent ratings for our performance from Dow Corning.’
What made the difference?
Taking the quality process to heart.
‘A Review of Customer Satisfaction at ICI Chemicals & Polymers Limited,’ an MBA dissertation written by Andrew John Fortune and sponsored by C&P, pulled together the results of that 1986 and subsequent surveys carried out for C&P and other parts of ICI.
That showed over and over again that on issues such as security of supply, reliability of delivery, documentation, handling of complaints, efficiency of ordering service, and in particular, communication, there were others who tried harder and did better.
So if C&P wanted to increase — or even retain — its market share, it was going to have to make changes.
‘One of the fundamental tenets of the quality process,’ said Anthony Goddard, ‘is that you should understand your customer's requirements.
Through surveys and informal questioning and, more recently, partnerships we have been trying to do that.’
There are also more customers who now define standards themselves and assess suppliers against them.
‘In the past customers tended to buy far more on price,’ Anthony explained, ‘but now they are becoming more conscious of the importance of service, more aware that better service can deliver bottom line benefits.
So they themselves are putting measurements in place to help them differentiate between suppliers.’
‘Dow Corning, for example, has a very sophisticated system which allows a large number of people dealing with suppliers — QA people, accounts payable, receiving, planning and purchasing — to input.
How polite are drivers?
How accurate is documentation?
How punctual deliveries?
It all goes in.’
Using information from assessments such as these, from surveys and from customer complaints, C&P sales offices set about identifying procedures and standards associated with product availability, delivery, order processing, and documentation — their aim being to achieve BS 5750 registrations.
By mid-1990 customer service units in both the Northeast and the Northwest had gained BS 5750  accreditation.
‘The inside operation,’ explained John Sutton, sales resource manager, ‘is at the forefront of C&P's interface with customers, with distribution operators and sales administrators working together to ensure all service-related criteria were met.
We have written procedures around these roles, and we now have a fairly robust system to deal with everything that is important to the customer.’
‘They are actually very obvious things,’ he continued.
‘But it is the first time we have established formal procedures which ensure that we deliver and measure against set and agreed criteria.
In addition to improving service you also have a sound basis for going out and telling your customer what you are doing, which can act as a useful marketing tool.’
The complaints handling procedure, for example, aims to resolve problems within 30 days, and between October 1990, when it was implemented, and December 1991, there was a 73% improvement.
Results like these show a commitment to quality and customer service.
‘The quality initiative has been a major driving force,’ John added.
‘It has provided a mechanism for formalising everything in writing so people are very clear about what is expected of them.
This eliminates confusion, allows initiative to flourish, and has also delivered training benefits, particularly with starters.’
CUSTOMER PARTNERSHIPS
Partnerships with customers go beyond QA registration.
‘The partnership approach grows out of the quality approach,’ Anthony Goddard explained.
‘It makes you understand that you are inextricably bound up with each other and that your fortunes depend on one another.
At its root is the premise that by more openly sharing with one another both our long-term strategies and how we operate on a day-to-day basis, we will actually be able to improve both our businesses.’
It is, as was stated in Andrew Fortune's thesis, a proactive rather than reactive approach, where customer service can be tailored to a customer's needs.
It made sense to work with companies such as Albright and Wilson, Sterling Organics, Dow Corning, FMC, Procter and Gamble, Kodak and numerous others because they do a high volume of business with C&P, are open to this approach and because ‘we believe they are tomorrow's winners,’ said Anthony.
‘In our close work with P&G,’ said John Sutton, ‘we have put down on paper an understanding by both of us of what the customer expects and what we can adhere to.’
P&G's Specifics for suppliers cover, among other things, delivery times/lot sizes/tolerance/requirements, certificates of analysis, and emergency procedures.
‘Basically, it formalises exactly what to do and when, whom to speak to and about what,’ said Chris Mills, a sales administrator in Industrial Chemicals.
‘It has also enabled both of us to measure performance and to identify areas where we can save money,’ added Anthony.
‘And it has resulted in an increase in business.’
The partnership with Sterling Organics has involved exchange visits by production personnel in an effort to help them understand how each other 's processes work.
‘Our people saw that the Sterling plant was quite different from other plants,’ Anthony recalled, ‘and it made them appreciate that because our product was going into a pharmaceutical process, quality is absolutely critical.’
‘We were also able to change the specification of one of our products in a way that is beneficial for them and for us and has taken several hundred thousand pounds of cost out of the combined operations.
As a result of all these efforts the total amount of business with Sterling is steadily increasing.’
IMPROVING COMMUNICATIONS
In order to improve communication further with its key customers, C&P is also exploring electronic links.
‘Through electronic data interchange [EDI]we are now in a position to offer customers the facility to place an order by sending a message down the wires to our processing system,’ Anthony explained.
‘When the order is delivered, it can be invoiced electronially.
It will cut out the need for paper orders and acknowledgements as well as the time spent inputting information.’
It means the supplier and customer have to align their systems.
Something you can do only if you are working pretty closely with one another, but we are now working with a number of customers to get this up and running.
We are also considering linking electronic mail systems so that people can quickly get operational messages to defined contracts.’
These ideas and some of the interactions he has mentioned do not, Anthony hastened to add, apply across all of C&P yet.
He hopes they soon will, but in spite of the success they have experienced there are those who remain cynical.
‘We still have trouble convincing people across ICI of the value of partnerships.’
said John Sutton.
‘We have put people through a lot of training,’ added Anthony, ‘and will be putting them through more training, aimed at changing attitudes and leading people, whatever function they are in, to ask more frequently.
‘What does the customer want?’
ICI is one of the companies in the European Foundation for Quality Management, which considers customer satisfaction to be the key principle guiding all business decisions.
Even so there is still some dragging of feet which makes things like the implementation of standards which could be used across, not only C&P, but ICI as a whole, something that still belongs to the future.
In his thesis Andrew Fortune made a number of recommendations to help step up the improvements in customer service, which have been echoed in the recommendations of the Customer Focus Task Force.
‘The Task Force was commissioned by the C&P executive to identify ways of improving C&P's customer focus and to raise the profile of customer service,’ said Anthony.
‘One of its conclusions was the need for more senior manager involvement.’
In particular, to include in their objectives improvements in customer service alongside profit as performance indicators.
If a business general manager is required to report not only on profit but on customer service, he is going to take more interest in it.
That interest should, as Fortune points out, give more weight to the customer service issue, as well as keeping senior managers in touch with customer thinking so it can be taken into consideration when formulating company strategy.
In order to create a system that delivers first-class customer service across the full range of C&P businesses, everyone has to work together.
As John Sutton said, ‘It's like a tandem with six people on it who all need to pedal in the right direction.
Five years ago, we had one person pedalling forwards and five pedalling backwards.
Today there are a lot more people who see the benefits of quality.’
Customer service is no longer an added extra.
It can now be the difference between keeping a market share or losing it.
‘It's something,’ said John Sutton, ‘we can't afford not to do.’
‘The partnership approach grows out of the quality approach.
It makes you understand that you are inextricably bound up with each other and that your fortunes depend on one another.
At its root in the premise that by more openly sharing with one another both our long-term strategies and how we operate on a day-to-day basis, we will actually be able to improve both our businesses.’
Leading Quality Improvement in C&P TRIBUS AND WICKENS AT EXECUTIVE CONFERENCE
In February, C&P Executive Conference members attended a two-day event at Runcorn to explore the key leadership issues for the quality process.
To help them think in advance about the issues, members undertook pre-work relating to the quality Improvement Process and its state of progress in their domain.
They answered questions about, for example, determining key indicators in their area and about getting everyone involved in quality improvement.
Two external consultants helped them focus on the key issues.
Myron Tribus, well-known for his writing on Deming's philosophy of management, gave input on TQM leadership, on tools and techniques for managers and on external awards and standards.
Dr Tribus is one of the founders of the American Quality and Productivity Institute which teaches and promotes the fundamentals of quality management.
On day two, Peter Wickens, director of personnel at Nissan, led a session on employee involvement.
He spoke from his experience at Nissan where he has been responsible for developing and implementing Nissan's philosophy and pratices and for ensuring that the business and personnel policies are totally integrated.
Commercial manager Philip Felcey said: ‘The Quality Improvement culture is firmly established throughout C&P and Myron Tribus and Peter Wickens, both world class quality practitioners, were able to bring a broader perspective to C&P's activities and to provide real impetus.’
When it established its quality awards scheme last year, ICI C&P was in good company.
At almost the same time, the European Foundation for Quality Management [EFQM], of which ICI is a key member, launched the European Quality Award, it is co-sponsored by the European Commission and the European Organization for quality.
RAISING THE PROFILE OF QUALITY AWARDS
EFQM was set up in 1988 and now has a membership of some 200 leading European businesses, all of which recognize the role of quality in achieving competitive advantage.
EFQM sees its role as enhancing the position of Western European companies in the world market.
It will do this by accelerating the acceptance of quality as a strategy for global competitive advantage and by stimulating and assisting the deployment of quality improvement activities.
2 The European Quality Award will be won by the most successful exponent of Total Quality Management in Western Europe.
A number of European Quality Prizes will be awarded to companies which demonstrate excellence in the management of quality as their fundamental process for continuous improvement.
Submissions for the European award are based on self-appraisal, whereby a company carries out a systematic review and measurement of its operations.
The model for this self-appraisal process looks like this:
The ‘Results’ aspects are concerned with what the organization has achieved and is achieving.
The ‘Enablers’ are concerned with how results are achieved.
The nine criteria have each been given weightings with ‘customer satisfaction’ the most important [20%], ‘business results’next with 15% and ‘process’third with 14%.
Based on initial assessment of application, finalists will be chosen and specially trained teams of assessors will pay on-site visits to them during the summer.
The presentations to the prize winners will be made at the European Quality Management Forum in October.
C & p has had a direct hand in the development of the European Quality Award.
Mike Gallagher of the corporate quality team has been seconded to EFQM to work on the award.
As manager, Assessment Operations, Mike has been closely involved in establishing the detail of the model and in the methods of scoring and assessing applications.
Meanwhile, in February 1992, then UK Trade and Industry Secretary Peter Lilley announced that he had set up a steering group of leading businessmen to consider a prestigious new National Quality Award for the United Kingdom.
ICI Chairman Sir Denys Henderson would lead the group which would present an initial report by 31 July 1992.
If this new award gets off the ground, it will replace the current British Quality Association Awards which was won by Chemical Products Billingham in 1989 and for which ‘Melinar’ at Wilton received a commendation in 1991.
It will be another goal, along with the European Quality Award, for C&P and its businesses to aim for.
The essence of the model is that customer satisfaction, people [employee]satisfaction and impact on society are achieved through leadership driving policy and strategy, people management, resources and processes leading ultimately to excellence in business results.
Mike Sutton, Head Teacher of Birkenhead Institute, spent a term recently on secondment to MOPS, looking at ways of upgrading work experience processes and preparing a procedure to BS 5750 standards.
His article gives an insight into how the world of education sees quality and the benefits it could bring in non-industrial environments.
WORKING WITH THE TEACHERS
When I saw the advertisement for the secondment, it immediately captured my interest for a whole host of reasons.
I had been the head of Birkenhead Institute for nearly ten years: a time during which great changes had been introduced, some successful, some less so.
The opportunity to go away from the school and work in a different atmosphere and with people who might have a different perspective on the management of organizations would give me the chance to look back into the school more objectively and question some of the assumptions I had grown to accept.
The fact that the secondment was in the part of MOPs where I had worked on summer vacations nearly thirty years ago was an added incentive.
Having decided to apply — possibly a high-risk strategy in this time of rapid change in education — the rest of the process was remarkably straightforward.
Wirral LEA decided to recommend me to ICI with the request that I look at management information systems within the site.
This was to see if there were any experiences that could be of use to the LEA as it looked at its own internal processes, particularly the support services it provides for its schools.
My ‘mentor’ within MOPs was Henry Ratter, C&P training and development manager in the North-West.
He wanted me to look at the provision by the business of work experience for secondary school students during the compulsory stage of their education.
The intention was to produce a quality system and procedure which could be accredited to BS 5750.
This was not the first time I had come across the concept of ‘Quality’ as meant in this context.
It had been raised a year earlier at a residential conference for Wirral secondary heads with the sugestion that schools should attempt accreditation under BS 5750.
At that time, the idea of schools being ‘kitemarked’ like safety belts or electric kettles seemed to me rather bizarre.
The pressures of coping with the Local Management of Schools, the introduction of the National Curriculum and the resulting assessment made ‘Quality’ an interesting concept that could be debated, or conveniently forgotton, at some future date.
Q SYMBOLS EVERYWHERE
Trevor Stephenson, C&P; North-West education liaison manager, kindly gave me an induction day at the Heath.
As he took me round, it very rapidly became obvious to me that C&P did not take quality lightly.
Wherever I went, whatever I saw, there were reminders of the importance of quality.
The ‘Q’ symbol appeared everywhere — on notice boards in corridors, in training rooms, in individual offices.
There were statements of intent, exhortations, graphs and charts all aimed at producing improvements in what was to me at that time the nebulous concept of ‘Quality’.
I have to admit that at this stage I was still wondering if this was just one of those gimmicky fashions that organizations, educational as well as industrial, go  through occasionally.
All-pervading for a short period but ephemeral in the long term.
On taking up the secondment full time at MOPs, the external manifestations of the quality initiative were less obvious.
However, on examining the notice boards around the MOPs main building I saw displayed the measures of the improvements made in areas prioritized by senior management.
Again, talking to people on the site, the topics of quality improvements and quality assurance were part of most conversations on processes within MOPs.
Henry Ratter had arranged for me to attend several training courses, including the two-day ‘Quality in Action’ workshop.
Over the past few years, the quality of in-service training courses for teachers has improved greatly, but I wasn't prepared for the effort [and financial resources]that had obviously been put into the ‘Quality in Action’ workshop.
There was the training manual used by the managers to deliver the workshop, plus the training they had been given to deliver it.
In addition, every member of the workshop was given a very high quality A5 folder.
This was clearly intended to be used not only during the workshop to receive the professionally published course material [not the usual duplicated sheets]but as a personal organizer which would be a continual reminder to the participant of the course content.
Add to this the extremely high standard of the luncheon provided and the message which came through to me was that the company regarded the message of the workshop as very important.
So important that it merited the expenditure of much care and effort — if you are propounding the importance of quality, then you have to do it using a quality method!
If only the Department of Education and Science would take a leaf out of C&P's book when introducing some of the fundamental changes that education has had to absorb over the last few years!
A PICTURE IS WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS
The workshop was based on what we, in schools, would describe as ‘active learning,’ mixed with inputs of company ‘models’for looking at problems and solutions.
One of the strong impressions that I took away from the secondment was the ability of C&P managers at all levels to use various diagrammatic models to help them not only explain the workings of the company, but to help them analyse problems and synthesize solutions.
As a senior manager in a profession which earns its living by presenting ideas to children, frequently in a visual way, it struck me how we infrequently use the same techniques when carrying out our managerial functions.
Unlike my counterparts in C&P, my office doesn't have any means of diagrammatically expressing ideas during meetings.
The apparent reliance of industry and commerce on the flip-chart is still a standing joke in education, but perhaps there is a lesson to be learnt here and my office wall may soon sprout one!
The workshop session on the importance of the measurement and analysis of data made me understand the purpose of the charts and graphs displayed on office walls at Runcorn Heath.
Again, it highlighted something that, as a teacher, I knew but failed to utilize in other aspects of my work — that simple pictures and diagrams highlight the obvious more easily than paragraphs of words.
HOW TO APPLY THE THEORY
I came away from the workshop with ideas for introducing total quality into education, plus curiosity about the practicality of BS 5750 procedures in a school.
I asked Henry Ratter if he would run a workshop for a group of Wirral secondary headteachers and senior LEA officers.
I was certain the LEA officers would find the industrial experience useful in the changes which Wirral, like many other LEAs, is undergoing following recent education legislation.
This legislation is transferring money from the centre to individual schools and the LEA is having to provide services into which schools will buy.
In addition, schools are looking very carefully at their own effectiveness and I felt the total Quality Improvement Process might be a useful instrument in this self-examination.
Henry Ratter set up a moodified Quality in Action workshop for a group of 25 heads and LEA officers, many more than the usual number.
My educational colleagues are a hard-bitten lot and I had not expected them to come out as complete ‘quality’ converts.
However, what I had hoped for did happen; people came away from the workshop with a desire to see how they could use the experience and the insight they had gained within their own establishments.
As one of my colleagues put it when asked if he had enjoyed the workshop, ‘I was too busy working out whether, and how, I could apply the concepts in my own school.’
David Rigby, the Wirral's Director of education, after attending the second session of the workshop, said he intended to take the lead in setting up structures within the education administration to promote the issues of service level agreements, quality assurance and total quality systems.
It is early days yet to see how the ideas of Total Quality Management will affect the way in which schools operate but I have no doubt they are concepts which are of great usefulness to education.
I am also sure that schools will take these concepts, adapt them to their needs and circumstances and successfully absorb them, as they have with the many other innovations taken on board by education over the past few years.
‘By broadening our view of quality from the early days, we've come to realise its importance as the framework for everything we do.’