

ISSUE NUMBER 6 GOING FOR GOLD WITH KODAK
INTRODUCTION
Q Magazine has been redesigned as a direct response to the two main concerns expressed by readers in the survey carried out after issue number 4.
In an article on page 13, the magazine's designers explain the background to the changes.
I hope that the new format, while tackling the criticisms of ‘awkward size’ and ‘too extravagant,’will be as favourably received in all other respects as were the first five issues.
With stories from Millbank, ICI Paints and Kodak Limited, we are also responding to readers' requests for more information on other parts of ICI and on other companies.
The need to communicate more across ICI, to break down the ‘not invented here’ barriers in quality improvement, is also expressed by ICI Director Chris Hampson.
It's one we hope to address regularly in future issues.
There are many quality successes described in the pages of Q magazine 6 and the 1991 C&P Quality Awards provide the opportunity to recognize and celebrate these and other successes in a formal way.
If you're feeling proud of a quality improvement project in which you have been involved, you should enter for the awards.
Entry forms are available from line managers, quality managers or the quality group at No 2 Process Office, Wilton.
Veronica Lawlor talks to ICI Director and C&P Chairman Chris Hampson on how quality is seen from the centre of the ICI group.
THE VIEW FROM MILLBANK
A Canadian, Chris Hampson has worked on three continents in his ICI career.
He joined ICI's Canadian subsidiary CIL in 1956.
After a spell at Millbank as general manager planning, he went back to CIL as senior Vice President before moving to Melbourne as Chief Executive and Managing Director of ICI Australia.
He has been on the ICI board since 1987 and has overview responsibility for safety, health and environmental matters.
FOCUS ON THE CUSTOMER
Chris Hampson sees the key to quality programmes as the definition of customer requirements.
‘That's where quality programmes tie in very closely with the market focus approach to understanding customers.
Defining the requirements of internal as well as external customers is a good way of getting people, particularly in functional departments, to think about their customers.
In the functions, it's easy to become too concerned about professional standards and to forget that the prime need is to serve the customer.’
Everyone realises that the external customer is becoming more and more demanding.
The big automobile companies, for example, are moving to work very closely with fewer suppliers.
As specifications become more and more stringent, so they work increasingly with suppliers who give them exactly what they need.
‘As a customer ourselves, we're finding that the specification of raw material requirements, defining what we want when we want it, plays an increasingly important part in our whole quality approach.’
Chris Hampson sees an enormous number of pay-offs from this focus on the customer's requirements.
‘Take our paint business.
They've been measuring performance in terms of delivering the right product at the right time — On Time In full.
By concentrating on that, they've not only improved their service level remarkably but they've also reduced their stock levels at a number of warehousing points and reduced their cost structure.’
See page 4 — Ed.
AN ICI QUALITY PROGRAMME?
Mention of the Paints quality programme led me to ask Chris Hampson about the overall ICI approach to quality improvement.
Was there not a case for a corporate quality programme to bring together the different initiatives around the company?
‘It's even been suggested that there should be an ICI director responsible for quality programmes.
I think that would make the whole thing too bureaucratic.
It can become a very bureaucratic process anyway so I wouldn't be in favour of trying to impose one overall system.’
‘We shouldn't be too rigid, though, within our own systems.
Quality improvement is a living thing, we must be prepared to learn from each other.
There's a certain tendency in ICI towards the ‘not invented here’ syndrome —‘if it's not in the C&P; system, it can't be any good.’
We've got to stop that and learn from others.
One of the things I'd like to see happen is a greater exchange across all the businesses of what they've learnt and how they've gone about quality programmes.
THE JAPANESE APPROACH
In the external world, Japan is a place Chris Hampson believes we can learn from.
‘One of the reasons I think the Japanese are so good at putting in quality systems is that, in some ways, it's painful attention to detail, a series of little things which really improve performance.
Maybe the reason why it's been so successful in Japan is because the Japanese mind seems to think that way.
The British have more Nobel Prizewinners and are better at the breakthrough to something completely new.
Lateral thinking and tolerating eccentricity are British characteristics whereas quality programmes tend to be made up of a lot of little things which cumulatively add up to something important.’
To make the point, he described a visit to a Toyota assembly line where they had developed the Kamba or Just in Time system.
‘Every car that comes along the line is different — a station wagon followed by a sports car followed by an export model.
the system is set up so that the engine for each car arrives at just the right moment.’
Toyota reckon to get 50 to 100 suggestions each year from every employee and about 50% of them are accepted.
‘One example.
Each employee on the line puts three parts on each car in one minute.
An operator suggested designing a special apron to hold all  three parts so that he could save a second and a half per car.
It didn't seem much on its own but, when it was added to other suggested improvements, it could mean that each operator could put four parts on to each car in the same time.’
‘That's the way the Japanese think,’ says Chris Hampson, ‘and we've got to get people to think that way too.’
This is where employee involvement comes in.
‘It's part of management's job to involve employees more, to draw out their contribution.
If we can unlock the potential of employee involvement, the benefits are enormous.
Each employee knows best what goes on in his or her job and so is best able to suggest how things could be improved.’
Safety, health and environment are high profile portfolios and Chris Hampson believes that quality programmes have a part to play here, too.
A good example was the impact made by Engineering Department installing a monitoring system on plant effluent from the Billingham site which contained ammonia and was putting a pollution load into the river Tees.
The instrumentation group devised a way of measuring continuously the ammonia content of the effluent.
When this was fed back to the operators, they were quickly able to see how their actions were contributing to the effluent and to make substantial reductions in the amount of ammonia leaving the plant.
It was a good example of how employees can contribute to solving pollution problems.
Rather than just spend money on curing the symptom by, say, building an ‘end of pipe’ pollution abatement plant, we're increasinglyseeking to solve the problem at source within the process.
the best way to solve pollution problems is not to create them in the first place.
That's very much the quality message.’
‘Quality is a way of improving business performance and increasingly a requirement for doing business,’ says Chris Hampson.
‘As a customer ourselves, we're finding that the specification of raw material requirements, defining what we want when we want it, plays an increasingly important part in our whole quality approach.’
‘The best way to solve pollution problems is not to create them in the first place.
That's very much the quality message.’
Richard Kelly, CHLOR — Chemicals Technical Manager at Bain Works, reports on how a corrective action team has used quality techniques to save over £250,000 a year in caustic losses.
It has also brought about a real improvement in waste management, showing how the quality improvement process can be used to tackle environmental problems.
QUALITY CUTS CAUSTIC LOSSES
During 1988/89, the caustic [sodium hydroxide]plant at Wilton was not performing well.
Caustic losses were very high and were rising.
Centrifuges and filters were failing regularly.
A lot of off-spec product was having to be recycled.
So at the beginning of 1990, Mike Rex — on secondment from AECI — and chemical engineering student Joe Masih started charting the two — hourly process operator analyses and found a lot of variation.
They came together with control engineer Dave Smith to look at this particular problem but, as their work progressed, their recently acquired quality training made them realise that a Corrective Action Team was needed to look at the wider question.
Caustic/chlorine plant manager Dennis Brown and senior process operator Mick Porritt were other members of the CAT.
For us, this was a pioneering use of quality tools and techniques in problem solving.
The PONC we estimated was large.
Caustic losses to drain — and hence to the river Tees with environmental consequences — were running at over £300,000 a year.
It was costing another £150,000 for unplanned centrifuge maintenance and chlorine plant shutdowns caused by centrifuge failures and resulted in 12 days lost production in one month alone.
the CAT identified backwashing the filters as the main cause of the fluctuating caustic concentrations.
By using water instead of dilute caustic soda for backwashing, we immediately saw a dramatic improvement in caustic losses and in plant operation.
We had set a target of 50 tonnes per month maximum of caustic lost to drain and quickly met and indeed exceeded that.
FINDING THE ROOT CAUSE
The problem was that we didn't know why there had been such a dramatic improvement.
In the summer of last year, we again lost control and caustic losses reverted to the earlier high levels.
We began to understand the root cause when senior process engineer Tom Alcorn showed us work done ten years previously on similar plants.
This work showed clearly that high or variable caustic concentration affects the type and size of salt crystals, which in turn affects the solid/liquid separation efficiency in the centrifuges.
We also put right some long term defects on the plant and made the process analysis charts part of our QA procedures.
Since July last year we've been close to or below our target and the original CAT can now be disbanded.
But we can't stop there.
There are two possible ways forward.
One is the Best Imaginable — to work steadily to reduce the losses even further and eliminate the day-to-day variation which is still there.
A new CAT has now been set up to go down that avenue.
The other approach would be to do some lateral thinking and use the effluent stream containing the caustic to neutralise an acidic effluent stream from another part of the plant.
A quality solution.
The business mission of ICI Paints Europe is to win and keep customers for its range of superior quality surface coatings systems, with customer service as the core value to grow towards a return on net assets approaching 35% by 1993.
DELIVERING THE GOODS — ALL OF THEM, AT THE RIGHT TIME
ICI Paints Europe handles 50,000 orders a month.
Through an annual survey in each business area, we prioritize key customer requirements and measure satisfaction.
One of the main elements which matters to customers is that stock should be available to them when they order it, that it should be delivered at the time they request it and that it should be assembled correctly.
So we have established a measure which we call OTIF — on time, in full— and we've been measuring our performance in this area for the past two years.
In that time, we've improved significantly in each business area.
[OTIF % equals % assembly accuracy X % in full X % on time.]
Decorative has improved from 50% to 90%
Refinish from 75% to 90%
Industrial from 40% to 85%
Packaging from 60% to 85%
That means our customers are in a better position to serve their own customers and we have a greater opportunity to increase our share of their business.
We don't expect to do it overnight, though — it's only when we are performing at a consistently high level that customers can forget some of their previous unsatisfactory experiences.
How have we done so well so far?
The introduction of detailed measurement and the systematic logging of failures has raised everyone's awareness of our OTIF performance and this had led to increased cooperation and feedback between all departments.
One important change already established in working practice has been the elimination of the ‘in transit’ stage when a delivery has left the works but not yet arrived at a distribution centre.
Now, delivery sheets are faxed direct to the distribution centres as soon as a lorry leaves the works.
This enables the centre to include immediately items which are en route in their stock control systems, rather than waiting until much later to check-in the delivery.
The majority of deliveries to the distribution centres are now also being despatched directly from the Slough filling lines without being stocked on site, with a new system of bar coding for ‘full pallets’ made up of single product lines.
The bar code will include the destination and contents of the delivery and will enter the information on a personal computer to produce a loading list.
Stock controllers from our distribution centres now meet their counterparts from Slough and Stowmarket works on a regular basis to discuss new ways and means of improving our OTIF performance and eliminating stock-outs.
This group has contributed significantly to the improvement in OTIF.
OTIF is only one part of ICI Paints' Focus on the Customer programme but it's a vital stage of our journey to becoming a total quality business-one which is organized to be totally responsive to customer needs.
‘…
It's only when we are performing at a consistently high level that customers can forget some of their previous unsatisfactory experiences’.
There are differing views on the value, both real and perceived, of the cost of quality.
But with an identified total of over £400 million for C&P, it clearly can't be ignored.
WHAT PRICE COST OF QUALITY?
At the beginning of 1991, we decided to look again at Cost of Quality and how it was being used in C&P.
A number of external events, including the publication of a BSI draft standard on COQ, made it timely to reconsider the C&P approach.
Our review confirmed the opinion which we have held since C&P was formed — the Cost of Quality is all about the Price of Non-conformance [PONC].
It is not an accountancy measure but a way of enabling us to put a figure on all the opportunities we miss and all the things we foul up.
It tells us how far we are from the Best Imaginable Performance!
WHAT IS COST OF QUALITY FOR?
Finance function Quality manager Dave Storey sets out the background to C&P's pursuit of Cost of Quality and gives some guidance on how it can best be calculated.
Why measure the Cost of Quality?
First, it makes good sense because everyone understands the language of money as a common denominator which goes across all boundaries.
It also helps us set priorities and stragegies in both the short and the long term.
But we must own it and feel comfortable with it or nothing will happen.
The C & p approach has been developing since 1988.
Types of performance measures and Non-conformances [missed opportunities and foul-ups]vary because of the variety of the different parts of the company, from oil crackers through plastics formulation plants to functions like distribution and catering.
A useful way of deciding on Non-conformance headings is to ask four questions about the performance of your part of the business:
How should I judge the performance?
How will my customers judge the performance?
How will my boss judge the performance?
How does the performance measure up against the best in the world?
You should also look beyond the immediate boundaries and ask ‘How do my actions affect other parts of ICI?’— the ‘knock on’ effects.
It's important, too, to look for and identify ‘hard’ and ‘soft’PONCs.
If we deliver the wrong product to a customer, the ‘hard’ costs should be fairly easy to calculate — additional transport and paperwork, disposal costs etc.
The ‘soft’ costs are less tangible — the possible loss of business, the postponement of a possible price increase.
While they are more difficult to calculate, the ‘soft’ costs which you include are as realistic as possible, because if not, the credibility of the total figure will be called into question.
All the C&P businesses are now using Cost of Quality as one of their criteria of success.
They report periodically to the centre on their total PONC and on the PONC eliminated so far this year and the cumulative total to date.
The accent so far has been on production and we need to spread its use in the commercial, R&T and other support functions.
For those who are not yet using it, here are some tips.
It's important that the calculation is done in a particular way, that it is managed and owned by the department.
It helps to clear the mind and establish ownership by starting with a proper brainstorming session on what ‘Best Imaginable’ really means.
Use the self-examination questions mentioned earlier, but most of all, ask yourself ‘Who will carry out the improvement?’ and then focus the PONC in terms which are familiar to those people.
In that way, PONC becomes action-orientated and not just another reporting system.
Action is what the Cost of Quality calculation should bring.
It's a structural common-sense approach to improvement.
Cost of Quality Success Stories RECOVERING CHLORINE PACKAGES
Last year's annual review showed savings from the Quality Improvement Process running at over £70 million.
Here are just a few of the projects, large and small, which are reducing the Cost of Quality in C&P.
Last year, a Corrective Action Team was set up in Chlor-Chemicals to find ways in which the existing stock of drums and cylinders could support a required 25% increase in chlorine business while avoiding major capital expenditure on new packaging.
CAT members had a brainstorming session to identify the root causes for the packages not being fully utilised.
These were then classified according to impact on the business and ease of solution.
This led the team to concentrate on two aspects.
First, packages were not being returned from export markets and second, when they were, they were not being refurbished and returned to service quickly enough.
A two-pronged attack was instigated — a placement student was asked torun a campaign with overseas customers for the return of packages and Castner Kellner works personnel investigated wsays of speeding up the refurbishment process.
As a result of these actions, 1990 sales of packed chlorine increased by 44%.
This figure was directly attributable to better package management.
In profit terms, this meant an increase of at least £250k per annum.
The CAT's work is being continued with a new package chasing initiative led by teams in ICI Watercare,’ says industry service manager Jill Raine.
‘Each two-person team has been given several overseas markets and told to get back as many packages as possible.
With 1,531 drums and 8,221 cylinders still outstanding, representing assets worth £3.5 million, they certainly have a lot to go for.’
The effort already looks as though it's working.
so far this year, packed chlorine sales are running at 160% of budget and ICI Watercare have been able to supply new overseas markets which had previously been impossible because of the shortage of packages.
Cost of quality success Stories IMPROVEMENT TO ‘MELINAR’ BATCH PLANT PRODUCTIVITY
In 1989, a production Corrective Action Team, including shop floor representatives, made a study of autoclave variability at the Wilton ‘Melinar’ plant.
Using Pareto analysis, they discovered the main causes of poor productivity and quality.
As a direct result of the CAT's work, production was increased from 24.5 ktonnes in 1989 to 30 ktonnes in 1990.
Batch cycle times were reduced from 3 hours 30 minutes to the present 3 hours and occupation inceased from 80% to 90%.
Gross margin was improved by £1.65m.
TRANSMITTING DATA ACCURATELY
Ian Woodward and Maureen Johns in commercial Group Finance, in conjunction with Paul Bate of ISD, helped design and implement a new system for transmitting production, sales and stock data for the Plastics business to the corporate accounting system.
The need arose because the system which was being used had no method of automatically transmitting full data.
Pending the design of the new system, a ‘fix’ was put in place whereby the data was manually calculated and transmitted — but this meant using another unreliable system!
Ian, Maureen and Paul, with representatives from each C&P works, formed a cross-function CAT which looked into the problem, designed a new system and scrapped the two useless ones.
There is an ongoing saving of £60,000 which includes a saving of approximately 20 man days a month inputting the data.
ELIMINATING EQUIPMENT FAILURES ON PTA BAGGING PLANT
After his Quality in Action training, Brian Collins, a fitter on the T7 PTA plant, gathered data on causes of failure of an unreliable bag stapling device.
He used Pareto analysis to identify the principal cause as a loose loading arm.
This was secured by fitting of special pins and the failures eliminated.
The resultant saving in replacement parts and additional bagging costs was £20,000.
SORTING OUT THE STORES
Since it joined the MOPs quality programme in late 1990, Weston Point Salt Section has eliminated over £1m from its Cost of Quality.
After QiA training, they identified PONCs and set up 20 Salt Improvement teams to investigate key areas and remove non-conformances.
One example of their work: Bernard Flanagan was asked to give direction to the works stores.
He quickly discovered that, as well as the official repository, there were three ‘unofficial’ stores.
He set up an improvement team to investigate the whole issue of stores requisitions.
The group's remit was to credit back all unwanted items to stores: to give the storekeeper a clear list of who could order materials: to identify what key stores items should be kept on site: and to monitor every item received by the plant each day.
By end September 1991, £165,000 worth of items has been credited back to Merseyside stores.
SAFE HANDLING OF ASBESTOS
Several problems with the control of asbestos on the North tees Works in recent years had highlighted the need to take action.
Things had come to a head in 1990 when a release extenxded a shut-down by several days at a cost of £250,000. a CAT, involving a wide cross-section of disciplines, was set up and reviewed incidents from 1987 onwards.
This pinpointed the main problem ara — non-asbestos work resulting in damage to asbestos-containing insulation material.
The CAT came up with three recommendations.
First, the works procedure for handling asbestos should be reviewed and additional emphasis placed on procedures to be followed in the event of an accidental release.
Second, the works induction training package should be updated, with particular emphasis being placed on the need for non-asbestos workers to be aware of potential problem.
Third, a Personal Monitoring exercise should be carried out to reassure employees that background levels were below HSE Occupational Exposure limits.
All these recommendations were implemented and special publicity, auditing and incident exercises were held to ensure widespread understanding of the changes.
The initiative was fully supported by the Petrochemicals business and Phillips Imperial Petroleum have significantly accelerated the asbestos stripping programme on the Crude Oil Unit.
This year all major vessels and columns were stripped of asbestos and reinsulated during the major shut-down in July and August.
This exercise, which cost over £200,000, was carried out within the critical path time and in accordance with the CAT's recommendations.
The unit was started up three days ahead of scheule and with no incidents.
In May the petrochemicals business was presented with a Kodak Limited quality first Silver Award for the supply of pure terephthalic acid [PTA]and monoethylene glycol during 1990.
These are the main raw materials in Kodak's Estar polyester film base for graphic arts films.
Now the business is looking to achieve the Gold Award, something no supplier outside the US has yet been awarded.
GOING FOR GOLD WITH KODAK
ESTAR base film is made at Kodak's Harrow plant, the first Kodak factory to be set up outside the US.
Just over 100 years ago in 1890, George Eastman, the bank clerk who turned his hobby into a world-wide business, bought the land in what were then the fields of North West London.
It was Eastman who invented the name Kodak — easy to spell and memorable without being in any way offensive in many languages.
Kodak is known world-wide and is being used almost as a generic term for photographic film and paper.
For many years after George Eastman patented his first camera in 1888, the company occupied a dominant position in photography.
Since the 1970s competitive pressures, particularly from Japan, have been building up and like so many other American and European companies, Kodak has adopted Total Quality Management [TQM]processes which the Japanese themselves used to achieve their success.
Kodak world-wide is now totally committed to TQM.
The Juran approach to quality improvement was introduced into US manufacturing operations in 1983 and in 1985 the first ‘change agents’ or quality improvement facilitators were trained at Harrow in techniques such as statistical process control.
These ‘change agents,’ many from the shop floor, were instrumental in working on quality improvements to the manufacturing process through teamwork involving front line people.
It was obvious that, to make further progress, every manager had to be involved and non-production areas were just as important in the elimination of waste.
In the words of quality guru Bill Conway, ‘anything that doesn't add value is ‘waste’— and that can be as much as 40% in non-manufacturing operations.’
So quality improvement facilitators in the marketing and service functions were trained and Kodak adopted the TQM culture company-wide.
In 1991, the emphasis has been on the achievement of ISO 9002 registration and the introduction of MRPII as Kodak works towards manufacturing excellence associated with World Class Companies.
Progress charts are evident in all areas of the company, measuring quality improvements and waste reduction, many of them drawn up by the production staff.
Most recently, staff have been trained in Kodak's own version of TQM called the Quality Leadership Process [QLP].
In this, the familar ‘Assess, Plan, Do, Verify’ cycle has an important added ingredient — Customers are brought sharply into focus at the ‘Assess’stage to ensure their needs are being met.
THE SUPPLIER AWARDS
The Q1 [or Quality First]supplier programme is an integral part of this process and grew naturally from the importance which Kodak places on motivation and recognition.
as Purchasing and Contract Department Quality manager Owen Edis explains, ‘we encourage our managers to give recognition for a job well done, so it was natural to extend this recognition to suppliers.
We run workshops for them, providing training in quality tools and techniques.’
ICI is a key supplier to the Harrow Factory and in 1988 and 89 won a Q1 supplier award.
A joint quality team meets regularly and last year ICI produced improvements in product and delivery performance, resulting in the higher level Q1 Silver award.
Kodak rely on ICI as single source supplier of PTA and MEG and they do not carry out any incoming acceptance testing.
‘We have complete trust in ICI,’ says ESTAR Zone manufacturing manager Malcolm Rowe.
‘We have reduced our stock so that we now hold only two days’ inventory.
ICI deliver PTA at 2 pm four days a week and MEG twice a week.
I have plenty of things to occupy my time in this area but being concerned about raw material supply from ICI is not one of them.
Experience has told us we can trust ICI to deliver to our exact requirements.’
The next hurdle for Petrochemicals will be to go for the highest level Q1 Gold award which will involve another step up in performance.
Senior Buyer Barrie Carvill explains that there must be mutual benefit to supplier and customer in any quality partnership.
‘We're looking for significant cost gains for both Kodak and ICI by identifying major improvement opportunities using the Kodak QLP process.
An important element of this is to have all key variables in the manufacture of these raw materials under process control.
It's a challenge for both companies but it must yield worthwhile benefits.’
Personal Profile — Robert Gibson
Robert Gibson is responsible for quality education and training in ICI Chemicals & Polymers central quality team.
He joined the team in 1989 specifically to design, launch and develop the quality in action suite of training programmes.
2 Robert came from ICI Fibres where he was training and Development Manager.
He joined ICI in 1984 after working in the retailing, packaging and Banking Industries, in his spare time, he's a keen Jazz musician and photographer.
BRINGING THE VISION TO LIFE
The past two years have shown me that getting people ‘turned on’ to quality is a huge challenge.
The formulation of the C&P Vision, setting out what kind of organization we aspire to be, was a great step forward but getting there can look like climbing Everest.
During those two years, I have also come to believe that with the help of two powerful tools we can turn people on to the quality process.
The first of those is leadership, that intangible attribute which can inspire and motivate people at all levels to achieve the impossible.
In the final analysis, every person has to motivate him or herself but high profile leadership can release energies and aspirations which we didn't know we possessed.
Quality training is the second way to show people that quality improvement works.
That is why C&P has made such an investment in it.
One of the biggest challenges in such a large company is to have everyone united behind a belief in a common goal.
When the going is rough, it's essential that we all understand where we fit in and what is our special contribution.
That is where quality education starts.
It sets the scene and then helps us work together to improve our situation.
By looking at concrete examples of improvement, it can bring C&P's vision to life.
People also need to learn the practical skills which bring about improvement the problem solving techniques and diagnostic tools for finding the way through seemingly impassable barriers.
The training means people can relate quality to their work so it's no longer just an airy-fairy philosophy but a practical tool kit.
That in its turn means people feel empowered to take initiatives themselves without needing to be told what to do.
It can release people's imagination and energies in a way which brings real job enrichment.
WHAT ARE THE PRODUCTS?
Since the QIP was started in ICI Chemicals & Polymers in 1987, a full range of training programmes has been developed.
For managers, there is the well-established Managing Quality Seminar and the new QIT Review workshop.
This gives managers an opportunity to evaluate where they are in the quality process, to look at the Eight things To Do and to adjust their direction if necessary.
In the general area of quality education, we have developed a comprehensive suite of programmes which comprises Starting with Quality, the Quality in Action workshops and specialist modules on measurement, problem solving, systems improvement and customer service.
All of these programmes are designed as enabling mechanisms which allow participants to try things out, test their assumptions and then to transfer the learning into action.
If there is no action as a result of the training, then there's no benefit from the learning.
We want people to try something new and feel good about their achievements!
THE ROLE OF THE LEADER
One of the lessons we learned early on from QES was that it's not enough to appoint a number of specialist trainers, brilliant though they may be, and expect them to lead change.
As in all significant campaigns, quality education has to be led from the front, with the manager showing the commitment and leadership which make others realise that things can and will be done as a result.
That's why the Quality in action workshop is designed to be delivered by line managers to their own staff.
WHERE NOW FOR QUALITY EDUCATION?
Over 20,000 people have now been through the Quality in action workshop and more than 2,500 managers through MQS.
As the Quality Improvement Process becomes more and more a part of C&P's culture, quality education will naturally become more integrated with the mainstream training programmes at all levels.
Customers, suppliers and other parts of ICI have shown great interest in the C&P quality materials.
As a result, we have decided to market them, using a network of consultants and trainers to deliver the courses and give consultancy help as required.
In this way, we can increase awareness in the world at large of C&P's commitment to quality.
Spreading the philosophy of quality improvement among our suppliers will also yield enormous benefits.
The existing programmes will not stand still, set in tablets of stone, but will need to improve continuously and evolve to meet business needs.
It will be vital to retain their cohesiveness, style — and quality!
Success Story THE STADIUM AFFAIR
THE CAST
THE DRAMA
Stadium Plastics at Hartlepool was using ‘Maranyl’ grade A190S 047 for Black and Decker production during the night of 22–23 May.
Suddenly they met burnt chip contamination and had to shut down the production line, a major anxiety as they were producing to a tight schedule in a ‘Just in time’ situation.
CUSTOMER SERVICE/CORRECTIVE ACTION
23 May 08.00 Ray Taylor phones Peter smith to explain the problem.
He asks for immediate customer service and corrective action, supported by a visit from the ‘Maranyl’ quality manager to deal with the long-term implications.
08.05 Peter Smith phones Alan Anderson, gives him grade and batch data, plus details of problem and likely cause.
08.10 John Bell establishes that boxes of A190S 047, from a completely different batch, are available in the warehouse.
He also confirms that a heavy goods vehicle has just been loaded and is about to leave for another customer in Tamworth.
08.15 Melanie Harrison, ‘Diakon’ /‘Procom’distribution clerk at Wilton, interrogates POPE computer system and confirms that the three boxes in stock are not committed to another customer.
08.18 Alan Anderson confirms from forward production plan that the boxes can be replaced in stock in 7–10 days.
08.20 Alan Anderson phones Ray Taylor at Stadium, apologises for causing problems and tells him replacement stock is available.
Ray Taylor says a delivery could be offloaded immediately on arrival.
[John Bell had already persuaded Fred Allcock to help in this emergency and the boxes of ‘Maranyl’ were by the side of the vehicle, ready to load.]
08.30 Fred Allcock, who has already been given temporary hand-written despatch documents by John Bell, drives off to Stadium Plastics.
Alan Anderson phones Ray Taylor to advise him product has left.
08.45 Replacement product arrives at Stadium Plastics goods inwards point.
Just 45 minutes after the first emergency call, replacement product is with the customer.
THE ROOT CAUSE
A great ‘fix’— but what about finding the root cause?
The team didn't neglect that either:
23 May 08.35 Alan Anderson, discovering that the ‘Maranyl’ quality manager is on holiday, contacts his deputy Richard Mann and briefs him on situation and on need for a customer visit.
08.40 Richard Mann telephones Ray Taylor to arrange visit.
10.00 Richard Mann and Maurice Eddy arrive at Stadium Plastics, just in time to see production commence with the replacement product.
10.45 Richard Mann and Maurice Eddy return to Billingham with samples of complaint material and start complaint investigation procedures in advance of the formal complaint appearing in the Comdap Complaints Database.
Investigations have established that the root cause was the malfunction of a piece of equipment called — mysteriously — a ‘beard blower.’
This is designed to prevent contamination getting in to the product.
The Corrective Action took two forms — formal monitoring of the beard blower's operation and increased awareness of the complaint through publicity.
A good example of a swift corrective action being put in place with people from a variety of functions co-ordinating rapidly to help a customer solve his problem.
The results of the readership Survey in the last issue of the Quality Magazine highlighted some areas for improvement in Design and Production.
The Designers — RSCG Conran Design — explain how they have addressed the problem in this issue.
DESIGNS ON QUALITY
‘Glossiness’ 17% and ‘awkard size’15% are the criticisms we have tackled in the re-design process.
Any magazine, whether it deals with fashion, fishing, or nuclear fusion, must appeal to its readers and must look and feel relevant to the subject matter with which it deals.
All design decisions must be made on the basis of understanding two factors — the audience and the message.
The literature design process mirrors any manufacturing process: the first stages are research and development, defining markets and audiences and finding the most suitable materials and shapes that will perform the required function.
In delivering the quality message the total quality feel of Q magazine is important for two reasons.
Firstly, to quote the famous phrase, ‘the medium is the message’— talking about quality must be done in a quality way.
If the packaging is second rate, you do not value the product.
Secondly, to give the magazine readability, something with lasting value and relevance that readers wish to keep for reference.
Q MAGAZINE — BEFORE
The original design of Q magazine was intended to be highly distinctive, to create impact and to celebrate the total quality programme.
The unusual size was chosen to give more space to the visuals and to stand out from the standard A4 size so common in offices.
The quality message of the editorial contents was continued through all areas of the design process.
Each article was designed to interest and entertain both the serious reader and the ‘dip in’ readers.
Highly talented photographers and illustrators were commissioned to supply the visuals; a quality paper stock was selected and the designer worked closely with the printer to achieve the best possible colour reproduction and finishing.
Q MAGAZINE — AFTER
The readership survey confirmed our belief that we had created a high quality magazine, with many readers saying they found it attractive, colourful and easy to read.
There were, though, negative comments: 17% of respondents thought it looked extravagant and was too glossy.
15% of respondents complained about its ‘awkward size’.
It was decided the magazine should be re-designed to respond to this customer feed-back.
We were able to solve the ‘awkward size’ problem by re-formating the magazine to A4.
Readers tend to associate gloss with high cost and, in solving this criticism, we looked at ways of reducing the overall magazine budget.
The A4 size requires less paper while more pages can be printed together thus cutting expensive print machine time.
A further cost reduction in print was gained by reducing the number of colour separations for type and diagrams and by dropping the gloss varnish on the visuals.
In order to cut costs in the design process, we looked at reducing the amount of design time required for each issue.
We have simplified the layout and rationalised the type so that fewer elements are used to make up each page.
The cover has been formalised by a grid which will be consistent with each issue while retaining alternative background colours to differentiate issues.
The budget for photography and illustration will be maintained as this is a vital visual ingredient which highlights outstanding achievements in the total quality programme and supports the written word.
CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Technology progresses quickly in the design industry.
Recent innovations with computer aided design enable us to produce magazines which are more creative, efficient and cost effective.
The benefits of new technololgy are primarily the cutting out of middlemen so that the designer, working closely with the editor and the editorial team, can produce pages printed in colour with text and visuals in position at all stages of the process.
This makes correcting efficient both in cost and time.
We very much hope that we have satisfied our customers, and have retained a quality look and feel to the Quality Magazine of ICI Chemicals & Polymers.
Please let us know in future readership surveys!
Be a Quality Winner The C&P QUALITY AWARDS 1991
The C&P Quality Awards have been set up to recognize outstanding achievements in quality improvement.
Launching the scheme, Chief Executive Ralph Hodge commented: ‘As I have said on many occasions, the Quality Improvement Process must be central to the way we manage C&P and meet the many challenges which lie ahead.
The quality improvements we are already making provide a major contribution and should be recognized and celebrated.
The scheme will recognize achievements but, even more important, it will show the value we place on the people who make these improvements happen.’
The awards scheme will be in two parts.
Each business unit, site and function will run its own local award scheme before the end of the year.
All local winners will receive a Chief Executive Officer's award and in February 1992 will attend a ceremony hosted by Ralph Hodge.
From these local winners, a small number will be chosen at that ceremony to receive special awards for the best contributions to C&P's Quality Improvement Process.
The judges will be looking for examples of quality improvement which have involved teams [such as Corrective Action Teams]and have shown clear, measurable improvements like reducing the cost of quality or improving customer satisfaction.
They'll also take into account how complex the project was, how many people were involved and in what way.
HOW DO YOU ENTER?
You should first fill in an entry form to your local scheme — forms are available from your line manager.
The form asks for names of team members, what was the aim of their project, how they went about it and what they achieved.
Closing date for entries to local schemes will be on the posters which will be displayed throughout C&P.
WHAT ARE THE AWARDS?
Prizes will be in the form of gifts or vouchers — there will not be any direct financial rewards.
The winners of the special CEO awards will be given an attractive travel opportunity.
Everyone who enters the competition will receive a small gift..
C&P's Occupational Health Department — 100 strong and spread over five locations — recently became the first medical service anywhere to achieve quality assurance registration.
In this article, Quality Manager Dr Joe Paterson explains how they did it — and suggests how quality systems can be used in other management processes.
ASSURING OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH
When C&P was formed, Occupational Health thought that quality was just one of a number of new management initiatives which unfortunately we could not dodge.
There was no real enthusiasm and we launched in the training programme in a rather unstructured way.
I remember sitting in a hotel in Lymm thinking that I couldn't really spare the time for the Managing Quality course but I'd run out of excuses!
But slowly the penny started to drop.
The beauty was in the simplicity.
And it soon became apparent that very little of what we did in the department would pass any objective assessment of a clearly understood and resourced process to satisfy agreed customer requirements.
After the course, I began taking more interest in how other departments were tackling quality assurance.
We dealt direct with BSI at Milton Keynes for whom it was also a new experience — they had not had any previous registrations from purley health-based organizations.
There followed a long period of explanation of what we did followed by negotiations on what we would have to do to meet the standard.
At this stage, we had a change of manager.
we were able to persuade our new manager Wilf Howe not only of the potential importance of QA to the department but also that we should have an ambitious leap ahead of other departments.
We would register our management system in its entirety rather than have two systems running parallel — QA on the one hand and Standard Management on the other.
Over the next eight months, the deadline to achieve ISO 9000 was extremely important as we worked to achieve a QA system at both the procedure and instruction levels.
It gave a great sense of shared purpose among the senior managers and staff to agree procedures and instructions quickly in order to get the critical mass of a system operational.
LOOK TO THE AUDIT
About this time, I went on a Bywater Auditor Training Course.
A second stage of realisation dawned.
It is difficult to design a good system without the audit in mind.
If it cannot be audited, you'll never know if it works.
But more than this, audits can be a very valuable method of training and sharing best practice, particularly in a widely dispersed department like ours.
We decided to draw our internal auditors from operational staff across the board so that over a few years everyone would have the opportunity to be an auditor as well as being audited themselves.
EMPOWERMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Two other key aspects in a Total Quality Management system are transparency and involvement.
Everyone has access to the whole system, both to see what's going on and to contribute to change through Corrective Action and writing new procedures and instructions.
This may sound like anarchy but the checks and controls clearly keep the system under the management's control.
This is both an opportunity and a challenge for management.
They can cash in on good ideas from staff and benefit from many small improvements and occasional large leaps forward.
But equally they have to be in a position to justify openly what they do and to accept constructive criticism.
The system challenges the management as much as the staff and this is a vital element in its acceptability.
A WIDER ROLE FOR QUALITY SYSTEMS
Earlier this year, Occupational Health embarked on the mission statement and critical success factor analysis exercise.
This is for senior management groups to test if they know where they are going and the processes they use as well as the factors against which success can be judged.
It is independent of the quality process but, in retrospect, would make the ideal first step in instituting a management system which is also a quality system.
To achieve ISO 9000 you must operate a number of general management processes like contract review, purchasing, internal audit, corrective action [including customer complaints], training and statistical review, as well as procedures to control the particular process you operate.
Conventional wisdom has it that management cannot focus its attentions on  more than seven critical success factors serviced by up to forty critical business processes.
This equates well with a quality assurance management system in which the procedure level is reserved for critical business processes.
We are now busy completing the alignment of our quality system with the results of this exercise.
Trying to write a quality procedure to describe each management process flushes out the ‘motherhood’ statements and causes the re-examination and refinement of each process until a simple management procedure can be drafted which is clearly understood and accepted by operators.
Such simplicity is an aid to audits and helps explanations to customers whom the process is designed to serve.
To illustrate what I mean, take as an example Product and Process Stewardship [below].
This is a subject being addressed by all parts of ICI at present.
I reproduce one model procedure which sets out a management framework within which it can be achieved.
It shows how a complex process can be distilled into a simple framework, generating documentation that can be easily audited.
So we have come full circle.
The system's simplicity also helps in checking with our customers that we are actually meeting their requirements.
In a functional department we face quite properly increasing pressure on our resources.
But, when asked to check their requirements, our customers quite often reply: ‘You tell me what I need.’
Although it seems a good opportunity, it is no long term basis for a good relationship with our paymasters.
Budget arguments should be based on a review of requirements with the ability to demonstrate efficient compliance.
I believe the quality process potentially gives ICI an important new way to tackle the control of functional costs.
For the safety, health and environment areas, a clear understanding of requirements must be the best way forward, leaving the most efficient method of delivery as a secondary issue.
Simplicity is the beauty of quality.
we either greatly exaggerate the complexity of systems or we try and use complexity to disguise our lack of prioritisation.
To those who say ‘We don't need quality,’ I say ‘You haven't looked.’
To those who say ‘We don't need quality,’ I say ‘You haven't looked.’
PROCEDURE FOR PRODUCT AND PROCESS STEWARDSHIP FOR XYZ BUSINESS
SCOPE
All Staff of XYZ Business of ICI
PURPOSE
To ensure the reliable and consistent availability of Safety, Health and Environment information concerning the products and processes for which XYZ Business is responsible.
REFERENCES
C&P Ltd Safety, Health and environmental Standards and Guidance for Businesses.
XYZ Business Document Control procedure.
SOI No XXX Creation and Maintenance of Product and Process Dossiers for XYZ Business.
PROCEDURE
1
The Business General Manager of XYZ Business or their nominated representative will create and maintain a list of all products and processes specifying in each case all relevant markets and locations.
2
The Business General Manager of XYZ Business or their nominated representative will create and maintain a list of product and process stewards for all the products and processes identified in 1.
3
The Business General Manager or their nominated representative will create and maintain in conjunction with each national, territorial or local management as appropriate a list of named local SHE contacts to support the product and process stewards.
4
Each steward will create a list of issuing authorities for all Product and Process Dossiers within their responsibility.
5
Each Issuing Authority will create an archival file for all information relevant to the preparation and maintenance of each dossier.
6
Each dossier will be a controlled document within the XYZ Business Quality Assurance System.
7
Each issuing authority will prepare the dossier according to SOL XXX.
8
The issuing authority will arrange for each local contact specified in 3 above to prepare a supplement which specifies specific local or national stewardship issues.
Arrangements for translation of the main dossier will also be specified.
9
The Occupational Health sections of all dossiers will be approved by Occupational Health [OH]who will arrange appropriate review by national or territorial OH resource elsewhere in the ICI Group.
10
The relevant steward will nominate specific individuals to approve the general technical, safety and environmental aspects of each dossier.
11
Each dossier will be approved by the relevant steward prior to issue.
12
All staff of XYZ Business will notify the relevant steward of any information or issues which may be relevant to the assessment of the Safety, Health or Environmental impact of the products and processes of XYZ Business.
DOCUMENTATION
Product Dossiers.
Process Dossiers.
Product List by market with local SHE contacts.
Process List by location with local SHE contacts.
Product and Process Steward list.
Dossier Issuing Authority list.
Part of the chemical products and Chlor-chemicals businesses, ICI Baleycourt Products plasticisers, lubricants and solvents.
It started its quality improvement process in 1988 and the following year became the first French chemical company to gain ISO 9000 registration.
ENTENTE CORDIALE The Quality Improvement Team at Baleycourt is currently arranging a series of customer visits by teams from the plant.
the first took place when 10 people visited SILEC, a large cable manufacturer which buys esters from Baleycourt.
Quality manager Francine Galivel says the objective of the visit was fully achieved because everyone — the shift operator, the operator who loads the tanker, the person who plans the haulier's despatch notes, the chemist who checks that the product meets specifications — all came back with a better understanding of how their jobs fit into the unbroken line from supplier to end product.
At the same time, SILEC took the opportunity to strengthen their already stringent requirements.
In order to increase SILEC's production capacity, ICI Baleycourt has agreed to make deliveries on Saturday mornings.
A higher level of stabilisation of the product has been offered.
The visiting team has formed a CAT to work out how further product improvements can be introduced.
All these aims will be much easier to achieve now that they have met their customers face to face and talked over their problems.
The articles reviewed on this page can be obtained from the Library, Information Services, Wilton Centre F2, Extension 6674.
NOW READ ON…
UNDERSTANDING VARIATION
By Thomas Nolan and Lloyd Provost Quality Progress May 1990
A most excellent article giving, in simple terms, real insight into the scope and importance of this subject.
This one is ‘essential management reading’!
TOTAL MARKETING: TOTAL QUALITY AND THE MARKETING CONCEPT
By Barry Witcher The Quarterly Review of Marketing Winter 1990.
This paper argues that marketing is a total concept and has much in common with quality ideas, yet too often they seem to be at odds.
Marketing must be a business way of life, not a functional activity.
A very digestible article which supports the view that ICI's Market Focus initiative is a vital quality process and has a synergy with everything that is happening in C&P.
QUALITY PURCHASING
By Peter Kite Logistics Today May/June 1990
The important and radically changing role of purchasing in the drive for quality products and services is examined in this wide-ranging article.
Through a ‘total cost approach,’ all aspects of the appication of quality principles in the procurement process are examined with a particular bias towards the engineering environment.
And two articles emphasising the importance of quality as applied to service issues — the new focus for the quality process.
THE SERVICE IMPERATIVE
By Keith Denton Personnel Journal March 1990
Quality focus has tended to be on the manufacture of top class products.
Now the approach is expanding to include world class quality service.
This easy-to-read article presents business examples of ways to measure and improve service quality.
Within this simple, yet useful exposure of the subject is the suggestion that ‘the customer complaint department in service is an obsolete as the quality inspection department in manufacturing.’
MEASURING SERVICE QUALITY
By Mal Owen Managing Service Quality November 1990
Improving service delivery requires constant measurement against established standards of performance.
In this non-technical article the author argues that Statistical Process Control is not limited solely to manufacturing applications.
Major benefits are to be gained from introducing SPC in administrative and staff support functions.
Browsers, Please Help!
SHARING QUALITY NUGGETS
In your reading [anything from specialist journals to Sunday Sport]perhaps you happen upon some item or extract which gives you a new insight or understanding of some aspect of Total Quality.
If you think it's likely to interest a large number of people in C&P — not necessarily everyone but, say, research people or anyone with a responsibility for safety — then why keep it to yourself?
Please pass your discovery on to the editor, preferably in the form of a photocopy, marking the particularly interesting bits and giving the reference source.
It doesn't even have to contain the word quality — if that's what you think it's about, you're probably right!
The plan is to print some or all of these articles in each issue of Q magazine.
It will be just one more way in which we can grow into the habit of continuous learning for improvement.
And, finally, some thoughts from Alan wilkinson, Tops Quality Manager.
HE IS THE VERY MODEL OF A MODERN MIDDLE MANAGER
Hi, fiddle-de-dee, The Factory Life for me!
Some of my friends went to the City They're better paid — but spare your pity; There's more to life than pounds and pence — My quality of life's immense: A cosy office, nearly new, Equipped with latest PS2.
With SMART and LOTUS 123 No byte of data gets past me.
I simulate ‘what-ifs’ galore From lightning strikes to Third World War; No problems with communication — With Stratos I can reach the Nation [Except for those so low and mean They haven't got a PC screen…
The workers: well, they're overrated; Some day they'll all be automated.
Meantime I keep in touch with them By Quietwriter [IBM]: I bash my PC keyboard gaily and send them memos, three times daily.]
The older generation say They didn't do the job this way.
They'd walk the patch and talk to foremen…
Operators…fitters…storemen…
This notion shook me to my roots — I'd mess up my new safety boots, And what about the donkey jacket?
These things must cost the firm a packet.
Besides, I'd have to leave my screen, And heaven knows what that might mean!
My window and my swivel chair Let me see what goes on out there — I check the plant six times a day [Except when steam gets in the way]…
Here's my review.
What's my boss put on?…
‘He keeps his finger on the button.’
‘Experience has told us we can trust ICI to deliver to our exact requirements.’