

Switching back to gas
NEARLY TEN years after providing services to British Gas during construction of the South Morecambe Terminal, CCG is back on site for the North Morecambe Terminal.
The contract, announced in December, is for all site services for at least three years as the massive £350 million terminal takes shape.
Peter Absalom, managing director of CCG Contracting, said: ‘I am particularly delighted that we have won this contract at Barrow.
When I joined CCG in 1982 it was to provide services during the construction phase of the South Morecambe Terminal.
Nearly ten years on we are back there.’
He added: ‘This and other new contracts means we are one of the largest total support service contractors in the UK, something of which we are very proud.’
The project brings CCG Contracting's order book up to a value of £10 million, showing its valuable contribution to the CCG group's prosperity.
CCG are recruiting about 70 staff to run the site, and some have already started working on site security and other services during the mobilisation phase.
Colin Currie, project manager, began work at North Morecambe within days of the contract being signed, and he was soon joined by his deputy, Stan Hill.
Colin said: ‘I am renewing old acquaintances as I was previously the site services manager at the end of the South Morecambe project.
It has certainly helped being here before, knowing the people and the system.’
Already some of the contractors are on site, using temporary accommodation, like Colin and Stan.
Their first major task is to build a two storey block for the project offices by the end of March, including two canteens and space for medical and nursing facilities, as well as an induction centre for health and safety training.
The canteens will start serving meals by Easter, catering eventually for over 800 people.
Being right on the coast, there are special considerations.
Adjacent is a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
Being situated on land previously used for settling pulverised fly ash has meant special ground improvement and piling operations were necessary.
The full list of services include temporary accommodation, temporary power distribution, catering, cleaning, medical, security, logistic support, transportation and materials handling.
Colin added: ‘We will be used as a purchasing arm by British Gas, right down to fairly small items, which takes away much of the administration burden from them.’
Since leaving South Morecambe, Colin has been manager responsible for CCG projects all over the country, as far as Hull, Peterhead, Essex, Nottingham and Lincoln.
Normally he would manage projects from his office in Bridge of Allan, but he is now based on the North Morcambe site because of the size of this contract.
North Morecambe Terminal takes shape, with the South Terminal in the foreground.
TEN YEARS ON
THE COMPANY celebrated ten years of offshore contracts in December with a party in Aberdeen, where chairman Frank Bell cut a specially prepared birthday cake.
At the same time, eight members of staff marked ten years with the CCG, and were presented with carriage clocks.
CCG's first contract back in 1981 was for catering services for Shell on board the Stadrill.
Today, the Aberdeen division provides hotel services offshore for firms such as Shell Expo, Amerada Hess and British Gas, as well as several onshore contracts.
Lindsay Toucher, divisional director, said: ‘Our success in Aberdeen is based on the CCG philosophy to provide a high quality service exactly tailored to each client's needs.
We have grown steadily and now have offshore contracts from most major players in the North Sea and beyond.
Frank Bell cuts the cake at the Aberdeen celebration, watched by long-serving staff (from left)
BIRTHDAY PARTY
OUR FIRST YEAR in the North Yorkshire schools was celebrated recently with a giant party in Scarborough, when our catering staff from 70 schools were joined by children, teachers, council officials and the press.
A special birthday cake was baked to mark the occasion, which was held in Graham School.
CCG was awarded the £1 million contract for North Yorkshire schools last January, and since then we have implemented the healthy eating policy that has been so successful in other school contracts.
As General Manager Edward Clarkin explained: ‘We offer meals children will eat and enjoy, yet we aim at the healthiest types of food.
We also cater for ethnic tastes, and we like to introduce children to new dishes to widen their tastes, and improve their diet whenever possible.
A first cake for North Yorkshire
New School Gain
CCG has won another schools catering contract, the latest in a series of valuable new work that means we now provide over 200,000 school meals every week.
The latest award is in the Borough of Sunderland and starts in February.
Mike Queen, director in charge of the public sector, said: ‘We are delighted to have been awarded this prestigious £4 million contract.
It places a great responsibility upon us to ensure that the children of Sunderland are given the very best possible value-for-money meals, while also ensuring that public funds are used to the best effect.
‘Our policy of healthy eating and parental consultation will be implemented in a similar way to that already successfully established for the London Borough of Ealing, the City of Westminster and in North Yorkshire.’
CCG's schools experience helped towards the smooth operation of the huge logistical effort in getting ready, not least recruiting and training hundreds of staff.
About 85 per cent of the staff already work in the school kitchens, but they still have to be interviewed, appointed and trained in CCG methods.
Project manager Jan Smeaton also organised the rest of the mobilisation programme, which was complicated by the contract starting in the middle of a school term.
Every school was visited, head teachers were consulted, suppliers were arranged, and an accounting system set up, all geared towards the first day of the new contract on February 17.
TAKING OVER
CCG have taken over the Spinneys division of Airwork Ltd, as well as the onshore interests of Universal Ogden.
This fits in with our strategy to expand our health care and defence contracts.
The moves add a further 265 staff to the CCG payroll of over 4,500 throughout the UK.
Following long negotiations, we took over from Spinneys on 1 November at a number of hospitals, Ministry of Defence and other institutions.
These have now been absorbed into our private sector division.
Ian Bird, director, said: ‘There are six major operations and three small units, a portfolio which fits in well with our company strategy.
Along with the contracts, we were delighted to welcome about 200 new employees to CCG.’
Joe Monks, manager at MOD Corsham, was one of the staff who made the transfer from Spinneys.
He commented: ‘We were woken up with a jolt when we found out that Spinneys were going to be bought out by some ‘jocks from over the border’.
After several visits from head office staff to put us in the picture, we now look forward to being part of a much larger organisation and being fully ‘commercialised’ in 1992.’
Universal Ogden have passed on a number of Ministry of Defence contracts in England to CCG, involving a further 65 staff.
SPOTLIGHT ON SCOTLAND
AS YOU would expect from a company founded in Scotland, CCG has a particularly strong presence in its native land, with a large diversity of work.
While we have particularly strong links with the media and the oil industry, other clients cover the whole spectrum of the Scottish community, from banking to manufacturing, from local government to public transport.
Our West of Scotland area is essentially anywhere west of Cimbernauld, extending across the south of Scotland and beyond into England.
Operations director Alan Brown has been with the company since 1969, as chef, manager and director, so he has built a long-standing relationship with many of our clients.
In the East Coast area, which also covers north east of England, regional general manager Barbara Cumming is highly experienced in catering management.
She has been with us since 1988 and has played a significant role in the development of CCG's in-house marketing strategies.
Our Aberdeen office, which recently celebrated ten years offshore, has Divisional Director Lindsay Tocher at the helm.
Lindsay, a native Aberdonian, has worked in the offshore industry since 1978 and trained with a major hotel group before joining CCG in 1986.
Banking on quality
CCG run staff catering for the Royal Bank of Scotland at four locations in Edinburgh, and it is a pleasure to be involved with an organisation that thinks of food as an essential ingredient of daily working life.
One of the biggest operations is at Fettes Row, the Bank's technology centre, where the restaurant is open throughout the day, serving breakfast, lunch and tea.
Christian Greenan, catering manager, and her two chefs Paul McGrain and Colin Hamilton, provide an excellent choice of hot meals every day, with the emphasis on innovative healthy food.
Flexibility is the key.
In addition to the daily service there are functions in a main function suite and in conference rooms on every floor.
Vending machines are also maintained throughout the building for food and beverages.
In the city centre, in Princes Street, where CCG won the contract two years ago Sandra Angelucci and her staff provide an individual service and respond to requests.
Being so central, there is plenty of competition nearby so they have to keep on their toes to ensure a steady business.
As well as the spacious restaurant, there are two function rooms overlooking Princes Street for entertaining customers.
Here a formal waitress service is essential.
With a lot of corporate entertaining, Sandra's team must always be ready for special functions, and they pulled out all the stops for a particularly busy build-up to Christmas.
Christine Greenan and her staff at the Fettes Row Restaurant.
Busy on Campus
THE LORD Todd restaurant and bar was built with the early halls of residence on Strathclyde University's student campus.
In term, most of the customers are students, but the holidays are not quiet for the Lord Todd — just the opposite, as the staff cater for conferences.
The busiest time is in summer, with up to a thousand covers for three meals a day, seven days a week, which means recruiting up to 20 extra staff.
It is self service in term, but conferences often want waitress service, sometimes with silver service for formal dinners.
Even in term, however, up to 450 people take lunch in the Lord Todd, which has a capacity for 200, so there is plenty of work involved in serving and then clearing tables to accommodate all the diners.
Despite the number who use the Lord Todd, manager Pierre Bretenoux has a normal staffing level of just seven, including .
The bar next door is popular with campus residents.
It has a promotional night every week if possible, and is always busy with students.
CCG also run a small shop in the building.
On the Riverside
STAFF AT the Intervention Board in Newcastle enjoy a fine view with their meals, specially prepared by the CCG team in an attractive restaurant overlooking the River Tyne.
The Board is a Government Department that administers the Common Agricultural Policy for the European Community within Britain.
Catering manager Kirsty Yearsley and her staff cater not only for the Board's 300 employees, but also for 100 civil servants who occupy the building.
The restaurant is open for breakfast and lunch, and kirsty said: ‘We serve a variety of dishes every day as well as snacks, sandwiches and salads.
We are very flexible and try to offer the staff what they want on a day-to-day basis.’
The road to better eating
AT UNIROYAL Tyres in Newbridge, to the west of Edinburgh, catering manager Rose Forrest and her team run a food service that never stops.
As the factory operates on shifts throughout every 24 hour period, there are always more workers building up a hunger and thirst.
Over the three shifts, there are about 500 potential clients, which means preparing a range of meals from tasty filled rolls to a fully plated meal.
Most of the food is served through vending machines, but that does not make it uninspiring.
The kitchen has a cook-chill routine which allows chef Jim Dick to prepare a variety of dishes for the vending machines, and these can then be cooked to order in microwaves.
In addition, the clients can buy hot homemade soup over the counter.
An unusual feature of the canteens is the noise: it is also a recreational area for games of dominoes, and the sound of the pieces echoes through the long room.
On the right track
Jim Watton and Agnes Boyd show of the Scotrail that features CCG's catering service
JIM WATTON, contract manager for CCG at Scotrail, is delighted at the impact his trolley service has had on rail passengers in Scotland since the company took over the contract two years ago.
Jim said: ‘We had to tackle the traditionally bad image of train catering and we really have come a tremendous way as far as quality is concerned.
Certainly we have gone a long way to improve the ‘traditional’ British Rail sandwich.’
He pointed out that CCG now serve 150,000 sandwiches a year, made to our specification, and following customer research we have just introduced a bigger range of sandwiches.
To gain a wider appreciation of customer opinion of the trolley service, appraisal cards have been given to passengers on selected routes for their constructive criticism, and overall the comments are good.
Based at Queen Street Station in Glasgow, with further offices in Aberdeen, Inverness and Fort William, CCG operate trolley catering on six routes.
The Express routes are Glasgow to Edinburgh, Glasgow to Aberdeen, Glasgow to Inverness and Edinburgh to Inverness, while another two are Glasgow to Oban and the West Highland from Fort William to Mallaig.
Jim and his assistant Margaret McKean have a staff of 55 for this service, including six supervisors.
They operate an average of 25 trolleys at any one time, and the logistics of putting the right trolley on the right train mean there are built-in margins in case of lateness.
One recent star of CCG team was Agnes Boyd, a supervisor who was chosen to feature in ScotRail's recent advertising campaign, which showed the improvements made in the Scottish rail network — one of them being the catering service.
Front page food
AN UNUSUAL feature about CCG's contracts is the large number of media clients, and this is particularly true in Scotland.
One of our longest contracts is at George Outram in Glasgow, publishers of the Glasgow Herald and Evening Times, where Mary Mulgrew is something of an institution.
She has managed their staff restaurant for 18 years, so obviously has a great relationship with our clients.
As well the restaurant, CCG also cater for functions in the board room and the Albion Suite provide evening dinners for directors, teas and buffets.
At night, the presses do not stop until the small hours, so the restaurant stays open with a cook, a general assistant and a catering student.
Mary's staff include .
‘I am very proud of my staff’ she said.
‘They are all very obliging and will come in at any time.’
Mary has a close family interest in the building as two of her daughters and a grand daughter work there.
Of her daughters, Linda McReadie is a boardroom waitress and Janet Kirkwood is a VDU operator.
Linda's daughter Sharon works as a Saturday girl.
An even longer contract is at Grampian TV in Aberdeen, where we have been operating 365 days a year, for the past 24 years.
Not only for the staff restaurant, but also for the boardroom and guests.
Doreen Gerrie is the catering manager, and she and her staff cater for 300.
At Aberdeen Journals the restaurant is open virtually round the clock, catering for the staff at Aberdeen's two newspapers and Press and Journal and the Evening Express.
We have been there for 20 years.
Catering manager is Irene Forbes, and she and her staff cater for 350 people in the restaurant, as well as operating vending machines and catering for functions.
Margaret O'Conner manage the staff restaurant at Radio Clyde, who are based in Clydebank Business Park.
The service also extends to the boardroom, where there are regular conference lunches.
Although the restaurant is only open for lunch between 12 and 2, the three staff are there for several hours either side for preparation.
Margaret works with Laura West and Margaret Fourna.
They also open a small bar in the restaurant on Friday evening, which is popular with Clyde employees as they start their weekend.
‘You never know who is coming into the building’, Margaret said, ‘which means you always have to be on the alert to prepare a tray of sandwiches.
The kitchen has to be ready for anything.’
One of our longest standing clients in Edinburgh is the staff restaurant at Scotsman Publications, home of the Scotsman and Evening News, which caters for everyone from reporters to printers.
The restaurant is open from 8 am through till 9.30 pm, serving both shifts at lunch-time and in the evening.
They also serve light snacks throughout the afternoon.
Manager Douglas Scott has considerable experience in catering having been with CCG for almost 10 years.
Northern Lights
IN ABERDEEN we offer a wide range of services to, amongst others, oil industry clients on and offshore.
In the North Sea's Central Field, CCG provide a complete hotel service on four units for Shell Expo, a contract we have held for over three years.
Our 68 staff work 12 hour shifts giving a 24 hour service.
Our managers are .
On the Amerada Hess AH 001, managers Derek Watt and Jim Gibb oversee a complete catering and housekeeping operation for 90 people a day, about 100 mile off Aberdeen.
Another offshore contract is with British Gas Exploration and Production in Morecambe Bay, which was renewed recently for a second four year period.
Larry Henderson manages our catering and housekeeping service on five installations, with up to 600 people on board, from our Blackpool office, reporting to Aberdeen.
Moving onshore, at McDermott's oil industry construction yard in Ardersier, we cater for no fewer than 3,000 people on site.
CCG have staff canteens in eight locations, as well as undertaking all the office and workshop cleaning.
We have 70 employees here, and have held the contract for 13 years.
Catering manager Jim Buchan commented: ‘We provide a snack service as well as hot meals and we run the vending operation for the yard.’
CCG were recently re-awarded the contract at Total Oil Marine in Peterhead, which we have held for six years.
At this gas processing facility, close to the St Fergus plant, we serve food to 150 people a day, every day of the year.
There are 11 employees under catering manager Jan Szczesnowicz.
We provide a top quality catering service for employees using the restaurant, which is also used extensively for VIP functions from other Total locations and from France, who expect high standard of food and service.
Staff line-up at Total (from Left):
The Bistro Touch
THE ULTRA-MODERN building which houses the new Glasgow Development Agencyhas one of CCG's most attractive staff restaurants, with designer furniture and smart decor.
GDA is not a large operation, employing 130 people on two floors, but while planning its opening in July last year it paid close attention to making the restaurant a focal point.
It has a modern bistro feel, and in a short time catering manager Debbie Ferrie and her staff have impressed with their food.
Even the local choice of eating outlets in central Glasgow, the restaurant is well used and at least half the staff use it every day.
The restaurant has a choice of one hot main meal every day, and also serves a range of sandwiches, rolls, fruit and yoghurts, as well as many buffet trays for business meetings.
Being close to the offices it serves, there is no fryer thus avoiding cooking smells, which in turn means a natural emphasis on healthy eating.
Deborah Ferrie, manager at GDA, with her staff 
London Gain
THE GROWTH of our London Division continues, and the latest to join the fold is SG Warburg, a highly prestigious contract only a stone's throw away from the City Road office.
Opening day was one of the smoothest yet, managed by , all promoted to their positions from other CCG locations.
Our Warburg customers expect and receive the very best of services in the attractive restaurant with crisp linen tablecloths, black leather chairs and fresh flowers.
At lunchtime our clients are tempted with a choice from the carvery, a hot main dish, a vegetarian dish a fish dish or an extensive salad bar and grill bar.
These are complemented by an innovative selection of hot and cold sweets prepared on the premises.
The management team have also been congratulated for their professional approach to evening functions, which have ranged from boardroom dinners to Christmas parties.
Nigel Whitman and head chef Ernst Melhuish-Weisbrod at SG Warburg
GOOD NEWS FOR FM
GERRY Barron-Fox, newly appointed director of our Facilities Management Service, was delighted recently to announce that we have been awarded the contract for the management of multiple support activities at BP sites throughout Dorset and at Sherwood House, BP Wytch Farm.
This is the operations base for the largest onshore oil field in Western Europe.
Commenting on the contract, Gerry said: ‘We were awarded the new contract against stiff competition from other FM companies, and look forward to continuing our relationship with BP.’
CHILDREN IN NEED
CCG EMPLOYEE in North Yorkshire raised £2,460 for the Children in Need appeal.
Staff from 70 kitchens gave up their spare time to organise cake sales, raffles, discos and magic shows to raise the money.
The presentation of the cheque was televised live from the Spa in Scarborough and some of the staff were interviewed on Radio York.
Pictures are some of the appeal's organisers:.
A further £1,224 was raised for the appeal by CCG catering staff at the KG Ethylene Project, Grangemouth.
Volunteers from each canteen dressed up in Santa Claus suits and took buckets round the contractors to raise money.
The festive helpers were .
Working for YOUR Health and Safety
Raising safety awareness
LAST YEAR proved to be very busy for the Safety Department with numerous new unit openings and many legislative changes to be applied.
In some way we were all affected by the impact of the Food Safety Act 1990 and the amendments to food hygiene regulations.
At CCG, we have always maintained high standards of hygiene and food handling techniques, and whilst we have introduced some new systems we have not experienced any difficulties adopting the new regulations.
Certified training of our food handlers and the results from recent follow-up testing have been very encouraging, delegates achieving an average pass mark of 83 per cent, testament to the quality of training given.
This coming year, health and safety issues will enjoy an even higher profile.
Starting on March 1, the European Commission has designated 1992 as European Year of Safety, Hygiene and Health Protection at Work.
The principal aim is to raise awareness among workers and employers of hazards in the workplace.
This year is important, and we intend to be in the forefront of promoting and supporting this EEC initiative.
Good health and safety management is beneficial of employers and employees alike, so the message has to be: think of what you do now — can you do more?
Benefit yourself and others and enter into the community spirit for the coming year.
Developing procedure manuals
THE MAJOR formal task for Quality in the past quarter has been the development of procedure documentation.
A review of our quality management systems had identified the need to re-appraise the procedures for controlling unit operations and to develop our systems of document control.
Work has been specifically aimed at developing procedure manuals for the Offshore Division, Education Catering Services and Contracting.
The offshore team are nearing completion of their operations manual, which reflects tremendous efforts by Lindsay Tocher, the entire offshore management team and Annette Aitkin, with the guidance of Bob Rae.
Education Catering Services are working on two fronts: the production of the quality assurance manual, under the direction of Joanna Carroll, for the central production unit in Ealing; and the operations manual for school meals which will be installed initially at the mobilisation of the Sunderland school meals contract.
The development of the Contracting Division's procedures is being carried out by Gerry Donnelly with the guidance of the Divisional Quality Sterring Committee.
Bob Rae, general manager quality developments, said: ‘Although we are working to specific target areas at present, the knock on effect for the entire Group will rapidly become apparent.’
Training Update
The Food Safety Act 1990 has led to an increase in demand for hygiene courses throughout the country, and to help the Training Department cope with the demand has meant having another qualified trainer in this area.
We are proud to say that Jean Conway has achieved her Food Hygiene Diploma from the Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland, and Jean has taken over most of the food hygienecourses running in Scotland.
The Training Department has also been involved in CCG's expansion and over the past three months trainers have been delivering induction courses for our openings at SG Warburg, British Gas Heysham, Sunderland schools and recent public sector contracts.
SALES LEADS
TWO MORE employees have scooped £250 in the CCG Sales Leads incentive campaign.
David Rose, head chef at Ernst and Young in London, suggested an approach to the Hoskyns Group, and our sales team were able to tie up a new contract.
Meanwhile, Helen Mair, chef/manager at Hall and Tawse in Aberdeen, gave us a successful sales lead for Grampian Transport.
There have been a number of other people who were given £50 by the company for information which led to the presentation of a sales proposal to a new client.
And the good news is that you too can profit from this scheme: in addition to the above £50 for information leading to a sales proposal, if the approach is successful, you will be rewarded with a further £200.
Neil's bravery Award
Staff working on the KG Ethylene project are safe when Neil Redding is about!
He has won a Central Scotland Police medal for bravery.
Neil, a driver/porter, puts his self defence training into practice helping the police arrest a knife-wielding man who robbed Haddows off-licence in Grangemouth of £200.
Neil said: ‘I chased the robber and tackled him several times.
After a few struggles I managed to disarm him and get some of the money back.
He ran off down the street straight into a policeman.
I was called to make a statement and later found that I had won the medal.
I was also presented with a certificate for crime prevention by Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, at a ceremony held in Edinburgh Castle.’
Neil Redding with his bravery medal
WHERE'S THAT TREE?
Some of the highest Christmas trees in Britain were supplied by CCG at the KG Ethylene Project in Grangemouth, including the one pictured.
Ken Martin, services co-ordinator said: ‘The five trees looked magnificent lit up in the evening at 300 feet on the cooling towers and furnaces.
Our maintenance team put them up to add a touch of Christmas spirit to the plant.’
ACTION PACKED
A FIVE-A-SIDE football team from Citibank CCG overcame a strong side from one of London Region's nominated suppliers, CP Quiney, in an action packed match in Lewisham Sports Centre.
The score: Citibank CCG 13, CP Quiney 11.
For CCG, Alan Outram and Kevin Mount scored four each, David Walker three and Michael Scott two.
Ralph Clarke and John Wood in defence saved more goals than they let in, and after the match Ralph was nicknamed Kamikaze for bravely tackling an 18 stone opponent.
Tournament not squashed
SQUASH enthusiasts at Morecambe's Concorde Sports and Social Club were able to compete against some of the country's top players, thanks to £2,000 sponsorship from CCG for their 1991 Open Squash Championship.
The event is one of the few open squash tournaments in the country and was once again won by Peter Marshall, Britain's number one player.
Tom Dodd.
tournament administrator, said: ‘The tournament really wouldn't have been possible without this sponsorship.
It was a tremendous success and thoroughly enjoyed by both players and spectators.
Our own club members greatly appreciated the chance to compete against professionals.’
Peter Marshall (front) and Paul Lord in action during the final
New Director
JUDITH CANNON has recently been promoted to operations director public sector, a new senior position that reflects the continued growth of our public sector division, which caters for schools and hospitals across the UK, Judith joined CCG in 1984 as senior area manager for the Earling schools and social service contract, and was then promoted to business development manager and latterly general manager.
She is a graduate of Ealing Hotel School.
FESTIVE FEASTS
Setting up the mince pies for Christmas at the National Rivers Authority are :
All set for a festive lunch at Grampian Transport in Aberdeen are driver Frank Evans and his colleague Neil Warden, who were being served by CCG's manager, Isobel Walker.
CLOWNING AROUND
Putting a smile into a special family day at Daniel Industries in Larbert are Claire Fitzgerald, Sybil McLaren and Shona McPhee.
Healthy hearts all round
AS PART of the Ayrshire and Arran Healthy Heart campaign in the autumn, CCG won a commendable four Heartbeat Awards.
To win an award, each restaurant had to have a healthy eating option on the menu, be spotlessly clean and provide a non-smoking area.
In addition, at least a third of the staff should have obtained a food handlers certificate.
The CCG winners included catering managers .
Well done.
LONG SERVICE
THERE WAS a double celebration in Glenrothes recently as Margaret Cunningham (left) and Christine Munro were presented with carriage clocks to mark ten years with CCG.
Margaret and Christine, who both work in the Development Corporation's staff restaurant, were congratulated by Barbara Cumming, regional general manager.
The ceremony meant an unscheduled return to work for Christine as she had been off work with a broken hip, but was well on the way to recovery and set for a New Year return.
Congratulations also to Irene Ellis, Catering Manager at Wiggins Teape, who recently received recognition of 12 years long service with CCG.
ALL THE BEST, MAY!
WE SAID farewell recently to May Lennon, who retired as a supervisor in the purchase ledger department after 13 years with the company.
May, who lives in Causewayhead with her husband Mike, joined us at Abbey Road as a clerkess and was promoted five years later.
As well as being given presents by her colleagues she was presented, on behalf of the company, with a gold chain and fob by Mike Queen, director (left) and Eric Brown, financial controller.