

Total Quality Management — The future for CCG
On March 14th, at Dunkeld House Hotel, CCG held an historic two day conference and seminar for directors and senior management as the first step in the launch of CCG's Total Quality Management strategy which will effect all of us — very much for the better.
Quality Management means that we could have as much as 30% more time and effort to devote to our real jobs — for that is the amount of time and effort expended in British businesses sorting out things that have gone wrong.
A TQM system will get rid of that.
It starts at the highest office in the country — and works right through to the youngest, newest, employee.
The CCG Quality Policy is designed to involve everyone, all the time.
Quality in business in the nineties means getting things right first time, every time, right across the board.
Be it taking accurate telephone messages, preparing a quotation, or cooking a meal, quality management means it is done properly, all the time.
So out goes waste, misunderstandings, repeating tasks, and so on.
Everyone benefits from increased job satisfaction, more time to do the real task, less friction, and a happier environment in which to work.
It also means a more profitable company and more secure jobs.
As Frank Bell pointed out, ‘Over the last twenty years we have strived to provide a Quality Service.
The platform we have built over those years is an excellent base from which to become a Total Quality Culture.
I look forward to all of us joining in this great challenge of the next decade.’
The TQM strategy has developed from an earlier corporate planning exercise carried out in 1986 and more recently from a comprehensive survey conducted by an external quality consultant with support from the SDA.
Clients and CCG employees at all levels were interviewed across the scope of CCG services, including offshore, schools catering, commercial and industrial catering as well as site catering and contracting.
The task of introducing TQM has been given to former Group Training Manager, Bob Rae, who was promoted to General Manager, Quality Development in January.
Bob will introduce and expand TQM throughout the company.
After the recent launch to Directors and Senior Management, TQM will now be developed throughout the company with a further Senior Management Conference being held in London.
Each division of CCG will be in charge of its own quality control programme, setting up Quality Improvement Teams who will come up with ideas to improve various aspects of their particular areas.
These teams will be trained in direction and how to participate in problem solving.
Divisional teams will report in to the Group Steering Committee chaired by Frank Bell.
The TQM policy is laid out in the adjacent panel.
But what it really means is quite simple.
Each and every employee should look at what they do to see if it is possible to do it better and more consistently.
Better techniques, better documentation systems, better communication between all members, better customer liaison and contracts.
It all spells out a more efficient and profitable company.
However, it is not something that happens overnight.
TQM will take time and training to achieve.
TQM is not a magic formula.
It is, however, the industrial revolution that cannot be ignored by any business intent on progress and security.
Most companies insist on demonstrable quality management procedures before they will contract work at all.
The time of quality has arrived, and CCG intend to be ahead of the field in our commitment to it.
Chairman Frank Bell signs CCG's Quality Policy as delegates look on.
Charles Jackson from Quality Consultants ‘People First’ stresses a point at the conference.
HONOUR FOR DEREK
CCG's Derek Wort has been presented with an ‘Award of Plate’ by transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind for the ‘skill and tenacity’he showed during the Piper Alpha Rescue operations almost three years ago.
Derek, who was Catering Manager on board the flotel the MSV Tharos at the time, was directly involved on the night of the disaster.
The Tharos, which had been acting as a support vessel to the Piper Alpha platform was anchored close by.
Derek and his crew helped in the rescue operation with the Tharos acting as a hospital ship for survivors.
The award was made at a special ceremony at Admiralty House in London.
‘I was very surprised to have been singled out for this honour.
Although the award was made to me, my thoughts were with the CCG crew that were on board the Tharos that night — I really was collecting it on their behalf’.
said Derek.
The award of Plate was founded in 1854 for acts of valour and life saving at sea and originally was a silver salver.
Recipients now choose from cutlery, clock or a barometer.
The latter was Derek's choice and now hangs in pride of place in his Abernethy home.
Derek who was accompanied by his wife, Lorna, daughters Charlotte and Emma, and his parents, nearly didn't make it to the ceremony.
‘I was fogged in on board the Amerada Hess AHOOI where I am now working.
I was two days late in getting onshore and just got to London on time.
Luckily Mike Farquharson who had only come offshore for two days and ended up staying a week, volunteered to cover until my colleague Jim Gibb arrived.’
Derek receives his Award from Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind.
A NOTABLE FIRST
CCG have scored a notable ‘first’ in the £7.5m contract recently awarded at BP's KG Ethylene Project at Grangemouth.
The contract is part of BP's £600m planned investment in the General Scotland area.
The first for CCG includes their involvement in providing a complete construction site and refurbishment package — from greenfield site to multi-contractor welfare and support services.
The KG project itself expands BP's existing capability for the production of ethylene used in the chemical process industry.
CCG's responsibility is to provide the construction site at Grangemouth with a complete infrastructure capable of supporting the welfare needs of 2,500 multi-skilled operatives for a period of approximately two years.
CCG will engage around 200 employees at Grangemouth at peak.
The contract was awarded in September 1990 and within six weeks CCG had mobilised and handed over a number of buildings to support the construction team on the ‘Core Site’.
The scope of the CCG role is extensive including support services such as: design, supply and build of temporary site buildings (plus all fixtures and fittings), site catering, cleaning, janitorial, waste disposal, temporary power, floodlighting, waste and water distribution, car parking, road building, induction training — indeed everything that both the clients and contractors need to support the engineering construction activity.
Services required are spread over three separate construction sites, however CCG's expertise in co-ordinating multi-site activities gained from their experience on previous construction projects such as BP Wytch Farm Project enable them to provide a quality service to all those areas.
To give some idea of the scale of this operation, on the ‘Core Site’ alone, CCG are operating two 800 person canteens designed to serve 1,600 people in a space of 10 minutes.
Commenting on the Grangemouth project, Richard Buckley, Project Manager, said ‘CCG are unique in being able to handle such a vast and diverse project on a single source basis.
I do not believe there is another contractor capable of going from Greenfield to completion in this way, across the range of services, and on this scale.
We are also proud to be in the vanguard of training and safety initiatives for our Division as we place a great deal of importance on the safety aspects of working on a major construction site.
All this must in the long term benefit both clients and contractors alike.’
CCG Grangemouth team from left to right 
Joe Cowan and Mick McPhilips hard at work in 2100 sq.m. warehouse.
Another satisfied customer
MARINE DISCOVERY
CCG has won its first major contract with BT Marine Ltd to provide catering and housekeeping services on board the 4,750 ton support ship the MV Discovery.
The modern purpose-built vessel which operates from Southampton, is used to lay and repair subsea cable.
Also capable of supporting offshore operations in severe environments the vessel has the safest and most modern saturation diving sustem available for underwater operations including accommodation for an 18-person dive team.
Spacious air conditioned living quarters have been designed to meet top European standards and can accommodate up to 97 people.
The facilities, which include a gymnasium and recreation rooms, certainly impressed CCG's Mike Farquharson, who mobilised operations in October of last year.
‘The Discovery is a brand new vessel and the facilities are superb.
It was built in Belgium and as a result we were asked to mobilise the ship from the Belgian ports of Zeebrugge and Antwerp.’
‘We took a crew across to Belgium plus all our light equipment and bedding for up to 97 people.’
CCG's Catering Managers Steve Baker and Gordon Walters and their crews are now working 6 weeks on, 6 weeks off to provide a full accommodation and catering service.
But its a catering service with a European flavour.
‘A number of the crew are Belgian and we therefore have a Belgian chef on board so that we can offer traditional Belgian fare
said Mike.
CCG will continue to provide services for the first year of operation and hopefully into the future.
The MV Discovery with Antwerp Cathedral in the background.
Good food at Goldmans
Traders at Goldmans Sachs new London headquarters need no longer leave their desks for a minute thanks to a new system devised by CCG.
For over 300 hungry traders at the American Investment Bank, lunch is now delivered to their desks and its still piping hot!
For meals are delivered on individual airline style trays.
Dublin-born Manager, June Loftus explained,
‘Traders can choose from the daily menu which may include Chinese or Indian dishes, pizza or pastas, traditional English cuisine or healthy choices.
There's also a wide range of sandwiches and salads.
We've introduced a computerised system to deal with the orders and the meals arrive in heated vans with our service crew ensuring speedy delivery on the Trading Floor’.
CCG are also running Goldman Sachs' staff restaurant.
The facility incorporates many interesting design features.
The servery is completely furnished in stainless steel and chrome whilst the seating area, in distinct contrast, boasts four different wall finishes, long mirrors, glossy coloured tiles, large white metallic tiles and matt painted surfaces.
The subdued purple and green lighting completes the image of style and sophistication reflected in the menu range, the food presentation and the staff employed.
So the 700 Goldman Sachs employees can look forward to an extensive selection of cold starters, salads and both pre-packed and made to order sandwiches, gateaux, cakes, yoghurts and fruit as well as a wide range of non-alcoholic beverages, in attractive surroundings.
Manager June Loftus and her staff at Goldmans Sachs line up ready for service.
AT SEA WITH CCG
CCG staff are now on board two floats in the North Sea's Brent Field after winning a new contract from Shell U.K. Exploration and Production, operator in the U.K. sector of the North Sea for Shell and Esso.
The contract is for catering and housekeeping on board the accommodation vessels the Safe Holmia and Port Royal.
CCG Offshore Operations Manager, Ian Russell explained the mobilisation process.
‘The Port Royal was not available until the end of March so we were asked to mobilise the Safe Holmia and another flotel the Polyconfidence first’.
This initial mobilisation was carried out at the beginning of March with all staff receiving company induction, full food hygiene training and safety induction and familiarisation on board the two installations.
‘Then at the end of March we had to repeat the process, transferring all personnel equipment, housekeeping supplies and food from the Polyconfidence to the Port Royal.’
‘Equipment and supplies had to be packed into containers and transferred by crane.
Staff literally had to demobilise one installation and mobilise another in one working day’.
said Ian.
The operation went smoothly and Catering Managers Ian Cameron and John Dunn are now looking after 350 persons on board the Safe Holmia rising to 440 at peak, whilst on the Port Royal, John Turner and Ian Ross are looking after 175 people.
The Safe Holmia on a previous contract in Norwegian waters.
One of the most modern flotels the Holmia has twin cabins, a gym, cinema, recreation rooms and two saunas.
Japanese Cuisine at Nissan
An architects' model of the new Nissan Centre.
This September some 300 staff at the brand new Nissan European Technology Centre Ltd will be offered catering facilities ranging from the very best European and Japanese cuisine to a simple vending service, all provided by CCG.
The Nissan Centre is nearing completion at Cranfield, Bedfordshire.
The design will emulate many of the features of the Nissan Technology Centre in Japan, with the establishment of an environment in which the creative design process will flourish.
The Japanese are firm believers in the creative stimulus that nature can provide — and at Cranfield the staff restaurant will be located on an island in a man made lake which also extends around the front of the office building.
Extensive landscaping, including Japanese style gardens are planned.
Access to the glass fronted restaurant will be by footbridge.
English and Japanese chefs will work side by side in a ‘state of the art’ kitchen area preparing Japanese dishes such as Beef Teriyaki, Chicken Sashimi, Clear Soup with Tofu and Ginger, Fried Aubergine with Miso Sauce, alongside Lamb Boulangere, Devilled Chicken Kebabs or vegetarian options such as Lentil and Mushroom au Gratin and Vegetable Pies.
In addition CCG will operate a salad bar and vending service for hot and cold filled rolls, sandwiches, snacks, hot and cold beverages of all types.
CCG's Regional Manager, Ronnie Noble, commented, ‘Nissan are renowned for quality assurance and attention to detail in all that they do.
CCG will be offering a similar painstaking approach to ensure the very best service and value at Cranfield.
We are delighted that our proven quality has enable Nissan to award us this prestigious contract.’
FEEDING THE ‘TUNNEL TIGERS’
Chris Horn and his CCG staff of some 110 joined in the celebration last December, when the UK and French tunnel engineers broke through to link up the Channel Tunnel Marine Service Tunnel.
The CCG team started work on the Channel Tunnel site in September 1987 and have built up until they are now catering for some 6,000 workers at two locations — Upper and Lower Shakespeare Cliff.
It has been a hectic three years, operating a round-the-clock snack bar, and restaurant service for 17 hours every day.
A normal day menu means the provision of 1,500 and 2,000 meals and snacks, covering TML staff as well as the men driving the tunnel itself — the so-called ‘Tunnel Tigers’.
Any worker may eat at any of the canteens or special selection dining rooms.
CCG employees staff three shifts, handling menus that range from sausage, egg and chips to venison, quail, with or without chips, to an imaginative healthy eating salad bar.
The canteens and speciality restaurant are not subsidised yet prices for the workers and staff are remarkable.
A full ‘English’ breakfast, bacon, eggs, sausage, potatoes, etc costs just £1.25 and is served from 05.15 am.
Lunch, a full three courses, costs £1.75.
A speciality dinner costs £1.50 for the main cavery dish, roasts, double loin, saddle of lamb, etc plus vegetables and extras.
‘These costs are achieved by professionalism’ says Chris Horn.
We urge all our team to use their skills to the full to achieve efficiencies and it works.
There is, of course, also an economy of scale.
We can also assure you that quality and quantity is excellent — try feeding a Tunnel Tiger anything less!.’
Chris Horn, General Manager for the project opened the Tunnel contract 10 years after joining CCG.
Originally from St Albans, his first CCG site was at Arderseir, on the Moray Firth, followed by Projects on various sites, including Shetland, and at the Torness Nuclear Power Station site, where he opened site services before moving on to village accommodation.
CCG hope to remain at Shakespeare Cliff until 1993 or 1994, although Chris Horn anticipates a gradual downturn as the contract progresses.
‘I'm looking forward to the final official opening of the Tunnel, and I'm delighted to have been part of the support structure that has made it possible.
But I'm really looking forward to moving back north to Scotland when the job's done.’
A Tunnel Tiger tucks in
SCHOOLS SUCCESS
Pupils at St Joseph's Primary School, with headteacher Mr McLorman, show off their healthy Christmas Presents from CCG.
CCG have been awarded the contract to provide school meals in the Scarborough and Ryedale are of North Yorkshire.
The contract which began just before Christmas last year covers 67 schools run by North Yorkshire County Council.
Mike Queen, Public Sector Director, commented, ‘We were naturally delighted to be awarded this contract.
As a company we have a proven track record in schools catering and are committed to providing nutritious school meals.’
CCG served their first meal at St Joseph's Primary School in Pickering on 21st December where children were given a special Christmas present to mark the occasion.
Services commenced at the remaining schools at the beginning of January.
Over 300 staff have been employed to carry out the service led by General Manager, Edward Clarkin and CCG have opened a new Scarborough Office.
CCG's Training Department played a significant role in the mobilisation as CCG's Bob Rae explained, ‘Bookkeeping and Induction sessions were run in schools in Ryedale, Scarborough and the surrounding areas.
Over 80 managers and supervisors attended the bookkeeping sessions and over 300 attended induction sessions.’
The training was carried out by .
Healthy eating plays an important role in CCG's service as Mike Queen commented, ‘We are currently building upon the Council's existing healthy eating policies and are using their Herbie cartoon character to help promote healthy eating to the pupils.’
Working for YOUR Health and Safety RESPONDING TO THE FOOD SAFETY ACT 1990
It is widely recognised that the Food Safety Act 1990 will progressively impact on the way food businesses operate.
CCG's Bob Rae writes on CCG's reaction to the new legislation.
‘CCG has been responding to the implications of the Act since its publication last year.
To date, most of the regulations provided for have yet to be made.
The role of CCG's Safety and Training Department has been to analyse the information available: clarify the requirements and keep management, staff and clients up to date on developments.
In December information was sent to all units by means of the Health & Safety Bulletin supported by two government produced pamphlets.
An information paper ‘Hygiene Developments’, describing in more detail CCG's response to the Act, was circulated to Operations' Management to assist them in planning to cope with the onset of the new legislation.
A ‘Food Safety Update’ sheet was launched in January to ensure that early clarification of the progress of regulations was made available to Operations' Management.
The first in January, dealt with Training Requirements, the second in March, with Registration of Food Premises.
More updates will follow.
Food hygiene courses continue to be well supported and already this year a further 100 employees have gained their Food Hygiene Certificate.
The company's Health & Safety Manual continues to provide standards and codes of practice that conform to current legislation with a revised manual to be issued later this year.’
If you would like more information on how the Act will affect you and your unit call Bob on 
Scottish Tourist Board
For Eleanor Hunt from Essex, the chance of a position with CCG in Scotland was an opportunity to good to be missed.
‘I fancied a change of scene from London where I'd been working with the Bank of England in-house catering team’ she said.
Now Eleanor is Catering Manager in charge of the staff restaurant at STB Headquarters in Edinburgh.
Here Eleanor and her assistant, James King, provide a lunch and snack service for 120 people involved in promoting Scotland.
However not much promotion was necessary in Eleanor's case, ‘I love Scotland and am enjoying the relaxed pace of life in Edinburgh’.
Eleanor has faced a number of challenges with one of the most memorable being the organisation of a Burns Day celebration.
‘I'd never been near a Haggis before — far less cooked one.
However with a little advice from my colleagues we pulled it off and everyone really enjoyed the meal.’
Achieving high standards is something Eleanor is conscious of, ‘A number of our customers are Hotel Inspectors for the Scottish Board so we are doubly aware that our standards have to be of the highest and we work very hard to achieve this.’
Scottish Tourist Board receptionist Angela Crolla (above left) is offered a Taste of Scotland by CCg Catering Manager Eleanor Hunt.
CCG's standard recipes are now available in an easy to use card file system.
The boxed set, which all units will receive shortly, contains 380 cards.
For Training Officer, Sandra Brockman, it has meant 18 months of hard work compiling the recipe cards.
As Sandra explained, ‘Each pack is divided into 18 sections covering items like stocks and sauces, soups, starters, different types of meat, fish, vegetarian dishes and even herbs and spices.
In addition to recipes there are costing cards and cards for Chef's own favourite recipes.’
Units were approached for their ideas and most popular recipes, and Sandra also created a number of new dishes.
‘We asked units to try out some of the new recipes with positive results.’
Even some of the old favourites have had a few imaginative additions like Vegetarian Lasagne with added carrot, apple and fennel.
Care has been taken to ensure that these original recipes are nutritionally balanced.
The system has been designed to allow for new developments.
‘We are already planning to include Theme Day recipes from across the country and will be writing to all units for their ideas’, said Sandra.
Christmas at Harper Collins
A new ‘chapter’ was opened in CCG London's success story when a sparkling new restaurant was opened in Harper Collin's beautifully appointed offices in the heart of Hammersmith.
Full credit for the success of the opening goes to Catering Manager, Laura Gilbert and her team, supported by Area Manager, Simon Tebbit.
Since opening in mid-November ‘Chapters’ has gone from strength to strength.
The management team's concern for the highest standards of service and presentation were in full evidence on 18th December when ‘Chapters’ hosted its very first Christmas Lunch for employees of the publishing firm.
Our photo shows CCG Chairman Frank Bell with Returns' Supervisor Mrs Isabelle Lawson on the occasion of her retirement.
Mrs Lawson, who was presented with a gold watch to mark the occasion, joined CCG in 1969 as Catering Manager at Cameron Iron Works.
From there she managed a number of CCG units including STV's Gateway Theatre in Edinburgh, something of a challenge as Mrs Lawson explained.
‘We only had a matchbox size kitchen from which we had to fees the likes of Spike Milligan, Harold Wilson and Ken Dodd.
The last client I looked after was none other than David Niven.’
In 1983 Mrs Lawson was appointed Returns' Supervisor at Bridge of Allan Office.
On her retiral she commented, ‘I've enjoyed many rewarding moments through the years and I'd like to thank everyone for the wonderful send off and beautiful gifts.’
‘BOWLED OVER’
This is exactly what happened to the London Regional Team when Divisional Managing Director, Peter Kelly, agreed to an evening of Tenpin Bowling at Streatham's ‘MEGABOWL’.
Eighteen would-be-bowlers joined in a social evening designed to bring colleagues together in a friendly environment for an evening of fun.
Peter Kelly gained the prize for the highest overall scorer with Graham Sibthorpe and Simon Tebbit second and third respectively.