

Business is Booming
A MULTI million pound deal to provide a school meals service in London is the icing on the cake after a terrific summer of new and extended contracts for CCG.
A wide variety of businesses have chosen CCG to provide top quality catering and support services, including some of London's major financial institutions as well as schools, offices and industry.
Everyone in the company is delighted with our recent success across the country, which goes to show that out emphasis on total quality is paying rich dividends.
One of the largest new contracts is a £9 million deal with the City of Westminster to provide a school meals service.
The contract includes 54 schools and will last five years.
Welcoming CCG for the new school term, Councillor Alan Bradley, chairman of Westminster's competitive tendering committee, said: ‘The meal service is a vital one and I am confident that CCG will do a first class job.’
CCG director Mike Queen added: ‘We are delighted to have this prestigious contract.
Our track record in London and in Yorkshire is a key factor in our success, along with the launch of our Total Quality Management programme, which ensures standards are maintained at the high levels expected in Westminster.’
It has been a busy time in London, with new contracts across the city.
Full details of some of these are given in our London feature inside, but others include Ernst & Young (two staff restaurants in the city and five satellite locations, plus function catering); London Docklands Development Corporation (a top quality restaurant for up to 300); and the Penguin Group (staff restaurant for 100).
Details of Goldsmith Sachs, Morgan Cuaranty Trust and Reuters are inside.
Still in the south east, at Trans Manche Link in Folkestone, 300 Project Link Office workers are being served breakfast and lunch inside the portacabin complex.
CCG already cater for TML at Shakespeare Cliff.
Just north of London, we have been successful in Milton Keynes, at the new Polytechnic and at Volkswagen Audi Group.
At the Poly, where we are already catering for 400 students, a new canteen designed by CCG is due to open in 1992 to serve 1000 students.
At VAG's headquarters at Blakelands and their nearby training centre at Wymbush, the company will supply catering at the most prestigious level for executive visitors, a high quality staff restaurant and food hall, a sandwich bar, working lunches and 20 vending machines at both locations.
CCG have been retained by NEI/ABB on the site of National Power's new power station at Killingholme and at Powergen's Killingholme combined Cycle Power Plant where we have been retained by Siemens plc.
In total CCG are providing catering and welfare services for 1,200 workers in the Humberside area.
Moving to the Midlands, CCG are operating a new staff restaurant at Volvo Trucks UK's parts warehouse in Rugby, serving up to 60 people daily.
In Newcastle, at the Intervention Board's new offices on the banks of the Tyne, CCG will operate a restaurant serving salads and hot meals to 280 staff, plus a vending service.
These are busy times in Scotland, too, with several important contracts, particularly in the north east.
These include BP Exploration & Production at Millar House in Aberdeen (top quality catering, cleaning and housekeeping); Scottish Hydro Electric at Peterhead Power Station (meals and snacks at six sites, 24 hours a day, as well as vending machines); and Grampian Transport in Aberdeen (serving about 300 staff, with a main canteen at their head office and a subsidiary early morning service and vending machines).
In the west of Scotland, CCG have been selected by the CPC Social Club in Paisley, not only for a bar and food service with entertainment for 420 members, but also for ground maintenance including their bowling greens and tennis courts.
And we are now catering for 160 staff at Glasgow Development Agency in their new top quality restaurant where there is emphasis on healthy eating.
We are also supplying site catering and cleaning services for BP Exploration at their Kinneil Terminal Expansion Project in Grangemouth, for up to 800 people.
We would like to wish all our staff every success with these new contracts.
CASH FOR KIDS
CCG STAFF at the Sizewell B Hostel teamed up with residents to raise money for nearby Warren Special School.
Bar manager Carolyn Baker organised pub games which raised an impressive £2,000.
Now Warren's 71 pupils can enjoy a week's educational holiday away from home this summer.
Kevin Murray, administration manager of the hostel, said ‘The idea came from Carolyn who proposed we adopt a special school and Warren School was the most local.
We are delighted our own staff and the residents have given their effort, time and cash so generously.’
Bar manager Carolyn Barker presents a cheque to Steve Jinks, Warren School's deputy head, backed up by CCG staff (from left):
Most of CCG's staff at Sizewell B turned out to watch the reactor being topped out.
All went well and the 600 tonne roof was lowered safely down on to the reactor.
Our picture shows CCG's medical and fire crews, staff from the site canteen, trades department, hostel, chalet and office and the bar manager.
In front is general manager Jim Howden.
IF Eugene Kertsman asks you to go for a little jog to keep fit — watch out!
Our new operations manager, Provinces South, must be one of the fittest men in the country and recently completed the gruelling Ironbridge Iron Man Triathlon.
Starting at 6 am, the field of almost 200 athletes began with 2.4 mile swim in the River Severn, jumped onto racing bikes for a 112 mile loop around Shropshire, and finished with a full 26 mile marathon along the banks of the Severn.
Eugene finished 100th of 198 starters, taking just 12 hours 38 minutes to complete the course despite hazards like a dawn thunderstorm, a puncture, and finally blazing sunshine.
Our new name
WE HAVE changed!
For over five years, news from CCG has come under the banner What's Cooking?, but as the company has grown to include a wide range of other services as well as catering, we felt that title was no longer appropriate.
Hence the change, and the new name reflects what CCG is really all about: people.
The people who work for us, and the people who use our services.
So welcome to the first edition of CCG People, which we hope will tell you all you need to know about the people that make CCG such a success.
Share Your news
CCG people is YOUR newspaper, so if you think you have got something that may be of interest, please write to us.
Send your information to  .
Spotlight on London
THIS has been a momentous year for CCG in London, with a number of important new contracts and expanded services with existing clients.
In this issue of CCG People we decided to take a closer look at our work with some of our most prestigious customers.
Our London operation, set up in the West End, moved to City Road earlier this year.
It covers the whole area inside the M25, but concentrates on the centre of London.
The staff in the office-directors and their support services — are supported by Group Resource.
Revealing the secret of CCG's success, Peter Kelly, divisional managing director for the London area, said: ‘We have a flexible approach to clients’ requirements, and a consistently close monitoring of our work with each of them.
‘The performance and leadership of the field and unit managers with professional teams of staff, is seen by clients and potential clients as our major thrust.’
Peter feels that CCG's training policy has played a major role in staff attitude and professionalism: it has an impact on existing businesses and is viewed favourably by potential clients when visiting our operations.
The move to the new offices in City Road has enabled staff at all levels to respond effectively and quickly to any situation, and the London based directors ensure constant contact with clients so there is no ‘ivory tower’ situation.
Peter continued: ‘The sales staff continually come up with innovative proposals, and their approach is reflected in our success of the past few years.
They can sell the business with confidence and our commitment to the client is second to none.
‘We will not develop the business where there is no emphasis on quality, and we intend to continue in that framework.
Our recent success reflects that.’
‘We are forecasting a very exciting time developing our activities in London and we will continue to gear our services to the clients requirements and ensure that our approach is a refreshing change.’
Some of CCG's London team outside the City Road office (from left):
Banking on quality
CCG provide over 5,000 meals a week for Citibank at three locations in London, at the Strand, the Cottons Centre and in Lewisham.
At the Stand, where the company's executive offices are located, catering managers Ralph Clark and Annette Ware operate a suite of seven private dining rooms services independently from the staff restaurant.
These are used for banquets and conferences on request.
There is also a highly popular staff restaurant and in the eight years since CCG began catering we have introduced several innovations such as vegetarian and ethnic food, a salad restaurant, an outside catering service and a bespoke catering service to satellite locations.
The beautiful Thamesside setting of the Cottons Centre, where CCG run customer catering for Citibank, was put to the test this summer with an exclusive dinner for 15 chairmen and chief executives, who have been booked in by a public relations consultancy.
They wanted somewhere really stunning to entertain clients of a major insurance group.
Una Kyne, the executive services manager, put on a memorable meal and even had to make arrangements for 15 chauffeur driven cars to be given access.
It went so well that the consultancy is now planning to hold more top notch dinners at Cottons.
CCG also provide an extensive staff restaurant service under manager David Walter.
At the third site, in Lewisham, CCG's manager Kevin Mount runs a successful staff restaurant with similar facilities to those at the Strand.
Abbey National Growth with interest
WHEN CCG first started catering for Abbey National in Milton Keynes, the requirement was to provide a counter service lunch to about 700 staff in one office, along with executive and conference dining facilities.
However, as the building society has grown, so have their catering requirements and CCG are now serving food at six locations in Milton Keynes and nearby Bletchley, as well as two in London, including their head office in Baker Street.
Each location has a counter service restaurant at lunch time, along with a coffee and snack bar open all day.
Popular a' la carte restaurants have also been introduced.
The catering team, under group catering manager Mary Markham, is based at a central production unit at the largest contract in Milton Keynes, although each outlet has its own operating staff.
At the central unit, we use our expertise in cook chill to prepare food, which is then distributed to the other sites nearby.
Special theme days have been introduced to all Abbey National sites, and the office staff have expressed their appreciation at our initiatives such as offering turkeys at Christmas, and baking decorated cakes for special occasions.
Express Delivery
The executive dining room at Express Newspapers
SITUATED in prestigious Ludgate House in Blackfriars, Express Newspapers keep going throughout the day, so CCG provide a staff restaurant for breakfast, lunch and evening meals.
There are about 1,100 staff, who can take advantage of a variety of hot dishes, including a vegetarian choice, and an ever popular salad bar and snack service.
CCG catering manager Jeremy Hook, who has a staff of over 40, also runs executive dining rooms and conference rooms for which an extremely high standard of service is required and provided.
An unusual feature is Poppins cafe bar, open at lunch times and in the evening for all grades of staff, where as well as drinks there is a tasty selection of bar food, with the ‘big and bountiful salads’ being especially popular.
Trading Aces
GOLDMAN SACHS, a major financial institution, has been a challenging venture for CCG since the restaurant opened in March.
The catering contract is unique in character, with special requirements for quality and speed of service.
At the staff restaurant, everything must be available in a hurry with an optional takeaway service.
The product range changes subtly during the day from breakfast rolls and croissants to made-to-order sandwiches and cakes, with the emphasis on healthy eating options.
CCG catering manager David Betteridge also operates services for the 300 trading floor executives, who can order lunch directly from the restaurant, delivered in individual packages to their desks on purpose built trolleys.
Traders working late can even take a full evening meal in the restaurant.
For added convenience, there are pantries with beverage machines on each of the building's ten floors, with a dedicated CCG employee ensuring the ingredients are kept stocked at all times.
Staff can also use three vending machines outside the restaurant.
Anna Meurling, receptionist at Goldmans Sachs, chooses a salad
News highlights
REUTERS, the world famous news agency, has a magnificent restaurant on the upper floor of a purpose built leisure complex, designed by top architect Richard Rogers.
With its panoramic views over the River Thames at Docklands, it is a delightful venue for CCG catering manager Tracey Evans and head chef Steve Raven, who until the recent opening of the restaurant were catering for the 200 Reuters staff from a portacabin complex.
The restaurant has a full meals service, seven days a week, and there is also a bar facility.
Inside the main building next door, there is a chefet snack bar.
To complete the picture, the restaurant opens out onto a rooftop garden and lawn, while on the ground floor the staff have top leisure facilities including a swimming pool and sauna.
An attractive haunt
Manresa House conference room, on Thames Poly's Roehampton campus
THAMES Poly has grown to become one of the largest polytechnics in the country.
From its original base in Woolwich, it has expanded to several locations in south east London, each offering a wide range of teaching and recreational facilities in attractive surroundings.
There are now about 9,000 students on principal campuses at Roehampton, Woolwich, Eltham and Dartford, and three smaller teaching centres at Wapping, Shadwell and Deptford.
Under the direction of group controller David Philp, CCG supply a wide range of services to the Poly, including catering, housekeeping, security and care of the grounds.
This ensures that students and staff are well looked after at all times, and staff are well looked after at all times, and they can continue to work and live in an attractive and secure environment.
The Poly's principal entertainment venue in Southwood House, at Avery Hill in Eltham, where special meals are often planned and prepared by Hilary Arnold, catering manager, and Michael Leach, executive chef.
Over in the South West London, on the Roehampton campus, the superb group of fine Georgian houses, originally built as summer residences, are now in use as a tranquil centre for study, overlooking the wide expanse of Richmond Park.
CCG's general services manager at Roehampton, Andrew Legere, oversees a staff of about 35 in term time, including caretakers, gardeners, domestic help and of course the catering team.
There is a considerable potential for development of our services, and Andrew hopes to use Manresa House, a former Jesuit school, for receptions and dinners.
He is hoping the functions will not attract Manresa's hidden resident — it is supposedly haunted by a Jesuit monk!
Not a second wasted
WHEN Morgan Guaranty Trust moved into new offices in whitefriars earlier this year, it was natural that CCG should move with them to their new staff restaurant, as they already had four years experience of our catering.
The offices, converted from the old City of London School with a new trading centre built on, house hundreds of staff including many traders.
As the traders often cannot spare the time to come to the staff restaurant, they can place their breakfast and lunch orders in advance and CCG staff serve them at their desks.
When they do have time, however, the Trading Post on the third mezzanine floor provides a speedy snack service for traders from 7am onwards.
On the whole they are health conscious, so the emphasis is on low fat foods.
In the staff restaurant, an interesting feature is the cashless Girovend system.
All employees are issued a with a security card which not only allows them into the building but also stores details of their credit facilities.
Staff can add credit onto their cards by putting money into card machines in the building.
When they arrive at the restaurant cash points they run their card through the machine which automatically flashes up the price and deducts the cost of their meal.
Visitors to the restaurant can also purchase a card.
CCG's staff services manager Karen Pleva commented: ‘Once staff got used to adding credit onto their cards, they have been impressed by the time saved.
The system allows eight people to pass the cash points every minute.’
With her deputy Nick McCabe and head chef Paul Dickson, she manages a facility that offers breakfast, lunch and all day coffee to about 1,600 customers a day.
The highlight of the restaurant for many is the delicious line of sweets prepared by the Moroccan pastry chef, Ben Abdallah.
Every morning he prepares a range of at least 20 sweets, which go down a real treat.
CCG also operate Morgan Guaranty's magnificent dining and entertainment centre, managed by John Roxborough, offering some of the finest cuisine in London with no fewer than nine private dining rooms.
Head chef Anthony Jones also provides catering for buffets, lunches and cocktail parties within the Great Hall and executive meeting rooms.
Ben Abdallah serves up his famous sweets for Morgan Guaranty staff
Wendy Hulse serves in Morgan Guaranty's Trading Post restaurant
Working for YOUR Health and Safety
CCG's response to the Food Safety ACt continues: so far this year another 300 employees have gained the company's Food Hygiene Certificate on successful completion of the end of course test.
Follow-up testing has been started with a questionnaire being sent to past course delegates to check their continued understanding of food safety requirements.
Responses so far have been most encouraging.
We have also gained registration as a Basic Food Hygiene Centre offering the Institute of Environmental Health Office's Basic Food Hygiene Certificate.
The Health and Safety Bulletin continues to provide legislation updates and information on identified safety concerns.
If you have any queries contact  .
TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT
The company's Total Quality Management initiative, launched in March, has progressed with the development of Divisional Quality Plans.
These plans reflect the twin aims of developing our Quality Management systems and promoting a TQM culture.
TQM seminars have been run in all Divisions to spread the message and promote commitment.
TQM is now integrated into Divisional management meetings with a variety of specific initiatives being pursued across the Group.
At a recent meeting Jim Naden of Scottish Enterprise, who had assisted with the initial Quality Survey, said he was delighted with the progress that had been made and the enthusiasm that was clearly evident.
Our quest for Total Quality will be unending but the future looks healthy.
TRAINING NEWS
As the course year drew to a close, management development courses have clocked up 477 trainee days.
Once again the most requested coursed were those dealing with the development of Trainer Skills.
One new course in the past year was Performance Appraisal, aimed at developing the skills of Appraisal Interviewing, not originally on the calendar.
The course was well received and will be offered a variety of venues in the coming year.
The group-wide identification of management development needs has just been concluded and the new course calender will shortly be circulated.
Offshore units have been piloting changes in the job training format which will result in a reduction in paperwork and clearer guidance for the trainers.
IMPROVE YOUR SKILLS
The good news for CCG staff who would like to gain a City and Guilds qualification is that the course is now open to any CCG staff member.
CCG have become a recognised examination centre for the City and Guilds Joint Certificate for Catering and the Licensed Trade.
To achieve the City and Guilds certificate you are put through your paces with written examinations, and also have to complete caterbase modules in a variety of subjects from food and beverage service to cookery processes.
City and Guilds is a vital part of the training for our YT trainees, and a cash bonus is paid to trainees and their supervisors on completion of Level I and Level II.
This scheme is a great success as our trainees benefit from learning in a real working environment.
In fact, two of our trainees, Deborah Harris at ScotRail and Helen Neil at Glasgow Development Agency, are about to complete their caterbase modules and will become the first City and Guilds candidates.
We hope that many more members of staff will soon follow in their footsteps.
If you are interested in gaining a City and Guilds qualification contact CCG Training on .
GILLIAN GAINS AT GLAMIS
Gillian Bulloch, a relief manager for CCG Catering in the east of Scotland, was the lucky winner of a raffle held at the Leonard Cheshire Foundation home, Glamis House in Glenrothes.
As our picture shows, Gillian (centre left) was presented with her £100 prize by Brenda Wylie, chairman of the house management committee, who said: ‘We raised £885 through the raffle which we will be putting towards a converted car for our residents to use.’
CCG provide a complete catering service at the home, which cares for 16 residents.
GOLD FOR GAIL
Gail McAllister, a trainee manager in the west of Scotland, has won the highest accolade in the Duke of Edinburgh's Award, the Crown, as well as gaining her Gold Award.
Gail, from Stepps, worked very hard for her success, which included spending a week of her holidays with young people as part of the residential section of her Award.
She was presented with her award by Prince Philip at Holyrood Palace in July.
BOULES-EYE FOR PIERRE!
PETANQUE expert Pierre Bretenoux, our manager at the Lord Todd in Glasgow, captained his triples team, Les Pirons, to the Scottish Grand Prix title in five years.
It was a memorable weekend for Pierre, as his son Paul, won the singles championship just 24 hours later.
SHOOT TO WIN
GEORGE Wood, CCG's manager at Osmosis Bar in Glasgow, competed again for the Scottish shooting team in July in the Home Internationals for Skeet, which were held on the Isle of Man.
Although George was disappointed that Scotland narrowly lost the senior title to England in a shoot-off after a draw, there were compensations for the team with three other trophies, the Captain's Cup, the Dragon Cup and the Thistle Cup.
BEST FOOT FORWARD
CCG Catering staff in Bridge of Allan suffered after they walked the ten miles from Bridge of Allan to Menstrie and back to raise money for Forth Valley Health Board.
However, it was all in a good cause as the sponsored walk organised by accounts supervisor Andrena Cowan, raised £1,300 towards the cost of an Ultra Sound Scanner.
Winning Themes for winning teams
AMERICAN Independence Day was celebrated in style by CCG catering teams the length of the country, with catering staff dressing up and offering clients special themed menus.
At Total Oil in St FErgus, near Aberdeen, manager Yan Szczesnowicz had his staff dress up as anything from Mickey Mouse to Bart Simpson, with a few american indians, the cavalry and Uncle Sam thrown in.
The same team followed that up just ten days later with a French day to commemorate the storming of the Bastille on July 14.
Meanwhile, down in the deep south — at TVS studios in Southampton to be precise — there was a 4th July menu that ranged from real Texas burgers to an adventurous Lousiana duck.
The restaurant was decked with more stars and stripes than you could count, and the staff took great care to dress up for the occasion.
A yankee doodle line-up at Total Oil
UP IN SMOKE
THE BEAUTIFUL grounds of Dalmeny House near South Queensferry were the setting for the annual BP barbecue.
Nearly 700 BP employees involved in the KG Ethylene Project turned up to enjoy a delicious grill and tasty menu specially prepared for the event.
Over 50 CCG staff were on hand to help serve the food inside the marquee, and Ken Martin, CCG's services co-ordinator, at Grangemouth, commented: ‘The evening was a resounding success.
BP were thoroughly impressed, everyone enjoyed themselves and the weather was great.’
CCG have organised several other BP barbecues and look forward to a lot of fun next summer.
LONG SERVICE
THERE have been a number of long service presentations to staff recently, with David Paterson, fleet manager at Head Office, being presented with a gold watch to mark 20 years with CCG.
In his time with us David has pioneered the transport side of the company.
When he started in 1971 the car fleet had only 11 cars, 20 years on there are 150 vehicles.
He commented: ‘I have grown with the company and seen many changes.
All in all I have enjoyed working with CCG.’
Also presented with a 20 year long service award was vending engineer Tommy O'Donnell.
Helen Harvey of the Lord Todd has received her presentation for ten years with CCG.
SIMON STRIKES IT RICH
THE latest winner in CCG's New Sales Leads campaign is Simon Tebbit, CCG area manager, who was awarded £250 for his initiative in suggesting a presentation to the Penguin Group in Kensington.
Our sales team turned Simon's tip into a new contract which started in June, supplying catering services for 100 staff at the publishing firm.
Another winner is Jean Kent, CCG's manager at Express Newspapers plc, who also took £250 for a sales lead which resulted in a catering contract at London Docklands Corporation at Thames Quay, for over 300 staff.
All CCG members of staff can win rewards like Simon and Jean: all you have to do is give information which leads to the presentation of a sales proposal to a prospective client — that's worth £50.
And if your lead results in CCG gaining a contract you will then be rewarded with a further £200.
That way, you can profit from the company's success!
DEREK LIFTS THE MAX
Derek Polson, a CCG storeman at KG Ethylene Offsite stores, showed he knows all there is to know about fork lift driving when he scored a perfect 100 per cent in his driving test — the first time a driver has achieved the maximum score at Hargreaves Training in Glasgow.
After a five day course on reach truck driving Derek scored an outstanding 85 per cent in the written test before going on to give a perfect display of driving for the examiners.
Here, some of Derek's follow drivers pay tribute to his skills.
MAKING DOUGH
CCG staff rose to the challenge and baked hundreds of scones and cream teas for the Weir Paper Products fete held in Falkirk.
Over £1,500 was raised at the fete and this will be used to give 200 pensioners a slap-up Christmas dinner.
Seen here are Margaret Harper, Cara Laurie and Margaret Hanlon with some of the fruits of their labour.
CHANGING FACES
FOLLOWING our business success in recent months we welcome these new staff and wish them every success in their careers with CCG.
CCG have made two new senior appointments in the London office.
Oliver Parker (left) has been promoted to operations director and Peter Graves to business development director.
Oliver joined CCG in 1989 with 20 years experience of top flight operations.
Peter has with CCG for the past 2 years and also has 20 years experience in servicing ‘blue chip’ clients and business development.
Lindsay Tocher has been promoted to director of CCG's Aberdeen and Offshore Division.
Lindsay, an Aberdonian, has worked in the offshore industry since 1978 and trained in catering with the Sheraton Hotel Group before joining CCG in 1986.