

PREFACE
This Survey was designed and supervised by , Research Officer.
Thanks are also due to,, and , of the Library's curatorial staff, for explaining the aims of the Survey to members of the public entering the Exhibition Room; and to members of the Library's warding staff for their co-operation during the period of the Survey.
Secretary of the Library
August 1982 
INTRODUCTION
In 1981, at the request of the Department of Administration, the Readers' Services Division of the National Library of Scotland conducted a Survey, the object of which was to obtain information about visitors to the Library's Exhibition Room, and about their response to the exhibitions which they saw.
The Survey was by questionnaire, and, with 366 questionnaires completed, achieved a response rate of not less than 67%.
The Survey was conducted on seven selected days between 16 August and 9 September 1981, all but one of which fell within the period of the Edinburgh International Festival.
The results obtained, particularly those relating to the origins of visitors, are, therefore, not to be seen as necessarily typical of the year as a whole, but as representative of the Exhibition Room's busy summer period.
The three exhibitions on view during the period of the Survey were:(a) Thomas Carlyle 1795–1881 (the Library's major summer exhibition for 1981), in the Main Exhibition Room;(b) Somhairle MacGill-Eain/Sorley MacLean, in the Annexe to the Exhibition Room;(c)‘The Strathspey King’: James Scott Skinner, in the display cases of the Front Hall, outside the Exhibition Room proper.
The results of the Survey are presented in two sections, each of which begins with a summary of its major findings, while a third section outlines the main conclusions suggested by the Survey.
An Appendix, which contains a copy of the Survey questionnaire, gives details of the days on which the Survey was implemented, the procedures used to conduct it, and the measurement of its response rate.
It should be noted that where readers could give more than one answer to a question, percentage results may add up to more than 100%, and that the rounding of figures to the nearest whole number may also, on occasion, have produced a total of slightly more — or less — than 100%.
1 EXHIBITION VISITORS
Summary
The audience for the Library's exhibitions was drawn very largely from what are traditionally considered ‘middle class’ occupational groups, and almost half of it (47%) was composed of academics, students, and the retired.
Over a third (38%) of visitors came from in or near Edinburgh, but those from parts of Scotland outside the Edinburgh area (19%) were outnumbered by visitors from elsewhere in the UK (27%), and were only slightly more numerous than those from overseas (16%).
Four-fifths (81%) of those who came from outside Edinburgh were visiting the City for leisure purposes.
About three-quarters (75%) of the respondents had not used the Library as readers.
Around half of those who replied (56%) had never before visited the Library's exhibitions, and only about a quarter (23%) had previously visited exhibitions more frequently than once a year.
More than half (61%) of those who replied had learned of the Library's exhibitions by seeing posters outside the Library, while other (24% and 20% respectively) had learned of them by seeing advertisements, or by talking to friends.
1.1 VISITORS' OCCUPATIONS
Of the 366 respondents, 356 (97%) gave their occupation.
An analysis of their replies showed clearly that the great majority of them came from what are traditionally considered ‘middle class’ occupational groups, and that academics, students, and retired people (the majority of whom were retired professionals) accounted for just under half of all visitors.
Table 1, below, gives details of these findings.
1.2 VISITORS' ORIGINS
Only one visitor failed to say where he or she normally lived.
Of the 365 visitors who gave the location of their permanent home, slightly more than a third (38%) were from in or near Edinburgh, while the next largest group, accounting for just over a quarter (27%) of those who replied, did not come from elsewhere in Scotland, but from parts of the UK outside Scotland.
The number of visitors from parts of Scotland outwith the Edinburgh area was, in fact, comparatively small (19%), and exceeded the number of overseas visitors (16%) by only a small margin.
In analysing these figures, which are detailed in Tables 2 and 3, below, it must not be forgotten that since the Survey was conducted in summer, the proportion of visitors from outside Edinburgh will be higher than at other times of the year.
On the other hand, the fact that foreign visitors who did not speak English (a total of 13) were unable to complete questionnaires at all, means that the proportion of overseas visitors in the summer may in fact be greater than Table 2 would suggest.
1.3 REASONS FOR VISITING EDINBURGH
Respondents who did not live in or near Edinburgh were asked if their visit to the City was for leisure purposes, or for the purpose of business or study.
The responses of the 228 visitors from outside Edinburgh are set out in Table 4, below, and show that most of these individuals were in Edinburgh for leisure purposes.
Six respondents indicated that their visit was for a combination of leisure and business or study.
1.4 THE EXTENT TO WHICH VISITORS ARE ALSO READERS IN THE LIBRARY
A total of 363 exhibition visitors (99% of all respondents) indicated whether or not they ever used the Library as a reader.
Their answers, outlined in Table 5, below, show that only a quarter (25%) of them were also readers.
1.5 FREQUENCY OF VISITS
A total of 356 visitors (97% of all respondents) indicated how often they had visited the Library's exhibitions before their current visit.
Their replies, summarized in Table 6, showed that more than half had never before visited the Library's Exhibition Room.
1.6 VISITORS' SOURCES OF INFORMATION ABOUT THE EXHIBITIONS
A total of 350 visitors (97% of all respondents) replied to question asking them about the way in which they had come to hear of the Library's exhibitions.
A number of them mentioned more than one information source.
Their replies, detailed in Table 7, below, showed that their main sources of information were posters outside the Library (61%), advertisements in the press (24%), and personal contacts (20%).
It should be noted that the high figure for posters outside the Library may be linked to the considerable number of tourists using the street in front of the Library as a thoroughfare during the summer period.
On the other hand, the figures for press articles and radio and television programmes may not adequately reflect the importance of these as sources of information, since the majority of such features were produced either before or after the Survey period.
THE EXHIBITIONS
Summary
As might have been expected, the larger exhibitions attracted considerably more visitors than the smallest exhibition, but all three received a generally favourable response from the public, with both the Carlyle and MacLean exhibitions being rated as Very Good or Good by at least 90% of those who saw them, and with 78% of those who saw the Skinner exhibition giving it similar ratings.
Visitors felt that a number of factors contributed to the appeal of the exhibitions, and it became clear that, in addition to their general interest in the subject of the exhibitions and in their content, the most important of these were (a) the informative nature of the exhibitions,(b) the layout and presentation of the exhibits,(c) the presentation of original documents, and (d) the presence of photographs and artefacts.
Most of those who replied (93%) felt that the exhibition labels were adequately detailed.
Only a quarter (24%) of those who replied to a question on exhibition catalogues indicated that they would buy one.
Of the reasons given for not purchasing one, the most important were (a) an insufficient interest in the subject, and (b) the cost of the catalogues, the latter being of particular concern to a number of unemployed or student visitors.
2.1 RELATIVE POPULARITY OF THE EXHIBITIONS
Since the Survey's seventh question asked visitors to comment on the exhibitions which they had seen on the day of their visit, it was possible, by noting the number of replies which related to each of the three exhibitions, to discover the number of visitors attracted by each exhibition, whatever their assessment of it.
The results obtained, outlined in Table 8, below, show that, as was expected, the large Carlyle exhibition attracted the greatest number of visitors, while the smallest exhibition, that on Skinner, attracted substantially fewer.
2.2 VISITORS' ASSESSMENTS OF THE EXHIBITIONS
As Table 9, below, shows, the response of the public to the exhibitions which they saw was generally favourable.
Of the 287 people who saw the Carlyle exhibition, 94% rated it as Very Good or Good; 90% of the 237 visitors who saw the MacLean exhibition gave it similar ratings; and 78% of the 147 visitors to the Skinner exhibition considered it Very Good or Good.
2.3 THE APPEAL OF THE EXHIBITIONS
A total of 270 visitors (74% of all respondents) replied to a question inviting them to say why the exhibitions appealed to them.
With many of those who replied offering more than one reason, a total of 413 reasons were stated, of which 206 related to Carlyle, 134 to MacLean, 32 to Skinner, and 41 to the exhibitions in general.
As Tables 10–13, below, show, most of the factors mentioned were common to all exhibitions, although the degree to which a particular factor contributed to an exhibition's success varied from one exhibition to another.
From the results obtained, it is clear that, in addition to visitors' general interest in the exhibitions and their content (either because they dealt with topics already of concern to the viewers, or because of their Scottish, or, indeed, local connexions), there were a number of features with particularly appealed, including the informative nature of the exhibitions, the layout and presentation of the exhibits, the presentation of original documents, and the presence of photographs and artefacts.
2.4 EXHIBITION LABELS
Although a number of visitors had spontaneously mentioned the quality of the labels as one of the factors which attracted them to the exhibitions, the questionnaire also contained a specific question on the adequacy of the labels accompanying exhibits.
As Table 14, below, shows, of the 346 visitors (95% of all respondents) who replied to it, as very high proportion (93%) felt that the labels gave sufficient information.
Of the 23 respondents (7%) who did not, 21 accepted an invitation to explain their views, and just over half of them (11 respondents) indicated that too much prior knowledge of the subjects was sometimes assumed.
2.5 EXHIBITION CATALOGUES
The final question of the Survey questionnaire reminded visitors that catalogues for the Carlyle and MacLean exhibitions were on sale at the Publications Counter, and asked them if they intended to buy one.
Since the Publications Counter is closed on Saturdays and Sundays, the question was deleted in questionnaires issued on these days.
An unfortunate error also resulted in seventeen questionnaires with the question deleted being issued on a week day.
In all, 293 visitors were asked whether or not they intended to buy a catalogue, and, of these, 261 (89%) replied.
As Table 15, below, makes clear, just over three-quarters of those who replied (198 respondents; 76%) did not expect to buy a catalogue.
Of the 198 respondents who did not intend to purchase a catalogue, 157 (79%) went on to give their reasons.
Examination of visitors' replies showed that the two most important reasons were insufficient interest in the subject to explore it beyond the exhibition (35%), and the cost of the catalogues (31%).
Table 16, below, details these findings.
3 CONCLUSIONS
The main conclusions to be drawn from the Survey are outlined below.
3.1 BREADTH OF AUDIENCE
Although the majority of people who visited the Exhibition Room on Survey days appeared to be well satisfied with what they saw, it is very clear (a) that people who visit the Library's Exhibition Room are largely ‘middle class’, and (b) that comparatively few visitors come from other parts of Scotland.
This is not an uncommon pattern with central institutions, but it does strengthen the case for sending the Library's exhibitions (in photographic form) to other parts of Scotland, and possibly to other areas of the City.
3.2 PUBLICITY
It may be that greater financial resources require to be made available in order to increase public awareness of the National Library and its functions by increased advertising and other publicity means.
At the same time it should be recognized that the Library's exhibitions in their present form are likely to appeal only to a limited audience.
3.3 CATALOGUES
The results underline how essential it is to scrutinize the case for publishing exhibition catalogues (as opposed to free handouts) very carefully, and to take into account factors such as the saleability of the catalogue after the exhibition is over, and the importance of carefully directed promotion of publications through mail order.
3.4 EXHIBITION FACILITIES
From the favourable comments on the presence of photographs and artefacts in exhibitions, it is clear that the public likes (and now expects) a multi-media approach to exhibitions.
The Library is restricted in its efforts in this direction by the traditional layout of the present Exhibition Room, and it is clearly desirable that, when resources permit, the Library should contrive to have a new Exhibition Room adapted to the requirements of modern exhibitions.
APPENDIX: TECHNICAL INFORMATION
SURVEY DAYS
The Survey was conducted on seven selected days between 16 August 1981 and 9 September 1981.
The days, chosen to provide one sample of each day of the week, were: Sunday 16 August, Thursday 20 August, Monday 24 August, Friday 28 August, Tuesday 1 September, Saturday 5 September, and Wednesday 9 September.
IMPLEMENTATION
The Survey was conducted by questionnaire in the Exhibition Room of the Library.
Although a notice at the entrance to the Room indicated that the Survey was being conducted, and invited visitors to co-operate by completing a questionnaire, a pilot survey in 1980 had shown that a satisfactory response rate could be obtained only if this was reinforced by a personal approach to visitors.
Consequently, all visitors entering the Exhibition Room on Survey days were approached by a member of the Library's staff who outlined to them the object of the exercise and invited them to complete a questionnaire.
Those who agreed were given an envelope in which to seal their completed questionnaire before returning it to the member of staff.
It was hoped that this visible guarantee of anonymity would encourage visitors to be as frank as they wished in their replies.
No pressure was brought to bear on visitors who were reluctant to co-operate.
RESPONSE RATE
Since the number of visitors to the Exhibition Room is noted as a matter of routine at all times of the year, in theory no special effort had to be made to record the number of potential respondents.
However, since foreign visitors with little understanding of English, and very young children, could not reasonably be expected to participate, the member of staff on duty was asked to record the 
number of visitors falling into these categories, and this was taken into account when the response rate was calculated.
As Table 17 shows, a total of 366 questionnaires were completed, representing a response rate of 67% for all visitors to the Exhibition Room, rising to 71% if children and non-English speakers are excluded from the total number of potential respondents.