

LEADER
Rail privatisation: questions that must be answered
The debate on railway privatisation in Britain has lasted for well over five years.
In July 1992, the Government finally produced its White Paper ‘New Opportunities for the Railways’ and in October the first consultation document ‘The Franchising of Passenger Rail Services’appeared.
Here we pose the question that the Government needs to answer.
Fundamental to the future of the railway is a guarantee by the Government to provide adequate funding for long-term investment by Railtrack and for continuing subsidy to rural and urban services.
Associated with this is the cross comparison of highway and rail investment on the same cost benefit basis.
Investors will not be able to fund, for example, the upgrading of the West Coast Main Line and Great Western electrification and they must be able to achieve a reasonable rate of return on their investment.
Will the Treasury guarantee the long term investment programme and not require an eight per cent return from Railtrack on such investment?
Will operator charges by Railtrack be reflected in higher fares and possible loss of patronage resulting from cross price elasticity?
Who will pay for safety costs and network upgrade — the passenger or the taxpayer?
Will equal status be given to road and rail investment?
Will the Treasury provide guarantees of losses over the life of a franchise on, for example, rural or commuter routes?
It is not the case that privatisation can only be attractive to operators if accompanied by large guarantees of taxpayers' money?
The consultation document contained no firm proposals on the franchising system although, given that 137 out of 167 pages referred to the present BR profit centres, it is reasonable to infer that the Government's preferred set up would be based on profit centre related franchises.
Certainly the route plan suggests that.
Has any decision been made on the lines to be franchised?
What conclusion has the Government drawn from the responses so far?
Given that many bus operators would be interested in franchisees, what conclusions can be drawn from Badgerline's reported withdrawal following a threat of an OFT monopoly inquiry?
At the Foundation of the Government's policy lies the primary objective of competition.
Not only does the Government want to put the railways into the private sector, it also wants competition on the routes.
But it is unlikely to find that goal outside the premier routes from London to Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds and Newcastle.
A company obtaining a route franchise might well invest in new station building; a bus company franchise might well establish seamless interchange facilities.
They are unlikely to welcome other rail operators creaming off their business.
Even on the premier franchises, the marginal operator is likely to compete only at the best times while the franchisee is left to operate the full seven day service.
Is open access not the result of political dogma rather than practical hard-nosed business analysis?
Without open access, will the result not be a semi-public, semi-private railway monopoly run by a jumble of guangos with no one boss?
How will Railtrack decide on access priority when track slots are scarce?
Where terminal stations are shared who will be allocated the best platforms?
Will operators be required to pay into ABTA/ATOL type bonding fund to guarantee against bankruptcy.
Who will pay compensation if one operators' trains are delayed by a breakdown of a train by another operator?
Will the requirements of the Passenger's Charter be imposed and by whom and at whose cost?
Will fares have to rise to provide for this, particularly if open access and therefore competition is not present?
One of the pleasures of travelling by rail is the availability of a national timetable whereby one can plan one's journey with reasonable certainty.
There are also many discounts available.
The franchising of services with total responsibility for pricing in the hands of operators may well bring many new local marketing ideas.
For the customer to take advantage of these deals some form of IATA like interline booking system is required.
At a recent CIT Metropolitan Section meeting, Brian Cox, MD of Stagecoach Rail, suggested a National Ticket Office through which tickets could be sold, presumably through a nationwide computer facility.
Who would establish a National Ticket Office?
Would all franchisees be required to be participants as part of the contract?
How would commercially sensitive information of one company be protected?
Will the franchising authority produce a national timetable?
Will the franchising authority specify the terms and conditions of the operator's ticket contract with passengers?
Will the Government set standards to be imposed contractually, possibly linked to a Passenger's Charter but where compensation is easily obtained to where consistently poor performance results in withdrawal of the contract?
The Government has, through the last two Secretaries of State, set out two main objectives in relation to rail freight:
transfer of freight from road to rail (Malcolm Rifkind)
to establish a competitive and privately-owned rail freight industry (John MacGregor)
Both these objectives suffer from the same constraints — the uncompetitive nature of railfreight charges compared with road haulage, other than trainload freight, and the lack of private sidings in Britain on anything like the scale in France or Germany thus requiring intermodal handling and its resultant costs.
Will a new grant scheme be introduced to encourage the building of private sidings or intermodal terminals?
Will the investment in new wagons be justified by private operators or leasing companies given the uncertainty of the market?
How will the Government respond to any request from Railtrack for an infrastructure grant to cover investment costs and enable lower rates to be charges to operators?
Can the Government guarantee that the recent increases in railfreight charges will not continue under their privatisation proposals?
Will the problems faced by Charterail be repeated and worsened under the railtrack regime?
These questions underline the real issues to be faced by all the interested parties involved in privatisation.
It is about time we saw some answers.
SIR ROBERT REID LECTURE
German rail restructures
The German railway system is facing major structural changes over the next few years as it struggles to rebuild its share of the transport market.
Heinz Durr, chairman of Deutsche Bundesbahn, giving the CIT's Sir Robert Reid Lecture, set out the three stage strategy that will transform the country's two state owned railway organisations into three privately owned railway companies.
The West and East German railways are starting the process of being united though at the moment they still operate quite separately.
Together they have some 25,000 miles of track, employ about 400,000 people, and turn over DM 25 billion (£10bn).
But despite national policies that promote rail, the railway system has lost market share heavily since the 1960s and is currently running a deficit of some DM 14bn after heavy subsidies.
The total burden is about DM60bn.
The railway was unable to respond to the challenge this presented because of its position as a public authority.
‘In its present form the railway system cannot be managed commercially’, he said.
To meet the challenge the public authority would have to be transformed into a public limited company.
This is not as easy as it sounds as it needs a change to the German constitution which requires a two third majority in the German parliament.
In addition, some 130 German laws will need to be amended.
The current debt burden will be written off and the organisation liberated from the public finance system.
In addition, the Government would invest some DM100bn to modernise the East German railway system over the next ten years.
The first phase of the plan merges the two railways into the new.
In the second phase three operating companies will be created — for passengers, freight and infrastructure — as part of the holding company.
In the final phase, in 2002, the holding company will disappear to leave the three separate operating companies.
Initially, the new company will be entirely state owned.
Mr Durr said the important thing was that it would be able to behave as a private company.
It would be able to cut costs and raise capital for investment in building its share of the market.
The Government would support infrastructure development on profitable routes with interest free loans while it would contribute to the cost of unprofitable routes.
Another problem was the position of some 130,000 civil servants that are part of the railway's workforce and have significantly better terms and conditions of employment than the other employees.
To get round this, the plan was for the Government to ‘lease’ these employees to the railway at less onerous rates.
The plan is to have the plc in place by the beginning of 1994.
This deadline has been set because in 1994 Germany will have 19 separate elections making progress impossible.
New Year's Honours
Congratulations are offered by members to the following whose names are included in the New Year's Honours List:.
Rail costs under scrutiny
Although rail now has the reliability necessary to support the development of intermodal road/rail freight transport in the UK, now established, productivity and cost structures still leave a great deal to be desired.
That is the blunt message from the managing director of failed UK combined transport company Charterail, Robin Gisby.
Speaking at the recent Logistics 92 conference on the Canberra, he claimed rail could still not compete with road when it came to transporting packaged goods.
And a major reason for that was comparative operating costs.
Elaborating on that point, Mr Gisby took as an example a 22-tonne load being moved 400 miles between London and Glasgow.
‘Let's pretend our train has got 25 loads on it, let's pretend British Rail has got a locomotive which can actually pull 25 loads over Shap Fell and let's assume it is 100 per cent full,’ he continued.
The cost of moving a 22-tonne load by road worked out at roughly 95p per mile, of which 60p were fixed costs and 35p variable costs.
Over the 400 miles, that produced a total cost of £3.80.
Using rail, the train journey cost per mile worked out at £10.60, of which only £2 was fixed cost — mainly provision of a locomotive and driver — and £8.60 was variable cost such as track maintenance, fuel and depreciation.
‘If you look at the rail figures, they are nearly all variable.
It all comes at you in marginal costs, £8 to £9 a mile.
On that basis, it is very hard to see how you can achieve productivity gains,’ he said.
Taking those figures, the rail truck haul cost for each of the 25 theoretical 22-tonne loads worked out around £168.
Together with other costs such as collection/delivery by road and transfer operations, the total for each intermodal load movement worked out at £373, a saving of just £7 on pure road haulage.
‘That is not very attractive.
We thought the difference was going to work out at around £60.
We thought the rail trunk haul would be rather less than £168’, added Mr Gisby.
Looking ahead at general prospects for UK intermodal freight transport, he said a key issue would be higher rail access priority for potential service operators.
‘When we were setting up our flagship London/Glasgow service, it took us seven months of negotiation with BR to get an acceptable time slot,’ he claimed.
A new lobby group ‘Freight on Rail’ has been formed to promote the successful transition of the Railfreight industry into the private sector.
FoR is supported by organisations representing more than 150 private sector companies.
Secretary Julia Clarke said: ‘The aim of FoR is to encourage the Government to pursue policies which will bring real benefits to private sector interests and eliminate any threat of continuing monopoly power.’
Transport Secretary John MacGregor will set out the Government's plans for railfreight privatisation at a conference on the future of railfreight after privatisation to be held at London's Marriott Hotel on January 20.
The CIT is one of the sponsors of the conference which will include presentations by James Jerram, British Rail's board member for finance; Derek Harrington, managing director of the Port of Felixstowe; and Robin Gisby of Charterail.
Full details from the  
For the second year in succession, Iveco has won the International Truck of the Year Award for its innovative and versatile ‘Eurotech’ range of trucks.
Iveco won the 1992 Award for its New CArgo range in the 6–15 tonne category.
Transport Policy Committee
The Transport Policy Committee (TPC) had its first meeting of the year in mid-January and a full report on the issues being debated will be included in the next issue of Transport.
There have been some recent changes to the membership of  the TCP.
Alan Jones and Steve Abel have stepped down from committee due to other work commitments; their involvement in the work of the TCP over recent years has been much appreciated.
We are pleased to report that Alastair Channing, Deputy Managing Director of Associated British Ports has accepted an invitation to join the TPC and was officially welcomed on the committee in November.
In June 1992 the consultants, PIEDA, were commissioned by the North West Regional Association of Local Authorities and the North West Business Leadership Team to help in the process of developing an economic strategy for the north west.
A principal objective of the strategy is to act as a bidding document for the next tranche of European Structural Funds.
Public consultation and consideration of the draft strategy was carried out in November and December and the CIT were invited to take part in this process.
The Northern Regional Officer, in association with the Chairman of the North Western and Merseyside Sections and a working group of their members, has responded to the consultation draft.
Four giant cranes have been given a lift ten miles down the River Mersey to start a new life working in the Port of Liverpool.
The floating crane Mersey Mammoth carried the dismantled Liebherr gantry cranes and rail mounted transtainers to the Coastal Container Terminal at Royal Seaforth Dock.
They will be used for Coastal Containers Line's daily Irish Sea services.
While supporting the general thrust of the strategy and its emphasis on the importance of transport to the regeneration of the regions, the CIT's response also comments on the absence to date of an effective structure that could apply any available EC funding and carry a regional  strategy forward, as well as on the need both for considerable investment in public transport and for the best use to be made of the existing transport infrastructure in serving proposed strategic development sites.
The response points out that there is little point in improving regional road links if traffic cannot move at the beginning or end of its journey — inevitably this must involve a public transport solution within urban areas, with some form of limitation on car usage.
It also asks for the inter-relationship between land use and transport to be spelt out more clearly.
TPC Membership — '93
Transport Statistics Users Group
Readers of Transport will no doubt have seen references in the magazine to seminars being held by the TSUG.
What is the TSUG?
The TSUG was formed in 1985, following an initiative by the Chartered Institute of Transport and the Statistics Users Council.
It aims are:
to identify problems in the provision and understanding of transport statistics and to discuss solutions with the responsible authorities;
to provide a forum for the exchange of views and information between users and providers;
to encourage the use of transport statistics through publicity and education.
The TSUG is run by a management committee drawn from the membership and, since its inception, has concentrated its efforts in three main areas:
the production of a Directory of Sources and Contracts in Transport Statistics.
This Directory is supplied free of charge to all UK TSUG members.
A comprehensive review of the first edition has recently been undertaken;
the production of a quarterly Newsletter containing news and reviews of matters relating to transport statistics and the TSUG membership;
the organisation of seminars addressing contemporary issues in the field of transport statistics.
How to join the TSUG
For those wishing to find out more about becoming a member of the TSUG, full details are available by contacting .
Commonwealth library
The Commonwealth Trust has been founded by the Royal Commonwealth Society and the Victoria League of Commonwealth Friendship at its premises in Northumberland Avenue.
Its purpose is to keep secure the future of the library of the Royal Commonwealth Society.
The library contains some 350,000 items very well catalogued and referenced.
It goes back more than 200 years and forms an enormous resource for those studying the history of the Commonwealth.
If there are any members who want to know more, our librarian has copies of the brochure they have produced.
They are making an appeal for £3.5 million in order that it can be rehoused at the University of Cambridge where a special facility is going to be added to the university library.
It is possible also, that some of the CIT historical material from Commonwealth sources will also go to the same place.
In the meantime, most transportants will be amused by the version of the 23rd Psalm printed below.
It was written in some exasperation by Frederick Midgeod as a result of his experiences presumably with a Model T Ford during his time in what  was the Gold Coast and is now Ghana.
Migeod's 23rd psalm
The Ford is my car I shall not want — another —
It maketh me to lie down in wet places,
It soileth my soul, It leadeth me into deep waters,
It prepareth a breakdown for me in the Presence of mine enemies.
Yea, though I run down the valleys, I am Towed up the hills.
I fear much evil while it is with me.
Its roads and engines discomfort me.
It annointeth my face with oil.
ITs tank runneth over.
Surely to goodness the damned thing won't Follow me all the days of my life,
or I shall dwell in the house of the insane for ever.
Proceedings
The first number of the Institute's Proceedings for 1993 will, as usual, contain material to interest all our members.
Four outstanding papers cover transport regulation; the future of public transport from a Merseyside perspective; EC air transport policy; and a new field for the journal — energy conservation in a road transport operation.
With the review section also covering a wide range of books, this is an issue not to be missed.
If you have not subscribed to Proceedings yet, here is a opportunity to find out for yourself what good value a subscription will bring.
In search of the little mermaid
The Western Section have arranged their 1993 study tour to Denmark.
The tour, which is open to all CIT members and their partners/families, will leave Gatwick airport on the 4th of June, returning on the 11th.
An attractive programme of visits to both transport and cultural centres has been arranged for your interest.
The basic tour cost is £525.00, which includes flights, hotels, meals and excursions.
Full details and booking forms are available from    Please book now to avoid disappointment.
Silk Tie
A new stock of blue silk ties, with a single Pegasus motif is held at HQ.
Price
15.00 each including postage to UK, payment in advance (£1.00 extra for delivery elsewhere).
IRTE 50th Anniversary
To celebrate its 50th anniversary The Institute of Road Transport Engineers is holding a transport engineering conference on 30th October — 1st November 1994 on the theme ‘Living with Technology’.
Details of the call for papers, closing date 1st April 1993, is available from 
Princess Royal to visit Western Section
HRH The Princess Royal has accepted the invitation of the Western Section to attend a seminar ‘Transport for Sustainable and Green Tourism’ organised by them and the Tourism Society.
It takes place on 26 March at Gloucester, in the redeveloped Docks.
The purpose of the Seminar is to show the importance of the choice and management of transport in developing green and sustainable tourism, to protect the natural world and our cultural heritage from the damaging effects.
Speakers will include Lisa Davies of the Association Internationale de Tourisme and representatives of the different modes of transport.
Enquiries to  ,
French look at CIT
CIT was host in November at 80 Portland Place to a party of two dozen French graduate students, led by Roland Brenin, their director, from the European School of Transport of Group Promotrans.
The School, located at Reuil, Malmaison, outside Paris, specialises in educating future leaders and managers in transport and logistics.
The students, among whom a significant proportion was female, were at the beginning of a two year full time course on subjects familiar to CIT students.
Faculty of Freight Vacancy
Attention is drawn to the advertisement for administrative support for the Faculty of Freight (see page 25).
Transport Economists Group
Transport Economist's Group meetings are held at the University of Westminster, Marylebone Road, London NW1 at 1730 for 1800 hrs.
On January 20, Prof Andrew Evans of University of London will discuss the ‘Economic evaluation of Transport Safety’.
And on february 17, Malcolm Fairhurst of London Transport will look at ‘London Transport's fares policy’.
Enquiries to  
Smart Card ‘93
The Smart Card ‘93 International Conference and Exhibition will take place at Wembence Centre from February 16–18.
Full details from Lowndes Exhibition Organisers,
Single Market comes to Dover
The Single European Market officially came into being in the early hours of Friday, January 1st 1993 in Dover.
Heralded by a deafening midnight firework display and a cacophony of ships’ hooters and truck horns, P&O's Pride of Kent, the first ferry arrival of the New Year, docked in the port's Number Two berth and the first trucks rolled off onto the otherwise virtually empty quayside.
First in the queue was John Hickman driving a British-built Leyland-Daf belonging to Hargrave of Spalding, taking first place in preference to the first vehicle of the ‘official’ convoy, a Laser Transport International German-registered MAN with local MEP Christopher Jackson accompanying driver Roy Clementson in the cab.
It later transpired that the Hargrave vehicle customs-cleared its load of Spanish refrigerated produce in Dover as it would have done on any night of the year, up till now.
Laser Transport was followed by French airfreight carrier Transports Prevost on what appeared to be a regular run from Paris to Heathrow, and then the official convoy made up of vehicles from Portugal, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Greece, Spain, Ireland and Germany.
Identifying the first piece of freight to leave Dover on 1/1/93 proved to be even more difficult.
The first sailing from the port after midnight on the New Year was taken as the official start of the Single Market; the first piece of freight on board was actually an unidentified light van and trailer — the driver no doubt blissfully unaware that he had made history — which, along with several vehicles turning round from the inbound convoy, sneaked back on board the 01.00 return sailing of the Pride of Kent while the official welcoming party was still in progress at the other end of the port.
The official honours went to Laurel Garrard driving a Daf for Marathon Haulage, part of a three-truck convoy carrying textile plant from Nottingham to Greece on the 02.30 departure of the European Endeavour to Zeebrugge.
The ‘no-paperwork’ aspects of the single market could in fact have been enjoyed by vehicles on the previous 23.59 sailing from Dover, which was scheduled to arrive in France after midnight.
Indeed, it appears that an unknown Spanish haulier on this sailing had been the first trucker to actually receive a tangible benefit from the Single Market.
It should not be forgotten that the advent of 1/1/93 is viewed as a very mixed blessing in Dover — several freight agents apparently walked out on a speech given by Christopher Jackson MEP to a local chamber of commerce meeting recently.
This particular trucker's agent had gone out of business late on New Year's Eve, one of a number of last-minute bankruptcies and mergers and a new agent would somehow have to be found to stamp his papers if Customs were to let him depart on the 20.15 sailing.
But to the Dover Harbour Board management there was an obvious solution: ‘Tell him to wait until the 23.59 — he won't need to bother with any of that business then’.
MOBILITY
Accessibility measures proposed by DPTAC report
Margaret Heraty looks at the key recommendations
The bus industry and transport education and training are two of the three major topics on which urgent recommendations are focused in the Sixth Annual Report of the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee (DPTAC), published in October 1992.
Bus Design 
The Secretary of State is urged by the Committee to advocate European legislation for the mandatory inclusion of accessibility features in future bus design.
Currently, a draft EC Directive is under discussion with a compromise with existing practices in Ec member countries, but falls short of desirable standards which are already in place in some states.
The UK Presidency of the EC offers the Government an opportunity to press for more constructive legislation.
It is estimated that there are six million people in the UK who are able to use existing designs of bus only with great difficulty or not at all.
Unless there are improvements in design and operation, the six million will have become seven million by 2026.
There are clear market opportunities for operators from these millions who could use buses if they were more accessible; there are also proven operational benefits from the lower boarding times for all passengers which low-floor buses offer.
UK local authorities should be encouraged to require that buses used on tendered routes should offer high standards of accessibility through low-floor design or equipping them with lifts or ramps.
London Transport are inviting tenders for a number of low-floor buses to equip particular routes, while the Department of Transport is supporting a scheme to demonstrate low-floor buses in operation elsewhere in the UK.
The report proposes that Section 106 grant be applied towards part funding the purchase of replacements units, at a rate of 50 per cent for low-floor buses and 30 per cent for lift-equipped buses.
This could result in an annual investment in bus fleet renewal by the public sector of £30–35 million, plus a similar amount by the bus industry.
The price differential between low-floor or lift-equipped buses and traditional high-floor models is expected to fall as the production lines of accessible models are extended.
Education and Training 
The Chartered Institute of Transport was one of the bodies consulted by DPTAC before the recommendations on education and training were drawn up.
The Committee welcomed the prevailing willingness to include transport for people with disabilities as an optional topic in most transport courses, and at major seminars such as the PTRC Summer Annual Meeting.
It recommends, however, that the subject be better integrated into mainstream transport teaching and examinations (including those of the CIT).
An elementary teaching aid (‘The DPTAC Catechism’) has been circulated to universities, colleges and professional bodies, as well as associations of and for disabled people.
This serves both as a text for use at basic levels of training, and as a spur to the development of more intensive courses, seminars and private study.
To this end, the Certificate of Professional Competence and a vocational qualification in passenger transport are also under review by DPTAC and the Department of Transport.
Other issues 
DPTAC also makes proposals for the pedestrian environment which would be of benefit to everyone, and commends the Guidelines produced by the Institution of Highways and Transportation.
The report describes current progress in improving other transport modes, and lists research and publications on relevant topics, including taxis, driving and parking, trains, ferries and airports.
DPTAC is a statutory body under the 1985 Transport Act and reports annually to the Secretary of State for Transport.
DPTAC Publications are available form .
‘There are clear market opportunities for operators'
CONGESTION Brian Oldridge responds to questions raised by Dr Tom Van Vuren in the last issue of Transport
Congestion under scrutiny
As co-inventor of the Congestion Metering system, I am pleased to answer the queries that Dr Ton Van Vuren raised in his letter in the last edition.
These points are often raised in discussion at various seminars.
1.
‘Cordon pricing could be more attractive in changing drivers’ behaviour’.
Flat rate charging by a single zone is too simplistic.
A simple zone covering a city centre only would be far too small to achieve the objective of lowering congestion in the whole city: indeed at morning peak (before 9 a.m.) city centres, including Cambridge, are often the quietest part of a city.
Multi-zoning will, therefore, be required to be effective.
Each zone in a multi-zoning system will need to be comparatively small in area because many journeys are very short in distance and all or most journeys must be charged to be fair.
A city with 10 zones and 4 times frames, could have a matrix of 40 separate prices on a single day; and then weekdays would probably be different from weekends, Bank Holidays, etc.
No city has yet tackled the practicality of achieving road use charging by flat rate multi-zoning.
Because the concept is easy to understand, it is superficially attractive to theorists yet, I suspect, almost impossible to put into practice.
It can be controversial and I envisage that fixing zone boundaries would require a procedure of public enquiry etc.
Similar to that for major improvements.
Zonal systems are rigid in operation.
However, as land use patterns change over time, zone boundaries will need changing, adding to the procedural complexity.
The more sophisticated variants on zonal systems, which change by time consumed or distance travelled, have far greater possibilities.
Both can be designed with much larger zones.
They have, like all systems, inherent problems but the concept is far more flexible in translating to a practical solution.
There are, however, ‘unit rate’ systems.
2.
‘Variable pricing will not allow the driver to know his costs before his journey.’
This is a purely theoretical stance used by economists not borne out by practical experience of how systems will work.
Many systems of payment for commodities are based on ‘unit price’ rather than lump sum and indeed it is argued that this is a much simpler system for the general public to understand because the rate is fixed for all eventualities and becomes well known.
Gas, electricity and British Telecom are obvious examples.
In the transportation field, taxis and the most basic commodity of all, fuel, are based on unit cost prices.
The only other major commodity which is based on lump sum rates regardless of quantities used, is water and the Water Companies are slowly moving over to a metered system in order to improve the discipline of use.
Having to pay for each 1/2 kilometre of congestion at a known rate will in my opinion be a greater deterrent to fighting congestion than any other form of pricing.
There is surprisingly not very much variation in the levels of congestion from day to day, except in exceptional circumstances, and the regular motorist will soon be aware of his broad order of costs.
The congestion metering system will ultimately include information to the driver on the expected journey time and costs as he approaches the city.
3.
‘The system could lead to increased rat-running’.
As part of the comprehensive transportation policy of most cities, a network or urban main roads is being defined which should cater for all movements over than access.
All sectors of a city bounded by the main road network are having traffic calming measures introduced for environmental and safety purposes which seek to make journeys through them extremely difficult.
Most cities will have these policies in place before any form of road use charging is introduced in say 5 years time.
Congestion metering only ‘trips in’ when vehicles are physically unable to act other than following the behaviour of the queue itself.
As soon as the queue dissipates, travel patterns will be above the threshold and will not be charged.
Therefore any individual stops which will be required at single pelican crossings etc., will have no effect on charging.
Finally, is road works are causing a serious problem, then police cars can be issued with mobile beacons which can switch off that particular queue.
However, within 5 years the new street works act should be operating properly which means that the planning and execution of all public utilities works will have far less effect on peak hour travel and congestion except for unplanned emergencies.
One of the major benefits of congestion metering is its simplicity.
The unit rate of charge is the only piece of information that the motorist needs to know; there are no vehicle zones, time areas or matrix of payments, as mentioned in the earlier paragraph on zonal pricing, which would prove to be extremely complex for the motorist to understand.
It can be seen that when the theory of road use charging, which has been spoken of exhaustively over the last few years, is translated into practical application, many problems will arise.
Nothing in life is perfect.
But I am sure that a dynamic system which is flexible enough to respond to congestion as and when it occurs and can cope over time with any land use intensity changes without modification, will be more acceptable to the travelling public than rigid systems.
The front runners will, therefore, be zones charges by distance or time and congestion metering.
CONSULTANCY
Calculating the rail fare
The Government has seriously miscalculated the effect of privatisation on through rail fares and the national timetable, according to a report produced by ‘Platform’ an 80-member organisation set up to represent users' needs.
Under the authorship of one of the Institute's latest recruits, public transport travel consultant Barry S. Doe MCIT, ‘Tickets, Trains and Timetables: The Impact of Privatisation on the Rail Network’ warns that the country is in danger of ending up with an airline style ticketing system in which passengers wishing to travel outwards on one franchisee's train but return home on another's may have to pay a supplement up to the value of the full ‘standard’fare.
The other alternative is that through-fare reduced rate tickets will have to be discarded — passengers wishing to travel on saver-type tickets would have to re-book at franchise boundaries.
Not only has the Government failed to appreciate the importance of the fare mechanisms and allocated systems such as BR's Business Systems division in dealing with complexities of out-and-back fares on journeys where a multiplicity of different routings are available.
It seems to ignore the way in which existing fares are calculated' including as they do an element of ‘taper’ to avoid long journeys made up of several different sectors ‘bolted together’from becoming too high: again something which would be difficult to replicate in a situation where the railways were operated by numerous regional franchises.
Nor is there any mention of the problems which would arise if (as seems likely) different franchisees decided to offer different levels of discount on their ‘discount rate’ tickets.
The government also appears to be under the misapprehension that it is not at present possible to arrive at any one BR station and demand a ticket (full fare, saver or railcard-discounted) to any other on the network.
Moreover, the legislators are evidently unaware that, at present, about 40 per cent of all journeys are both on reduced rate tickets and also cross the boundaries of BR's existing profit centres, the latter being likely to correspond to any future franchises boundaries.
It is this type of journey which will give any post-privatisation revenue-allocation system most trouble, Mr Doe affirms.
Experience in the bus industry has shown that it is in practice very difficult to persuade different operators to reach agreement on cross-validity of discount fares: ‘only one in four bus operators now accept each others’ tickets.’
Railcards, which currently give discounts off standard and reduced-rate fares to the young, the old and families — at least nationally accepted versions could also share the same fate, as could the combined rail-bus-underground Travel card in London.
Mr Doe insists that he is no opponent of privatisation as such and has no political axe to grind: ‘I'm not concerned who owns BR as such: there could be advantages in taking BR out of the public sector in terms of investment rules’, he said.
But he would be much happier with a National Express type privatisation in which a number of franchisees operate and market a uniform system with nationally available fares and information.
‘BR has spent a great deal of time and money building up nationally known brand names and images.
We shouldn't throw this away in favour of a franchise system.’
So far, there has been little official government reaction to the report.
Roger Freeman, described the report as ‘over pessimistic’ in a private letter.
However, Mr Doe claims that the reply from the Minister has vindicated him in one of his other chief concerns, the future of the national rail timetable.
While essential if the travelling public are to have reliable information about all services in all parts of the country, Mr Freeman's reply reveals that ‘there would be no obligation on operators to participate in producing a single national timetable.’
LETTERS
Three cheers
Sir , Three times three cheers for your achievement with the latest issue of Transport.
Today, little more than a week after the event, I received my copy, to find not only a short account of things said by the Secretary of State at our Anniversary Luncheon, but also our Chairman's considered response.
Your speed in reporting, printing and distribution is highly commendable.
Your identifying the most contentious point at issue was commendable.
But even more commendable was the publication of Sir Alastair's contrary view and of his welcome demand that we ‘bring this discussion out of the closet’.
For too long have many eminent members of the Institute been shy about such debate, hiding behind the feeble argument that it must respect the conflicting views of different modes of transport.
Certainly such conflicting views can be found.
But in my own brief experience of compiling papers on behalf of the institute I found far more in common than in conflict.
The real conflict which most of all inhibited our work was the conflict between the professional and the politician; between sensible transport management in the public interest and personal discretion.
It was as if we were thought of as an extension of a civil service in which the expression of contentious opinions would be frowned upon and whistle blowing seen as a crime.
If Sir Alastair has broken this spell, as I most sincerely hope he has, the Chartered Institute may, after more than three quarters of a century ‘provide a source of authoritative views on transport for communication to Government and the community’; just as its founders intended.
The task ahead
Sir , Your latest leader confirms that in a world of change some things never change.
Is it really as difficult for our Institute to discharge its primary task ‘to promote the study and advancement of the science and art of transport in all its branches’?
If, 73 years after its foundation, we have to start from basics, one wonders if we are ever going to get there.
The creation of the Single European Market is only one aspect of worldwide economic activity in which the role and nature of the Transport Sector must be properly understood.
That there exists considerable ignorance, especially within governments, is abundantly clear, if only illustrated by the fear of the UK Government of Multimodal Planning.
How can any viable investment decision be made, in any field, without a strategic plan made within the framework of a policy?
The comments of the Secretary of State indicate only too clearly the delicacy of the task, for which nevertheless I believe our Institute is eminently suited.
Eleven years ago I wrote to the then President of our Institute making the case for expanding the role of the Institute.
While I was then involved with technical assistance to LDCs, I was responding to what I believed was a window of opportunity for our Institute.
It seems not much has happened in that period.
And yet the know-how is there.
Like any viable policy, objectives without an implemental strategy are impotent.
So why does the Institute not get on with its major responsibility?
The swords are drawn
Sir , So, the swords are drawn with the Government at long last, now that you have a UK Chairman whose speech at this inauguration laid it firmly on the line, that what this country needs is a transport policy to serve commerce and social preference.
He is prepared to teach, lobby and lecture ‘those who refuse to see that transport is a basic element of modern society’.
But he will not succeed because you are not a force which Government recognise, despite your having the best transport brains and experience in the world among your members.
Your Transport Policy Committee presumably has some thoughts on rail privatisation which are prevented from being published until the House of Commons Transport Select Committee has published its own evidence.
This pussyfooting has to stop if you are going to get anywhere at all with Sir Alastair's excellent prospectus for the next 12 months.
Yours members should already be aware of the Committee's recommendations so that they too can lobby MPs and Government contracts, in advance of the Select Committee's proceedings.
NORTH WEST Philip Hastings looks at the growth of air links to the region while, on page 17, Ian Yearsley examines the development of public transport.
Building for the future
Manchester Airport, the ‘Heathrow of the North’ is already well ahead of its London rival in one important respect — direct connection to the national rail system in time for this year's summer season.
The northern gateway, eight miles south of Manchester city centre is already ranked eighteenth in the worlds in passenger terms and plans to open a second international terminal in March.
But a come for an eventual second runway has whipped up the inevitable storm of controversy among local residents.
Manchester's new £570 million Terminal 2 will be used by both scheduled airlines and leading charter carriers.
Likely users in the former category include Delta Airlines, American Airlines, Air Canada, Cathay Pacific, Singapore Airlines, Quantas and South African Airways.
The latter group will probably include Britannia Airways, Air 2000, Nationair, Air Transat, Canada 3000 and American Transair.
Among the new terminal's facilities are 14 additional aircraft parking stands, 54 more check-in desks, nine extra restaurants and bars, extensive retail shopping areas and lifts serving all airbridges.
Road access will be via a purpose-built junction on the M56 airport link road.
Initially, the terminal will be able to handle up to six million passengers a year, boosting the airport's overall annual capacity to 17.5 million.
A phase two Terminal 2 development planned for 1997/98 will increase that total capacity by another six million passengers a year.
The Airport's passenger traffic business should receive a further substantial boost with the scheduled opening on May 17 when the new rail link opens.
There will be regular electric trains from Manchester's main Piccadilly station and other diesel operated express services from other key northern centres such as Leeds, York, Scarborough, Huddersfield, Bolton, Preston, and Blackpool.
Altogether the new £28 million rail link is expected to carry over 1.5 million passengers a year.
Cheshire County Council is currently considering whether to contribute to a southbound spur to the Manchester-Crewe via Styal line — total cost estimated at £5 million — which would give direct access to the airport from the south of the country, as well as the Midlands, Chester and North Wales.
The next major development at the airport looks increasingly likely to involve the construction of a second runway, although the need to take into account environmental factors and possible objections from some bodies could make the planning process a fairly drawn out affair.
The airport authority board recently authorised the examination of a new area of search for the project.
Although initial studies focused on three area, all of them parallel to the existing runway, consideration is now being given to a non-parallel alignment.
This would involve a second runway stretching roughly westwards past the village of Ashley making a shallow ‘V’ with the south-west tip of the existing runway.
Although involving fewer homes than the parallel options, stiff opposition from local residents and Manchester City Council can still be expected, particularly as the ‘V option’ would extend the airport's territory deep into the Cheshire commuter heartland — even though the new scheme appears to be the airport management's preferred option.
The continuing development of facilities at Manchester Airport is necessary to keep pace with passenger figures which, apart from the Gulf War, have shown an inexorable upward trend over the last decade.
The total number of passengers in fact doubled between 1982 and 1992 from just under five million to ten million.
The total for 1992 will be around 12.5 million and for the year 2000 the airport authority is projecting some 22 million.
Freight and mail traffic, too, has soared, from 27,000 tonnes in 1982 to over 73,000 tonnes in 1991.
Latest traffic figures available at the time of writing showed that the airport had its busiest October on record.
Scheduled and charter passenger throughout rose by five per cent and 11 per cent respectively to over 260,000 and 675,000.
And freight traffic exports jumped by 13 per cent to 4,000 tonnes and imports were up by over 20 per cent, giving an overall freight increase for the month of 17 per cent .
‘In view of the current economic position, that performance is exceedingly encouraging.
The commencement of a daily Qantas service to Australia via the Far East and Gulf Air's start on the Abu Dhabi routes bodes well for the future,’ said Manchester Airport chief executive, Gil Thompson.
The recently-started daily Qantas service referred to by Thompson now departs Manchester at 10.20 hours, arriving in Sydney 23 hours and 25 minutes later.
Operated via London, Heathrow and Bangkok, Thailand, it makes Manchester only the second city in Europe to have a daily direct service to Australia.
The new Gulf Air service departs Manchester twice a week, Wednesdays and Sundays, for Abu Dhabi, via Frankfurt, Germany.
Development of these services has helped to consolidate Manchester's position as the only non-London airport in the UK to have direct airline service links with five continents, with longhaul flights to North America, Middle East, Far East, Africa and Australia, as well as regional services to Continental Europe.
Manchester has established a particularly strong role in the North American market over the last few years, with scheduled flights to New York JFK (American Airlines and British Airways), Chicago (American) and Atlanta (Delta).
Next development in that context involves the scheduled start on March 28 of a scheduled BA service to Los Angeles.
The five times a week non-stop service will depart Manchester at 10.00 hours, arriving in Los Angeles at 1320 hours.
Within Europe Manchester now claims to have direct airline services to nearly every major Wester European city.
Domestically, there are eleven shuttle flights a day to London Heathrow and six a day to London Gatwick, plus daily services of varying frequencies to Belfast, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Newcastle.
Continuing expansion of those services both supports and is reinforced by the airports authority's ‘Manchester Connects’ policy which promotes Manchester as an international hub.
‘The hub initiative is continuing to generate high yield traffic and the growing number of transfer passengers in October illustrates the growing popularity of Manchester as a key connecting point, claimed Thompson.
Meanwhile, much smaller North West neighbour Liverpool is looking to continue building up domestic and regional aviation-related business following its becoming the first local authority-owned airport to transfer from the public to private sector when it was bought by British Aerospace in 1990.
Naturally, it has rather more modest ambitions — at least for the time being.
‘In the short term, we will continue to pursue our aims to be one of the best regional airports in the country’, said airport director and general manager Rob Hill.
‘But Liverpool Airport has far greater potential than is often perceived  and we have a strong underlying confidence for the future.’
In that context, the airport company last year acquired nearly 90 acres of perimeter land to help with its aim of establishing the airport as a new centre for regional aviation-related business.
A number of dedicated development areas have been outlined for further market and feasibility studies, including freight warehousing, light aviation facilities, hotel and office accommodation, a corporate and business jet centre and aircraft maintenance units.
Main scheduled passenger service operators at Liverpool are Manx Airlines and Ryanair, with regular flights to Dublin, Belfast, the Isle of Mann and Knock.
And Jersey-based airline Air Cobiere last year launched a twice-daily scheduled service between Liverpool and the Channel Islands.
But the most positive news is that scheduled services to London are to restart in the Spring, following British Midland's suspension of its Heathrow service in early 1991.
Meanwhile, Liverpool is steadily attracting more passenger charter flight operations, with Airtours the latest to announce new holiday flights from there during 1993.
The airport has also established a niche in the express freight/mail market, being used as a hub and distribution centre by TNT Express Worldwide and Royal Mail.
TNT, which operates twice nightly British Aerospace 146-QT jet freighter flights — and some times a third aircraft — to and from its European air hub at Cologne, Germany, in fact currently claims to be experiencing a ‘substantial increase’ in traffic at Liverpool.
According to TNT station manager Rhys Roberts, the number of outbound consignments in the latter half of 1992 were up to 70 per cent on the same months in 1991, with inbound traffic up by 30 per cent.
Latest figures show that the airport had its busiest October on record
The next major development is likely to involve a second runway
Liverpool is steadily attracting more passengers
New ideas in public transport
Ian Yearsley looks at developments in passenger services
The North West represents a microcosm of many of the present opportunities and problems for public passenger transport in Great Britain.
For not only does it contain one of the largest conurbations outside London, but it also includes some thinly populated territory as well as smaller towns and rural districts.
Its main public transport lines of communication north and south, British Rail's West Coast main line and the M6 motorway carrying many coach services, run to the left of centre of the region missing most of the main centres of population which are in consequence served by branches.
And the main conurbation formed by Greater Manchester and Merseyside follows roughly the line of the Irwell and Mersey valleys across the southern end of Lancashire but extending well into the Cheshire plain.
In the urban areas particularly, public transport is part of the equation in which land-use and the growing costs of congestion are important elements.
CIT's honourary president the Princess Royal said at Light Rail 91 in Manchester that public transport had to be seen as an improvement not just as an alternative to car use.
Much publicity has surrounded the opening of Manchester's Metrolink light rail system, linking two former BR suburban lines with a street tramway through the city centre.
Its construction formed part of an overall traffic management programme aimed at getting through traffic flows out of the city centre.
In 1985, 150,000 vehicles a day entered the city centre and, of these, 53,000 were passing to destinations beyond.
The traffic management strategy, including completion of the inner ring road, is aimed at holding the total entering the centre down to 150,000 — despite forecasts of 210,000 by the year 2000.
With all the problems of section 56 funding, and the learning curves involved in the Government — required design-built-and-operate contract, as well as being the first new street tramway built in Britain since 1949, Metrolink has nevertheless provided a focus and showcase for the large number of light rail schemes at present being developed.
The 30.8km system replaces two lines which together carried 7.5 million passengers and expects to increase patronage to 10.5 million by next year.
But Greater Manchester also supports 157 route miles (253 route km) of BR line with 101 stations.
For 1992–3 it has budgeted revenue support of £30.2 million and capital investment of £8 million.
The opening of the first line of Metrolink relieved pressure on the Deansgate-Piccadilly link used by BR Regional Railways North West to East Anglia services as well as local services.
From May 1993, it will also carry trains to Manchester airport using a link jointly funded by BR Regional Railways and Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive.
Rail developments also form part of Manchester's bid to host the 27th Olympic Games.
Greater Manchester's area extends from Tameside in the east to Wigan in the west, and here it borders on Merseyside, which takes in the metropolitan districts of Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral.
The rail network supported by the PTE is smaller than in Manchester  with 88 route miles (142 route km) and 74 stations, but it is more intensively used and largely electrified.
Electrification is being extended beyond the PTE boundary to Chester, due to open in October 1993 and Ellesmere Port in May 1994.
Regional Railways, Cheshire County Council and the European Regional Development Fund are all contributing along with the PTE, to the £10 million cost.
But here, and in the area as a whole, a great deal of uncertainty is created by the Government's proposal to privatise BR.
The West Coast main line was electrified in the 1960s and much rolling stock is 15 to 20 years old.
A local authority delegation recently urged public transport minister Roger Freeman to initiate a full feasibility study into creating a high speed line alongside the West Coast line as part of the European network.
Proposals are emerging once again for electrification of the line between Manchester and Preston.
This is now a missing link in the electrification: completing it would enable Birmingham-Scotland Intercity trains to be electric-hauled throughout and the Manchester Airport — Preston Service would also be electric.
Extension of electrification to Blackpool would make it economic for BR to restore the London — Blackpool Intercity link, withdrawn in 1992 because of the cost of changing traction at Preston.
Lancashire has developed plans to open several stations which BR cannot resource but which would exceed 8 per cent return on capital.
Some would give 25 or even 40 per cent.
The country will, in effect, act as a banker, paying for new stations and being paid off from revenue over about three years.
There is some concern that such schemes could be killed off by privatisation.
Lancashire has also been working with BR to reopen the Blackburn Clitheroe Line in 1994.
Along with GMPTE it is involved in the Yrans-Pennine rail study, a project bringing together four shire counties and four PTEs.
The country's budget of £4 million for bus services in 1993–4 is exceeded by its education services budget of £5.5 million used partly for local bus service contracts and partly for purchasing seats on commercially run buses.
At present, six to eight tenders are made for each bus contract but this element of competition may be reduced or disappear if the eight municipal companies are sold to one or other of the large bus companies.
Sale of the Lancashire bus company could result in one major group dominating bus services from Lancashire right through Cumbria to the Scottish border.
Among the 62 bus proposals given Government approval in December are a real-time passenger information system in Blackburn and a park-and-ride at Chester.
Extensive bus lane and priority traffic signalling is approved for Manchester.
In both the PTE areas, the former PTE bus undertakings have had to face extensive competition since deregulation.
But the pattern is different in the two large cities.
In Manchester, Greater Manchester Buses has faced competition from up to 60 operators and, at present, 40 take part in the PTE concessionary fares scheme.
GM Buses, which is also a shareholder in Manchester Metrolink, is now required by the Government to split into three.
GMPTE is now launching a pilot project in Bolton for a smartcard based fare scheme which is designed to be expanded as an ‘electronic — purse’ so that the cards can also be used for telephones, car parks, taxis and leisure facilities.
It will also use contactless smartcards to speed boarding and will provide accurate data for revenue allocation between operators.
And it will generate extra revenue from the extra uses.
Merseyside in Liverpool has faced competition from one large and several medium-sized operators including fleets of new as well as second-hand vehicles.
The PTE area covers both sides of the Mersey and the ferry services, declining in traditional form, have been reorganised to operate as a circular tourist service calling in turn at Liverpool, Seacombe and Birkenhead Woodside.
At Woodside a ‘Heritage’ tramway is being built with two cars newly built to an old design by Hong Kong tramways and now being tested in Blackpool, on the one example of a street tramway of the old generation to survive into the light rail era.
Despite all the problems, public transport in the North West has plenty of ideas to offer.
PORTS Peter Turnbull examines the impact of the abolition of the National Dock Labour Scheme.
Ports face up to competitive pressures
In July 1989 the Conservative Government of Margaret Thatcher abolished the National Dock Labour Scheme which was first introduced in 1947.
As far as the Government was concerned industry-wide regulation of employment, recruitment, discipline, dismissal and the like was no longer compatible with a modern transport industry.
The scheme was a ‘damaging anachronism that had outlived the circumstances of its birth.’
Government economic policy during the 1980s consistently extolled the virtues of competition and declared the superiority of private over nationalised or state regulated industries.
The repeal of the scheme was therefore intended, first and foremost to increase competition in the industry, both between scheme ports themselves and between scheme and non-scheme ports such as Felixstowe and Dover.
It was anticipated that port performance would improve as a result of more intense competition and that jobs would be created (upwards of 50,000) as a result of investment, redevelopment and rejuvenation of ailing dockland areas.
As for the industry's registered dock labour force, the Government made provision for a three year redundancy scheme, jointly financed by the Government and the employer of any dockers who were ‘surplus to requirements’.
The Government's first priority, to increase competition in the industry has certainly been realised.
In a survey of more than 200 port operators (which collectively account for over 70 per cent of all UK traffic movement) 59 per cent of respondents reported an increase in competition since July 1989 (1).
The was particularly marked among former scheme port operators, where 67 per cent reported more intense competition.
Not surprisingly, customer demands for lower charges and improved service were cited as the major source of competitive pressure in the industry (reported by over 55 per cent of all operators).
As cost was the most important consideration of port users when determining port of call and as labour costs typically account for 60 to 70 per cent of operating costs, employers have sought both to reduce the size of their workforces and improve the utilisation of the labour that remains.
Of a pre-abolition of more than 9,300 registered dockers, some 70 per cent have been declared redundant under the Dock Labour Compensation Scheme at a cost to the British Tax payer of about £150 million (2).
Between 1989 and 1991, total employment in the port transport industry fell by over 9,000 (22 per cent) from 40,674 to 31,667.
Contrary to Government and employer predictions, then the abolition of the scheme has not yet created a net increase in employment (although one in five former scheme port operators envisaged recruitment in 1992 along with 37 per cent of former non-scheme operators).
The failure of deregulation to create new jobs to date, is no doubt attributable in a large part to the current economic recession.
It has also been affected by the pattern of investment in the industry.
Investment is certainly widespread but this has always been a feature of the docks.
In fact, there are now more companies with no plans for future investment (52 companies) than companies that had not made any investment over the previous three years (43).
More importantly, much of the investment that is taking place simply replicates facilities at other ports and adds to excess capacity in the industry.
The result therefore is a zero-sum rather than a positive-sum outcome.
Given the scale of redundancies, the question that arises is ‘Who is performing dock work?’
The answer, quite simply, is that other port employees are now allocated to dock work, representing a significant change to both working practices and labour utilisation.
Flexible working is now ubiquitous — 88 per cent of all operators report flexibility within grades and over 80 per cent across grades.
Flexible working arrangements allow operators to meet fluctuating labour requirements as does more flexible hours such as weekend working, new shift arrangements or greater use of overtime (reported 12 to 29 per cent of former scheme port operators).
If labour requirements cannot be met through the more efficient or intensive use of the existing labour force, a great many employers (almost half) use temporary or casual labour including former registered dockers made redundant under the Dock Labour Compensation Scheme.
Most operators have therefore reduced their labour force to a core of general port operatives who are required to perform a wide variety of tasks, supplemented as and when needed by a periphery of temporary, casual or contract labour.
Ex-registered dockers are a particularly useful force of labour as they know the work and do not require training or close supervision — and they are only paid when work is available.
Some dockers have even used their redundancy pay to set up their own stevedoring companies which invariably contract their labour to larger companies or the relevant port authorities on a short-term, but ongoing, basis.
The dock worker cooperative at Southampton has proved particularly successful although coops at Barry, Greenock and Newport have found life tough in the more competitive environment of the 1990s.
The effect of these changes on port performance is difficult to determine — at least at the aggregate level.
There is no doubt that many individual operators have been able to reduce costs, shorten turnround times, raise productivity and improve the quality of service they offer.
In fact 60 to 80 per cent of all former scheme port operators report improved performance in these areas, especially cost.
Likewise some former scheme ports, most notably Hull, have won back traffic lost to non-scheme ports during the 1970s and 1980s.
But the overall share of UK traffic passing through scheme, as opposed to non-scheme, ports has remained fairly stable.
Essentially former scheme ports are holding their own (albeit in a declining market) rather than attracting trade from their non-scheme competitors.
Future trends are equally difficult to predict.
Privatisation of the former trust ports will no doubt generate a number of substantial port development projects but there is already over-capacity in the industry.
The opening of the Channel Tunnel is more likely to have a detrimental effect on former non-scheme operators as they are largely concentrated in the South East corner of Britain.
However, most operators (63 per cent) believe the Tunnel will have little or no effect on their business.
Conversely, the Single European Market could benefit operators in the South East but a great many operators are uncertain (31 per cent) or indifferent (36 per cent ) to the Single Market, believing that it will have no effect.
In sum, all of these developments add up to more intense competition for the foreseeable future.
Of more immediate concern are some of the labour problems created by deregulation.
While strikes might be a thing of the past, at least in most ports, there has been a marked increase in accidents and sickness rates reported by several operators.
Unfortunately, systematic, industry-side data is now a thing of the past for the port industry following the demise of the National Dock Labour Board and the National Association of Port Employers, so it is impossible to determine whether this is a specific or general phenomenon.
Nonetheless, increase accident and a number of well-publicised fatalities where the pressure of work was cited as a contributory factor in the accident causing death must give cause for concern.
The pressure on operators to cut costs (labour costs in particular) could encourage some operators to cut corners.
Stricter regulation of health and safety standards is called for.
Until economic growth returns, there would appear to be little respite for the industry's labour force.
(1) These and other figures are taken from a report published by the Cardiff Business School entitled ‘Continuity and Change in the British Port Transport Industry (1991)’ by P Turnbull and S. Weston (price £25).
(2) Committee of Public Accounts (1991)‘Dock Labour Compensation Scheme’ HC 196, HMSO.
BOOKS
Managing People
The title of this work suggests that it is an essay in the sociology of transport, a subject that has crept into some degree and other courses at University level.
On the contrary, it is a short, but comprehensive introduction to personnel work in both the haulage and road passenger sides of the industry.
It can not, of course, cover the full legal and statutory framework in 200 pages, especially since it includes a section on the structure of the industry, an analysis of the workforce and also a section on organisation patterns, together with a chapter on ‘Managing Communication’ which includes homilies on ‘listening’, ‘writing skills’, and (inevitably)‘motivation’and ‘leadership’.
The coverage of industrial relations, merger consequences, redundancies, equal opportunity legislation, and so on is designed to make the reader aware of issues, and the implications of modern legislation, rather than to act as a manual of practice or standard work of reference.
That being so, one must ask at what level of readership the book is directed.
It would seem to be middle sized undertaking, since the very large business will employ personnel managers and legal experts who need no introduction to the subject, while the smaller operator (the book quotes the average number of goods vehicles per operator's licence as no more than three trucks) is normally too concerned with driving by the seat of his pants while looking over his shoulder at legal requirements (one may envisage!) to worry unduly about the skills of communication or the restrictions on picketing flowing from decisions of the courts as well as statute in the event of a major dispute.
With this proviso, the book can be recommended as readable and illustrated with several case-studies to reinforce the authors' points.
It is perhaps more of a shopping list than a Bible, but that makes it comprehensive and intimidating, with a refreshing freedom from jargon.
Prospects of travel
Its 1992 reports sets out to give a view of the prospects for travel and tourism on a global basis.
followed by 22 personal insights including ones by Sir John Egan and Sir Colin Marshall.
The bulk of the Report is the comprehensive business statistics of the industry on a world and regional basis covering financial, investment and employment factors.
It does not give figures for performance by transport organisations.
The Report discusses the problems of presenting statistics from many sources and how this has been tackled.
It thus becomes a major provider of information on the industry as a whole, so that the analyst has much material for study.
Haulage in Eastern Europe
This is a study undertaken by Michael Roe of the University of Plymouth following recognition in commercial circles in Western Europe that Eastern European states were operating unfair practices in the administration, a particular concern of EC member states of the effects on their own hauliers.
The book examines the haulage operations of the European members of the CMEA (the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) including Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Poland, Romania and Hungary.
There is an overall view of international haulage in Europe, a detailed analysis of the trade between the CMEA states and the EC, and the legislative and commercial framework within which this trade is undertaken.
For Bulgaria, Czechoslavakia, Hungary and Poland the author provides an overall summary of each country's economy and a detailed picture of the various national transport undertakings operating international services to and from these countries.
This includes operators familiar on UK and continental roads such as CSAD of Czechoslavakia and Hungarocamion and reveals that SoMat of Bulgaria, operating in the region of 3,800 HGVs, is the largest trucking company in the world.
The book relates to 1990, before the re-unification of Germany and naturally, with the pace of major changes taking place economically and politically, is out of date in some respects.
However, as a study into a hitherto relatively unexplored area of commercial activity it is highly recommended to those involved in the sale of goods vehicles, in international — and domestic (as restrictions on cabotage are removed!)— transport and in commerce with the CMEA countries.
For students preparing for examinations in road transport it provides a wealth of detail on trades in general and the operators in particular and the rationale behind the services that they provide.
Edinburgh's transport
Railway histories are innumerable and road passenger transport histories are by no means rare.
Mr Hunter's book is unusual in that this is the first volume of the history of a passenger transport network.
It concerns itself, not only with the operators but also very much with the role of the local authorities — in this case, principally those of Edinburgh and Leith.
Those who know something of the Edinburgh area will find the account fascinating.
There are tables and anecdotes to satisfy the enthusiast (the list of vehicles may be seen by some as excessive) and also lessons for the contemporary practitioner.
The early pages underline the importance of mineral movement in creating the early railway and subsequently underpinning a network of local passenger train services.
This, of course, is an issue very much apparent in the fortunes of local railway lines at the present day.
The railway chapters, however tend to be brief, in deference to the available published alternatives, the volume heavily weighted towards the descriptions of the tramway systems in their horse-drawn, cable and electric versions.
Few may realise that Edinburgh's cable tramways were once the most extensive such system in Europe.
The detailed descriptions of the cable working, might have been helped by diagrams.
Nevertheless, the problems of  this ultimate in fixed track systems are particularly well documented.
Difficulties created by local authority boundaries, especially where policies differ sharply and where these divide built up areas are well described.
The frustrations arising will be recognised by those engaged upon the contemporary scene, even if present day issues are less picturesque.
It is also interesting to reflect upon the restraints applies by the City of Edinburgh in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in order to protect its environment.
Contrast this to the unrestrained private vehicle access to the City today.
Motor buses occupy a relatively minor role in the period covered by this volume.
They are, however by no means neglected and give an interesting insight into the foundations of the Scottish Motor Traction Company.
Essentially, this is relaxing rather than educational reading.
It is, nonetheless a valuable commentary on transport in the scene of social history.
People
FTA chief to retire
Gerry Turvey is to retire as director general of the Freight Transport Association in October 11, his 59th birthday.
He joined the Traders Road Transport Association, the predecessor body of the FTA, in April 1960.
He was promoted to secretary in 1968 becoming deputy director general in 1974.
He director general in 1984.
Mr Turvey was a member of the Council of CIT between 1987 and 1990.
He was awarded the CBE in the 1991 Birthday Honours and won the 1992 ‘Motor Transport’ Special Award for his outstanding contribution to the road transport industry.
Fellow gains Masters degree
Geoffrey Price FCIT has been awarded an MSc in Transport and Distribution from the University of Salford.
His thesis looked at the economic and environmental arguments over 40 and 44 tonne lorries.
OBITUARY
Condolences are offered to the families of the following deceased members:
TRANSAID IN ACTION
1992 has seen the project list rise to number 60 and the 12 new projects have been varied and interesting.
The severe drought conditions of Southern Africa have dominated the scene and account for 4 of this year's work.
The project described below are, where appropriate, shown in country alphabetical order.
WORLDWIDE
Project number 1 on the first list, which derived from the first reconnaissance, was to ‘Develop a worldwide communications system’ For various reasons the project was not taken forward but Save The Children have continued to take the view that good communications, within the Field and between Field and HQ, is of the highest priority.
Research is now to be undertaken to determine an appropriate communications strategy for the Fund and this research will take place in 1993.
Over the five years of TRANSAID's operations the most recurring need has been to provide advice on transport management and control.
Indeed, if anything, the incidence of this need is on the increase.
To assist with the addressing of this problem and to get some consistency into the approach it is intended to bring together the experience gained, so far, in the form of small manuals and guidelines.
The TRANSAID team will write the outline documents and then get a professional writer to produce the final manual.
AFRICA
The management of S.C.F.'s not inconsiderable fleet of vehicles is of relatively high importance in considering the financial and physical performance of the Funds's activities in Africa.
Some 20 per cent of the Field Budgets is concerned with transport and large amounts of capital are spent on vehicle purchase, spares etc.
Following initial discussions with T.N.T.
is was decided to purchase computer software, from a specialist house, which would enable Field Directors to have quite detailed inventory and operational performance data regarding the fleets under their control.
The package has been tested in a number of Fields and is now being extended to the remaining African locations.
Ghana
The major project referred to in last years report was to improve the organisation and performance of the Governments Health Service transport.
The implementation stage of this project was initiated by the visit to Ghana, this year, of TRANSAID's Chairman Geoff Myers.
The appointment of a transport adviser has now been made and she is preparing to leave for Accra at the time of writing this report.
Ethiopia
The Joint Transport Operation (with Oxfam) which was formerly located in Desse, capital of the region of Walo in the north of the country, was relocated in Addis Ababba during the latter stages of the civil war.
Recent proposals that S.C.F. should take responsibility for fleets belonging to other NGO's in Ethiopia have caused The Fund to seek TRANSAID's help in examining the needs of the organisation including the development of a workshop in the Capital.
Lesotho
The introduction and development of the use of motorcycles for health workers has proved to be very successful and has illustrated that the effectiveness of health work can be improved.
The experience gained here and in other countries is now being written up in the form of guide lines for future motorcycle users.
Malawi
TRANSAID have assisted The Fund in the selection of a transport operations manager and a suitable expert in commodity tracking to assist Jim Lawrence, S.C.F.'s transport coordinator, in managing the emergency relief operation in that country.
Southern Africa
The severe drought, unprecedented in this country, in Southern Africa has created the need for a variety of logistics and distribution resources.
Eric Schumacher, newly appointed as TRANSAID director, has visited Lesotho and Mozambique and thence to South Africa to meet representatives of the Road Transport Federation, with whom S.C.F. are now dealing to locate possible resources to assist in the present emergency.
Sudan
The review of SCF's emergency food distribution in Darfur was followed up, during the year, by supporting SCF's management with a transport specialist.
This enabled appropriate control and management systems to be installed and also, later in the year, the appointment of a replacement manager.
Zanzibar
As in Ghana a review of arrangements for transport and its management in the Health Department was carried out earlier this year.
The Health Department has now asked for a project proposal to be prepared as a basis for providing assistance to introduce the proposed changes during the year ahead.
Zimbabwe
As a result of the severe drought in Southern Africa, the Department of Social Welfare in Zimbabwe has requested help to review arrangements for emergency food distribution.
Through TRANSAID staff were provided by TNT to report on the position.
With the help of the team while they were in Africa, a Transport Manager (employed by the Government of Zimbabwe) was selected as part of this project and has now been followed up by the appointment of a transport adviser (employed by SCF) to provide ongoing advice and guidance in implementing the proposed arrangements.
ANNUAL REPORT 1992
CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
1992 has revealed yet again that there is no shortage of transport problems to be tackled in providing support and aid to developing countries.
The year has seen another 12 projects added to the active list bringing the total considered to 60 since TRANSAID was launched in early 1988.
The programme has reflected the needs arising from the many relief projects in Africa as well as the efforts being made to help improve the management of transport in health and other programmes.
The small voluntary TRANSAID team has been strengthened this year by the addition of Eric Schumacher, formerly a senior manager with I.C.I. Eric brings with him extensive general management and transport experience, which is already proving to be valuable.
As always the supporting organisations have been ready to help and thankfully TRANSAID continues to exist because of the support.
T.N.T.
are worthy of special mention since, during the last year, they have provided assistance in several areas, not the least in the field of relief food and distribution.
This in no way is meant to lessen the significance and importance of help which we have received from our other supporters which is very much appreciated.
I believe the Chartered Institute of Transport, who launched TRANSAID, and all the sponsors can be well satisfied in the knowledge that the concept continues to fulfil a very valuable role in support of S.C.F. However it is clear that the need for help and guidance with transport management and operations in needy countries is much wider than that which can or should be tackled by S.C.F. Whether this has or should have any implications for the future status and role of TRANSAID is certainly an issue we shall be addressing with our parties as we enter our sixth year.
BESO WORKING WITH TRANSAID
BESO's primary role is sending experienced men and women to private enterprise and public sector organisations to help them to become more effective and efficient.
This necessarily entails longer term assistance in comparatively stable situations.
We therefore particularly value our partnership with SCF through TRANSAID since it enables BESO to make a direct contribution to Britain's relief efforts in Africa.
When expertise is not available from the transport industry, BESO can draw on its register of 2,600 volunteer advisers which includes a strong cadre of transportation experts.
In all assignments BESO meets the cost of airfares and other external expenditure.
1992 has been another year of fruitful cooperation with TRANSAID.
Six assignments have been performed under the TRANSAID's auspices during the year, including three involving drought relief work in Southern Africa.
In this connection BESO was able to recruit Dr Eric Schumacher to advise on transport for emergency food aid distribution in Lesotho and Mozambique.
Dr Schumacher has since joined TRANSAID as a London-based director.
BESO looks forward to developing its collaboration with TRANSAID and to making greater use of its bank of expertise, not only in transportation but also in other fields in support of TRANSAID's objectives.
SCF — OVERSEAS VIEWPOINT
TRANSAID's support to Save the Children has again proved invaluable in responding to the challenges facing Africa in 1992.
Southern Africa experienced its worst drought this century and needed to import more than 12 million tonnes of grain, but many of the affected countries lacked the experience and established mechanisms to handle emergency food aid distributions.
TRANSAID has provided technical advice in Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Malawi and Mozambique to help strengthen governments' ability to transport and distribute relief supplies.
This has included an assessment of the availability of transport fleets South Africa for use in Mozambique and Lesotho, which lack private trucking capacity.
In Mozambique TRANSAID is also helping SCF and the Government to rebuild roads and bridges destroyed by civil conflict and to increase the capacity of water transport to handle relief and rehabilitation supplies.
The conflict in Somalia has demanded special expertise to meet the difficulties of working in a war zone.
TRANSAID has helped SCF to secure an aircraft to fly relief workers and supplies to famine-stricken areas of Somalia, where continued fighting and looting make overland travel dangerous.
As well as emergency assistance, TRANSAID has provided support and assistance to SCF's longer term development work.
Effective transport and logistic systems are crucial for delivering drugs, vaccines and supplies, supervising staff and generally supporting health services.
In Ghana and Zanzibar, SCF and TRANSAID are helping the Government to develop a national transport policy for the health sector.
In Burkina Faso, Mali, Malawi, Uganda and Ghana TRANSAID is passing on its skills through training for drivers, riders and mechanisms working to support widely dispersed health facilities.
Through this work, and the support and advice provided in London, SCF's partnership with TRANSAID has again proved its worth in 1992.
I have no doubt that this important relationship will continue to flourish and I look forward to working with TRANSAID in 1993 and beyond.