

LEADER
Government plans to take its toll
Funding the road network has been a source of controversy for many years.
Now the Government is expected to set out its latest thinking on the issue in a Green Paper due to be published around Easter.
The Green Paper is likely to take a comprehensive look at the subject including both road pricing and road tolls.
Road pricing has been up for discussion for some time as a possible way of alleviating the high levels of traffic congestion in many city centres.
A scheme is being brought into operation in Cambridge to give a guide the effectiveness of the concept (Transport May-June 1992).
The Institute has played a major role in focusing attention on the key issues involved in road pricing through two reports under the title: ‘Paying for Progress’.
The second report published in April last year examined the alternatives and complements to road pricing, the impacts on different sections of the community, effects on commercial traffic and taxis, public attitudes, and technology and enforcement.
What is likely to prove even more controversial is the suggestion that the Government is looking seriously at imposing tolls on particular roads.
This is certain to be opposed vigorously by freight transport organisations which argue that road taxes are already high in this country.
Supporters of tolls often point to France where toll roads are common.
However, the Freight Transport Association points out that Vehicle Excise Duty for a 38 tonne lorry in France is £690 a year compared to £3,100 in this country.
There are also fears that tolls on motorways will simply push traffic onto other roads creating new patterns of congestion.
While such arguments are now simply a rehearsal for what will follow publication of the Green Paper, they serve to illustrate the far-reaching consequences of changes to the way roads are funded.
The Institute has a key role to play in bringing the expertise of transport professionals to bear on this issue.
The Institute has played a major role in focusing attention on the issues
FOCUS
BRANCKER MEMORIAL LECTURE Financial challenge for air transport
The key challenge facing the airlines in the 1990s is not one of shortage of aircraft, as in the late 1980s, but a shortage of capital, according to Dr Tony Ryman, chairman of the GPA Group.
Dr Ryan took as his theme ‘The challenge of financing air transportation growth’ when he delivered the 50th lecture commemorating the life and work of Sir Sefton Brancker.
The airline industry's annual funding requirement was growing dramatically, he said.
Between 1972 and 1981 it had been £14 billion a year.
Over the next ten years it had averaged £23 billion a year.
‘It is projected to average £33 billion annually to the turn of the century and grow to £45 billion a year for the first decade of the new century.
‘Traditional sources of funding are drying up and the events of the past two years have further undermined the capacity of airlines to finance new aircraft on their own balance sheets.
New and innovative sources of financing will have to be developed to meet this challenge — and this great investment opportunity.’
Dr Ryan estimated that the industry would require something in the order of £330 billion to pay for new jetliners over the next eight years.
For the remainder of the 1990s, he expected that 75 per cent of aircraft orders would be from airlines with the remaining 25 per cent coming from leasing companies.
But airlines were unlikely to be able to finance more than half the aircraft they ordered through their balance sheets on an outright ownership basis.
Likewise, leasing companies were unlikely to be able to retain more than one third of the aircraft they ordered on their own balance sheets.
‘All the remaining aircraft will have to be financed on other balance sheets or through facilities such as Exim,’ says Dr Ryan.
‘As the industry matures, I believe airlines will be stripped down to the core business of flying people and cargo from place to place.
They will focus increasingly on achieving marketing command.
‘Many functions such as baggage handling, catering and maintenance are already being contracted out to specialist third parties.’
That trend was likely to develop to include operations, accounting and even flying, he said.
This specialisation of function would also apply to ownership of aircraft.
Fewer aircraft would be owned by airlines.
Most would be owned by investors such as leasing companies, financial institutions and investment portfolios.
Dr Ryan argued that new approaches to financing were vital.
They would be based increasingly on the operating lease and take the form of instruments focused on the capital markets.
‘They will be hedged geographically and in terms of aircraft types and airline risks.
They will be actively managed by a new breed of aircraft investor/owners,’ he said.
GPA had been developing such new forms of finance, he said, most notably with the launch of ALPS92–1 — the first publicly rated aircraft fund.
This was a £521 million Eurobond issue backed by the leases and future values of 14 modern aircraft.
The fund was developed jointly by GPA and Citibank.
ALPS (Aircraft Lease Portfolio Securitisation) is a special purpose company which brought the aircraft from GPA.
GPA is the manager of the aircraft and will act as agent for the sales of the aircraft prior to the maturity of the securities issued by ALPS.
Looking ahead, Dr Ryan expected economic recovery, together with the cutback in production of aircraft and the retirement of old equipment to bring supply and demand back into balance.
‘This could occur as early as 1995 and the years 1996 — 2000 should represent profitable opportunities.
‘While one in every five aircraft is on an operating lease today, this is likely to rise to one in every two over the next decade.
‘The challenge of financing air transportation growth is a very large one but also an exciting one,’ he said.
Dr Ryan receives the Brancker Medal from Sir Alastair Morton, Chairman of the CIT in the UK.
FACULTY OF FREIGHT Tackling the key transport issues
John Orange, chief executive of BP Oil UK was the guest speaker at the third Faculty of Freight Court meeting held in London recently.
Launched last year by the Chartered Institute of Transport, this influential think tank has attracted interest from more than 50 key members of the freight industry representing every mode and discipline.
Mr Orange warned that the costs involved in addressing environmental pressures on the worldwide oil industry were rising to a point where they would soon equal revenues.
But he gave no hint of alternatives to replace diesel fuel over the next 25–35 years.
The oil industry would be faced with the cost of meeting the ever higher burden of controlling emissions at the manufacturing plants.
BP was spending £45 million a year on sulphur recovery alone.
In addition, £750 million was being spent on reducing emission at petrol stations throughout the UK.
Mr Orange did not accept that a ‘carbon tax’ would solve all the emission problems.
Evidence showed that this would not reduce demand.
He cited better building regulations on houses and the move to gas-fired power stations as far more effective ways of reducing the use of fossil fuels.
He delighted the Faculty, which represents all modes of transport when he said: ‘We do not believe the road system comes before everything’.
Yet problems were emerging with other transport modes that were discouraging their use within BP.
The company is no longer going to run freight trains in Western Scotland because British Rail has increased the transport rates by 50 to 80 per cent to cover fixed costs from an ever decreasing user base.
‘This is an issue that neither the Government nor BP have grasped at the moment,’ he said.
Also, he concluded, many ports did not have the cleaning facilities for BP's fleet of coastal tankers.
This too put an added cost burden on the company.
The faculty has been focusing on the main issues affecting freight into the next century.
It has focused on congestion, vocational education and the freight sector's public image.
Alan Jones, managing director of TNT Express UK and chairman of the Education and Training Working Party, reported that research had indicated a clear need for the creation of an umbrella body to make sense of and, ultimately, simplify the current maze of qualifications.
‘Members saw that this would result in a significant increase in the value of qualifications to employers and members,’ he said.
Alan Waller, Dean of the Faculty, confirmed that the organisation would be seeking support for research into intermodal congestion issues.
A study of congestion undertaken by the Faculty earlier in November highlighted a ‘key gap in the existing understanding of the potential.’
Mr Waller also confirmed that the Faculty believed in a consistent transport policy from the Government.
‘We will be seeking ways of promoting the importance of the freight industry to all facets of the UK economy across all modes of transport’, said Mr Waller.
‘We do not believe the road system comes before everything,’ John Orange of BP told members of the Faculty Court.
TRANSPORT POLICY COMMITTEE Focus on working parties
The CIT Transport Policy Committee (TCP) had its first meeting of the year in mid-January.
The meeting concentrated on the activities and progress of the three main working parties set up late last year to consider: rail privatisation; the bus industry and financing of transport infrastructure.
Rail privatisation:The evidence submitted by the CIT to the Transport Select Committee is now in print and copies of the full transcript of written and oral evidence are available from HMSO.
The working party has continued to monitor the progress of the Bill and wrote to the Secretary of State in January asking for clarification of the Government's policy on charging and access rail freight users.
Following the publication of the recent consultation documents (particularly on access and charging) the working party is now preparing a more detailed paper for submission to the Secretary of State.
Bus industry:As part of its programme of work, a seminar was organised in early February to which senior representatives from other organisations concerned with bus transport were invited.
The seminar was very well attended and the discussion provided useful comment that will be taken into account during the drafting stages of the report.
As a result of the seminar, a private meeting with senior officials from the Department of Transport and the Office of Fair Trading has been arranged so that some of the ideas discussed can be perused further.
Financing Transport Infrastructure:This working party has now met several times and has established the key issues it wishes to address in its final report.
The first stage of drafting has now begun and publication of a report is anticipated in mid-1993.
Liaison with the Department of Transport:The TCP is continuing to maintain a dialogue with the Department of Transport at senior level and a meeting is currently being arranged between members of the committee and Patrick Brown and his Deputy Secretaries.
Responses to Regional Policy:CIT Sections are actively encouraged to set up their own working parties to comment on policy issues of regional importance.
Two such papers were tabled at the last TCP meeting: a submission from Metropolitan Section to the Traffic Director for London commenting on the Draft Network Plan and a response from the North Western Section to PIEDA's Regional Economic Strategy paper.
The CIT has also responded to the Department of Environment's invitation to comment on a draft for a revised planning policy guidance note on town centres and retail development.
We supported the view expressed in the draft that the quality and attractiveness of town centres can be further enhanced by good public transport facilities.
In the context of deregulated bus services, it was important that strenuous efforts at informal co-ordination between bus operators and local planning authorities should be encouraged.
The response also emphasised the usefulness of park and ride schemes, pointing to the need for a high degree of co-operation and goodwill where it is necessary to involve adjacent local authorities.
The TPC meets again in early March and Richard Dawbarn, Managing Director of United Transport International will then be joining the committee.
Transport Statistics Users Group
Since its formation in 1985, the TSUG has continued to work towards developing a better service for all its members.
Last year saw a major update of its Directory of Sources and Contacts in Transport Statistics, a publication available free to all members which contains entries and sources of transport statistics from governmental and non-governmental organisations.
The group also organised more seminars last year, all held at the Chartered Institute of Transport, free to TSUG members, and covering a wide range of topics.
The seminar topics included: road accident statistics; planning passenger railways; air transport statistics and European transport statistics.
The 1993 programme is currently being planned and it is anticipated that this will include seminars on bus and coach statistics, road safety statistics, transport finance statistics and ports and shipping statistics.
For further information and details about joining the TSUG, please contact  .
7 days beneath the White Eagle's wing
A 7 day tour to Poland, open to CIT members, spouses, and colleagues has been arranged for the first week of July, boasting a programme, both transport orientated and cultural.
Visits include FSM (car manufacturing plant), Krakow; Technical Museum and Railway Museum, Warsaw; Hydraulic canal trip; Ports of Gdansk, Gdynia; Baltic sealine of Sopot and Molo.
Approximate cost — £550/£600 — to include travel either by air or coach (taking in a visit to Berlin); hotel accommodation, meals, internal travel, excursions, English speaking guides and entrance fees.
Full details and booking forms are available from  .
Proceedings
Those who subscribe to the Institute's Proceedings say that one of the most valuable contributions it makes has been the books that are reviewed by our members and this listing of books recently published or announced.
The second number of the 1993 volume, which has now gone to print, contains an extra selection of book reviews, and as well as the usual listing it has several other items that will be of interest to anyone who wants to keep up to date with what is being published.
All this is in addition to four first rate papers, including the text of the Sir Robert Reid Lecture, given by the Chairman and Chief Executive of German Railways.
Those who heard the lecture will want to read it, and for those who did not, it is to be strongly recommended.
Altogether a bargain — not least at the price for a year's subscription.
Smog control
The Department of the Environment has circulated a small leaflet: ‘How to help prevent it’ dealing with the winter-time pollution which is such a threat to road usage.
Seven actions for drivers are listed which would lead to improvement in air quality.
Copies of the leaflet are available free from 
Full papers
Reports of meetings appear in Transport and full length papers appear in Proceedings.
Further papers are available from time to time and are available, payment in advance from the Director of Professional Activities:
Time — the competitive weapon in logistics 
The maintenance philosophy — the Vehicle Inspectorate view 
Dutch Prime minister Ruud Lubbers will open Schiphol Airport's new £190 million terminal in May increasing passenger capacity to 27 million.
Last year it handled 19 million
Henman Lecture
Barry Lessing, Chief Executive of Spoornet (South African Railways) is to give Philip Henman Overseas Lecture on the subject of transport in South Africa.
The meeting will be held on Monday, May 17 at 1715 for 1745 hrs at the Royal Society of Arts,
Members and non-members are most welcome.
They are asked to let Lorraine King at CIT HQ know they are coming.
Travel to poppy country
The Essex Section will travel by coach to the poppy country of Picardy, Northern France to study public transport and railway installations and services in Amiens and district.
The tour takes place from April 14–18, 1993 and costs £210 (approx).
A few places are still available.
Contact  .
THE INSTITUTE IS ALIVE AND WELL
In the week commencing 15 February Sir Alastair Morton, CIT's Chairman in the UK, had ample opportunity to see that.
On the Monday morning there was a well-attended meeting of the UK Council at the CIT's offices in Port Land Place.
That evening he addressed close to 200 members and guests of the Metropolitan Section at the Institution of Electrical Engineers on the Thames Embankment.
Wednesday evening found him in Belfast for the Annual Dinner of the Norther Ireland Section, attended by about 550 members and guests.
It is one of the leading business events of the year there.
After returning briefly to London, Sir Alastair was in Cardiff on Friday evening, 19 February, for the Annual Dinner of the Welsh Section, for which there was a capacity turn-out in excess of 200 members and guests.
The CIT's members are standing up to the recession and keeping close to their customers and associates.
That is a healthy sign.
The major functions of CIT Sections serve that purpose and clearly continue to serve it well.
That is also healthy.
The CIT speaks for transport.
It continues to bring transport people together to strengthen that voice.
EC policy threat to liner shipping…
The way in which the European Community's competition policy is being applied threatens the existence of the liner shipping industry in Europe, Edmund Vestey, president of the Chamber of Shipping has warned.
Speaking at the Chamber's annual dinner, he said recent actions in Brussels applying the Community's competition policy threatened complete chaos to the international liner trade.
‘At worst they could virtually finish the liner shipping industry in Europe.
At the least damaging, they would lead to a far less efficient service to European exporters, dependent on less skilled and reliable shipowners, with all that would mean to safety at sea and the environment.’
It was important that government and the European Commission looked beyond the narrow confines of the current legalistic approach and took full account of the practical consequences of this onslaught on the system which has served the Community and world trade so well for more than a century, he said.
Mr Vestry, who is chairman of Blue Star Line, also called for investment in the shipping industry.
‘To put our industry in context, the balance of payments deficit is running at about £13 billion.
Our contribution to the balance of payments is, at present, about £4 billion gross or £2.3 billion net.
‘In real terms, it is half what it was a decade ago.
The proposals we have put to the Government could at minimal cost easily enable us to double our contribution’.
Some 95 per cent of the UK exports went by sea but only 18 per cent moved in British vessels.
‘Can we really contemplate the whole of British industry being dependent on foreign carriers?
The British Shippers’ Council has made it plain that it welcomes foreign competition as a means to lower rates of freight.
‘Short-term that may be fine, but shipping is a long term business that needs to ride the historic cycles.
‘Where will our exporters be if one day the foreign shipowners find it cheaper only to call in Rotterdam with just a few feeder services to this country?’
…and to rail privatisation
The EC's Common Transport Policy could frustrate the British Government's aim of privatising the rail network, Professor John Hibbs has warned.
In a pamphlet, ‘Off the rails: the Implications of EC Transport Policy for Rail Privatisation’, co-written with Malcolm Gylee, Professor Hibbs said: ‘The history of the EC shows how deeply ingrained is the centralising theory and the public sector ownership policy of the commission.’
The pamphlet, ‘Community Paper No 4’, is available from the International Freedom Foundation.
Air Transport — Strategic Issues in Planning and Development
This splendid book on the fast moving air transport industry will be a useful update for the student seeking the right background to discuss the issues of the time.
From that point of view, it is a pity that Philip Shearman who has a distinguished reputation, does not offer the student his alternative opinion on the current important issues of government regulation, global alliances, the auctioning of airport slots or, for that matter, the strengthening hold and control of the marketplace by the large travel agents and CRS (computer reservation systems).
There is also a mention if the cargo contribution to airlines which for the passenger carriers is, at 50 per cent return on revenue, the most profitable thing they have in the market at the moment.
More analysis of the deregulation lessons for Europe (which will not finally happen until 1997) from the US experience would have helped the student at the start of 1993.
Air transport moves quickly and this excellent book can only be a 1992 snapshot of a complex industry — however it is expensive.
Annual General Meeting
The Annual General Meeting of the Chartered Institute of Transport in the UK will be held on Monday March 29, 1993 at 1030 hrs at , to consider the Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended September 30, 1992, to elect to the Board, Mr A Dartnell and Miss S Jourdain having been nominated by Sections Conference as Directors, and to elect auditors for the year 1992–3.
Philip Henman
The CIT thanks Transport Development Group for the fine portrait of Philip Henman which now hangs on the first floor landing at 80 Portland Place.
Among his benefactions was the endowment of the Overseas Lecture which this year will be given by Barry Lessing of Spoornet (South African Railways) on May 17 at the RSA in London.
TDG is also thanked for their gift of the bronze bust of former Vice-President William Fraser which also stands in CIT headquarters.
VIEWPOINT
Air liberalisation: who benefits?
Stephen Wheatcroft set out the case for airline deregulation in the November — December issue of TRANSPORT.
Here Mr B Pocock, General Manager of Air Botswana, explains why not everyone is enthusiastic
The currently fashionable and oft repeated litany is that although the world air transport industry is presently going through a fundamental and painful period of change, this will ultimately lead to a new and improved deployment of resources, through the creation of far fewer but infinitely larger air carriers.
These, though deregulated and privately-owned multinational marketing and route networks are, we are told, sure to be better able to serve our future air transport needs.
Liberalisation, consumer sovereignty, the need for the creation of a global industry are all put forward as doctrinaire arguments, while conveniently overlooking monopoly, foreign exchange drain and, in the case of smaller nations, lack of concern for legitimate development aspirations.
This new world will also be one in which we cannot expect any new carrier to be able to enter the airline market to any competitive extent owing to lack of the large resources required.
Before proceeding, it is perhaps appropriate to examine what is meant by deregulation and to try to access the likely effect of the philosophy if it is fully extended to international air transport.
Certainly its application within the large domestic market of the United States, which alone accounts for some 40 per cent of world air travel, can hardly be considered an unqualified success.
There were some 130 airlines in existence prior to the experiment, whereas today 90 per cent of the traffic is concentrated onto only ten carriers — more than of which are bankrupt and continuing to operate only under the protection of Chapter 11.
Undoubtedly there have been some short-term fare benefits for the air traveller, but these are clearly the result of marginal cost pricing policies chasing after survival cash flow which blatantly disregard the ultimate responsibility to capital invested and are thus unsustainable.
Internationally, where some remnants of the previous bilateral structure still exist, the situation is no better.
The 208 members of the International Air Transport Association which carry 96 per cent of the world's traffic have collectively lost £10 billion of their domestic and international operations in three years.
Although this was brought about by the Gulf War and the subsequent world recession, it is certainly now exacerbated by an unrestrained and reckless war of attrition in which dollars are hauled over the top of the grain of a few inches of market share.
‘Deregulation’ means many things to many people, but is generally, if inaccurately, understood to imply that the conditions of free competition within a perfect market are created through the removal of controls, regulations, so that the consumer eventually benefits from the advantages offered by the more efficient low cost producer and the withdrawal of the inefficient.
A ‘perfect’ market in economic theory is of course meant to be one in which the product is broadly comparable, entry and exit is possible, and price information is readily available to the consumer.
Although some of these conditions present no particular problems, it is clear that the air transport market has too many imperfections to work as theory would suggest.
It must therefore be recognised that the greatest protagonist of deregulation are largely acting out of self-interest, and that they themselves demonstrate remarkable inconsistency and reversals in their arguments — depending on which area of that self interest they may be pursuing at any particular moment.
If successful, the advocates of these deregulation policies will irrevocably change the previous bilateral philosophy (fair and equal opportunity, balance of rights, and sovereign nature of traffic) to one which clearly favours the larger aviation powers and which is, in consequence, likely to be detrimental to the overall interest of the industry.
Fair and equal opportunity has been replaced by ‘equality of market opportunity’ which broadly translated, means the grant of uncontrolled shoplifting rights to the man with the most muscle, all supposedly in the name of competition and the perceived interest of the consumer — as interpreted by a distant shareholder with little concern for local aspirations.
Make no mistake, there are many who believe (again not without considerable self-interest, that the serious business of running airlines should be left to a few major carriers — except, perhaps, for a few local services.
The major airlines, so the argument goes, can easily provide for all our serious air transportation needs on a suitable basis, thus leaving the less able to concentrate their resources on more worthy causes.
Naturally there are many who do not share that view, with its obvious potential for the abuse of market domination and disregard for local or regional needs.
It is, perhaps, interesting at this point to recall a recently expressed official view that: ‘Air transport must fulfil the demand for economic and social integration, facilitate regional economic development, serve tourism and establish air links to less developed peripheral regions with low traffic demand.’
Add to this a few arguments related to the preservation of choice, local market knowledge, and participation in technology transfer, and you have the case for not allowing air transport power to be concentrated in too few hands.
The interesting thing is, however, that the speaker in this case was Karel Van Miert, former Transport Commissioner at the European Commission.
He was talking about the EC which is a great protagonist of deregulation in its external policies!
What was even more interesting was when he went on to say that he ‘finds it unacceptable that member states continue to negotiate fifth freedom rights with third countries (the ability to uplift and carry passengers onward to a third country) as these should be considered Community assets’.
So traffic rights are assets again — a sharp contrast to arguments  expressed elsewhere.
it all depends on whether you are giving or taking.
An even more spectacular reversal occurred as recently as the day following the inauguration of President Clinton when Mr F Pena, the incoming US Transportation Secretary, quite unashamedly declared that the US ‘cannot give away valuable rights…without equivalent benefits for US carriers.’
This, coming on top of the refusal to allow ‘globalisation’ or multinationalism of the carrier USAir through British Airways participation on home ground clearly demonstrates the fallaciousness of previous stances and the fundamental self-interest of liberalisation arguments.
In the developing world, the preservation of schedule and service independence through some degree of national ownership, even if linked by commercial alliance to one of the major carriers — rather than abdication of this responsibility to others — will safeguard against having those air lines become the casualty of a bottom line result in a distant board room in London, Atlanta or Paris.
Civil aviation is a major industry with an economic impact on the employment market of at least 21 million jobs, and which is the core of a world travel tourism activity representing 5.5 per cent of the gross national product of the entire world.
Despite the current returns on capital invested in a so-called deregulated environment are such as to ensure that no sensible investor will commit further of his resources to the industry.
Therefore to suggest that an undertaking of this enormity with its potential to contribute to various national and word; d development activities should be allowed to become the vehicle for economic experimentation or the advancement of narrow short term profit motivation without proper examination of the alternatives, is clearly a path which we will tread at our peril.
LETTERS
British Rail privatisation
Sir, I read with great interest your leader on rail privatisation (Transport, January-February 1993 ).
As a proponent of the concept of the removal of public sector influence from any business or undertaking that can obey the requirements of the marketplace.
I have for some time studied the prospects for the privatisation of British Rail.
However, I am not convinced that the Government's proposals are right or workable.
All privatisations to date have placed the public sector utility in the private sector.
There they have operated, partly under genuine competition and partly as a monopoly controlled by a regulator.
Despite considerable controversy in the media, the regulatory system for gas, electricity, water and Telecom are working well, with the quality of customer service in all these industries measurably improving.
For some reason the railways are seen as ‘different’.
Why?
They are a utility like gas, and they conform to the elemental principles of accountancy.
The only difference between railways and the other utilities is that they are precieved to be costing the exchequer money, not providing revenue to it.
Many of the questions that you pose in your leader would simply disappear under the conventional privatisation concepts.
For example, the Track Authority would be a private sector company, operating in an objective manner, rather like the National Grid Company in the electricity supply industry.
It would ‘offer terms’ to any legitimate operator (ie licensed by the regulator) and would receive the proposed timetables of all licensed operators — both passenger and freight.
Since the track authority needs this information to access the capacity and other related constraints on the system, it is best placed to provide or sell timetable information nationally, regionally or at an individual service level.
There would be no need to involve the operators who would have to register and have approved, any timetable changes proposed — approval being the Track Authority from an operating point of view and the Regulator from a competition viewpoint.
The franchising industry should be removed and the letting of services should be the responsibility of the Regulator in conjunction with the Track Authority.
The question of open access is not political; it is the essence of all UK privatisations and it has been demonstrated in the electricity supply industry that competition is not only possible, but healthy, in the generation and supply of electricity.
The advantages of open access are significant, especially when applied to the European Community opportunities.
It should, however, be remembered that the network of services, including the timetabling of trains within that network, is almost completely driven by operational considerations .
The passenger has always come a poor second to the operational integrity of the system.
Open access with a larger number of smaller commercial companies would prove very beneficial to customers in ways not possible today.
New logo for the CIT?
Sir, Arising out of your questionnaire (Transport September — October 1991 ) it occurred to me that perhaps the CIT logo could be looked at with a view to substituting something more modern or vibrant for the horse/steed.
EDUCATION & training 
Scholarships, Grants and Awards
There are two new awards for 1993.
The first is for a paper on international logistics and has been given by the Maersk Shipping Company.
The second is donated by Ian Allen, the well-known transport book publisher.
Scholarships, Grants and Awards brochures and application forms are now available and have been widely circulated to all Sections and those who have requested them.
Application forms are available upon request from the Examinations Department at Portland Place.
The Scholarships, Grants and Awards have been strengthened for 1993 with the addition of several new ones.
All applications must be received by the end of May when the Committee reviews applications and selects the winners in each group.
All entries will be acknowledged and the results advised as soon as possible.
Save the Children
Most things seem to run in seasons.
Our efforts last year were completed when we made a major presentation to the fund at a prize-giving in October.
There is a nice link in this in that this year's efforts have been started by one of the exam prize winners who has passed his prize back to be donated to Save the Children.
Our thanks to Julian Walker.
TTA revision weekend
You will see this annual event advertised in Transport.
Its purpose is to help UK students prepare for the forthcoming examinations in May.
The whole course is flexible and the students can take one or more sessions, according to their needs.
Each session lasts for four hours (in two blocks of two hours each).
The event is held in a comfortable hotel in Birmingham where residential accommodation is available for those who want to stay over night.
Institute History
Sue Woolley's book has now been printed and will be despatched to subscribers at the beginning of March.
If you haven't ordered your copy yet you will find an order form on this page in the magazine.
1993 Exams
1993 examination entries are now in and candidates will receive their Confirmation of Entry Form by the first week in April.
The examination timetable has been widely circulated but if any one wishes a copy please telephone your request to the examinations department.
External students (those studying by distance learning) who have requested a certain centre to sit the examinations will be accommodated, where possible, at the centre requested.
However, certain centres are unable to take external students.
If that is the case, the individual candidate will be advised and offered an alternative centre.
The institute of Chartered Shipbrokers examination candidates now all sit the CIT examination paper 22 — International Through Transport Management — as part of their own examination requirement.
The Shipbrokers candidates will also sit as external students at the centres requested.
Our liberian has updated the reading lists for all examination subjects and these are available from the library.
As a result of the update, the basis recommended reading shown in the Handbook will also change in the next edition.
TRADE
The invisible contribution of transport David Robinson on how transport helps the balance of payments
The UK is the world's second largest recipient of invisible earnings after the US.
In 1991 these totalled £16.9 billion showing a healthy rise of some 10 per cent on 1990.
This represents 12.6 of the world's total invisible trade and significantly for the UK, invisibles contributed £13 billion more than visible trade earnings.
Invisible receipts as a percentage of GNP are the highest of all for the UK with 20.5 per cent compared with 4.8 per cent for the US and 5.6 per cent for Japan.
France is second with 11.2 per cent.
Such earnings are little appreciated outside the specialist areas of business such as finance and insurance which directly contribute to invisible earnings.
However, their spread is much wider and transport related earnings represent a major contribution to the total.
To many, invisible earnings are often just associated with the banking and other financial and insurance services provided by institutions in the City of London.
Invisibles are, in fact anything else which earns money for the UK such as tourism, transport services, consultancy, computer programming and training to name but a few.
Looking at the overseas receipts for UK financial institutions, two transport-related bodies, the Baltic Exchange, whose members are involved in more than half the world's international ship chartering business, and Lloyd's register of Shipping figure prominently.
In 1991, the Baltic contributed £804 million, 7 per cent up on 1990, while Lloyd's Register's earnings in 1991 were £33 million, some £4 million higher than in 1990.
Looking at other earners of invisibles, tourism, shipping, civil aviation, consultancy, telecommunications and postal services and land freight transport all reflect the role of the transport industry and the substantial contribution it makes.
Tourism is easily the top earner contributing £7.2 billion in 1991 though this was £600 million less than 1990, no doubt to do with the Gulf War.
This figure is the total expenditure in visits, excluding air fares paid to get to or leave the UK.
Linked to this but not directly invisible earnings is another £1.9 billion paid to British Carriers.
Invisible receipts from tourism have shown a steady rise over recent years from
2.97 billion in 1981.
The earnings from shipping fell to £3.66 billion from £3.73 billion in 1991.
Reflecting the decline in the UK merchant fleet through the 1980s is the fact the contribution in 1981 was also £3.73 billion.
Shipping's net contribution to the balance of payments was a mere £15m but this was an improvement on the previous two years.
Those earnings include revenue from export and cross-trading for both wet and dry cargo shipping, time charter income and passenger revenue from overseas plus disbursements from foreign-owned ships.
The Gulf War had an impact on civil aviation earnings which fell to £3.93 billion in 1991 from £4.36 billion the year before.
Income from telecommunications and postal services rose from £100m to reach £1 billion.
Land freight transport services contributed £353m in 1991, an increase of more than £30m on 1990.
In 1981, the earnings were £89m.
Estimates suggest that the annual world market for services exceeds £750 billion.
The UK has a 7 per cent of this market compared with a 5.5 per cent share of trade in goods.
A recent survey suggests a good future for the UK's invisible earnings.
The survey, by British Invisibles and A T Kearney, involved more than 80 companies from the sector.
‘Britain's private sector service industries earned almost £32 billion from exports in 1991 and accounted for 57 per cent of GDP and over 60 per cent of employment’, the survey said.
THE CHARTERED INSTITUTE OF TRANSPORT IN THE UK REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 30 SEPTEMBER 1992
CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 SEPTEMBER 1992 JIM CLEARY
It is my pleasure and privilege to present to members of the Chartered Institute of Transport in the UK the first separate Chairman's Report and Accounts since we in the UK became one of the nine National Councils now established by the Institute under the successful re-organisation approved by the Council.
As I think members will have realised from my visits to each of our 25 Sections during my year of office, I very much enjoyed being Chairman.
I was delighted to take over with the CIT in the UK in such good heart, locally and nationally, thanks to the initiatives set up by my predecessors being so well supported by the Uk Board, as well as Section Chairman and their committees.
Despite the many benefits available from CIT membership to serious transport professionals, a number have ceased paying subscriptions and we have applied a strict policy of erasing them from our records of members.
Nevertheless the year end total of members showed some growth in the core of the loyal membership and is an excellent base on which to continue to build.
Financially, too, we are making progress.
Total subscription income increased by 2.5% to £509,709, and this without any increase to the general level during the year in the individual rates of subscriptions, which I am sure members will applaud.
Richard Botwood and his excellent team continued their cost-containment programme (but still of course working to provide the value-for-money service members look for), so that we finished the year with an acceptable surplus of £35,231 to be used for the benefit of CIT members and transport in general.
This surplus was achieved after the transfer of £36,550 to a Leasehold Replacement Reserve to be utilised to acquire new premises when the existing lease on 80 Portland Place expires in 2021.
In the 30-plus years since I started my CIT life as a student, I have found the many local and national meetings and lectures to have been a valuable way of giving and receiving information and help.
1992 was a strong contender for best year yet, with eminent experts talking knowledgeably on the myriad of inter-modal transport topics of interest to members.
This diversity and range was nowhere better demonstrated than in our six prestigious national lectures: The first of these lectures having been held in Sheffield, this second was held in Tynemouth and Bill Oakes, Chairman, Northern Section, and his committee are to be congratulated on the 200-plus members and guests that came to hear what Alan had to say.
In June, the Humberside Section was honoured by a visit by Her Royal Highness, The Princess Royal, Honourary President of the Institute; and in July she officially opened the new training wing of the Freight Transport Association with Tony Pomeroy and myself with our wives and Richard Botwood and Leslie Aldridge, in attendance.
The joint FTA/CIT initiatives in education and training are now attracting great interest.
The national Youth in Transport Competition, now in its third year, also continues to attract interest: this year we had even more entries and sponsors, and I take this opportunity of congratulating all the prizewinners, and of thanking the sponsors of this valuable and far-reaching scheme.
Prizewinners and their families, teachers, sponsors, CIT Section Chairman and many guests were given an inspirational address by Sir James Duncan, Chairman TDG, one of the sponsors, and a Past President of the Institute, at a celebratory lunch at the Inn on the Park in London in June.
Our Anniversary Luncheon, with Malcolm Rifkind, Secretary of State for Transport, as principal speaker, was as well attended as ever; even the Annual Ball in March was enjoyed by over 300 members and guests.
The important work of the Transport Policy Committee, and of the Faculty of Freight, has been widely covered in Transport and at local and national CIT meetings, so needs no detailed report here.
I was, however, pleased in my year to be associated with many papers and reports put out by their working parties: to government, select committees, special interest groups and to the national and transport media.
I thank Tony Ridley, Chairman of the Transport Policy Committee, and Alan Waller, Dean of the Faculty of Freight, for their skill in persuading busy specialists to give so much time and effort to the CIT.
Communications and the media are important in our business, and our recognition of this is shown by the Transport Journalist of the Year and Transport Photographer of the Year Awards presented this year with the sponsorship of TNT (UK).
I was delighted to receive such a tremendous response from transport companies, CIT Sections, and many individual members to my request for sponsors for the cycle ride which my wife Maureen and I did from Land's End to John O'Groats on behalf of The Save the Children Fund in August.
We collected almost £8,000 which the SCF will use to help the all too many afflicted areas of the world.
Thank you all.
The CIT in the UK is set for another memorable year, under our energetic and high-profile new Chairman, Sir Alastair Morton.
I am conscious of unfinished business: we still need many more new members (and the newly announced bonus scheme for Sections should help here); we still have more to do to broaden and cement relationships with other transport associations, despite what has already been achieved; and above all we have to continue to strive for transport excellence, and to adapt and change to meet today's needs.
I am however sure that if Sir Alastair gets the support from the Sections and Portland Place that I did, then the CIT will very quickly be where we all want it to be.
Thank you for making my year so interesting and enjoyable.
Formation of Company
The Chartered Institute of Transport (‘The Company’), a company limited by guarantee, was formed on 15 July, 1991 and remained dormant for the period to 30 September 1991.
It commenced activity from 1 October 1991 on the transfer, a gift from the Chartered Institute of Transport (‘The Institute’) of those assets which were wholly employed in activities of the Institute in the United Kingdom.
The transfer has been formally approved by the Institute and The Company.
These accounts are for the period from 15 July 1991 to 30 September 1992.
Notes
Due to shortage of space we are unable to print the full UK accounts in Transport magazine.
If you would like to receive the set of 16 pages please write to  .
The AGM will take place at Portland Place London on Monday 29 March 1993.
The accounts, which have been audited represent the CIT in the UK and are the first accounts of the Limited company.
The accounts of the Institute, which exclude the UK activities, are reported in the current section of Transport World — see blue pages.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY Computer systems are playing an increasingly important role in the transport industry.
Malory Davies reports on developments.
Write a letter to your computer
Written examination: Fujitsu's PoqetPad in action.
For many people the biggest problem with using a computer is simply that you have to type something on the keyboard to achieve anything at all.
As a productivity tool, a word processor is limited mainly be the speed at which the user types in the text — for a non-typist the improvement is only small.
What is really need is a computer that will understand your writing.
Getting a computer to do that is not easy.
Every individual has his or her own writing style so the word ‘truck’ looks very different when written by two different people.
However, the development of increasingly powerful processors and some clever software means the pen-based computers are starting to become available at a realistic price.
Pen-based computers are not only easier to use — they can also be more portable than standard key-board-based machines.
NCR has just introduced a model that is about the size of an A4 pad making it possible to walk around and make notes as you go.
The NCR machine uses a special version of Windows the provides little boxes to write in.
To start with you must teach the computer to recognise your writing by giving it examples of the way you write individual letters.
Then, as your write a letter the computer interprets it and pops up the letter it thinks you have written.
Windows is rapidly becoming the standard for personal computer interfaces so it is very easy for someone to move to using the pen version.
The term ‘pen’ is something of a misnomer.
The ‘pen’ is actually a plastic stylus — the computer simply notes the points where it touches the screen.
An even more portable computer is produced by Fujitsu Persona; Systems.
The PoqetPad weighs 1lb 2oz and can be held in one hand.
It has already found uses in the transport industry.
Shipping Line SeaLand uses the system in Rotterdam to enable staff to keep a check on the location of containers.
Clearly there is a range of similar applications such as warehouses and supermarkets where someone has to go around checking stock and then enter the data into a computer.
Parcels delivery is another area where pen computers could make a big impact.
Some companies are already introducing systems that enable recipients to sign for a package straight into the computer.
Sales is another obvious application.
A salesman can go to a customer, write in an order and download it to his company's main computer at the end of the day.
Even inspecting a road might be made a little easier with one of these machines.
Although technology has reached the point where such systems are becoming widely viable, they are still expensive compared to the old-fashioned keyboard-based computers.
And character recognition is relatively slow and prone to errors even on powerful computers.
However, the technology is moving very fast and, as pen computers come into common usage, prices will fall as dramatically as the prices of conventional computers have over the last couple of years.
Transport has been relatively slow to see much benefit from the information technology revolution.
Transport is about moving people and goods and to be really useful, the IT systems have to be able to move as well.
They also have to be robust and easy to use.
Pen-based computing is a major step in that direction, Until someone builds a computer you can talk to that isn't the size of a filing cabinet there is likely to be an easier way to communicate with your technology.
On the air Putting telephones into vehicle cabs has become commonplace but there are a variety of alternatives
On call: The AA Roadwatch paging system.
Not so long ago, a haulage company would send its drivers out into the world with few opportunities to communicate with then until they returned.
The advent of Cellular Radio changed all that.
Cellphones are now commonplace enabling managers to keep in touch with the vehicles out on the road.
Swift Transport, for example, has 300 trucks equipped with Cellnet phones to enable drivers to keep in touch with depots and customers to confirm times of arrival.
As a large user of the service Swift has its own private link from the Cellnet network to head office.
The service, known as CallAccess, bypasses the public telephone system cutting costs.
Cellnet claims that saving of up to 40 per cent can be made on call costs.
However, Cellphones are not the only solution to maintaining contact with moving vehicles.
Mobile data networks are starting to make an impact.
At a recent conference in London industrial guru Sir John Harvey Jones set out the reasons why.
‘The two biggest business problems are change and the realisation that speed is a source of competitive advantage.
In particular, competition is increasing in the areas of reading the market, service, speed of reaction and development of products to file markets.
‘All these lead to a decentralisation of an organisation's activities and the requirement of an interactive communications system.
It is a key enabler for this, but only if people use it as a way of changing the way business is done rather than merchandising existing systems and organisations.
‘This is where mobile data fits in, enabling businesses to fulfil their need for real time information flow regardless of location.’
The providers of such services are moving rapidly to develop their shares of this market.
Securicor Datatrak has just introduced a new version of its Fleetrak system which allows drivers to send and receive messages using in-vehicle terminals and printers.
Fleetrak automatically collects data on the locations and status of vehicles and loads as well as providing exception reports and historical analysis of fleet operations.
The company operates its own radio network in the UK with a system that allows thousands of users to operate on a single UHF or VHF channel.
The service has already made an impact in a wide range of sectors such as high value loads, emergency services, public transport and service management.
The system transmits data in standard data packets of 80 characters.
A single 80 character packet takes 100 milliseconds to transmit.
The company says system trails showed that 95 per cent of data messages were successfully transmitted which it reckons is better than the other means of mobile communication.
Mike Cooper, managing director of Securicor Datatrak said: ‘Take up from existing mobile data offerings has been slow.
We believe that part of the reason lies in the fact that no integrated fleet management system has been on offer before and potential users are put off by having to deal with third parties, complicated billing arrangements which makes it difficult to access payback, and lack of geographical coverage.
We've addressed all these problems.’
That is a claim that Securicor's competitors would, no doubt challenge.
RAM Mobile Data also provides a network and is working with a range of third parties to provide operational facilities.
For example it has just formed a partnership with Lotus, the computer software giant, to allow users of ‘cc:Mail’ the Lotus electronic mail system to send and receive messages while they are on the move.
It has also linked up with Card Solution of offer a product for the road haulage industry called ‘Cablink’.
This is an in-cab computer system that transmits data back to the home base using RAM's network.
Cablink provides all the functions of a tachograph in a much easier to use form.
For example it monitors driving times and can tell a driver when he needs to take a break.
It also provides a number of other functions.
Radio network can be used in other ways such as the provision of traffic information.
The Automobile Association recently linked up with Air Call, the paging operator to offer a paging system, AA Roadwatch, that provides traffic information to drivers.
Information is provided on the basis of regional zones.
As the vehicle moves into a new zone the information provided by the pager changes accordingly.
Basic software tools: Spreadsheets
No-one wanted personal computers until an American called Dan Bricklin invented a piece of software that would do lots of boring calculations in the blink of an eye.
Even today, the spreadsheet is probably the single most useful piece of computer software for technical and business users.
In concept, a spreadsheet is like a large piece of paper covered with boxes of cells.
Cells can contain words, numbers or formulae which can be added, multiplied, etc.
For years the market has been dominated by Lotus 123 but the development of Windows has enabled other products to move into the market — notably Excel from Microsoft.
To the untrained eye, the two products look remarkably similar.
However, there are significant differences.
Both products do calculations and supply a huge range of built in statistical and engineering functions.
Both allow you to format your data to presentation quality and both provide charting facilities.
The great strength of 123 For Windows is its compatibility with all the earlier versions of the product.
While is has smart Windows menus, it also provides an old-style menu system for those who can't get used to using a mouse.
It also offers 3D spreadsheets so that changing a value on one spreadsheet automatically changes a related value in another one.
But while 123 Windows is a relatively new product for Lotus, Excel has been exploiting the Windows interface for longer and it shows.
For example, it uses ‘Wizards’ to guide you step-by-step through relatively complex procedures asking questions about what you want to achieve before doing it for you.
When it comes to charts, Excel also scores with the ability to produce a wider range and better looking graphics than 123.
And because Lotus is the market leader, Microsoft has ensured that Excel is fully compatible with 123.
The Lotus product provides only very limited support for other file formats.
If you spend much of your time dealing with figures then a spreadsheet is invaluable.
If you are newcomer to spreadsheets then you may find Excel easier to deal with but if you are an experienced 123 user then the latest version from Lotus is likely to be the only choice.
Making machines talk to each other To the uninitiated it must seem absurd.
Here are all these computers producing huge amounts of information and completely unable to share it with other computers.
That is what Electronic Data Interchange is there to do.
Software designers will never agree to a standard format for the data in their programs so instead there has to be another piece of software that will bundle the information into a standard format to enable it to be transmitted to another computer.
EDI has become extremely important in international freight enabling shippers, forwarders, carriers and HM Customs and Excise to communicate with each other using a set of standard messages.
In addition, the introduction of the Single European Market at the start of the year has resulted in a new system for the collection of trade statistics — Intrastat.
Community Network Services, for example, offers a system to enable traders to send Intrastat returns via its EDI network, CNSNet which also provides Direct Trader Input Customs entries facilities.
Under the CNS system the Intrastat return is filed in an electronic mailbox for Customs to pick up.
Computer-shy
More than half of Britain's smallest companies do not use personal computers, according to a MORI survey commissioned by IBM.
And six out of ten of the companies that do not use PCs said they would never buy a computer at any time in the future.
‘Another major issue is the reluctance of small businesses to invest in a PC may lie in doubts about their ways of use’, the survey said.
Howard Ford of IBM said: ‘I think the industry has become too introspective, concentrating on technical arguments which put off many potential small businesses.’
CONSULTANCY The introduction of BS5750 has forced companies to examine their internal systems — often with the aid of consultants
Making quality sell
One of the best investments we ever made in our business.
That is how Tom Stack describes achieving BS5750.
Mr Stack is vice president Europe for Air Express International and he was speaking just after AEI had won the British International Freight Association's 1993 Air Division Gold Award.
The reason AEI won the award was explained by Jim White, director general of BIFA: ‘The fact that AEI managed to accredit all of its 33 branches in the UK with BS5750 in one operation is a fantastic achievement.’
For his part, Mr Stack was clear about the benefits: ‘There is no question that this is the recognised standard which an increasing number of major international traders look for, and often demand, from their logistics partner’.
Consultants are playing a major role in helping companies go through the process of achieving BS5750.
Business Post, the express mail and parcel carrier went to TEC Consultants for advice when it set out on the path of getting its network accredited two years ago.
There are some 18 quality standards laid down in BS5750 and it requires the development of comprehensive quality manuals.
It is not a process to be embarked upon without good advice and support.
For Business Post there was the added complication that as a franchise operator, it had to sell the concept to its franchisees.
Chairman Peter Kane said: ‘It wasn't simply a question of motivating and training our own employees…we also need to communicate the benefits to all 50 franchisees.’
Roger Wilson, TEC's quality projects director, said: ‘The task of achieving simultaneous accreditation for the entire operation was enormous.’
‘The fact that Business Post achieved the award within two years highlighted the high value management have placed on training and staff development in both the company and the franchises.
Business Post has shown a tremendous commitment to quality by taking this route.’
The cost of getting BS5750 across a large network is undoubtedly high.
Business Post calculates that it has spent about £400,000 on the programme.
And it has created a new job, that of quality assurance manager, to ensure that standards are maintained.
However, Mr Kane is in no doubt about its value to the organisation: ‘Working towards the award has led to a noticeable increase in staff motivation and morale.
Employees and franchisees alike are now more highly committed, which has a positive effect on the entire operation.
‘Everyone now understands that we are in the business of satisfying customer needs’.
For Business Post there was also an added incentive.
‘The  award comes at a good time.
In the run up to Post Office privatisation, it is vital that we have our house in order, so that we can compete effectively in both the parcel delivery and letters markets’.
Only a few years ago no-one in the transport industry ever really thought about BS5750 and it wasn't until companies started feeling pressure from customers, particularly in the field of hazardous goods that minds started to become focused on the benefits.
Achievement of the standard has now become a crucial part of the marketing for many companies.
It can give a company a competitive advantage or at least level the playing field.
But achieving the BS5750 is not something that has to be done alone.
In October last year, Federal Express, Business Logistics became the first transport company to win accreditation jointly with another company.
It worked in partnership with Crookes Healthcare, which makes Optrex and Nurofen, to achieve the standard at a dedicated distribution centre near Nottingham.
Federal Express now plans to follow the same approach with other customers.
Wincanton has focused its attention on achieving accreditation to BS5750 Part One.
It now reckons its the first national distribution company to get Part One accreditation.
Part One encompasses Part Two, the more usual form of accreditation as it covers the design of distribution contracts as well as their operations.
In particular it covers the development of cost-effective, integrated responses to customers' distribution and transport requirements and involves making in-depth study of customers' needs, analyzing the data and then designing tailored packages making the optimum use of vehicle and warehouse resources, IT engineering and personnel.
To achieve Part One, applicants must demonstrate their ability to design a solution that meets customers' needs effectively, as well as the capability to operate contracts within agreed performance parameters.
As more and more companies achieve the standard it will not be too long before BS5750 is practically obligatory.
Celebrating success: Surrounded by AEI staff managing director Tom Stack brandishes the BIFA Award with Jackie Power of British Airways World Cargo which sponsors the award.
BOOKS
Intersection control
URBAN INTERSECTION CONTROL
Susan Jourdain has written, in a very lucid style, a book for, as she states, existing and aspiring engineers.
The book is read so easily because it is almost devoid of mathematical formulae, normally the very foundation of engineering work.
I prefer the publisher's note that the book is for planners, police and others concerned with the safe and efficient use of roads.
It does give reference to the main publications which contain the background theory and the formulae.
To make the book come even more to life, the author introduces hypothetical characters, the Sportsman, the Visitor and the Engineer, and it does not take much imagination to think of their behaviour in driving or road design.
All aspects of intersection control that I could think of, and even some aspects of urban and road design and management are included in a chapter on links between intersections.
The absence of mathematics eliminates any advance treatment, but it could serve as an introduction text and as a source document.
There are two other pleasing aspects in the text.
One is the use of the term ‘intersection’ in the title, described by Ken Huddart in the Preface as an American term.
To my mind, intersections intersect and junctions join, so both are necessary, but intersection is more general.
Another is the international perspective the author has brought to bear with examples from Australia in particular and elsewhere.
An unusual feature is the very lengthy glossary running to 37 pages for 46 terms.
The trouble with this method is that there are still more definitions required, for example, all of the signal control terms which are in another chapter.
Some care is needed with interpretation.
An instance is that ‘platoons’ are said by the author to disperse to regular or random lengthy headways.
These might be regular if there is not overtaking but random if there is unlimited overtaking, quite different patterns.
Later concerning pedestrians, she hopes that a pedestrian requiring an eight second gap to cross a stream of 600 veh/hr will not be delayed for more than 30 seconds.
I think this book is worth having for a professional needing some facts in a hurry and for a student wanting an introduction to intersection control.
Brewery Transport
WHITBREAD — 250 YEARS OF BREWERY TRANSPORT.
Mention the word ‘beer’ to the average person coupled with the name ‘Whitbread’, brings forth images of glasses full of light brown liquid with a little froth on the top.
Combine the above images with the name of Arthur Ingram and you'll know that the following book will be concerned with road transport.
This latest work deals with the history of road transport connected with the Whitbread Company.
the story starts with a comprehensive review of the various types of horse drawn transport with some good photographs of the brewery area and London delivery areas — even in the early 1900's experiments were taking place on the transport of beer in bulk using horse and carts for delivery vehicles.
The steam traction engine is not forgotten and many interesting photographs of vehicles used by associated companies during this time are included.
The next development was the use of limited motorised vehicles powered by the international combustion engine or electrically driven.
It is interesting to note that electric vehicles built in 1920 were still in use in the 1950s.
The history unfolds with the full scale introduction of motor vehicles following the First World War and the gradual take over of all delivery services.
Illustrations of the vehicles used for long distance services linking London with the West Country and the North, are shown and mention is made of these services being operated under control by several operators and then, by BRS.
Fleet standard is well illustrated with many photographs of the Dennis vehicles operated on local deliveries together with examples of the AFC flats and tankers used on long distance services when these were operated by Whitbread of which I can recall observing on their journey between London and the depots at Ashton-Under-Lyne and Stockport.
Examples of the later Atkinson and Seddon tankers operated during this period are also included.
The late 1950s to the 1970s saw a very interesting and rewarding period of development in the carriage of beer and is amply recorded in the book, covering not only the Whitbread vehicles, but also many examples of vehicles operated by other companies within the Group.
The ongoing development is continued in the story right up to the present day and it is very interesting to see the numerous designs which have been tried, tested and put into operation.
I found the book to be thoroughly entertaining.
The chapters commenced with a short description of the particular subject, followed by numerous photographs of vehicles and other ancillary equipment.
The standard of photographs through out, which do include a few very early ones, is very high.
I hope he continues to add to this series.
Planning transport
DECISION MAKING IN TRANSPORT PLANNING
This book is a worthwhile contribution to a poorly represented area.
According to the publisher, this introductory text ‘aims to foster better communication, between politicians…and transport planning professionals’.
Putting aside any cynical thoughts that it's a bit more than just communication which is needed here, I am reminded of views expressed by Prof Tony Ridley: ‘The job of the professional is to assist the politician  and clarify the issues for him.
No progress will be made without agreeing what the fundamental questions and issues really are.’
So, how does Truelove's book help us?
Perhaps, unfortunately, the emphasis is on discussion of recent events in the road and rail industries.
‘Recent’ in this case seems to mean c1990; thus reference is made to proposals for Manchester's Metrolink to run in the City Centre, while the changes wrought by the Transport and Works Act 1992 are barely anticipated.
History can never be fully brought up to date!
The author is on stronger ground when he looks at the technical characteristics of various modes.
Thus, the comparative analysis of achievable stopping patterns by bus, light rail and suburban rail is well done.
Some tabulation would have been useful.
This is essentially a book about urban policies; the duties of County Councils and Scottish Regions with reference to bus services escape any notice, while deep rural area problems are ignored.
However, this is not supposed to be a transport textbook.
The range of political institutions and objectives is well discussed, although one could have wished for more emphasis to be placed on European Community matters and where they may lead us.
From the point of view of those studying for the CIT Transport Policy and Planning examination, there are some useful insights.
Present practitioners in the black art of decision making in transport planning will find little new, but it is a useful compendium of information form scattered sources.
What the passengers say
BUSWATCH — A PASSENGER'S VIEW OF LOCAL BUS SERVICE 1988–92
What our users want is adequate information about regular, punctual services, on buses which give them a comfortable ride in a clean environment, driven by skilled and courteous drivers.
Inn many cases this is what they get, However this is not consolation to the user who, having been misinformed by an out of date roadside timetable, spends, say, fifteen minutes at a windswept bus stop, in pouring rain, awaiting a bus that is less than clean, being driven so badly that the ride is uncomfortable by a brusque and unhelpful driver.’
This is a preface to a genteel, quietly phrased voice of reasoned desperation from the person waiting (and sometimes waiting, and waiting) for a deregulated English bus.
This reader did not know whether to be more depressed by the carefully presented statistics, or the faint praise offered to bus managements for their efforts to rescue some kind of order from a rising tide of chaos.
The report gives the statistical data and the quantitative judgements of 410 regular bus travellers who were the Buswatchers.
The geographical spread of the observers is skewed.
There are large numbers in the area of Dr Cahm's own territory (Hampshire) and non reported in Scotland, Wales or the North West.
The tribulations of Manchester and South Wales are not recorded here.
Even so service instability, a lack of timetable data, and a failure to deal sensibly with complaints are some of the symptoms of poor service analysed here.
Buswatch has the virtue of not attempting to score points off harassed operators, and one of the most interesting dimensions of this excellent report is a record of the responses given by bus company managers to some of the issues raised.
These responses range from the occasionally constructive to the frequently resigned, salted with the occasional idiocy.
The report is clear, well written, almost too fair minded, and well quantified with excellent statistics prepared by Bob Harper and John Abbiss.
One longs to give a copy each to ten assorted bus company managers (leavened with the occasional politician and academic) and make them wait on a cold dark wet night in a vandalised bus shelter for an unpredictable R registered banger.
To make the scenario real they should be given pushchairs (complete with toddlers) and be regularly splashed by passing company cars.
A first hand acquaintance with dispiriting reality might bring some change to public transport policy.
In the meantime, those who view the bus as a feature of their past should read this report.
INSTITUTE PEOPLE
New chairman for RTITB
Ken Rogers OBE FCIT, who was chairman of the East Anglia Section for 1988–9 has become chairman of RTITB Services Ltd.
Mr Rogers has been associated with transport for 52 years and was National Chairman of the Road Haulage Association for 1980–2.
His commitment to training is well-known and CIT wishes him well in his new position.
Doctorate for award winner
Peter Hughes, who received the TNT-sponsored Transport Journalist of the Year Award from the Institute in 1992, has been awarded a Doctorate from the Open University for his thesis ‘A strategy for reducing emissions of greenhouse gases from personal travel in Britain.’
Peter is assistant editor of the ‘Local Transport Today’.
Jack Mather is retiring as Chief Executive of NFC following the company's annual meeting.
He will be succeeded by Peter Sherlock who until recently was a director of Bass plc.
Mr Mather was elected a Fellow of the Institute in 1981.
He has chosen to take early retirement to protect his long-term health having undergone major heart surgery three years ago.