

HELLO!
WELCOME TO THE SENIOR SCHOOL
THIS BOOKLET IS TO HELP YOU TO SETTLE IN BY GIVING YOU SOME INFORMATION ABOUT THE SUBJECTS IN YOUR TIMETABLE.
IT WILL NOT ANSWER ALL OF THE QUESTIONS THAT YOU HAVE, BUT HOPEFULLY IT WILL MAKE THE FIRST WEEK OR TWO EASIER!
IF YOU ARE NOT SURE ABOUT SOMETHING ASK YOUR CLASS REGISTRATION TEACHER OR YOUR YEAR TEACHER OR ANY MEMBER OF THE TEACHING STAFF.
THEY WILL BE PLEASED TO HELP.
WE HOPE THAT YOU ENJOY BEING IN THE SENIOR SCHOOL AND WE WISH YOU WELL.
QUESTIONS
Q What do I do if I am late for registration with my Class Teacher at 8.35 am?
A Go immediately to the Refectory and register there that you are late.
Q What do I do next?
A You may still be in time for Assembly, and if so, you must attend.
Q If I am late for assembly, what then?
A Wait in the Refectory until you are dismissed: this will usually be at 8.55 am.
Q If I arrive in School between 8.55 am and 9.30 am what do I do?
A Go to the Lodge and register late there.
Q Suppose that I arrive after 9.30 am?
A Go to the Lower Office and register there.
Q What do I do if I am feeling unwell at any time?
A Ask your teacher for permission to go to the Matron's Room .
If she is not there you will find a notice on her door telling you where she is to be found.
Should you still be unable to contact Matron, go to the Lower Office but only in an emergency.
Q What do I do if I wish to be excused attendance at School?
A A day or two beforehand bring a letter from you parent/guardian to your Class Teacher.
Your letter must state:
a)
Your name and class
b)
The length of time you wish to be excused classes
c)
The reason for your absence
The Headmaster is reluctant to agree willingly to absences for extended holidays.
ART
Art will not be a new subject for most of you.
However, the work you will be doing in the Art Department is the first two years of the Senior School is probably a bit different from what you have done in previous years.
You will be given the opportunity to try your hand at ceramics, printing, three dimensional model, pottery and of course painting and drawing.
The course is arranged to allow you to express your ideas and enjoy yourself.
At various points throughout the course you may be asked to visit Art Galleries and Exhibitions to help you with your Art project work.
The Craft Workshop meets on Mondays.
BIOLOGY
Biology is the study of all living organisms: plants, animals, bacteria and fungi.
You will investigate the features of living organisms.
You will look at how they feed, get their energy, get rid of waste materials, reproduce and take in the world about them.
You will learn about how they all depend on each other and about how the destruction of any one of them can have far reaching consequences.
Biology, like the other sciences, is partly studied in a laboratory but also partly studied by observation in the world about you.
You will be asked to design experiments and be given other problems to solve.
CHEMISTRY
Chemistry will be a subject new to you.
It is an essential part of all our lives concerned with the food we eat, the clothes we wear and the fuels we burn.
Finding out new facts about everyday substances and the environment will be something you will enjoy.
You will do experiments, usually working in pairs, in a chemical laboratory.
You will learn how to use scientific apparatus such as test tubes, beakers and Bunsen burners.
COMMUNITY EDUCATION
Could you give any helpful advice in this situation?
This moral dilemma is just one of the many topics studied in Community Education.
But it includes much more…from personal hygiene to library studies…from a Police course to knowing what it's like being deaf.
This one period a week course brings in guest speakers, involves group discussion and co-operation, and encourages sensitivity to adult values.
It's non-examinable, but that does not mean that what you are taught here is not worthwhile!
Indeed, you will learn many things which will be of great benefit to you, not only in your later years in School, but also as you prepare for ‘life in society’.
Much use will be made of the School Library where study skills will be learnt.
It's very surprising just how few people can actually look up a reference, or seek out information on a given topic!
COMPUTING
You may well have a computer at home or have used one somewhere else.
Computers are becoming more popular every day and because they are so useful, it is important that you learn something about them.
You will learn about the words people use when talking about computers.
You will also learn to find your way round the computer keyboard, and how to use computers when working with words, numbers and pictures.
We hope you will enjoy this subject and if you are really interested you can also join the Computer Club.
ENGLISH
In English we will look at a wide variety of different kinds of literature: novels, short stories, drama and poetry — you will be expected to read and understand them, and also to try your hand at writing stories and poems.
In addition, your skills in Writing will be developed through regular interpretation work (reading passages and giving answers) and writing essays and reports.
There will be opportunities to work in small groups and this will involve discussion and co-operation with others.
Apart from classroom work and regular written homework, there is a great emphasis on reading on your own.
Your English teacher will supply you with ideas but you are expected to read widely using the School Library and other sources of material to further your knowledge and your reading skills.
You must try to talk English!
Your teacher will be asking lots of questions, and you must try hard to give your views in class discussions.
the English Department hopes you enjoy your work in English in S1 and throughout the School.
FRENCH
BONJOUR!
Although you may not have studied French before, you will be surprised at how many French words you know and how much you know about France.
You must have been to ‘un cafe’, or to ‘le cinema’, or watched ‘le sport’ on ‘la têlêvision’.
In the French class nowadays the important thing is to SPEAK French — the sound of your voice in French may seem strange to you at first but you have a go right away and you will see what fun it can be.
Speaking French can be useful on holiday, can open up new friendships and may eventually help you in your work when you leave school.
Europeans are increasingly finding jobs in different countries.
‘Bonne Chance’!
GEOGRAPHY
Geography is simply the study of places.
One of the topics you will look at is the parts of the world where living condition are difficult for Man, like deserts, the Arctic and mountain areas.
Man also has to cope with a great range of natural disasters, like earthquakes, hurricanes and volcanoes — other topics studied in Geography.
You will learn how to make, and make use of maps of all kinds, skills which are useful in later life.
Later, we take a close look at the city of Edinburgh and the local scenery.
In the wider world we examine the great differences between countries like our own and the less fortunate poor world.
Lastly we must all learn how to protect the Earth from pollution, acid rain and the Greenhouse Effect if it is to remain a safe and healthy place to live in in the future — your future.
The Earth matters…we are all ‘green’ and ‘friends of the Earth’…or should be!
HISTORY
History is…understanding the past, through the eyes of the present.
Since history includes all that has ever happened, you will concentrate on two main areas — looking at the ancient civilisations of Egypt and Rome, before moving on to the Middle Ages.
You will learn how people lived and died, what has changed and what has stayed the same…the whole heritage of our human race if there!
You will be taught how the archaeologist and historian work together to investigate and piece together the evidence.
You will learn their skills — how to question, what to select and trust, and the way to record your own conclusions.
You will discover much in your journey through time — above all, that history is…fun!
HOME ECONOMICS
Home Economics' lessons in schools teach you useful skills which will help you to become independent as you grow up.
These skills are important for everyone — boys and girls — and include things like being able to use equipment safely with good results, being able to weigh and measure accurately, being able to plan, design and carry out practical tasks.
Most people enjoy eating but we don't always choose the foods we eat carefully.
In Home Economics we investigate different foods and their effect on our health.
We do this in different ways — by carrying out investigations, by conducting experiments, by tasting, comparing, costing and even cooking things!!
Most importantly you will enjoy doing things and making things, finding things out for yourself and making things look and taste as nice as possible.
MATHEMATICS
Mathematics can be a fascinating and exciting subject to study and the S1 course will encourage a greater understanding and enjoyment of Mathematics at ALL levels — you don't have to be a whizz kid!
Our scheme aims to promote your strengths and help you to become confident in the use of Mathematics in everyday life.
The course is designed to give you a grasp of the basic rules and how to apply them through the means of classroom teaching, practical activities, brainstormers, puzzles and the use of the microcomputer.
Teachers are there to help you as an individual.
No matter how easy or hard you find the work, our aim is to develop your potential to the full.
MUSIC
You must like some kind of music — whether it be Pop Music, Jazz, Folk Music or Classical Music!
In the Music class you will have the experience of listening to and making music of various kinds.
You will have a chance to play a variety of instruments ranging from recorders, percussion instruments including drums, to guitars, electric keyboards and synthesizers.
You will be able to put on group performances.
The School is full of opportunities to use and enjoy music.
We have three orchestras, several choirs, bands, a saxophone quartet and a pipe band.
A world without music would be a very dull place, so play your part and join in the singing, listening and playing.
Individual tuition in many instruments is available within the School — ask your Music teacher for details!
PHYSICAL EDUCATION
Nowadays everybody is aware of how important it is to be fit.
This doesn't just happen to you — you have to work at it and PE will help you to achieve fitness in an enjoyable way.
In your PE periods you will be introduced to basketball, water based activities, personal conditioning and softball.
On your Games Afternoon, Thursday in S1, you will go down to Goldenacre — your sports ground.
There you will learn to play hockey or rugby.
Later you may be able to choose cross-country running.
In the summer, athletics, cricket and tennis take over from the winter sports.
You will learn about your own individual fitness and skill levels and how you can improve these.
You will also experience playing as a member of a team in various sports, and how, by co-operating and getting on with other people, you can make a team more successful.
You will find out that sportsmanship, respect for your opponents and for the rules are all factors which will add to your enjoyment and sense of achievement when playing any sport.
If you are unable to take part in your Games lesson (due to injury or illness) then you should bring a note, asking to be excused.
This should be shown to the person in charge of your team, then taken to the ‘Excused Games’ room, where you will remain until 3.15 pm.
If you forget your kit you should still go to Goldenacre and report to the member of Staff in charge of your practice.
PHYSICS
P…
Please tell me, just what is Physics about?
H…
How on earth does a satellite stay in orbit?
Y…
Are lasers used in medicine?
S…
So what's so cool about double-glazing?
I…
Is there a point to lightning conductors?
C…
Can anybody resist electronics?
S…
Seems Physics is fun, doesn't it?
Some of these questions are difficult to answer.
In Physics, we try to unravel the fascinating problems and patterns set by Mother Nature, then use this knowledge for the benefit of all.
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION
Throughout history people have always found a need to worship a god and to understand something more about human life and spirituality.
The main organised religions in Scotland today are Christianity, Islam and Judaism, all of which share a belief in one God.
In the RE class you will learn about these three.
We hope to teach you that religion, in whatever form, affects our behaviour and how we organise our lives.
It is important today in a multicultural society that you learn to understand and respect what other people think and believe and therefore why they behave in the way they do.
RE will allow you to air your opinions and listen to other people's — an exciting challenge for anybody!
TECHNICAL
This is a new subject for you.
In the Technical Department you will learn to work with a variety of tools, materials and processes.
This includes lathes, drills, wood, metal, plastics and computing.
You will learn how to design and make things using all of the above and produce actual models which you can take home.
Technical Education is an exciting subject and makes use of many of the skills you are taught in other Departments such as Art, Computing, English, Mathematics and the Sciences.