

The Home Front
We gather in the house and stare,
Hoping to get things clear,
The small grey box; it brings the news
That most folk want to hear.
Young children pass the window.
So dark; I see their eyes,
No tears in their naive faces
For loved ones long since died.
Outside the wind is cold and harsh
The factory lies bare.
As darkness falls an eerie voice
Whines beware, beware, beware.
The School Photograph
Everyone smart, all eyes to the front,
Reluctant at first— there's one grin for one glare,
‘Please look the part’ says the man with a grunt,
Then a smile spreads form mouth's everywhere.
This is the moment for which they kept clean,
They all file away — slacken ties, undo belts,
Everyone glad just to leave the scene,
The view filled with smiles melts.
Later I found it — in a drawer tucked away,
The paper all crumpled and the corners torn,
The colour all faded, but the outlines stay.
Suddenly proud of the colours I'd worn.
The view that was captured, all memories too,
All faces remembered, but names — just a few.
This is my own work and it is not a copy or near copy of anything I have read or heard.
‘LENNIE’ POEM 
A huge man,
broad and strong,
But different inside,
His mind all wrong.
Trapped as a child,
It makes some sad,
Some laugh at him,
Some call him mad.
He tries to talk,
He tries to say,
What he means,
But they walk away.
Afraid to know,
Afraid to care,
They only want,
To stand and stare.
But he has feelings,
He's just confused,
People speak,
And he stands bemused.
He tries to know,
To understand,
He strives to learn,
But he's banned.
From being normal,
Fitting in,
He tries so hard,
But he can't win.
It has to end,
But still the hand,
That holds the gun, trembles,
As he hits the sand.
WAR POEM 
I suppose,
If different countries of the world
Can't come to an agreement
About an issue,
Then war might be O.K.
There's sometimes no better way
To decide who's boss.
But
What I can't understand is
Why don't the important people fight each other 
Instead of saying
‘What jolly good citizens you are —
Now go and fight terribly bad citizens
From that other part of the world
Because we don't like
The important people there’.
No — I think,
If the world did what I said,
I would make sure that
When important people argued,
They would go
Into a special place just for them
And kill each other as fast as possible
Until some of them decided that
Well maybe
The others were right after all
And they would stop fighting.
But they wouldn't be allowed to bother us while they did that.
We would be much better off
Without important people anyway
They just annoy us
And while they were killing each other 
We could all live quite happily
On our own.
SONNET — THE STREAM 
I walk in a wood on an Autumn day;
The air is so fresh, and crisp, and clear,
Nature before me has come this way,
And scattered her palette of colours here.
Yet despite all the colour, and beauty, and light,
So quiet it could be a dream,
The wonder that instantly catches my sight
Is the rippling, bubbling stream.
I watch, entranced as it gurgles  its way
Through the shadiest part of the wood —
It becomes, as the sunlight flashes a ray,
So beautiful, but simple; so fluid, yet one could
Not move it, for here it will always be —
Entrapped in the forest, but forever free.
POEM — WORST ENEMIES 
Forever moving forwards
It cannot be stopped
Some cower
As it marches ruthlessly on
Sometimes fast, sometimes slow
Yet never changing speed.
Others glance at it, furtively,
Hoping to get by without being noticed
But unable to succeed.
It always leaves its mark
They will never be the same again.
Some try to race it
Always wanting to get there first,
To get everything done
Before it catches up with them
But it always wins,
And they must leave what they are doing
Until another time.
THE P.E.
TEACHER
The bell rings, we pack away
‘Oh No! it's gym today’
We thunder down the cold stone stairs
To the dreaded gym waiting there.
We change as fast as we possibly can,
One thought in our minds — that awful man
The light blue shell suit, training shoes,
We wait to be given the bad news.
‘It's fitness today!’
We all give a groan
And collapse with a loud universal moan
That awful whistle, on its thread,
The piercing sound fills us with dread.
He proceeds to tell us what to do
He gives instructions; ‘You and You ’,
Set up the equipment we will need,
And you there boy, take the lead’.
The poor victims tremble, but obey —
They're sure to embarrass themselves in some way,
Like trip a mat, or drop a weight,
They give that teacher looks of hate.
The class proceeds: the thin and fat,
Stagger around the gym, while that
Dreaded teacher turns a blind eye
To the grunts and groans of his victims, why;
He's almost even enjoying the pain
Of us suffering children, under such strain,
Until finally, with a sigh of regret,
He blows the whistle — but it's not over yet.
We must still tidy up, put things away,
To wait until another day
Changes…
‘Dad…!
I said smiling sweetly.
‘Dad…’
I repeated, more firmly this time.
‘Yes, Jennifer?’
‘Em…
I was wondering, can I get some money to go out with Kate and Alison this weekend?
Please Dad.’
I stood with my hands palm to palm in a praying position and pleaded with him.
‘I'm sorry Jennie, darling.
You know how tight it is just now what with your mother's funeral expenses.
I am sorry.
Maybe next week, eh?’
He stroked my hair.
‘Sure Dad.
Next week,’ I said wistfully.
I forced a smile and then turned and fled to my room.
I shut the door and leant against it.
‘It's not fair.
It's just not fair!’
I crouched down behind the door and buried my head in my knees.
I sat thinking about the twins, Kate and Alison, family.
They had a grand white house which sat on the side of a hill where there were large gardens and also a stables.
If we went into town, for instance, and they saw perhaps clothes that they liked, they would be sure to come to school next week wearing them.
Or, if they wanted new make-up then they got it.
I don't wear make-up.
Nor are my clothes ‘trendy’ or my jewellery expensive.
I lived in a small, second floor flat with my father, my mother being dead, which overlooked a small, noisy courtyard.
I had never been in the lift since moving — either it was out of order or I could smell the putrid stench seeping out into the lobby and avoided it.
The stairs were my usual route to the ‘hell-hole’ in which I lived and walking up them I had to dodge numerous heaps of ‘gunk’.
Some remains of a take- away pizza or greasy Chinese food cartons and mountains of chewed gum stuck to the floor, walls and hand rails.
Graffiti like ‘Stacey luvs Kev’, written inside a red heart, adorns the grey cement walls and people's front doors.
Our door is painted a bright green colour with numerous messages using inappropriate language and phrases covering its exterior.
I fell asleep, crouched beside the door, still wearing my clothes.
The next morning I awoke early and tidied myself for school.
I quietly let myself out of the flat and ran down the stairs coming too quickly upon a crumpled heap hunched at the bottom.
‘I'm sorry…
I didn't mean to disturb you,’ I mumbled apologetically.
‘Hullo there…‘ere who're — ye?
Not seen you before round ‘ere.’
His voice was slurred but friendly.
‘Well, I'm new.
I've got to go…’
‘Bubye…oh flower of Scotlan’ w'en will ye see…’
He picked up a bottle of meths and took a ‘slug’.
I turned and left the building hastily.
When I got to school, Kate and Alison were waiting for me.
‘Hi Jennie.
How do you like my new skirt?’
Kate did a twirl, ‘Daddy bought it for me.
Are you able to come out at the weekend with us?’
‘Well…em…no.
I don't think I can.
I've lots of jobs around the house…you understand, don't you?’
‘Yes, sure.
Oh, well.
Maybe another time, when you are not so busy.’
With that, they walked off together to class and left me standing alone by the gates.
Why could I never go out with them, be like them or have as nice clothes as them?
Of course, I knew the answer.
‘Hi Dad!’
I shouted, closing the flat door after me.
There was no response so I called again and walked over to the kitchenette.
A note lay on the counter-top:
Jennie
I am at work but I'll be back later tonight so your dinner is in the fridge.
A letter came for you — I have left it on the table.
See you later,
Love Dad.
I found the letter and picked it up.
My name and address were printed in a bold black type on a plain white envelope.
Using a knife, I carefully opened it across the top and slipped the letter out.
I could not believe it!
This surely was a mistake.
When I was two my mother had bought me a number of premium bonds and ever since I had hoped for a little win.
This, however, was incredible!
I shut my eyes and opened them again and checked the figure it said I had won.
No, it was true.
Half a million pounds!
I didn't know what to do, I couldn't phone my dad because we didn't have a phone so I sat around grinning, and waiting.
We moved out of the flat a few weeks after and found a house fairly close to Kate and Alison's.
I didn't realise at the time the extent to which it would actually alter my life.
For the first few weeks I enjoyed being able to go out at the weekends, to buy trendy clothes and other things that I did not really need or appreciate.
I cannot believe I was so shallow back then.
I thought that just because I had money, I would somehow be accepted more.
People began to ignore me and call me a ‘snob’ behind my back — I admit I was now, I did not understand why.
I thought that because I had looked up to the twins on account of their wealth I expected others to do the same to me.
I soon realised that not everyone was as naive as I had been and I fell out with Kate and Alison.
People, my real friends, had respected me for coping so well after my mother's death and for putting up with my financial situation at home.
When I became fully aware of this, I gave all of my fashionable new clothes to ‘Oxfam’ and fished out my old blue jeans and ‘sloppy joe’jumper which I had nearly thrown out only a few weeks before.
Well I'm busy this afternoon — I'm going to the library with a couple of my new best friends.
Although it is fun to be able to go out every weekend I've learnt that being rich is not all it first appears to be.
The Music of the Loom 
It was 4 o'clock in the morning when Agnes got up.
Her husband was still asleep in bed but she had work to do.
She lived on one of the small crofts on Lewis in a small glen that was home to three other crofts.
Dawn was just breaking as she went down to the burn to fetch water.
The women of the other crofts were already at the burn, filling their pails at the freezing cold stream.
Though heavily laden as they were on their trek back to the crofts, they did not complain.
They were used to heavy work as they had to run the crofts & do all the work themselves when their husbands were away on the boats.
All the men on Lewis were fishermen and the women were used to coping without them.
When they were away, there was always the worry that they would never come back but when they got home, they always brought with them gossip of other places and other people.
That morning, the Gaelic voices rose and fell excitedly on the way back from the burn as the three women talked of the news their husbands brought — news of a new born baby on the other side of the island or a death on a neighbouring isle.
Agnes left the other two as she drew near to her cottage.
She had no time for idle gossip as she had to do all the work herself.
The other women had daughters to help them, she had never been so lucky.
It was getting on towards 5 am and that left her only two hours before her husband got up.
In that time, she had to clean the house, set the fire, heat water for her husband and make his breakfast.
Agnes set the fire first.
It would take a time to catch and then she could heat the water & cook Alisdair's breakfast.
If it wasn't ready, just as he liked it, there would be trouble and that was something she just didn't have time for.
She put the porridge on to cook and started to sweep the room.
The croft cottage was small, only two rooms, but she took pride in her work.
It was her own cottage and it was all she had to show for 20 years of marriage so, she reasoned, she might as well make it look as good as possible.
Half an hour before Alisdair got up, she moved the porridge to the back of the fire and put a pot of water over the flames, she was roughly on time at the moment so there might not be trouble after all.
Agnes went outside and took a ladder from the out-house.
She put the ladder up against the stone wall of the cottage, gathered her skirts up in one hand and started to climb.
When she was level with the edge of the thatch, she stopped and leaned over with well practised ease to take her tin of money out from its hiding place under the thatch.
She took two silver coins out of the tin then put it where it could only be found by her.
The pig Agnes had at the moment was just about ready to have its throat slit so she would send Alisdair to the market for a new one.
In this manner, she could get Alisdair out from under her feet for the morning and, when the meat from the present pig ran out, there would be a new one ready for slaughter.
Agnes went back into the cottage and, hearing Alisdair moving around in the other room, poured the water into a basin so that he might wash.
As he was washing, she told him that he was to go to the market for a pig.
He reluctantly agreed to go then went to have his porridge.
Once he was gone, Agnes cleaned the porridge pot and put it back on its hook beside the fire, then went out to milk the cow.
She only had one cow, it was all she could afford, but it provided enough milk to go with the porridge in the morning and the potatoes at other meals.
Once the cow was milked, the chickens fed and the eggs collected, Agnes faced the task that she dreaded.
She had to kill her pig.
The last one's meat had run out the previous day and if the new one's meat was not salted within a day or two, there would be no pork or bacon for at least a month.
She shut her mind to the fact that the pig was a living thing and as she drew the knife across its throat, she told herself that she would not let herself get this attached to any future pigs.
As soon as she thought this, she realised that she had resolved to do the very same every time she killed one of her pigs.
After the pig had issued its last piercing shriek, Agnes offered up a prayer asking God's forgiveness with the excuse that, if she hadn't killed the pig, Alisdair would have gone without his bacon.
Once the pig was dead, Agnes viewed it in a whole different light and very matter-of-factly skinned it and salted the carcass.
She then hung it out in the outhouse for storage.
With the greater part of her days work done and since she did not have to cook Alisdairs lunch,(he would likely stop in a pub near the market), she went back into the cottage to enjoy the only pleasure she got from life on the croft, her weaving.
She pulled her loom out from the corner and put a stool in front of it.
As her bobbin shot back and forward between the wools, she sang the old Gaelic songs that had been passed down from mother to daughter for centuries.
She might not have had a daughter to sing them with but she could enjoy their soulfullness on her own.
Gluttony
A small boy sat beside a home-made wooden cross.
The dust blew round his feet and often he rubbed his eyes because they had filled with water.
As far as the eye could see was desert and the only break in the horizon was the pitiful silhouette of a few mud shelters.
Otherwise the sand simply merged into the clear blue sky.
The village seemed to shimmer as the heat made everything look as though it was under water.
Scattered around him were complete skeletons reminding him of when his country was able to produce crops and feed animals.
Now all that was left of the farm was a very thin goat which would not last much longer.
Nobody could ever bring themselves to putting an animal out of its misery because the farm was no longer talked about, although at the back of everybody's mind was a dream of a new farm, even better than the first, with water being pumped from underground to irrigate the crops.
The only water to be seen was the boy's tears falling into the sand.
Buried under his feet were the remains of his little sisters and his mother.
He laid the cross down and his mind flew back to the day his sisters were born….
His father had been working on the farm and he had been sitting at the door of the hut.
His mother called him to help her lift the water pot.
He had not gone because his mother was always asking him to help her with things that she could have done perfectly well by herself.
She called him again but he ignored her.
He waited until he could hear the water pot being pulled across the floor of the hut and then he entered to find his mother leaning against the mud wall and screaming for the doctor.
The doctor had told the boy to leave and get his father, but on their return the doctor appeared at the door of the hut and handed the boy's father a baby girl wrapped in his wife's shawl.
The doctor had announced that the boy's mother was dead and that she would have had twins but they had come prematurely because of her lifting something heavy.
One of the girls was much bigger than the other but neither survived the first hour in their new world.
More tears rolled onto the sand as he remembered how his father had dropped the bundle and run away across the farm, never to be seen again….
He pushed himself back up on to his feet again and started to stumble across the sand to the village.
A large gust of wind blew a cloud of dust in to his face and he put his back into the wind so that he could wipe the rest of the tears from his cheeks.
He made his way slowly along the dust track as rickets had disabled his knees and the only way he could move was to shuffle his bare feet slowly along the hard-packed mud track.
Waiting at the doorway of the wind beaten mud hut were the last remaining members of his family — his grandparents, who owed their sight problem to cataracts.
They gazed at him with blue- black fly filled eyes, and a small glimmer of happiness grew on their faces.
They did not ever smile — but you could tell that when their empty eyes opened they were alive.
The boy's name was Asik.
He had to look after his grandparents, bring them food and water and re-build the mud shelter.
After a while under the hot sun the mud dried out and started to crumble.
This meant bringing water in large water pots from the river two miles away.
The journeys needed to be made twice and sometimes three times a day.
Asik knew that his grandparents would die if he did not give them enough water and there was no water left in the pots, so he set off to the river.
The empty pot was heavy and Asik found it very difficult to walk without carrying anything, but the pot made it almost impossible for him to move at any speed.
The hot sun burnt his back and sweat ran down the rags of his shorts.
Still he trudged on.
On his way, many other people passed him with water pots — many with swollen knees like himself and others with different disfigurements.
Some had leprosy and other people's backs were crooked from carrying the heavy containers.
As he neared the river he passed through small farms and villages.
Asik simply wished he could live closer to the village but he knew there was no way his grandparents would survive the move, so he trundled on and tried dearly not to think about it.
The day was extremely hot and by the time Asik reached the river it was already very busy.
Dirty children, no younger than himself, splashed around in the water; women washed their clothes and many animals drank from it.
The river was muddy and dusty.
Asik was glad to get a drink; it did not matter to him if the water was dirty or clean, he was thirsty and gulped down as much as he could, washed his feet and then filled up the water jug.
He sat on the bank for a while and looked longingly on while the children played in the river.
He looked up at the sky and the sun blinded him, he looked at the river and the reflections of his disfigurement hurt him.
He looked to the east and saw the city, the sight of the city was all he was ever allowed.
The rest was like the reddest apple on the highest branch of a tree, forbidden.
Everything shimmered in the heat and he knew he was not wanted by the river and he knew his place was at home.
The journey home was always worse.
The sun was already directly above him and his knees hurt him badly.
He had to stop and sit down twice on the way because he felt as though he was going to collapse.
Still the flies gathered around his eyes and mouth.
As soon as he got back to the hut he passed his grandparents a bowl of water each.
This time no expression came over their faces and he knew they did not have much time to live.
He had a small drink from a bowl and started to wander away from the camp.
The sun was no longer so hot on his neck but still perspiration gathered on his face and the flies gathered round his eyes.
He thought again about his parents, but it had been a long time and he became angry with himself because he could no longer picture their faces like before.
He thought this was because he was bad and the evil in him was telling him to forget about them, but he would win, he would not forget.
But the evil was strong and he could not stop it.
He moved on slowly until he reached one of the roads into the city.
He was tired after his journey to the river and his knees ached.
He sat at the side of the road and surveyed the sun-parched land before him.
Never before had his country had such a devastating drought.
Never before had he seen so many people starving and so many crops dying, their dried remains being simply blown away by the wind.
Why had this been allowed to happen?
Surely God, if there was one, wouldn't have sent it!
Asik knew that blaming God for everything was not right, his mother had told him so, but who else could have been so cruel?
Asik's faith in God was rapidly decreasing and the only reason he still trusted God was because the memory of his dear mother still lingered somewhere in the back of his now muddled mind.
His stomach ached because of lack of food and he was no longer a quick thinker of a fit and healthy boy.
His tummy had grown very large and when he walked he could no longer see his thin, mis-shapen legs.
How he longed for food and a drink.
Asik heard a rumbling noise and he could just see a small cloud of dust appearing in the distance.
If it were a cart then he could ask for a lift and go to the city where there was shelter and plenty to eat.
He could get a job and earn some money to buy some clothes — but he knew this was just a dream.
He would be lost in the city on his own and besides he must not forget about his grandparents — they would die if he did not look after them.
The noise became louder and he could just see the outline of a lorry.
It was very old and very dirty due to the dust and sand on the road.
Asik rose to his feet and moved slightly back from the road.
As the lorry neared him he could see that it was carrying fruit for the city.
How he longed to taste fruit again.
He had not eaten anything apart from the occasional so-called mash since the crops had died and he had only been allowed that because of a special emergency food supplies being sent in from other parts of the country.
Asik became angry as he thought of all the people in his village who could have been saved by the fruit in the lorry which had just passed him, throwing up bucketfuls of dust into his face.
His eyes filled with water and he rubbed them to remove the dirt.
Seeing the first signs of salt water he was landed on by lots of flies which got into his eyes and irritated him more than the dust.
Asik was hungary and tired, his knees were sore and he wanted to go to sleep but he got up slowly and started down the road.
As the long days of sunlight drew on Asik became weaker and weaker but he was kept going by an object in the direction of the city which looked like another lorry, but this one was not moving.
It was red and looked too small to be a lorry but never the less it had wheels like the carts in the village.
As he drew closer he could see the outlines of people sitting down under the shade of a tree near the river.
They were talking and laughing and generally having a good time.
A red and white checked blanket lay on the ground and in the middle of the blanket was the biggest box Asik had ever seen.
It looked as though it had been woven like the baskets which were used to collect tea from the old plantations.
Asik ran behind a nearby tree and watched.
A family was placed evenly round the blanket.
Three well built children squabbled for plates and one was broken.
The mother shouted at one of the boys and he went back to sit in the small lorry.
The woman was well built too, and the man had a very large stomach and was wearing a baggy shirt which just covered his belly.
The mother opened the box and Asik's mouth began to water for within the box was the biggest feast Asik had ever seen.
There were sandwiches and meat on sticks, fruit and small pots of a strange looking white substance.
Asik watched as the mother passed around all of the sandwiches and put them daintily on the plates.
Some strange noises came from one of the children and Asik thought he must have been in pain.
The mother snapped back at him and frowned.
The father did not say a word but he shovelled many sandwiches into his mouth and swatted the occasional fly which landed on his fat body.
The boy complained again and this time his mother got up and grabbed his hair.
Asik was astonished, he forgot about his hiding place behind the tree and jumped into the road.
The party turned around to face him and for the first time the fat man moved.
He grabbed a sandwich off his plate and threw it at Asik.
Asik immediately reached down for the delicacy and carefully slipped it into his shorts.
The father dashed round his vehicle and came out with a camera.
Asik gazed in wonder at the strange contraption.
The flashes of light as the lens reflected the rays of the sun blinded him.
Asik reached to hide his face and fell onto the ground.
Shrieks came from the mother and the children quickly stuffed the rest of the sandwiches into their already full mouths.
The youngest child in the lorry started to cry as he saw a skinny boy crumple in the road.
The mother tried desperately to pack the remains of the afternoons tea back into her box.
The party crammed back into the lorry and quickly set off again.
The children were still crying so their mother promised them ice cream and sweets from the city.
Asik still lay in the road.
He had no energy left at all.
He clambered slowly back to his feet and ambled back to the village.
He had not realised quite how far he had walked from his hut.
As he saw his grandparents as the door he started to move faster.
His grandmother had slumped into a heap but when Asik tried to lift her head he realised that she too had died.
A tear slowly rolled down his grandfather's face, but still his eyes gazed at a point miles and miles away.
Asik handed him the sandwich but this time no hand reached towards the morsel.
Asik thought if only….
In a Bath Teashop
She sat, still staring at the newspaper and slowly a look of understanding came across her face as if the final piece of the jigsaw had just been put into place.
As I recall it had all started about three months ago when Miss Court first joined the group of church helpers but she was more of a helper as we had never seen her at church before.
The van would arrive every evening to give food to the homeless living on the streets and she was serving up the soup when she saw a man sitting in the doorway.
So, eager to help, she went over to him, he had been around for a while but he was strange so nobody really spoke to him.
He was talking to himself as she approached and when he saw her he immediately huddled further into the doorway.
‘Soup?’
‘What?
Here?
Now?
No thank you’ came the rather strange reply from the dark.
‘Are you sure?
I mean there's plenty.’
‘I said no alright.
Now leave.’
She did as instructed but left the cup of soup out and as she glanced round she saw a hand grab it and disappear into the dark.
This situation carried on for a few weeks, she would try to talk but always just ended up leaving some food on the step.
Then one morning on her way to work she was distracted by a commotion across the street and as she crossed she saw the owner of the hand being thrown out of a shop.
She went over and helped him up and offered to buy him breakfast which, after a lot of persuasion, he accepted.
They walked to the teashop in silence and sat in a booth waiting to make their order.
‘I'm Lizzie Court’ she said in a desperate attempt to break the silence.
‘Joseph Cant.
Pleased to meet you’ he replied.
‘I must thank you for all this and giving me food in the week and I'm sorry for what I said, it's just that I'm not used to people being nice to me.
They usually look down on me, if only they knew.’
‘Knew what?’ inquired Lizzie.
‘Oh you know, the usual,’ he said quickly and then changed the subject.
‘What do you work as?’
‘Oh I've got a boring job in an office.
But tell me what was going on back there?’
‘At the shop you mean, well I was just trying to borrow  something , that's all.’
The conversation carried on for half an hour and then they parted company as she went to work and he went off to his job.
She did not see Joe for a few days and then one Friday as she walked past she saw him in the teashop and went in to join him.
He was constructing something from a foil ash tray when she approached.
He intrigued her, there was something about the way he acted, the way he spoke that made him different from all the other vagrants that she had met.
She allowed the idea of falling in love with him dance across her mind but soon dismissed it with a smile.
‘What's this?’ asked Lizzie.
‘It's the machine that I used to dream about.’
‘What does it do?’ she asked with a confused expression.
‘Travels through time,’ came the reply as the silvery mess was crushed in his hand, ‘but it is only a dream.’
They talked for hours about everything and she loved to listen to him as he had views on trivial things which she had never considered before.
But she still could not help but stare and think about that crumpled dream on the table.
This time when they said their good byes they arranged to meet the following morning and so things continued.
Every morning at 9  am they would meet and sometimes in the afternoon.
They would frequently receive strange glances from those in other booths but she just ignored it.
She would find herself looking forward to their meetings and to their conversations even if they were slightly strange sometimes.
Again she considered that she may be falling in love with him but this time she was not so quick to dismiss it.
They never changed the booth they sat in and they found that nobody was ever sitting in it as if it had an invisible reserved sign hanging above it.
Lizzie was waiting for him one morning when the waitress came over to the table.
‘Late is he?’ she asked.
‘Yes.’
‘That's unusual.
I must admit I never thought I'd see a tramp like that one falling in love with such a good woman as yourself’.
‘Pardon?’ said Lizzie in a shocked tone.
‘Well you know what I mean.
He's a thief, done time probably and well,’ the waitress was looking more uneasy and going redder as she talked herself into more trouble, ‘anyway here he is,’and she scuttled off.
Joe sat down, he was red and out of breath.
‘What's up?’ asked Lizzie.
‘My past has caught up with me, I was not fast enough in building my machine.’
‘What are you talking about?’
‘Last night I finally realised what was missing from my design so I went to get it but I got into some problem.’
explained Joe.
‘What do you mean, what problem, what's going on?’ she demanded.
‘I needed this piece and as I was looking around I saw exactly what I needed on this motor bike so I took it and now these guys want to kill me.’
‘No wonder.
Have you gone mad or something.
I mean you talked about this before but it was just a joke, right.’
said Lizzie.
‘Yeah sort of.
But forget it what has been happening here.’
Asked Joe while nervously looking around him.
‘Well the strangest thing just happened.
That waitress just came over and said that we were in love.’
‘And are we not in love?’
‘Eh I don't know.
I've thought about it but we are so different, with you being a thief and I'm just an ordinary woman.’
‘Let us not speak, for the love we bear one another— let us hold hands and look.’
As they stared at each other everything seemed fine, the differences did not matter, all that mattered was the love they shared.
Joe then jumped up and ran shouting as he went.
‘I must go and finish it, before they break it, before they destroy my dream.’
A headline had grabbed her attention and so she bought the paper and sat in the booth reading over and over again the following morning.
‘Missing Eccentric Scientist found stabbed to death in doorway.’
As she stared, she saw out of the corner of her eye a perfectly constructed foil dream.
ANGER 
The bundle of carefully folded linen fell from Mrs Crawford's hands as a piercing shriek cut through the silence of the afternoon.
She shot down stairs faster than she had moved for thirty years, her head full of horrific accidents.
Had someone broken a limb?
What if Lucy had split her head open again?
She would need to call an ambulance straight away.
Maybe one of her children would need to stay in hospital for weeks — could she cope?
And what about….
But all her frantic thoughts were cut short as she opened the door, to see her own children sitting, staring in amazement at the red-faced boy in the middle of the floor with his hands raised to strike one of them.
A broken toy lay between them which seemed to be the source of the trouble; it was Lucy's best doll, she noted, before striding into the room, anger swiftly replaced her fright.
That Bingham-Jones boy had been a nuisance all day; he was a spoiled brat; and what he needed was a good smacking.
If she wasn't being paid by his rich over indulgent parents, she would have punished him there and then.
As she stood, wondering how to sort out the tangle, the door bell rang.
Thank god, she thought, his parents at last.
They'd left Jamie with her while they went on a business trip across the country, and she was thoroughly fed up with him.
She opened the door thankfully, ready with polite expressions of welcome, but they died away at the sight of the tear-stained, pale faces before her.
‘We've been cheated,’ sniffled Mrs Bingham-Jones, ‘We've lost everything’.
And she burst into tears again.
Mrs Jones stood in the entrance of her small livingroom, her face betraying unhappiness as she surveyed the scene before her.
The worn, faded furniture, the dingy wallpaper, the papers scattered around, the smell of alcohol.
The room reflected an aggressive nature — the photographs of burly boxers with fists held high in victory, the guns in the cabinet on the wall, the small black-and-white television blaring out the commentary of a boxing match, the picture of a large dog in the corner.
And in the middle of all this, her husband Jamie sat dozing in a large, battered armchair, belching every now and then.
He was unshaven, and his stomach was beginning to protrude over his belt, but there were still traces of the fine, athletic figure and well-cut features that she had married seven years ago.
She remembered those days when they had played together as children, too, he always getting his own way.
The Jones' family had moved in quietly when Jamie was just nine years old, and she had lived a few doors down the street.
The family had been odd she remembered; their accent was more up market, and they had formal, stiff manners, unlike the relaxed style and broad accents of the Glaswegian neighbourhood.
Still she had found Jamie fascinating as a boy, despite his selfishness, and their friendship had flourished.
But since they had married, as young impulsive teenagers, his charm had evaporated.
He gambled and drank, and she had to humour him always to prevent him from flying into rages….
Her reverie was interrupted by the click of the front door being opened and closed, as her daughter stepped into the room.
She doesn't deserve a life like this, thought Mrs Jones, looking at the pale face and shadowed eyes before her.
And again she felt that pang of guilt which had bothered her ever since they had adopted Jo five years ago, at the age of eleven.
They had both agreed to adopt after two years of unfruitful marriage, but decided to bypass the responsibilities of looking after a baby.
But maybe they shouldn't have — she must have known a better life before this, and what right had they to claim her as their own without having brought her up?
Her head full of these questions, she turned wearily and went back into the kitchen.
Mr Jones stirred, belched and clambered reluctantly out of his doze.
The boxing was still on, his wife was in the kitchen and his daughter was sitting in the sofa, reading a magazine.
He felt irritated without knowing why, and addressed his daughter sharply.
‘Where've you been all this time?’
‘Out’ she muttered reluctantly.
‘Answer my question, girl,’ he snapped.
‘I was shopping,’ she said.
‘What did you buy?’
‘A hat’ she spoke the words clearly, in defiant tones, expecting trouble.
But suddenly, he couldn't be bothered to argue any further, and went back to watching the boxing, storing the argument away carefully in his mind to bring up against her another time.
She got up and left the room.
About a week later, the family sat at the small table eating dinner.
They ate in silence, broken only by the clatter of cutlery and requests for the salt.
As they finished eating Jo stood up saying
‘Well I'm going to get myself ready’
‘Where do you think you're going tonight?’ demanded Mr Jones
She opened her mouth to speak, but Mrs Jones cut in quickly.
‘She's going to help Gail set up the charity drive for tomorrow, aren't you Jo?’
‘Yes Dad, she asked me for some help.’
‘Why wasn't I told,’ he grumbled peevishly.
‘Well, you've been at work all day; we haven't seen you to tell you,’ broke in Mrs Jones again.
He grudgingly let the excuse pass, and Jo ran off to get ready before he could stop her again.
Leaving his wife to clear up all the dishes, Mr Jones went to get himself ready for a good game of cards with his friends from work.
Before he left, he called to his daughter;
‘Home no later than 9.30, Jo,’ to which he received some inarticulate reply.
Ignoring it, he left the house.
At 11.00 that night, Mr Jones returned.
Singing loudly he entered the living-room and called for his wife to bring him something to drink.
As she emerged from the kitchen, he noticed a look of disapproval on her face which provoked him to anger.
He also noted that she hadn't brought a drink.
Demanding to know why, he began to shout at her.
But he had been coming home drunk too often and now she was determined to let him know her feeling about it.
Unused to being argued with, he shouted and cursed at her, and soon the two of them were arguing fiercely, he having trouble making articulate sentences due to his excessive amount of drink, which only made him yet angrier.
And, into the midst of this crept Jo, trying to escape up to her room without being seen.
She failed, however, and Mr Jones grabbed her and shook her, demanding to know where she had been, and why she was two hours later than he had said coming home.
Mrs Jones began to frame a feeble excuse for her, but he cut her off and shoved her roughly out of the way without losing his grip on Jo.
Again defiant she told him;
‘Out with someone’.
‘Who?’ he shouted.
‘Stuart Hardy’ she answered, some of her confidence disappearing.
Mr Jones exploded in anger.
‘Why didn't you tell me, you stupid little slut?’ he yelled.
‘No daughter of mine goes near a bastard like that!
And you, Jenny, you must have known as well!
She shrank away from him, nodding.
But her fear only provoked him further and he turned + slapped first Jo, and then her solidly across the face — a thing he had never done before.
He told them both never to leave the house again, and stormed out of the room, slamming the door hard enough to break a chunk of plaster out of the wall.
The two left behind stood looking dazedly after him.
After that night, the family began to deteriorate.
Although Mr Jones final orders were neither carried out nor enforced, he became progressively more violent and was drunk more often, leaving them little or no money for food.
Over the following months, Jo and her mother received several blows for relatively small offences, and they began to feel afraid of him, always humouring him to prevent trouble.
Then one night he came home to inform them that he had lost his job.
He just walked in announced this, threw himself into a chair and took up a book.
His face clearly forbade questions and his wife and daughter automatically obeyed.
He never gave an explanation and they knew better than to ask, but they guessed it would be a problem connected with his increasing consumption of drink.
After this, he became brooding, listless and depressed.
He never made an effort to look for a job, but would sit for hours, staring at the television and through it without seeing.
He still drank, began to smoke, and only took notice of his wife and child to shout at them or hit them, usually when he was drunk.
This gave them a little more freedom, and his habit of falling asleep in the afternoons allowed them to get out of the house sometimes.
And Mr Jones in his own world never once suspected that Jo would dream of seeing that boy again after that fateful night, that seemed so long ago.
In the middle of the night, Mr Jones awoke with a crashing headache and a foreboding feeling that something was decidedly wrong.
As he turned over, he noticed that his wife wasn't there.
Instantly he sprang out of bed, shouting her name, and ran all over the house looking for her.
As he re-entered the bedroom he noticed that some of the drawers lay open and were messed up, and as the truth began to dawn on him he ran to his private money supply hidden in a sock, for his outings to the pub.
It was empty, Jo was by this time awake (having crept earlier to bed), but she didn't move for fear of her father's anger interpreting his shouts of rage, she gathered that her mother was gone and realising what damage he could consequently do to her and her baby, she knew that she had to escape.
But her earlier beating caused her to move slowly and as she was attempting to open the window in order to jump out, her father strode into the room.
Instantly seizing her, he dragged her to the living-room, yelling and shouting, demanding to know where his wife was.
Jo began frantically to try frame a lie in her mind but she could not think clearly.
She just shook her head worthlessly, terror in her eyes.
She could see the rage building up in her father and knew that when it burst he would lose all ability to reason.
She had to act before he killed her or her child.
As he lunged for her she threw herself out of the way and looked desperately for a way out.
Her eye fell on the cabinet on the wall containing the guns: a memento of his strange and unexplained past.
In the second her father took to regain his balance she smashed the glass and grabbed one of them.
Before she could think or reason she levelled the gun at the face before her and felt herself pull the trigger.
The figure slumped to the floor and the anger was gone, the gun fell from her shaking hands ss she heard, all over the street, the sounds of families waking and children crying in fear.