

Highlights of Stirling's Silver Jubilee Year
Jubilee jubilations
At the end of a busy year of celebrations, Dennis Farrington, Deputy Secretary and Registrar, casts a backward glance at the festivities.
THE opening ceremony for our jubilee year was aimed to coincide with the Graduates' Association 25th Anniversary Reunion weekend on 29 August.
Under overcast skies the Principal officially opened the proceedings, the new commemorative flag was run up and a celebration cake was cut by one of the earliest students, Alastair Gentleman, and our longest serving member of staff, University Secretary Bob Bomont.
It was a colourful and happy occasion as guests mingled with graduates, staff and friends of the University.
The following month, the University celebrated its foundation with Thanksgiving Service in the Church of the Holy Rude on September 23, attended by more than 30 clergy and a large congregation of staff and students.
In March the University community was the guest of Logie Kirk, in celebration of the gift by the Kirk of the University's Mace in 1968.
Lecture programme
During the year the University has been fortunate to attract a wide range of excellent speakers to an expanded public lecture programme.
The Andrew Williamson Trust Lecture was given to a packed house by Sir Edward Heath, and the Robbins Lecture was given by Professor Sir Frederick Holliday, a former Deputy and Acting Principal of the University.
The Drummond Lectures were given by another former member of staff, Professor Stewart Sutherland, Vice-Chancellor of the University of London, and who, it was recently announced, is to be the next Principal of the University of Edinburgh.
Public lectures were also organised by the four Schools, and a series of talks given by specialists in various aspects of information services, including the application of new technology to teaching, attracted appreciative audiences.
The undoubted highlights in the Arts was the poetry reading by Sorley Maclean, Norman McCaig and Edwin Morgan, which was held in a packed Pathfoot Lecture Theatre and on which occasion the University was particularly pleased to welcome senior pupils from local schools.
Concerts and Drama
Local schools were again in evidence at the Central Region Youth Orchestra concert in the MacRobert in March, part of a series of concerts, drama and other events organised by them as part of the Jubilee.
Exhibitions included the work of Scottish Colourists, which attracted over 2500 visitors during March, the works of Robert Adam (featuring a new model of Airthrey Castle), the development of the University, and the University's regalia.
Concerts included a series in memory of our late Chancellor, Sir Monty Finniston.
A Fund Day
Social events included a Ball held in the Management Centre in November, a Sports Fun Day in May and events organised by individual departments to welcome back former staff and students.
During the year the University was featured in the Times Educational Supplement; published the first of its new-style Annual Reports; and attracted more favourable press comment as a forward looking, responsive institution.
It has been a good year to be at Stirling.
Alistair Gentleman and Bob Bomont cut the celebration cake.
March: Celebration of the gift by Logie Kirk of the University's Mace in 1968.
See story on page 4
On the ‘up’ escalator
1992–93 will be remembered as a good year for the University of Stirling for many reasons.
It was the year in which we celebrated the first twenty-five years of a successful university.
It brought us to a stage of development when, with a student population of almost 5000, the university has established itself as a viable, innovative, vibrant and mature institution.
And it was a year in which we were able to declare ourselves to be a good research and teaching university.
The plan to mark the silver jubilee by a co-ordinated programme of highlights of the normal year's activities has proved to be very successful.
We have been constantly reminded of our 25th anniversary by the Official Opening Ceremony on Saturday 29th August, the Service of Thanksgiving in the Church of the Holy Rude, the Logie Kirk Commemoration of the University Mace, a prestigious series of public lectures, concerts, exhibitions, parties of all kinds and, yet to come, the Silver Jubilee Graduation Ball in early July.
What a year!
The University will reach its target of 5000 students next September with the admission of a new intake of 1150 first years.
We are beginning to plan the next stage of development with a target of 6500 campus-based students by the year 2000.
Together with a greatly increased number of part-time students and students studying in associated colleges in Falkirk and Inverness there will be a total student body of about 10,000.
Within this population there will be a mix of undergraduate, postgraduate degree, diploma and certificate students.
The University will be responding to the perceived needs of students, employers and society generally.
We have a mission to widen access to higher education and to teach and research at the highest possible level.
The university has set  itself the objective of becoming an outstanding research and teaching university.
With our highly flexible course structure based on a semester system, and our attention to providing our students with a high quality learning environment, we are confident that we shall retain our excellent record as a good teaching university.
We are now just as determined to move upwards as a university at the forefront of high quality research, contributing to knowledge and understanding relevant to the needs of society.
We were greatly encouraged in this when, in December 1992, the results of the latest national assessment of research were announced.
The overall rating put Stirling well into the upper half of the UK universities, with almost half of our departments rated as doing research of international standing.
Nearly all were rated as doing work of national significance.
Our immediate objective is to move into the upper quartile and, in so doing, become one of Britain's top teaching and research universities.
Campus is a new newspaper published by the University of Stirling for University staff, Members of the Court, Members of Conference, Alumni, Honourary Graduates and Friends of the University.
This is a 25th Anniversary Special but we plan to publish Campus each semester in April and November.
The April edition will have a Graduates Association supplement featuring members' contributions and details of events.
Letters, photographs with captions and telephone calls reporting news or events that might be featured in this University newspaper are all welcome and should be addresses to  .
2000 alumni contracts Let's hear from even more of you!
Those who attended the Graduate's Reception and Jubilee opening ceremony at the University last summer may remember completing a short questionnaire about themselves and volunteering the names and addresses of their Stirling graduate colleagues.
It was thought that their former colleagues might like to hear from the University, particularly if some improvement in the alumni services available to those who studied at Stirling years ago could be made both useful and attractive.
About 190 questionnaires were completed on the campus, with an additional 250 names and addresses of absent colleagues submitted.
Since then, various voluntary groups throughout the campus, the UK and abroad have come forward with names and addresses of active alumni, some of whom have been networking enthusiastically for many years outwith the official organisation of either the Graduates Association of the University.
Most expressed great interest in becoming more centrally organised and informed.
Many expressed a desire to be able to get in touch, particularly with others who studied with them at Stirling.
Overseas groups and individuals from such places as Hong Kong, Norway, Malaysia, Kenya and the USA have also written in or called during our silver anniversary year.
These graduates have already supplied not only their name and address but also names of colleagues, which are now held on database.
Hong Kong graduates even sent in photographs taken at their 25th anniversary dinner.
Many of you will have already received, at the principal's request, a copy of the University's Annual Report 1991–1992 published in February 1993, to update you on how the University has evolved and grown.
Arrangements are currently under way for the University to provide the Graduates Association with more help and assistance for the future and to use the lists of the alumni that have recently been compiled, to help them enlist new members.
There are now over 16,000 people who have graduated from the University of Stirling, all of whom are potential members.
Under proposed University legislation, new graduates will automatically become members of the Graduates Association on receipt of their degrees, after which it is hoped that many will endeavour to create and foster the right conditions to make it attractive for graduates to want to belong and help make their membership worthwhile and rewarding.
We have now had a positive response from nearly 2000 ‘old’ Stirling alumni.
If, on reading this newspaper, you would like to ensure that your name and address as a graduate is properly updates, please write in to  and ask us to send you a questionnaire and sae.
There is much yet to be done to try to improve our network and increase our numbers, with the object hopefully of enriching the life of both the graduate members and the University.
Record intake achieved in 1992–93
THE University of Stirling broke all records yet again.
1250 students were admitted to first year undergraduate studies last year and over 500 to postgraduate studies, giving a total population of 44000 full-time students.
This included a 100 per cent increase in the numbers following the Evening Degree Programme, which attracted a £100,000 grant from the Universities' Funding Council — 10 per cent of the total UK funding.
The total spending power of the University, its staff and its students is estimated at over £70m, most of which is spent directly in the local community.
Speaking to a joint meeting of the University and Central Region officials recently, Professor Michael Jackson, Deputy Principal, estimated that the University now supports in excess of 2800 jobs in the Region (1380 employees and a further 1500 jobs in support services).
The University's current planning estimates a growth to some 6500 students by the end of the century, which would generate more than 2000 additional jobs.
Of these, some would be academic posts but most would not.
Over three-quarters of the recruitment would be expected to be from people already living in the Region.
Active student recruitment programme brings excellent results March, April and May proved particularly busy for those involved in recruitment overseas, led by Dr John Stewart, Director of Student Recruitment and Admissions.
As well as being present in Kuala Lumpur, the University was represented at major education exhibitions and other recruitment events in .
At the National University of Singapore the small Stirling delegation was invited in by Professor Ernest Chew, Dean of the Faculty of Arts in Singapore, to address senior staff on the subject of the semester system.
Professor Chew attended the graduation of his niece at Stirling some years ago when she obtained a degree in Management Science — and from all accounts they are both Stirling enthusiasts.
Dr Stewart also visited Santa Barbara, which is the main headquarters of the University of California Education Abroad programmes, while Peter Meech visited the University of Kanvas and University of California, San Diego.
The University of Stirling has undergraduate Exchange programmes with both institutions.
Other Exchange partners were visited by Professor Michael Jackson at Texas A & M University and Georgetown University, Washington DC, during a recent study tour of the United States.
The Stirling-American traffic has not been all one way!
On 2 July, 23 members of Butler University (Indianapolis) Advisory Council, which included Study Abroad Advisors from throughout the United States, will visit the University of Stirling and will attend one of our graduation ceremonies.
Dr John Stewart, Director of Recruitment and Admissions, told Campus that he continues to be greatly encouraged by the interest shown overseas in Stirling's undergraduate and postgraduate courses.
Above: Prospective postgraduates visit Stirling University's stand at the British Council Exhibition in Singapore in April.
Talking to them are Dr John Stewart and Dr Jimmy Young.
Also present at the exhibition was Paula Elliott, Deputy Director of Admissions.
Pathfoot extension completed
MBA 1992–1993 Programme students on the steps of the new Pathfoot Extension.
The building will help ease the growing pressure on academic accommodation.
The University was successful in bidding for a capital grant from the Universities Funding Council (UFC) towards the cost of a £1.5 million extension of the building.
The building is now complete and is being used to re-locate the Department of History with the rest of the School os Arts in Pathfoot.
Revisions to the Charter and Statutes
SOME of the longer-serving staff and graduates may remember that in the mid-1970s the University embarked on a major review of its Charter and Statutes, designed to make changes in governance which we thought desirable after ten years of operation.
The process was never completed owing to a lack of consensus in a number of important areas and only a few piecemeal changes have been made over the years, most recently the creation of Schools in 1989.
During 1992/93 the University found the need to tackle the issues again, to remove non-functioning bodies from the instruments of government, to streamline various decision-making processes, to redefine membership of the University following the major changes in academic staff tenure, to change the composition of the academic Council and, by no means least, remove gender-specific language.
A large number of changes have been agreed and currently wait the approval of the Privy Council.
It is hoped to publish the revised Charter and Statutes, together with Ordinances also redrafted to remove gender-specific language and to comply with the new statutes, in August of this year.
Meanwhile all the changes can be located on CWIS.
In their honour…
The University will award honourary degrees at the graduation ceremonies on 1 and 2 July.
The recipients of the honourary degrees will be:
Doctor of the University
Master of Arts
Dr Miller heads University Court
THE University of Stirling has elected Dr J D F Miller as Chairman of the University Court to succeed Dr Angus Mitchell, who retired in July 1992 after serving eight years as Chairman of the Court.
David Miller was educated at Edinburgh Academy, the University of Cambridge and LSE.
Following National Service he joined J & P Coats Ltd in 1958, holding a variety of posts.
Dr Miller was Group Personnel Director of Coats Paton and then Coats Viyella plc from 1977 until 1991.
He is Chairman of the Scottish Vocational Educational Council (SCOTVEC) and of the Wolverhampton and Dudley Breweries plc.
He holds a number of public appointments including: council member, Outward Bound UK; Governor, Outward Bound Loch Eil UK; Chairman of the Independent Schools Careers Organisation; Commissioner of the Queen Victoria School, Dunblane; member of the Council of the British Institute of Management.
Dr Miller previously served on several of Stirling's internal committees contributing, for example, to staffing and careers matters.
In 1984 he was awarded an honourary doctorate of the University of Stirling.
Inverness Initiative
EXCITING course developments are taking place between the University of Stirling and Inverness College, writes Professor E F Wolstenholme.
In addition to the recent creation of Stirling/Inverness degrees in Business Administration and Applied Computing, moves are now under way to develop a Stirling/Inverness degree in Electronic and Electrical Engineering (EEG).
This will be based upon the elements of both the current HNC and HND courses in EEG at Inverness and the undergraduates programmes in Business and Management at Stirling.
Particular emphasis will be placed on utilising Management Science courses at Stirling in Operations Management, Quality Management and Quantative Management Techniques.
An important and novel characteristic of the degree will be the proposed articulation through the three years.
The intention is that students can obtain and HNC after one year, an HND after two years and a general degree in EEG after three.
a subject committee is in place to assist the development of the initiative and the intention is to have the first cohort of students enter the programme in Autumn 1993.
Royal Society
THE Royal Society of Edinburgh Summer Reception was held in the Pathfoot Building this month.
Professor Malcolm Jeeves, Senior Vice President of the Royal Society, welcomed guests on behalf of President Sir Alistair Currie.
An exhibition of some of the work and research carried out by the University of Stirling was on display in the crush hall.
Demonstrations were put on by the Institute of Aquaculture and the departments of Environmental Science, Education, Psychology, Biological and Molecular Sciences, Japanese Studies, English Studies and Information Services.
Walter Abbott and his team have advised thousands A career in careers
‘On yer bike!’
Young graduates over the years have been sent far and wide in search of that elusive first job.
Campus talks to the man who sent them, one of the University's longest serving members of staff, Walter Abbott, who retires this year.
IT is unbelievable that in 1970, during our formative years, only 30 undergraduates were awarded the first general degree of the University, at a ceremony in Pathfoot.
This year just under 100 students will receive their first degrees at Stirling and Chief Careers Advisor Walter Abbott, who retires this summer, can look back and take pride in the fact that he and his small team in the careers office have had the opportunity to help prepare 16,000 students for ‘life after Uni’ during the 24 years that Walter has been here and seen the University grow.
Graduating from the University of Edinburgh with an MA degree in 1949, Walter took a Diploma in Social Studies.
During his time at the University, when not playing rugby and tennis for Trinity Academicals and acting with the FP Dramatic Society, he had vacation jobs United Wireworks, Symington's Coffee Essence Company, ICI and British Aluminium.
He took his first permanent job with Metropolitan Vickers now part of GEC, broadly working in personnel, overseas recruitment and welfare before joining the University of Stirling in October 1969 as Careers and Appointments Officer.
‘The Careers Advisory Service is available to provide a comprehensive vocational guidance service to students and postgraduates on campus at whatever stage in their studies that they feel the need’ he said.
‘The Service also has the responsibility of helping all students to achieve their aspirations in the fields of employment and postgraduate studies and to gather and collate statistics on first destinations.’
Walter is backed up by Graham Nicholson, who takes over in July after working with him for 18 months.
The team includes .
It is clear in talking to Walter, as he nears the end of his career, that while he has greatly enjoyed his job working with students, he is saddened by the fact that prospects for young people are not very promising at the present time.
‘During my first 20 years at Stirling most of the students I saw and advised were able to fulfil their aspirations.
Recently the marketplace has become very difficult, and many graduates have considerable problems in obtaining their first ‘real’ job.
I feel that the facilities provided by the Careers Service have never had greater significance and I take some consolation in knowing that the current team is well structured and dedicated to providing the best possible service in finding careers and fulfilment for graduates from the University’.
Walter lives in Dunblane with his wife, Judith, who also works in the University as part-time library assistant.
They are both involved with the University Choral Society, Walter being Chairman and Secretary and Judith the Musical Librarian.
They have a son John and a daughter Fiona, and this year Walter and Judith have become grandparents.
St Mary's Episcopal Church in Dunblane benefits greatly from having Walter as a Lay Representative.
He is also Chairman of the Financial and Stewardship Committee, a member of the vestry and of the church choir, while Judith is well known for her community work and embroidery.
Walter played full-back for Trinity Academicals and tennis for Dunblane in his younger days.
He wore baggy knee-length shorts which, we are told, were the sartorial talk of the campus during the circuit-training sessions, organised by Ian Thomson for the young administration staff in the 1970's — but this is where we came in.
Walter now restricts his hobbies and sport to country walks, watching rugby, music, gardening and the cultivation of fuchsias.
The Mace — our symbol of authority for 25 years
LOGIE Kirk and the University of Stirling celebrated the 25th anniversary of their special relationship in a church service this spring.
The bond between the two is symbolised by the Ceremonial Mace gifted to the University by the Kirk Session at Logie in April 1966.
Some 429 members of the Kirk's congregation contributed towards the purchase of the Mace and their names are contained within.
Following the Church Service, the University entertained members of the Paris in Pathfoot.
Local community groups, Councillors and Guides were among those in attendance.
The mace was designed and made by Edinburgh silversmith William Kirk.
It bears the words: ‘Keep Hold of Instruction: Do Not Let Go.
Guard Her: For She is Your Life’.
It has been used on many ceremonial occasions over the past 25 years and serves as a constant reminder of the common history and friendship shared.
Clergy and senior officials with the mace outside Logie Kirk.
Music…
Painting…
Arts…
A hotbed of the arts The MacRobert celebrates in style
From the start of the University's anniversary year the MacRobert has been a hotbed of Jubilatory activity, with the Arts Centre a focus for social and creative events of all kinds.
Campus looks at some of the Centre's events.
THE Sir Monty Finniston Memorial Concerts by the Scottish Chamber Orchestra were a huge success.
The University commissioned a new piece of music by Irish composer Elaine Agnew for the first of these concerts, which not only gave a young composer her first opportunity to write for a full orchestra but also provided an affectionate tribute to the former Chancellor's memory.
The anniversary year and the MacRobert also provided a showcase for the riches of the University Art Collection.
A collection so rarely seen as a compact whole, provided many with an eye opener as to the quality and range of the work housed in the University corridors and offices.
The collection is certainly an asset to any University, and many will now give the walls a second glance as they rush on to lectures and seminars.
The Scottish Colourists Exhibition, the highlight of the gallery's exhibitions to date, displayed work by the four artists Hunter, Fergusson, Cadell and Peploe, regarded by some as Scotland's greatest painters.
Featuring three Fergussons from the University's own collection, the show was the first selected exhibition of work by the Colourists since 1988.
The University Staff Art Exhibition in May was in a class of its own, reminding us all of the talent there is on campus.
Notable painters included  with stained glass panels by , embroidery by , lacework by  and tapestry by  who also exhibited watercolours.
In celebration of Scotland's most famous architect, the Gallery hosted an exhibition of the architecture of Robert Adam: ‘Life, Death and Survival’.
The exhibition featured a scale model of Airthrey Castle, which he designed, and examined Adam's influences, including the overwhelming impact of his visit to Italy.
The MacRobert is poised to start major development work for both front-of-house and backstage and huge fund-raising efforts will go in hand with this.
A total refurbishment is planned for the foyer and front-of=house areas, which will mean adding a new floor level with its own bar, adding a cafe facility, improving wheelchair access, moving and expanding gallery space and refurbishing the studio.
As well as the extensive variety of events enjoyed in the theatre and public spaces of the Arts Centre, there is a huge programme which the Arts Centre undertakes with local children through schools.
General Accident as sponsors and MacRobert Arts Centre were presented with a prestigious ABSA Award for Sponsorship of Community Related Activities at the ABSA awards dinner at Glasgow's Kelvingrove Galleries in May.
The Adopt-a-Player Composition Project, was nominated for the ABSA Award, was devised by Education Officer Sylvia Dow, based on ‘Sinfonietta’ by acclaimed Scottish composer James MacMillan (see photo).
Children from secondary schools in Central Region adopted a musician from the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra and composed their own work, guided by James MacMillan and composer Elaine Agnew, finally performing their pieces with musicians from the orchestra supplied by an enthusiastic audience in November.
Local school children were again involved when taking part in a composition and puppetry project based on Prokovief's Peter and the Wolf.
The results were enjoyed, when on 9 May Blue Peter's John Leslie read Proskovief's narration to packed house in the MacRobert.
In August the campus will be visited by the Bavarian State Youth Orchestra and also by ballet and contemporary dance companies from Norway, North Carolina and Venezuela, who will be performing at the MacRobert.
September 1993 features a largescale joint Special Needs Project with the Smith Art Gallery and Museum in Stirling.
This year, taking the theme of ‘Crofting and the Clearances’, both adults and children in the local area will be creating a crofting community in the Smith's large exhibition hall.
The composer Elaine Agnew, Diana Rigg, Chairman of the MacRobert Arts Centre and James MacMillan
The artist Alberto Morrocco, Councillor Pat Greenhill and Principal John Forty at the Colourists Exhibition.
Update on The Gardeners' Memorial Garden
I am pleased to report that the development of the garden is going well.
The building of Alexander Court has had a strong influence and the overall view of the area has been enhanced by the interaction of the garden and the new residence.
The shape of the garden had to be changed in order to allow the widening of the access road and long delays occurred in defining the new boundaries.
However, the planting of beech hedging and the erection of rabbitproof fencing has enabled some work to be completed.
The existing large border has been improved and money kindly donated by a number of well-wishers was spent on specimen trees and shrubs for ground cover.
Also, a bed containing heathers and low-growing conifers has been established.
Native Trees
The best corner of the site has been planted with native trees.
a further planting of this area will be carried out in the autumn.
Gifts of bulbs and trees will be much appreciated in the period September to December.
Generously donated
In October 1992 we were pleased to receive a visit from Lady Finniston and members of her family.
She generously donated a seat in the memory of our late and much loved Chancellor, Sir Monty Finniston.
This seat is now pleased together with a gift of trees to the garden.
The stunning view of Dumyat makes a splendid backdrop to the garden, reminding us of the times Sir Monty spent hillwalking on the many occasions he visited Stirling.
–7
25th Silver Jubilee Anniversary celebrations
The Right Honourable Sir Edward Heath on his way into the Logie Theatre to present the Williamson Memorial Lecture.
Madge Niven — our oldest graduate at 85 years.
After graduation at the MacRoberts Centre.
Staff art exhibition at the MacRobert Gallery, 17 May.
This photograph, taken after the conferment of a number of honorary degrees, shows 
Official party on steps of Cottrell Building prior to the Principal's opening speech.
Waiting for the officials to arrive to open the Jubilee year at the Queen's Court.
On day of the official opening ceremony at Queen's court.
Local school children take part in Fun Day events on 1 May.
The Jubilee Ball in the Management Centre was attended by many members of staff and the University Court and alumni.
A memorable time was had by all.
Luncheon in the Court room for senior staff and guests followed the official opening ceremony.
An exhibition of University regalia was on display in the MacRoberts Arts Centre including: Silver gifts to the University, hoods representing degrees, Chancellors' gowns and the mace.
Spectators at the official ceremony in Queen's Court.
Croquet: one of the Fun Day events.
Institute helps aid Kuwait's recovery
PROFESSOR Ron Roberts, head of the Institute of Aquaculture, was invited by the Emir of Kuwait recently to observe the progress being made in regenerating the scientific programme of the Kuwait Institute of Science and Technology (KISR) after the devastation of the illegal occupation of Iraq during the Gulf War.
The institute has played a significant role in Kuwait's mariculture development, as three of our graduates, Dr Sulaiman Al Matter, Dr Abdul Aziz Al Ameeri and Dr Khaled El Allah, now work at KISR plus Dr Albert Tacon who worked at KISR for a short time before being forced to flee Saddam Hussein.
Professor Roberts reports that the Kuwaitis have made a remarkable recovery.
‘Massive efforts have been directed at expunging all trace of the invader and fortunately they have the funds and the expertise to do it.
The aquaculture centre is working well.
The new hatchery will soon be open and Dr Khales will have room for on-growing the quite amazing numbers of grouper fingerlings he produces.’
Rain or shine?
INCREASED rainfall has increased the mean flow of many Scottish rivers by 40 per cent since the 1970s according to Professor Keith Smith of the Department of Environmental Science.
Professor Smith's conclusion is one of the findings published in the University of Stirling's annual climatological bulletin.
The report, which has profound implications for water managers, gives a detailed review of 1992.
It notes the heavy rain, gales, frost and floods in the latter half of the year, describing them as further proof of increased fluctuation and variability in the climate.
The report also considered other more far reaching subjects including the Rio Earth Summit and meteorological effects of ash from the eruption of Mount Pinatubo and the Gulf War.
Neal Hazel, President of Stirling University Students' Association takes a look at what SUSA has achieved for its members 25 years on.
Stand up for your SUSA!
‘TWENTY-FIVE Years of Innovation’ is a concept most students at present at Stirling University find rather difficult to grasp.
To be honest, as children of the Seventies.
a quarter of a century of anything is a tad beyond our powers of comparative analysis.
For the majority of us, the ‘Swinging Sixties’ is a decade only experienced through our history textbooks, or our parents' all too frequent reminiscences.
If the records popular when the University first opened are recognisable to us, it's only because they have recently enjoyed their third or fourth revival in the charts.
It is hard for us to comprehend that thousands of students have roamed and studied on ‘our’ campus since long before most of us were born.
And during that time, thousands of students have socialised in the campus bars, played on the University sports teams and been members of the University clubs and societies.
thousands have needed and received confidential academic and financial advice, have written for the campus newspaper and presented shows on Scotland's only campus radio station.
And thousands of Stirling students have been personally represented at university, local and national level.
Many benefits
In short, generations of students have enjoyed the many benefits of free and automatic membership of the Stirling University Students' Association (SUSA).
For a quarter of a century, the Association has allowed us, as students, to provide for our own independent social life, recreation and representation.
Over the years, it has progressed and developed into an efficient organisation employing more than sixty staff, with an annual turnover of more than £1 million.
It is, however, all too easy for any of us to take the Students' Association for granted.
I wish I had a pound for every time friends have turned to me and asked: ‘Yeah well, what has SUSA ever done for us?’
The irony is, of course, that we are usually sitting in one of the three newly refurbished SUSA-run bars at the time, drinking a SUSA-subsidised pint, poured by a member of the SUSA bar staff.
The chances are that my friend belongs to a least one of more than 30 SUSA clubs and societies, ranging from ‘Ballroom Dancing’ to the ‘Balls Juggling Club’and may watch the odd (often in more ways than one) movie at the SUSA ‘Film Circle’.
My friend may well be one of the 1600 members of the SUSA-funded Sports Union, perhaps belonging to one of their 40 sports clubs.
He or she has probably eaten meals in SUSA's recently built Robbins Centre, and bought pens, stationery or even a ‘Stirling…
Probably the Best University in the World’ sweatshirt in the SUSA shop.
It is also likely that my friend will, at some point, have been to see the SUSA Welfare Officer and obtained help with a late grant, or received advice on one of a whole host of student problems from harassment to housing.
For my friend, and thousands of other students at Stirling, the services and facilities offered by the Students Association have, rightly, become a way of life.
They are an expected and integral part of University.
It is becoming painfully clear, however, that students at Stirling University can no longer afford to take their Association for granted.
The government is currently discussing severe changes to the funding of the associations which would appear to threaten the universal right of Stirling students to free membership of SUSA and all the accompanying benefits and rights.
Any such proposals would effectively remove the strong and independent enabling role which has served Stirling students so well over the past 25 years.
They would make it impossible to fund clubs and societies and would inevitably suppress much of our vital welfare work.
Nobody pretends that SUSA is perfect of infallible.
I am well aware that much could and should be improved and reformed.
That's why I have taken on this job (and for my sins!).
But it is absolutely essential that these reforms are directed from within, according to the wishes of the Association's own members.
Only as a service run for Stirling students, by Stirling students can the Association democratically, efficiently and effectively meet the needs and requirements of the ever-changing campus population.
As members of a dynamic Association, Stirling students are already shaping their vision of what [external forces permitting]their SUSA should be, in the University's second 25 years.
Elections held this spring, for instance, presented a significant shift away from direct party political involvement in the Association.
For the first time in the Association's history, not one of the four Sabbatical Officers, or any of the Executive, were elected under a Party banner.
The days of pseudo-Citizen Smith style SUSA are well and truly over.
Support
Stirling students have shown their support for an efficient and independent Association, accessible and relevant to all members.
With ever-increasing numbers at Stirling University, it is imperative that SUSA is allowed to continue to build on the current provision of social, welfare and commercial services so essential to all students.
We must try to ensure that present and future generations of Stirling students are able favourably and frequently to reminisce about their days [and nights!]on campus, for many years to come…much to the annoyance of their own children.
Happy birthday SUSA!
‘Kist of Musick’ comes to Stirling
MUSIC from the 17th and 18th centuries was on the programme when the ‘Kist of Musick’ Chamber ensemble visited the University.
The performance, which was a great success, was staged at Stirling university's Airthrey Castle — a fitting venue for the musicians who have a passion for historical music.
The group, which comprises two violinists, a cellist and a keyboard player, performed pieces of Bach, Corelli, Handel, Purcell, Scarlatti and Vivaldi.
However, true to their colourful Scottish title, they also specialise in 18th century Scottish music.
Favourite composers include: Sir John Clerk, of Penicuik, the Earl of Kelly, Neil and Nathaniel Gow, William McGibbon, Charles McLean and James Oswald.
Wired for the future with JANET
The University of Stirling is one of only 27 universities to be connected to the Joint Academic NETwork [JANET], a national pilot project which has an authorised expenditure of £5 million in its first year.
Bruce Royan, Director of Information Services, explains what this means for the future.
STIRLING is fast becoming a wired campus.
Already all major buildings are linked together by fibre optic cable and by the end of this year all offices and most teaching rooms will have an outlet to an integrated network for academic, library and administrative computer services, and 90 per cent of academic staff should have a networked microcomputer on their desks.
This increase is not just for number crunching; the system has been installed to meet user needs for Personal Productivity [wordprocessing and spreadsheets]and Information Access [library catalogues and databases].
In addition more and more departments are exploiting the new technology in their teaching.
Information Resources
Users value the network for the access it gives to computer and information resources on campus but perhaps even more so for the gateway it provides to JANET, the network linking hundreds of institutions and thousands of computers in the UK.
During the 80s most of our terminals and computers could transmit just under 10,000 bits of information per second.
Our new campus network runs a thousand times faster at ten megabits per second [10 Mbps].
The lower speed was fine when most data communications consisted of text; one A4 page contains only 35 thousand bits.
But an A4 fax page contains 800,000 bits and a high-resolution 24 colour picture more like 100 million.
We judged that Stirling would need the wider bandwidth of 10 Mbps for the more sophisticated applications of the 90s.
Upgraded
The link to JANET has also been upgraded — to two Mbps, the fastest JANET can currently handle.
Clearly, however, the needs we have identified at Stirling for the transmission of documents, images and so on are also arising at other sites — and between sites as well.
To meet this demand the SuperJANET initiative was formed.
SuperJANET will provide a very high speed backbone to which institutions will connect at appropriate speeds, from 10 Mbps to 155 Mbps.
At such bandwidths, a number of new services become possible, including:
Document Supply — As libraries move from collecting likely materials just in case to supplying the right document just in time, there will be an increasing need for fast electronic transfer of facsimiles of documents including text and illustrations, in colour if appropriate.
Computer Based Learning — Multimedia Courseware now being developed could be delivered, or indeed remotely accessed, over a sufficiently fast network.
Supercomputing — High-performance computers costing millions of pounds cannot be sited at every university that needs their computational power; Yet the vast amounts of data they produce require advanced data visualisation techniques for their human understanding.
This rapid transmission of pictorial output demands very high speed links.
Telepresence — Live interactive television links, supported by remote display of prerecorded material or by output from computers or laboratory equipment as appropriate, will allow academic and administrative meetings, lectures, seminars and demonstrations to take place with the participants at different geographical locations, saving time and travel costs and opening new opportunities for collaboration.
Virtual Personal Computing — the attractive use of graphics, colour, sound and the ‘mouse’ which have eased the acceptance of AppleMacs and PCs at this University, have been built upon the high bandwidth once only available between components of a single personal computer.
The availability of similar speeds across the network could make the future remote facilities as intuitive and supportive as if they were all on the user's desktop.
A Campus wide information service
COMPUTER networking on campus has made possible the introduction of a Campus Wide Information Service [CWIS.
The Stirling CWIS came into operation in 1992 and was, we believe, the first operational CWIS in Scotland.
It gives access to all sorts of information, whether locally provided, or by remote access to systems all over the world.
This information can be accessed by students and staff from their desktop computers; in addition a number of special, easy to use ‘Information Points’ have been set up throughout the campus [for example in the library, the Cottrell Foyer and the Pathfoot Resource Centre].
These feature a large colour screen allowing users to select the information source they want simply by pointing or pressing the appropriate colour-coded key.
The CWIS ‘blue source’, for example, makes it possible to search the hundreds of thousands of titles in the Library, to place reservations and even to check one's own borrowing record.
The ‘yellow source’ gives up-to-date information on the phone numbers, locations and electronic mail addresses of all Stirling staff.
This is the first fully operational implementation of the new International Standard Directory Service [X500]in any UK university.
The final source, ‘Campus Information’, accesses job vacancies and theatre programmes, teaching timetables and payscales as well as details of clubs and societies and large University documents such as terms and conditions of employment and Safety Regulations.
There has been a great deal of interest in the Stirling CWIS.
In March computer and information services specialists from all over Scotland and Tyneside converged on the Stirling Management Centre to see the CWIS in action and to hear how it had been put together.
Silver Memories Two moments to remember…
HM The Queen is introduced to the late charles Allerdyce, formerly Head Porter and Mace Bearer, by University Secretary Bob Bomont on an official visit to the University in 1972.
Our first Vice chancellor Tom Cottrell looks on as Lord Robbins, then chancellor, presented the University's first Undergraduate Degree in Pathfoot Dining Hall in 1970.
New Professors Appointed
Professor Donald A Davidson, Environment science
Held previous appointments at the Universities of Sheffield, Wales [St David's University College]and Strathclyde.
Also, several short term teaching and research positions in Carleton University, Ottawa.
Longstanding involvement with school geography, was Convener of the Geography Panel [Scottish Examination Board]and until recently was Honourary President of the Scottish Association of Geography Teachers.
Currently a member of the Science-Based Archaeology Committee of the Science and Engineering Research soil protection policy for Scotland, and an advisory group to Historic Scotland dealing with medieval or later rural settlement patterns.
Research area is pure and applied pedology [the nature, formation, distribution and use of soils].
Professor Vicki Bruce, Psychology
Came to Stirling in Autumn 1992.
Formerly Professor of Psychology at the University of Nottingham.
An expert in face recognition and face processing.
Has served in recent years on both the Research Grant Board and Human Behaviour and Development Research Development Group of the Economic and Social research Council.
Professor Robin Limmack, Accountancy and Finance
Promoted within the department at Stirling.
A Fellow of the Institute of chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
Obtained MBA at Liverpool University in 1993 and Certificate in Education [London University]in 1975.
Has worked as far afield as the University of Otago [New Zealand].
Joined Stirling in 1978.
Principal research interests in Merger Activity.
Is a reviewer for British Accountancy Review and the Journal of Business finance and Accountancy.
Professor Eric Wolstenholme, Management Science
Appointed 1 September 1992.
Educated at Nottingham and Brunel Universities.
Joined Stirling from Bradford University Management Centre.
Professor Wolstenholme became a chartered Engineer in 1982.
Previous experience in academia and industry.
Worked with the National Coal Board on research and purchasing.
At Bradford, headed System Dynamics Research group and Strategic Modelling Group.
Was subject head for Management Science and Information Technology.
Professor Brian Murdoch, German
Personal Chair awarded; Dr Murdoch first became a member of the department in 1992.
A graduate of both Exeter and Jesus College, Cambridge.
Held posts in Glasgow and Chicago.
Medieval Literature is main area of research [German, Celtic and comparative literature]especially on religious writings and the legends of Adam and Eve.
First World War lyrics comprise just one of many publications, including an edition and study of ‘All Quiet on the Western Front’.
Sporting opportunity for talented students
THIS year the University has added eight new sports bursars to the scheme.
With a fine catalogue of achievements behind them already, the bursars' potential bodes well for their sports.
New bursars this year were:
Steven Carmichael — Golf.
Top 20 finishes in 3 Open Senior events, 1992.
County Match play and Stroke play Boys champion, 1992.
First-year student, History.
Handicap, 1.
Gordon Sherry — Golf.
Scottish Boys team 1992 [winners of European Team Event], runner up Scottish Schools Stroke play, Ayrshire Senior champion.
First-year student, Biochemistry.
Handicap, scratch.
Russell Thornton — Golf.
Finalist, Scottish Boys Match play 1991, semi-finalist 1992, Scottish Boys team 1991, 1992.
First-year student, Economics.
Handicap 1.
Mark Rawson — Golf.
England Schools 1992, third place, Midland Boys, Midland Youths, 1992.
First-year student, Business Law.
Handicap, 1.
Sarah Bishop — Golf.
England Girls team 1992.
Top Ten in English Stroke play 1991.
Notts County Senior and girls champion 1992.
Midland Girls Champion.
First-year student, Business Law.
Handicap, 2.
Nevill Martin — Tennis.
Ulster No. 1, Under 16, 18 and 21.
Irish Under 18 team versus Sweden.
Member Irish Elite Squad.
First-year student, Business Law.
Paul McGurk — Squash.
Winner Belgian and Dutch Junior Opens.
Belgian team for World Junior Championships.
First-year student, Business Studies.
Adrian Blackman — Tennis.
British Junior Team, European Team Cup, 1990.
Finalist, Public Schools Championships.
David Lloyd/Slater scholarship.
Cambridgeshire Senior champion.
First-year student, French/Business Studies.
Maintaining links with graduates
THE University of Stirling Graduates' Association was founded in the early 1970s to represent the interests of Stirling graduates on the University Conference and Court and to provide social and other activities for graduates to maintain their links with the University and their contemporaries.
Membership has always been voluntary, remaining at less than 10 per cent of the possible total and the considerable workload has been carried by a small, enthusiastic group.
A number of branches have been formed both at home and overseas and many more graduates who are not currently members of the Association, or with whom the association has lost touch, have been enquiring about membership.
Because it relies entirely on voluntary effort, the Association as currently constituted is not able to face a major expansion without help from the University.
During the Jubilee Year the University has decided to inject some resources into the association to develop it into a larger and more effective body, to enable graduates to keep in touch with the University and each other.
A revised constitution has been approved in principle by the Court and will be submitted for the approval of the existing membership in July.
Subject to the final approval of the constitution, from next year all graduates will automatically become members of the Association for a nominal fee and may maintain membership thereafter on payment of a small charge.
In return they will receive an annual magazine, building on the excellent Airthrey Journal, and details of activities being organised in their area.
In recognition of his contribution to the development of the Association over the years, and in particular the efforts he has made to keep graduates in touch through the Airthrey Journal, James MacGlone will be honoured in July by the award of the honourary degree of Master of Arts.
Running tradition which started over £1
JIM Davies, Environmental Sciences won the 21st Dumyat Hill Race, in a time of 35min 52sec.
He was closely followed by students Matthew Powell, Roger Knox.
Catherine Coey was the first woman to cross the line in a time of 45min 57sec.
The race was created 21 years ago when a psychologist, propping up the Gannochy bar, laid a £1 bet that no member of the University ‘could, without mechanical assistance, do the return trip of five and a half miles from the Gannochy to the top of Dumyat [418metres]in less than an hour.’
On Graduation Day 1971 the £1 was lost by three minutes.
The first ‘official’ race was held in 1972 and it has been held annually on the first or second Wednesday in May ever since.
A FINE MATCH FOR ALISON
Alison MacKenzie, second year student of Maths and Computing at Stirling University played hooker for the Scottish national team in the first ever full international women's rugby match against Ireland.
Alistair says goodbye
Alistair Cairns, Supply Officer, has retired after 27 years service.
Here he receives, from Donald Weir, Estates and Buildings Officer, a farewell card and travelling gifts given by his colleagues.
Alistair actually joined the University before it was fully established.
25 years' service celebrated
Forty members of staff celebrated 25 years of service at a luncheon, hosted by the Principal, on 31 May at the Court Room.
SOLE GIVES US A LECTURE
Nearly 150 people gathered at Stirling University to hear former Scots Rugby Captain David Sole deliver a lecture on the numerous aspects of leading and motivating rugby players.
The lecture lasted for 45 minutes and provided an interesting and amusing insight into the world of international rugby.
Regional ponds full of life Results of two-year study ‘encouraging’
A two-year study of the conservation value of ponds in Central Region has just been completed as part of the Operation Brightwater Campaign organised by the Scottish Conservation Projects Trust.
THE study was commissioned following research in other parts of the country which had shown a marked decline in the number of ponds remaining in these areas.
Study in Midlothian had shown a 33% loss, East Lothian a 23% loss and Bedfordshire in England had shown a remarkable 82% loss of ponds over the last century.
This study of the ponds in Central Region was undertaken by Dr Olivia Lassiere at the University of Stirling.
The first phase of her project was to study Ordnance Survey maps published from 1896 onwards, to compare the numbers of ponds in existence in the last century with those present today.
The results show that, unlike most other areas in Britain, the number of ponds in Central Region has actually increased by 85% over the last century.
‘This was a very interesting finding in itself,’ explains Dr Lassiere, ‘but more does not necessarily mean better.’
The next phase of the study was to look at the quality of these ponds in terms of the numbers of species of animals and plants they support, the water chemistry and the surrounding land use of each pond or loch.
Dr Lassiere carried out detailed surveys of 10% of the ponds in Central Region.
These sites included natural lochs such as hill lochans, oxbow pools and bog pools, and artificial lochs such as curling ponds, gravel pits, reservoirs, shooting ponds, quarries and town ponds.
A rich variety of plants was found in Central Region ponds, including 68 types of aquatic and 35 wetland plants.
Thirteen rare species and 3 introduced species were also discovered and Dr Lassiere is particularly concerned that 8 of the 14 sites where these occurred have no special conservation protection.
The variety of animal life found was also impressive, with 256 different types being identified.
Some ponds were so rich in animal life that a single pond net sample contained over 8,800 animals!
These were mostly invertebrate species such as flatworms, true worms, leeches, springtails, beetles, caddis fly larvae, water bugs, dragonflies, stoneflies, mayflies, snails and watermites.
The vertebrates were represented by the fish and amphibians.
Rare animals found included the Great Pond Snail Lymnaea stagnalis, another snail which is apparently at the northern limit of its range in Britain, and a freshwater limpet Acroloxus lacustris.
One shrimp which was found turned out to be an American introduction that originated from ponds in Grangemouth used to season timber.
‘I think the results are extremely encouraging,’ said Dr Lassiere.
‘The survey has shown that Central Region ponds are extremely important for wildlife both rare and common.’
She went on to say that ‘many of these pond sites are not legally protected.
They only warrant protection when they are inhabited by rare species of animals and plants.’
The study also highlights some of the threats facing many of the lochs in Central Region, including acid rain, changes in catchment characteristics, siltation, water abstraction, shading, rubbish dumping, eutrophication [nutrient enrichment]from duck and fish droppings, encroachment, and edge trampling by grazing animals.
‘Although Dr Lassiere's findings seem quite encouraging for Central region, we should not be complacent,’ warned Operation Brightwater campaign Officer Valerie Johnston.
‘This is a terrific resource but it must be managed sensitively if it is to survive.’
Systems up and running
THE annual conference of the Systems Dynamics Society, which in 1994 celebrates its 10th anniversary, will be held at Stirling University in July.
This will be the first time that the conference has visited the United Kingdom.
System Dynamics is a methodology whose areas of application are growing rapidly.
It provides a framework for modelling and understanding of the behaviour of complex social and business organisation and is being used widely for systematic problem-solving, organisational learning and business re-engineering in a variety of fields.
The conference is expected to bring together a very diverse group of practitioners from all over the world and many leading world figures in practical systems thinking have agreed to attend.
A highlight of the conference will be a wide debate on the value added to managerial problem solving from quantification in general and simulation in particular.
Calender of Events 1993/94
Scottish Freshwater Group, Thursday 28 October 1993.
Scottish Marine Group, Thursday 28 October 1993.
Saturday 20 November 1993 Man and the Environment Symposium Theme ‘Clackmannan’.
ritish Ecological Society.
Winter and Annual General Meeting, Wednesday 5 to Friday 7 January 1994.
During the meeting Dr Martin Holdgate will deliver the BES Lecture and Dr Linda Partridge will deliver the Tansley Lecture.
Offers of papers for this meeting are invited.
It is hoped to include sessions from among the following topics: Avian ecology, Freshwater and marine ecology, Tropical rain forest ecology, Education and ecology, Artic terrestrial ecology, Terrestrial and aquatic microbial ecology, Management of aquatic ecosystems, Community structure and function, Global environmental change, Conservation ecology, Herbivory, Mutualistic and parasitic symbiosis, Molecular ecology, Management of renewable resources, Ecotoxicology, Mire ecology.
Scottish/Nordic Postgraduate Winter College Sociological Methods and Policy Analysis in Comparative European Research 22–29 January 1994.
Williamson Memorial Trust Lecture.
Paddy Ashdown MP will present the next Lecture in the series during April 1994.
The precise date will be published later.
The 1994 International System Dynamics Conference, 11–15 July 1994 of Management Science [see story on right].
Contributions with regard to future events are invited for publication in Campus.
Details to the Press Office, Room 2B8, Cottrell Building.
Jubilee fun day for all
THE University hosted a free-for-all Jubilee Fun Day at the Gannochy Sports Centre on Saturday 1 May in recognition of the University's support from the local community over the last 25 years.
Visitors were given the opportunity to ‘Try-a-Sport’ which included activities such as canoeing, croquet, weights, aerobics and trampolining.
There was also the Girobank junior tennis challenge, Highland Games and a Charities Fete [in aid of local charities].
Boys and girls from Stirling District primary schools competed in the schools soccer challenge.