

ACTS shop meeting 27.4.93
Agenda
Welcome and apologies
Confirmation of minutes of previous meeting
Matters arising
1.
Redundancy policy
2.
Grading structure
3.
Union Social
4.
Job shares — Women's forum report back
Main Items
1.
Career development proposals
2.
Environmental audit
AOB
1.
Training for shop stewards
2.
Salary Calculation
Date and time of next meeting.
MINUTES OF ACTS SHOP MEETING.
31 MARCH 1993
Present:
The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed.
1.
Matters arising:
Career Development — Notes from the meeting with Tim Moulds (10.3.93) were distributed and discussed briefly.
It was agreed that individual members should contact the CD group with comments by 15 April.
The group needs to know which of the proposals we are prepared to compromise on and which we want to fight.
(copies available from Kathryn).
Redundancy/Church Relations — Sandie reported back about the SMT discussion held 12.3.93.
Her present post will end.
SMT decided to create a new post in the directorate not higher than G2.
If Sandie does not want it she will still get redundancy pay.
She has now seen the new job description which is very similar to what she does now but with part of the Clerk to the Board post as well.
It is described as a G1 post.
Sandie may accept it with some changes if it really is a G1 post.
It was pointed out that SSC grades jobs, not SMT.
Redundancy policy — Brenda reported back from staff council meeting of 24.2.93.
Tim Moulds will rewrite paper in response to discussion.
The discussion centred around the flexibility clause which is unlikely to be removed.
Kathryn will ask Alex  Yeats and Rachel Maybank if they would like to be involved in doing some work on redundancy.
Ramani Leathard agreed to work with them.
Political education — Peter promises to organise a meeting when he returns from travelling.
Grading — Mark Segal and Brenda Nicholson will send a questionnaire to members to discover their views and will look at what the Union position has been in the past.
2.
Agenda items
Equal ops policy: Kathryn said that there were more and more occasions when management wanted the union to agree to not advertising posts externally.
These decisions are made by an informal group made up of ACTS, NUJ, Staff Council and Tim Moulds.
On 2 recent occasions this group could not agree and Tim said he would approach Michael Taylor for a final decision if the meeting was unresolved.
The union agreed that in cases of disagreement the final decision should be taken by SSC, not Michael Taylor.
In these 2 cases, new jobs have been created because upgrading requests have failed.
Therefore the new posts are effectively earmarked for specific people.
Up-gradings often fail because the job description does not match actual work.
The meeting felt that job descriptions should be renegotiated so that regradings were more likely to succeed.
Jean Robinson said it was unfair to advertise unless there really was a post available because people would waste time and energy applying for something that didn't exist.
Union policy is that all new posts should be advertised and the process must be taken seriously.
Brenda Nicholson will put these points to SSC.
Judith Knight agreed to help the distribution of Union minutes.
TUC day of Action — The Union did not decide to do anything in support of the day.
Richard Burge is organising a union party for Labour Day, to be held on 30th April.
All ideas welcome.
Environmental audit — Most staff are in favour of this, but management is against it.
Mark Segal said that the Union should have a full discussion because an audit may recommend changes in working practise.
Job shares — Womens forum are working on this.
Union members were encouraged to go to the Thursday meeting.
Next Union meeting: Tuesday 27 April 12.30 pm.
SCOTTISH CHRISTIAN AID COMMITTEE
Minutes of the Meeting of the Partnership Sub-Committee Tuesday, 28th April at 7.00pm 41 George IV Bridge, Edinbrugh
PRESENT 
APOLOGY 
1.
The Chair opened the meeting with prayer.
2.
MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING OF 18TH FEBRUARY, 1992
The minutes were noted.
3.
MATTERS ARISING
There were not matters arising not on the agenda.
4.
PARTNER-IN-RESIDENCE
a)
Iain Whyte reported that communications had been received from Zimbabwe indicating that the Mafinyani family would be arriving on 8th July.
He circulated a paper with background details on the family and a photograph of Densen and Netsai Mafinyani and their two boys.
Details of family and dates
b)
Iain reported that Tim Moulds had informed him about the present situation.
The initial application for the work permit had been refused by the Home Office and an appeal was now being submitted with more detail.
Iain had been in touch with Tim and offered any support from the Church of Scotland, the Committee or other sources.
Andrew MacKenzie had a ‘phone conversation with Tim following discussion with the Methodist Church Overseas Division's overseas staff member responsible for permits.
The problem seemed to be that the job had not been openly offered on the market here in Britain, an impossible condition given the remit of the job.
Ann Wigglesworth observed that when Augustine and Indir Borde had come for the Church of Scotland there had been a considerable delay and difficulty in getting their work permits and Ros Lyle brought evidence from the Welsh Presbyterial Church and Council for World Mission, where political pressure was needed in order to secure a permit for someone.
The Committee then discussed the possibility of lobbying through various political contacts and it was suggested that Tom Burt get in touch with the office of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton to see when it might be possible to have a talk with him.
Tom is a constituent and it was suggested that he, Andrew and Iain go to see Lord James (who has responsibility for Scottish Home Affairs).
Iain was to get in tough first of all with Tim Moulds to co-ordinate any lobbying.
Work Permit
c)
Iain reported that he had been in touch with the Colvins and the Newis (retired Methodist couple with experience in Africa) and both of these had agreed to be a support to the Mafinyani's.
It was that Katy Laidlaw, as the Home Organisation Secretary of the Church of Scotland, be brought in on any meeting with C.Aid staff and the Committee.
Planning meeting with Church of Scotland and C.Aid Staff
d)
It was provisionally agreed that Wednesday, 12th August be a date for the official welcome to the Mafinyani's.
Dates and September and October had proved to be difficult and beyond that, it would be a very belated welcome.
Arrival and welcome arrangements
5.
OVERSEAS VISITORS
Iain circulated a brief paper on the various overseas visitors since C.Aid Week last year.
These included two from India, one from the Philippines, one from Zimbabwe and one from Costa Rica.
Amongst the points in discussion were that there should be more opportunity for visitors to visit smaller areas outside the cities and main towns.
Also, the question of a more detailed briefing on language needs, with the possibility of an interpreter, was discussed.
6.
COMMUNITY LINKS
a)
Iain reported on the continuing attempts to link a Justice and Peace Group in the Philippines with one in Glasgow.
Philippines
b)
He also reported on the possible links between a parish in the East End of Glasgow, where the Minister was the Rev. Ada Younger, and Orap, in Zimbabwe, following the very successful visit from Simbongile Jamaila.
Ada Younger is to go out to Zimbabwe in the late summer and hopes to arrange for a group from the church to go at a later date.
Zimbabwe
7.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
It was noted that Mrs Joan Blair would be on the Staff part-time over the next year.
Her replacement by Liz South on the Scottish Committee had been agreed by the Scottish Episcopal Church and Liz South would also be invited to be on the Partnership Sub-Committee.
Joan was thanked for her participation on the Committee.
8.
A.O.C.B.
There was no other business.
9.
DATE OF NEXT MEETING
The next meeting was set for Monday, 26th October at 7.00pm in the C.Aid Offices.
It was recognised that in the meantime there would be a number of informal meetings regarding the Partner-in-Residence.
The members were thanked for attending and the meeting was closed.
CHRISTIAN AID
AGENDA PAPER
Coordinators Meeting — February 5th/6th, 1991
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT FOR AREA STAFF
As you know, I have been preparing material concerning the bringing of secretarial assistants onto the payroll and also on the larger and long term issue of administrative support for area staff.
As I feared, the paperwork and costings for all possibilities have proved extensive and it serves no purpose at all to copy that paperwork which is really only reference material.
I therefore summarise the proposals for our discussion next week and apologise for its lateness chiefly due to my being off sick at a crucial point.
a)
That in line with the Area Staff Commission, Coordinators discuss with all area secretaries and their secretarial assistants Christian Aid's invitation to secretarial assistants to come onto the payroll at sometime during eighteen months beginning 1st October, 1991 at grate IV and at the same number of hours worked at present.
If a secretarial assistant does not wish to accept the invitation with its terms, we would not press the matter but the policy should be that we appoint no more off-the-payroll secretarial assistants and that the whole arrangement ends by April 1993.
b)
That in line with the Area Staff Commission and understanding the need to give adequate administrative support on an equitable basis, Regional Coordinators be given a budget of certainly not less in real terms than at present, to allocate to administrative support for regional colleagues wef April 1st, 1993.
With regard to proposal (a), a job description and terms of service document would be agreed to accompany the invitation.
Among the issues to be addressed would be:
1)
Title to be Secretarial Assistant (Area Staff).
2)
Transfer to the payroll at the same hours as at present which would form the basis of their regular monthly salary.
3)
Responsible to the senior colleague at the place of work (Area Secretary or Coordinator/National Secretary).
4)
Hours of work are recorded and sent monthly to the Coordinator to allow for any flexibility agreed with the Coordinator.
With regard to proposal (b), there would be adequate time for discussing details during the year leading up to April 1993.
The phrase ‘certainly not less in real terms than at present’ is a base line and not a final restriction.
We shall need to balance the proper freedom to allocate the budget within the region, against some agreed criteria by which such budgets and ways of working achieve equity.
The actual sums of money will of course be subject to negotiation.
MINUTES FOR THE STAFF TRAINING CONFERENCE PLANNING GROUP
Monday 10 February 1992 10.45 in the Salisbury Room
1 Introductions
Those in attendance:
Apologies were received from 
2 Review Staff Conference 1991
The conference was very good.
The same structure will be used for the 1992 conference but the conference group will incorporate the suggestions made in Alison Rose's evaluation paper into the planning process.
a)
the conference will not be held at High Leigh but Swanwick.
b)
the content of the plenary sessions will be reviewed.
c)
there will be more participation on the first afternoon.
3 Main theme or themes of the conference;
The group decided that TRADE would be the theme for the conference.
4 Outline conference programme
staff would arrive before 2.00pm in time for the first session.
Lunch would only be provided for Area Staff arriving at the centre early.
the Open Forum session will take place between 8.00-9.00pm on Thursday.
Free time and Workshop 2 (4.30-6.30) to be swopped.
Suggestions for the plenary sessions:
an icebreaking/getting to know you session — Sandra Pollerman?
group dramas
two interactive exercises on the first afternoon
Trade video
Trade slides
Music
Plenary session 4 — to include a summing up/consolidation/action planning session; to look at the consumer angle of trade.
Alison Rose to liaise with Swanwick to find out how many rooms are available for workshops.
Alison Rose to write memorandum to all staff asking for suggestions for workshops.
suggested workshops: Consumer campaigns, Story telling, International Financial Institutions.
Tasks for Planning Group
* Tim Moulds responsible for allocating people to tasks.
Main speakers
two main speakers required; a) Marcos Arruda
Kate Gibson would be responsible for Marcos' arrangements and for references.
All members of the Planning Group to offer suggestions for a second speaker.
We need an experienced woman speaker, with knowledge of trade and Africa or Asia experience.
Katie Duckworth to ask Africa/Middle East Group for suggestions.
Tim Moulds will ask Leo Bashyam to do the same.
Jonas Debassie a visitor from Eritrea will be in London in September.
Worship
an external person should be asked.
Tim Moulds and Wendy Clark will compile a list of suggested people.
Future meetings 
Any other business
the badges/or print should be bigger
the plenary sessions should be given titles
more suggestions on how to get to know people better.
CHRISTIAN AID ACTS Shop
Date of next meeting: Wednesday 27 January 1993 12.30-1.30 in Room B15
Minutes of Extraordinary Meeting, 9th December 1992
Present:
Apologies:
Jasmine Huggins was welcomed as a new member.
1.
Update on situation with proposed redundancies
The feeling of staff over this issue had been communicated effectively to management.
There was to be further discussion within the organisation over Church Relations, and an assurance was given by management that there were no further redundancies in the pipeline.
The issue of redeployment in relation to equal opportunities policy needs further discussion before the union can state its position on this, and this should be an agenda item for January's meeting.
It was agreed that the union should be involved in discussions over redundancy policy.
Rachel Maybank had previously been involved in some discussions, Peter West agreed to talk to her and shop stewards.
It was noted that the union's actin over the redundancy issue should be used as an opportunity to push recruitment.
2.
Report back from sub group on consultation
the two-sided paper had been circulated and comments/further suggestions invited.
In discussion the following points were made:
1.5 is the most important point and should be emphasised.
There should be clarification of what is meant by ‘if consultation is impossible…’
1.8 — SMT minutes) add ‘informative/meaningful’
The term ‘consultation’ is often used inaccurately; we should be clear as a union, but also CA as an organisation, as to what we mean by it.
It is possible to identify times when there has been a good process of consultation and use them as examples.
Include ‘relationship of trust with line managers is essential’.
Should not just be managers who identify what issues  will be consulted on.
1.6 — working needs to be amended — all policies involve conscience and ethics to some extent.
It should be possible to develop a system of categories whereby management is able to state at what grade of consultation a certain issue will be dealt with.
On Workload, 2.2 — 20% of time for reactive work — add that this may have staffing implications in some cases.
2.9 Group Administrator — A/ME group going ahead with this proposal.
2.6 Telephones — Reception staff should be asked for their views.
It was agreed that the subgroup would revise the paper to take to SMT for Friday 11 December, but it would be an ongoing discussion within the union, and be brought to January meeting.
3.
Campaigns Unit
There was discussion on Michael Taylor's proposal for Tim Moulds to become Acting Head of Campaigns for one year, and it was noted that a decision on this would be taken at SMT on Friday 11 December.
The following points were made:
There was recognition of the need for effective management of campaigns.
The proposal had implications for personnel; there would be a Grade 1 staff members heading up personnel rather than SMT member.
There should be a management representative involved in individual cases of negotiations.
It was noted that campaigns is becoming more important within CA and that there is concern about what this means for CA's priorities.
The proposal is unacceptable given CA's equal opportunities policy.
It was proposed that the shop stewards work on a brief response to Michael Taylor's memo and present to SMT members before the meeting where decision would be taken.
(See attached).
From: The Christian Aid ACTS shop.
To: All members of SMT
10 December 1992
The Union meeting on Wednesday Dec 9 discussed the proposal for a new Campaigns Unit within Christian Aid.
We wish to make the following points to SMT before a decision is made:
1.
We recognise the need for effective management of campaigns within CA at SMT level.
This must include proper support of staff who work mainly on campaigns, and also rational negotiation of the impact campaigns may have on the priorities and workloads of other sectors and groups.
2.
Major changes in job descriptions must always be subject to our Equal Opportunities Policy.
If a post of Acting Head of Campaigns and Personnel is to be created this would have a different Job Description to that of Head of Personnel.
It should therefore be advertised internally and externally according to agreed recruitment practices, to adhere to CA's equal opportunities policy.
3.
We welcome the proposal to try out a new Campaigns Unit for one year, but would stress:
a)
that the arrangement must be on a temporary trial basis,
b)
that procedures for evaluation and consultation during the trial period should be agreed before the proposal is implemented,
c)
that any permanent posts created as a result of the evaluation must be advertised internally and externally in accordance with EOP.
3.
We fear that inadequate time will be available for Personnel if the Head of that sector is also managing campaigns.
There are matters of staff management, consultation etc which need to be dealt with at SMT level.
The creation of a new Grade 1 post within Personnel is not acceptable as a means of dealing with these matters.
4.
In our view the need for adequate management of Campaigns and of Personnel will not be met by the present proposal.
ACTS SHOP MEETING
AGENDA
The next ACTS Shop meeting will be on Wednesday 25 March 1992 at 12.30pm in Room B14.
1.
Welcome and Apologies
2.
Matters Arising
3.
Career Development
4.
The Way Forward for ACTS
5.
Any Other Business
6.
Date of Next Meeting
MINUTES OF ACTS SPECIAL SHOP MEETING
11th February 1992
Present:
Apologies:
1.
Welcome and Introductions
Brenda welcomed everyone to the meeting.
2.
Career Development/Equal Opportunities
Sarah Hughes mentioned that a response was needed from the Union to Tim Mould's paper on career development/equal opportunities.
The following points were made:
— Tim's paper saw career development only in terms of promotion and not within people's existing jobs
— One should not assume that equal opportunities and career development don't go together
— Staff were encouraged to move out if they are not satisfied with their career development
— There was little encouragement for doing courses to develop one's career
— There were no clear conclusions from the SMIT minutes on this issue
— It was pointed out that the devolution of responsibility to Grade 1 and 2 for lower grades, meant that they would be responsible for the career development and training needs of staff they work with.
It was also noted that a new higher grade 1 structure may come into existence
— There needs to be a policy paper on career development
— The problem of more training within one's job means that people may take on more responsibility and will need regrading
— Study leave and sabbaticals would enable staff to develop within their jobs
— The question of job swaps was not clear in Tim's paper — for example for Area Secretaries it meant that they wanted to job swap they could do so by moving region
Karen reported on a meeting convened by Jenny Borden on consultation on management involving 11 people mostly from Aid Sector: in this meeting Jenny mentioned that no more grades would be created, training should be related to a person's job only and staff shouldn't take on other tasks not included in their job description which would lead to dissatisfaction of salary level.
Staff involved in this meeting did not feel this was a real consultative process.
Following on this discussion, the shop decided that it needed to have a policy on career development and it was suggested that ACTS and Staff Council should produce a joint paper.; A group is to be formed to look at the paper with Sarah Hughes, Bridget Middleton and Peter West in consultation with colleagues; they will consult with Staff Council concerning a joint paper.
3.
Pay Campaign
The ballot results had been unsatisfactory and results were not decisive enough as too few people responded.
It was noted that some staff were not aware of the whole background of questions and had found it difficult to reply to the questionnaire.
No Union debate had taken place on the pay formula.
Some staff felt they needed to go back one stage and ask why a formula was a good idea in the first place.
A formula could be seen as a way to get a fair wage increase and made it easier to deal with differentials.
Other members objected to a formula as it takes away  negotiation power from the Union and increased passivity.
It is important for Unions to win campaigns, otherwise disillusionment can set in.
It was however pointed out that the pay formula had already been agreed at SSC.
At its next meeting, SSC would be setting the wage increase.
It was not too late though to properly inform staff.
It was  recognised that it was not possible to use the ballot results to decide on the continuation of the campaign.
The Shop needed a statement on the current position and possible options for action.
It was noted that a sizeable minority of the Shop still wanted to fight for differentials.
The Shop Officers and Mary Purcell would prepare a statement.
4.
Date of Next Meeting:
The next regular Shop Meeting will be on Tuesday 25th February.
(postponed)
CHRISTIAN AID
Agenda for Extraordinary Meeting 13 March 1991
PAY CAMPAIGN
After the last shop meeting (6 March 1991) it was agreed to hold a further meeting to discuss what further actions should be taken in pursuance of the Pay Campaign.
Members will be asked to vote on the following actions which are designed to achieve a reversal of the decision made at F&S on 5 March 1991 not to implement the Shop's proposal for a reduction in pay differentials.
1.
To lobby the next two meetings of SMT beginning with the meeting on 22 March 1991.
2.
To hold a ‘work-in in the room where SMT are due to meet.
3.
To send a resolution of no confidence in F&S.
4.
To send a letter in due course to ask for support from Council of Churches in the UK and Ireland.
5.
To hold a meeting to educate those who do not feel well enough informed and to allow the free flow of debate on all the issues.
6.
To send a letter of protest to all members of F&S.
7.
To hold weekly Union meetings for as long as necessary to monitor the progress of the campaign.
8.
To pool the increase in salary from 1 April 1991 and distribute the money equally among all union members.
9.
To hold a ballot for strike action on this issue at some point in the future dependent on the success of the actions outlined above.
10.
To set up a working group to look at ways of achieving a reduction of differentials for next year.
CHRISTIAN AID
Minutes of the ACTS Special Meeting held on Wednesday 6th March 1991
Present:
Apologies:
PAY CAMPAIGN
The Chair welcomed members to this special meeting and thanked all those who participated in the lobbying of F&S at lunchtime on Tuesday, Amanda reported back from F&S on what had been decided on salaries, London Weighting, and differentials.
Salaries were to be increased by 9%, full London Weighting of £1776 to be given to all London staff, but there was to be no reduction in differentials.
Members expressed disappointment at this decision and three possible ways of taking the issue forward were suggested:
1.
limited protest action to show disappointment at the decision;
2.
to begin working on next  year's pay claim and to set up a working group to consider new strategies for the campaign;
3.
to keep pursuing this claim by not accepting the decision of F&S and to threaten to use further action if necessary.
After much discussion three proposals were made and agreed by a majority of members:
1.
that the shop stewards would reply to Michael Taylor's memo to all staff expressing the anger and disappointment of the Union at the manner in which the decision was made, disregarding the strength of feeling of the majority of staff on this issue;
2.
that action be taken to reverse the decision;
3.
that a delegation of ACTS officers and Staff Council reps meet with Michael Taylor and Alastair Hanton to convey the anger and disappointment of their members and their willingness to continue further action if necessary in order to reverse the decision.
Date and time of next meeting
Wednesday 13th March 1991 — at 12.30 in room 425.
10th March 1990
Dear Michael
 Thank you for your letter to all staff.
It is with regret that we are writing to you in order to register our continuing concern about the decision taken at F&S; on Tuesday.
We had hoped that our demonstration revealed sufficient strength of feeling on the part of staff to produce more than mere ‘puzzlement’.
We felt that our arguments ‘hold up’ extremely well and deserved more recognition in the outcome since they answered at least two of the board's main arguments against the reduction of differentials.
The recruitment argument is spurious since our proposal does not affect any changes to the Grade 1 salary, or indeed those above, given that SMT salaries are not included in the SSC negotiations.
Further, you say that money is tight but whilst there is still money for increasing staff numbers we are not prepared to accept this as a major reason against.
We are frustrated that London Weighting has consistently been used as if it were a concession to our demands.
It is not ‘enjoyed’ by all staff and was agreed three years ago and therefore we are only being awarded something which was already due.
Our proposal is a modest one: we are trying to implement a more just system rather than tackling a great injustice.
We believe that Christian Aid tries to be visionary in all areas of work, so why not in this case?
At present we are mirroring the system which maintains the basic effect of the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer.
You talk about  achieving a balance between idealism and realism as if we already have a perfect one.
But there is more than one way of arranging differentials and we wonder why the board is so much more in favour of one way than another.
Are they more in favour of realism as they perceive it and out of touch with idealism?
Do they not value the feelings and opinions of a majority of staff?
We feel that Christian Aid, as an organisation, be well served by a more pioneering approach rather than following the dictates of the market economy in this matter.
In your letter you present the fact that yourself and the Deputy Director have opted for an increase based on the Grade 1 salary and presumably you saw that as a gesture of good will or a concession to our demands.
However such tokenism misses our point since we are concerned with improving the whole system rather than management gestures, and unless the saving is redistributed to the lower paid staff it does not begin to address our concerns.
We understand that offence was caused by our slogan ‘Strengthen the Christian Aid Poor’ and that the general feeling was that poverty in UK/I is minimal in comparison to that of the Third World.
It hardly needs stressing that poverty is relative and whilst our concern for our partners is  overwhelming, we also have to look to our neighbours at home.
We cannot ignore major factors such as the poll tax, keeping up with rent and mortgage payments and buying the basics which cost the same for all of us.
Our members are angry at the decision made by F&S and the annual dismissal of this important issue.
This time we intend to continue our protest and will escalate action if necessary.
We have not taken this decision lightly and are making efforts to ensure that all staff are aware of the issues so that it is not seen to be just the ‘childish’ agitation of a minority group.
Shop stewards and staff representatives are prepared to meet with you and Alastair Hanton at your convenience if further discussion is desired.
Yours sincerely
ACTS Shop
cc.
Alastair Hanton 
CHRISTIAN AID
Notes of a meeting between Overseas Education Advisers and Head of Area Staff
Present:
Apologies:
The main points which emerge from discussion were as follows:
1.
Noted that in the choice of visitors and the way they have been used, a more coordinated approach has been evident.
2.
While the more organised approach culminated in the proposed ‘primary and secondary host’ plan, the realities made it hard to be quite so regimented.
3.
The proposal did however offer a good measure against which the visits could be set.
It was important to present an accurate annual review of visitors from the three groups and where they had been.
This would reveal an imbalances and encourage compensating planning by both the Overseas Groups and the Regions.
4.
Christian Aid priorities were also being kept much more in mind.
5.
The way of working therefore should be to negotiate long term visitors with regions on the present ‘bidding’ system as this gave enough space to work through the Coordinators with the opportunity of a regional strategy for using the visitor.
Short term visitors would be negotiated with individual area secretaries as at present with a copy of correspondence to Coordinators.
Again imbalances over short term visitors could be corrected in the light of the annual review.
6.
Overseas Groups would publicise their plans for future visitors as at present at the annual meeting in January or February of each year and perhaps circulate how those plans are developing midway through the year for peoples information.
7.
The review and planning paper would therefore be circulated to all area staff after the AGM.
8.
Area Staff were still encouraged to let Group Education Advisers know the kind of visitors they wanted.
Hence the plan as such was not commended for implementation as suggested but was valued and to be retained as a tool against which the balances of visitors in the various regions could be measured.
CHRISTIAN AID
OVERSEAS VISITORS PROGRAMME
Minutes of Meeting 23 February 1993
Present:
Apologies:
Minutes of the last meeting were approved with the following  amendment :
a) final para p.1
The meeting noted that while Africa had hosted about twice the number that Asia had hosted, this was in no sense a criticism of either.
However it was felt that a more even balance would be sought in future.
The optimum number of visitors…
Other Matters arising:
b) It was agreed that more Sector involvement was now being seen in the Programme.
c) A chart of primary and secondary visits, approved in principle at the last meeting had been produced cf. below.
d) Becky Dudley and Ken Forrest were to meet to take forward the Procedures paper agreed previously.
It was further confirmed that while members of ASMT had been rightly involved in the process of planning the 93/94 visits via Plan requests etc., ASMT meetings as such were not the place to negotiate details of the programme.
There would however be opportunity for a general ASMT discussion at an appropriate point.
1.
The question of using overseas visitors for advocacy had arisen and was discussed.
The clear consensus of the meeting was that while some visitors might be able work with us on advocacy, we were increasingly asking a growing range of contributions from such visitors.
Consequently, it was felt that while this had not so far been excessive, we needed to keep it under very careful scrutiny to prevent our increasing requests becoming unnecessarily burdensome for the visitors.
It was also noted that the more visitors were sought as resources for various parts of Christian Aid, the more the danger of eroding the original purpose: to work with and energise local supporters in the UK & Ireland alongside the Area Staff.
Finally, it was very much hoped that financial provision in the Groups for this proven and valuable programme would not be  reduced.
2.
Those responsible for programmes of visits in the three Overseas Groups then reported on visits made since last October.
From Africa it was noted in one or two cases, that some visitors who came from extremely distressing and confined situations found it hard to offer to groups the ‘hopeful and inspiring’ messages so often hoped for and expected.
Asia had not had visitors since October although some were arriving shortly: one had had to postpone a visit.
The visitors from Guatemala and from the Windward Islands had been helpful from LAC point of view creating a better gender balance in the programme.
A second partner-in-Residence, Luis Corea would be following up the present partner (with MCOD).
It was generally felt that partnerships around visitors was a good experience.
3.
The remainder of the meeting was spent in looking at the Grid on which visitors envisaged were placed with Regions for Primary (ten days to a fortnight) or Secondary (5-7 days) periods.
The Grid as agreed by all parties at the meeting is enclosed.
The following points should be noted:
a)
This approach moves away from the ‘open offer competitive’ system towards a more planned approach.
This takes note of the widespread area staff wish for the larger piece of time in a Region (but also gives the shorter period too): it reduces a lot of sorting out of requests by the Overseas Groups and simplifies for them a pretty complicated and demanding piece of work: it means we don't expect visitors to fly from one end of the UK & Ireland every 2 or 3 days as has sometimes happened in trying to meet a lot of requests.
In other words, it is more PLANNED.
b)
‘Primary’ does not necessarily mean that the visit must be arranged first chronologically: the ‘Secondary’period can happen first if that is more convenient.
c)
It won't always work out as tidily as the Grid suggests!
Visitors don't always arrive, or arrive on time.
Life for them is often considerably less planned ore predictable!
Other factors enter in.
But we are clear this is the way to go.
Flexibility is still possible in that there are in any one year at least as many shorter term visitors available which we cannot feature on the Grid system.
d)
If a Region would like a special overseas visitor not catered for in the Grid system, they can contact me in the first place.
I can then approach the overseas groups knowing something of the overall picture.
You should not request time from a visitor already allocated on the Grid.
e)
Most Regions have got all or most of what they requested on  their Annual Plans and in subsequent memos.
Please remember that the programme has to try to meet the expectations of eight different Regions/Nations, the Overseas Groups, Sector interests eg. Fund-Raising, Communications, not to mention the visitors themselves.
The task of combining these requests in terms of priority themes, dates of events, countries etc. is considerable.
Finally, while I hope we will work hard to implement this system, if there are problems please get in touch with me.
Iain
You'll see we have managed still to give you all your top 4 priority requests.
Hope you can work with this — Casual visitors will no doubt provide extra flexibility and opportunity
Ken
CHRISTIAN AID
DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION GRANTS COMMITTEE
MINUTES OF the MEETING HELD ON WEDNESDAY 3 MARCH 1993
Members present:
Lady Fraser, Chair of the Board was present.
Staff present:
WELCOME AND PRAYERS
Molly Kenyon welcomed Lady Fraser, Chair of the Board, to the meeting.
In addition she welcomed those attending the committee for the first time, Bet Aalen from Ireland, Watson Moyes from Scotland and Arton Medd from the North West.
She explained that she was chairing the meeting in the absence of Elizabeth Varley, who is ill.
The Committee asked for their good wishes to be sent to her.
Vaughan Jones opened the meeting with prayer.
APOLOGIES
Apologies for absence were received from John Newbury and Elizabeth Varley.
Since this was Keith Jones' last committee meeting, the committee expressed its gratitude for the valuable contributions he had made to the committee.
Since Keith was a Board members of the committee, another Board member would be asked to sit on the committee.
MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
The minutes of the meeting held on 17 November 1992, which had been circulated, were confirmed and signed as a correct record.
MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
Music Project
Discussions had been held with the Asia Pacific Group, and it was felt suitable to have a Philippines focus.
A grant of £10,000 a year for 3 years was approved.
Global Futures Project
After taking advice from Religious Education Advisers, it was felt that the project would not address issues from a faith perspective, and was not essentially relevant to the National Curriculum.
It was thus decided not to bring the proposal back to the Committee.
Education Policy Paper
A revised Policy Paper had been circulated, and amendments made by the Board to the Policy paper were tabled.
The Committee accepted the policy paper.
This paper is a document for public use, and can be widely used.
SCHOOL STRATEGY
Ruth Lewis introduced the discussion paper about the recent thinking on schools strategy.
This rethinking was prompted by changes in the schools systems, in two particular ways.
(1) Changes in the ways that schools are managed and funded have made it more difficult for Christian Aid to relate to schools.
(2) the introduction of the National Curriculum.
Christian Aid has now decided to produce more materials relevant to the National Curriculum, and less on the Christian Aid Week, Harvest and Christian Aid Corporate themes.
In addition, Christian Aid would employ a person to recruit and train volunteers to do educational work in schools.
The Committee discussion raised several issues:
—
the problems and Christian Aid's approach to them were similar in secondary and primary schools.
—
Our concern was to make sure that development issues were taught in schools (by Christian Aid or any other agency), and also to raise Christian Aid's own profile in schools.
Christian Aid would like to work more in partnership with other agencies.
—
It was also acknowledged that there was a large demand for our materials in some schools.
A recent survey revealed a particular demand for Christian Aid's RE materials.
—
During Christian Aid Week an assembly sheet would still be produced.
—
it was agencies like Christian Aid that had lobbied for the inclusion of Development Education in the National Curriculum.
—
the involvement of Development Education Centres (DECs) in schools was very varied.
Their partnership with other agencies depended often on the personalities of those working at grassroot level.
Sometimes the area secretary's relationship to a DEC was different from that of the more educationally experienced staff of Oxfam.
Oxfam has a very low profile in Ireland, although other agencies are very active in schools.
—
a lot is expected of the contract volunteers who work in schools.
A Volunteer Teacher Coordinator, if appointed, would be expected to train and resource contract volunteers more effectively.
—
such a post might be based in a region, so that a more concentrated attempt at servicing contract volunteers and developing networks is facilitated as ‘an experiment’.
However, the person in this post would have overall care of all contract volunteers in England and Wales.
—
A paper on how to develop a relationship with DECs is available.
—
It was suggested that it might be necessary to monitor DECs more strictly, with some possible funding implications.
The Committee affirmed the paper and encouraged further discussion and action about these issues.
FUNDING THEOLOGICAL REFLECTION
Barbara Vellacott introduced the paper on Funding Theological Reflection, an initiative from the Aid Sector, being explored throughout Christian Aid.
She pointed out that this committee had funded various projects engaging in theological reflection in the past, eg ICOREC and PRAXIS.
Overseas Groups already fund theological reflection in the South, and also in the North through their own Development Education budgets.
There was a distinction between simply a reflection on development and a feeding of insights gained from individual development experience into a wider shared theological reflection on development.
The Edinburgh University's Theology and Development Course programme is an example of the latter.
One aspect of this reflection could be on the production of liturgy, and its relationship to social justice.
This might encourage more lay involvement in mainstream liturgy.
Liturgies raising social and development issues, such as Christian Aid liturgies, were often used on less formal occasions, and were often not central to churches' worshipping pattern.
There were possibilities of Christian Aid funding theological reflection on development in all areas of tertiary education.
Already, Christian Aid have agreed to fund the development of a Theology and Development course in Lampeter.
The Scottish Development Education Committee turned down a request to fund a ‘Development for Life’ course, because it was not felt to be grounded in a particular situation.
It was felt that maybe a stronger emphasis should be put on the need for ecumenical and inter-faith dialogue.
Theology needs to be rooted in people's material conditions in this country and in the South.
If there is commitment to doing theological reflection with and for the poor in the North, then the experience of overseas people is only sometimes relevant.
Requests for funding theological reflection need to be stimulated.
DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION GRANTS BUDGET FOR 1993-4
Barbara Vellacott introduced the paper giving the proposals for next year's budget.
£80,000 would be taken from the grants budget to be used on Christian Aid's own Education and Campaign work, eg for a Volunteer Teacher Coordinator.
Christian Aid's development education budget is large compared with other agencies, but very small in relation to the need.
At present there are no plans to reduce further the grants budget in the future.
There was discussion about the relationship between the central and regional dev.ed. committees.
It was important for regional committees to be independent.
However, there might be guidance about the proportioning of grants to various aspects of development education.
By its membership, the central committee was the coming together of regional committees to discuss common strategies, which would then be taken back to the regional committees for further discussion.
The allocation of money to the regional committees was decided centrally, after discussion of commitments, needs and requests with the regional coordinators and national secretaries.
Each Overseas Group also has a Development Education budget.
The Committee accepted the proposed budget outline.
Owing to the limited budget, Barbara urged caution on decision on grants which were phased over more than one year, and thus had financial implications for the future.
FAIR TRADE FOUNDATION
Tim Moulds, Head of Personnel, and a member of the Fair Trade Foundation Board, introduced the paper giving the background to the Foundation.
As the proposed grant for 93–94 from Christian Aid was so large, at £50,000, the Committee was asked to consider the proposal in advance, and give some  now indication of whether it would support the request when it came to committee for approval next year.
The Foundation aims to have 2 major products requesting the Fairtrade Mark before the end of 1993, with a further 4-5 major products on board the following year.
It is understood that Typhoo Tea will seek to qualify for the Fairtrade Mark, in addition to its own mark; they indicate that they are willing to pay for it.
The Committee agreed to consider the grant favourably at its next meeting.
SUMMARY OF CURRENT APPLICATIONS AND FINANCIAL POSITION
One correction was made to the summary.
The balance now available for 1992-93 stands at £16,963, owing to the return of some money to the central fund from a regional committee.
APPLICATIONS FOR FUNDING
(i) Continuing commitments — agreed in principle
Farmers Third World Network — a grant of £6,510 was approved for the continuing development of a network of interested farmers examining the issues and effects of European policy on Third World agriculture.
This is the third of a three year commitment.
The Committee agreed to consider a larger amount when all the applications for funding had been presented.
World Studies — a grant of £5,355 was approved for developing new modules and courses in global citizenship.
This is the balance of the first of a three year commitment of £10,000 per annum. £4,645 of the first payment was allocated in 1991-92.
Action for World Development Fund — a grant of £23,220 was approved for AWDF's educational work on servicing its members with information and briefing materials in support of WDM campaigns.
This grant is made with the BOAG agencies.
Tools for Self Reliance — a grant of £3,690 was approved for TFSR's, development education programme as the second of a three year commitment.
(ii) Public Education
International Broadcasting Trust — a grant of £3,000 was approved to research and lobby the BBC on the inclusion of environment and development issues in its programmes.
Cicada Productions — a grant of £7,000 was approved to stimulate interest in celebrities to take part in five popular documentaries on development issues.
Artscape — a grant of £20,000 was approved (eight members for, and three against) to built a Christian Aid garden at the Hampton Court Palace International flower show.
A quality leaflet or card including information about Christian Aid would be distributed.
The Committee discussed the project at length, and agreed to the grant on the condition that the budget, literature and question of sponsorship was carefully looked at.
In future, it recommended the construction of something which could be transported to several shows.
(iii) New phases of funding requested from existing partners
Returned Volunteer Action — A grant of £10,737 was approved towards the core costs of RVA as the first of a three year commitment.
This is approved on the understanding that RVA works in closer partnership with Christian Aid.
Third World First — A grant of £14,350 was approved towards the core costs of 3W1 as the first of a three year commitment.
This is approved on the understanding that 3W1 works in close partnership with Christian Aid.
(iv) One-off requests from existing partners
UK One World Linking Association — A grant of £4,000 was approved towards its core costs.
National Curriculum Monitoring Project — A grant of £3,000 was approved towards the core costs of the monitoring project from April 1993 — March 1994.
Overseas Development Institute — A grant of £5,250 was approved towards the cost of a suitable paper on condition that Christian Aid receive appropriate acknowledgement on the published paper.
Methodist Church Overseas Division — A grant of £2,500 was approved to fund the completion of this year's Partner-in-Mission element in the MCOD Grassroots programme.
World Student Christian Federation — A grant of £1,000 was approved towards the costs of students from the South attending a conference on Justice, Peace and the Integrity of Creation.
(v) New application
Christian Education Movement — A grant of £16,693 was approved to create a 3 year part-time post which will develop curriculum material and teaching strategies in RE and PSE in schools in the principles and issues of world development.
£10,000 would be released as the first of a three year commitment.
The post would be one of real partnership with Christian Aid.
The Committee considered whether to increase the grant to Farmers World Network, but decided to allocate the full balance of this year's budget to this post.
MAJOR DISCUSSION ITEM FOR NEXT MEETING
The Committee agreed to discuss two subjects.
One of the subjects would be Regional Committee Funding.
DATES OF NEXT MEETINGS
The dates for future meetings are:
SCOTTISH AREA STAFF MEETING
Meeting of 8th December, 1992 at 10.30 a.m. at 759a Argyle Street, Glasgow
AGENDA
10.30 1.
Worship and welcome
10.35 2.
Minutes of the previous meeting of 5th November
10.45 3.
Matters arising from the minutes of the previous meeting
11.00 4.
Reports:
CAW
Finance
Fundraising
Staff Council
11.10 5.
SMT Minutes, 30th October, 13th and 27th November (please bring)
11.15 6.
Year Plan (please bring)
12.00 Lunch
1.30 8.
Overseas Visitors
1.45 9.
Conference and Euro Summit
2.00 10.
Ann Russell and Mandy Peck
3.00 11.
A.O.C.B. 
CHRISTIAN AID
Development Education Grants Committee
Wednesday 3 March, 11.30 am — 4.30 pm Room 425, Interchurch House
AGENDA
1.
Welcome and introduction to new members
2.
Prayers
3.
Apologies
4.
Minutes of Meeting 17 November 1992 (circulated)
5.
Matters arising:
—
final decisions on Music Project and Global Futures project
—
Education policy paper (circulated)
6.
Schools strategy
for discussion of implementation of proposals
Paper A
7.
Funding of theological reflection
for discussion and recommendation
Paper B
1.00 pm Lunch
8.
Development Education Grants Budget for 1993-94
Paper C
9.
Fair Trade Foundation
Paper D 
10.
Summary of current applications and financial position
Paper E
11.
Grant applications
(i)
continuing commitments
Paper F
(ii)
public education
Paper G
(iii)
new applications from existing partners
Paper H
(iv)
new application
Paper I
12.
Major discussion item for next meeting
13.
Dates of next meetings
14.
Any other business 
CHRISTIAN AID
Development Education Grants Committee
Tuesday 29 June, 11.30am — 4.30pm Room 425, Interchurch House
AGENDA
1.
Welcome and introduction to new members
2.
Prayers
3.
Minutes of last meeting 3 March 1993 (circulated)
4.
Matters Arising:
Update on the following:—
—
Public Education Grants
—
Music Project
—
CEM Project.
—
World Studies evaluation study.
—
Association for Development Education
5.
Review of regional funding
Paper A
— the subject of this meeting's major discussion
6.
Overall picture of Grant Commitments of Central Committee for the year and summary of applications to this Committee
Paper B
12.45pm — Lunch
7.
Applications:—
—
Continuing applications
Paper C
—
New phases of funding
Paper D
—
New applications from existing partners
Paper E
—
New applications
Paper F
SCOTTISH CHRISTIAN AID COMMITTEE
4TH JUNE 1991
AGENDA
1.
Opening Worship
2.
Welcome to new members
3.
Minutes of Meeting of 19th March 1991
4.
Matters arising:
91/27 Fundraising Membership
91/29 ACTS Membership
5.
Financial Report
6.
National Secretary's Report
7.
‘Window on Andra Pradesh’— Lady Marion Fraser
8.
Fundraising Sub-committee
9.
Development Education Sub-committee (paper attached)
10.
Visit to El Salvador — Rev. Keith Steven
11.
Publicity Sub-committee (paper attached)
12.
Partnership Sub-committee (paper attached)
13.
Christian Aid Executive
14.
Date of Next Meeting — Wednesday 11th September 1991
15.
A.O.C.B.
Lunch — 1 pm 
SCOTTISH CHRISTIAN AID COMMITTEE
SUB GROUP: PUBLICITY & PUBLICATIONS
Meeting 23rd February 1993
AGENDA
Welcome and Opening Devotions
Apologies for absence
Minutes of the meeting on 26th.
November 92
Matters Arising
a) Press and P.R.
Officer (Martha Clarke)
b) Scottish Newsletter
Press & PR Officer — Relationship to Sub Group
Related items from Press/PR Officer
a) Christian Aid Week launch.
b) Photocall opportunities
c) Broadcasting training.
Promotions/Merchandising
Budget
A.O.B.
Date of next meeting.