

Letter from the Chairman
Very many thanks to all of you who returned the questionnaire.
The response was terrific and it was obvious that much thought had gone into your replies.
It will be quite some time before all your suggestions are processed in details but I know you will be interested in some of the preliminary findings.
It is quite evident that the majority feel that Medau Blue should be retained for use on special occasions thought you are not nearly so favourably disposed to wearing it in class — at least in its present form!
Our image provoked an emotional response.
‘What image?’ wrote one member rather plaintively!
Clearly many of you are anxious lest the essential qualities of Medau be jeopardised or lost and on that particular point I would like to give reassurance.
‘Change for change's sake’ is not our policy and as un-paid voluntary workers — going more or less flat out — we have little or no time to spare for non-essentials!
However, as your elected officers we do feel responsible for ensuring that as a national organisation; we continue to survive and grow which means above all that we have a continual influx of new members.
This is by no means an easy task when so many types of movement classes and fitness pursuits are competing to attract potential members.
The Medau Society remains a caring Society and is justifiably proud of its standards.
The work is for everyone — fit and not so fit — young and old.
But look around you — at your own class — the next rally you attend, the Annual Reunion and judge for yourself where we should be directing our efforts.
It is the younger age range to whom we must make ourselves more attractive and appealing.
Nearly all of you promised to promote Society membership and I thank you for that.
NOW is the time to act.
For instance, when you return your renewal slip why not enclose at least one or two application forms from new members or better still get your class organised and send in the whole lot together!
With very best wishes for a happy New Year,
Return Visit for Anke…
We are delighted that Anke Rohlfs, guest teacher at our 1982 Summer Course, is returning for this year's International Summer course, and once again we are able to use the facilities at Green Park Centre, Aston Clinton, Bucks.
The Course, from 13th–19th August, offers two interlinked programmes of recreational work with a choice of specialised options for teachers.
Come for the week, half the week, or just a day.
The Easter Course (25th–28th April) at the West Midlands College of Higher Education, Walsall, and Lilleshall (11th–13th May), are also included in the details of the enclosed Course leaflet.
1984 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
This year it will be held on Saturday, 12th May, at Eltham Hill School, SE9, and will take the form of a Movement Class during the morning, Ploughman's Lunch (for which a small charge will be made), followed by the business meeting in the afternoon.
PRETTY PEOPLE AT THE PINEAPPLE
For Lucy Jackson it was to be a summer task — How to present the Medau Method to the notoriously critical 18–25 age group in a trendy setting.
It had to be in the form of a fast one-hour package workout, but how to preserve our aims and teaching principles?
Everyone knows the fame of the Pineapple Dance Centre in Covent Garden and Lucy was amazed to be ‘hired’.
It is a dancers' haven, surprisingly unplushy and ‘laid back’ but with a special atmosphere, friendly gassy, theatrical and kind.
The first class was a horror — rows of pretty faces with eyes glued to the wall length mirrors and feet stuck to one spot on the floor.
The loud taped music, incredible speed, vigour and sheer rush of a non-stop class sent her home reeling and almost defeated.
However, six months on and the class is flourishing and fun.
Lucy says she has learned to enjoy the pace — even the lack of commitment, new appraising eyes each week, the sprinkling of young men, and above all, contact with other disciplines.
Where else would one be teaching black Robotic dancers, a dancer from the Stuttgart Ballet, seven pretty Chinese girls, a female weightlifter, a University oarswoman, ex-dancers, ex-aerobicists, with the rest of us, in the space of a few months.
Lucy says it has been a lesson in sympathy to begin again as a ‘new’ teacher, finding a way to pull our work more into line with the current fitness scene.
It brought all the agonies of doubt and self-criticism which we can too easily forget.
But above all, it has brought the pleasure of new friends in a new environment, and the great joy of seeing our Medau Method ‘up on the boards’ at the Pineapple.
News from Germany
Ulla, wife of Hinni Medau opened a Medau movement studio in Bad Sackingen, Germany in September when Jochen lectured on ‘Women, Sport and Gymnastics’ followed by a team performance from Coburg College.
Fascinating Figures
The Medau Society has them by the hundred — nay, by the thousand — and they have to be kept in order.
Do you find statistics scintillating, estimates enthralling, and ledgers liberating?
You could be just the person we need.
We are looking for a new custodian of the Society's money.
The Treasurer's job is both interesting and rewarding — and not in the least formidable as the title might suggest.
It involves routine book-keeping, liaising with the Sports Council, and advising the Finance and Executive Committees on Income and Expenditure matters.
To find out more about this office please contact the retiring Treasurer, Janet Rogers, on 01–644 3288.
PLEASE don't hide your light under a bushel — the Society needs you valuable expertise.
Crystal Palace 1983
The hugh complex of the Crystal Palace Sports Centre does present certain problems to those who shoulder the responsibility of organising our biennial November Rally there, and bouquets go this time to Ann Langford and her Surrey colleagues in ensuring a smooth, efficient, well-planned event.
The great size of the Sports Hall does give tremendous pleasure to members who wish to join in the open sessions, and the picture of so many enthusiasts on the floor is particularly heartening to those who work so hard for the furtherance of the Society.
All the teams taking part in the display programme showed exceptional versatility in costume colour and design, from the ‘baseball team’ look of the Teens in brilliant white sports suits, with crimson anklewarmers and belts, and using crimson balls to match, to the elegant handkerchiefpoint pink shaded skirts over navy leotards worn by the Essex team.
Our President, Lady Braithwaite, appearing in public for the first time in her new role, was warmly greeted, and during the afternoon she drew the first lucky winners of our 200 Club, a most important new venture to raise badly needed funds for the Society.
Out of the entire proceedings came just one plaintive comment: ‘Why is it always raining when we are ready to go home?’.
Start of the New Course
The new Medau Teachers' Training Course was successfully launched in October, with an enrolment of twenty-seven students.
The Home Counties are well represented, plus some students from Wales, the North West, Scotland and from the Southern and Western Counties.
During this probationary term there have been two training Saturdays in South London and a residential weekend in Buckinghamshire.
We also have six student-trainers, whose training programme runs parallel to the main course.
In addition, small group music lessons have been arranged separately and are being given mostly by student-trainers.
The staff and students are quickly getting to know each other and are shaping up into a hardworking and enthusiastic team.
Chance to perform at the ALBERT HALL
An audition will be held on 7th April 10.30 — 4.30 at Aylwin School, Southward Park Road, London SE16, to select a display team to represent the Society at the Festival of Movement and Dance being given to celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the Central Council of Physical Recreation.
Two performances will be shown on Saturday 20th April 1985 at the Royal Albert Hall.
Over 15 movement and dance organisation will be taking part and our item will be choreographed and produced by Margaret Charlwood.
The first two rehearsals will take place at Aylwin School on May 19th and June 16th and from September the team will rehearse once a month on Saturdays from 10.30 to 4.00.
There will be a lot of hard work involved but this is YOUR opportunity to take part in promoting Medau in a most exciting way.
Youngsters (over 18) are especially needed and of course all those who are young at heart!!
Application forms for the audition may be obtained from the office from mid-February.
Closing date 24th March.
Anne McMillan's ‘babies’ are now our bright and bouncy Teens Team.
They are all daughters of Medau Teachers or class members, and their Mothers fondly remember those early days when they took their little girls along to Anne's very popular Saturday morning Children's Classes at Leatherhead Leisure Centre.
The team was formed just over two years ago under the tuition of Margaret Charlwood and made its first public appearance at Crystal Palace in November 1981.
They performed again at our 30th Reunion, and are now an anticipated attraction at our own big public events.
The girls are all under 20 years of age and they work extremely hard, fitting regular rehearsals into their many other activities.
Through them we can be reassured of the continuing popularity of Medau, in spite of today's selection of heavily publicised good, bad and indifferent alternative movement methods.
Letter from Malta
Just about a year ago Cicely and Dick Harris made their third trip to Malta; this time to find a flat for rent on a permanent basis, enabling them to spend the Winter months there each year.
Cicely writes:
‘We left England on a dark cold night, but as we approached the Island the clear lights of towns and villages sparkled like jewels.
We stepped off the plane into warm balmy air, happy to be back amongst the many English and Maltese friends we have made here.
Our flat is in the small village of Attard, just 4 miles from the sea and we are well integrated into the local community.
One becomes accustomed to constantly ringing church bells and clocks — our local church clock chimes up to six, then at 7 o'clock it begins again, requiring a mathematical feat to work out the correct time.
We have had many laughs during our travels and our domestic life here.
On one flight from England, carrying some of our personal possessions, bells started ringing at the Customs Desk — and my carving knife was temporarily confiscated in case I attempted to hijack the plane!
The Gozo boat was raided by the Police.
Fearing a drug smuggling gang at work, we were relieved to see cases of Mars bars being offloaded — by order of Dom Mintoff.
A matter of illegal entry from Sicily.
The Government tried to improve the water shortage situation by enlarging pipes carrying rainwater down to the sea, but as the tides rose fish entered the pipes and kept popping out into the roadway!
We love Malta, with its beautiful climate and friendly people, and feel we have the best of both worlds, here and England.
P.S. Anyone still own an old Ford Popular or Austin A30?
These cars are treated with great respect by the Maltese’.
Not only (Medau) but also…
Being a lady gardener is not a glamorous occupation.
Visions of Dr. Martens steel-caped boots with shorts in summer and empty split peat bags warding off sudden downpours in winter are all too realistic.
Forget thoughts of balmy days, gently dead-heading herbaceous flowers in cottage type gardens, not so.
We are here mainly for the hard work that clients can neither do nor wish to do themselves, for example; pulling out hedges which contain years of accumulated dust (bad for the sinuses), grubbing out tree stumps, digging heavy clay soil (a nightmare for the lower lumbar region), pruning overgrown trees, cutting up brushwood prior to removal.
Make no mistake, gardening is tough, unyielding, frustrating — the weather sees to that.
I have my lighter moments though.
Usually when the welcomed cup of tea arrives, my husband, with whom I work, hardly ever tells the customer who I am.
‘Does your friend/the lady/your son/take sugar’?‘er, my wife’ is the reply, then everyone relaxes.
I have been put into the proper slot….
Faux pas have been many.
Once I was told to cut to ground level everything in the border, which I did.
‘Not the hydrangeas’ shouted hubby on his return.
I don't know what he said to the lady of the house, but we were not invited to return.
Hydrangeas were her late husband's pride and joy.
I can never get the technique for pulling on ropes quite right.
According to the manual, regarding the felling of trees:— firstly remove long branches, except on the side where it is supposed to fall, then if possible excavate around the roots, finally one person pushes the main trunk while the other (me) pulls on the rope.
When taut, no problem, but as the trees starts falling it is difficult to take up the slack, thus a backwards tumble into the shrubbery.
Charlie Chaplin had the movement off pat, I haven't, only the bruises!….
I have given you a lot of minuses but there are pluses too.
Everyday is different, every garden has its own character.
To see a job completed to the best of your ability and to the satisfaction of the customer is just reward.
We won't ever be wealthy, but the mere fact that we ARE working means that we must be healthy and all those extra stolen minutes in the warmth of the winter sun is richness indeed.
KENT
Chris Ruffle's great new venture, her Mums' and Toddlers' Class on Wednesday afternoons at Ashford Adult Education Centre gives pleasure to all participants, from the youngest tot of 10 months to the oldest Mum, a Grandmother!
The Class runs for an hour and it is playtime for the 24 children.
Mums join in the fun, and Chris introduces Medau themes into the sessions.
You're never too young or too old to enjoy Medau, and in Joan Daniels' Class Leila Barrows, at 74 is full of zest.
Many Kent members took advantage last summer of Hazel French's ‘Open House’, also enjoying her lovely garden with its inviting swimming pool.
Elsie Streek was busy organising a Medau Evening to raise funds to help the Blind.
This was in December at Kidbrooke School.
Happily pictures below are Dulcie and Arthur Maxim.
They celebrated their Golden Wedding Anniversary last September, and Dulcie has been keenly involved with Medau for over 36 years, starting with the Post Natal Classes at Days Lane School, Sidcup, taken by Molly Braithwaite and Peggy Secord.
SOUTH WEST
‘Better Leisure’ offers gently exercise and relaxation for men and women of 50–plus.
Following six months of preparation and a two-week promotion of 6 pilot Classes in three local areas, supported by the Sports Council, Rosemary Gould's new Class at Saltford Hall, near Bath, is well underway.
Between 2.00 and 3.00 p.m. every Wednesday, ladies and gentlemen enjoy a session of Medau linked with some aspect of health, along with the added enjoyment of a nice cup of tea.
Each week a different aspect is discussed in detail, with relevant leaflets from the Health Education Council to support it.
Topics covered so far have included: — 
(1)
the importance of movement
(2)
the need of fibre in the diet
(3)
the benefits of walking and fresh air
(4)
awareness of rest after effort, rather than sleep after inactivity
(5)
discussing tension and anxiety, and finding how to work out frustrations
(6)
taking a much closer look at the food we eat — and why
Medau Rhythmic Movement and Relaxation Therapy was the subject of a Talk and Demonstration given by Barbara Potticary before Bath branch members of the Back Pain Association.
It was felt that our exercise system is very suitable for back pain sufferers, there being little risk of over-strain or accident, and applicable to all ages and conditions.
Hertfordshire
More celebrations in this County as the Harpenden Class enters its 25th year.
Doreen Copas well recalls her meeting in 1959 with the Principal of Harpenden Evening Institute when she asked if she could start a movement class, and was told there was no real demand.
With the Further Education Centre now providing facilities for some 40 or more physical activity and Yoga classes, someone had to get her foot in at the door in those early days!
Harpenden have planned visits to Sadlers Wells Royal Ballet as part of their celebration programme.
Best wishes to Vera Reeves, a member from this area, who has embarked on the Teachers Training Course and will, we are certain, help carry on the Medau tradition in Hertfordshire.
MID-WALES
Rose Mayers' Class in Llyswen, which began five years ago, is flourishing nicely.
During 1983 several demonstrations took place, the most successful one being held in Hereford City at a Ladies Coffee Evening, when many of the 100 strong audience joined enthusiastically in an open session.
Rose sends greetings to all those Medau friends she hasn't seen for some time.
SURREY
As a result of excellent publicity via a Cheese & Wine Evening Rally at Guildford organised by Margaret Charlwood, there is now a thriving Class at Bishop Reindorp School, Larch Avenue, taken by Ann Langford on Wednesday evenings.
Margaret's REdhill Rally — always an event to look forward to — was again a repeated success.
There is a new Class for the Mentally Handicapped at St. Ebba's Hospital, Epsom, under the sympathetic guidance of Pauline Kenward.
Many Surrey Teachers were very busy for months ahead in preparation for the 1983 Crystal Palace Rally, organised by this area, and this time the programme included an item performed by a Surrey team devised and produced by Vanessa Forbes and Delia Beaver.
Yet more babies in fertile Surrey in 1983 — to Terri Jones a second daughter, Leonie, and to Pauline Kenward, a handsome grandson.
LONDON
Congratulations to Miss Kay Evans MBE, ex-President and Vice-President of the Society and Miss Eileen Alexander OBE, also one of our Vice-Presidents, on being made Fellows of the Physical Education Association for their distinguished contribution to the work of the Association and in the physical education and movement field.
Their Awards were presented by Baroness Ewart-Biggs on the occasion of the Prince Philip Fellows Lecture held at the House of Lords on 5th December.
Miss Olive Newson, who retired from the Sports Council in September 1983 has been associated with the Medau Society for nearly 30 years.
She first met Molly Braithwaite when, as Director of Physical Education and Social Activities at the Central London Polytechnic she opened the first Medau Rhythmical Movement class with Molly as its teacher.
Medau interested her enough for Olive to take part in our first training course and she was also a member of one of our early display teams.
Prior to her retirement she acted as the Society's Liaison Officer for the Sports Council for the last 20 years.
We would like to take this opportunity to say thank you and wish her a very happy retirement.
Middlesex
Every year the mentally handicapped girls of St. Raphael's Convent, Brentford, work hard to master and learn an item for their Christmas Display which is given for the Sisters of the Convent and nursing staff of the Infirmary, where the girls live.
It takes great concentration on their part, and for weeks ahead their Teacher Phyl Bailey carefully guides them through rehearsals.
The picture shows them performing a hoop item before physically handicapped class members from St. Joseph's Hospital, at an annual party for the disabled.
Mentally and physically handicapped, and able-bodied class members, join together in a particularly happy afternoon of laughter, singing, and food — especially food!
HAMPSHIRE
Everyone was pleased to welcome back to Chichester from the USA Sarah Smith, who went to live in North Carolina in 1980.
On her return she was promptly plunged back into teaching by Caroline Little, and at present she is working as Caroline's assistant in her Classes for the Elderly.
Sarah hopes to start taking Recreational Classes again soon.
By the most amazing coincidence Caroline's daughter, Barbara Griggs (also a Medau Teacher), has gone to live in America about 80 miles — a mere ‘backyard’ distance to the folk over there— from where Sarah has returned.
ESSEX
Edith Harlow has been teaching for 40 years and Teachers in this area felt the time was ripe for celebration.
Edith arrived one evening at a local hotel for what she thought was just a companiable dinner party amongst friends in very pleasant surroundings.
She certainly did not expect to see the beautiful cake especially made by Tina Denny, iced in Medau Blue, with our logo girl in one corner, or the surprise presentation of a charming Royal Doulton figurine, accompanied by much love and good wishes.
Doreen Cowie was unfortunately not able to be present on the night, and sends her own very best wishes to Edith via our column.