

PEGGY SECORD Our New President
Peggy was born in Italy of an English Mother and a half-German half-Swedish father.
Quite early in life she decided she wanted to be a dancer and was entranced when she first saw Bode-Medau work while attending a display of various systems of rhythmic movement.
She longed to become a Medau teacher and, as luck would have it, met Hinrich Medau in Berlin at the point when he was in need of an English Language tutor prior to a visit to the United States to introduce ball and club gymnastics.
So Peggy became his tutor.
She then trained at the Medau School under the talented Irmela Doebner and some months after qualifying decided to come to England, and with the help of a postgraduate at Cambridge arranged to give a display at Newham College.
There she met Molly Braithwaite, who was so enthusiastic that after finishing her degree she also trained at the Medau School and on her return joined Peggy in taking classes.
After Molly was called to do war work Peggy was helped by Edith Harlow.
In 1941 Peggy married Campbell Secord and after the war had to abandon her Medau teaching to live abroad.
She then became fascinated by Montessori pre-school education and on returning to England she started a Montessori school in her country home.
This school is still going and Peggy regards all the children as her family.
‘When I read the Medau News, ‘she says, ‘I am completely overwhelmed with admiration at the way my Medau colleagues have created a Medau world in this country — far beyond any pipe dreams Molly and I could have had in the early years of struggle.
I can't tell you how thrilled I am to be in closer contact with Medau again.
THE MEDAU FAMILY
After a rural childhood in Schleswig-Holstein, teacher-training at Giessen and gymnastic teaching experience in Spain and Portugal, where he absorbed the rich rhythmic pattern of Iberian life, Hinrich Medau returned to Germany to study new ideas combining rhythm and physical education.
At Dr Rudolf Bode's Training College he met a fellow-student who was to make a lasting impact on his life both personally and professionally — Senta Medau's warm personality, beautiful movement, choreographic flair and ability to teach in four languages made her ideal partner and wife.
Their four children grew up in the strict but loving atmosphere of the Medau College founded by Hinrich in Berlin in 1929.
The elder son, Karl-Hinrich, is now a specialist in ceramics, and is married to Ursula (nee Dietzius), a practising Medau Teacher.
The younger son, Dr Jochen Medau, is a lecturer at the teaching hospital of Wurzburg University in Coburg (the town to which the Medau Schule moved in 1954), specialising in intestinal medicine, cardiology, and sports medicine.
He is married to Ingrid (nee Schneider), has to children, Anja, aged 15, and Peer Henrik, aged 10, and lives in a lovely house built in the grounds of the Medau Schule.
When his father died in 1974, Jochen became the Principal of the College, the administration of which he combines with his medical career.
Anna Monika, the elder daughter, had been expected to become Principal of the college, and worked hard to acquire the necessary qualifications.
However, it was not to be.
She was killed in a car accident in 1961 shortly after her marriage to Dr Julius Seeger.
The second daughter, Katarina (Tinka), also graduated from the College, where she taught for a time.
She is married to Peter Hutz and they have three daughters aged 21, 19 and 17, the eldest of whom, Ursula, is currently training at Coburg in gymnastics and physiotherapy.
Tinka's home is now in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, but for many years she lived in Johannesburg, where she established the Medau Society of South Africa.
She has taught international seminars in Denmark, France, England, South Africa, Malaysia and Thailand, and all our members who attended the 1986 Coburg course were delighted to be taught by her there.
Although Hinrich and Senta Medau are no longer with us, their work and inspiration live on through the second generation, while in this country the Medau Society celebrates its 35th Anniversary in 1987.
(More information on the life and work of Hinrich Medau can be found in Medau Rhythmic Movement by Molly Braithwaite, price £1.50 — ask your teacher for a copy.)
BEDU
In March the Society took great pleasure in sending Gisela Klotzer (Bedu), Director of Movement at the Medau Schule in Coburg, a bouquet of flowers with birthday greetings and warm congratulations on 25 years of Medau teaching.
It was a delight to have Bedu teaching at this year's Easter Course at Aston Clinton.
September's Medau News will carry a full report on the course.
THE SOCIETY'S DISPLAY TEAMS
The auditions for the Celebrating Age Festival Team and the National Display Team were held successfully, and both teams are now rehearsing regularly and members getting to know one another.
Details of ticket prices etc. for the Celebrating Age Festival to be held at the Royal Albert Hall are not yet known; they will appear in the September Medau News.
NEW TEACHERS
Following the Society's Examination in March, we are delighted to announce the names of six new teachers.
Geographically they come from far and wide, which means that Medau is breaking new ground through their classes.
They are:
SPRING INTO ACTION
We promised an extra issue to add to the New Year and Autumn ones and — hey presto!
Our first Spring issue is here.
May-time — Springtime — any time of the year is Medau-time.
Particularly true now as more areas are organising summer courses and events for you to attend and include in your diary.
The future is important for us all.
Today's climate of difficulties and problems, stresses and strains, inevitably affects our lives in many ways.
We hope we help you to overcome them.
We know you leave your class ‘alive’ and happy with that wonderful feeling of well-being and belonging.
When you have read (and re-read) your Medau News we hope it gives the same feeling.
Perhaps you could pass your Medau News on to friends with an encouragement to them also to join a class.
Membership, especially new membership, is tremendously important to the Society.
We need your continuing support and interest for the future of your Society.
Remember our motto, ‘Come Alive’— add to that ‘Spring into Action’ and spread the Medau News far and wide.
Thank you.
POTENTIAL TEACHERS' DAY
Stockwell Park School, Clapham Road, London SW9, Saturday 4 July 1987, 10.30 (for 11.00 start) to 5.00.
Fee for the day, £5.00.
This day is open to anyone interested in the Medau method of teaching and the possibility of joining the Teachers' Training Course, either with the next intake in October 1987 or at some future date.
Application forms from the Office — to be returned by 25 June.
JOHN HEWITT
Members will be very sad to hear that John Hewitt, husband of our secretary, Hilda, has died.
He had been ill for some time, and passed away peacefully on 12 April.
On behalf of the whole Society we offer our deep sympathy to Hilda and her family.
THE SOCIETY'S NEW OFFICERS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Pam Moran is married with three daughters, two stepsons and five granddaughters.
Pam became hooked on Medau after joining Molly Braithwaite's London Polytechnic class early in the 1960s while living in Wimbledon; she moved to Essex in 1975 and was overjoyed to find that Medau flourished there too.
She still attends three classes a week.
Vivien Rendall was introduced to Medau in 1966 when she joined Wynne Norris's class in Upton Chester; on moving south she was able to attend classes in St Albans and Hemel Hempstead, and since 1984, Gerrards Cross.
She has enjoyed many courses, including Coburg last year.
Vivien has been involved with committee work in the past, is a keen gardener, enjoys handicrafts and also swims, dances and skis.
She and her husband, an engineer with Shell Expro, have one daughter, Diana.
Stella Webb discovered Medau in 1968, and was subsequently cajoled into becoming a teacher by Cicely Harris, under whose guidance she qualified in 1973.
She started teaching in Orpington and now has classes in Blackheath Village, Downham and Sevenoaks.
She was elected Chairman of Kent Teachers in 1982 and is currently Treasurer, she also coaches the Kent Display Team.
Stella is married with three children, all themselves married, and has one grandchild.
Her other interests, when time permits, are needlework, lacemaking and cake decorating.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The Society's 35th Annual General Meetings was held on 11 April at Wheathampstead School.
Nearly 100 people made their way through Hertfordshire's intricate labyrinth of roads to attend.
Open classes by Margaret Charlwood and Rosemary Gould were followed by a ploughman's lunch and a video and film display featuring Medau pat and present.
A cut-glass bowl was presented to retiring president Lady Braithwaite, and jewelling to retiring chairman Hilda Lodge.
OUR RETIRING OFFICERS
Mrs Hilda Lodge
Hilda Lodge took over from June Bascombe as Chairman in 1985.
She was a popular choice — though a reluctant nominee — and her Medau roots go back to her days of early motherhood when Dr Anni Noll encouraged her to try Medau with Molly and Peggy.
She has been an extremely well-liked, quietly efficient, tactful and supportive chairman.
She promised herself, however, that she would hold the office only briefly, and now that her husband Stan has retired, she feels that she can no longer involve herself to so great an extent in commitments and activities that take her away from home.
Lady Isabel Braithwaite
Lady Braithwaite, Molly's sister-in-law became President in succession to Kay Evans in 1983.
It was a particular pleasure to the Society that the link with Molly's family could be maintained in this way.
Isabel has worked with great energy for the Society, and has been a much-welcomed participant and calm presence at many Society functions.
We thank Hilda and Isabel most warmly for their work, and we wish the new President, Peggy Secord, and the new Chairman, Pauline Kenward, every success.
REFLEXOLOGY
Reflexology is based on the principle that there are reflex areas in the feet that relate to every organ, gland and part of the body.
By special massage with the thumb and fingers on these areas of the feet, the body is ‘tuned up’ and helped to function more efficiently.
As with all natural healing or ‘alternative therapy’, Reflexology does not claim to cure; it aids the body in helping itself.
The aims of Reflexology are: to relax stress and tension, the cause of approximately 75% of today's diseases and ailments; to relieve blocked nerve impulses that end in the feet, to improve circulation, for it is at the feet that the blood, as it is pumped around the body, changes direction.
Congestion can occur (blocked pipes).
This can sometimes be felt in the feet as fine crystals, which, when massaged in the correct manner, can gradually be broken down and washed away in the bloodstream as circulation improves.
Unlike Acupuncture and Acupressure (Shiatsu), which work through complicated pathways throughout the body called Meridian Lines, Reflexology works on a Zone principle.
Slice the body in ten.
One toe for each slice.
Your spine runs down the centre of the body, so the corresponding foot reflex will be found running down the inside edge of both feet.
Take a look at your foot and marvel at how similar its shape is to that of your body:
Bearing in mind the resemblance of the feet to the body, all reflexes to the body can be found in the corresponding area on the feet.
To take a classic example, the big toe relates to the head, and so on down the body.
Before Reflexology was researched and developed in America in the 1930s, work on reflexes of the feet had been carried on in China for thousands of years.
The Egyptians used the technique as long ago as 2,000 B.C.
RECENT PUBLICATIONS
Relax and be Happy by Jane Madders Unwin £6.95
This very interesting and worthwhile book is aimed at helping parents and teachers to introduce children and young adults to techniques of relaxation.
The book is presented extremely well, with excellent explanations of what causes stress, and an indications of the levels of stress that children can cope with.
It explains how, from a very early age, it is necessary for everybody to experience stressful situations as a preparation for later years, and how parents and teachers, through their own behaviour, can help the child.
The book has many pictures showing children learning to relax through play and simple exercises; 8–to 13–year olds are shown developing their ability to relax and becoming aware of the difference between tension and relaxation.
Finally, the problems facing teenagers are explained and dealt with sympathetically — the changes, for instance, in their emotions and behaviour, and the stress created by examinations.
The book includes a chapter on calming massages to aid relaxation, which I feel sure would be beneficial to people of all ages.
Jane Madders, the author, has had close links with the Medau Society.
I well remember her giving an excellent day course to the Society trainers on relaxation.
Chambers ‘Coping With’ Series
W & R Chambers of Edinburgh publish a series entitled Coping With under the general editorship of Dr Judy Bury.
The books give practical advice to sufferers from any of various physical, social and psychological problems, from severe disablement to shyness.
There is background information specific to each problem, and plenty of good advice on how to deal with the day-today- difficulties that arise from it.
Emphasis is on self-help, and the organisations that can give support or provide equipment are listed.
Shown here are four titles, all price at £2.95.
A full list of titles can be obtained from Chambers at  
BERKSHIRE'S HIGH FLIER
A course in Air-obics.
Congratulations to Catherine Hopkins, a member of Barbara Norton's Finchampstead class, who to her other qualifications (she's a pharmacy technician, a cordon bleu cook and a herbalist) has added a private pilot's licence.
The training, which took her a bare eight months, was a strenuous business, including 52 hours of flying (13 of them solo), and culminating in four written exams, on air law, navigation and meteorology radio-telecommunications, and air-frames and engines.
The flying test was followed by an intensive oral examination on technical details.
During training Catherine had to acquire a few hair-raising skill such as flying upside down and rescuing the aircraft from a stall.
‘How did it go today’?
Barbara once asked her over the phone.
‘Not so good,’ came the reply.
‘Today I lost the Isle of Wight.’
Her fellow class members made sure this wouldn't happen again, by giving her, on qualifying, a congratulatory card decorated with a map of that elusive isle.
NEW VENTURES
The scene a few weeks ago at St Barnabas' Hall, Epsom, during the first mother's and toddlers' class organised by Jill Kelly and Janice Golding, at the request of the National Childbirth Trust.
Janice and Jill have since wisely divided the 50–strong class into two sessions —one for under-threes and one for over-threes.
During February Chris Ruffle addressed the AGM of the National Playgroup Association in Ashford on the subject of Medau work with mothers and toddlers.
The ‘Body Talk’ column of the Eastern Evening News recently carried the above photo and a report on Molly Scrutton's new class for working women, held at tea-time in the centre of Norwich in the Chantry Hall, just behind St Peter Mancroft Church.
Molly herself is seen at the centre of the picture.
MARJORIE'S 80th BIRTHDAY — SUSSEX CELEBRATES
It took many months of research on the part of Vanessa Forbes to track down the 21 of Marjorie Worgan's original class members (some now grannies) who managed to attend the surprise lunch she organised for Marjorie's 80th birthday.
A class member of Vanessa's made a birthday cake iced in blue and white, depicting naturally, a ball, hoop, club and the Medau logo — but so beautifully that it was with difficulty that Marjorie was persuaded to cut into it.
A more permanent reminder of the day was the Edinburgh crystal bowl that Sussex members presented to her.
It was Marjorie who brought Medau to Sussex 22 years ago.
She was won from the League by Molly Braithwaite at a lecture demonstration, and herself became a dedicated Medau worker and ambassador, qualifying as a teacher in 1963, and travelling by bus and train, apparatus and all, to take her numerous classes.
Sussex teachers thank Marjorie especially for the way in which she has always helped and stood by them, from their years of training onwards.
RALLY NEWS
Jean Parmiter reports that the Merton Rally was a sell-out and that the afternoon, with excellent classes, displays and video sessions, went well.
Next year she hopes for a larger venue, with catering facilities.
Kent has achieved two rallies: one at Maidstone on 14 February organised by Chris Ruffle, with displays by the National Display Team and the Kent Team; the other, with a membership drive, run by Elsie Streek and Joan Gatfield on the evening of 25 March at Grove Park.
The day of the Sussex Rally, 21 March, dawned snowily, but proceeded well, with classes by Betty Hartley and Pat Shere,, and a rapid work-out with Janice Golding.
Displays included the Junior Display Team's fast-moving ‘Wow!’, with large exotic scarves, and two items of nautical flavour (Berkshire using hoops to the ‘Onedin Line’ theme, and Surrey with scarves in ‘Sailes’).
The National Display Team performed Betty Hartley's ‘Champagne Fizz’, and Vanessa Forbes, Janice Hewitt and Brenda Morgan provided comic relief with ‘What shall we Teach them Tonight?’
Guests for the day were Hilda Lodge, Pauline Kenward and Marjorie Worgan.
At Norfolk's rally on 4 April, organised by Mavin Shulver, the raffle, cake stall and gift stall added £300 to the Norfolk Teacher-Training Fund, and Marlene McGee ran a membership promotion raffle.
Enjoyable sessions were taught by Dorothy Ralph, Mary Fox, Molly Scrutton and Rita Horton, and younger enthusiasts moved with Marlene McGee to the strains of Madonna.
Colour characterised the displays, with Taverham and Drayton members using the multi-coloured ribbons bought in memory of Kathleen Greenwood in ‘Over the Rainbow’, Mary Fox's girls in assorted bright leotards in their travelling item, and equipped with pink hoops (painted by a Medau husband) in their second item, and Marlene McGee's team in black with a touch of silver at the wrist for their item performed to ethnic music.
A highlight of the day was Jane Fisk's solo ball sequence.
The proceedings were watched by Michael Crook, principal Adult Education Organiser for Norfolk, along with other AE officers, Peter Softly of Norwich Sports Council, mentioned particularly how impressed he had been by the day.
IN BRIEF 
OUT AND ABOUT IN MEDAU
Chris Ruffle taught Medau at a Dance for Africa Day in Ashford at Christmas, and Marlene McGee gave a class at a ‘taster’ event organised by the Open University at Lowestoft.
Anne Seaton taught at a SKFA ‘associated movement’ course in Glasgow in February and at a WLHB charity rally in Ayr in March (specification — tow identical half-hour sessions, each for 100 people, using balls and clubs); Anne was also invited for the second year to help judge a heat in the Movement and Recreative Dance section of SKFA's Open National Championship.
In March Elsie Streek and class members took tambours and bean bags along to the Woolwich Branch of the Salvation Army, and everyone had an enjoyable afternoon of Medau.
ACTIVE RETIREMENT
Ashcroft High School in March sent pupils along to watch Luton's Active Retirement Club members in session, as part of a school project on the positive and active side of retirement.
Aldercine announces that the third Active Retirement Club, at Flitwick Leisure Centre, was successfully launched in January.
TEACHER-TRAINING
Beryl Beddows reports successful NW training days with Chris Ruffle, Rosemary Gould, Joan Gatfield and Barbara Norton.
Doreen Copas sends the good wishes of Herts members to trainee-teachers Rosemary Smith, who now has a class in St Albans, and Frances Judd.
THE PIONEERS
News from the northern and western frontiers is that Chris Oake has a class going in the Isle of Man, a full complement of clubs, and hopes of a second class, and that Rosalind Garton in St Andrews is enjoying her contrasting sessions — a daytime one catering  for the 55–70 age group, and an evening one for the younger and nimbler — with the occasional supplementary advanced class.
MEDAU MIRACLE
Hathor Hamilton of Devon, a 64-year-old member of Moyra Hopley's class, sustained a broken elbow and lacerations when she was hit by an overtaking car last October and thrown 12 feet, ending up in a hedge.
It could have been worse.
Perhaps the Egyptian goddess after whom she is named was watching over her — but she herself attributes her escape from serious injury entirely to Medau.
Three of the medical staff who attended her independently assured her that had she not been so fit and supple they would have been measuring her for a wheelchair, or worse.
REMOTE LINK
Audrey Archer during her world tour met, in Taiwan, a German couple from Nuremberg.
Audrey mentioned her Medau teaching and asked them if they knew Coburg.
‘Very well,’ answered the wife, ‘and it always reminds me of my former Croydon neighbour, Pam Hook, who also taught Medau.’
Irene Wilkin-Zeitner left England some 25 years ago!