

OBITUARY Beryl Smith, Diplomée of the Medau College, who died 18th May, 1985
Beryl's love of movement and dance started at a very early age when she and her older sisters attended a local School of Dance once a week.
AT 2 she performed her first solo — as a bee emerging from a flower!
On leaving school she became an active member of the Keep Fit Association, Laban Guild, English, Scottish and Irish Dancing.
She had innate sense of good movement and was searching for a system embodying those principles which fulfilled her concept of the art of movement and teaching its technique.
She found it in Medau Rhythmic Movement when attending a course given by Molly Braithwaite at St. Andrews in Scotland, and decided at once to study at the Medau Schule in Coburg.
She worked assiduously to earn money to pay for German lessons and the necessary 3 years tuition, and went to Coburg in Autumn 1958, graduating at Easter 1961.
Returning to England she was able to put her principles of movement teaching into practice with Molly accompanying her on the piano.
‘An invaluable experience’ she said when starting her own classes.
In 1966 it was Beryl who found the advertisement which led to the purchase of the property in Balham which became Medau House, the Society's Headquarters for many years.
As a Trainer she brought enthusiasm and inspiration to the courses held there, and with boundless energy she taught at courses and rallies all over the country.
As well as dedication to movement, Beryl had great concern for people and spent much time helping with problems large or small.
Her creative teaching and training of movement technique and knowledge of all aspects of movement work will be sadly missed.
But, to quote Cicely Harris, ‘We must be grateful that Beryl touched our lives with her very special qualities’.
A memorial service for Beryl was held on 27th July at St. Marks Church, Hamilton Terrace NW8.
Miss Kay Evans, M.B.E.
has retired as Sports & Physical Recreation Adviser to the Disabled Living Foundation.
Our 84 years young Vice-President had the honour of being presented to Her Majesty The Queen when, accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh, she officially opened the D.L.F.'s new Centre in Harrow Road, London, W.9 and saw demonstrations by physiotherapists and occupational therapists of some of the many aids and equipment available.
The Centre offers professional advice, without charge, to disabled people, their relatives and helpers, on their varied problems and difficulties and also offers encouragement and information on taking up outside interests, such as in music and physical recreation.
CITY OF WESTMINSTER 400th Anniversary
Movement and Dance organisations will be putting on an interesting weekend of comparative movements on the 19th and 20th October when to celebrate this occasion the City of Westminster is placing the Seymour Halls at their disposal for Medau, Keep Fit, yoga, Swimming etc.
The complete programme has yet to be finalised but if you wish for more information please contact the Medau Office Epsom 29056 or send S.A.E.
C.C.P.R.'s GOLDEN JUBILEE FESTIVAL OF MOVEMENT & DANCE — APRIL 1985
What a brilliant spectacle!
Over 600 amateur performers representing 11 Organisations including the League of Health & Beauty, Keep Fit, Margaret Morris, Medau, Slimnastics, Ballroom and Folk Dance, etc. moved in a kaleidoscope of colour within the splendour of the Royal Albert Hall enthralling their audience, ending in a grand finale flooding into the arena from every entrance and aisle, swirling round in one great happy group to celebrate this wonderful occasion.
The C.C.P.R. has done much to help the Society and other Organisations establish themselves, and Festival Producer Olive Newson is well known to us for her encouragement and help.
Our Youth Team in gleaming white catsuits with red trim and legwarmers, performing a fast-moving ball item, brought pride to many hearts, and our senior Display Team made tremendous impact in ‘Spring Tide’, depicting its ebb and flow with hoop dexterity, fine footwork and beautifully sustained movement — so elegant and graceful in especially designed Medau Blue catsuits.
Congratulations to both teams and to Margaret Charlwood who choreographed and arranged the music, and again to Margaret and June Bascombe in their pianist and percussion roles on stage.
Dr Jochen Medau and his wife Ingrid flew over from Germany for the evening performance, yet another great honour!
They attended the Reception afterwards when each organisation was presented with a beautifully engraved crystal goblet to mark the great occasion.
INSIDE INFORMATION
MEET YOUR NEW REPRESENTATIVES ON THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Firstly HILDA LODGE whom you met before when she became our Vice Chairman in 1981 has now changed her hat to become the Chairman and she is already busy in her new role, well supported by the Executive Committee which now has four new members following the elections of earlier this year — so please meet: — 
JULIE GILBERT has a B.a.
(Hons.) degree from the University of Leicester and is at present a supply teacher to Surrey County Council, teaching French and German.
She became interested in Medau just over ten years ago and qualified as a Medau teachers in 1979.
Julie has four children, three daughters and a son and is married to John, a Reader in Science Education at the University of Surrey.
An active member of the Cercle Francais de Guildford she is their current treasurer.
MOLLY SCRUTTON's interest in movement began at an early age and led her to join a junior dance group and later a gymnastics club.
Since qualifying as a Medau teachers in 1968 she has taught regular classes for adults, children and the mentally handicapped.
As a member of the Norfolk training branch she held office as Treasurer for ten years and is currently branch Secretary.
A keen member of the Norfolk display team and was the producer of the Festival of Movement held in Norwich in 1979.
She is employed as an Administrator for a group of psychiatric hospitals and her hobbies include music and gardening.
BETTY SYRETT recently retired from the Civil Service where Town and Country planning matters were her chief concern.
She has taken part in gymnastics and movement classes since the age of eight; saw Medau demonstrated at Bedford College in 1951 and became ‘hooked’.
She is a founder member of the Medau Society, qualifying as a Medau teacher in 1958 and taught for ILEA for 20 years and now greatly enjoys being a class member.
Betty was previously on the Executive Committee for 13 years as the Qualified Teachers' Representative.
Her other interests include classical music, the care of the elderly and the handicapped particularly with British Polio Fellowship and helping with riding for the disabled at the Diamond Riding Centre, Carshalton.
JOSEPHINE WILLIAMS was introduced to Medau in 1962 by Jean Parmiter and began training in 1963; qualifying and commencing teaching in 1966.
Josephine lives in West Wickham, Kent and she is married to Paul, the Deputy President (technical) of the British Amateur Gymnastics Association.
She gave up teaching to start a family and now, one son and one daughter later, has restarted again in the London area.
Much of her spare time is taken up acting as Paul's secretary for gymnastics with the occasional game of badminton and tennis thrown in!
Following her attendance as a guest at the C.C.P.R. 50th Anniversary Festival, when she was very impressed by both Medau items, Dame Ninette de Valois has graciously accepted our invitation for her to become the Society's Patron.
Kay Maskell, one of the Society's Vice Presidents and valued committee member, played a supporting role in the very popular TV series This Is Your Life, when Eammon Andrews ‘surprised’ her husband Dan Maskell in his renowned Wimbledon habitat.
Many world-famous tennis celebrities added anecdotes to the fond reminiscences of family and friends who appeared, with Kay, on the show.
THE EASTER COURSE
On April 10th in the year nineteen hundred and eighty five — the legions again marched on Royal Bath — well, fifty of us by coach, car and rail — we had come from all over the country to join a contingent of local enthusiasts like lambs to the slaughter at Bath University for the Medau Easter Course.
To greet us was our ever smiling secretary Hilda Hewitt who saw us safely installed.
The wide variety of sessions, given by Jean Parmiter, Lucy Jackson, Chris Ruffle and Rosemary Gould including a ‘trip’ to the Peruvian mountains, throughout the course were a joy.
There was time for sightseeing in Bath which was most enjoyable despite the weather and the last night party went with a swing with marvellous entertainment from amongst our fellow course participants.
Another super course — Roll on 1986.
A.G.M.
The Society's 33rd Annual General Meeting followed the present policy of ‘going out and about’ and was held at Hounslow Manor School, Middlesex on Saturday 27th April.
The format, too, followed last year's by being an all day event starting with enjoyable classes given by Ann Langford and Chris Markham, after which an appetizing ploughman's lunch was served at flower-decked tables, efficiently organised by Phyl Bailey and Anne Weathers, ably supported by their class members.
Approximately 100 people then took part in the business meeting when our President, Lady Braithwaite, opened the proceedings with many congratulations to the Society on the previous eventful year in which she had taken a deep interest.
The retiring Chairman, June Bascombe, then went on to enlarge on these past events and issues an the Hon. Treasurer, Joan Daniels, presented her report with great lucidity.
Finally the Meeting was brought to a close by the new chairman, Hilda Lodge, who made a presentation on behalf of the Society to June Bascombe in recognition of all her hard work over the last four years.
CRYSTAL PALACE REUNION
For our event at Crystal Palace this year we plan to change the format to try and encourage you all to come along in droves!
Firstly — the seating, if you are just spectating, is now greatly improved.
Secondly — we are introducing a special family ticket to cover to adults and two/three children.
Thirdly — we are planning a separate programme for the children so that you (Mum) will be free to enjoy the lively classes to be given by Margaret Charlwood and Chris Markham — one class will be with scarves — so please bring a large silky/rayon/polyester square with you and although not compulsory if we could keep to a blue theme for leotards it would make a lovely contrast with the scarves.
This will be followed by the display programme and then we are planning a sponsored event which can be as a family team, with Mum, children and husband/grannie/auntie or a group of friends — each team of four plus one must have a ball.
This event has been devised by one of our teachers, Pat Palmer, and she will take you through your paces.
The charities benefiting will be Action Research for the Crippled Child, Age Concern and the Medau Society.
so — you see — the day is aimed to please right across the board.
Not only (Medau) but also…
…a person who has been fortunate to have been connected with Guiding for the past 18 years.
Has anyone said to you ‘It will not take up much of your time, only a couple of hours on a Friday evening’?
Well — that happened to me when my daughter joined the local Brownie Pack; they were desperate for help and that ‘couple of hours on a Friday’ led to my becoming that pack's Brown Owl, moving to a Guide Company that was in danger of closing and finally becoming District Commissioner administration four Brownie Packs, four Guide Companies and one Ranger Unit.
My Guiding plus teaching Medau keeps me in contact with seven year olds through to my ‘old folk’ Medau class some of whom are in their nineties!
As well as attending most Easter Courses for the last eleven years I have assisted at Guide Camps for even longer enjoying at least one week a year far removed from houses, telephones and television — what bliss!
My family have sometimes joined me on these camps but are mainly content to be ‘Guiding Orphans’ as well as‘Medau Orphans’.
Camping has taken me all over England and twice to Scotland.
One trip to Scotland brings back memories of helpful folk.
That year we took all our Camping Gear on the train with us instead of hiring a lorry.
Can you imagine the pandemonium we caused?
It was alright at Euston Station on the way up because we had plenty of time for loading — but — on the return journey we could see the train approaching while still careering through the country lanes on our coach.
What if we missed the connection!!!
However — the coach screeched to a halt in the station yard and the Guides quickly formed a human chain to move the equipment and some kindly passengers realizing our predicament came to our aid, joining in the chain and we were soon aboard the train heading for London.
This year has ben particularly hectic, celebrating our 75th anniversary with many special events.
I was lucky enough to receive an invitation for the special AGM held at the Guildhall London, attended by Lady Baden-Powell and other Guiding dignitaries including a lady who has been connected with Guiding for all its 75 years.
I have made lots of lasting friendships along my Guiding road as I have through Medau and think myself lucky.
Another door opened to me last year when my daughter presented me with a gorgeous grandson, Simon, the same daughter who was instrumental in my first joining the Brownie Pack so many years ago!
NORTH WEST
Expressions of appreciation for the CCPR's Festival of Movement at the Albert Hall came from the members (mostly ‘Cheshire Cats’) who made the trip to London.
Training Days — taken by Hilary Weedon and Ann Langford — have been well attended, some enthusiastic participants travelling from as far away as 60 miles.
An enterprising member of Dorothy George's class raised money for the projected Chester Hospice by successfully negotiating all the obstacles in a sponsored round of a Krypton Factor assault course.
Finally, Medau News readers will be happy to hear that Beryl Beddow's thyroid operation was successful, and she was well enough to attend the Lilleshall Course in May.
ESSEX
The annual Rally held in Rayliegh on 11th May was well supported.
Guest teacher was Joan Daniels, and we thank Kent display team for joining us despite the miserable weather.
Edith Harlow was presented with a cake to mark her ‘30 years in Wickford’ form Dorothy Cole's class members (Dorothy was in hospital but is home now and making progress).
A second fund-raising day was held at the end of July in the form of a continuous ‘teach—in’.
Essex display team have acquired a permanent home for this year and Rita Forde is coaching the forthcoming item for Crystal Palace.
The team took part in an event organised by Havering Council promoting Adult Education for 1985/86.
Joyce Hitchcock and Doreen Hunt, who both teach in this Boro, thank the team and class members who took part, helping to make it a successful evening.
In October there will be a Barn Dance at Rayleigh organised by the display team in aid of their funds.
BEDFORDSHIRE
Aldercine Hodson, who has long felt that Medau's possibilities were under-exploited and that it could be developed, for instance, as a valuable coaching-aid in sport, tells the following story, which she thinks illustrates her point and makes Medau News.
For over four years, those belonging to her Active Retirement Club in Luton (90 members) have been encouraged to move their bodies in a natural way (the Medau way) and to try to introduce this way of moving into their sport.
One member, Bill Corless, particularly liked the exercises that gave him suppleness and flow.
He felt that his own game, bowls, could benefit from such movements and incorporated them into his performance.
The latest news of Bill: he is now official coach for the whole of Bedfordshire for Indoor and Outdoor Bowls.
His intention, when he starts his courses for coaches, is to warm them up the Medau way.
Good luck Bill.
NORFOLK
This year Norfolk members are celebrating their Silver Jubilee and the highlight of this special year was the 25th Annual Rally, held 23rd March at Thorpe St. Andrew Lower School and attended by about 240 people.
There was a gratifying amount of publicity both before and after the event.
Radio Norfolk interviewed Molly Scrutton the day before and a week previously, the ‘Body Talk’ page of The Eastern Evening News featured Medau.
One photo selected by journalist Belinda Smith to illustrate her article — Medau on Cromer beach — taken 25 years ago — so impressed MP Richard Ryder that he offered to help promote Medau in North Norfolk.
A newspaper report of the day included this picture of the Norfolk display team using tambour and quoted the opinion of rally-organiser Ruth Rolph that he known benefits and creative nature of Medau work would help it thrive in spite of the popularity of recent arrivals such as aerobics.
Participants were delighted to be able to welcome our President, Lady Braithwaite and Sir Franklin Braithwaite and also to have with them for the day Hilda Hewitt, Edith Harlow and Jean Parmiter.
Lady Braithwaite cut the celebration cake, made by Norwich Hotel School students and Jane Fisk (Jane in foreground of tambour picture) presented her with a bouquet.
There followed a programme of displays and a raffle added £104 to Norfolk's funds.
Marlene McGee is pioneering work with Suffolk County Council: Jane Fisk is selling Medau gummed stamps that urge everyone to ‘Try Medau — Keep Fit’: £150 was raised for the ‘BIG C’ appeal (Norfolk's cancer research charity) at a Medau ‘Get-Together’organised by Ruth Rolph: Kay Baxter organised a successful jumble sale in aid of Society funds.
On Whit Monday Norfolk participated with Medau demonstrations and a publicity stand at a Fun and Fitness Health Fair at St. Andrew's Hospital, Norwich.
KENT
JOAN DANIELS has recently introduced Medau to three different groups of people in Kent.
A Discovery Day for the mentally handicapped was held at Mid-Kent College with two open Medau classes.
Parents, friends and students came along to see the many activities and interests available to the mentally handicapped in this part of Kent.
Seven 50 minute Medau sessions were given at a Kent County Council Fun Day for girls, part of the ‘Ever thought of Sport’ campaign at Buckmore Park Activity Centre, near Maidstone.
Over seven hundred girls were able to choose from 34 activities on offer, ranging from abseiling and go-karting to spinning and cookery and about one hundred aged between 13 and 20 attended the Medau classes.
At a Movement and Dance evening held at Gillingham Adult Education Centre a short display programme included Medau, Aerobics, Yoga and tap dancing.
BERKSHIRE
‘Something for the MEDAU NEWS, please write it if you would — Not too long and not too short — we know you'll make it good!’
So specified our Editor, who has the Big Red Pen; I'll therefore try to keep it brief — she cannot edit it then!
Our Rally was just super — more people than before — But what they didn't know was that they had a treat in store: The National Display Team came for the afternoon To show their special item — we were all over the moon!
Our Workshop Day at Marlow as well attended too; Class embers came from far and wide — a dedicated crew.
Chris Markham has a new club now, for children after school, So you see we're pretty busy — and that's generally the rule.
Two girls from Berkshire classes have joined the Teacher's Course — We hope they are successful and will join the teaching force: Janet and Diana — we shall help them all we can, For, in Berks, the spread of Medau is our most important plan.
SURREY
Much time and effort has been put into promoting adult education this summer.
In particular, Bentalls, the big departmental store in Kingston gave its prestigious Wolsey Hall over to a large exhibition lasting a fortnight, covering a great range of subjects including Medau.
Volunteers from Mary Edwards' Surbiton class participated in a demonstration class and Pat Keen and four members from the Surrey Teachers' Display Team ably shoed many aspects of our work as well as performing their latest item.
A special vote of thanks was given on behalf of Adult Education in Kingston.
SUSSEX
News of further sponsored exploits of daring and endurance.
Linda Thomas, one of Vanessa Forbes's class members, did a sponsored swim in aid of Ethiopia and Janice Munday emulated dare-devil Ann Langford's recent achievement with a parachute jump at Headcorn, Kent in aid of John Groom's Home for the Disabled.
Pat Keen, who has gone to Cornwall will be greatly missed as a teacher.
A hard-working Society member, for many years a member of the National Display Team and nore recently of the Surrey and Sussex team, she has been putting the latter through their paces for ‘In the Pink’, the ball item first performed at last year's Reunion.
Pat served for six years on the Executive Committee; she has also been responsible for arranging the flowers at many important functions.
Sussex members take this opportunity to thank Pat for starting the East Grinstead Rally and assure her of their intention to carry on her good work.
They wish her good luck and observe ruefully that Sussex's loss will be Cornwall's gain.
SCOTLAND AND NORTH EAST
Ruth Baird continues to teach a strong Edinburgh class but as a result of her unplanned and completely unsponsored double somersault down a highland waterfall, Muriel Jessop had to have an operation to deal with a torn cartilage and frayed ligaments in her knee.
She hopes, however, to be teaching again in the autumn.
On the positive side, Chris Algar, who described her busy life as a systems engineer in last September's Medau News has joined the Teachers' Training Course and at the Step-up and Dance Studio in Leeds Jean Gill made a great impression with an introductory Medau session that she had been invited to reach.
Rita Quick in April gave a weekend course in basic apparatus work to members of Jean Yuill's WLHP Scottish Training Course, with a follow-up course in July.
Vicissitudes notwithstanding, six members from the North East made sure they got to the Albert Hall in April to applaud the fine performances by the Medau teams.
HERTFORDSHIRE AND CAMBRIDGESHIRE
February, the month for which the annual day rally was scheduled, brought arctic conditions and 3 class members unfortunately broke bones in accidents in the snow during the week before the event.
But about 60 people braved the weather to attend the rally — organised by Gill Hill and members of her Hatfield and Hemel Hempstead class — and enjoyed sessions taught by Margaret Charlwood and Ann Langford.
A coach part of 45 strong travelled to the Albert Hall and had a very pleasant evening watching the displays; another group of 12 from the Melbourne class went to the afternoon performance.
Seven Hatfield and Hemel Hempstead members attended the Lilleshall course and thought Ann Langford's and Joan Gatfield's classes excellent; they look forward already to next year — which for some will be their tenth visit.
MEDAU SOCIETY APPEAL 1984/85
Remember me?
I asked you through the Medau News last year to all help and make our fund raising this year a really great success and when you know that the figure at the time of going to press is over £2,600 you will all be as pleased as our Treasurer is.
A big THANK YOU to those teachers who have worked so very hard in so many various ways to encourage this scheme and above all a big THANK YOU to our class members who after all are the backbone of our Society; it would be impossible to raise money without their help.
There is always someone somewhere who is going to say —‘Why must we have fund raising?’— Unfortunately because of the financial climate today it is always going to have to be a part of our Medau way of life — anyway this ‘do your own thing’ method has proved so popular we plan to continued in to 1986 with your help, of course— but — if you have any brilliant ideas for our next venture please send them in to the Office.
Cheers!
SHE'S LANDED — HURRAY!
Ann Langford having made her very successful parachute jump which has produced a handsome sum to be shared between Dr. Barnardo's and the Society wishes to thank all those people who sponsored her in this even.