

EDITH'S HALF CENTURY
This is written in the full realisation that it may mean the end of a beautiful friendship — knowing how resolutely Edith shuns public acclaim.
But just for once— let's ‘honour the prophet’ and salute this tremendous achievement — FIFTY years of unbroken involvement with Medau.
This long association began in 1936 when Edith, then attending an evening class in Dagenham, Essex, first came under the influence of the ‘ladies in blue’— Molly Braithwaite and Peggy Secord.
Plans were soon afoot for Edith to train at the Medau School in Berlin, and German language lessons were embarked upon, but the Munich crisis intervened.
During the war years Edith played an important part in keeping the British Medau sapling alive, travelling countrywide to assist Molly and Peggy, and later on taking over classes.
Edith qualified at the very first Medau Society Teachers' Examination in 1955, and carried on developing classes in Essex, all the time making openings for the new teachers who were beginning to emerge.
Her prodigious output included innumerable displays and talks, to which we, the performers, came with our blue silk tunics carefully folded round pieces of cardboard — Edith's ruse for preserving the ‘band-box’ appearance.
In the sixties, the Medau Society greatly expanded its training provision, and Edith was in the van of courses set up farther afield, travelling regularly to Norfolk, Leeds, the South West and many other venues.
The monumental Harlow stamina and determination — surely a manifestation of the inborn grit inherited from her northern forebears — carried Edith triumphantly through weekend after weekend.
Her energy seemed inexhaustible and equal to that of colleagues many years younger.
One other major development in the sixties was the founding of the Society's headquarters at Balham and it was largely Edith's housewifely flair and innate good sense that set the high standard and ordered the smooth running of what was inevitably a labour-intensive project.
The bands of volunteers rallied willingly at Edith's command, and though her residency was comparatively short, her influence was great.
Throughout these fluctuations of fortune, Edith's unique teaching style was getting more finely honed.
Her inimitable use of rhythm caught many a class member on the wrong foot, but how spirits lifted when we got it right, and the ultimate but awful joy was being chosen to demonstrate.
Nowadays Edith fulfils a more consultative role, but as ever, is always ready to give support and help when needed.
She has in recent years been able to devote more time to dressmaking and tailoring — arts which she has perfected to professional standards.
Through the years she has earned affection and esteem — we respect her judgement and sheer native genius — we appreciate her droll waspishness — we love to ‘get her going’ and hear the irresistible laugh!
Doubtless very few will manage to come near to, let alone equal, her magnificent record.
Many, many of us have found inspiration in her teaching and have derived much pleasure from her comradeship.
Edith's story is inseparable from the Medau story and we in the Society say ‘Thank You’.
NEW INTAKE FOR TRAINING COURSE
At the very successful Potential Teachers' Day in July, 29 students were introduced to Medau at training level and were given background information about the syllabus and course structure.
The programme included practical experience in Breathing, movement with apparatus, and movement accompaniment.
The next intake is already planned for Autumn 1986, but there is still time for anyone suitable and interested to be included.
ACT NOW — contact the Secretary at the Medau Office, or write to the Course Co-ordinator,
COBURG ‘86
‘But why so many British ladies?’ asked the young German student bemusedly as 60–odd enthusiasts of all ages tumbled off the coach at the Medau College in Coburg.
The answer — the first ‘English’ course there for almost ten years.
And although we were joined by French, Belgian, Dutch, German, Danish and Finnish colleagues, the week-long Whitsun course provided a wonderful opportunity to reinforce the close links between the British Medau community and the College, directed by Jochen Medau, son of the founder.
We discovered — or rediscovered — its many delights: the accommodation (charmingly rustic or space-age split-level, with split-level stairs to trip the unwary), gracious Schloss Hohenfels itself, dominated by the painting of Hinrich Medau above the grand piano, idyllic grounds, and gymnasia with excellent floors, high ceilings and custom designed storage for balls, hoops and clubs.
Even the weather co-operated, but could not have been as warm as the welcome extended to us by staff and students.
Course teachers were three old friends of the British Medau Society — Gisela Klotzer (better known as Bedu, Director of Movement at the College), Katarina (‘Tinka’) Hutz-Medau (daughter of Hinrich and Senta) who had travelled all the way from South Africa, and Irene Schwartz, who teaches Medau at Freiburg University.
Between them they showed just how ‘many possibilities’(to quote Bedu) can offer.
Tinka presented a course of work for backpain control, which not only got us ‘tightening our tummies’ and protecting our backs, but opened up Medau to a new and very large community of back-pain sufferers.
Irene worked from the simplest beginnings — a stretch, a curve, a step forwards or backwards — into tremendous variety of movement, delighting us with her physical and mental flexibility, and a sense of humour which needed no translation.
Bedu's rhythmics lessons got us all banging bongos, clashing cymbals, dashing round the gym and holding a rhythm against all comers.
as if this weren't enough, we bounced on oversized ball, wielded staves for posture, learnt national dances and songs, explored the mediaeval charms of Coburg and neighbouring Bamberg or wallowed in the thermal baths of Rodach — and of course consumed enormous and excellent meals at the college, supplemented with German cakes in the town (not to mention German wine…—.
The course ended with a magnificent banquet and uproarious party, despite the prospect of a 6.30 a.m. departure next day.
It was a fitting end to an experience which had been ‘atemberaubend’— breathtaking!
JUNE BASCOMBE
It is with great sadness that we announce the unexpected and tragically early death of June Bascombe on 21 August in the Intensive Care Unit of Epsom Hospital.
Last year she had an operation for cancer but recovered well and had taken part this year in many Medau events, including the Coburg Course.
It was only at the beginning of July that she was again taken ill.
June was Chairman of the Medau Society from 1981 to 1985.
She was a valued Trainer, and a fine musician.
All those who knew her will miss her warm personality and lively mind.
On behalf of the Society members we extend our sympathy to June's husband Bob and her two sons.
INSIDE INFORMATION
MEET YOUR TWO NEW COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Frances Millary was introduced to Medau by Marjorie Worgan in Sussex about 20 years ago.
She later became a pupil of Margaret Charlwood and more recently has been taught by Vanessa Forbes and Brenda Morgan.
Frances's other activities include walking and swimming.
She is a voluntary visitor for the West Sussex Association for the Disabled and sits on two village committees and looks forward to serving on the Executive Committee of the Medau Society.
June Thomas was an engineering draughtswoman until three years ago, and still does a full-time job.
She has always been interested, and taken part, in physical exercise, and was introduced to Medau through Joan Daniels' first class in 1966; June enjoyed it so much she went on to train and qualified as a Medau teacher in 1974.
For the past two years she has been Chairman of the ‘Kent Teachers’ and has also been a member of the Kent display Team since 1976.
Her other interests include gardening, decorating and watching all sports, especially athletics.
June's husband Ralph is an air-filtration engineer and her daughter Jill is a professional dancer and secretary.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The Society's 34th Annual General Meeting was held on 19 April at the Merton Adult Centre, Morden.
During the morning over 100 people participated in the open classes taken by Chris Ruffle and Jane Fisk, who was accompanied by Molly Scrutton.
Then followed a ploughman's lunch.
The afternoon, given over to the business meeting, was enlivened by the presentation of the Society's cheque by our President to Age Concern and the draw for champagne for two lucky new members.
The Chairman then gave her report of the year's activities and the Treasurer delivered a concise but informative statement of the Society's accounts.
The two new Executive Committee members took their places; a short profile of each one appears on this page.
The Chairman then brought the Meeting to a close with thanks to all who had attended and an expression of hope that with the support of an enthusiastic and growing membership the Society would continue to prosper during the coming year.
NEWLY QUALIFIED TEACHERS
We are pleased to announce that all five candidates in the Medau Teachers' Examination in April were successful.
They are:.
RETIREMENTS
This summer marked the retirement of two of our teachers: Anna Koller, who qualified in 1966 and has taught in West London and Buckinghamshire, and Mabel Io Smith, who qualified in 1971 and has always taught in Surrey.
We send them both our very good wishes for long, happy and healthy retirements.
EASTER COURSE AT AVERY HILL
Another very successful course was held in April; after the awful winter weather, the sun shone down on Avery Hill College, London, as folk gathered from far and wide to attend.
Although there were fewer residents this year (the Coburg Course was to follow shortly), the week was as full as ever of fun and laughter and top-notch Medau.
Amongst the many excellent sessions, we leapt with Ann, had fireworks with Margaret, and were beribboned with Lucy; while, beavering away in the background to keep things running smoothly was ‘our Bridget’ whose efficiency was, as usual, unfailing.
The last-night party, a hallowed Easter Course tradition, was studded with starts of the highest calibre; we were richly entertained throughout the evening by acts that were all professional to the core, even if we did see through some of the flimsy disguises.
Saturday brought the course to close with an enjoyable ‘altogether’ in the gym, then once mor we made our ways home stimulated, refreshed and already looking forward to next year.
MEDAU AND WLHB
Our links with the Women's League of Health and Beauty were further strengthened on 21 April when Jean Parmiter was invited to teach at the East Midlands Associated Members' Annual Reunion, held in Groby, Leicestershire.
Jean was accompanied by a small display team, which included members of her Morden class and two members of the Surrey Teens team.
Together they performed three items, which went down well with the audience.
NEW HONORARY TREASURER NEEDED
Joan Daniels' term of office expires at the 1987 Annual General Meeting, so we are looking for a new treasurer.
In order to make the transition as smooth as possible, it would be a great help if a suitable and willing person would come forward NOW.
We need someone who enjoys working with figures and accounts, is prepared to give time to Executive and Finance meetings, and can liaise with the Society's Officers.
If you are interested and would like further information, please telephone Joan (Medway 71926)— she will be pleased to answer your queries.
ANNUAL REUNION
The Annual Reunion will be held on Saturday 29 November 1986 at Warwick Park School, Peckham SE15.
The afternoon's programme will include open classes, a Christmas Fayre, displays, tea and time to chat.
Tickets available from the Office from 1 October, price £2.00.
Members only, as numbers are restricted to 400.
Please include a S.a.E. with your application, and state whether you wish to participate in the classes.
Not only (Medau) but also…
My life as the wife of a veterinary surgeon is surrounded by animals and dominated by the telephone.
With our two sons, we live ‘over the shope’ in a large country practice, which also serves the local market town.
Our customers are many and varied, ranging from domestic pets to farm animals and even an occasional exotic animal — like the lion that was brought from a travelling circus with a cut foot, and caused consternation amongst our more regular clients; they were not prepared for such a large cat sitting in the back of a Land Rover in our car park.
The telephone has to be manned 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, so when it is my turn on duty (at night or at the weekends), answering the phone occupies much of my time.
Although many of the calls are routine, we do have moments of light relief.
Such as the time when the very inebriated gentleman, at 2 a.m., wanted to know how to stop his budgie falling off its perch, because he thought it had cramp in its legs!
Or the time when the distraught lady asked how to make her puppy sick, because it had eaten all her house-keeping money — and she wanted it back!
Sometimes I am ‘foster mum’ to various waifs and strays; amongst my charges have been gerbils, a slow-worm, hedgehogs, various wild birds including a heron with a broken wing and a kingfisher with a bent beak, and out latest acquisition — a kitten abandoned on our doorstep in a cardboard box, now firmly established as one of the family.
Having been trained in Institutional Management I still like to keep my hand in by catering for private functions such as weddings and christenings, and I intersperse this with occasional cookery demonstrations for women's groups in the area.
Medau has been an important part of my life since I started attending regular classes in 1975.
I went on to join the Kent team and later the National Display Team.
1985 was special for me — as one of the National Display Team I took part in the CCPR celebrations at the Royal Albert Hall, and later in that year I successfully completed the Medau Teacher Training Course.
So now my home is filled not only…with cats, birds and hedgehogs, but also,…with clubs, balls and hoops!
DON'T PUT YOUR BALL-ACT ON THE STAGE
Well, not on a sloping one, anyway.
We hear from Sally Boote that at High Wycombe Town Hall, where Betty Hartley's Berkshire team were to perform two items as a contribution to Wycombe Arts Festival, the designers, had raked the stage instead of the floor of the auditorium.
The team's ball-item (‘Sugar and Spice’) would be the one in which they had to deposit their balls at the back of the stage, jump, turn and move downstage.
The balls of course would not stay put, and followed their pirouetting owners down to the front of the stage, with every intention of dropping into the auditorium.
Fortunately, it was just a rehearsal.
Would the evening's audience lob the balls back, or would they treat them as collectable souvenirs?
Better not get involved in that one; instead, two offstage fielders were appointed and all went well on the night.
HILDA IN EXCELLENT FORM
From Avon and the South West Rosemary Gould sends news of a successful rally in Saltford Hall on 5 April, with classes by Doreen Prescott and an appearance by the ‘bunny girls’(proceeds to South-West training days), a fund-raising gourmet lunch (proceeds to the Society), and the problem of hall-lessness in the area — last February it hit members of a regular Thursday class particularly hard:
‘The hall is not available.’
‘Outrageous!’ was the cry; ‘We've always had our Medau here — Some of us for twenty years!’
The high point of the year, however, was Hilda Hyam's 90th birthday party on 31 May.
She says about herself and Medau: ‘I think it was 1940 when Medau came my way — Molly, her mother and Edith came to a League of Health and Beauty group, and Molly gave us a Medau class.
What a revelation!’
Molly was invited to start a class and Hilda was one of five beginners in it.
The class continued throughout the war and into the post-war years, with Molly, Edith and Peggy as teachers, and any number and variety of halls as venue, one of which had been used by Pavolva for practice.
In 1951 came the excitement of the MEdaus' visit; the next year Hilda became the Society's first reassurer; then in preparation for her move to Weston-Super-Mare in 1961, she took the leaders' training.
‘It paid off,’ she says, in laconic reference to the widespread promotion of Medau that she was able to accomplish in the South West.
About 30 people, including two fellow-Hildas — Hilda Lodge and Hilda Hewitt — came to Weston to join in the birthday celebrations.
These took the form of a day of Medau, with classes taught by Rosemary Gould, Yvonne Wilson, Barbara Potticary and Jean Parmiter; Hilda took part in them all, wearing in her leotard a festive buttonhole of lily-of-the-valley.
Then came the birthday tea, at which she was presented with a planted basket of flowers, a much-signed card from all her Medau friends, a bone china tea service, pink rosebuds, and a basket filled with fruit and some of her favourite delicacies.
She sends a message of thanks to all those who made her birthday so happy and memorable.
And we in turn thank her, for all the work she has done for the Society.
KENT KEEPS MOVING
The Kent Spring Rally on 1 March might have been a total ‘white-out’ but for the admirable spirit of Kent members, who ploughed their way through a freshly deposited six-inch fall of snow to get there.
In April Elsie Streek and Myrtle Mott entertained elderly and disabled people with a day of movement and display organised by Thameside Institute; this was followed a few days later by an afternoon with the Woolwich Salvation Army Group.
At an open evening on 6 June the central event was a sponsored continuous-movement session.
Participants kept going, musicians kept playing, and a young drummer said it was ‘just great’.
To date, £700 in sponsorship money has been collected for Cystic Fibrosis.
NEWS FROM NORFOLK
Taverham and Drayton class members were saddened by the death of Kathleen Greenwood from cancer.
She was an untiring worker in the Medau cause, and is much missed.
In her memory the classes contributed towards the purchase of class equipment, and with the money donated bought a number of coloured ribbons and wands.
Ruth Rolph continues her series of lecture-demonstrations, and Molly Scrutton is making a tour of classes in order to promote Society membership.
The Norfolk Display Team appeared with their brollies not only at the Essex Rally, but also at Norfolk's own rally in March — an occasion additionally graced by Rosemary Frost's ‘witches’ complete with broomsticks in their item ‘Stick with Medau’.
MEDAU IN MAN?
From the North West, Mary Paterson reports that the Annual Rally and four teacher-training days came and went successfully, and that they have reluctantly exported Chris Oakes to the Isle of Man, where her husband has been appointed Chief Constable.
Is Chris planning to introduce Medau into to Island?
Floreat Manx Medau, if so.
FUND-RAISING FOR CANCER
Sussex members thank rally-teachers Jean Parmiter, Lucy Jackson and Chris Jones for helping to make the Sussex Rally the success it was.
Enough money was raised for substantial donations to be made not only to the Society for the National Team's September visit to Edinburgh, but also to the Sussex Cancer Trust.
The latter is a favourite cause of Vanessa Forbes and her class members, one or two of whom have had treatment, and excellent care, at the Sussex Cancer Clinic.
The money will go towards the new unit that is to be built at the clinic.
In May a small group of Sussex members gave a display of Medau work at the Healthier Living Exhibition at Brighton, which resulted in several interested enquiries.
DOREEN'S SILVER JUBILEE
Doreen Copas had to be reminded that she had been teaching Medau for all of 25 years by her Herts and Cambs colleagues and class members; they presented her with a generous gift of garden tokens on the occasion of the Westhampstead Rally.
As she is to be moving house and garden this year, she foresees a ceremonial tree-planting as a follow-up to the presentation.
Rally-attenders at Wheathampstead were gratified to find the school magnificently decorated with flowers (albeit for the previous evening's farewell to the retiring headmaster).
The day, with classes from Jean Parmiter and Joan Gatfield and a fun-session from Aldercine Hodson, lived up to the elevated tone of the surroundings, and donations were sent both to Macmillan Cancer Relief in memory of Beryl, and to the Society.
Gill Hill has had a broken elbow — we wish her all the best for its return to full mobility.
THE SOCIETY'S APPEAL 1986
Our fund-raising has been just a little slower during the current year after the bumper total achieved in 1985, but nevertheless it has been most gratifying that we continue to receive contributions from so many classes over a very wide area.
The money was raised by once again‘doing your own thing’— through rallies, cheese-and-wine or supper parties, raffles, bring-and-buy sales and book-sales — all bringing fun and pleasure while keeping the cash flowing in.
The grand total, as you can see, is now £1500 — still a goodly sum, so we once again thank you all most sincerely for your continued efforts on the Society's behalf.
MEMBERSHIP
Your response to our membership campaign has been most encouraging.
Already there have been three ‘100 New Members’ Champagne Draws and a fourth is due shortly.
The lucky winners were Maggie Pittard from South-West London, Angela Hopkins from Kent and Isabel Merrick from North-West London.
Nevertheless, we need still more of you to encourage every Medau enthusiast or supporter to join the Society as a demonstration of faith in the lasting appeal of Medau work and the quality of training necessary to produce new teachers, both to maintain existing classes and to launch new ones, throughout the country.
If you are one of the few forgetful members who have not renewed for 1986, it is not too late — Hilda will be delighted to hear from you.
STOP PRESS
Everyone renewing their membership in 1987 will receive a surprise free gift as a ‘thank-you’ for their continuing support, and — for 1987 only — if you can enrol five totally new members all at the same time your own membership will be free.
A TREE FOR BERYL
A tree has been planted in Beryl Smith's memory at Regent's Park, close to the one planted for Molly.
Our picture shows Hilda Lodge, the Society's Chairman, performing the task earlier this year.
One of Beryl's sisters travelled down to witness the ceremony.
Poster Competition Winner
We are pleased to announce that the winner of our ‘Draw a Poster’ competition is a young lady, Robyn Emerton, who lives in Gnosall, Staffordshire, her interest in Medau having been engendered by her enthusiastic mother.
Robyn's poster with a little modification has already been processed and copies are now available from the Office.