

Letter 1
24 February 1977
Dear Everyone,
We have just arrived in Peking after a long day's travel.
We started from Hong Kong at 7.30 a.m., and went by train to Canton.
On the way, we stopped at the border and went through the immigration and customs formalities, which were very courteous though long, and we were given lunch before getting back on the train!
We went through some typical Chinese scenery with mountains and paddy-fields before we reached Canton.
There we were met by a Ministry official and an interpreter, who showed us something of the city and were very pleasant and chatty.
They took us to the airport, where we flew to Peking via Hangchow.
At Peking we were met by quite a delegation of people, and sat down at the airport for some formal introductions and speeches.
Then they took us to the Friendship Hotel (an enormous complex of buildings) and to a dinner, where we had ‘hundred-year-old eggs’ and other things (actually the eggs are not all that old!).
Excuse me for not writing more as I have to catch up with some sleep and get to a meeting about the course by 10 a.m. tomorrow!
Hope all of you are well & enjoyed half-term.
Love from  
Letter 2
Peking 17 March 1977
Dearest all four of you, at last I have time to write you a proper letter, which I hope will reach you, via the ‘diplomatic bag’ before mummy's birthday.
I'm afraid the Chinese stamps enclosed, although quite varied and colourful, are a poor offering for a birthday present, but we are not allowed to send diplomatic mail in the form of packages, so I shall try to bring something extra special with me when I return via Hong Kong.
Incidentally, I have plenty of pocket money, as the Chinese have been very generous, and I gather have given us almost twice as much as the average wage for a Chinese university or Institute teacher — which is absurd in a way, since all our food and accommodation (as well as free transport and haircuts!) are found for us.
Actually, the Friendship Hotel is a vast ghetto of ‘foreign friends’(as we are conventionally described), but a ghetto in a pleasant sense, in that we are highly privileged in comparison with the Chinese.
We have excellent food — almost twice as much as we can eat is offered us at every meal — and we have well heated rooms, which is indeed a blessing, when you compare the virtual absence of heating at the Peking Languages Institute where we work.
Apparently the Chinese are used to living with little heating indoors & we now understand why they wrap themselves up so well, with padded trousers and jackets, as well as caps or enormous fur hats, which they keep on even indoors during the classes.
Fortunately now, though, the weather is improving.
When we arrived the weather was icy (although there was no snow, the atmosphere was cold and dusty, since they have very little rain here during the winter months) and everything looked a sort of browny grey colour, with no green grass and bare trees.
Today we have the first spring rain, which the Chinese regard as very precious.
It certainly freshens up the dusty atmosphere, and one can almost see the grass and leaves on the trees beginning to sprout.
The Friendship Hotel is a large complex of buildings built in the 40s or 50s to house ‘Russian experts’, at a time when the Chinese were relying on their ‘big brother’ Russia for technical aid.
It bears the mark of its origin in its heavy Stalinesque architecture, relieved a little by the curly chinese rooves and pagoda-like ornamentation of the  upper stories.
We live on the fourth floor of one building, in what, by Chinese standards, are luxurious conditions: we each have our own bedroom, living room, and bathroom, with drinking water, cigarettes, and thermos flasks of hot water (for making Chinese tea) laid on in the living room.
The rooms are rather drab and institutional, and the loos are unpredictable, but who would complain, when the average Chinese family probably lives in an apartment half that size?
We get up at 7 a.m., and have breakfast at 7.30 (now it's getting to be more like 7.45!) before we set out by car for the Institute where we start teaching at 8.30.
The teaching is finished by noon, when we return for lunch.
In the afternoon, one or both of us goes in for extra teaching, discussions, etc.  in the afternoon , and then we eat dinner at 6.
The food is very good, although not much like the ‘Red Rose’ at Lancaster!
The chef, Master Worker Chang, is a caricature of a Chinese chef, very large and fat, who is very solicitous for our welfare, and comes in and explains to us the dishes in a sort of Chinese version of Hyman Kaplan's English.
We are not too partial to the seaweed, mysterious black-fungus, and other unattractive exotica which tend to be part of our meal, but there are always plenty of other nicer things to choose from.
Now and then I hanker for a good solid ham-and-tomato sandwich of the British Rail variety, but not too much.
I must explain that  and I eat in a special compartment, screened from the other foreign friends, who pay for their own meals.
We share this compartment with two French Canadians, who are teaching a course in French rather similar to ours.
We gather this special treatment is because our meals are paid for by the Institute, for whom we are working.
Whenever we need to go to and from the Institute, or even if we want to make an expedition into town, we go to the Car Office, at the hotel, where they give us deluxe transport by car, and pick us up again when we want to return.
We feel quite like VIPs, although it is really the only practicable way of travelling, since the Institute is a couple of miles away, and even if we had the energy to cycle (as all the Chinese do) I don't think we would have the time.
The policy seems to  be to segregate us from the Chinese as regards eating, sleeping travel, etc. as much as possible, but mainly for our own comfort, so that we can enjoy a  higher standard of life than the Chinese themselves could expect.
It's quite an adventure being driven along the straight tree-lined roads in the morning and afternoon on our way to work, as the roads are full of bicycles, three or more abreast, ridden by identikit Chinese figures in blue jackets and Mao caps, and the few cars, lorries and buses blast their way through the sea of bicycles by liberal use of their horns.
Sometimes a head-on collision with a lorry seems inevitable, but somehow at the last moment we or they swerve out of the way.
Then there are cyclists with all kinds of strange burdens strapped to their backs or tied to their carriers, and teams of horses and donkeys (and sometimes bullocks) pulling carts.
As we are in the suburbs of the city, much of the land at the sides of the road is taken up with intensive agriculture.
Also we see plenty of ‘earthquake shelters’ built out of mud, brick, wattle etc…
There is supposed to be one such shelter for each household of Peking.
Some of them look quite permanent and appear to be inhabited.
No one seems to worry about earthquakes, however: there was a slight tremor at about 8.30 a.m. one day last week, but it was so slight that I didn't notice it, although  did.
Most of our free time in the afternoons and evenings is taken up with preparation, as the Chinese want us to produce detailed summaries in advance of our lectures.
This takes a great deal of time, as we then have to give the draft to them, and they type it out and have it duplicated for the classes.
But we also have various visits, etc.
I think the best thing for me to do now is to give you a day by day account of what has happened since we have been here.
I won't bother with the details of the journey to China — except to say it was a bit of an ordeal, as the British Caledonian airplane broke down at Karachi (an axle broke on landing), and so we were kept endlessly waiting around.
We stayed for one night, there, in quite a luxurious hotel, so there wasn't anything extraordinary to grumble about: the worst bit was trying to deal  with our luggage — trying to retrieve it from piled-up trollies on the airfield in the heat of the day, etc.
The result was we arrived in Hong Kong a day late, and quite late in the evening, and our journey to China proper was due to start early the next morning.
So we saw almost nothing of Hong Kong, except the inside of the luxurious Hong Kong Hotel, where we had a few hours' sleep before going to the railway station in the morning.
Then began the 60-mile railway journey to Canton, which took in fact 5 or more hours, because of the lengthy border-formalities.
However, everything was very civilised, as the Chinese travel staff, in their inevitable blue caps and jackets, ushered us through all the details, and even provided tea and lunch at the border station, in a rather old world atmosphere of  chintz curtains and sofas with antimacassars.
Only the reading matter — the Peking news, with its latest vituperations against the ‘gang of four’, and its praise of Chairman Hua and the great revolutionary zeal of the Chinese workers, peasants, cadres, etc. warned us that we were now behind the bamboo curtain.
We felt pretty helpless in the train, as we did not know whether  any arrangements had been made to meet us at Canton, but at the station we were welcomed by a Min. of Education official, together with a teacher-interpreter from Canton university, who surprised us with his urbane manner, excellent English, and his knowledge that David Owen had just been made the substantive Foreign Secretary to replace Anthony Crossland (and that, incidentally, is about the last news we have heard about affairs in the U.K.!).
We had only two or three hours in Canton, before we left by plane for Peking (no rail journey this time).
The plane touched down at Hangchow, where we were exhorted to eat a rather mediocre dinner at the airport before continuing our flight.
Chinese airplanes are quite comfortable, although no meals are served on board, and the stewardesses do not aim at glamour.
We arrived rather exhausted at Peking airport, but were immediately met enthusiastically by a rather formidable delegation of ministry of education officials, people from this or that Revolutionary committee, and members of the Peking Language Institute.
The smiling white face of William Ehrman, young third secretary at the British Embassy, was a  reassuring presence at the table, when we sat down to a welcoming drink.
After one or two formal speeches (at which reference was made to our visit as the ‘first short-term English course since the crushing of the Gang of Four’, and I tried to make a suitable reply,) we were whisked off to the Friendship Hotel to a welcoming meal consisting of Peking duck, ancient  duck's eggs, and other good things, and I wielding our chopsticks to the best of our ability.
Then they escorted us to our rooms, where we gratefully made up for lost sleep.
Next morning (25th) we had a meeting with Comrade Chang, the cadre in charge of our course, and Comrade Wong, an English Teacher at the Peking Languages Institute.
Comrade Chang, the cadre, speaks only a few phrases of English, but seems a very pleasant man.
He explained to us, through Wong, that the participants on the course at Peking would be teachers from various Institutes and Universities in Peking, that there were 27 of them, and that they would be divided into two groups, to whom we would each ‘lecture’ alternately every morning.
He also said we should be asked to give a few extra lectures, to a wider group of comrades, viz. teachers who did not have the opportunity to attend the course full time.
He placed the course in what was, to our minds, a very reasonable perspective, saying that we were here to teach our particular specialities, but obviously there would have to be give and take, in that we would adapt ourselves to the students' needs, and they would adapt themselves in turn to the sort of thing which we felt capable of teaching.
In fact, this is how the course has turned out.
He also explained to us that our stay in China had been planned so that we should spend 4 weeks in Peking, and 3 weeks in the other three cities.
Thus we leave Peking on 27 March, leave Sian on 17 April, leave Nanking on 8 May, and leave Shanghai on 28 May.
After a brief stay in Canton, we arrive in Hong Kong on 31 May.
At present, we don't have our addresses in Nanking and Shanghai, but will try to get them in advance, so that we can let you know how to contact us.
The first week-end, and I were frantically busy preparing for our first meetings with the students, and also unpacking and setting out all the books, tapes, etc. which we had got via the Embassy and the British Council.
But on the Friday Evening we were treated to another dinner, this one so splendid that it was designated a ‘banquet’, and was held at the Peking Duck Restaurant, an eating place of great fame, specialising, like Mrs Hogg, in duck.
We duly ate, in various forms, every conceivably edible  part of the bird, including the feet, but excluding, for some reason, the feathers.
I, being regarded as the principal guest, was presented with the greatest delicacy, which appeared to be a part of the breast.
Another British Embassy man was there, and the principal host was a Mr Hu from the Ministry of Education (our previous dinner had been hosted by another Mr Hu, who the embassy designates as ‘Mr thin Hu’ as opposed to‘Mr fat Hu’).
Formal speeches were made by practically every one present, and after each speech one had to have a toast and down the requisite amount of liquour after clinking glasses and saying ‘gambei’(‘empty your glass’).
Fortunately, the following morning I had nothing to do in particular, so I had a chance to live through a vague sense of hangover.
One advantage of Chinese celebrations is that they do not linger on, as everyone knocks off and goes home to bed at about 9 p.m.
On Saturday afternoon, our faithful guide and interpreter Comrade Wong, together with another comrade who mysteriously seems to accompany us on such occasions (Comrade Sun) took us by car to the Friendship Store which is an emporium for the exclusive use of ‘foreign friends’.
We contented ourselves with a few small purchases, but will probably go there for some more serious shopping before the end of our stay in Peking, as it is obviously the best place in the country for buying touristy things.
The Friendship Store is in the downtown area, and so we had a chance to stop on the way at the Tien An Men Gate (the famous gate providing an entrance to the forbidden city), and Tien An Men Square, Peking's equivalent of Trafalgar Square, except that it is about 20 times as big, and contains about one-twentieth of the traffic.
Over the other side of the square from the gate, you can see scaffolding soaring into the air where people are working to a frantic schedule to complete a magnificent mausoleum for Chairman Mao.
Comrade Wong is an endearing fellow, whose face makes one think that Chinese faces were made for smiling with.
His job is to look after us both as regards our work at the Institute as well as on recreational trips, and he does his best, although his English is perhaps not as good as it could be (at least he sometimes doesn't seem to understand what we say).
He also has the rather unenviable job of being the go-between between the leadership and us, which means he has to tell us any things which ‘are not done’(for example that I ill-advisedly introduced Confucius into one of my examples), and also has to clear any demands we make with the leadership.
Consequently, he often appears rather vague and evasive, but I think this is not his fault, poor chap.
In fact, our relations with the leadership have appeared to be very good.
Our experience here has been quite unlike that of the Shanghai group last year, in that everyone seems to have fallen over backwards to make the course unpolitical.
We have even found ourselves teaching a little bit of linguistics, since some of the comrades seemed interested.
In fact, there seems to be some feeling here that China has fallen right behind the rest of the world in matters of language study and language teaching methodology, so I found myself, on one day, giving a  résumé of Linguistics in the west over the past 50 years!
One or two students have been avidly reading Chomsky, but since we were certainly not anticipating any sort of demand for theoretical work, we have scarcely no books on the subject to offer them.
The guide-lines for the course, as regards its fitting into the Chinese way of thinking, have been very gently imposed, and we are wondering whether we shall be as fortunate as this when we move to the other cities.
On Sunday morning (27 Feb.) we were taken by Comrade Wong and the mysterious Sun (who speaks very little English) to the Imperial Palace Museum, which is what is known in the west as ‘The Forbidden City’.
Since this is not a tourist guide, I'll merely tell you we spent a whole morning there, and didn't see half of it.
The place was full of Chinese sightseers, obviously many of them peasants from far away.
We certainly felt, from all the staring faces that met us wherever we went, that many of them hadn't seen any ‘foreign friends’ before.
Actually, we decided after a bit that there was nothing very sinister about Sun, but that he is just an auxiliary comrade who helps to keep tabs on us, makes sure we don't get lost in the crowd, etc.
For example, when we complained about our laundry not getting done at the hotel, and about our rooms not being done, it was Sun who went to the hotel and sorted things out.
In so far as there is surveillance of us, we tend to feel it is largely intended for our own good, to avoid us getting into difficult situations, etc…
This may also mean protecting us from the seamier side of Chinese life.
In the evening we met Ian Lamb, an Englishman living in the hotel with his family.
He teaches at the Language Institute, and was very helpful to us in giving some of the background to the students.
Like many of the expatriate teachers here, he obviously has strong sympathies with the Chinese communist line, and that's probably why we weren't introduced to him by the embassy.
On Monday (28) we had our introductory meeting with the students.
They are all over 30 except one (but then Chinese tend to look so young that that is difficult to believe), and 9 out of the 26 are women.
They are all married, it appears, except Chiang, who is the youngest.
After two days or so of ice-breaking we have found them all pleasant and cooperative, and eager to take advantage of the books, etc. that we have brought.
For the first week, and even later, we had great difficulty in remembering their names, since their names, as well as their faces seemed so alike: for example, we have a number of Li's, Chu's, Chang's and Huang's; and even the occasional odd name, like Fang and Kuo, is not particularly helpful.
Added to which they all tend to wear the regulation uniform in class, complete with cap very often, so that and I stand out conspicuously in our light coloured and variegated clothes.
But these are superficial things, since we soon learned that Chinese faces and people have almost the same degree of individuality as western ones.
Although we have little opportunity to meet the participants socially, there is very little sense of social barrier, and I wonder what all these western myths about the ‘inscrutable Chinese’ mean.
The fact that we come from a capitalist country means that some topics tend to be dealt with delicately or avoided, but that is all.
Most of them have a very good knowledge of English, even down to the most obscure idiom, but they are not always fluent in expressing their ideas.
On Thursday morning we had the ‘criticism session’ which appears to be a weekly ritual in the Chinese education system, but this was full of polite references to what  and I were doing, followed by one or two mild suggestions about how the course could be improved.
The first afternoon of the course, we did nothing, as the participants all had to buckle down and clean out the premises, including the lavatories and the windows.
This is part of the normal regime — they have to arrange among themselves the cleaning, etc., and also have to do other manual jobs from time to time for example yesterday, they all had to go out and plant castor oil seeds in the campus grounds.
We are let off this sort of thing!
On Friday 4th March we all went out of Peking by bus to spend a morning at a commune — part of the ‘Open-Door Schooling’ policy, the idea being that by interpreting for us at the commune, and by collecting information etc., the students could improve their English, and also devise suitable English-teaching materials based on commune life.
We were welcomed by a woman vice-chairman of the commune, who made a long and formal speech giving lots of statistics to show how the commune had improved its production in line with Chairman Mao's directives, and how the Gang of Four had tried to tamper with agricultural production.
We then made brief visits in turn to some greenhouses, to a school where we witnessed an English lesson, to a clinic where we saw barefoot doctors and Chinese herbal medicines, to an agricultural machinery factory, and finally to a couple of peasants' homes.
The old peasant woman whom I visited told me how bad things had been before the Liberation — that she had had 8 children, of whom all but three had died.
Comrade Li, who did the interpreting for us, got  a bit mixed up with his vegetables and statistics, but was good-humouredly prompted by the others.
We all went home to lunch in good spirits, and the ‘open-door schooling’, far from being a chore, was a pleasant outing.
The English lesson was the high point of the morning, as the children, 10 or 11 years old, had greeted us smilingly in impeccable English with ‘How do you do’, ‘Glad to see you’, etc., and gone through various dialogues which  they performed smilingly with Chinese stage gestures.
Then they sang a song, and said farewell with ‘Good-bye’, ‘Come Again’ etc. etc.
However well rehearsed this was, it was quite an accomplishment considering that their teacher was self-taught.
That evening we were visited by William Ehrman and his wife (recently married) from the Embassy; he brought a tape-recorder and other equipment.
Saturday was another day for outings, as they had arranged for us to go to an Art Exhibition in the afternoon, and to a singing and dancing programme by ‘Minority Nationalities’(Ughars, Kazaks, Mongolians, Tibetans, etc.) in the evening.
Both the exhibition and the Show reminded us forcibly that it's difficult to get away from politics in China.
The exhibition was full of gaudy paintings of the lives of Chairman Mao and Chou En Lai, and similar themes.
After seeing so many beatifically smiling faces of Mao, Chou, and Hua, as well as many jolly workers engaged in various agricultural and industrial pursuits, it was quite a relief to enter a large room the walls of which were absolutely covered with vitriolic cartoons against the gang of four.
At least the cartoons, which all seemed to portray their victims with spiky western-like faces, showed wit and originality, even if their theme was bit repetitive.
The visit to the Palace of the Minorities for the singing and dancing show had some stirring patches, such as some ‘polovtsian dance’ type music played with great gusto on strange balalaika-type musical instruments.
But again the songs (whose content Comrade Wong resolutely translated for us in stage-whispers throughout) harped on the great achievements of Mao, Chou and Hua, the last of whom seems to be being built up into a great leader matching his predecessors in stature.
Every item must perforce pay the tribute of the  Chinese people's gratitude to and love for Mao or Chou, and also to Hua.
However strange this was to us, it was genuinely moving to the Chinese audience, and Comrade Chang, the cadre, sitting on my left, was in tears at the end of a sequence mourning the death of Chou.
On Sunday 6th we have a free day — a much needed respite to enable us to prepare some of our work for the next week — but in the evening we went to dinner with  from the embassy, as well as with two senior visitors from London, one from the British Council (, who is responsible for all Chinese visits) and one from the Foreign Office.
They had travelled by train to Peking, via Russia and Outer Mongolia!
John Morgan, the man from the F.O., had been imprisoned by the Chinese in earlier days.
On Wednesday, we met them again, when we were invited to a dinner in their honour at the Embassy.
There were plenty of Chinese there, and some English students studying Chinese in universities here.
The ambassador and his wife were very pleasant, and as the Ambassador stood up and made a very impressive speech in Chinese, I thought him a distinct improvement on his confrère in the Hague!
On Thursday we gave our first lecture to a wider audience, and were surprised that more than a hundred turned up.
On Friday evening, we were visited by six or seven of the Chinese participants in the Friendship Hotel, and chatted with them in a relaxed manner, although they didn't seem keen on accepting whisky!
This idea of visiting us was proposed by them, and we were very pleased, as it's the only chance we really get to meet them socially.
There is no place, for example, where we can have a coffee-break with them during the morning.
Apart from anything else, coffee is not drunk by the Chinese, which makes me very glad I bought my packets of Nescafe, and rather annoyed that I didn't bring more, as I have already used up more than a third of my coffee.
But at least we have trained the waitress to bring us three cups of coffee each for breakfast, as we need at least that to wake us up for an early morning start!
The normal Chinese day starts at 8 a.m., and of course is 6 days working a  week , so we are rather lucky that the course leaders have allowed us to start at 8.30.
On Sunday we went by minibus to the Great Wall of China, together with Comrade Wong, the inevitable Comrade Sun, and three members of the course, Comrades Huang, Chang, and Liu.
Comrade Huang is an older man whose general good sense  and responsible outlook seem to have caused him to be regarded as a leader by the others; Comrade Liu is a younger woman, who went to Colchester 3 years ago to study English, and whose father, it turns out, was also a university teacher of English — he studied at Edinburgh in 1947–8.
She is very pleasant and communicative.
Comrade Chang is a younger teacher (working at the Foreign Trade Institute) who looks about 24 but is in fact over 30.
We call him ‘gangling Chang’ to distinguish him from the other Changs, because he is tall, thin, loose-limbed, and is ready to laugh about anything, although it appears he has some family problems in that his wife is away and his baby son is ill.
We got to the Great Wall in about 2 hours, passing through mountain country which is unfortunately not very beautiful at this lime of year — brown, bouldery and inhospitable.
We reached the wall, and had a ceremonial walk up a half-mile section which has been restored.
I'm sure it's the same section where Richard Nixon and Ted Heath went.
It was so steep (about 1 in 3 or even 1 in 2 in parts) that one wonders how on earth they used to drive their horses five abreast along this particular section.
There were defensive turrets every few hundred yards, and the whole place was like Hampstead Heath on bank holiday, with hundreds of foreign visitors mixing with hundreds of Chinese, many of them P.L.A.
personnel.
After that, we drove to the Ming Tombs close by, and stopped to have an enormous picnic which they had packed for us at the Friendship Hotel.
Then we visited one of the 13 tombs, which are like underground palaces, built for the Ming Emperors.
According to our companions, the workmen who made the tombs were killed after they had done the job, so that no one could find out exactly where the tomb was.
Consequently it was quite an achievement when an archaeological team in the 1950s opened up this tomb.
Most of the others are still unopened.
But the whole area of the tombs is dotted with ornamental buildings of various kinds, and the best thing of all is the great avenue of stone animals and people who guard  the sacred approach to the tombs.
There are two of each animal on each side of the road: elephants, camels, horses, as well as very engaging mythical beasts rather like unicorns and dragons.
The avenue ends with ferocious looking stone generals and solemn looking mandarins of various kinds.
In case you think I have been having a merry old time, I'd better tell you also that I have been staying up to the small hours as there has been such a lot of preparation to do, and the course participants have also been keen to make use of our presence by asking all kinds of questions about English etc., so this is literally the first free time I have been able to make since I have been here.
Yesterday evening we had a courtesy visit to our rooms from Comrade Wong, Vice-Chairman of the Institute's Revolutionary Committee, Comrade Chang our cadre organizer, and the luckless Comrade Interpreter Wong, who spent the whole time interpreting, so that he didn't even have a chance to drink his tea or to eat a biscuit.
I don't quite know what the idea of the visit was, but the French Canadians had a similar one — anyway, everyone sold gold bricks to one another like mad.
Leading Comrade Wong wanted to know the weaknesses of the Chinese English students, and we said they were really very good (which they are), and he asked whether we had any dissatisfactions or criticisms, and we said we didn't, which seemed almost to crestfall him, as it seems part of the Chinese way of life that criticisms should be exchanged.
He also told us about the work of the Institute, which teaches Chinese to a large number of overseas students from numerous different countries.
We see quite a number of black and Arab-looking students here, as well as some from the west and Latin America.
We are already two-thirds of the way through  our stay in Peking, and by the time this letter reaches you we may well be getting ready to leave for Sian.
We have been promised a visit to another great showpiece in Peking — the Summer Palace built by the Dowager Empress last century from money she misappropriated from the naval funds (so they tell us).
Then, at  's earnest request (and mine) they have arranged for us to go   to Sian by train.
(Apart from that, most of our travel, it appears, will be by air).
On the way, we shall be able to make a detour to visit Tachai, the name which is on all Chinese lips at the moment as the commune whose great achievements are to be emulated by all the other communes in the country.
It is in fairly mountainous country, where they have apparently transformed, by tremendous effort, a poor and barren area into highly productive farming country.
Our French Canadian friends have been very good company for us (actually, the woman, Dorothy, is Scottish by birth and upbringing), and we have been improving our French at the breakfast table, so even if(as I fear) we shall come home unable to speak more than ‘hullo’‘goodbye’ and ‘thank you’in Chinese, at least our French will be a bit better.
I hope everything is going O.K. for you.
I have now received 3 letters and 1 card, and the time seems to be quite good — about 6 days in some cases.
This is probably the only letter of this kind I shall be able to write to you, as we shall not be able to use the Embassy as our post-box after leaving Peking.
(But I shall be able to write ‘self-censored’ letters).
Well done, and , with your school work!
And well done,, on getting into the Computer M.A!
And particularly well done,, for keeping up your diet with great fortitude.
I regret I am not likely to lose weight in China, as their habit, at least in Peking, is to give us at least twice as much food as we need, and however much we gently suggest that three platefuls rather than six would be sufficient, they still go on just the same.
I have had a Chinese hair-cut which makes me look slightly less like a fierce western barbarian to Chinese eyes, but I have kept my beard.
I heard from  that she and you were trying to find a copy of the Style Sheet for the Quirk volume for .
If it's anywhere, it'll be in the green file in my den labelled ‘FR’ or ‘RQ’(I can't quite remember which).
But if it can't be found, it doesn't matter all that much.
I also had a letter from  about some request she'd had to send a copy of the CAMET corpus to Sheffield.
I'll be writing back to her about it soon.
My dearest love to all of you.
Letter3
23 March 77
Dear all,
I'm afraid this letter has been delayed as I haven't had a chance to get it to the Embassy before today.
Everything's still fine.
We went for a visit to an Arts and Crafts factory on Saturday.
The weather has turned much colder due to‘winds from Siberia’ and the comrades have been extremely solicitous, warning us to wrap up warm, and lending us gigantic padded overcoats.
Our time in Peking is now short, as we leave for Sian by train on Saturday, and have to pack up all our books etc.
On the way we're going to visit Tachai, the famous leading commune.
A comrade Wu (a lady) is going to accompany us to Sian, and in fact to act as our guide for the rest of the tour.
I'm sorry I have little to report on the Bird front.
A few Chinese  sparrows and Chinese magpies is all I've seen.
We thought at first the Chinese had eaten all the other birds!
But I think it's just that the winter weather keeps the birds away.
There has been no opportunity to find books or pictures on that sort of thing, and in fact we don't have any books on China apart from the Nagel's guide which we brought with us, and please tell  when you see him how useful it is.
Love to all,
Letter 4
Peking 26/3/77
Dear All,
We shall be leaving Peking for Sian at 11.30 this evening, and the comrades have given us a rousing send off with beautiful presents including a big embroidered tablecloth and napkins, and a beautiful framed picture made out of shells, with an inscription written on it specially for  & I. They also gave us the enclosed photos, which give you an idea of what life is like here.
I have put the details on the back of the pictures.
I thought you might like to show them round.
This month has gone so quickly it's difficult to believe it's over a month since we left the U.K.
The mail will probably take a couple of days longer to reach you from Sian, & no doubt we'll be very busy when we get there, so forgive me if you don't hear from me for a little while.
Love to all from  
Letter 5
People's Hotel, Back Building, Sian 4 April 1977
Dear 
We've now spent nearly a week in Sian, and everything is fine.
The weather has been very warm, but now there's another cold front coming down from Siberia, and we expect to don our long johns again before the week's out.
The People's Hotel is on a grand scale, and we drive in style to the Foreign Language Institute, where our course takes place, every day, in company with Comrade Gao (Ministry of Education), Comrade Yu (our local interpreter) and Comrade Wu (a lady in her forties who is accompanying us on the rest of our tour).
At the weekend we went on two sight-seeing trips, one of them to two old buildings in the city (the Bell Tower, and the Big Goose Pagoda).
Both are very fine buildings, and the Pagoda dates from the 8th century.
We climbed to the top of it.
In the streets and in other public places everyone stares at us, as they see few foreigners here.
But everyone has been very kind.
On Sunday we went on our 2nd sight-seeing trip, to Huaching Hot Springs, a historic ‘spa’ patronised by emperors in the old days when Sian was the capital of China.
The Hot Springs are at the foot of the hills, and we climbed up to‘Capturing Chiang Pavilion’, where in 1936 Chiang Kai Shek was captured, and was made to come to terms with the communists in their struggle against Japan.
Chiang tried to escape by running up the mountain, and a pavilion has been built to mark the place where he tried to hide in a crevice before he was caught.
We also saw the ‘Concubine's Pool’ where the Emperor's favourite concubine used to bathe many centuries ago, and had a bath in the hot spring water ourselves before lunch.
Afterwards we went to another historic place nearby, the tomb of the first proper emperor of China, Emperor Chin I; it's an enormous man-made hill, and there are supposed to be great treasures hidden in the tomb below, perhaps comparable to Tutenkamun, who knows.
I forgot to say that on the way to the hot springs we stopped at a neolithic site where they have excavated and reconstructed the life of the people living there 6,000 years ago.
In many ways they seemed to have been on the verge of civilisation, as they kept pigs, and cultivated the land for millet.
But in other respects they were tribal hunters and food-gatherers.
I hope you have been receiving mail from me.
I don't know how reliable the post is here, as I have only received one postcard from you here — it was posted on 16 March, and was awaiting us on arrival.
has also not received any mail since our arrival.
We still do not have a proper address for Nanking, but I'll try to sent it to you soon, as I understand a comrade from Nanking is coming to see us here to make arrangements for our visit there.
But in case another address doesn't reach you soon, you can write to me as ‘Visiting Expert (!) in English Language’, c/o Municipal Education Bureau, Nanking’.
Everything is very green and spring-like here, in contrast to Peking and Tachai.
Peach and cherry trees are out in blossom, and we've seen quite a few birds.
We saw hoopoes and redstarts (of a kind) at the reservoir at Tachai, and at Emperor Chin's tomb we saw (I think) a raven and swallows.
There were also wild-flowers — irises and violets — on the slopes of the tomb.
I hope everything is going well for you all.
I feel bad about not sending more cards to Granny and Grandman, but time has been short.
Here we are often working morning and afternoon, and preparing lessons in the evening.
But it is all good fun.
Much love to you all —
Letter 6
People's Hotel, Back Building Sian 6 April 1977
Dearest all four,
I've just got your letter of March 21st (Mother's Day), and was very happy to hear the news.
Letters seem to be taking sometimes two weeks or more to get here, and I suppose it might be the same at Nanking, but I think the post to & from Shanghai will be quicker.
Our address for contact at Nanking will be:,(VISITING IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE), NANKING UNIVERSITY, NANKING.
At Shanghai our address will be: Foreign Languages Institute, Shanghai.
We fly from here to Nanking on April 17th, and from Nanking to Shanghai, we go by train on May 8th.
Then we leave Shanghai for Canton on May 28th (again by air, I think).
We'll probably spend one or two nights at Canton before leaving for home.
I hope you all have a good Easter and a good Easter holiday.
is very clever to have got his weight down, and an 11-mile orienteering course at Silverdale must have been quite a testing expedition.
Glad to hear that  &  are getting on well with ‘Whaley-bonce’.
One thing I have missed here is a piano to play, but we visited an Australian who teaches English here last night, and listened to some Beethoven.
Tonight we went to a film all about a peasant leader who had to fight against some bad elements in his village, it was good and funny in parts.
It is touching but rather embarrassing that after the film the rest of the people waited for the foreign quests to leave first, and clapped us when we went out.
I don't feel that we deserve such treatment!
Comrade Wu, our guide who is coming with us for the rest of the tour, is teaching us some Chinese in the evenings, and we are trying out some new phrases every day and causing them some amusement.
She only sees her husband once a year because he works in Outer Mongolia, so I feel my three month's absence from home is not as bad as it might be.
She is very pleasant and helpful, and also Comrade Yu, a young teacher with plaits who looks after us in Sian and acts as interpreter.
It rained for the first time since we arrived in Sian today; There has been a drought all winter, and the townsfolk have been out into the countryside to help water the crops.
I get free beer and cigarettes, and Chinese whisky is not bad; I tried some Chinese ‘orange wine’(curacao) last night, and that was very good.
I'm getting so expert with my chopsticks now that I can almost eat my soup with them — actually, that's not so silly as it sounds, as the soup often contains large lumps of meat and veg.
I must finish now as I have to prepare teaching for tomorrow.
I hope you're all going well with your squash and mini-computer.
Love Daddy 
Letter 7
People's Hotel, Sian 17 April 77
Dear all four of you
We're just about to leave Sian by air for Nanking, and we've just heard that a bevy of Brit.
Vice-Chancellors with a high-powered escort including the Director-Gen. of the British Council are arriving here an hour or so before we leave (i.e. c. 40 mins from now) so I am frantically typing a brief letter of a confidential kind that I can hand over to them.
Anyway, there's not a great need for  confidentiality , as the Chinese have really been extremely considerate, polite, cooperative, hospitable.
The only thing is that the VIP treatment (with ritual speeches, etc.) sometimes gets a bit wearing and we sometimes have to keep a very straight face when the same political points are made to us over and over again by this or that party cadre when we go on official visits.
It's part of the set-up here that foreigners are treated as tremendously privileged guests, who are kept in a sort of cotton-wool  cocoon such that contact with ordinary people is rather difficult.
Consequently, wherever we appear in public enormous crowds of staring (but not hostile) faces cluster round us — even if we just stop to buy a post-card.
The Sian area is an absolute treasure house of archaeological and historical relics — the seat of Chinese imperial government for about a thousand years up to 9th c.
A.D. There are masses of emperor's tombs around here still unexcavated — there must be a tutankamen-type find in almost everyone of them.
Comrade Wu our interpreter who will accompany us all the way is a very pleasant lady in her forties.
We are a bit tired of getting up early  (breakfast 7.30, start teaching at 8.30 — and that's a concession to us lazy foreigners, since teaching starts at 8 normally here) so Comrade Wu kindly arranged for us to have breakfast in our rooms today — the first opportunity for a lie-in we've had!
But  and I are so used to early rising now that we were awake betimes as usual.
In the hotel here there are lots of foreigners, mainly birds of passage (delegations etc. from Canada, Australia, France, Finland etc.).
But there is a mysterious group of British engineers, who are not allowed to let us know what they're doing — I suppose they are helping the Chinese build a factory or something — anyway, it has been refreshing to hear a homely Lancs. accent at the next table.
Yesterday we went on a trip round the city, first visiting some important finds unearthed from a tomb nearby, in the museum, then we went to the ‘Little Goose Pagoda’ built in the 8th cent.
(I sent  a card of it), then we went to the park, and were promised boating on the lake.
We were looking forward to some exercise of rowing, but typically when we arrived, we found they had prepared a gondola-like craft (of a kind emperors used to go in) on which we were meant to sit and be gently punted around while we sedately drank tea.
But  insisted that we got into a rowing boat instead, so we did, and after failures to dissuade us, we were promptly joined by three park-keepers who sat in the boat and insisted on ‘helping’ us to row!
The Chinese seem to find it difficult to believe that foreigners have arm- and leg-muscles the same as themselves!
This protectiveness has been especially strong in Sian, as before we got here there was an ‘incident’ in which an Australian girl teaching at the Foreign Language Institute was attacked and injured (a fractured scull) by a son of one of the workers who worked in the Institute.
Apparently this chap's father had been criticised severely after the fall of the Gang of Four, and he had gone a bit berserk.
Anyway, the Chinese seem excessively embarrassed and concerned about an incident of this type, and we have been kept under very careful supervision (I am sure for our sakes, in their eyes) whenever we have gone out of the hotel.
Actually, it couldn't have been too bad, as we met the girl, and she is determined to stay in China to the end of the contract, in spite of what happened.
Last night we said goodbye reluctantly to all the participants on the course at Sian, to whom we had got very attached considering our short stay here.
There was a ‘get-together’ at which there were a lot of pretty speeches and selling of gold bricks, and then there was a lot of singing.
The Chinese are very good singers, and practically every other person seemed to have a good voice and a repertoire of songs, a lot of them popular revolutionary songs, but also they gave us a rendering of ‘old Man River’ and a few others, and we all rounded the occasion off with Rio Grande, Old MacDonald had a farm (during which the Chairman of the Institute Revolutionary Committee looked a bit bemused) and Auld Lang Syne.  and I also did our bit, singing a few English songs including ‘Turpin Hero’, and we even attempted a rendering of two Chinese songs from the opera ‘the White-Haired Girl’, much to everybody's amusement and applause.
Comrade Yu our local interpreter is a young woman with pigtails and who is constantly breaking into smiles and laughs, especially when we try out our broken Chinese on her from time to time.
Comrade Wu has been kindly giving us Chinese lessons in the evening whenever we have some spare time, so you can tell  that his tuition, what little I was able to attend, has been coming in very useful.
Well I must stop now as the V.C.s are due to arrive any minute.
The weather has been very warm here, although we had a couple of days of rain recently.
I'm sorry it has been rotten weather at home.
It's lovely to receive your letters — the post has been taking about 11–14 days to get here and most of the letters appear to have been opened, but have arrived safely nevertheless.
We have been to a couple of films here.
One about the soldier-hero Lei Fung who was renowned for his good deeds, as well as for his exemplary adherence to Chairman Mao's revolutionary line.
The other film was about a conflict between ‘good’ and ‘bad’leaders in agricultural cooperatives soon after Liberation.
It was more enjoyable than it sounds, as there was good acting and some humour in it.
We are very well looked after for money and food — the food here in Sian hasn't been a patch on Peking (where it was very good indeed), but we aren't grumbling — if we don't like what they give us we ask for something different (e.g. omelette) and get it.
There is free beer with every meal!
Love to you all, and to W.C.  
Letter 8
Shuang Men Lou, Nanking, 23 April 77 (Sat)
Dear All,
Here we are in Nanking.
Actually, we've been here for 5 days already, but things have been a bit hectic.
I'm going to write this letter over the next few days, and give it to , of the British Embassy, when he visits us on Wednesday.
He's coming here next Wed.
to visit the British students studying at Nanking University.
There are four of them in Nanking, studying Chinese, and we are going out to have a meal with them tomorrow night.
(It is a restaurant for Szechuan food, S.W. China, which is supposed to be very good, but very hot.).
Actually, considering there are less than 100 Britons in China, about one for every 10,000,000 Chinese, we've done pretty well for meeting compatriots.
Last weekend, as you will know by now, we briefly overlapped with a bevy of V.C.s from British Universities and the Director-General of the British council & his wife before we left Sian.
I actually had lunch with .
Then they were whisked off to the museum, while we stayed at the hotel waiting for news of our flight to Nanking.
The Chinese don't like their planes to fly unless the weather is absolutely O.K. So we had to wait for a few hours for the plane to arrive from Shanghai.
When we got on the plane, we appreciated the Chinese caution: it was a rather ancient Russian prop-driven machine, which must have been one of those the Russians bequeathed to the Chinese when they went home in the early 1960s, taking all their spare parts with them.
We were not reassured when a solitary American tourist travelling on the same flight told us he'd been on this very plane on a previous flight, and they found petrol pouring down the window before take-off, and had to do some repair work on it.
The flight was very bumpy indeed, and we really wondered whether we would make it to Chengchow, where we had to make a half-hour stop before continuing our journey.
But everything ended up happily, and we were met by members of the reception committee at Nanking, and taken to this very pleasant hotel called ‘Double-gate Building’.
Nanking is a very green city with beautiful plane-trees lining the main streets, where (as in all Chinese cities) there is comparatively little traffic except for crowded buses and trolley-buses, and of course hordes of pedestrians and cyclists.
The hotel is a group of buildings surrounded by gardens and trees in a compound, and we noticed from the start a vaguely British feeling about it — we asked our guide and he told us it had been formerly the British Embassy (presumably during the years when this had been Chiang Kai-Shek's capital), and had remained in British hands until 1960 or so, I suppose it was a consulate or something.
Anyway, it has a spacious and homely feeling about it left over from the bad days of British Imperialism, and this is epitomised in my bathroom, which has an enormous (though now cracked) Shanks sink, made in Scotland!
It is very strange to find, after wearing thick overcoats in Peking only a few weeks ago, that we are in the middle of hot summer weather (by British standards) here.
In fact it has been so hot and humid today that I have had to get an electric fan and put it on in my room.
As elsewhere, the people have been very kind here, and have let us teach more or less what we want.
We are working at Nanking University, in rather cramped and primitive conditions, for the buildings have seen better days.
But as elsewhere, we are given a little ‘staff-room’ to relax in, and are plied with cups of tea and cigarettes at all times, to make us feel at home.
As we work, we can look out of the window now and then and see the students doing physical exercises and practising sports for the sports day on Monday — they're very keen on physical jerks here, and at Peking we used to be woken up at 7 a.m. to find the Chinese staff doing P.E.
to the accompaniment of cheerful revolutionary-sounding music relayed blaringly over loud-speakers.
Wherever you go in colleges, parks, etc. there seem to be distorted noises (music or voices) coming out of loud-speakers.
This is the first time we've been in a University.
Nanking Univ., like other Chinese Univs., seems to be quite small in numbers — only 3,000 students and 12 departments.
There are one or two old professors here left over from before the liberation (apparently no profs have been appointed since) and the professor of English, Prof. Chen Jia, is a charming though deaf old fellow who studied in the U.S.A., and who used to write books on English literature before the Cultural Revolution put a stop to all that sort of thing — but even so he quoted a bit of Chaucer to me surreptitiously at the dinner table.
Things seem to be a bit more relaxed here compared with Sian, where we were shepherded around with great ceremony, had to make formal speeches etc., and attracted crowds of astonished bystanders whenever we appeared in public.
We were invited to a ‘banquet’ on the evening after our arrival here, but actually there wasn't the usual kind of formal speech making.
The principal host was the Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of the Higher Education Dept.m for JiangSu Province.
Since the Province has a population larger than that of England, this means that this was quite an important personage roughly equivalent to the Minister for Higher Education in Britain.
We were all set to be impressed, but when we entered the room, it turned out that she was a tiny-little lady with grinning peasant features and the usual pudding-basin haircut.
To our relief, she missed out on all the formalities except for a perfunctory cry of ‘GamBei’(‘Down the hatch’) and ‘Greetings to our British friends’, and concentrated on tucking into the excellent meal — she gave the impression that she had come for the food and drink and nothing else.
Tomorrow we have to get up at 6.30 (on a Sunday!) in order to go with the participants on the course to a commune outside Nanking, to do our ‘Open-door Schooling’— Open-door Schooling is an essential part of the Chinese political philosophy of education — i.e. educational institutions have to have an open door and renew their contacts with industry and agriculture.
As I have to get up early, I'll break off the letter now, and take up the story later.
26 April (Tues.)
The weather has suddenly gone cold again.
I can't get used to these Chinese fluctuations in the weather!
It's not like changeableness in England, because weather here can fluctuate from very cold to very warm in a day.
But now it is miserablish English-type April weather, and we have abandoned our plan for a walk in the woods near Nanking for tomorrow.
Yes, we have a free day tomorrow — actually the first really free day we have ever had here — i.e. not only free of teaching but also free of official sight-seeing arrangements.
This turns out to be rather fortunate, as  from the embassy is coming to Nanking to see the Brit.
students tomorrow, and we are all going to meet for lunch.
We met the students on Sunday — had dinner with them in the Sichuan restaurant, as I said, and they turned out to be very pleasant, one girl (whose blonde hair must strike the Chinese with amazement) and three men, sporting their long hair in defiance of the Chinese preference for short back-and-sides.
I have now had my second Chinese haircut, and am looking a suitably shorn lamb, but still bearded, and therefore sufficiently odd from the Chinese point of view.
On Sunday we had a successful open-door schooling, visiting an ‘advanced Tachai-type’ commune about 20 miles from Nanking, in the rice growing area.
It was an interesting day.
 Altho' we started at 7.30, as we passed through the streets there were already hordes of people on their way to work, and armies of volunteers (yes, at 7.30 on Sunday!) making the streets nice and clean.
And really, the cleanliness of the streets here does them credit — not a  piece of paper or a  cigarette packet (scarcely, in fact, a cigarette end) to be seen in the tree-lined thoroughfares on Nanking.
Like Peking and Sian, the main streets here are spacious and tree-lined, but we rarely explore the back streets, which you see branching off everywhere, alley-ways where the people live in hovels which would make the slums of European cities appear spacious mansions — but even these alleyways look clean and well-cared for, in spite of their higgledy-piggledy mud- or wood- or brick-walled dwellings.
Nanking presents a well-groomed appearance  in comparison with Peking and Sian because the earth-quake shelters (built of anything from matting and maize-stalks upwards) have been shifted from the main streets.
In the other cities these huts littered almost all the main streets.
In Nanking also, they had to build them as a safety measure, but they have either been dismantled or moved out of sight.
Another thing which makes Nanking look less cluttered is the absence of the horse- and donkey-drawn vehicles which one saw all over the place in North China, including the main streets of Peking and Sian.
here they don't seem to keep horses/mules/donkeys, but one sees water-buffalo ponderously and patiently pulling ploughs through the ooze of the paddy-fields.
Well, we got to the commune (in two buses hired for the participants in our course) at 9 o'clock, and were given the sort of welcome-for-foreigners which we have got used to elsewhere.
I.e. you are met by one or two leading comrades of the commune and taken into a biggish reception room with tables, cigarettes and cups of tea (these are big cups with lids, in which the tea is brewed — and girls in pigtails normally come  round and replenish your cup with hot water from time to time).
Then the leading comrade makes a long speech (with pauses for interpretation) full of statistics about how before liberation the commune used to only produce so many jin per mu (jin being a measure of weight/capacity, and mu being a measure of land) and how the commune now produces about 15 times that amount.
These statistics go on and on — quite interesting if you can fight your way through the jin and mu to find out what is really happening — and are frequently laced with political remarks about following ‘our great leader Chairman Mao's revolutionary line’, and the ‘wise leadership of Chairman Hua’, with the inevitable explanation of how the Gang of Four sabotaged agriculture, just as they sabotaged everything else.
This is all part of the ritual whether we are visiting a commune or anything else, but good humour now and then breaks through the solemnity, e.g. when one of our students misinterprets and has to be prompted by someone else.
After the introductory speech I (as ‘leader’ of the delegation of  and me) am expected to reply, and we dutifully ask some questions, preferably avoiding the jin and mu .
A photographer takes pictures, and the whole thing is tape-recorded (just as practically everything we say is tape-recorded) so that the students can make use of it for interpretation or translation practice later on.
Then we make a tour of the commune — we visited a secondary school ( altho the children were away, it being Sunday) and were duly impressed by what had been achieved, esp.
in science and technical subjects, in the rather spartan buildings of the school (all Chinese educational buildings are very spartan by our standards).
The school has its own experimental farm, and has produced special strains of rice for the commune.
Next we visited a grain  processing mill, a hospital where they proudly displayed their own X-ray machine, a chicken-incubating factory, and a fish farm, where we watched them ingeniously catching fish with an enormous net stretched right across the fish-pool.
As the net closed in, guided by a man balancing in a sort of tub in the water, the fish jumped higher and higher out of the water, and some of them managed to escape.
I'd better explain that a commune is a sizable place, in this case with a population of 26,000, including a small town and many villages.
We went back to the commune headquarters to have a splendid lunch (while the poor Chinese participants ate their sandwiches in another building).
After lunch I went for a walk in the little market town, now being hardened to being a subject of great curiosity, with people gaping at the sides of the road, and children following us up and down the street.
Afterwards we split up into various groups, and  and I had another formal introduction to one of the ‘production teams’(which is really a little hamlet with a population of 200 or so near the town).
The leading peasant made us welcome in one of the peasant houses, where the same sort of ritual took place — long speeches, Chairman Mao, Chairman Hua,jin and mu , but with homely humour  thrown in now and then.
Afterwards various groups of us went to investigate different things, the idea being that the experience and the collection of information on the farms can then be used for language-teaching materials.
I stayed behind in the peasant's house and asked him and his family some questions.
Another group went to talk to the ‘Educated Youth’(i.e. young people who after leaving school in the city go to work in the commune and learn from the peasants)— after 2 or more years in the country, a few of them may get the chance for further training or education before they are assigned to their jobs (there is no such thing as applying for a job here).
The more politically-minded or more unfortunate of our participants were in the ‘manure’ group, studying and participating in the preparation and spreading of muck for the fields.
‘Old Zhang’ the peasant I talked to spoke proudly of the immense improvements in his life.
Now he lives in quite a large house.
Like all the peasants houses I have seen, it is clean and functional, but bare, with portraits of Chairmans Mao and Hua on the wall, and a display of family snapshots.
He had been brought up in a hut where six people slept in one bed.
The grandma of the family added a few details about how she had starved and three of her children had died.
Zhang proudly demonstrated his portable radio to us, and said that he would even be buying a bicycle soon.
As a party member, he had done well, and his children had made good.
A daughter had become a teacher in a nearby county, and a son had become a technician.
I was told that everyone in the hamlet had electricity and a loudspeaker in their room — all, that is, except the ‘bad elements’— children of the rich peasants or landlords who had apparently not become (or had not been allowed to become) good commune members.
We cannot but be overwhelmingly impressed by what the Chinese have achieved in the country and elsewhere, but at the same time we cannot help seeing the comic side of the rituals in which we find ourselves participating.
The continual speeches and pep-talks are part of the Chinese way of life, as is their way of treating foreigners as a completely separate caste of people, who require special luxuries, every possible attention, careful shepherding from point A to point B, formal receptions, etc.
We have to feel  grateful for this solicitude, and at the same  time wish sometimes that this VIP treatment was relaxed, and that we were treated a bit more like ordinary people.
It was only with great effort that  was able to get them to arrange the Open Door Schooling visit so that it was useful as a teaching exercise, instead of being a ceremonial procession through the commune.
We also sometimes wish that we were given notice about the arrangements being made for us, and were consulted.
But it seems churlish to grumble.
This afternoon we learned that they are arranging a trip for us to Wuxi, a city in beautiful surroundings between here and Shanghai.
This will take place on Sunday, after we have witnessed the May Day celebrations in Nanking.
Your letters are very much appreciated, and thank you especially for the Photos, which are not bad at all, and which  handed to me just before we left Sian.
I got your first letter to Nanking on Saturday, and had plenty of letters at Sian — I'm not sure that I got them all, in particular I got a letter from Tom sent on March 23, but I'm not sure whether that's the one you referred to, anyway I'm grateful to you all for keeping me in touch.
We're now beginning to look forward to the return home, which is little more than 5 weeks distant.
My address in Shanghai will be Visiting Expert in English Language, Foreign Language Institute, Shanghai.
No doubt if any letters came after I left Sian, they will forward them, as the Chinese are very conscientious about such things.
Hope the Q.U. is going well.
love to you all :
Letter 9
Shuang Men Lou, Nanking, 7 May 1977
Dear ,
Your letters have been coming quite regularly, and apart from the couple of letters which reached me via Sian, nothing has interrupted the flow, and they are a comfort, especially as the children seem to be getting on so well, and the computer course as well.
This is our last day in Nanking, and we leave for Shanghai by train at 10 a.m. tomorrow — the journey will take c. 5 hours, and we'll pass through Wusih and Suchow on the way, but the train's non-stop.
The weather has been terribly wet here, I don't think it could be worse in England — but now at last the rain seems to have stopped.
But still the weather is quite cold, considering the hot weather we had when we first arrived here.
We're moving to Shanghai with mixed feelings, as we've heard we'll be staying in the Peace Hotel, in the noisy centre of the city, but it's nice to feel now that we are moving on to the home stretch.
The hotel in Nanking has been very pleasant, and the food on the whole very good.
The comrades we have been teaching are very pleasant, but a bit more reticent than elsewhere — the people at Peking and Sian got round to calling us by our first names, but here it's ‘miss ’ and ‘Professor ’(or , to give my name in Chinese).
Tonight, we'll have our usual send-off party, with speeches and the singing of songs.
The work has been quite hard, actually little short of the 24 hours' teaching a week which I originally feared we might have to teach, but it's a pity not to offer the course as we prepared it in Peking, complete with extra lectures, as there seems to be a great demand for anything we teach, which is understandable considering that it's a chance of a lifetime for some of the teachers; in fact, some have never spoken to a foreigner in their lives before!
Last Wednesday we invited the 4 British students studying at the University to visit us at the hotel for dinner.
They were very glad to borrow the few Penguin books we brought along with us, even though they are not particularly light reading.
They feel a bit beleaguered here, and they cause quite a sensation when they walk about in the streets with their long hair (the men, I mean!).
On Thursday we were taken out to see a revolutionary opera, and it was quite an experience, especially as we were sitting in the 2nd row of the stalls, within ear-splitting distance of the gongs and drums which play a large part in the orchestral accompaniment.
The opera was called ‘sister Chiang’ & was about a girl who was leader in the guerrilla fighting in Szechwan just before the liberation.
All the good characters (i.e. the communists) have bright red faces and eyebrows which slant up sideways, whereas the bad characters tend to have wrinkly eyebrows and yellowish faces.
The girl sister Chiang arrives at the wharf at Chungking on her way to rejoin the rebels in the N. of the province, and is met by a communist agent who is rather foppish in his behaviour, and later turns out to be, not surprisingly, a renegade.
As she makes her way home, she learns that her husband has been shot by the Kuomintang.
After she reaches the mountain stronghold of the guerrillas, the ‘Old Woman with the 2 pistols’ who leads the guerrillas, commiserates with her, but she rallies round, and makes a speech saying that her husband's  death will spur her on to fight with new vigour for the Liberation.
She becomes a leader of the guerrillas.
Meanwhile, in Chungking, we see the Kuomintang general  villainously plotting to defeat the guerrillas, with his equally  villainous lieutenant, both dressed in rakish American-style uniforms.
After a lot of ranting and raving at his lack of success so far, he determines to launch an all-out attack on the guerrillas.
The renegade comes slinking in and simperingly confides to the general his ability to lead his security forces to Sister Chiang.
In the next act we see a mountain village, where a feckless Kuomintang soldier is slouching around keeping an eye on the villagers.
One of the guerrillas invites him to drink wine, and in no time he is completely drunk, and has told them that some lorries loaded with ammunition are coming up the road, to help in the campaign to wipe out the guerrillas.
Immediately Sister Chiang organizes an ambush, and the glorious soldiers of the liberation leap on to the stage, do spectacular cartwheels and somersaults, seize the soldier, and capture the ammunition.
But soon a Kuomintang agent comes on the stage, and recognizes Sister Chiang.
he tries to arrest her, but she bravely defies him until some guerrillas arrive, and he is soon begging abjectly for mercy.
Finally the dastardly renegade arrives, and engages Sister Chiang in conversation.
She sees through his unctuous manners to his black-hearted designs, and shoots him on the spot, but it too late, and she is surrounded by Kuomintang forces.
Before she is finally arrested, she shoots a number of them, and lobs a grenade into the wings, where it goes off with a loud report.
We next see the grim headquarters of the Kuomintang war-lord in Chungking.
We learn that Sister  Chiang has been in prison for 3 weeks, but has not revealed a word about the guerrillas, in spite of torture.
His fiendish lieutenant is all for killing her, but the chief decides to use cunning.
Sis.
Chiang is brought in, looking as immaculate as ever, and the chief sidles up to her with ingratiating smiles on his hideous face.
He promises her freedom and a passage overseas if she will betray her comrades.
She disdains his odious advances, and makes an inspiring speech on the glorious revolutionary future.
In a towering rage, her orders her to be tortured; unbowed and defiant, she walks towards the red-hot furnace upstage, as the curtain falls.
Afterwards, we see Sister Chiang in prison with four faithful women comrades.
her hands are bound up and bloody, but in the foul-smelling prison she heartens her companions with happy visions of the communist future.
In the next cell there is a wild-looking man who has been in prison for 8 years, and whose long, unkempt hair has gone white.
He trots around doing menial jobs under the eye of the warder, but in fact is a guerrilla leader who is merely pretending to be mad.
The Kuomintang general, holding his nose because of the stench, enters the prison cell and makes one more attempt to win Sis.
Chiang over.
Needless to say, he fails, and she is condemned to be executed.
However, the cheering of the masses in the city outside announces the establishment of the People's Republic, and the inmates greet the news with rapture.
Sis.
 Chiang happens to have under her pillow a large red flag, and the five women embroider on it the five stars of the republic, meanwhile singing a song of praise.
Soon the prisoners are led past for execution, and Sis.
Chiang is put in irons ready to be shot.
She is led out of the cell, and the firing squad is lining up.
But a great noise outside heralds the arrival of the Liberation Army.
The  general and his lieutenant scurry around cravenly looking for escape, but they are captured, and the Liberation Army enters acrobatically, doing cartwheels, double somersaults, and spectacular sword-play with their bayonets.
The curtain falls on a jubilant scene, as the forces and the prisoners join in rapturous praise of the Liberation, while the general and his  minions cower in a corner.
I forgot to say that the guerrilla who was pretending to be a madman had let Sis.
Chiang out of her cell, so that she could take part in the liberation.
By western standards, the singing was nothing to write home about, but the movements and gestures on stage are like ballet, and are very impressive.
I was sorry to hear about  but am glad to hear that apart from that everything is going well.
I went to a department store on Wed.
to buy a ti-tzu for .
I got him one which is not quite the same as the one on the picture, but there are various types.
I failed to get a single note out of it when I brought it back to the hotel.
You have to play with a special membrane, made of v. thin bamboo, over one of the holes.
I'd better stop now, as I have to prepare speeches & songs for this evening, and also pack for the journey to Shanghai tomorrow.
Love to all of you  
Letter 10
Friday 14th May
Dear   
You'll  be surprised to learn that I am still in Nanking: I've been in hospital for 6 days with gastro-enteritis, but I'm glad to say now I'm fine, and am due to travel to Shanghai tomorrow.
I didn't write to you in hospital, for fear of causing unnecessary concern.
It happened like this: last Saturday, after the farewell party at Nanking University, I came back to the hotel, and packed my things ready to leave for Shanghai, then about 10.30 I started to feel sick, and it got worse and worse and went on and on until I had to wake up Comrade Wu at about 3.30 and ask her to get a doctor.
In fact, they whisked me off to the Nanking Workers' Hospital, where I stayed in ‘solitary confinement’ until this afternoon.
I say ‘solitary c.’ because they gave me a little ward of my own, but it was anything but uncomfortable, as they gave me a treatment which ‘private ward’patients in Britain might envy, except that the food of course was Chinese, and they insisted on giving me 5 meals a day, so that I had some trouble getting my appetite back to normal.
One of the English teachers from Nanking stayed in the hospital with me, so that I didn't feel too helpless or lonely, and the 4 British students here visited me.
Also I received a visit from the Vice-Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of the university.
For a long time they thought it might have been dysentery, but thank goodness it didn't turn out to be that serious.
In a typically Chinese way, when I was discharged, the doctor who had treated me escorted me to the car, and shook hands and asked if I had any complaints, as he knew the hospital left plenty of room for improvement.
Now I'm back in the guesthouse, and have time to do some preparation ready for leaving for Shanghai tomorrow.
Of course, had to go on to Shanghai and get the course going there without me.
She has written to me a couple of times and seems to have managed to keep everyone busy in my absence.
I'll have to work a bit harder to make up for lost time when I get there.
She sent me your card of Lancaster Castle, which arrived in Shanghai.
Love to you all  
Letter 11
Room 435 Hoping (Peace) Hotel 18 May 1977
Dear  and 
I am writing you a joint letter this time, as I forget who I sent my last card to.
I have now started working in Shanghai.
We are staying at the Peace Hotel, an enormous building on the waterfront.
It was built before the war, and I have a Shanks loo, which makes me think that the British must have had a hand in building it.
When we have breakfast, on the 8th floor, we can look down on the river, and watch all the river traffic, including large passenger vessels, big merchant ships belching smoke, strings of wooden barges, and big and small old-fashioned junks, which look as if they have been sailing for a 100 years at least.
Every morning we travel through the busy city streets by car from the hotel to the Foreign Language Institute, where we teach.
The streets are quite narrow, and thronged with people.
Yesterday we saw some criminals being paraded in public on a lorry, and being ‘criticised’ by the crowd.
We are staying in what was the British part of the city a long time ago, and as you can imagine the ‘British Imperialists’ are not very popular here, but everyone is kind to us, and doesn't mention such things.
There is a battered old Steinway piano in the hotel downstairs, and I have had one or two goes on it.
This afternoon we went to see a new workers' housing estate and visited some homes.
They showed us some shacks (almost like dog kennels) that they used to live in at the time of the Japanese occupation.
I am now looking forward to coming home, and am thinking that a fortnight from now I should have arrived in Hong Kong.
Thank mummy and you for your nice letter.
I was glad to hear that  visited you all.
Love from Daddy.
P.S. They cook good western food here, and I am enjoying it now and then as a change from Chinese.
Today for lunch I had a club sandwich and apple pie with ice-cream.
Please forgive the shortish letter, but I am trying to catch up for the time I was ill, and have quite a heavy teaching programme.
They have also arranged quite a lot of visits, including a visit to Soochow on Sunday.
Soochow is a famous old city about 50 miles from Shanghai.
It is well known for its beautiful gardens, some of which are hundreds of years old.
We are also supposed to be going for a trip down the Whanpoa river to the mouth of the Yangtze, in the company of some other foreign teachers who work here.
One of the foreign teachers of English is an Australian girl who is going to come to our department at Lancaster next year.
I am now thinking of buying presents for coming home.
There is a special shop for foreigners here, called the ‘Friendship Store’, and I have been looking round it.
look after Mummy and W.C. until I get home.
Letter 12
Campinas Palace Hotel, Av.
Irma Serafina, 710, Campinas — SP — Brazil 4 January 1979
Dear Everybody,
I hope you are looking after yourselves, and that  's and  's exams are going well, and also  's return to work.
Nothing very much has happened so far, but I thought I would take the opportunity to write a longish letter, knowing that I would be busy later on.
The flight from London was quite tolerable — it took about 12 hours, but the plane was nearly empty, it being New Year's day, and I could even try to get some sleep by lying full length across four seats.
We stopped briefly at Recife (which is quite near the equator) and Rio de Janeiro before coming to Sao Paulo airport, but it was night time at Recife, and it was early morning with an overcast sky at Rio, so I saw little.
When I left the airport it was beautiful hot sunshine at 8.30 in the morning, and I felt rather ridiculous with my heavy overcoat and scarf tucked under my arm.
I was met by two organizers of the institute, and , who took me by car to Campinas which is not far away.
The country is pleasantly undulating around here, and it reminds me a bit of Italy, with the hot sunshine, and the little red-roofed farms and houses dotted over the country.
We had a good view of Sao Paulo as we flew over it — so massive, it looks bigger than New York, and you can almost see it grow as you watch it, because all round the outskirts of the city are straggling half-finished ‘shanty town housing estates’, with dirt roads and little hut-like dwellings, as it seemed from the air.
The hotel is very modern and pleasant, and one of the many skyscrapers in the middle of Campinas.
The first impression is rather like an American city, with the clusters of skyscrapers (some half-built) in the ‘down-town area’, but underneath the skyscrapers there are some nice little squares and open spaces full of beautiful exotic trees and lush grass.
Some of the palm trees look taller than the elm trees in ‘our’ wood, and they rise sheer, with  tiny top-knots of palm-leaves at the top.
Down at ground level, the ordinary houses are much nicer than in American cities, like little Mediterranean villas with tiled roofs and white-washed or painted walls.
And there are lots of flowering shrubs and trees about, not to speak of multi-coloured butterflies and spiders.
The weather has been ideal — about 85 in the shade, and not much more, although they say it is unusually ‘cold’ for the time of year!
The Institute seems to be rather vaguely organized, as they still haven't been able to tell me what students I am teaching — my teaching, it turns out, doesn't start until Monday, but I have heard that an abnormally large number of students have signed up for my course, so I shall have a lot of marking of papers to do at the end of four weeks.
I am about the only person who can't speak Portuguese here, even  knows Spanish well, and is giving his course in Spanish.
So I feel a bit of an odd one out.
The centre of the city is full of private schools advertising English language courses, but surprisingly few of the Brazilians seem to speak English.
from time to time I am having to call on my rusty knowledge of French to make myself understood.
I can easily walk out onto the streets to do some shopping: the centre of the town is crammed with funny little shops of all kinds, bars, cafes, etc., many of them open to the street, there was even a shop selling nothing but plastic bags (they didn't seem to be doing much of a trade).
I have also taken the bus to the University, about 8 miles away, where the courses are being held.
In an average Brazilian bus-load you will find an  incredible mixture of races — European, native-Indian, Japanese, negro — all possible hues from black through khaki to fair-haired people who are probably of German descent.
Also the population in general looks young and happy-go-lucky, which is not surprising, since half the population of Brazil is under 20.
I was taken out to dinner on the day of my arrival, and yesterday there was a ‘coquetel’(cocktail party) after the inaugural ceremony, which contained a lot of unintelligible speeches in Portuguese.
I doubt whether there will be much opportunity for sight-seeing here, but I might manage a trip to Sao Paulo or to Rio, or to the beach, which is about 60 miles away, I think.
Love to you all, and to woozle.
Letter 13
Campinas 10 January 1980
Darling all four,
I have now been here for over a week, and am beginning to get into the swing of things.
It is very hard work, but very enjoyable.
Also my teaching is squeezed into 4 days, which means that I have time to myself at the weekend, including Friday.
arrived two days after I did, and was put in the hotel room next to mine.
He looks much older, and looks more like a pirate than ever, talking in a queer half-American accent.
We have been eating together quite a bit, and also travelling to the University together on the bus — the University being about 8 miles from the city centre.
We now have the opportunity to move out of the hotel and to rent the house of a Professor of Biology, and thus to save on the high cost of the hotel.
The house is right on the edge of the University campus, only about 5 minutes' walk from where we teach.
There will be a motley crew of teachers sharing the house —, myself, a Peruvian and a French Canadian.
But it is a beautiful roomy house and also has a piano in it!(but the piano is locked — I hope we can find the key).
It has an enormous portico-affair and 2 large living rooms, as well as a garden full of lush grass and trees, surrounded by a high wall.
There are a mango tree, a passion fruit tree and an orange tree, and a lovely hibiscus hedge.
The mangos are quite ripe, but the oranges are still green.
We went to see it today and are to move in tomorrow.
The address is: RUA OITO 385, CIDADE UNIVERSITARIA, 13.100 CAMPINAS — SP, BRAZIL.
The weather has been very pleasant on the whole — sometimes a little too hot for comfort, but there has been the occasional rain-storm which has been refreshing.
We have breakfast in bed in the hotel!
We have lunch on the campus, and in the evenings we prefer to eat out of the hotel, as the town is full of cheap bar-restaurants where you can have a very sustaining meal for about £1.50.
In addition you can sit out in the square as we did in Italy and have hamburgers and beer.
Everywhere there is delicious coffee served very strong and black in little cups — it is either free or costs about 2p, and seems as common as water here.
I have not had a cup of tea since I came here, as the coffee is so cheap and good.
Everyone looks reasonably well-off in Campinas — this is the richest part of Brazil and wherever the poverty is, it doesn't seem to be here.
There are lots of boys running a portable shoe-cleaning business in their summer holidays in the park, and about five of them besieged me, tried out their broken English, and shone my 18-year-old Hungarian sandals so that they look like new.
For this I gave them about 30p, which is rather a lot, & since then they have been running up to me when they see me, offering to polish up my briefcase etc.
The students are very pleasant and interesting people, quite well-informed and keen.
On Sunday I have been invited to a farmhouse-restaurant in the country to sample some rural Brazilian fare.
Every now and then I have to kick myself to realise that it is 10 Jan. & everything must be very bleak in Lancaster.
I hope everything is running smoothly, including the car and the piano, and of course woozle-cat — tell her I have a pet  cockroach in my bedroom which is quite large but not a good substitute.
Love 
The piano-move seems years ago and in another world.
Letter 14
385 Rua Orto, Cidade Univeritaria, Campinas, 13.100, Sp, Brazil.
17 January 1980
Dear ,, and 
Thank you very much for your cards which arrived all together just before my birthday on the 15th. it was nice to see the pictures of the priory & of Durham Cathedral — the buildings around here look very flimsy and new in comparison!
I kept my birthday a secret, except that some students wanted me to sign some books, and as I signed them I put the date and I happened to say that ‘I am signing this on my 44th birthday’, and after that the news spread mysteriously and my whole class greeted me with ‘Happy Birthday to you’ in English, and today, when I saw the other class, they sang ‘Happy Birthday to you’in Portuguese.
Both my classes, the one on semantics and the one on pragmatics, have had a large number of students on them, which is gratifying in suggesting their popularity, but I shall pay the penalty when I have to mark all their papers.
Already they keep me busy coming and consulting me about their topics to write on, and that, with 12 hours teaching a week, means that it is no holiday.
They are mostly Brazilians, except that there are also one or two Argentinians, Uraguayans, and Americans amongst them.
All the same, it is a lot of fun, and the warm weather is very pleasant.
Since we are c.3000 feet up, it is not oppressively even though the sun is directly over your head at noon.
Outside the classrooms there is a sort of portico where you can sit in the open, and at the end of it there is a sort of hamburger and cold drinks stall.
There are all kinds of refreshing drinks made out of fruit juices — orange, mango, papaya, banana, apple, passion fruit etc, and of course there is ubiquitous coffee, which is very good and cheap here — in fact if you go into the supermarket they give you little paper cups of free coffee.
We have now been a week living in our big bungalow and it is working out well — at least we are saving lots of money looking after ourselves.
Apart from and me, there is , a rather lugubrious (though pleasant) Peruvian, and , the French Canadian, whole reminds me of , in that he expects everything to be done for him at little cost in exchange for a good wit and ready sense of humour — also like , he plays the piano, with a special line in French songs.
name; is a very respectable cook, so we make occasional trips to the supermarket and to the open market, and then eat at home in the evening, although we can also go out to a restaurant for a meal if we want, as someone has now kindly lent us a car.
Lunch is no problem, as we can eat at the ‘hamburger stall’ next door to the department, or we can get an amazingly cheap and sustaining meal for 12 cruzeiros (c. 15p) in a canteen on the campus, which is rather like the prison canteen in ‘Porridge’.
Tomorrow we are holding a party in our bungalow, which has room for about 60 people, and I imagine about that number may come.
It was  idea, and I think it was partly enlightened self-interest, the principle being that if you throw a party, then for the rest of the course people will be inviting you !
Anyway, we have asked people to bring food and we'll buy the drink.
But our Peruvian and Quebecquois cohabitants are not so keen on the idea — it appears that Brazilian parties are likely to involve a lot of loud music and wild dancing, and to last until about 6 a.m.
Already  stratagem has worked, in that 3 ladies (not beautiful Brazilian brunettes!) have offered to come and cook us a meal next Wednesday — a Japanese meal which sounds like a mixture of harakiri and kamikazi, but I hope it will taste nice as the person cooking it is Japanese — there are lots of Japanese in this part of Brazil.
Now that we have the car we hope to make one or two trips at the weekend.
One to the sea, which is about 80 miles away, and another to Sao Paulo which is quite near, and I hope to do some shopping for presents there before I come home.
I am not sure what the presents will be — I am not sure I can find anything suitable.
Also when I leave on 4th Feb, I have a 12 hour wait at Rio de Janeiro, so I hope I can look round the city.
Last weekend I was invited out to Sunday lunch by  the young teacher who is involved in organizing this course.
We went into the country to an old ranch-style house where they have ‘traditional Brazilian food’ and I walked around the ranch (‘fazenda’) for a bit with his family.
he has studied at Edinburgh and his son (aged 8) speaks very good English.
 I'm amazed that this country appears so stable as inflation, they say, has gone up 250% (!) in the last 3 years and wages have only kept pace with about half of that, and only yesterday a newspaper posted on the canteen wall announced a massive corruption deal whereby the country's leaders made 81 billion cruzeiros out of currency exchange.
Even so people seem to shrug their shoulders.
Superficially people seem to manage an American style of life, with a motorway system and massive supermarkets etc., and you have to look hard at least in this area to find the poverty.
I hope you are all well with exams safely over and not too much ice and snow on the drive.
I have to kick myself to think that it was Xmas only 3 weeks ago.
I have no news of Britain here, so I hope things are limping along in the usual way.
Love dad.
P.S. My substitute for Woozle is a salamander in the washroom.