

A. JOURNAL OF THE TOUR (see Appendix I for brief summary)
Saturday, 13th: Arrived at Delhi airport over two hours late, at 06.30.  met me personally at the barrier and eased me through the arrival formalities.
I spent the day at his house, sleeping till lunchtime, then discussing the tour programme.
He and  took me on a short sight-seeing trip to the Qutab Minar.
Evening: a buffet dinner chez , at which I met , Assistant Director General of the British Council and ; British Council English Studies officers  and ; also members of staff from English and Linguistics Departments in Delhi, including  (Linguistics, Jawaharlal Nehru University),(English, J.N.U.),(Linguistics, Delhi University),(English, Delhi).
I was surprised to hear from  that there were c. 50,000 students, all told, in his department.
Sunday, 14th: Flew with British Council English Studies Officers  and  to Jaipur, where we were met with a posy of flowers at the airport by my host and ex-student,, organizer of the Workshop on Communicative Grammar.
After a late breakfast and a discussion of the programme,, and I explored Jaipur, the ‘city of palaces’ in the late afternoon, before being entertained at home by .
My first exposure to India ‘in the raw’, this was an exhilarating, astonishing and (in the scope of this report) indescribable experience.
During the week of the Workshop, I stayed in the University guest house.
Monday, 15th: The Workshop began in earnest after a formal opening in which speeches were made by  (Chairman of English, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur),(Senior Professor of English),, and myself.
Entrusting my garland to  I started the Workshop with a talk on a functional model of language.
The Workshop was attended by about 25 participants from all over the country, as well as by about 20 Rajasthani college and university teachers of English.
Among the participants were many noted specialists in English and Linguistics, including  (Puna),(Varanasi),(Delhi),(Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi),(College of Commerce, Delhi University),(CIEFL Hyderabad), and  (Trivandrum), a well-known poet who had travelled three days by train to get there.
All these, as well as of the British Council, contributed substantially to the Workshop.
The female participants included  (M.A. Lancaster) and , formerly B.C.E.S.O. in Calcutta, now teaching in Assam.
Representatives came from at least the following states: Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Panjab, Gujarat, Kerala, Assam, Maharashtra, Mysore, Rajasthan.
I was glad that I had not attempted to plan the whole programme in advance, as the Workshop developed under its own momentum, using  and  Communicative Grammar of English as a text and ground-plan.
I gave talks on those subjects the participants judged to be of most interest (e.g. tense and aspect, sentence connexion), and the Workshop progressed from the theoretical basis of communicative grammar to descriptive topics, and finally (in the last two days) to detailed devising and planning of teaching materials.
For this latter purpose, the participants divided up into four ‘cells’ or groups, each concerned with a different area of practical teaching.
(See Appendix II for the detailed programme of the Workshop.)
In the evening, we had drinks at the  
Tuesday, 16th: After the day's Workshop programme, we had drinks in my room.
Wednesday, 17th: After the morning's programme, the participants visited Amer Fort (also called the glass palace) and the Queen's Garden, both close to Jaipur.
In the evening I was invited to have dinner with a citizen of the city, whose son is a  student of .
Thursday, 18th: After the day's programme, I was invited out by , a local participant, to visit another garden of the Moghul era, where we saw a son-et-lumière celebration of the 250th anniversary of the founding of Jaipur by the Maharajah Jai Singh.
Friday, 19th: After the day's programme, a party was held in my rooms in the guest-house.
The local musicians who had been brought in to entertain us were not allowed to perform in the guest-house, so we provided our own (less professional) entertainment by singing and reciting poetry.
Saturday, 20th: On this and the previous day I was ill, but was able to attend the closing meeting of the Workshop.
, and I flew to Agra in the evening, and were met by the British Council driver.
and I stayed in the Clarks Shiraz hotel.
Sunday, 21st: A sight-seeing day, on which we visited the Taj Mahal and the nearby Fatipur Sikri, a city planned by the great Moghul emperor Akbar, but never completed and now deserted except for tourists, guides, and sundry holy men.
In the afternoon we drove to Delhi, where I was accommodated in Claridges Hotel.
Monday, 22nd: 11.00: I gave a lecture on ‘Grammar and Rhetoric: Two Aspects of Communication’ at Jawaharlal Nehru University, where my hosts were the two .
In the afternoon, I was conducted on a shopping expedition by  from Alligarh, an ex-student of ours from Lancaster.
Tuesday, 23rd: After a brief meeting at the High Commission with the Education Adviser , I gave a second lecture on ‘the Logic of Polite Conversation’ at J.N.U., and was afterwards invited to lunch by the English Department, in the company of the Vice-Chancellor and various members of staff.
In the afternoon, I gave a more formal lecture on Stylistics for the Linguistics Department at Delhi University.
My hosts were  (dean of the faculty) and  (Professor and Head of the Linguistics Department).
Afterwards  (another former Lancaster student) invited me home to tea, and in the evening, and I were entertained at home by 
Wednesday, 24th: I flew in the morning from Delhi to Hyderabad, to begin my three-day stay at the Central Institute for English and Foreign Languages.
I was met by , British Council A.C.E. Officer, and was accommodated in the CIEFL guest-house.
The CIEFL was on vacation, and I was led to expect that there would be little for me to do there except have informal talks with the staff and such M.Litt students as might be still in residence.
I was surprised, therefore, to discover that quite a busy programme had been arranged for me.
At 3.00 pm I had my first ‘informal’ meeting with the CIEFL staff and students, and found myself addressing an audience of some 40 persons on communicative grammar and semantics.
This was attended by , Director of CIEFL.
In the evening, dinner in the Nanking restaurant with a group including ex-Lancaster students  (Reader, Materials Production CIEFL),(Lecturer, Correspondence Course, CIEFL).
Thursday, 25th: 10.00: Another ‘informal meeting’, this time on A grammar of Contemporary English .
11.45: Lecture on Stylistics to the English Department of Osmania University, Hyderabad.
The lecture was introduced by .
3.00: ‘Informal discussion’ at CIEFL on Semantics.
Afternoon and evening: private discussions at the guest house with people seeking advice on theses etc.
Friday, 26th: 10.00: ‘Informal discussion’ at CIEFL on Stylistics, attended by .
12.00: Lecture on Stylistics at the new national University of Hyderabad.
My lively and accomplished host:.
For lunch, I was invited home by , and met a group of teachers from CIEFL.
Afternoon: private discussions with teachers and students.
Evening: invited me home to a buffet meal with a group of friends and colleagues, including ,(Linguistics CIEFL),(Linguistics CIEFL),(Correspondence Course, CIEFL),(Materials Production, CIEFL).
I had met  in London in the 1960's.
Saturday, 27th: In the morning, I was accompanied on a shopping expedition by  (Lecturer, CIEFL, ex-Lancaster student).
For lunch, I was invited, together with a large number of other guests, to meet the Indian Minister of Education Social Welfare and Culture,, at the Director's house.
The Minister was apparently paying a semi-private visit, having come to Andhra Pradesh on official business.
The Chairman of the U.G.C. was also present.
17.30: I gave a lecture on Stylistics to the Teachers' Forum, a group organized by  of Osmania University.
The lecture took place in the splendid hall of the former British Residency, now a women's college.
My lecture had to be cut short, so that  could drive me to the airport to catch the evening flight to Delhi.
I spent a few hours at  house in Delhi, before leaving on Sunday 28th November to catch the 03.45 flight to London.
B. THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE TOUR
The tour was very well organized by the British Council in India, and I am very grateful to  and  in Delhi for looking after me so well.
, a delightful person, was my guardian angel for the first ten days of the tour, and was also good enough to rearrange my return journey from Hyderabad, so that I could get back in London in time for an appointment on 29 November.
, the ESO from Madras, was also extremely helpful, and is clearly respected by the Indians as an intellectual force on the ELT scene.
looked after me in Hyderabad, where he and his wife made me feel at home with their warm, relaxing hospitality.
I was very satisfied with the arrangements for accommodation.
At Jaipur, the University guest house, although by no means luxurious, was a friendly place to be, especially since many other participants in the Workshop were staying there.
I was placed in ‘splendid isolation’ in the chief guest suite, while others were sharing rooms in rather cramped and spartan conditions.
Even so, a spirit of close cooperation and bonhomie was generated, contributing much to the success of the Workshop.
Similarly, my stay in the guest house in Hyderabad, though somewhat less pleasant, enabled me to keep in close touch with the staff and students of the CIEFL.
In contrast, it was a welcome change to stay in the impersonal luxury of international hotels at Agra and Delhi for one or two nights.
It was also a pleasant break from air-travel to go by road from Agra to Delhi, and to see something of the country.
C. THE ACADEMIC AND SOCIAL PROGRAMME
My original programme included the week's Workshop in Jaipur and two lectures in Delhi, but in fact I found myself with many more professional engagements than this, through the Indian habit of ‘cashing in’ on one's presence to arrange last minute lectures and seminars, and the Indian tendency to solicit one's opinion of personal research, of Ph.D.
theses, etc.
I had been warned of this, and was therefore able to take the extra engagements in my stride, and to enjoy the opportunity to visit varying institutions and talk to people of all positions on the academic scene.
I was led into all these commitments in a very friendly and deferential spirit, and in a similar spirit of friendship and hospitality I was invited to numerous social engagements, from  impressive lunch in honour of the Minister of Education to an invitation to a private home in Jaipur, where my kind host and hostess had gone to the trouble of preparing sandwiches, cake, chips (without the fish) and pudding, in case I should not like the Indian dishes served for the other guests!
Altogether, the tour gave the Indians maximum exposure to me and gave me maximum exposure to the ELT situation in India.
I was able to meet some of the leading Indian academic figures in English and Linguistics, and at the same time to find out what was going on at the lower levels of teaching in Universities and affiliated Colleges.
I made a number of valuable contacts, and was able to renew my acquaintance with seven graduates of the M.A. course at Lancaster (four of them teachers at the CIEFL).
D. THE WORKSHOP AT JAIPUR
The Workshop in Communicative Grammar bore the stamp of its energetic organizer,, who had gone so far as to postpone a Fulbright Fellowship to study with  in Pennsylvania in order to bring the planned Workshop to fruition.
The level of argument and discussion at the Workshop was very high: in the course of the week, the assumptions underlying the teaching of a communicative syllabus were explored carefully and critically, but by the end, it seemed that the sceptical voices among the participants had become more sympathetic.
This emerged in the practical group planning sessions, where more critical members joined diligently with others in working on the details of communicative teaching programmes.
Through  insistent guidance, a final report was corporately prepared, giving the Workshop's findings and recommendations for the development of communicative teaching in India.
It was felt that this approach could best be tried out initially in the 1st year undergraduate programme, where a communicatively-based syllabus would give a much-needed new direction to the largely remedial teaching task that lecturers face.
My feeling (although I am not the best judge) was that the Workshop was a complete success in that it involved the participants in exploring the intellectual bases of their subject, and led them from there to the practical rethinking of their teaching methods and curricula.
The gulf between theory and practice, which can so easily thwart real progress at such meetings, was not in evidence here.
I hope that the British Council will give its fullest support to ventures of this kind in the future, and will encourage the group which met at Jaipur in their plan to hold a second Workshop to follow up the work of this one.
E. THE CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR ENGLISH & FOREIGN LANGUAGES
There was no need for me to be convinced of the high standard of the staff and work of the CIEFL on arrival, since we at Lancaster have learned to regard the Institute's graduates as among the best qualified ELT specialists in the world.
The CIEFL is, indeed, an internationally unique institution, and probably contains the world's greatest concentration of ELT expertise.
I was not able to see the CIEFL in session, but through discussions was able to get a good idea of the activities of its various English Departments.
The CIEFL's privileged status and overall responsibility for ELT programmes in India leads to a certain amount of resentment from other institutions.
At Jaipur, for example, it was noted that the CIEFL had not given its ‘blessing’ to the Workshop, and that only two CIEFL members of staff (one a personal friend of ) participated.
This jealousy between a corps d'elite and those who are not able or willing to come under its patronage is understandable, and became more understandable to me when I reached Hyderabad and found that the Institute was a self-contained and sequestered community, and that its comparatively luxurious campus bore a faint resemblance to a military camp, with living quarters graded according to the status of their occupants.
(Director's Lodge, Readers' Quarters, Lecturers' Quarters, etc.).
The standard of the buildings and gardens, and of their upkeep, is much superior to any other Indian campus that I saw.
These external impressions harmonised with the impression of academic excellence, to build up an impressive picture of the  perseverance and influence of the CIEFL's present Director,, through whose leadership, it seems, the Institute has reached its present status.
I did not find the CIEFL's supposed ‘elitist’ image reflected in the attitudes of its staff, who were without exception friendly, and who entered into discussions with me in a spirit of lively and good-humoured controversy.
A number of staff pressed me to make a second, and longer visit in the future, and this I would certainly like to do.
University of Lancaster 23 December 1976    