

MANSFIELD 297
The stage-curtains folded away the first half of the show to the accompaniment of enthusiastic applause.
Tony and his friends made their way to the bar — homing pigeons coasting along on the wings of thirst.
‘Good first half,’ Bernie licked Mansfield Bitter from his moustache, ‘that blonde's a bit of all right.
Lovely figure.’
‘She's been going some years.’
Ralph looked at his reflection in the mirror at the back of the bar and gently patted his toupee.
‘Look at her through your binoculars…mutton dressed as lamb.
Some of 'em never want to retire.’
‘Good actress through.’
Tony was fascinated by actresses — especially blond ones with shapely figures.
The three friends sat down and enjoyed their favourite pastime — eyeing up the women in the theatre-bar.
Fancy a chaser before the bell goes?’
Bernie stood up and took out his wallet.
‘Need some cigars…
I'll come with you.’
Ralph also stood up.
Tony leaned back in the comfortable maroon velvet chair and admired the decor in the newly refurbished theatre-bar.
Photographs, some black and white, others coloured or sepia, decorated the ornate maroon and gold wallpaper.
Instead of gilding the lily the photographs added atmosphere — a sense of history.
Actors and actresses revealing how ancient they were by their dress and arrangements of hair-style smiled down from the walls, their smiles captured forever — frozen in the curtain-call of time.
A theatrical poster, protected by glass, was displayed in the far corner of the room.
Tony walked over the to poster and was intrigued by the programme of entertainment displayed.
It read:
The Empire, Stockwell Gate, Mansfield.
—(1910)
Proudly presents ‘A Night to Remember’— Music Hall.
Miss Vesta Tilley —‘The London Idol’
Albert De Nero — The Prince of Tenors
The Flying Falcons — Acrobats Supreme
Hubert D'Garcy — Strongest Man in Britain
Mrs Henry Woolley — Comic Monologues
Dress circle, stalls and pit-stalls.
Twice nightly at 6-15 and 8-15
Advance box office.
Tel.
Mansfield 297.
‘Wondered where you'd got to.’
Bernie handed Tony a large whisky.
‘Thought you'd gone backstage to see that little blonde.’
They all laughed and Ralph handed out cigars.
‘I was looking at this.’
Tony pointed at the poster.
‘Nearly ninety years ago…
I'd loved to have seen Vesta Tilley.
She was one of the greats.’
‘Dressed up as a bloke, didn't she?’
Bernie laughed and winked at Ralph.
‘Bit peculiar, if you ask me.’
‘She ended up as a Lady.
Married Sir Walter de Frecs.
Not that peculiar, was she?’
Tony still studied the poster.
‘I'd have loved to have seen her in the flesh.
There's nothing quite like real theatre.
That feeling of…of being part of it all.’
Bernie downed his whisky and said, ‘Seen that telephone number?
Mansfield 297.
Not many people had phones in those days.
No you can't move for them…they're everywhere.’
Ralph looked at his watch and said, ‘Couple more minutes left…come on drink up…time for another.’
He bought the drinks and then nodded towards the poster.
‘Tony,’ he looked mischievous, ‘why don't you ring that number in the morning?
Perhaps they's let you talk to Vesta Tilley.’
The three friends laughed loudly, united in the warmth of shared absurdity.
Tony looked again at the poster — felt it drawing him to the past — the glamour of showbusiness, with its stage-door Johnnies and exciting, feminine showgirls.
‘Yes…
I'll ring the theatre in the morning.
Book myself a seat for the show tomorrow night.’
The theatre-bell announced that interval time had ended.
Velvet curtains swished gracefully aside once more and the scene was set for act three.
The next morning Tony parked his car and walked slowly towards the newly completed office block.
A neat lawn surrounded by rows of shrubbery hugged the base of the red-brick building.
Tony's feet crunched over white pebbles, on the path that led to the front door of the insurance company where he spent seven hours a day hunched over claim-forms.
He took a form from the top of the in-tray and clicked the end of his Parker pen in and out.
The pen wrote a number on the top of the claim-form.
Mansfield 297.
Tony hardly noticed.
Again, he wrote down the number.
Mansfield 297.
The theatre poster unfolded itself inside his head.
He recalled the names of the  artistes quite easily and the telephone number had also stayed in his mind.
He lifted the telephone receiver and dialled the number.
A dialling-tone purred in his ear and then a woman said, ‘Number please?’
‘Who's that?’
Tony looked bemused.
‘This is the operator.
What number do you require?’
‘I…er…
I want Mansfield 297.’
‘I'm connecting you now, sir.’
The telephone made a different sound and then another voice said, ‘Empire Theatre, good morning.’
‘Who's that please?’
Tony could not believe it was really happening.
‘Which theatre did you say?’
‘Empire Theatre, Mansfield.
Do you require seats, sir?
We have an excellent show this week.
Miss Vesta Tilley is the top act.
And we have a full company supporting her.’
‘You're having me on.’
Tony laughed — unsure.
‘Who's put you up to it?
Ralph and Bernie?
Stop having me on.’
‘I'm sorry, sir…but I don't understand.
Having you on what?’
‘All right then,’ he decided to play along with her, ‘any seats for this evening…second half?’
‘We're fully booked for this evening, sir.
Oh, just a moment…
I do have one seat left in the stalls.
Or would you prefer to try your luck up in the Gallery?’
Tony smiled to himself and drummed his fingers on the edge of the table.
The phone would go dead any minute now.
The joke would be over.
He decided to go along with the frivolity.
‘I'll take the seat in the stalls then.
I'll pay for my ticket at the box-office.’
‘What name is it, sir?
‘Mr Anthony Lambert.’
‘Your seat will be waiting for you, Mr Lambert.
I'm sure you'll have a most pleasant evening.
Goodbye, sir.’
Tony replaced the receiver, then lifted it once more and listened.
He dialled the number again but this time there was no dialling tone — only silence stretching through the air-waves.
He replaced the receiver and smiled.
It had been a good joke.
Ralph and Bernie must have gone to a lot of trouble to set him up.
He'd get his own back on them.
Just needed time to think up something really good.
He was still smiling as he reached for another claim-form.
Tony finished his evening meal and scanned through the television programmes in the local newspaper.
Nothing much to interest him.
He decided to spend the last hour at the local pub.
He glanced at the clock and had a strange feeling that he had to do something — there was somewhere he ought to be.
Half-past seven.
The feeling persisted and suddenly, although he knew he was being ridiculous, he felt he had to take a ride into Mansfield to have a look at the site where the old Empire Theatre had once stood.
He had a quick wash and shave, put on a clean shirt and hurried out to his car.
Soon, he was driving along Stockwell Gate.
The road was brightly-lit and boasted a new Co-op superstore and various other new buildings.
Wasteland, half-hidden behind hoardings, came into view and Tony soon arrived at the site which had held the theatre.
He reversed his car and prepared to drive back down the road.
Then, he stared in front of him and his body froze in disbelief.
An ornate building, brightly lit loomed in front of him.
It displayed its name in large fancy lettering.
EMPIRE THEATRE — MANSFIELD
A poster at the front, near the entrance read: All this week — Miss Vesta Tilley —‘The London Idol’ and full company.
Tony sat quite still for a few moments and then parked his car on the wasteland at the side of the theatre.
He walked slowly towards the entrance.
A girl seated inside the box-office smiled at him and handed him a ticket.
‘Complimentary,’ she nodded, ‘I hope you enjoy the show this evening, sir.’
Tony pushed open the door marked ‘stalls’ and was at once enveloped in a pot-pourri of cigar-smoke, women's perfume and that unmistakable tang of bodies in close proximity.
He was led to his seat by a young woman dressed in a long green velvet skirt and a high-necked, white lace blouse with leg-of-mutton sleeves.
She pointed to a vacant seat which was at the end of a row near the gangway.
Tony sat down and looked all around him.
Everyone was dressed in Music Hall costume.
He looked for television cameras — that must be the answer — it was being televised — people had dressed up.
The orchestra was playing a polka and the audience tapped their feet in time to the rhythm.
A bell rang and a Chairman, sitting at a table near the apron of the stage, banged loudly on the table with a gavel.
Silence filtered through the noise and even embraced the over-excited people in the Gallery.
‘Good evening…ladies and gentlemen.’
The chairman twirled the left half of his highly waxed moustache.
‘For your entertainment this evening…
I give you…
Mister Albert DeNero…the prince of tenors.
The audience cheered loudly as the red velvet curtains danced apart and revealed the tenor.
Lights from gaslamps which were positioned round the walls of the theatre were dimmed — lamps placed at the edge of the stage were turned up full and Albert DeNero was drenched with light.
‘Come into the garden, Maude.’
Albert clasped his hands together in front of his chest and looked suitably forlorn.
The song ended and Albert took a bow.
Next, he sang about ‘Wine Flowing in the Garden of Eden’ and then got the audience swaying gently from side to side to the tune of ‘My Jane, my Pretty Jane’.
‘The Flying Falcons,’ bellowed the Chairman, as the stage became alive with muscular men leaping and somersaulting.
They threw each other around and the audience yelled for more.
‘Mrs Henry Woolley.’
The Chairman opened his eyes wide and grinned suggestively at the audience.
‘Comic monologues from your favourite comedienne.’
A middle-aged woman, matronly in appearance and, thought Tony, not looking at all comical, went straight into a saucy monologue about an amorous coalman who left dusty handprints on various parts of his lady customers' anatomies.
Six monologues and a comic song to finish with had the audience roaring with laughter.
Tony laughed along with the rest, even though the terrifying feeling that he was part of something unreal and sinister still persisted.
‘Silence please…ladies and gentlemen.’
The Chairman raised one hand and beat the table with the gavel.
‘Now to entertain you…
Mr Hubert D'Arcy…the strongest man in Britain.’
Hubert bent nails, made patterns with metal bars and suffered agonies as he struggled to lift massive weights.
Women giggled while men in the audience whistled and shouted — orange-showered down for the Gallery — wags shouted encouragement as Hubert's eyes bulged under the strain of it all.
Applause died down as the curtains folded Hubert and his weights away.
The Chairman stretched out his arms towards the audience, pleading for silence.
The orchestra played an introduction.
Tony felt a tingling feeling at the nape of his neck — it travelled to the base of his spine and he wanted to run from the theatre.
None of this could really be happening to him.
Maybe he was ill — delirious with some sort of tropical disease?
He looked down at the his programme and knew what it would say.
She was top of the bill.
The audience were all staring at the stage — as though not daring to miss one moment.
The music faded softly into the background and the Chairman proudly announced, ‘Ladies and gentlemen…we now present for the great enjoyment of all…the London Idol…the one and only…
 Miss Vesta…
Tilley.’
The audience went wild.
Stage-lights blossomed to full beam — curtains opened slowly — music began to play just a little bit louder.
Tony could feel his heart beating — faster than he could ever remember.
The audience held their breath in one collective sigh as the orchestra began to play the first few bars of ‘Strolling with Nancy’.
From the wings a slim young man strolled towards centre-stage.
Immaculately groomed in seaside holiday costume, he looked the preface ‘dapper young gentleman’.
He reached centre-stage and crossed one leg in front of the other — patent leather pumps whining in the glow from the footlights.
Leaning forward, he placed both hands on his walking-cane and held the pose for a few seconds, then he raised one white-gloved hand to the monocle at his hight eye and stared out at the audience.
No-one in the theatre made a sound.
Tony stared up at the stage and marvelled at the charisma that surrounded the young man.
He had never witnessed anything so electrifying.
The orchestra played louder — the young man sniffed at the white carnation in his buttonhole and wrinkled his nose in an upper-class fashion.
Now, he strolled towards the left of the stage and began to sing, ‘Strolling with Nancy’.
At the end of his song the young man bowed and raised his hat to the audience.
Removal of the straw boater revealed a head of sleeked-down dark hair — a man's head of hair.
The young man left the stage and the curtains folded together.
Tony applauded loudly with the rest and the applause continued until the young man once more strolled on stage, this time dressed as a policeman.
Smart, neatly pressed uniform and helmet complete with chinstrap and badge, the young man paraded up and down and then, still singing, marched off stage swinging a wooden truncheon.
Yelling and whistling, the audience begged for more.
The Chairman waved his arms about and the orchestra sorted through sheet-music.
Again the curtains opened and once more the stage was empty.
A ‘toff’ smoking a cigar strolled into the limelight.
Silk tophat, immaculately cut suit, maroon brocade waistcoat, starched wing-collar and brocade bow-tie, he thrust one hand into trouser pocket and began to sing, ‘Burlington Bertie’.
After singing the song through twice he then encouraged the audience to join in.
Everyone sang out loudly and then the young man led them straight into ‘After the Ball is Over’.
He made them sing softly and then to sing loudly — smoking a cigar and strolling up and down with his walking-cane he had everyone in the audience  completely under his control.
Tony joined in the songs, where he knew the words, and then the curtains closed for the last time.
Miss Vesta Tilley had gone.
The stage darkened and the audience shuffled reluctantly towards the exit-doors.
A magical, wonderful evening had ended on the highest of notes, Tony thought, as he was swept along towards the doors.
Tony reversed his car and turned to take another look at the theatre — there was nothing there.
Only sheets of crumpled waste-paper blowing about in the wind — looking like forlorn tumble-weed.
A large black dog in the middle of the waste-ground dined out on discarded chips.
A young man walked across the derelict site and hesitated as he reached Tony's car.
Tony wound down his window and asked,
‘Can you see a theatre over there?’
‘Watch it, mate,’ the young man grinned at him, ‘you've had a drop, ‘ent yer.
I've just come over to tell yer…you've not switched yer lights one.
Police are quick off the mark about that in Mansfield.’
‘No…
I haven't been drinking,’ Tony switched on his lights, ‘I just thought there was a theatre out here somewhere.’
‘Be a bit easy to spot, old son, wouldn't it?’
The young man grinned.
‘I mean…a theatre…couldn't miss it.’
He laughed and added, ‘Take more water with it next time…you'll be seeing pink elephants next time.
Good night, old son.’
He disappeared into the frosty night.
Tony arrived home and poured himself a large whisky.
Mind racing, he could still hear the music.
‘My Pretty Jane’, ‘Strolling with Nancy’, ‘After the Ball is Over’ and ‘Burlington Bertie’.
He leaned back in his chair and thrust his hands inside his trouser pockets.
He took out a folded piece of paper.
He opened a theatre programme and read:
The Empire, Stockwell Gate, Mansfield (1910.)
Proudly presents ‘A Night to Remember’— Music Hall.
Miss Vesta Tilley —‘The London Idol’ and full company.
Advance box-office.
Tel.
Mansfield 297.
The next morning Tony could not concentrate on claim-forms.
His brain seemed to be malfunctioning — his emotions felt like torn rags as he stared at the theatre programme that sat on top of his desk.
An idea filtered through is perplexity — he thumbed through the pages of a London telephone director and then dialled.
‘Ah, yes…
Stage and Television.
I wonder…er…if you could help me?
I'm trying to get information on an old theatre.
Which artistes were appearing on a certain date, that sort of thing.
Goes back a long way I'm afraid.
The year I'm interested in is 1910.’
: ‘Hold on, sir,’ a young girl's voice answered, ‘I'll put you through to Mr Stanley.’
His query was transferred to the appropriate department.
‘Take some time.’
A man's voice answered.
‘Give me all the details and ring back in an hour.’
‘Empire Theatre, Mansfield.’
Tony was enthusiastic.
‘The year was 1910 and I think it was March.
Not sure of the week, but I think the top of the bill was Vesta Tilley.’
‘I'll sort through some old copies of Stage then,’ Mr Stanley replied, ‘see what I can find.
Should be able to find some reviews amongst all the old copies.
Talk to you in about an hour them.’
Tony let his office and walked down the corridor to the drinks-machine.
He selected coffee and chatted to two young typists.
The hands on the office clock seemed to be weighted down.
Tony refilled his drink and walked back to his office.
He tried to concentrate on a claim-form but was unable to absorb the information.
At half-past eleven he rang Mr Stanley.
Jackpot.
Mr Stanley had found some information.
‘And it was Vesta Tilley,’ Mr Stanley reassured him.
‘The Stage gave her a wonderful review.’
There was a rustling of paper at the other end of the line.
‘Good supporting programme as well.
Albert DeNero…
Flying Falcons…
Hubert D'Garcy and Mrs Henry Wooley.’
‘Do you know where I could find details of box-office bookings?’
Tony was really excited.
‘Would they have been destroyed do you think?’
‘Try the land agents.
People who leased the property to the theatre company.’
Mr Stanley sounded rather doubtful.
‘If the theatre's been pulled down you could try the local council.
Archives department might have salvaged some records from the theatre.
You'll want local history records…that sort of thing.’
Tony thanked him and then telephoned the local council office.
‘I'm researching for a book,’ he white-lied, ‘I wonder if you could help me?’
The girl in the archives department sounded intrigued.
‘You're a writer then?
If you'd like to come into the office, perhaps I could help you to search.
We've lots of theatre memorabilia saved from old music halls and theatres.
You might find what you're looking for.’
The room smelt of yesterday.
Bundles of papers and piles of books guarded secrets from a bygone age.
Tony undid the tape on a bundle of books and papers marked Empire Theatre, Mansfield.
In small lettering underneath he read, Box-office information — bookings etc. 1900 to 1930.
His fingers felt cold as hands trembling, he carefully thumbed through the faded and torn pages of a large book.
‘Stalls — seating-plan and advance bookings for March 1910’.
Fragments of paper were missing from some of the pages and quite a few names were faded, some almost beyond recognition.
And then he found it.
March — 1910.
Miss Vesta Tilley and full company.
Wednesday — 8-15 — stalls — seat number 1 Row E. Complimentary seat reserved for Mr Anthony Lambert