

Surprise, surprise…no, not Cilla Black…c'est moi encore!
Inspired!!! by the enclosed letter, I thought that a meeting of our kindred spirits was due before the ubiquitous Christmas card season!
Retirement continued to be good…the mind is completely empty of all great thoughts, forward plans, deadlines to be met yesterday rather than today!
Mark you, I feel that you have to make the effort to go out there and meet the world…'cause, part from a few stalwart friends, the world does not come to you!!
I won't wax eloquent about my doings etc…in the hope that we can arrange a rendezvous…
I've been in Denmark with Kent for 3 days to see our brother-in-law & niece (('s sister died Oct, '91 of a second brain tumour).
That event &  's separation in the same year blighted by retirement…but  is now divorced & we've all brushed ourselves down & picked ourselves up again!))
I'm going to Paris 17 th –24 th June to spend the week with a friend whose husband has ‘done so well’ that he's now on the board of the French Co. for which he works, and she's trying to adjust to la vie Parisienne!
Apart from other moveable events (e.g. swimming/fitness club etc) I'm sure we can meet!!?
Hope to hear from you.
P.S. Isn't '; s letter wonderful?
The telephone rang at 8a.m. this morning to alert me to the fact that you were to be broadcasting on Radio 4…'twas a friend of mine to whom I had mentioned your future plans…
I telephoned  and he was going to ‘tune-in’ also!
My elder daughter has read ‘Some Other Rainbow’ in which you receive honourable mention and I hope to read it soon.
Your remarks re childbirth are very pertinent as the aforementioned daughter gave birth to a second little girl on Saturday…so her husband, like mine, will be surrounded by a ‘monstrous regiment of women’ as your wife is surrounded by men's shirts!
Your parents & your own family must be very proud of you.
Wishing you every success in your new venture.
P.S.  for grammar on the programme.
Thank you for your very kind congratulations and thoughts on the birth of …shall I say, ‘Thank Heaven for little girls!’(or women, in general!!?)
The group hope to meet at  's house on the 23 rd Sept. with a piece of writing!
On that day we'll be wishing you ‘Bon Voyage’ across the Atlantic.
I have not forgotten you!…been a very busy summer with friends & Festival & family!
had another daughter on Saturday ().
Some day soon I may call in to see you with out for half-an-hour!
A lovely memory of our weekend at Trouville in June…scene almost unchanged!! apart from Japanese businessmen in suits on the sand!
I'm enclosing the article on  which, I feel, is not very flattering to him, his work or his family!
The rain is not staying mainly on the Spanish plain…torrents of hailstones beating les fleurs to the ground!…says that the rivers will be full…it's an ill-wind etc!!
is  's image…including ‘mouth-in’ look!!
Regs.
to .
was born on 11 th Sept., 8lbs. 13ozs.
We are all glad that she has arrived safely and has all her faculties!
Congratulations on your grand-parenthood!!…hope that  is thriving.
We now have …11 th Sept., 8lbs. 13ozs.
Lots of snaps of our reunion…yours will be the same as the others!
Thank you for the lovely, lively lunch ‘hour’…made a change from children's chatter &’ baby's gurgling!
Memo:
‘Whitterick n. the curlew la. 19 —, local, Fif-Rox. [perch.
f its cry, with the form influ. by whitterick]WHITRAT’
…from The Scots Dictionary.
It also records a WHITRAT as being a weasel or a stoat but you said that your ‘thing’ /‘whitrick’flew!
N.B.
!!…born 11:09:93; 8lbs. 13ozs.
Good News!…
&  presented  with a baby sister &  & me with a second grand-daughter on 11 th Sept.……8lbs. 13ozs.
is well despite having had a forceps delivery & ‘piles’!!
is still enjoying her Glasgow life-style & loves her job…she's going to Crete for 2 weeks in Oct. — we are going to the U.S.A.…to Oregon & Seattle from 12 th Oct.…to 2 nd Nov.…to see  s brother & wife & family.
Hope you are all well.
I have not written any more stories of late!!
Did we really meet just over a month ago?
Hours lost, days lost, weeks, months…it's a pity that we did not have a day together to mull & muse…however, 'twas lovely to see you, to see you, lovely.
I'm enclosing the photograph of the 3 of us, the night before the wedding as you, like us, will have many of the Great Day.
I'm sorry that the Canadian/U.S.A. contingent were not in the print…takes the edge off what should be happy occasions…
I hope that you are all thriving now despite being back to work!
‘Our’ was born on the 11 th of Sept., so we have not yet broken the all female barrier…she's a healthy 8lbs. 13ozs. & giving  &  4/5 hours space between feeds.
She was a forceps delivery which  found more bearable than dear, little  's  Caesarean .
(also demanded an epidural!).
I'm pleased with the name…after my dear aunt, in a way!
continues to enjoy her post-marital-divorced status…life goes on…and she likes being an aunt…indulging  with unusual presents like a gun which ‘blows’ bubbles and collections of Russian style dolls within dolls…to date, she has a set of genuine Russian dolls from  's trip to St Petersburg…cat dolls, tiger dolls, peasant dolls etc.
We are up on The Tummel to-day in a Golden Haze of Perthshire sunshine & scenery…no salmon but lovely views!
Hope your  is thriving & that tout la famille are well.
P.S. Oregon 12 th Oct.…1 st Nov.
The end of what I've termed my ‘full circle’ year is in sight.
‘Full circle’ because we have renewed friendships, acquaintance & contact with people of & from the past.
Apart from the two 1953–1993 re-unions, we have had friends to stay from R.A.F. & early Edinburgh days.
The former came as a separate & separated pair…each with new partners!
As you know we went to Denmark & got to know  & especially our niece,, again.
The U.S.A. trip was wonderfully reminiscent too…mainly for the two brothers who travelled up & down Memory Lane every hour of every three week day.
(The places we saw & visited were mind-boggling but it was really a family visit to see  & , their daughters, sons-in-law & grand-children…all boys).
My cousins, & his wife,, sailed from Victoria, via Vancouver to spend a day with us in Seattle (we had already met them at an all-family-reunion wedding in Cheltenham in August.).
too as you know ‘full-circled’ with her marriage to divorce! &  &  had little  in Sept. who is a delightful baby.
To-day, I was a guest at  's First (of many hopefully) Nativity Plays…she was a musician…for 3½ yr-olds, they were all very good…& disciplined…which as you & I know is HARD WORK!
(Their nanny is superb with them)
I'm glad that you managed to visit the Muse/1e d'Orsay…wonderful building too.
Did you see The Barnes Exhibition?
Your French adventure sounds great & evocative with the visit to The Battlefields…we once visited a German one — very emotive.
is at the Builders' Dinner to-night.
is also out at a ‘do’ in Edin. with her new ‘friend’!
I'm all packed up for the shoot tomorrow…the second last for this year — then 2 more in January & into the salmon season on Jan. 15 th ! & so the year's round etc.
is in Malaysia just now…her mum is in a nursing home here.
They have bought a large drawing room flat in Edin.
She'll ‘blow in’ next week & ‘blow out’again!
They're spending Christmas in Paris & New Year here.
I wonder if 1994 will see you living in Scotland permanently?!
Best wishes for 1994.
Excuse the paper…it's easier to write a longer letter on foolscap paper!
We received your ‘letter’ piece inside your card yesterday.
It, unfortunately, is one of three (2, R.A.F).
from friends, midst the Glad Tidings, telling us of yet another marital breakdown (confirming statistics ⅔ marriages break down).
As one who went through this situation recently, I ‘feel’ for you and I just wanted to let you know this.
Summer ‘91, I had just retired and I was so looking forward to it when, one week ‘into it’, told us that she &  had parted company.
I, with a mother's intuition, had suspected that ‘things’ were not right but I expected that it was one of those ‘hiccups’…) not so, I'm afraid.
Everytime, I thought about it, I felt physically sick and my stomach knotted…
I also suffered over-night hair loss…in bald patches!
As I was no longer going out to work, I had plenty of thinking time…even a holiday with ,, &  that Autumn to U.S.A /Bahamas (retirement treat) was blighted.
&  were divorced this year…
I can talk about it freely now & we have all picked ourselves up & dusted ourselves down…says that she is a stronger person (maybe even ‘harder’)…& she is a very efficient business person & lives & works in Glasgow.
Everything was amicable!!!
She still sees him in a business capacity which I find ‘odd’.
The marriage cost thousands'; the divorce £25 each.
People say that having no children was/is a blessing.
We liked him & his family.
I have not asked any questions…but I feel that he was not ready for marriage & their careers were very important.
They hardly saw each other & did not leave space for each other!
She has a new ‘friend’…separated & has a little boy and that makes me sad too…for their family…again, I ask no questions.
However, we have found new joys in our grandchildren &  loves being an aunt.
‘It’ was tantamount to a bereavement.
But I felt I could ‘phone or meet ‘the body’!
All Good Wishes