

BRAER
Bestowed Riches And
Everlasting Resources.
We heard a call from a
Distant shore, audible
Above the mewing of island seagulls, who
Soared down into the
Effervescent wake of
passing tankers.
Screaming Shetland seagulls mocked the
Awkward boat below, as it
Tossed like a
Delirious child, the
Wild wind carrying
Drifting urgent voices,
Searchlight beams,
And later,
Soft snowflakes drifting
Blankly into the blackness, as
White birds fell to
Settle on the gasping waves.
Snorting, Shetland's white horses
Shied and bolted,
Driven out by
Swelling black herds,
Whipped by the merciless wind, which
Shattered the tanker's
Ugly carcass,
Spilling black blood onto
Jagged rocks.
Dawn broke, an
Indistinct grey, more the
Thinning of light that
Dusk brings.
Seagulls swooping crazily upwards,
Unwanted pieces of the black night
Sticking cruelly to their
Feathers; the sea carrying a
Dark viscosity, which
Did not reflect the
Weak winter sky above.
Fishermen on the clifftop behind
Watched floating fish
Spewed onto the rocks,
Black and dead,
Charred victims of an unseen fire,
Oiled and salted
Before their time.


Scottish island seagulls'
Subdued tearless crying
Fills the smoggy sky, as
Another tanker passes this
Ruined coast, trailing
Black bubbles.
We heard a call from a
Distant shore.
Beauty ravaged And
Environment Ruined.
Rings of Time
As the first circle is completed
Its successor-echo begins
Swelling ever outwards,
The solemn cycle of rings.
They mark the passing ages
Births, lives, deaths of men,
Seconds, days, seasons, years,
Repeated ritual — again and again…
Each ring recalls a moment
Years past and forever gone,
A growing, living reminder;
Time is infinite — the earth spins on.
Its power controls our human lives,
Decays the nature that we see,
And once dead, history can be read by all —
Within the parchment of the tree.
Indifferent to the Difference
Remember how
When you were very young,
Everything was always black and white?
Remember how
Your parents drew black lines
Around the cats and mice?
Remember how
As you grew to your teens
Grey shades revealed themselves to you?
Remember how
You tired of all that grey
And sought a shining colour, new?
As the clear edges blurred,
And the bright white went fuzzy,
With each new thing you heard,
You found your own clarity.
Nothing was certain there;
All was the same around you.
You did all you could to
Preserve the different you
Remember how
A few more years went by
And you became indifferent?
Remember how
The room was so full of different individuals
Who all chose the same colour.
A Lullaby
Our era's silence screams its message
Brutal about the holy walls
Then coup de grâce shatters
And the hammer falls.
A death blow splinters
Two year old skin beneath
Ten year old timber
As 10,000 fatalistic believers falter.
‘Guilty,’ the aged tones knoll forth,
‘of innocence in the first degree.’
As today's soot blackens
The whitened case
It rattles as the carcass turns
Rootless
Breathless from play
As 10,000 brows furrow in disbelief.
A whispered, ‘Come with us!’
The twain infant Sirens beckon and lure,
Their mud-scathed nails
Tainted with ruby remnants.
‘We know a good game, a new game.
We call it ‘the 90's.’
And 10,000 mourners retort
‘We call it homicide.’
New mothers shift uneasily in
Newly donated pews
And 10,000 more rock
Newborns in padlocked prams
And grip harnessed toddlers
With fist clenched, enclosing more.
And as all Merseyside grieves for one,
10,000 souls weep for the young.
Yet later when disillusioned eyes are dry
When memories fade with time
And tragedies anew
A family wanders home
The adult grasp slackens on the rein
And another child
Takes a step and falls
As 10,000 more are born to this.
Just the Beginning
He entered into the room, tall dark and handsome, looking like a character straight out of a Clarke Gable movie.
He surveyed the encompassing scene in the cool, calm and collected manner of someone who had seen it all before.
An attractive butterfly fluttered past the window.
He didn't notice.
His muscular hands by his sides, he stood, legs astride, lost in his train of thought.
Nobody acknowledged his presence.
Even if they could, they wouldn't.
The room darkened momentarily as a cloud hid the sun's rays.
Even in comparative shadow they still looked the same.
Daylight or darkness, it made no difference.
The same people, expressions and positions.
They may as well have been a small part of a photograph album gathering dust in the depth of someone's attic.
He shook his head involuntarily like someone returning from a trance.
they hadn't moved.
The same people, expressions and positions.
In the distance he heard the church bells signal the awakening of a new day.
Day and night were the same thing in this place.
To many this scene would have been unnerving and unsettling, particularly to those who knew them during the period known as the past.
Not him.
At first it did, though that was before the incident.
The room may well have been as it was then, twenty years ago.
The passing of time had eroded the picture from his mind as much as he could possibly allow it, so that now the two images were one and the same.
It was undoubtably a shame, he had concluded, that they should endure such a loss of dignity.
Just as well they were unaware of it.
To the untrained observer it was a room, an ordinary room, exciting in no particular way and one which contained the semblance of twelve human occupants.
Vegetables.
Vegetables rotting in an outer shell known as the human body.
Another drop fell into the pool of saliva on the black gummed woman's lap.
She didn't notice.
Nobody noticed.
The tragedy was that thirty years ago these were amongst the brightest and most influential members of this country's infrastructure: lawyers, biochemists, scientists and diplomats.
They were all here, or rather the outward appearance of what was them was here.
To those observers looking on it seemed hard to believe that the average IQ of the room's inhabitants was 149, and that they had more honours between them than a collection of top class civil servants—and to think that they had been reduced to such a pitiful state as this.
It would have been better for them to be dead.
That's not callous or shallow.
A statement of fact.
Sedate without sedative would be an appropriate statement.
These people were unconscious of any thought or self induced actions and movement.
Just sitting, lying, waiting for the inevitable visit to room 19.
There it would all end — peacefully and mercifully.
Or so the medical propaganda would have you believe.
He doubted if room 19 even existed; nobody in his circle had ever seen it or knew where it was situated.
Like so many things in that world its origins came from a period in history where everything was deliberately hazy.
At least they would not suffer.
They were incapable of experiencing any emotions, their bloodstreams devoid of blood yet flowing with drugs to sustain their pitiful physical states until he received the call, the dreaded call to wheel them into the lift and press the green button.
It was the not knowing which perturbed him most and led him to take an action which he knew would lead to his inevitable and somewhat painful death.
He counted them, thirteen.
In his small compact bag was 130ml of potassium hydroxide.
He had enough.
He put 10ml into the syringe, closed his eyes and injected the patient.
He had just begun and yet it had all just ended.
WHY LIVE LIKE THIS?
All day and all night he would be there loitering in the streets of Chichester, either surrounded by hoards of admiring people or dismissed as a dirty scavenging wretch, ruining the ornate Georgian Streets.
Never was he distressed but smiled with a grin fixed to his face without changing, depicting his life.
Anyone who didn't know him would turn up their nose, looking down on him, but Clary would only laugh as if he enjoyed it.
Some would look with pity at a fool, sprawled across a bench, bottle in hand, others would curse, telling him he was a bad smell which wouldn't go away.
Clary would smile, nod obligingly, with a look that knew something they didn't, one which delved deep down through two small black holes into a mind of knowledge, hidden inside, never daring to seep out.
Occasionally his dark figure, disguised under a skin of grey macintosh, could be seen, handing out tobacco or substances in glass bottles — resembling Vodka or Gin.
He would refer to it as the ‘funny stuff what makes me happy,’ claiming to live for it.
Clary would chuckle, and stumble on, bottle swinging by his  side , and cigarette squeezed between two thin, withered fingers, black with dirt — never washed away.
Generosity, was Clary's middle name, he would never cease to offer me a cigar or a sip of the ‘funny stuff’.
‘Go on — it will cheer you up’ but I dismissed him like the rest, saying I was not thirsty, despising the thought of drinking  from the same grimy  bottle which a rogue had.
He could interpret my thoughts though, with an intelligence which refused to correspond with his trampish image, and withdrew his offering with a grin, ‘it's not poison, love.’
The graveyard, was Clary's base, where he would establish himself, as he spoke with his fellow partners in life, about mindless things, which seemed funny, to what seemed low life citizens.
When I listened though, as I often did when my curiosity over-ran my actions, he was different from the rest.
He spoke with distinction, one with significance, knowing what he was saying in spite of the unpretentious rabble he listened to in reply.
His language was one with endings, extensive words and sense, defining him from his friends.
Clarence was not a true tramp, as he put across, but one by desire.
Every seventh day of the week, he would disperse from his slumber, leaving his slacks, filthy items and boots behind, where I do not know.
‘Today, is dignity day, my sweetheart’, he would state, behind a cocoon of suit and tux.
He would stroll the town as a noble  aristocrat , modelling a suit with gleaming brown shoes, reflecting the sun's glare, as even the sun touched them with a blessing.
Tipping his hat to all the cultivated elegant folks, flattered to see such a distinguished gentleman taking notice of them.
The same people who had turned a blind eye as they passed Clary in their snooty fashion, would regard this esteemed gentleman with admiration, perceiving Clarence, as a high-class citizen of Chichester.
I would ask Clarence where he received such large amounts of money from, and he would reply with ‘I won the pools’ or ‘Found it, darling’, giving me a wink.
No longer could I detect a whiff of stale odour, but the pleasant aroma of his aftershave.
The only minor manifestation which gave his game away, was the filth under his yellow, smoke-dyed nails.
By dusk, though, each day of dignity, Clary would return to his base and sit by  the cathedral, with his inseparable friend for comfort — the ‘funny stuff’.
His remarks would recur as he shouted across the streets to the snobbish people of Chichester.
‘I love 'em’, he would chuckle.
Often I would see Clary, with his guitar strumming familiar tunes, accompanied by his hoarse, amiable voice, enticing an audience as they laughed along with him.
Many a rainy day would he bring dreariness to an end, as his musical talents came out to the surface.
Clary, still remained the tramp, he loved to be, six days of the week, one along with many who are taken to be  inhuman .
As I see him sitting there now, sheltered under a derelict building's covered way, one which has been empty for a tedious never-ending era, with an unchangeable lifestyle, erected for nothing but with such a prospect for life, if used properly.
The faint smell of cannabis wafts up my nostrils, as the stale odour comes from Clary.
Puffing from the butt of a long gone joint, anticipating to squeeze the last speck, his hands blue from the cold icy wind as it runs in and out of his domain.
His breath forms smoke clouds as they are released from his tight pouting lips.
Why could anyone choose to live this way, with a musical talent, intelligence, and adorable personality like his?
He could simply enjoy a tramp's way of life, or  take the  micky out of  such a life as this, but I think he is interested and wonders why and how, people take a person's image for what is hidden deep down inside us, blocked off by an impression to put across.
As my bus drives up to ease me from the pitiful world outside, Clary waves, a week hand emerging from his dark shadow huddled from the cold.
He smiles with the familiar grin I know so well, but this time I see those eyes of loneliness, as if there's something no-one could understand, hidden by his visage of cheerfulness.
The bus shuffles away, as my warm, snug, enticing home awaits, opening  its arms to relieve me from the world outside.
I WISH IT NEVER HAPPENED
‘I'm going, going out and never coming back to this bloody house.
I hate living here and I hate you.
You don't deserve me to help you with things.’
Sean ran out of the house carrying just the bag which he had grabbed going out.
Sean's dad did not even leave his seat because he was unprepared to do anything about this problem, but he knew that he should do something about it.
Sean was intent on not coming back as he believed he was in the right, but he did feel very upset.
Sean had no where to go because he was not going to go to a friend's house as he was not ready to face up to people he knew.
So he walked to the park and sat on the park bench and let his thoughts pass through his head.
When it got to about 1 a.m. he realised how cold it got at night when you are outside.
He did not sleep that night as he was too worked up with what had happened.
At about 7 a.m. he walked towards his house and hid in the bushes across the road and watched for his dad to leave for work.
When he did he went into his house, opening his front door with his key.
He felt just as strongly as he had the night before.
When he got in he went upstairs and got a large blanket.
When he got downstairs he found an envelope from his dad, so he opened the envelope and took out the note.
The note read ‘I knew you would come back into the house, so please take some food.
I have left you £100, please take the money.
I'm not giving it to you out of charity, I'm giving it as a present to my son.
Remember you are always welcome in this house.’
There were two things that were not in the letter which Sean wanted.
This was that his dad did not say please come back and he did not say that he loved him.
Sean decided to take the money because he realised that it would be difficult to live with no money.
He put this in his pocket.
He then went to the kitchen and ate some food.
He then took some food which would last for a while and packed it into his bag.
Then he left.
He decided that school was  not somewhere he would like to go at this point because he looked pretty bad.
Later in that day he was in the town centre when his school was breaking up.
He saw one of his friends at the other end of the road.
He thought to himself ‘I don't want him to see me like this’.
So he walked in the opposite direction, and he went  to the park to get away from the people he might know.
He then had an idea.
He thought that he would catch a train up to London.
He thought that to stay was too big a risk as he might run into people he knew.
So the next morning he went to the train station and thought whether he should pay the fare or not to go to London.
He had only been out of his house for two nights so he was not going to start to do criminal things.
Any way he had the money that his dad had given him.
So he bought the ticket and went to London.
When he arrived he got talking with someone of about his age, who had also run away from home.
Sean asked him ‘Where do you sleep around here?’
The boy told him that he had got a place in a hostel, but that he would be lucky to get into a place like that if it was his first night.
It was likely to be some time before he was so lucky.
The boy offered to show Sean where the hostel was.
Sean and Mark, which was what the boy was called, went off to the hostel.
Sean asked if there was a place for him, where he could stay.
The man  began laughing at him and said ‘You need to get here when the doors open — there are lots like you, looking for a roof over their heads.
You are likely to be sleeping on the streets for a very long time.
It was now that Sean realised the bad decision that he had made.
He had left a home and run away, but all he looked as if he had got was the probability of sleeping rough on a pavement.
It would be difficult to go back and admit this.
He wished that he could go home and that none of this had happened.
The Pigeons of London Underground
A warm  draught blew across the platform, one which could only be a Mediterranean breeze or synthetically produced, the latter being more likely as we were standing under a dull  winter's day in London.
A long smashed grey train halted and opened  its mouth so that it could be fed.
Mainly without concern for their rivals a multitude of people mount.
An elderly man with camping equipment hurls his  rucksack over the crowd into the doorway, for there is not enough room for him and his luggage to get through the stampede.
It narrowly misses the corner of an executive's brief case.
A small boy laughs an unforgivable sin in such a sober and wary atmosphere, his grandad scolds him for destroying the unquiet silence which haunts the underground, he grabs the toy gun clasped in his grandson's fist and confiscates it after letting it wave foolishly, causing several greatly disturbed heads to turn, he buries into the depths of his duffle coat pocket.
A young girl with a carrier bag pushes her way through the crowd as if she was being pursued.
It is never known whether the doors are automatically programmed to close after twenty seconds, whether the invisible driver roughly decides when the train is full, or whether there are in fact built in eyes stopping a person from being dissected.
An elderly woman does not want to take the risk, hastily glances at the sharp blades of the door, retreats back to behind the faded white line and waits for the next train.
Sitting on the tube a largish, overweight man sits under a sign reading ‘Give up this seat to someone less  able to stand than yourself.’
a final plea for consideration for those liable to forget.
Next to him leans a standing woman ,her plastered foot breaking out from her swollen shoe .
 One of her crutches falls in front of the man ;she has to painfully stoop to recover it.
The man continues to read the Times and dust his suit.
Peeling and torn adverts advertise the ‘Summer Sun’ a middle aged woman, in a tweed suit looks up and reads it  as an excuse to turn away from her neighbour, an ‘undesirable type’or a young again middle aged man greased back hair, a black fake leather jacket with sheep skin bits appearing here and there and a necklace protruding from his left nostril eventually attaching itself to his right ear.
She shifted yet further away when he turned around to face her and she saw where the course of the chain originated from.
The shunting stopped and movement began to slow, the whiteness of the sign South Kensington flashed by.
The Times reader walked off his eyes fixed in false concentration.
A young ‘chic’ girl placed herself in his empty place, fixing her eye liner in the fake sun light of the train, sighed as she looked around the carriage and then smiled to herself, there was obviously no competition so she failed to add an extra layer of lip-stick.
At Hyde Park Corner a tiny youngish man was followed onto the train by a large stocky man a sadistic smirk emerging from the corners of his mouth.
I watched as he sat next to him, and whispered something into his ear, the small man cringed slightly and looked as the middle aged woman had done at the tattered ‘Summer Sun’ adverts.
He then slowly pulled out some bank notes and furtively handed them over to the large man, who patted him on the back and quickly got off at the next station.
Here a young couple got on  and tried to find a couple of seats which were situated together preferably away from everyone else.
 At last finding someone to move so their love didn't have to be separated they started to do things which the middle-aged woman in the tweed suit would not have approved of, luckily for her she had dismounted earlier.
As the sign for Piccadilly Circus flashed by I braved the warm  draught on the platform again and on my way to the National Gallery I passed Trafalgar Square where I observed the pigeons strangely doing the same things I had seen just moments  before , except of course rather less ‘chicly’.
The Precise Quadratics of Pointlessness
The amount of riboflavin in two square centimetres of banana skin.
The top left hand corner of a letter,
Forty-one shades of rose pink.
The invention of goods only to extend luxury's definition,
The bulge of affluence just north of the tropic of cancer,
The mindless eccentricities of civilised society.
The crude simplicity of war and the complexity of government,
The legacy of a suicidal race that can never be forgotten,
World peace kept only by the inbuilt survival instinct.
The Prosecution
The courtroom was silent except for the somewhat tinny tinkling of a small bell.
It came from the direction of the strangely attired man in the dock, and the more observant members of the jury could see that this bell was attached to the end of the man's hat.
It tinkled furiously, as it always did when he became agitated for any reason.
‘All rise,’ intoned the usher, and at this, the individual sounds of the pea hitting the sides of the bell merged into one, and became sharp and continuous, cutting through the drowsy silence of the old court.
The usher looked round irritatedly, as if hearing the bell for the first time, and gestured to the man to remove his hat.
The man obeyed, somewhat nervously, and as he did so, the Judge entered, wheezing a little as he trudged up the steps.
The man in the dock watched him in silence as he sat down heavily in his chair.
The Judge held the air of someone very world-weary, and this was accurate to some extent, as he had just re-read the case notes, and sensed today was going to be another long day.
He began reading out the typewritten sheet in front of him:
You stand accused of producing, through your books, material unsuitable for minors, including incidences of car crime, racism, corporal punishment, and not wearing a seatbelt.
How do you plead?
‘N…n…n…’
The man was obviously petrified.
‘Er, he pleads not guilty m'lud,’ interjected the defence lawyer, throwing an anxious glance at the man in the dock as he resumed his seat.
The other lawyer stood up, slightly flushed from the effort of raising his bulk from the cushioned bench.
The judge knew this man of old: he was the pit-bull of the legal profession, attacking any weak spots with devastating precision, and seeing him ended the Judge's faint glimmer of hope that he might just get home in time for the football.
He resigned himself to the inevitable, and grudgingly muttered, ‘Proceed with the prosecution.’
The prosecution lawyer drew himself up, and launched into his opening attack.
Two hours and several ‘objections’ from the defence later, he neared the end of his evidence.
‘Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, please bear in mind throughout your decision that all of the offences the defendant is being charged with have been deliberately committed in front of a young and highly impressionable public.
Now if you will refer to your folders, you have extracts containing the relevant material.
If you can keep up, I will reiterate the most important points.’
His voice droned on like that of a guide doing a conducted tour.
‘In volume four, we see numerous incidences of excessive racism.
You'll notice that the characters of a non-English origin steal the property, and in this particular volume, commit the violent crime of mugging.
They also appear to endorse car crime, as a car is hi-jacked, then is joyridden away.
In four of the illustrations the defendant appears naked after he has been mugged of his clothes.
There are also incidences demonstrating unlicenced and untaxed driving.