

Yeah I pushed one down and the other one  down  
Automatically yes.
So, same as this.
If you press  this one, if you press record  it won't because there's a tape in but if you just press press record  automatic  and you press  record and the play button  but you can't press just the record button.
They automatically both go down.
Provided there's a tape in the
In the machine.
in the machine that
I saw it actually when I was  just doing it and it went  how loud it was.
How could you be unobtru but it isn't look.
Can't hear it.
Cos you can hear it bzzzzzzzzzzz
Yeah.
I thought   loud.
noisy  
Yeah.
You're gonna
You could be an ob an obtrusive  making that noise.
No.
No it doesn't 
Though it doesn't make a noise cos I was doing it wrong.
Yes.
It's going slowly now.
Yeah.
Going much more slowly now as it records more  conver conversations.
That's it.
Mm  Don't stop talking now.
silly.
It's all gonna go quiet now isn't it?
Nobody else'll say anything.
at all.
That's ridiculous!
You gotta 
.
We'll just have to  put it down there some time and just  put it on.
Yeah.
So you wouldn't know when it's on or when it's off.
Mm.
Just have to try and, take a little while to get used to it.
Once you're used to it it's probably .
It's all a matter of getting used to being recorded.
Conversation.
Yeah well it sounds ever so funny when you hear it  
I know.
Yeah.
Horrible.
You think  I don't sound like that!
. Really makes you think.
I wish  done something about my  the way I speak.
Mm.
Mine's terrible because I've got a low voice, a deep voice anyway.
Sound more like a man I do.
I do on the phone don't I?
Don't know really.
I've not really heard you much on the phone.
Used to telephone didn't you?
Well yeah but
Didn't know it was me.
Oh yeah I knew it was you so it didn't make a lot of difference.
People have told me on the phone that I sound  cos I've got a deep voice I
You sound different.
Vera does.
Does she?
Mm.
She sounds funny on the phone.
Most odd.
Phone her up and think  that's not Vera I'm talking to.
Doesn't sound like Vera.
But it is  although it doesn't sound like her.
Funny innit?
What, her voice is different?
No it just sounds 
Or does she talk different because she's on the phone?
No  just sounds 
Some people do.
They put their phone voice on.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Don't they?
Yeah.
Oh I can't put any voice on, I've just got me own.
Mm.
I find people do tend to put a  quite a lot do, put a telephone voice on.
Specially if you're phoning a posh restaurant.
Yes.
Or something like that.
You tend to sort of I'd like to book a table for two
on Saturday night.
Rather than say  look mush I want a
I want a table, you know.
Oh I'd better go and wash our dishes dear.
Not many to do now  done them all.
Most of them.
There's only yours.
Have you had 
What about 
enough to eat?
Yes thank you.
Fine.
I would have done it actually when, when I took the plate out but the water in the bowl was cold.
Thought it was hot but it was cold.
I think I've used most of the hot water.
I think I need to put the immersion on for just  a little while.
Mm.
I need a bath as well but
Mm.
I've used quite a few buckets of water washing walls.
Washing the walls and    What's going on outside?
Car or lorry or something going by by the sound of it.
About that little  flat in   in Albany Road.
Yeah.
You have to realize that  we're never gonna get away from work.
Cos when the wind blows you can smell a tandoori and  
 
It's when you walk up that way you know you're getting near it
Yeah.
cos you can smell it.
Won't bother you?
No.
Not really.
Mhm.
fact it'll be quite handy in a way really, you know it's
handy to live on the  on your  right next to work in a way cos you don't have to  worry about
Getting there.
getting there so much do you?
It'd be quite nice for me to  be able to pop into town and get a bit of meat or something
Handy, really.
And it's not far from town.
Very handy.
You can go in for a drink.
It's a little walk but it's not that far is it?
Not very far at all.
Top  Street and you 
Yeah.
cross the main road and you
You're there.
and you're  like the  horse fair 
I said if you go for a drink you don't have to worry about getting home.
No.
Yeah I know we'd still go up the  Clickers sometimes but we don't have to go all the time do we?
We're not there yet are we?
Mm.
lot of things.
It's going well.
You and Andy?
Oh yeah.
Where did you meet him?
When you went to Russia.
Suppose you know that song well as well?
Sorry?
Suppose you know that tune well as well.
I wrote it.
You wrote it did you?
Mm.
Sing it then.
not now.
When I fill a book in about  recordings and that how do you put  have you got a regional accent?
You have.
Mm I'm aware I have.
And so have you.
Not really.
Local I suppose I put 
Well  haven't really got much of an accent at all have I?
No.
Think we'll have to put down yes though when we talk to mum.
Yes.
But not this region.
No.
You have to put  the the regional accents acc accent if they have one.
Ah.
Like er Liverpudlian or 
Get 
No it  I won't see .
cos he comes back next Friday and we're on lates so  he's on earlies so 
Yeah, suppose  
We shan't be seeing him.
Never mind.
Rita?
Essex isn't she?
that sort of   
Yeah, Essex isn't she comes from London doesn't she?
Romford yeah.
So she's got a bit of an accent in in a way hasn't she?
Oh she definitely has.
Ann has n't.
No.
Frank?
Frank and Barbara.
Frank's London isn't he?
Yeah yeah.
Definitely.
Bob?
Bob's  Notting 
Mm yeah.
Not  though is he?
No but he has got a bit of an accent.
Yeah.
Says lots of words  that I don't use.
Get old Sonny and George.
I won't though cos we hardly see them.
No.
Which is a pity because they are
Mm.
cos they've both got accents.
Sonny is  more sort of 
Norfolk.
Norfolkish isn't he?
Er and George is  Holbeach
Yeah.
in Lincolnshire.
He's got a  funny little voice hasn't he?
Yeah.
yeah.
Mild weather.
Yeah.
Cloudy mild weather's forecast  North Gloucester .
Why didn't you go in for that?
Meteorology.
Is that what you call it?
Yes.
Cos you're quite interested in the weather aren't you?
See what it's like Saturday evening when we go to the party.
Mm.
Whether we're gonna walk, ride or what.
Mm.
Good walk up there you know, isn't it?
Well it's only about as far up there as it is up town.
Is it?
Oh.
Don't think the weather's gonna be too bad.
We're usually pretty lucky when  when we're on holiday.
Aren't we?
Mhm.
Not that 
It's just 
we're going anywhere.
I tried to watch that but it wasn't very interesting.
So you couldn't get interested in it?
No.
No.
It's a bit I don't know 
to it.
see what it's about.
What about it?
You don't really know cos you weren't in interested  
No.
I I turned it over in the end.
Yeah.
I turned it over and that's about   Did you have 
again.
Ooh would you ever?
Did your teachers used to hit you?
No.
Oh, would have hit other kids cos you wouldn't have been naughty enough to be  hit.
I've seen people caned.
Saw one  one lad was really  really sort of well  okay he wasn't clever by any stretch of the imagination but he just, was just a  you know a sort of no-hoper and he  he riled one teacher up very  very badly one day  cos he didn't do his homework or he was  pratting about or he was  you know.
And he got this  he got a ca no it wasn't a cane but it was a  quite a big stick.
It wasn't a sort of a  sort of a thin cane, it was quite a  big stick, he whacked him a couple of times across the backside.
And he really, and he really did belt him one.
You know.
Cor  but he got him so riled and  you know.
Wouldn't he have felt it as well.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mm.
He was just a nice teacher.
Got on al we got on ever so well with him.
I did anyway, I got on with most teachers but  but he did, really did give him a  a really big, say a big  couple of swipes on his backside.
Mr  Mr  had erm  a locker.
You know he had about half a dozen in there, you know he  
Chose the one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah which one  you know.
Right you're gonna get one of these.
Which one do you want sort of thing, you know?
Yeah that will, no, maybe not.
Maybe this one .
Try that one today.
Aah!
Yeah.
 

No I don't think I was ever caned.
No.
Good boy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Too good.
One of the goody goodies.
Yeah.
Goody goody .
Just a good boy.
I'm a good boy now aren't I?
Sometimes.
Oh sometimes.
Mm  Well you never hardly go ever got into trouble at school.
No.
You were a model pupil.
Oh I don't know about model, but  no, not a model pupil dear.
You always did your homework.
I tried.
Sometimes it took hours and sometimes it didn't.
Depending how much you got.
I don't think I, I don't know, well I didn't get caned.
I got a swipe or two off Miss .
Her with the withered paralyzed arm that she bashed you with because she couldn't clear it and you blooming well could.
Yeah .
Her arm was like this  only ever such a little hand  and if you, she used to go  and it just sort of reached your earhole when she was  walking past you and if you were talking in class she'd go .
 
That's all she could move it really was
Just far enough to get your earhole.
like that.
Yeah.
Stop that .
Sit still.
She  a few times .
She was a  the sewing mistress.
And do you know, with this arm  it was the right arm as well there was the most beautiful sewing.
She used to hold it, she sort of took it in here
Yes.
and then sew with this hand  
Yeah.
one hand how she  And it was beautiful work
Yeah.
she used to do.
Yeah.
Really did.
she used to call us heathens  cos we didn't wear vests.
So we would  deliberately not wear one even if you did
Yeah.
if you had to go and try a garment on, you deliberately didn't wear underwear or  
Oh yeah, yeah 
just just to annoy  Heathens, she used to say.
Disgusting!
Where is your underwear?
But I wear a bra miss, I've got me underwear.
Where is your vest and your liberty bodice?
You will come to a bad end!
You gals.
Yes Miss  we'd all chant.
She used to really get  not just sit, you know really  silly old bat.
And we had Miss   who used to wear knickers down to her knees.
She used to sit behind her desk like this with her legs open and her knickers used to come down here, pink ones and blue ones.
And she used to eat chalk.
Eat chalk?
Yeah, she was ever so odd.
She used to 
What, lumps of chalk?
she used to chew it.
Mm and it used to be all around her mouth and she used to have a bit here sort of one of those old ladies who had whiskers on her chin and it'd be all white.
We didn't take a lot  I mean she was a history teacher so now you know why I didn't  learn a lot of history cos all we did was giggle .
And if you played up she used to chuck the blackboard rubber at you.
She was really dotty.
Really was.
Absolutely bananas.
She always used to sit with her legs open and these bloody knickers 
right down her knees.
Real passion killers like then?
Yeah.
It's just as well she  wore knickers like that the way she was sitting behind her desk.
Well sorry if she didn't wear any at all eh dear, eh?
Miss  but by god she had a good aim, she might have been bloody dotty
You got up giggling and laughing the back of the class and whoosh  the bloody board rubber come flying across the classroom .
Mm and blooming hurts and all .
That terrible?what they're gonna do with them?
Put them away for  life we hope.
They ought to.
Seem to put them away for  a long while but 
Would you like anything before you go out dear?
Mm I don't think so.
To abandon me to your friends .
Oh here we go again!
Don't love you any more  heard it all before I know 
I've abandoned abandoned you all day, most of the day darling and
I know.
We're on holiday and I'm being left on my own.
Cruel cruel hard man.
I know.
Not stopping you going boozing though is it?
Well there's  you're quite welcome to come with me if you want to.
I don't want to.
You don't want to.
Well there you are then.
If you don't want to you don't want to.
Well it's about quarter to seven so I suppose you're soon going to   be off.
So a little bit of discipline and a clip round the earhole obviously  done them good.
Oh they don't know half.
I was gonna say they discipline  hard to  discipline's much more 
Oh   we had much more discipline when we were young than they have nowadays and I don't think it does them any harm.
No.
If my children came home and said to me  that they got the cane at school I'd have just said well you must have deserved it.
I wouldn't have gone rush I mean some mothers have gone rushing up the school and complained.
I said well he must have done something to deserve it.
Mm.
Otherwise they wouldn't have done it.
Jonathan the other two didn't so much.
Jonathan did  couple of times.
He come home with lines and  write passages out of this that and the other.
Yeah.
Well Steven used to tell on him you see.
He's been in detention again.
Tell-tale.
What you tell her for.
Huh  You  telly-tale  oh you're too goody goody, you never get  .
Over exuberant, that's what they put on Jonathan's report, school report.
Good for some things.
Exuberant.
That's what one of his school reports said.
Jonathan suffers with an over ab abundance of exuberance.
When I were at the parents' evening I said does that mean er  he never sits still and he's always tearing about and 
said well something like that..
Yeah but probably now they'd call it hyperactivity.
Probably.
I don't think he was, he was just  I dunno 
A lad.
Yeah.
And I I er and not only that I used to say to teachers well if  if they'd ask him about and if he had  anything er er and he'd be bored.
Mm.
why do you  Jonathan,St Steven said oh he'd been in detention.
Why have you been in detention?
Oh I was playing up and they chucked me out the class or something and I had to stay in at dinner time.
Said well why were you playing up?
I was bored.
I tried telling some of the teachers that.
He finds the lessons boring  so obviously they're gonna mess about.
Yeah.
If they're bor if you're bored and you can't 
Bored yeah.
So you, you get distracted and do something else
Yeah.
you shouldn't be doing.
And that's a fault in some ways of the teachers.
Mm.
If the pupils are bored the  should make it interesting enough to keep their interest.
Yeah.
Mm.
Yeah I know  subjects they're not  you can't be interested in all of them.
No.
Look at them cars.
When I was at the garage  getting the petrol  I give them, signed the cheque and they put the cheque through the  cheque machine printing it out and that  and er  they've got a free offer at the moment.
You collect these tokens for  collect so many tokens and you get  a free Corgi toy.
I mean normally I don't bother with the tokens, I mean I  Anyway I paid the cheque  and I said to Peter I said  oh by the way what about me  tokens for me  for me toy I said  if I get a free one of them I can give it to  give it to the grandchildren.
See, Ricky'd like that I'm sure, little Corgi car I said .
He said oh no you don't get them with cheques.
Cash sales only.
I thought  I just spent twenty seven quid on petrol  I said  
And you can't even have a bloody free Dinky car.
free couple of vouchers for a new  for a Corgi toy.
There's a woman in there she said oh give it to him.
I said  give you a cuddle some time.
Mm.
I just thought you know I   okay it's only a cheque I know but
Yeah but it's still twenty seven quid.
They don't get many twenty seven pound customers.
No.
That's what I thought.
Fiver or what have you.
I think it's I think it's one voucher for fifteen litres.
Now what do I have?
If I had twenty seven quid's worth  at fifty P a litre  that's  fifty two  fifty two?
Fifty two litres  roughly  so if it was one voucher for fifteen that's  three innit?
And I think it was six vouchers for for a free
That's it.
free Corgi toy.
So all I've got to do is when I run out again fill it up again spending another twenty five quid's worth or so  that would have been six and I could have had a free Corgi toy for  Ricky for Christmas.
Yeah.
Or  whatever.
Yeah.
Little present innit?
Yeah.
Hasn't cost me nothing has it?
Or hasn't cost you anything.
But next time I shall have to run, take the cash in there.
And see  see what they say next time.
Mm.
pays a cheque it was just easier to pay by cheque.
And they've got a machine to do it anyway to  work it all out, print it all out.
Not very fair is it?
Oh no.
Saying cash I mean it's still cash  innit?
Would have thought so.
big business that.
Yeah.
Toys.
Terrible prices.
Bet mum's still got that 
Oh I don't know.
You want to ask her about that.
Mm.
You could see if anyone's got one at work couldn't you?
Yeah.
 

Oh well  I'd better go and do the dishes I think.
say there's not that many there is there?
Only a plate and a few fork, fork and a knife and that.
She's done everything else.
I must do them now and then it's out of the way cos you  and I want to see Emmerdale at seven.
Oh yeah.
Yeah of course.
Don't forget that clock's gone about five minutes slow.
Come along dear.
Yes, yes.
Oh there was  couple of nice bums there definitely.
Oh I know there was.
And then when we finished er finished the game about, I don't know  must have been about twenty to eleven when we finished the game  there was  sandwiches and  chips coming out.
At that time of night?
Well the game had finished you see so they brought supper out.
Usually have it half way don't they?
Mm sometimes yeah.
basket of chips and
Oh so you've had bloody supper have you?
sl sliced sliced  sliced boiled potatoes and  some er
Huh me sitting here and you've been eating blood supper .
sandwiches and french bread and that.
It it was about ten to, five to eleven  mm Bob said you know cos we went, me Ron Bob went in  in Shirley's car  and er cos Dave and  Tracy they come in their own car because  Sarah was not feeling very well so they had .
So Tracy went back to the  Griff and said oh share in with the supper.
What, it was for the team there as well?
The, for the A team yeah.
Erm  as I say it was about ten to five to eleven and  Bob said what are you  you know what's Ron doing?
Chatting up the women probably if I know Ron.
Quite enjoying himself .
He .
Yes he was.
Very much so.
Yeah I bet he was.
Said what you doing and
Eyeing up the bums like you.
and I said  I said to Bob I said well, you know  said well hadn't you better get  cos Shirley had had a go at Bob first off, before when, when I went in there first thing.
Shirley said and don't stay to the end.
He said well  you've got to stay to the end I mean, but don't stay right to the end, you know sort of 
Mhm 
So she'd had a bit of a go at Bob  and er
And I suppose you were saying I had Ann saying oh leaving me.
like I say about  ten to eleven, five to eleven said what are you doing then Bob?
He said well I'm  .
Shirley's sort of getting on to you a bit I think we'd better  make a move.
home and 
Pardon?
I'm going to bed now .
Have one more at yours before we you know before you  go home sort of thing you know .
He said oh I don't know, well what's Ron doing?
Ron!
What do you want to do?
I'm stopping for another.
So we stopped for another one.
So Bob's gonna be in the  in trouble.
Du n no.
Well I didn't ask  when he come in the door up there  where the hell have you been?
With me on me own for five hours.
And I had  John Smith bitter.
Oh well you've quite enjoyed that and you've had a few of them by the smell of you.
Smell like a bloody  brewery.
 
Told you, that's not a bad little pub is it?
What the ?
It's a goldmine.
Absolute goldmine.
Told you that and you said  yuk.
I don't mind it in there.
It's years since I've been in there.
Must be about three or four years since I've been in there  .
Not bad is it?
Oh no.
It's a nice pub.
say that but er  they've extended it
Yeah I know.
down the back and out the back there for darts and that.
I know.
I know and a little stage.
I've seen  yeah I have.
round the corner a bit 
Well maybe, maybe they  maybe they change it round when there there's something on there and there's no darts on or that.
Mm yeah probably.
Because erm because  er  Sue 
Mm.
thing and her dad's got a  country and western music I mean he, they go all over the bloody place.
But we we were in there one night and he, he was playing.
They had country and western night on there, now  I think I was doing nowt one Saturday night and Sue and Steven were going to hear her dad.
Mm.
Why don't you come with us for an hour or so?
Mum'll be there after bingo at half past nine.
Mm.
I was going to bingo and I said  and I said to her well we'll go and pick Sue's mother up and we'll pick you up and all and  she went the Empire, I went the Corn Exchange but that's beside the point.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And picked us up and I went in there and I were  yeah half past eleven time.
I mean it was a bit loud because it was live music I suppose but  it wasn't a bad night .
got lively.
I say it was say it was about three, four years since I've been in there so
Oh  
they'd extended it, they extended it round the back and
Yeah.
Well I was, it was round the back where 
Oh it  
he stood with erm the  
It's probably where they've got the dartboard and that in there.
Probably change it round.
Yeah there is.
And there was a bit of  there's a bit of floor in front of it.
And we were dancing on that bit you see.
Oh did you?
There weren't a lot of room but  you don't care do you?
When you've
Mm  little dance and 
at ten o'clock at night and  pub was packed.
People singing with the  the group.
Yeah he plays guitar and sings Sue's dad does.
 Stewie in The  Loco well huh
You know everybody.
Well not everybody but
Biggest part.
Knew the landlord .
Who I hadn't seen for goodness knows how long.
Hallo Stewie, how are you mate!
Bloody hell's that?
Knew his face and I can't remember his damn name.
Gary 
Might even have had my Steven in  wouldn't have known him.
Yeah, he would.
How do you know?
Because there wasn't a tall  slim  ginger-haired chap in  
 
I did think it, well I did think it was a possibility but I mean 
Probably his mother and father  her mother and father had been in there anyway.
there's a little boy there'd be no chance of him  going in there anyway.
Oh no, course not.
Course not.
So
I'm going soft in the  her mum and dad'll probably be in.
That's their regular  if they were having a  country and western they would ask him to do it because he's
What's his  what's her mum and dad look like?
He's big.
He's a, such a big fella.
Fat.
Sue's mum's little and fat, nearly as tall as she's  broad .
But dad's a  
Maybe they were in the lounge perhaps.
bigger  I mean he he he's at least as tall as you if not bigger and er also 
Sort of Tom  size?
Yeah.
And she's about the same size round but about five foot two..
Well I didn't see anybody
Sue's a big girl.
She's as tall as me and  weighs nearly
Mm.
she must weight fourteen, fifteen stone I should think.
Sue's  big 
Well then I certainly didn't see anybody in there looking like that.
I must admit.
Oh she usually goes after bingo.
They'll probably be in all night and she's just walked up from the bingo and  toddle in there.
No I didn't see anybody looking like that so  I don't know.
I wouldn't think they'd be in the lounge.
They could be but I wouldn't have thought so.
Thursday night anyway I wouldn't, does she go to the Empire  
Well I don't really know do I?
Empire.
Do they have it Wednesday night  bingo?
Thursday night don't they, bingo?
Is it Thursday night?
No oh I don't know .
Thursday night not at the Empire.
Wednesday night the Empire, Friday night .
Thursday night 
Oh well she wouldn't be there after the bingo then would she?
Probably went to  I know that she does go .
She  there most of the evening and she goes to bingo and
Yeah.
Cos they live   down round near Tina's but  not like Tina's house, before that  off  Allard Avenue round the back of Allard Avenue.
Sherwood is it?
Sherwood, yeah Sherwood Avenue .
Yeah.
Yeah they live up  yeah.
So it's not that far for The Loco really.
No just a  short walk.
It's sort of their local type of thing.
anyway but  Well Ann is going  to retire.
I suppose you're gonna have a bottle and a fag.
Mind you, the smell of you I think you've had sufficient bottles but
well  
Told you not to drink much.
I did n't.
Ooh.
Perhaps I'd better stop up then.
Well I tried not to, but
What?
Bob said do you want a drink and  Ron said do you want a drink and I said to Ron do you want a drink Ron and everyone said do you want a drink and 
You had quite a few.
No, not that many.
But er
But I might as well go to bed.
probably erm
But I might as well go to bed?
And you do realize that this conversation is on a tape recorder?
Well I don't mind.
if it is .
That's what they want.
Natural conversations so
Not sure how natural though 
I'll have a can of beer and  then I'll probably go to bed.
We haven't got any left.
I drunk them.
They've gone have they?
Mhm.
Oh.
I'd better have a bottle then.
I drunk them as well.
Oh you drunk them as well?
Oh.
ah  oh  now what am I gonna do?
Without.
I'm without.
Crafty devil.
Put them round the corner where  where I didn't know where they were.
Falling over now.
No I'm not.
Oh that young couple next door   ah!
Yeah?
They been at it, have they been at it again?
Oh I wish you'd have been at home, I'd have gone round there.
What've they been up to now then?
Oh god!
She's been screaming.
He's been  reckon she must have locked herself up in the dark.
And the only place with a lock on is the bathroom and I reckon they'll blooming knock the blooming door down by the sound of it.
Gawd.
She was screaming, he was swearing.
Running up and down the stairs.
What time was this?
Quarter to ten till about half past ten.
Or half an hour till half past ten 
Well that wouldn't please them next door would it?
No.
Coo.
And and really I mean you can't  I'm I'm s I'm saying that you, you can't interfere but  by god I'd long for someone to come in and interfere.
I really would have done.
And er er I  I could never understand why people  that obviously could hear what went on  and pretended they never.
I know you don't wanna get involved
Mm.
and this that and the other  but people must have heard what went on and and  you know the next morning they'd see a black eye and just carry out a normal conversation as though 
and you know they hadn't heard it all and
Yeah.
ooh have you had a fall or something?
Then you know I mean they must have  what was going on oh aye they just completely  ignore it.
Mm.
I'd be walking round  if I could get around.
Mm.
It were just you know oh it's a nice morning when I'm hanging the washing out as though everything was wonderful you know  
Yeah.
normal.
Yes.
Ooh I thought he was going to, ooh I felt  made me go cold and I  I thought if, if I hadn't been here on my own I'd have been very tempted to go round and  and say is there anything I can do.
Or I'd have called the police I think.
I weren't sure what I'd have done but
Bad as that?
Oh .
He was a calling her effing this, swearing oh it was dreadful.
She was screaming and you could hear her crying.
Then you hear, she pounded up the bloody stairs and he was after her  and I reckon  well the only room with a lock 
As you say is the bathroom.
is the bathroom, so she must have been in there cos he's hammering on the door and bashing it and kicking it.
Bloody hell of a row.
Or whether she opened it or whether she was in the front bedroom with something behind the door I dunno but 
That's his
and she run back down the stairs and the front door was opening and banging and shutting, whether she run outside or what  I don't know what happened, the dog was bloody barking.
Oh lord.
Well it's a wonder  Ann and Rita haven't done something about it.
Well I say it's er  amazing they've not said, said something  
And they had company as well there's a car there, blue car.
Who Ann and Rita or?
Or Ann and Rita.
I don't know.
Sally innit?
I don't know who it was.
It was Sally if it was a blue e , blue cavalier.
T D O something something something.
Sally can't drive so it must be some
Can't she?
Her latest beau I should think, I don't know.
Maybe.
Maybe maybe.
But it was  I mean I could hear it over the telly.
I know I don't have the telly on full blast but  I could hear it
Mm.
above the telly.
When I first heard the first noise I thought what the bloody hell's that and I turned the sound down.
Yeah.
Thought bloody hell, put it back up but you could, it was really distressing me cos
You knew what was possibly going on.
Yeah.
Mm.
A woman and that don't s I mean  if you're having just an argument  it's raised voices but a woman doesn't scream and  cry like that unless 
Unless there's something really
something awful going on.
Mm.
I mean Ann and Rita reckon they're not married or anything but why the hell does she stay with him then?
She's not got a bloody
Well there you go I mean 
she's got no children.
They're only young.
It's her house.
Isn't his.
He couldn't, she bought it without, with her father and
Mm.
and he come and lived with her in it.
Bloody hell.
I know I mean I stayed with him but I had three kids.
Gonna say you're you're 
I had three kids, where could I go with them?
Mm.
Mm.
If I'd have been on me own I mean that's all I was waiting for, mine to grow up so I could clear off.
Yeah.
If I'd have been on me own I wouldn't have stopped bloody long.
I mean even if she walks out he doesn't, no court in the land would give him the house if it's hers.
evicted and then she could come back again.
Mm.
Well if she went to the police they'd chuck him out.
He has no legal rights to the property.
It's in her name, she's, her father's helping her  paid the deposit or something and she clears the mortgage  she has no right, he has no right to it all if she went to the police.
They'd just turf him out wouldn't they?
Mm.
Well why stay in a relationship like that?
Don't understand it.
Certainly a bit rough, a bit hard.
Went quiet about half past ten so whether he buggered off out or what I don't know.
Mm maybe.
Certainly the front door was opening and banging and shutting.
Say I'm surprised Ann and Rita haven't sort of didn't
Well banging on the wall probably with all the other banging and  
May maybe.
Maybe.
They  part of the banging.
So much bloody banging going on.
Probably part of the banging  Ann and Rita.
And the people on this side  you don't know how they were reacting as well.
Say, they was a quite young couple.
We don't hear them that much do we?
Mornings is the  time I hear them most.
Cos they go out to work at half past eight and you hear them between half past seven and half past eight
There you are I've made you a cup of tea.
Thank you dear.
Very kind of you.
Are you sure you don't want any breakfast?
No.
You want nothing at all?
No.
You'll be hungry.
Eh?
What do you mean good?
Don't be silly.
What's the point in getting really hungry.
Had me tea last night and  the beer and   few sandwiches last night.
How would you like that?
Order's not completed you've got to stay till it is.
Up yours mate.
I'm going home.
Ten o'clock and that's it.
Or whatever.
Not many would.
Very rare.
Not often.
 

 

Oh my god!
I had that yesterday.
What's our post code?
P E fourteen seven P G. 
They was looking for it on a list.
Mm.
Said I know it's P fourteen, I don't know the rest of it.
And he looked on a list he had and he put seven something.
Seven P G.
I can always remember it.
Well you're good at remembering numbers.
Well yeah but I just think P E fourteen, half of fourteen is seven and then T.
G.
Yes darling.
So that's how I remember it.
Funny innit?
Yes very strange but you are strange.
I know yes.
Very strange, yeah, very strange.
You always remember numbers.
Don't you?
Car numbers and telephone numbers and
Car numbers I remember more by the letters than the numbers.
Because there are s specific set numbers.
Once I see 
When they come round at work and says  this car blocked in I say oh go and ask Stuart he'll probably know.
Give you a blooming it's a blue something or other and this is the number.
Go and ask .
I said go and Stuart or Bill they, they know most of them.
I wouldn't know one from another.
associated the letters with the car and the letters with the car go together.
And then the numbers, the numbers I don't remember that well.
Some of them I do.
now with them changing the  the changeover cos they always used to be  the letters followed by the numbers.
Now they've got  the initial letter  followed by the number then the letters.
Rather than so  As I say you associate the car and the number together.
I don't.
It would probably throw me completely If you  
 
it would throw me completely if you put, if you changed some of the number plates over.
If you put Tina's number plate  on another car  and visa versa  that would throw, I I'd probably look at it and think  you know, oh somebody's got a new car or that looks familiar but it's not the right car so I wouldn't think about it.
Even though I know Tina's is C two one one Y C L  if it was on a different car  I'd probably look at it  and think
Oh that's not right.
it's not right, it's not Tina's.
And so I wouldn't think that that  I  probably  Just a  just a trait of personality.
I wonder how she is if she's  at work or at home.
Don't really   don't really care to tell you the truth in a way but 
Oh that's nice.
Well no I care  I care if Tina's not well and hope she gets better soon but  I don't care if  
You don't care about work getting in a muddle 
I don't care about work and them being in a muddle, no not at all.
 

Let them get on with it.
That's not very nice.
It is.
No it isn't.
Well it is.
Why isn't it?
Cos it isn't.
Well
if  a lot of others were off we'd have to cope somehow wouldn't we?
So  there you go.
Just cos we're off.
And possibly Tina and that is off so  they'll just have to struggle on as if we were there and  a lot of others were off.
Don't you agree?
Yes darling.
Right.
So what's on the agenda for today?
Well you know very well.
We are going shopping.
Where are we going shopping?
Whenever you're ready to take me shopping.
But where  are we going shopping?
Well  probably Wisbech.
No point in going to Lynn if we're going to mum's.
No but where?
Wherever you wish to take me.
Where would Ann want to go?
I don't mind.
Haven't got a lot of choice.
I don't like Tescos at Wisbech cos it's .
Right.
So it's Gateway Gateway or blooming Rainbow.
Suppose we could go down the Rainbow and have a look at that microwave.
But I'll have to go into town first.
Cos I don't think they'll give me the shopping for nothing and there's no bank down Rainbow.
Well there is, a Co-op bank but I don't think they'll let me have some money out of it.
Mm.
Maybe not.
And seeing as I haven't got an account with them I don't think they'll say well you can  have some anyway.
No.
No.
And then we're going into town?
Well we've got to go into town 
Got to see the estate agents and see if we can  view something today.
Mm 
other ones that we are  definitely interested in and underneath the ones that we are  not so interested in.
Yeah  there's one down, that one down Elizabeth Terrace.
I was just trying to figure out which one it is.
Hundred and twenty.
I don't know if that isn't  erm what they call it who died not long ago?
Hazel's mum's.
Cos perhaps the dad's moved out or you know .
Quite close to her.
Oh what was her name?
Old Hazel's mother.
Hazel's mother.
The little old lady who went to Salvation Army, always wearing a little hat.
Oh what was her name?
Cos you know her as well.
And I said oh my god she's died and you said  oh I know her.
What used to go to the Salvation Army?
She was  to Salvation Army.
Ever so small little lady.
or something.
I can remember her kids and I can't remember her name.
Terrible.
Hazel and Terry, mother-in-law's brother Terry  fire officer at Wisbech, it's his mother-in-law  laws.
And she died not more than a few months ago.
Oh it's awful.
It's dreadful I mean  quite fond of her.
Just trying to think which one it was anyway .
I think it's her house.
Yeah but I'm trying think which one it is.
Cos I say I know that  I know Elizabeth Terrace well.
Yeah I know cos I think you called on her cos you knew her.
When she died you said  oh I know her well .
Hundred and twenty.
Let's go and have a look.
Oh it's in here somewhere innit?
I put a ring round it so I know 
Oh yeah here we are, hundred and twenty.
Ah the one  one in from the end.
Yeah, I know the one now.
One in from the end.
I think that is her house.
Mind she had a husband but  should think he  living with one of the kids.
Can't think who lived there now.
God, cos I used to call on that one.
perhaps.
The only trouble down Elizabeth Terrace  parking.
 

That's the only trouble.
The only consolation  if
the college.
if that was a possibility  or if that became a possibility  mum only live round the corner.
Not that far away is she?
Few hundred yards.
She drives.
And I could leave the car in her driveway.
Then there's the college.
Lot of people park in the college.
Don't they?
So that is a possi I was just wondering which one it was cos I say I know  some of them are a bit you know
Yeah.
a bit dodgy.
I knew there there they had a lot of trouble with one of them but  nearer Helen's end.
There was one there that was empty and  for a long long while.
The builders started building, knocking it about
And it fell to bits.
And then it
and then, no the  ran out of money.
The builder ran out of money  and the  it was just a shell.
You know, nothing in it.
No windows no doors no nothing er you know, completely gutted it  to make it all, to renovate it and then ran out of money and then it just stood there completely empty.
And can you imagine a house in the open air in winter?
Do it a lot of good would it?
It wouldn't do it a lot of good, no exactly.
Woodwork and
exactly.
and even the brickwork.
No.
damp and  If you get me back to mum's for about three o'clock time at the latest to take her to Osborne House.
Well that's what she's that's what she's  she's, she just sort of she didn't mean it but
No it 
it was her thought that we were
Yeah cos I mean you'd probably run her back, rather than her biking.
As I say I mean we, if we could make an appointment say three fifteen or three thirty to see Sefton Avenue.
Cos we'd be up there anyway.
Yeah.
Wouldn't we?
Before it gets dark and you couldn't see anything anyway.
Oh we'd have to go and have a look in the light.
Well that's it.
Definitely.
cos you can't see a lot.
Cos there won't be electricity on.
Anyway you wanna have a good look round  seriously consider it.
Cos I think now we  haven't heard from Mr  and I think that means  he's not prepared to take it so he's not bothered about coming.
Yeah?
Is that the  way you're reading it?
That's the way I'm reading it.
I'm 
Ignore it cos the man might  just leave him in there renting it until or when forever it goes up.
But we can't afford it to go up.
I'm disappointed that he's not been back 
Yeah I am.
to discuss it.
Yeah I am.
And to put the position to him.
Look the market's not very good I know but  we're sitting tenants.
We're quite happy to take it on.
We'd like to take it on.
If we leave have you got another tenant to come in?
You're gonna lose two hundred and fifty pound a month.
And a good two hundred and fifty pound a month.
Exactly.
You know, not one that he has any hassle in getting.
That's it.
He don't have to keep calling and wandering around after us.
But I'm not prepared to go on renting it.
No no.
As you say three thousand pound a year that could be paid off  a place of our own is is just  I mean if  I have to rent it well I'll have to rent one.
If we can't get anything else and we can't afford anything else we've just got to go on paying it but
But
when there's so much other 
as I say you look at  I mean this is two fifty.
You look here in the paper and see how much they are.
Yeah I know.
Some of them are terrible.
You're talking two sixty, two eighty.
I know.
Three hundred.
To let.
Three seventy.
No!
Detached four bedroomed house admittedly.
Granary.
Two b two two bed 
That's the one I fancy.
If I went anywhere into another flat, I'd quite fancy going into  
Two bed second floor self-contained flat.
Living room kitchen bathroom twelve months two seventy five unfurnished.
Mm I know.
 Armada Close two eighty.
Norfolk Street two eighty.
Mm I wouldn't I wouldn't go in to Armada Close I don't think.
That's furnished.
Six months.
Two eighty.
Yeah well you see, furnished you see they can charge extra.
Norfolk Street  self-contained principally first floor flat, two bedrooms furnished two eighty.
I wouldn't want a furnished one now.
No, of course not.
But  as I say 
I know they are expensive.
Which is why I  
Two sixty  two eighty which is the same price as  
which, which is why now er that Rose and Jean when they considered it.
Mum said how about renting one in Wisbech but I said well if she can't afford a mortgage you can't afford to rent one.
Not anything that's  worth living in.
No.
fifty quid a week ones are er forty pound a week and so on.
You gets what you pay for  which nowadays isn't a lot, not for that money.
You know when I asked, was gonna have  er on Lynn Road there what was that fifty a  fifty a week?
I mean it was
Fifty or fifty five weren't it?
it was  clean but that's about all you could say.
Is that the one Ann  is in now?
Or in that area.
I don't know where Ann  is.
No I think she's down Victoria Road somewhere.
She won't tell anybody.
But I think she lives somewhere down Victoria Road.
I don't know.
She's only in a bedsit.
Yeah.
But I mean you see her up town though.
I know.
That's cos she's lonely and she just wanders about.
She gets up 
 
don't want to stay in the bedsit.
One room   she she shares a bathroom and kitchen.
She just goes for a walk.
I mean she's seeing people and 
Yeah but I mean the times I've seen her it's been this end of town rather than that end of town.
Which has made, which which just makes me think 
I don't really, I just presume she lives down Victoria Road somewhere but I don't really know.
And she walks to work.
She couldn't do any other.
She hasn't got a vehicle, she can't afford one.
No no.
But that just makes me think why, that's what makes me think she's living .
She could be.
But that weren't a bedsitter that I was in .
Shared bathroom but I 
No  but yeah
but it was a kitchen and bedroom and living room.
They're only tiny like an alcove bedroom but
Oh yeah I've been in one of them.
You know I've seen them.
I mean it was the only one with a  with its own kitchen.
The one that I was gonna have.
Yeah.
This was right up the top and there were  a tiny attic bedroom thing was made into a  not very salubrious but it had a cooker and a sink.
Yeah.
And as I say that was fifty or something a week and it wasn't  wasn't worth it really.
No.
Furniture wasn't that posh but then er but the only thing I thought about it was safe and it was clean.
Needed a bit of personalizing but it was  it was old-fashioned furniture but it was polished.
It was clean.
Had a reasonable carpet on the floor and, and so on.
Mm.
But it wasn't worth fifty pound a week.
Definitely not.
But that's what they're going for though isn't it?
If they can get them for that  
people do .
People are desperate to buy and they'll have whatever and they have to pay.
Yeah.
When you think that one   what was thirty three thousand two hundred and sixty a month or something wasn't it?
Well that's gonna be about two hundred and forty, two hundred and fifty a month for that one down .
Cos thirty three worked out two sixty didn't it?
Oh the mortgage you mean?
Mortgage.
So you can say two hundred and fifty pound a month to buy a place.
Oh yeah.
And yet they want two eighty to rent one.
Seems quite ridiculous.
Well that's if you're prepared to  buy a flat.
That's the only thing isn't it?
If you're prepared to buy a flat.
Yeah but at least you've got, actually got the property haven't you?
You're not just paying somebody else to have a  Cos if you're moving if you can't sell it you can always rent it again.
Which is what a lot of people are doing   houses especially.
They buy a house cos they've had a child or something.
They can't afford to  they can't sell that one so they rent that out which pays the mortgage for it and start again on another mortgage.
You've got to be a bit careful when you're renting out though.
Oh yes.
Got to be careful of your tenants.
pay.
Tenants.
That's why it's best to go through an agency or er something like  White and Eddies because they have people that collect them and they have people who have to take up references and 
Yeah but not only that but I mean if you 
And they have they have proper leases.
I mean after that they're out and 
Yeah .
well I mean all, all well it counts towards your income as well.
Oh yeah I know.
Oh yeah income tax on it.
Counts counts towards your income.
But a lot of people are doing it.
Mm.
Oh I know.
Well there's  for one.
sell  
Lot of people are doing it because they just can't  well circumstances.
It's either the job or something means they've gotta go away or  they can't afford, they can't sell them so they   I don't know if that would make your income different if you were still paying a mortgage .
Even though your, all the money 
Think  
you were getting in was getting paid out again?
I think you'll find it counts towards your income.
So I mean if you had a job 
Paying them more tax.
You, you got a job say you're earning 
But I think the expenses when you're 
earning ten thousand a year.
And you're going, you're getting two hundred and fifty pound a month  as well in rent
Yeah but you, you'd be able to claim expenses.
I think so, yeah.
You wouldn't pay the whole of it taxable if it was  you know you would claim expenses for one thing and another.
Oh I don't know but I mean I wouldn't have thought so.
Yeah.
Otherwise  probably that's why they are dear because they have to do things like that.
That's probably why they're the price they are, two eighty.
That's it.
Because people take  
Pay fifty and thirty quid a week more is a bloody what they get stopped off them.
and people have taken out big mortgages like Tina.
And to pay off the mortgage they've got to charge so much  
I mean Tina's got that little house .
I mean now you'd get it two hundred and fi , I mean Tina pays two hundred and forty eight er pound a week, a month.
Three hundred and forty eight pound a month mortgage on that little house.
Yeah.
I mean that was bloody thirty nine thousand, or was it forty one when she had it.
It was 
I know.
forty one I think.
I mean now they're going for thirty two.
We can afford one like that.
Yeah we could  isn't it?
Mm.
They don't sell now.
Not selling at all.
There's a few renting now cos they can't sell them.
So  It's a nice enough little house but  I'm not awfully keen on it are you?
I don't like the, I don't like the bedroom
No I don't 
situation for one.
If it had a door and a wall and
You're just straight upstairs and you fall into bed.
Mm.
Handy I suppose but
In some respects but   I mean it just doesn't  I mean in a way I suppose well with Tina being a non smoker and  Wiggie being a non smoker
It's not so bad.
isn't so bad but, I mean if you're like us and I mean the smoke's just 
That's it.
That's why Tina doesn't like people smoking in her house because it gets into her bedroom.
Yes.
Exactly.
The smoke would just rise straight up and
Yeah.
straight up into the bedroom.
I mean she doesn't smoke anyway so I mean you know
She doesn't like people smoking in her house.
Because she says I don't want my bedroom smelling of smoke, her sheets and  everything else.
She would do  
Mind you they have done a bit more to it since Wiggie's been there in as much as she's had a big curtain put across
Oh yeah.
Across the top of the stairs like or  
All the way across.
Because Steve couldn't sleep.
Because of the light in that little
Because it's light.
See you'd even the patio door light went
Straight upstairs.
straight upstairs.
And that
Because he's, and then
skylight .
Mm yeah.
skylight .
He's had a blind put up  a special blind that leads straight across the fanlight.
And she's had curtains  big track put across so that sh 
She can shut it off.
she can shut it right off.
She couldn't, she just wasn't sleeping.
Said was broad daylight.
Mhm.
She said oh he  you know we've had all that done.
Tracked across the ceiling so that  shut the  off.
She said he just couldn't sleep in there.
With the light.
With all the lights and  daylight and sunshine through the bloody  thing and  It was alright once he got off but he had a job getting off when it was
Mm mm.
as I say when it was sunlight shining through the bloody thing on his face.
Mm they've had a special, they had a skylight blind made .
Mm mm.
They couldn't have an ordinary one cos it would hang down.
Has to be on a runners on the side as well otherwise it would  just fall down.
Side yeah so it  fall  
Yeah.
Mm.
It's got a, you know like a frame what you put in  along.
Like a venetian blind in a way .
Mm.
Or a straight down blind but at an angle  but er but on runners to hold, yeah.
But it's got runners to hold the side in you see?
Yeah.
I mean  but Steven would but
Do they owe  
the building society and erm
the building society.
Yeah.
They'll have to pay another mortgage as well.
Yeah but on the  yeah but I mean if she  sold it for thirty two  she'd still owe them nine thousand wouldn't she?
Well she must have paid a bit off.
She's been in there about three years.
Yeah.
Well say she owes them nine thousand anyway.
Yeah.
But then er if they wanted another mortgage it would be
That would be added to it you see.
They'd probably have a fifty thousand pound mortgage  to pay off the  the existing mortgage on that one and the balance.
I mean they can afford it between them.
Well I don't know, I mean Steve must pay about eighty pounds a bloody week.
Oh yeah of course Steven and his maintenance.
Maintenance.
Maintenance and one thing and another.
Yeah.
Yeah that would cut it down wouldn't it?on their own you can say they'd be able to afford it but if you consider the outgoings as well eighty pound a
Mind you saying that, three hundred fifty  pound a month to buy a bigger mortgage anyway.
Nowadays.
For the interest rate yeah, but it would only buy the same sort of mortgage that Tina's got on it already.
Yeah well that's what I mean.
They could have bought, afford a
Yeah.
a a better property for about forty four thousand or whatever for the same money.
Cos that's how it's worked out.
No cos she still owes, if she sold it she'd still owe the balance between the selling price and
Yeah so she's got to buy a cheaper one and that would be added to it.
That would be added to it you see.
Mm and just his wages how much extra they could afford.
That's it.
I know Steven would like .
Mm.
He'd like one with a spare bedroom so the children can come and stop.
I mean Tina's worried now, she's got his mother coming for christmas for a fortnight.
Don't know where the hell she'll sleep, she's got to sleep in the living room.
Mm.
But that's about fifty  isn't it?
Fifty two  probably get the fifty.
As I say you're looking at a
Hefty mortgage.
Tina reckons out of her wages she's got ninety , ninety six pound a week  out of her wages  just for mortgage and
Expenses.
expenses.
That's gone before she starts.
And then out of Wiggie's he's got
Seventy five I think he pays.
It's a lot of money gone before you've even  
Mhm before you even start.
Mm.
Depends what you want most don't it I suppose?
Mm mm.
That's true.
She'd like to change the car.
I mean she never liked that car.
Ever.
She had a nice car before Chris made her have that more or less.
She didn't want it.
She hated it at first, she wouldn't drive it.
Noisy and clumsy, she didn't like it at all.
She never has really.
It's not it's not a bad car is it?
She doesn't like it.
Never been happy with it.
Never.
It was Chris's idea to have the  diesel one and that model.
He  talked her into it.
Yeah.
But  she hated it at first.
She'd do anything rather than drive it at first.
I don't know what she had before but it was a
Mm.
Mind you it was quite old.
I think it was a car that she'd had for  was well looked after her dad used to see to it for her but it was  she'd had it for some years and she was always poodling about in you see.
And it was her second car that she'd ever had sort of thing.
Mm.
She'd had it five or six years or something like that.
You know, think it was about ten year old when she got rid of it.
Something like that.
Yeah.
But, say it was a lovely little car really.
And she hated that.
Mm.
Times she used to go  really hate it.
Yeah if that one, that Elizabeth Terrace one is, is the one I think it is  which is the one fairly near the end  in that in that bottom, bottom row  I think the  live in the first one, they still live in the first one  on the corner.
I'm not sure if they've moved actually now.
They may have done.
Got a funny feeling they have now.
But   Who's that?
Paper man.
Bloody hell.
Morning.
Did somebody kick you out of bed this morning Brian?
Thank you very much.
Thankyou.
Bubye.
Thought somebody must have kicked him out of bed this morning.
Only half half past ten.
quarter past ten.
That ain't bad.
Got the time to have a quick look at the paper now haven't we?
Yeah.
The Standard?
I don't mind.
Oh  mind at all 
And if we make an appointment to view some places and then we'll know what time we've got to doing the shopping and fit it in round taking mum.
Seeing mum.
something erm next week.
So you don't fancy this afternoon?
In the morning.
Oh yeah well  yeah I mean if if they if 
Cos as I say if we did see Sefton Avenue or New Drove today.
If there's nothing available.
That's what I meant.
Oh yeah, there's plenty of time.
I don't really want to go on a Saturday.
Saturday afternoons with mum.
Saturday afternoons with Helen.
well I wouldn't be absolutely  if, if I had to go out then I'd have to go out.
Then there's always Saturday morning  see Helen but then Stuart likes to sleep in.
But no I think Saturday's out really.
It's not a day for viewing houses.
We could go out Sunday?
And mum could come as well.
I don't know whether they work  
Oh yes.
People at work all the week don't they?
Yes.
Gets dark in the evenings then then then  definitely.
That's the only time you can view a property.
I mean unless somebody's living in it you can't go in the evenings in the winter can you?
And I don't  fancy a house that somebody's actually living in.
Cos then you've got ta wait while they
Yeah.
And it can all fall through because theirs is falling through or they can't get out when you want and  that can go on for  Can it not?
Yeah.
Sometimes it just can't be helped cos there's nothing  in your price range you know that you like that  isn't empty but  I would prefer  an empty property so that when we decide and then whatever just 
Certainly if we'd see something that would do this afternoon, or  New Drove  today, that's fine.
No problem.
Two of them at New Drove are downstairs and one is an upstairs.
The one upstairs, because it hasn't got a bay window
Yes.
is larger.
The upstairs one is slightly larger.
The upstairs one's larger?
number seven which is an upstairs one  hasn't got any bay windows.
It is  larger than the two five and six that are downstairs.
Who's selling that one?
Well one's Cornerstone.
One's Cornerstone 
So one's Cornerstone and two are the other 
Two are  Hansard 
Yeah.
I think it's Cornerstone one that's  the larger of the two, the three.
Six  seven.
Hansard.
Hansard.
They're doing five and seven so they've got one above each other.
So they've got  one  one's doing two and one's doing one.
One's doing five and seven which is  this is for two and one's doing six which is this one.
Yeah.
Seven is definitely slightly bigger than six and five.
I checked it out.
The lounge is fourteen by ten.
The bedroom is thirteen nine by nine  instead of eleven by eight.
That kitchen's thirteen by five, that totals eleven by seven.
Neither here nor there is it?
No.
None of it's much difference.
It's only a diff er it's a matter of two feet here and
Yes.
But then I don't mind .
I don't mind living upstairs or on the ground.
Well I mean if they've got the key to both might  haven't decided on both of them you might as well go and see them.
Yeah.
Both of them.
See which one you like the best or if you like them at all.
But as it's  got that financial package
That's Cornerstone?
Yeah.
Don't know whether the same applies to the other two.
it.
The financial package .
With Cornerstone?
Cornerstone.
Doesn't actually say that in   Pantiles 
No
Oh.
Just have to ask .
Yeah.
But actually the one at Cornerstone is fifty pound cheaper than the both of them at Hansard.
It is!
Fifty pound.
One's nine nine fifty and one's nine nine
five, yeah.
So it's forty five pound different.
Well that's a good way, if you think about it he's got, he's got four flats there  hasn't he?
Oh yeah.
Four flats at thirty thousand.
That's a hundred and twenty thousand for two houses.
They could be sixty thousand apiece.
Yeah.
Whereas if he had, if he sold them as separate houses he'd probably get forty thousand apiece.
Yeah that's just  Yeah.
Forty five thousand even apiece.
Yeah.
But he's making the money by selling them as flats.
Yeah.
The only difference is he's had a few thousand extra because it's got two kitchens and two bathrooms.
partitions and 
Yeah true he's had that yeah extra fittings.
But apart from that oh an extra bath instead of the other bedroom
Yeah.
Yeah.
and erm another kitchen instead of a dining room or something and that's the only difference.
Say three four thousand probably.
For the extra bits and pieces that's all.
Yeah.
I don't know how many of them there are.
Whether they only had four flats or whether there's a  flat on another block and another block of fours down the road.
I mean I don't know.
Only assume there's  you've got that one block.
Well there might be  four blocks of four or  I du n no.
No I don't think so.
Not enough space for them.
No I don't know.
I mean you know the area better than me.
Unless they've knocked them garages down or something 
I've no idea .
I know them council houses aren't usually  but I mean I can't visualize how much land there is.
I only know that by going to school and  
Yeah.
where they are.
Yeah.
Probably should have gone the other way into town but
that
Eh?
Neither here nor there.
Well you could have gone sort of like round the Rainbow and  that way on.
That's what I meant.
the bypass  that end of town  would have been perhaps a little bit clearer.
If you look at the first it might help you to decide whether you like 
That's it.
Whether you wanna go and see it.
Whether you wanna go and see them or not.
Whether you like the positions.
I mean we know where Sefton Avenue is and we know that's
Well we know where it is.
a nice house.
Well we don't know really.
We haven't seen it have we?
Well I mean  I mean 
Yeah but we haven't actually looked ins 
No but I mean I know which house it is with that  one, and you do don't you?
I think so yes.
Well I think so as well.
But it would be nice just to go and have a quick  check.
Oh I think, just to make sure that  
Just to make sure I like it.
Or 
it is the house that we're thinking about.
We think it is.
You may not like it.
I said as soon as I see it in the paper oh that looks nice.
Where's that?
I mean  not sure.
is it?
Or is this the one round the other end?
It's that one.
It's up here.
That one there right on the corner yeah?
Yes.
That's it.
I thought there was a separate  but it's not, no it's not is it?
Think it is.
It's an older property.
Got the double glazing.
Alright.
Looks nice.
Nice house though isn't it?
Yeah it's an older, more solid house.
You know sometimes I like as I say they've got 
Yeah.
Yeah Yeah true.
Very true.
they've got erm
Very true.
Yeah it's a nice house.
And this is a back, the back door 
Oh I see.
Yeah.
this one because you, there's the back view look I mean that's  that's a back door isn't it?
So you have the downstairs back and the the front stairs go up to the  can't actually see   That's definitely the back door.
There's a parking space as well.
Oh yeah it says allotted parking space.
We have made him an offer but he's not very keen.
I don't think, I don't think he will.
He's not like that.
It looks as if he's not very keen on the price we want to pay.
He said he knows the market's low and he'd rather wait.
But then we wouldn't be able to afford it if the market goes up and  
That's right.
same time .
If it's on, if it's on the market for a long while.
He can have it on the market for a year or so.
Yeah.
And he's and he's
He's got you there and  
Well at the moment he's got us 
Well that's it.
I mean we're paying two hundred and fifty pound a month so at least he's getting that coming in.
But then you can really have a mortgage for that.
and the thing is as well 
No.
But at the moment he's  well he's not come back to us with any answer from our offer at all so  we're we're presuming that means no so we thought we'd better start looking.
Oh and if you're paying that kind of money you could afford a mortgage couldn't you?
That's it.
Thereabouts anyway.
 
Yeah it's it's not much more.
And Stuart's been and enquired and it wouldn't be much more for a small property.
When the market lifts then you'd .
That's it.
There's not a lot more in here is there?
There's a bedroom, it's very 
They don't make them any more do they?
No.
They call this the bedroom do they, or ?
Yeah.
I mean it's quite a good 
This bedroom's got the bay window.
They've got security locks  same as ours.
Security locks like  like we've like we've got at home.
Yes.
Yeah.
can't you?
Quite nice .
Mm.
Don't think 
No.
Quite like the ceilings.
They're different aren't they?
Yeah, mm.
Quite pretty.
You've got erm point behind where you could 
Mm.
In burgundy.
I don't know what other colours they had .
But it's  reasonably good quality.
There's an airing cupboard   Probably got a dead body in there.
I watch too many mysteries don't I?
Cooker goes in there and the washing machine in there.
Yeah.
Nowhere for a fridge.
Well you'd have to have it sticking out  round.
This is a bit silly isn't it?
Not having any room for a fridge anywhere.
The cooker would have go in there and the washing machine in there.
Washing machine in there.
No fridge.
No he hasn't thought about it very well has he?
I'm afraid it would have to be sticking out.
Is it, is it a tall fridge?
Or is it just an ordinary worktop one?
No just an ordinary fridge.
There isn't a fridge.
Well there will be .
Just an ordinary one.
what the other ones are like.
Unless you, unless you get the fridge in the  cupboard.
Oh this is just exactly the same only the other way round.
Same, the same but opposite.
Yeah.
in the cupboard 
Oh yeah.
Oh that's  
It hasn't got a sink in this one.
It hasn't got a toilet either.
Or toilet.
It's all been 
Er actually  it has been broken into, this one.
Oh no.
We looked at it outside and and the window 
It looks like it yeah.
at the back there is broken.
somebody's been helping themselves.
fire alarms keep  though don't they?
Number seven.
This is the .
?
Yeah.
Yeah you see   your washing machine.
Cooker that
Oh I see.
This is different isn't it?
Yeah.
Got a bit more space.
Yeah.
See you could have your cooker one side and your washing machine and fridge, washing machine under there and fridge there.
So what you've achieved is this piece over the stairs.
Yeah.
Mm.
I said the one upstairs was bigger.
Yes.
You said it was bigger didn't you?
Yeah.
I was reading the things and I said it was a bigger  upstairs is, are bigger than the downstairs.
It's better cos the other one's a little bit of an alley isn't it, the kitchen?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's quite pleasant that is.
Yeah you see it's bigger cos the bedroom 
 
is a bigger bed bigger room altogether.
Goodness.
What a difference.
Oh there is a difference.
No this is the living room.
Yeah.
This is the living room here.
Yeah that's right.
This is the bedroom.
But even so 
But even the bedroom's bigger.
Oh crikey that's a big bedroom too isn't it?
It's bigger.
Most definitely.
Yeah I said  
So you'd have  
It's a lot better.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I could tell by the  you know the details 
Financial  
it just seemed that
Yeah.
The way they were reading.
Yeah the way it was reading.
I said to Stuart I'm sure
Yeah.
the upstairs is bigger .
He said that can't be.
But you've got the hall and that underneath you see.
Yeah it's the landing and everything.
Underneath us yeah.
Yeah.
It would be quite pleasant up here.
Yeah.
I like this one, I don't like the downstairs one so much.
No I like this much more.
What colour's the bathroom?
the bathroom's even nice.
It is isn't it?
I don't know why but it just is.
Yeah.
Yeah I prefer this one definitely.
I do.
Yeah I do.
What's  this little cupboard?
It's quite big as well isn't it?
Yeah.
You could put your hoover and ironing board in that.
Yeah.
Cos they don't think of those things do they?
No they never do, do they?
Yeah I prefer this one to downstairs.
It's much better.
I do.
I do.
Yeah.
You've also got  the loft there you can shove
Oh this one's locked 
rubbish .
Well that one actually's not advertized so it might have gone.
Oh.
we've only seen  well we've seen advertized  six five six and seven 
Numbers five six and seven isn't it?
but that one wasn't
Oh right.
That wasn't 
well there's no details in
That's probably sold then because if I had a choice of four  I would take the upstairs one wouldn't you?
Yes.
said.
Yeah.
Let's have a little look how it goes again if I may.
Cos I haven't seen 
I like the look well I like this one if out out out of all of them
I do.
Yeah I do.
this is much more  much the nicer.
I like it very much.
Yeah I like it.
Much the nicer.
As I say you've got plenty of room to have your
there's room 
You know, you've got your washing machine goes in here  the cooker there your fridge here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You could get it all in there wouldn't you?
You'd get everyth , you'd get your cooker  cooker goes there, fridge here, washing machine under there, you're
Yeah.
You're away.
Plus it's a little bit
Yes it's more
Yeah that other one was a bit narrow and 
a bit more elbow room.
Yeah.
I like this one.
Yeah I do.
I definitely much prefer this one.
And I say the rooms are bigger as well.
Yeah, it's a good size.
Yes they are.
Oh yes I definitely like the upstairs to the downstairs.
And what number's this?
Seven.
Seven.
Mm.
This is much better you can  almost see your furniture can't you?
There's room to put it in.
Yeah that's it.
afford this 
 
Yeah.
Yeah.
 
any of them.
I like this one.
I like this one better  than the others.
Yeah.
I definitely  
That that 
Yeah that's, when I was reading the thing I said to you somehow the upstairs seemed much better.
Yeah.
Cos it's quite a big .
It is.
It is a nice size bedroom.
Have you got
Yes.
wardrobes and dressing tables?
So you'd 
Mm.
Quite pleasant view as well.
It is, that's it.
It's not likely to be over well actually I don't we don't know if they're gonna be building there.
Well I think you'll I think you'll find you'll get buildings
Eventually.
 
eventually round the back.
It would be a good start wouldn't it?
Yeah.
Especially if you can get the right price.
Well I certainly, yeah, I certainly like this one.
When you say you've had  what sort of figures are looking  well, can you achieve?
Do you know?
Thirty two thousand.
Thirty two and a half maximum wasn't it?
Mm thirty two and a half at a push.
So really you just wanna get something as cheap as possible and
Yeah.
Cheap but nice.
Yeah.
Cheap as possible but
That's it.
you want a bargain.
And this one's, as I say it's twenty nine something so I mean it's  it's about right isn't it?
Mm .
Yeah and there are all sorts of ways you could .
You could either go in with  cash .
Do you have any deposit at all?
No.
?
No.
I definitely like this one.
The benefit of this one as well is  if, let's just say we, that you knocked him right down on his money  force as cheap a buy as possible  then ask if you can do a hundred percent.
Mm.
Providing  it's  providing it's  providing it's not  damp 
That's right.
new roofs and everything.
I mean you'd have no problem with this.
No.
None at all.
No problem at all, no maintenance at all .
Right, looks good.
It does yeah.
Yeah.
Alright.
I definitely like this one.
Yeah.
So we could work towards  to knock him right down.
Cos then obviously when the market lifts it's then  that's where you're gonna gain.
Gain.
Mm.
Mm I definitely like this one so 
Well it's a good size isn't it?
It is.
Much better.
Surprising really.
Only that 
Yeah.
extra foot more.
That's why I said to you
Extra foot or extra few inches isn't it?
Yeah.
Just makes all that difference.
Yeah.
Just that extra what, eighteen inches?
That's all it is  in the kitchen.
And somehow  the rooms downstairs  the bay.
Yes.
Yes because of the bay.
Yeah it makes  makes that much difference.
Yeah.
I like the colour best up here.
Yes I like the colour better.
Another thing  you've got a window in the bathroom.
Mm.
Yeah.
Mm.
Funny down here it's a dark hole.
 
Yeah down here there's no, no.
the bathroom's quite nice 
Right.
I know but in here there's no window at all it's er  you've got to have the light on all the time.
Don't you?
Yeah.
It's the way the door is as well.
The door  in the other flat is here isn't it?
Mm.
And you've got the bathroom and
Yeah.
The bathroom, bathroom  
are here and th there you've got the kitchen and the lounge.
It's turned over .
Kitchen to kitchen to the front.
And the bathroom's  
And I mean you don't really need all that space.
It's dark isn't it?
It is dark.
Mm.
Then you have the noise of the fan where upstairs you've got the window.
If you have a shower you can
Yeah.
let the condensation out.
This kitchen's really quite tiny .
It's quite but what I'm  I mean where would you put your fridge?
You don't do you?
I mean you've really got to have a fridge in this day and age haven't you?
Oh  yeah.
I mean you can't really afford to take a unit out.
No.
I mean
No cos then you wouldn't have enough space.
And you haven't got  
You couldn't have your fridge sticking out here so you could go and  to get 
No you couldn't do that could you?
Somebody hasn't thought, have they?
No.
Cos they've put a separate drawer unit in.
Oh yeah.
So you can't even lose that cos you lose your drawers.
Yeah.
Cos this is a double base.
Mm.
No I think number seven's the one.
Yes.
I do.
It's better than this one.
I like that one.
like being upstairs wouldn't you?
Yes.
Yes.
Well w we said we'd prefer to be upstairs 
Well we prefer stairs 
rather than have somebody above your head.
And you can make the noise can't you?
Also as well 
We work, we we work shift work so I I mean  you know we get up at half past four in the morning and and if you've got people trundling about above your heads all hours of the night it's er
Oh god.
How are we gonna get out?
Erm  we're not.
Oh.
Stuart.
Is it a security lock and I'm not turning the key round enough?
No you're not.
Is is there a key in the
No I've got the keys.
No there's no key 
Erm 
Can you hold it here so it's  security keys and I haven't turned it round the other way.
Mm.
Do you feel like jumping out the window?
 

Oh dear what a pity.
Never mind we'll just have to stay here the night.
Yeah.
 
Oh well done.
Window, oh we've done it.
I think it just needs a bit of 
Maintenance.
a bit of something on it just to
Yeah.
key.
what is it?
Something forty .
UB forty?
WD forty.
WD.
Yeah.
Ah that's it.
Oh I wonder if it's going to  yeah.
It's it's the security thing isn't it 
Mm.
turn it right round the key  it should 
Yeah it's not
It needs
It needs, just needs a little bit of attention.
Just, yeah.
That's to open it and that's to lock it.
Take the key out and that should lock it now.
Yes.
But now it should  yeah it does.
Yeah.
It's been just lying here.
That's now locked.
You won't be able to shut it now  because of that .
Oh right.
You could leave it open  that way.
If you leave it to there then that will click then then you'll be alright.
That's handy cos  to shut yourself out.
No.
Not if you've turned it that way cos then you won't be able to  
Ours is actually a new house.
It was but er  the market was so low that he decided not to  well I don't think he could get a buyer actually, it's just stood there so he he he let it out rather than have it stood there  with the option for us to buy it but I say now the prices are lower he's not keen on selling it at that price.
And I'm not prepared to go on paying three thousand a year renting it to give to him when I could be buying one myself.
Yeah.
Mm.
I mean three thousand a year to rent one's a lot of money really.
Mm.
Hallo there 
Oh hallo yeah, sorry about that
a bath and I was soaking in there for ages.
I wasn't quite decent and I thought well I'm not letting people in when I'm not decent 
Oh no .
I mean, please excuse the mess won't you.
Doesn't matter.
If you'd have let me in I could have washed your back for you.
No no no.
No I can manage on my own thank you.
Fair enough.
Fair enough.
Right.
Sorry to intrude on your  on your privacy.
That's okay.
But er  there we are.
That's the kitchen is it?
Economy seven .
it's dark in here.
bit sort of dark 
Yeah.
It's not normally.
Nice size kitchen isn't it?
Yeah that's alright  isn't there?
Yes.
If you can imagine it without the boxes it 
Yeah.
Cos you're packing up.
for a flat it's er
Yeah.
It's a nice size.
It's a lovely size kitchen.
you?
Oh yes.
What act what actually does the price include?
Does it does it 
That I couldn't tell you.
Is the cooker included or not?
No.
No.
That's 
That's, that's yours is it?
Doesn't, doesn't say.
It just says a cooker point.
Cooker point.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All the units are obviously ?
Yes.
Yeah.
Oh yes, yeah.
Are they your carpets?
No.
Okay.
And
So the carpets may be as well.
So we might get might get the carpets in as well.
you'd have to negotiate on that one with Mr  and Mr .
Yeah.
talking about your home.
The carpets  
Everything that is here is mine with the exception of the carpets.
Yes.
Right.
Shall we go, is that the bedroom through there?
No that's the bathroom.
Oh right.
Do you want to come?
And is that a store cupboard?
That's that's the airing cupboard through there.
But it 
This is the airing cupboard in here is it?
it doesn't air.
I'll be honest with you, it doesn't air.
No.
It's er very cold in there.
 
Well it's good  good, got a well lagged tank.
Yeah.
Which is not a bad
Yeah that is it.
That's what he said he had to 
That's not a bad thing in a way is it?
No.
It's better than having the water .
They actually took they actually took the front off so that the water would get hotter.
Erm and it didn't work and  you know
Mm.
I thought then I'd be able to use it as an airing cupboard but it still didn't work but it's like you said it's because it's got such a good
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it does, once you've actually heated the water  it keeps hot for so long it's amazing.
Ours is like that isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Where we are now is
We've got a similar one on ours.
Yeah.
Mm.
But it's a good store isn't it?
For your ironing board and cleaner and 
Yes it's quite large as well isn't it?
Mm.
Yeah.
I I mean you can put anything in there really.
Yeah.
I mean I did have some of the boxes in there until I sort of, thought while I was sorting things out.
Yeah, yeah.
The bathroom 
Yeah that's the bathroom in there yeah.
Oh it's a nice little bathroom as well isn't it?
Oh that's not too bad either is it?
No.
No it's pleasant.
It is isn't it?
Yeah.
Isn't it.
Yeah.
It's quite
Very pleasant.
Yeah, it's quite nice.
Big enough.
Yeah.
I like the colour as well.
Yeah.
Yes it's a nice colour.
It's a warm colour.
Yeah.
That's right.
Mm.
Nice.
Yeah this would be terrific.
Yeah that's alright.
like we've got the, quite, similar lot 
Yeah.
Same as we've got at home.
we've got already.
Feels warm in here as well.
Yes.
Do you have any problem with the heating?
Or 
Erm the bedroom doesn't get as hot as I would like it
Yeah.
but then I have circulation problems so I do feel the cold.
Yeah, yeah.
Erm but here in the kitchen it's lovely and warm.
But but it's quite, it's a warm it's a warm 
Yeah.
I mean that heater is not on full, not on full power.
That's quite good isn't it?
like ours.
That's very much like the one, I mean ours is on  about two or something like that and 
Yeah.
We have ours on two and it's ever so warm.
You go in there in the evenings you know when it's been  when it's been off and 
Yeah.
As I say I mean well because I do feel the cold I suppose I have to have more heat than
Yeah, yeah.
a normal person but er
Yeah.
Quite nice really isn't it?
Yeah I like this too.
The bathroom's a bit chilly but once you've put that heater on  and shut the door for a few minutes it's
Yeah.
Yeah.
it's lovely.
Yeah we've got one like that, I know.
That's not my artwork on there, that's my little niece's artwork.
space under there as well  .
Yeah there's space under there for  bits and pieces.
Yeah.
And it's amazing actually what you can get under there.
Ooh look at this.
That's a nice size bedroom.
It is a nice size isn't it?
Yes.
It's 
Eh?
quite a big bedroom.
That's a smashing size bedroom isn't it?
Mm it's a very good size.
This is where you  isn't it?
Mm.
Oh that's a lovely big bedroom isn't it?
Yeah.
And you've got the heater here over in the corner as well so it's gonna 
Got the heater yeah  yeah.
air it through.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Cos you don't always want it hot do you?
No, we don't like it too hot in the bed, well Stuart doesn't.
He's always well I'm always 
 
cold and he's always boiling.
If I have the heat up very high in the bedroom he can't sleep.
I'm impressed aren't you?
It's ever so nice.
Very.
It is lovely, yeah.
Have the oth is there another flat then above this one then?
Above.
Yeah that's a bit smaller.
Yeah  the door there isn't it?
That's a bit smaller.
Mm.
Do you hear them at all?
Erm  sometimes if he's  been out very very late and I'm still up and he's come home after a heavy night drinking.
I mean I'm not saying he's alcoholic but he goes out with the lads and he  you know he'll he'll sort of thud up the stairs.
Mm.
But then he'll apologize the next day.
Man after me own heart.
You know I mean other than that, no I mean it it's not as if 
Yeah I was gonna say same.
this one.
Oh probably, probably.
If he goes to the pub Stuart would probably know him anyway.
Might do yeah.
More than likely.
No, I mean it it's not as if you hear the telly or 
Oh I see, these are his stairs.
That's the stairway.
That's his stairs, yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
His door's just there isn't it?
Yeah.
That's right, yeah that's 
Yes that's his door there and
Yeah.
that's his stairs out.
But the upstairs one that's  the kitchen's a bit smaller.
Erm and instead of the bath in the bathroom he's just got a shower up there.
probably is  wardrobes there.
I must admit I like a shower but then again I do like the chance to have a bath now and again 
bath every, every now and again yeah.
Yeah that's bigger.
Erm which is why I went for the downstairs cos I had a choice of either.
But I went for the downstairs one because of the bath.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah be nice.
It's nice.
It's a nice size.
I mean we've just been to look at some others and  upstairs and downstairs .
But the upstairs one in the other one was was
Was bigger than the downstairs.
Hell of a lot of difference really, it's surprising just a
Yeah.
I mean I must admit I've looked at some other flats.
Erm  and one I looked at I couldn't believe it.
Erm  I mean it was a top floor flat.
And so I mean you had to sort of go up several flights of stairs  and you walked in and it, it looked lovely.
Thought oh this is nice it erm  it ha it hadn't got a separate kitchen, it was sort of like  a kitchen diner
Yeah.
Mm.
but it was very big.
A studio.
Mm.
It was very big.
I thought oh well this is lovely.
Walks into the bedroom, well you would have hardly got the bed in there never mind about anything else.
And er there was a hand basin in there  and when you went into
In, in the bedroom?
In the bedroom.
Yeah.
When you walked into the  well what I would call a cupboard but they classed it as the bathroom.
You'd got the toilet there  and behind the door, I mean you had to sort of squeeze yourself and shut the door, and behind the door was a shower.
You're joking.
 
No shower curtain mind you.
Even so, no room to swing a cat.
Terrible.
It was terrible.
Yes.
This is nice though.
I like this.
Yeah I like this one.
Very much.
Yeah it's a nice, just a nice size.
Do you know who the builder is?
It says here local  building.
Erm  well no all I know is  Bates and Dack but they didn't actually, but I mean yeah they put it together.
They, they renovated it.
They they they 
That's right yeah.
They renovated it.
they re, revamped it or whatever.
allocated parking.
You just park in the road or?
No, no there's the gravel down 
There's a space down  
the side is for parking.
Oh good.
So you've  got your own bit.
Oh yeah.
Yeah this one, I mean upstairs hasn't but  this one has.
And is there anything there, I mean can you dry your clothes out there at all?
No.
There's no  line.
Can't get over the size of this though.
I think I'd probably put my wardrobes on his, on the stair wall.
That would dampen it a bit wouldn't it?
Mm.
Nice .
I like it.
It's lovely and warm.
Very nice.
yeah.
What is your situation?
I mean, are you renting the flat?
Yes.
Yeah.
So how much notice do you have to give ?
Er  a month.
I'd like you to give me a month.
Thank you very much indeed for showing us your home.
Thank you very much.
I'm sorry to bother you.
If you can hear next door's music I can assure you it's not a regular occurrence.
And if you tell him about it he tu , he's in a rock band.
Erm  now and again he practises but he usually tries to do it when I'm not here but erm not 
seem quite friendly then?
Yeah.
Well we, we work shifts so he could probably do it when we're on earlies and
 
Well that's right yeah.
And when we're on lates he can do it at
Yeah if you let it, I mean you know he's fair like that.
If you let him know.
We're not really in that much anyway are we?
No.
No.
We work long hours and 
Thing is don't you find in th in this sort of environment if you've got, you know  if they're nice people you all communicate don't you?
Yeah, you can do things like that.
And that can work to your favour because if ever you have a problem, then you know.
Yeah you can talk and
That's right.
Yeah I mean that's the same as  I di I must admit I did have sort of an argument with him  once over his music.
We fell out for a little while but I mean,playing loud but I mean upstairs is fine.
And next door to him, number five  they're an elderly couple erm and they've got one of their sons living there at erm  he's disabled in some way but I'm not quite sure how.
Mm.
But they are very very friendly.
Very friendly they are.
Mm.
I suppose some people might say to them oh you're being nosy but then that doesn't bother me because you don't tell them what you don't want them to know.
No.
That's right.
But it's nice because if ever you're poorly then it's in your welfare isn't it?
That's right, yeah.
They keep an eye
They do tend to keep an eye on me anyway.
Neighbourhood watch..
It's, well there is a Neighbourhood Watch Scheme down here.
Really?
Yes.
Oh yeah.
No I'm really impressed.
It's nice isn't it?
Did you just want to have a little wander?
Yeah.
I like this one too.
We'll have them both shall we?
Yeah.
One each.
We'll have them both.
Yeah, you can live in one and I'll live in another.
and live in yours .
Nice aren't they?
Lovely aren't they?
Mm.
corner there  
Goodness.
Where do you get your carrots from?
Er  my nephew has a shop.
Erm  in Leverington actually.
Yes  
What, just like a shop shop or a?
A  shop.
So you got your you got your washing machine under there?
Washing machine and cooker and fridge So of course you could have  in here.
Cooker, fridge.
I mean Yeah I say, or you could have a taller fridge.
Oh yeah you could have a taller fridge.
Fridge fridge-freezer up there or against that window couldn't you?
Have it away from that .
I like them like that because what I tend to do with  so I like them that big because then I can cut them up into sticks, stick them in the fridge, then if I feel like being naughty   not ever so naughty because I'm nibbling at carrots rather than a packet of crisps or something .
But they're a nice  aren't they?
Oh yeah and I mean that sort of size  
Yeah.
I know.
. Well it's make your mind up time.
Well We've got to see what Mr  says first won't we?
They're specially for  baking.
I dunno.
I'm not waiting, bother waiting for the desired 
I mean with ordinary ones 
Well.
Er carrots are fifteen pence a pound but the potatoes th they're different.
I mean those bakers, they weren't very expensive erm  but it's ordinary potatoes 
nice kitchen.
I think they're probably a little bit more expensive but  he is much cheaper than in 
Well  in Leverington then?
Erm along the main  Gorfield Road 
But I mean, you can't get those that size where I live.
And I love baked potatoes.
We end up having 
That's right.
Yeah.
So thanks for showing us  
Yep, thank you very much.
Right.
Thank you.
disturb you again.
No that's okay.
Yeah.
Very nice.
Yeah I like it.
Very nice.
Mm.
Yeah.
It's nice and central 
That's it, yeah.
I mean you're you're not sort of right in the centre of town, but 
Right in but it's only a few minutes away.
That's right yeah.
You don't have to have 
It's up the road and cross the main road and you're in  Kingsway aren't you?
You don't need any wheels do you, really?
No.
No.
Which is just as well.
I crashed 
You're wheel-less are you?
Yeah I crashed mine.
Put it in the dyke.
Oh no.
 

Very nice.
I was very lucky actually.
Mm.
Somebody was looking after me cos I shouldn't have got out and I did.
Mm.
It does actually.
I was out with erm an nephew la last night and  I mean it wasn't icy but it was sort of getting late and it was cold.
It was slippy.
And he was being silly.
And I said to him if you don't pack it up I'm gonna get out and walk.
Yeah.
Mm.
Cos 
And he said well it's a long time since you had the accident.
I said I don't care.
It's still, you know silly little things 
No it still makes you very careful.
like that still unnerve me.
A bit of mud on the road and
That's it, yeah.
It was slippy though I mean I noticed that even, you know just pulling away from or something like that  okay I mean it's a  reasonably   car but I mean, you know just a little bit too heavy on the accelerator
You can feel it.
it's very easy  you can feel it slipping
That's right.
quite easily.
Thanks very much indeed.
That's alright.
Lovely.
Yeah thank you.
Thank you.
 

Are you alright?
Are you warm?
Oh I I mean I haven't been  I had it on but I put it off because it was
Yeah well you're going out anyway so you 
Yeah.
don't need the heater on.
How are you, alright?
 Enoch's coming for me.
Three o'clockish.
Oh well.
We didn't have to come.
you see.
We came round to give you a lift.
Oh that's very nice of you but I didn't know whether you were or not and she phoned, no I phoned her and she's going and  she said she'd come for me so
Yeah.
I didn't know whether you were coming or not cos you said you didn't know.
Well we didn't know, we weren't sure but
No.
You said you would be too busy.
Well we didn't know what time when we
What time we were gonna be viewing houses but we've been to see two.
Where?
Oh yeah I think, think  just finished meeting me and they're .
Have you heard from the people yet?
No.
Well th er  you have to wait till you hear from them really before you do  can you?
I don't know whether it's
Mm?
Whether it's what?
Well you can't just leave it and not bother can we?
No I know but I thought they'd, you know?
We thought there'd have been some response 
I thought they 
by now but there hasn't been.
There hasn't?
Did they say they'd come and see you?
Yeah.
And they haven't bothered.
Oh I wouldn't  .
Mm?
And he hasn't bothered.
Well  time yet isn't there?
Well we  thought we'd better get looking.
Oh yeah, you might as well.
You might as well.
Well what have you seen?
Where you been?
Albany Road and New Drove.
New Drove, where's that?
Down near  Queen's Boys 
Oh aye, down that way.
Yeah I know.
That one.
Oh!
A new one.
Yeah, brand new.
It's a flat?
Mm.
They're both flats.
They're both flats that we've seen.
Well is it upstairs or downstairs?
Well there's one of each but we prefer the upstairs one, it's nicer.
I didn't like the downstairs one.
I didn't like the kitchen.
It was like a passage weren't it really?
It's a funny little 
It was a small kitchen wasn't it?
funny kitchen.
There's no room for any 
No.
well there's room for a cooker and a washing machine.
Is it, there's nobody in it?
It's it's it's empty?
Brand new.
Mm.
Yeah brand new empty.
Nobody's been in them yet.
And how how big?
Is it the whole hou I mean how, what half the house?
No.
No.
Well the upstairs  half.
Upstairs half.
Yeah.
Well there's a h that's two houses there, there's four there?
Yeah.
There's four flats altogether in that block.
I see.
There's one bedroom and a living room and a kitchen and a bathroom and  it's qu they're quite sizeable really I mean they're not 
You're quite impressed?
Mm.
Well the upstairs one's certainly much much better than the downstairs one.
Yeah we haven't, we liked the upstairs one very much.
Is it?
Yeah.
The upstairs one  
And we can get a good package on that you see.
How do you mean?
Well he he's wanting to sell them.
Yeah but I mean  what do you 
And he'll either you can either knock  he'll ei , you can either knock  some money off, which he'd accept whatev ,mo most  or he'd pay your deposit for you.
Oh.
And what's that?
Well I'm  if it's full price thirty thousand, that's three thousand pound innit, near enough?
Yeah well fifteen hundred.
Five percent is 
Fifteen at five percent.
Oh he'd pay fifteen hundred for you?
What
Or or he'll knock it off the price if you want to.
Oh.
Well that doesn't 
You can get a good deal with him because 
Yes.
he wants to get, he wants them sold now he's built them.
Yeah.
And this is the other one is it?
What this is a house is it?
That's a flat as well.
No this is a flat as well?
they're both flats.
Yeah.
That's a downstairs one.
A downstairs flat.
Downstairs flat.
In an old house?
.
Yeah.
Older, yeah it's an older house but it's been completely
It's been 
Yeah.
builders ren made it into two separate  .
Is it nice?
Mm.
Yeah I think I like that.
It's the older one I know but 
I think they're both nice.
The bath the kitchen's nice in that one though isn't it?
The kitchen's nice 
What, in this one?
Yeah.
It's a lovely kitchen.
Yeah.
It's been done out nice and there's tiles and there's nice coloured units and that.
There's some lovely lovely units in that one.
And would there be any erm  difficulty in getting a mortgage with this one?
Well I don't think so.
No, they're quite happy to lend Stuart the money  as long as it's not more than thirty two which that isn't.
Yeah.
And we'll probably knock him down anyway because say there's 
Yes.
properties aren't going.
Where's this?
Albany, where's that?
Top top of Chase Street.
Behind factory .
Bottom of Chase Street.
Bottom.
Ch Chase Street, now where's that?
Where, Rutland Arms is on the corner.
It's right on the end of that.
Oh oh off Lynn Road?
Oh aye you're right in town then?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I say there, there
Interest you?
I've seen that before.
Oh have you?
Mm.
I was gonna rent it.
Are you making a cup of tea?
Yeah.
I'm making you a cup of tea.
Oh right make  
We're desperate.
We've not, we've been out since  about eleven o'clock and not had a drink.
Ah!
Haven't you been to the  
We've been in we've been in the estate agents and 
Oh.
seeing houses and
Well there's biscuits there, there's a c a bit of cake Ann.
I made a coconut cake but  er er I put some coconut icing on it  pink.
But the pink went a bit 
Well the cochineal was a bit dry so I put some water in and boof
out it came.
So you, it's got red icing on it.
But you can have it if you like, you know.
You can have it if you like.
Mm.
Or there's some biscuits.
Or there's some Ryvita.
Sheila has lost three and a half pounds this week.
Oh lovely.
Isn't she doing well?
And  well she's that chuffed with herself last night
She's so, done really well hasn't she?
yeah, no she won the fruit.
Have this heating on.
No it's alright.
Sure?
Erm 
It's not cold outside it's lovely.
No it's quite mild.
No it isn't cold.
I mean I had the heating on to start with and oh I thought this is ridiculous.
I mean 
Yes.
I may as well save my ga 
That's it.
cos it's gonna cost me  Erm  she won the fruit.
Now what they do is  each of them takes  a piece of fruit each time they go
Mm.
I mean this is quite a good idea actually.
An apple or an orange or something.
So the one who loses the most weight wins the fruit.
And she got the fruit.
Wins it.
Oh that's definitely an incentive.
Oh lovely.
Three and a half pound she lost and she lost more than any of them.
lovely .
Some of them's one of the women had gained a pound.
Oh dear.
Had gained a pound, so you know 
So I mean she's over half a stone now isn't she so that's nice for 
That's right.
That's what she say.
I said good girl, keep going.
Yeah.
Oh I'm going to she says.
Mm yeah.
But I mean that makes a difference Ann doesn't it?
It does.
Eh?
Mm that's smashing.
Yeah she's right chuffed with herself.
Right chuffed with herself.
I'm trying to wash my hair, but I daren't do, I'll do it tomorrow  
There you are dear.
Erm
Pop that down there  There you go.
Bet you're ready for that.
Yes
def definitely ready for it.
Definitely.
Definitely desperate for it.
Yep.
I'll leave yours another minute.
I'm desperate.
Ah!
Mum's got some cake in there she said if you want a bit.
cake at home.
Fair enough.
Just thought you might be hungry.
Cheers my dear.
Cheers.
See what I got yesterday Ann.
Oh they're nice.
Three pound.
Oh!
They're lovely.
Like them.
Oxfam.
Not Oxfam .
Look it's even got 
Aren't they nice.
a tummy thing in it.
You know, to hold your tummy in.
They're lovely.
How about that!
Three quid.
Three fifty.
They're nice.
Like them?
Yeah.
New pair of trousers aren't they?
And they fit me perfect.
They're smart.
Yeah they've not been worn have they?
You can tell 
No, look.
They're lovely.
Like them?
Mm.
Mm nice.
will go bananas.
The Heart Foundation Shop.
Well what's wrong with the Heart Foundation Shop?
Well whatever it is, you know?
It's as good as anywhere.
Sheila doesn't agree with it.
And why not?
Mind it's a pair, it's a tw it's about what, twelve pound pair of trousers for only for
Yeah.
a fifteen pound pair of trousers for
Yeah.
Cos they're not  it's not a cheap pair is it?
They haven't been worn have they?
No.
I'm quite happ chuffed with them.
Mm.
Ooh pardon me.
Have that cake Stuart.
No it's alright.
Well help yourself.
Don't worry.
He would.
Oh alright, alright.
.
I had the baby   I had the baby  in the er  in the er verandah all morning.
Oh have you?
I bet they liked it out there.
Change of scene.
I put the two of them in the cage, they went in the cage and they, oh and they get on alright together.
They was chirping a bit and  Whiskey's the bully.
Yeah?
And  Padley and then I sprayed them  and Padley started to wash himself.
Oh!
The size of them!
When he  flutter, oh he's very  he, oh he's a big bird.
He is.
He was a devil though.
They were alright though, quite happy out there.
Mm 
Do you wanna s er at the table Ann?
No you're alright.
That'll do me.
You're sure?
We shan't be stopping that long
Eh?
if you're going out anyway won't you?
Oh you can stay as long as you like.
It's up to you, I don't mind.
No.
We'll have a cup of tea then we'll go home.
Get our tea on.
Liver casserole for tea.
Oh very nice.
Very nice.
Just the job.
I hope so.
Should be alright.
Have you had your  hokey thing?
No I haven't  that.
Oh it's lovely.
Is it?
It's delicious.
I've eaten mine.
It  do you want er do you want
No, no you have it.
Did you have the two bits or the one bit?
Yeah.
I had two with a bit of salad.
With a bit of sa yeah I've got to do salad.
Oh it was lovely.
Was it?
Mm.
Ooh.
Yeah, no, I'm gonna have it tonight Ann.
I erm  had baked potatoes last night.
Mm.
What else did I do?
Just had a shower, cor feel a bit cold now.
What did you have last night?
Oh you had tandoori didn't you?
Tandoori.
I don't know whether to give Vera her present today or tomorrow.
What did you get her in the end?
A rosebush.
Oh yeah you said you probably were.
I mean I know, er do you think it's daft?
No, I think it's nice.
Ah but it's a it's a you know a rose, not  you know I think  I thought well what can you buy her?
Well that's it.
No point in buying her ornaments and things I mean 
Everybody's buying her all s .
No!
She's gonna get loads of ornaments.
That's it.
And and you know what she's like.
So  I I I mean, but I don't know whether to take it today or  you know because she'll get a lot of things given her today.
Or wait till tomorrow night or, Joan phoned this morning and  oh I s I saw Tom in town yesterday.
Although I didn't, he he, I didn't have time to ask him what the hell he'd been up to.
Here you are.
Oh I've got some n new cigarettes.
I never brought them in.
What kind?
What they called?
Dorchester.
Dorchester.
They're cheap.
Yeah.
Have you tried them?
Well th they're cheap.
I only got one packet cos they're cheap in Gateway and I thought well if  if they're alright might just go on them then.
Yeah.
These are getting ridiculous prices.
Well they are aren't they?
I agree with you.
So I'm, I thought we'll try them.
Dorchester?
Yeah.
Never seen them before.
Yeah.
How much were they anyway?
One sixty seven
Yeah.
kingsize and one sixty six ordinary.
Thought you might as well have the kingsize.
Yeah.
Won't smoke as many if they're bigger.
No.
If they're alright Ann.
That's it.
If they're alright.
Yeah.
tomorrow.
Ha.
 

I put on this  as this rose blossoms each year hope you will too.
And remember this day with joy.
Do you think that's alright?
Do you think that's daft?
Yeah lovely.
No.
I don't know whether to take it with me.
You are coming tomorrow night?
Cos I'm gonna tell .
Oh yeah.
Mm.
You know?
Yeah.
We're definitely coming.
Yeah, we're booked in.
You don't have to come too early only I've got to go at quarter to seven.
But I mean you don't
Well we'll be here.
Oh here's .
Oh here .
You said three o'clock.
No.
It's five to.
No I said   oh
Sue.
Pardon?
Sue.
Yeah.
Oh Enoch's staying and oh they're not waiting, I'd better go.
I'll leave you to it then, I'll hear all the gen tomorrow then.
Yeah.
We we'll still be, we won't be going, we'll be staying here.
Isn't no point in going home.
Unless you wanna go home and get washed and changed do you?
Might as well stay here and get washed and changed .
Might as well bring clothes and get ready here and
No point is there?
No.
No, no point is there?
Might as well bring the clothes and stay here as go home, all the way home and all the way back again.
Mightn't I?
Mhm.
I've got her pressy here but I think, I don't think I'll give it till tomorrow night.
I was just thinking you know she'll have that many things to do today won't she?
Yes.
So I think I'll give it tomorrow night.
Come in.
So I feel a bit 
This is Sue.
Mrs .
Hello.
This is Ann.
And that's Stuart.
On your own?
Well I know Stuart.
Well it's so nice to mee , Mrs , oh, very pleased to meet you.
Oh yes.
It's very nice to meet you.
Yes.
Yes.
You have met him haven't you?
Yes.
Unfortunately she says.
Oh no that is 
So I've had two injections.
What for?
Well they give you one don't they in your  bloodstream so they can have a deep scan.
Well what are they scanning then?
My back.
Your back.
Your back.
Yeah.
What are they doing that for?
It's my last one.
Oh to see whether your things are all in place?
I'm going back Yeah.
Oh I see.
So and then they gave me an injection in the back.
Ooh.
Cos I've got a bit er my blood's a bit thick round the scar so  disperse the blood.
Ugh!
Sounds .
You're not so you're not feeling so good?
Glad when it's all over.
Eh?
Be glad when it's all over.
Yeah.
That's right.
To be quite honest I could just go to bed.
And  
Well why don't, why don't you go then?
No.
Don't bother coming out there.
Then I won't sleep tonight then Jean.
Eh?
If I sleep during the day I don't sleep at night.
Well that's true but maybe, you know  and if you've to drink she , maybe you shouldn't drink sherry on top of what you've had injected into you.
Oh I know I shan't have any drink.
And my feet keep swelling up.
I've got my shoes on now, but I couldn't 
Do they?
Yeah.
But they don't know what's the matter with them.
Oh.
Don't know why  they keep swelling up.
Oh crikey.
Oh dear.
Otherwise your er  otherwise she's alright?
 
Otherwise she's alright.
Yeah.
I'll get me coat.
Yeah otherwise I'm 
Yeah well 
Mmmmmmm 
Not A fit but
No.
No.
not A one but  getting there.
Getting there.
Yeah.
Slowly but surely.
Yeah.
No work so  
Let's hope they soon get you sorted out.
Mm.
Well they've sorted my back out.
Mm.
Yeah I had my disc removed but  took two operations but
Say it'll take you a while won't it, to
Well I had my first operation twentieth of August then I had another one the second  of October.
Mm.
But  at least I haven't got no pain anyway so
Do they think you'll be able to go back to work?
Yeah, six months.
Six months?
Yeah, February.
Never mind eh.
Mm.
That'll soon be here.
Then you'll have to be careful  
 
won't you?
Be very careful.
Get christmas and that over with.
Yeah.
Oh Ashley's going this afternoon.
I know.
I met him.
But Ashley isn't going tomorrow is he?
I know.
So I hear.
I met him.
She's going tomorrow.
But he's not allowed is he?
Yeah.
Why can't he come?
He's not allowed he told you didn't he?
Well I  He told me he wasn't allowed to go  nights.
told him that er seeing he's on the sick he wasn't allowed to go.
he's only coming for an hour.
I tell you what he, bet, I bet you he's shitting, oh excuse me
shitting bricks today.
Well you know why.
It's either Maurice  going to be there or  .
I know.
's the b the big boy.
They'll 
Yeah but they don't 
probably both be here.
Well it don't look very good me being there then does it?
Oh that doesn't matter.
Well that's what, that's what his excuse was, never  cos he's never been in here.
Yeah but he told me  he told me he told 
He said  told him 
him
Yes?
that he's not even to phone the place.
That's right.
told him that, because
Yeah but why don't  tell the girls?
Well exactly.
Because you know what, they're up in the air aren't they?
Yeah , can you believe it?
Mm
And why?
Why can't he ph , that's ridiculous isn't it?
I said 
Oh well if he wants to know why I'm there and  me are you off sick I shall just show him a  I've got proof that I've been off sick.
Show him your scar  
I've got eight pins I have .
But
Well I know you're off but I mean that 
Yeah but   here there er 
Yeah I know but 
and everywhere isn't he?
Well if if  said that, and he he he he shouldn't have said it well he's in trouble.
Now I've lost my keys.
No I haven't.
Here they are.
I mustn't forget my keys.
No erm  I mean that's s but he's he's gonna feel like a right  it'll be funny today  Sue.
It will be  jockeying for position.
Ah  but he isn't there yet is he?
What, today?
Will  go?
You don't think he
Well it it's gotta be seen to believe.
You can't say 
Well yeah that's true.
until he turns up.
No.
Can you?
True.
But the thing is  he he's gonna be ever so, isn't he?
He'll be making excuses all the way round  
No I've gotta go .
Eh?
He he won't be there long if he does come.
Well that's it.
That's it.
But I mean if he doesn't and sh , I mean why shouldn't you?
I mean after  all these years here I mean you can't  well that's  
Do you wanna say cheerio?
Yeah.
Bye  
Bye bye.
Bye.
Bye bye.
See you Sue.
You'll see them tomorrow.
Th they're coming tomorrow 
Yeah we'll see you tomorrow.
See you tomorrow look.
but you know.
Oh yeah.
Well they said,wh when we, last Sunday weren't it?
Yeah when we called in.
I went in and paid my money  and they said to Ann
Isn't Stuart coming?
aren't you coming?
You know,be seeing you.
in the office didn't she?
Mm.
She nearly begged us to g , nearly went down on her knees to get us to go didn't she?
Well I'll see you tomorrow then Stuart.
Yeah alright Sue.
Yeah.
We'll see you then.
Yeah.
Yeah.
See you tomorrow.
Yeah.
Just lock up and  do what you like to the cat.
You can either leave it in or out you know.
Don't  
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Okay.
Cheerio.
Toodaloo.
Yeah.
See  are you coming round tomorrow afternoon Stuart?
Yes mum.
You 
We're not going  he's bringing his clothes.
We're not going home.
Oh aye yeah Ann.
Are you bringing yours?
Yeah, well there's no point in going home.
No that's true.
That's true.
okay.
Bye.
See you.
Bye.
See you tomorrow.
  

There we go.
Is that better dear?
Yeah.
That's lovely.
Shall we have a nice cup of tea?
I was gasping.
Especially when that man was 
Rabbitting?
Yeah, which I didn't understand any of it.
No.
Pension mortgages and this mortgage and and he didn't really know how er er  cos that that foreign Lucy or whatever her name was
Yeah.
that foreign lady was quite amused.
She was laughing when you were asking him questions.
Oh.
as if to say ah ah  he's not sure what he's doing.
He's got somebody here who knows .
Instead of just sitting there and quoting all these figures 
yeah 
and blinding you with science .
Yeah.
Somebody who can ask questions and knew what he was talking about.
Yeah.
And she was giggling away.
She kept raising her eyebrows and laughing.
I was watching her.
Well I couldn't see her cos I had my back turned.
No you had your back to her.
Yeah.
But I could see behind you and she was  
Well there you are.
When you do know a bit about it you yes you want to know 
Well that's it.
You're not, and you're not gonna be blinded by all these  like he was, what was he saying about  all endowments are are not unit then you were saying yes they are and  
I didn't know  what  on about there.
I I think he got his
said that.
Oh he knew what he was talking about but 
But you were confusing him because you knew, where he's used to just sitting there and telling blah blah blah blah and
Well you see the thing is they they they 
And you knew what he was on about.
they quote this unit linked business.
Now it's all 
And you didn't want that did you?
well and good a unit linked policy but  as I said to you before that  if they, if the market crashes the day before your policy is due out you 
And you haven't got enough money.
you could, you can lose a th I don't want one.
If the market crashes the day before you take your policy's due to mature  wallop.
You can lose a lot of money in a  you know, just like that.
But do you think this thing what he was on about, pension  mortgage, do you think that would be better?
Was that that PEP thing what's all in the papers at the moment?
No.
Is that what it means?
PEP's different.
Oh.
Is it similar?
PEP's a personal equity plan.
Oh.
Sorry.
Which is different.
To be perfectly honest  in my current situation
Mhm.
a pension mortgage  would be more advantageous.
Well that's the most important thing isn't it?
At the moment.
Because well I'm not in a pension scheme at work.
But I have got an option to go in it
Yeah.
if I want to.
Mhm.
Erm  the only problem is  well, even s even, not so much now because  because the er   a bit better.
Because of the m because of the way pensions and that are are organized now, they're more flexible now  I mean, you can go to a job beforehand if if if your company had a pension scheme, you were obliged to go in it  that was it.
All your other arrangements went up, went through the window.
Mm.
Erm so it it it it's difficult.
Mm I know you can take them along with you nowadays can't you and  into a 
You can now take, now now now you can take them with you.
Mm.
Where they used to be frozen and then you started another one wherever you went next time.
That's right.
That's right.
Whereas now  
And you ended up with three four d silly little bits and pieces didn't you?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Whereas now you see all the they can put them all into one.
Yeah.
I know you can take them with you now.
Mm.
So in a way I think
And it was a lot less money as well wasn't it?
I mm yeah but that w don't forget 
It started 
that was sixty five.
Yeah .
The quotation he give was sixty five and as he said which is true they double every five years.
Particularly in the later years there's you know
Mm.
more  And that's why I said, when it sounded so low  that's why I I still doubt his figures.
I still think two hundred pound a month  a thirty thousand pound mortgage  it's too low.
And and a cash sum at the end of it.
Still think it's low.
Seems quite  doesn't seem a lot does it?
No.
I'm pretty certain 
And would you still have to have an insurance on top of that?
You have to have term assurance.
So you'd still have to have 
You'd have
you'd have the two hundred pound and then you'd have a life insurance on top?
No no no.
No.
That was it, two hundred and twelve pound 
The whole lot?
The whole lot.
Well why doesn't everybody have them then?
Because not everybody's eligible for them.
I know but they didn't, he didn't suggest it to you or  why doesn't he say well there is this er er, you said that he didn't.
And he must have known that they're gonna be cheaper so why doesn't he advise people who are starting out to take one of them?
Didn't ask 
Rather than a
Didn't ask the questions.
I know, exactly.
But surely that's 
He didn't  he 
his job.
If he's trying to find you the cheapest
He's not doing his job.
Basically 
Exactly.
he's not doing his job.
Because a young couple going in  well even in our situation, you haven't got much money and you want the cheapest thing for the best  we you know.
But he never suggested it.
You said  what about a company, what about a a pension mortgage and he 
He didn't, he he didn't ask the question.
Which he should have asked.
Mm.
Exactly.
Yeah because it is cheaper and
You see the thing is  you see I mean wh wh when this  law came out, LAUTRO and all that business came out  that, and best advice and all this sort of thing  you had to go through all the finances and what people earned and all that sort of thing.
What they've got insurance already  erm so on and so forth.
And arrange around those circumstances the best advice  package.
Mm.
But he didn't ask me the questions.
He just  he just  he just 
No he just could do an endowment one and that was it.
he just assumed it was gonna be
An an endowment policy, and endowment mortgage and that was it.
He didn't tell you anything else.
No.
Well you see when he said your base is gonna be 
I know.
a hundred and two hundred 
Ninety six.
and fifteen pounds or whatever 
Two hundred and five and then that  on a ninety six 
And then a percent I could get you a percent off as a first time buyer.
Mm.
That brings it down to a hundred and ninety six  for the first year.
Then it goes back up to the base rate.
Yeah.
Not, I know all that's that's obvious.
That's quite clear.
Mm.
But then when he said two hundred and one pounds for a  pension mortgage  I thought well if a hundred and ninety 
That's only five pound a month to earn your pension.
if a hu if a hundred and ninety six is only your base how come you don't 
That gives you five pound a month towards your pension which is nothing is it?
how do you get two how do you get two hundred and one pounds or two hundred and fifteen pounds and what with, because of the term assurance on top.
That's fourteen pounds a month term assurance.
Quite high I think.
What's term assurance?
Don't understand that.
Term assurance is  life insurance  just on life only.
With no cash sum at the end.
Well if you died  you'd be dead.
Well that's fair enough isn't it?
You wouldn't want anything else.
But er throughout throughout the term of my life 
And if you died the  would be paid.
If I died a lump sum of thirty thousand pounds is payable.
That's it, you'd pay  
But I think fourteen pounds a month is quite high.
Term assurance.
I'm tempted, I'm I'm I'm tempted to have a word with Mick.
What and arrange your own?
Well
Or he'd just tell you?
well I, whether I, I don't know whether he would or whether he wouldn't.
I mean he might  he might not but  then again he might.
He might if I, if I talk to him he might tell me what sort of  I don't want to hassle him you see cos I've hassled 
No, that's it.
him before .
Not on that sort of thing but other things as well sort of thing and I don't wanna  I'd like to know.
Mm.
I'd like to know  before you know 
You've got to get the right deal.
Yeah.
I, I did  two hundred and one pound a month or two hundred and fift okay it sounds cheap but  I don't know fourteen pound a month just for li thirty thousand pound life cover over  suppose it's the 
Yeah but that's not that much a we 
I suppose it's the term of years.
It's only three quid a m a week.
Yeah but I suppose it's the term of years as well.
You sort of to sixty five rather than at sixty.
Well that's it.
So that probably makes it but I say without having me own book  to check it I can't
Mm.
I can't tell you.
You see you can, you get a lot, you can get tax relief off that or you used to be able to get tax relief.
Well he said you could get tax relief on the whole lot.
On the whole lot, yeah.
That's what he said.
At twenty five percent.
At twenty five percent.
I think you still, I'm not sure whether they've changed the law round or not cos they
Well that's what he said didn't he?
Yeah.
Er you'd be handy for a a tax relief on the whole lot rather than just
Yeah.
part of it.
Cos that  you see if you, if you, if you could link up  life assurance to your pension  you could get tax relief on your life assurance you see?
Mm.
Which makes it advantageous  because there's no tax relief on life policies now as there was
There used to be, yeah.
There used to be but there is no 
But they stopped it.
there is, they stopped it.
There isn't any more.
Mm.
No, I'm sort of I think he confused himself as well as confusing me slightly  
Yeah be because you  you confused him.
Yeah.
Because you knew.
Mm.
Rather than somebody as I say like me who sat down there and he'd just quote all these figures and you wouldn't know what the hell he was on about and just, all you, all I would understand at the end is  that's what you gotta pay.
Mm.
Which is what most people that go in there
Are interested in.
Well they wouldn't understand all the rest.
This plan, that plan, the other plan.
They only know well  you either have this option paying this amount, that option paying that amount or that option paying that amount and which one do you want to have.
Mm.
And and you don't understand any of the rest of it.
No.
No.
You just sit there mm yeah mm no mm  well that's the cheapest, that's the dearest and  and take their  advice which ones the best for you and have it .
And that's er that's all normal  people who don't understand any of it  that's the way they'd go about it isn't it?
Yeah.
You'd just accept whatever was 
See the other thing, I don't know  well no I'm not sure you can now.
See if I took a pension  mortgage out it would be linked to me  lumped into me current  pension contract.
Cos I've already got a pension  scheme running.
Cos I've contracted out of SERPS.
And also got  erm  erm what used to be called  seventy seven.
Yes Stuart.
Erm  a frozen pension with the Pru
Yeah.
linked in with it  at the moment.
That's that's that's my pension arrangements at the moment.
Mm.
Mm so  I'm tempted  er if I'm gonna do a pension  
I tell you what you wa who you wanna go and see.
Who I saw when I bought the house  at er thing.
Now he was, I know he blinded me with science but he wa , he was really very good and he had his computer there and he went through all these different societies and plans.
Well that's what he's done.
You see that's what he's done.
No but he had I mean he had a screen and er
Mm.
and that was  that's along near Maxie's near the post office but it's a 
Yeah, I saw him.
Oh the erm the Scots chap?
Er what's his name?
Oh and he was smashing.
And he explained it all to me.
Oh  I can't think of his name now.
I I I have had dealings with him.
He he explained it all.
Yeah.
And although there was all these figures and er  and he explained  what was best, I mean he was purely a financial  I mean he he  as he said when we went in cos  it doesn't make no difference, I I I'm not  attached to anything.
I'm here to 
No.
But nor's he.
I am here to give you advice.
That's it.
And that's it.
Independent financial advice.
And  and therefore I'm not here to sell you this or that.
I'm here purely to find out, you want to buy this council house  and and and I'm here purely to find out your circumstances and and what would be the best deal for you.
That's right.
And he went, I mean I was there  for blooming ages.
And he went through everything  till he found out  and it wa I didn't have the abs the absolute cheapest one.
Cos he didn't think that was a  because Steven was disabled and that as well and on my money and one thing and another
Yeah.
and  and one thing and another but er  it  I mean mi mine ended up with the Bradford and Bingley, I mean
Yeah well they're agents for Bradley, Bradford and Bingley 
Yeah I know but he did say that even though agents I'm not giving you this and then he showed me all the things you know to sort of prove that he was doing it.
But that's wh oh yeah that's who I had.
Yeah.
It doesn't matter what building society you go to.
No well that's what he said, it doesn't but I mean  he went through all these and insurance companies and because of my  kidney being removed  I had to pay, I had to pay higher even though I didn't have to have a bloody medical but I had to pay high because of my 
Yeah.
Medical condition.
because I'd had medical Yeah it was cos I'd had all these operations.
You know you had to put how many operations have you had in the last ten years and  have are you er receiving any treatment and all that bloody blah blah blah.
And so mine, mine was higher
Yeah.
than er than other peoples which is why he went to all these bloody quotes.
See the thing  yeah.
As I say the thing, the thing is as I say it's you you your mor 
He sorted it all out.
But he was really good.
Yeah.
Your mortgage, it doesn't matter who your mortgage is with, basically.
I mean you can go to most places and
Mm.
you're gonna be paying
But when you buy a council house it is slightly different in as much as some  some of them won't have them.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Then also, he also gave me  I mean I got hundred percent mortgage which you are allowed on, I mean the law says er  t the chance to buy so therefore you don't have to have a deposit.
But he also gave me enough to cover all my fees, legal fees.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I borrowed over what the house was worth.
But that was only because  I'd lived in it for a long time and I got a discount so the house was really 
Discount.
Yeah.
worth more
Yeah.
than what I was paying for it.
Yeah.
Cos I got a discount so er I borrowed another thousand pound
To cover your costs.
to cover all the costs for the survey for Maxie's and  and this that and the other.
Which I think come to about eight nine hundred pound.
Mm.
As I say it doesn't matter what building 
Anyway he borrowed all that for me.
it doesn't matter what building society you go to, you're gonna be paying basically the same rate.
Because they're all the same rate.
The base rate's the same.
You, okay one place you can get a percent discount  you might get a percent and a half discount depending on your
Mm.
depending on the building society at the time.
It's the life policy
Mm.
that makes the difference.
But to go to somebody like him  who knew his job
Mm.
which was his job and and had everything there and he, he patched through to this computer this place and  different computers that he had.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And the facility to to get through to.
Mm.
Mm.
That he could get all these to find out what he thought was the best policy in in your
Mm.
as I say because of my health and one thing and another you couldn't just  and he, and he was really good he was and explained everything to me I say that
Can't think of his name now but I know the chap.
He was a tall chap with glasses.
Mm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Ever so nice.
Yeah.
He really you know made me feel  I say I weren't sat there like I was with that fella thinking  well he don't seem to know what he's saying anyway.
No no.
Which is what the impression I got about him, he wasn't really sure himself.
Mm.
But I think that was partly you floored him because you knew.
Yeah.
Yeah.
He sort of was a bit you got him a bit couldn't say.
But certainly that man that I went to that time he was very very nice and
Mm.
then you could see he'd patch into all these different bloody things and
Mm mm.
and and and I ended up with  er a reasonable 
Was yours an endowment?
Or just
It was an endowment.
Yeah it had to be.
I dunno why but  it had to be.
Mm.
Well I don't know but that's what 
When does your mortgage finish then?
My mortgage?
I had it in  eighty one, twenty years so  another ten years.
So in fact there's still an endowment policy on you to cover that mortgage?
No they were all cancelled weren't it?
I dunno  
Oh yeah I signed the form.
So your endowment  policy
Everything's all
Ended.
Yeah.
Cancelled.
Cancelled.
Stopped.
Well what about the money?
The money was all .
I don't know.
I just signed forms to say that I was  no longer responsible or had any claim on the property or whatever.
And that was it.
I didn't have to pay any more and I didn't, and I was passing it over to  to Steve.
I don't know what happened.
Yeah but what about the  The life policy was in your name.
The whole lot was in  was it endowment?
No I dunno, it can't have been can it?
I don't know.
No it wasn't it was a  no it wasn't an endowment.
I didn't pay.
I only paid extra insurance.
Oh just a straight term p policy like I was 
Yeah because  yeah because, because of my health.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That was it.
Yeah it was   Yeah.
Because of my health.
It was a term assurance rather than it being an endowment insurance.
Yeah.
I couldn't, I don't think he could get the other  he got that one because of,i in my health you couldn't  they couldn't say how long
Mm.
because of my kidney.
The other kidney could go all blah blah blah and this that and the other.
Yeah.
It was just ordinary insurance.
I don't know how much it was.
I don't know.
I mean I only paid a hundred and sixty pound a month but I mean 
Mm.
Then I only borrowed twenty odd thousand cos I got a  forty odd percent discount off the price of the house anyway.
Mm.
Twenty two I think it was, something like that.
Mm.
You see  
And the rent was thirty six pound  a week.
And it ended up I was buying it for less money than what I was paying monthly for rent.
Yeah.
Well you would do.
So it was all
It was worth it.
Might as well have done it.
Mm.
Mm.
So I went into it.
Mm.
Mm.
Yeah it  it worked out hundred and sixty one pound a month, with the insurance.
So it's alright I mean I paid the whole bloody lot to them, I didn't
Mm.
sort it all out.
You don't pay it separate, I didn't.
I paid to council offices.
Mm.
And they sorted, they  forward it I suppose or did whatever they had to do with it.
Mm mm.
Used to pay at the council offices.
different book.
used to go and pay it.
Write the cheque out and he'd just take it in.
Mm.
I could have had it done through the bank but he was always up town anyway so
Mm.
So it didn't make any difference.
didn't make any difference one way or the other.
Mm.
Mm.
So how about you?
You'd have it done through the bank anyway and I'd just pay you  weekly I cou might as well rather than monthly .
Mm.
Save you going to the bank.
Couldn't I?
Just give you the money you  spends.
We'll see when we come, when it comes down to it won't we?
What we could do financially.
And sort something out then.
Well of course we will.
expect you to pay 
But I cert I I I I I ju I it it just sounds  you know two hundred pounds a month, just over two hundred pound a month  
Sounds smashing dunnit?
Sounds wonderful.
That's what I said, why doesn't everybody have them?
Well that's why I can't believe it.
Well he said go back and  tomorrow at least and 
And check his figures.
Mhm.
If that's right that's the one you want really isn't it?
Well I I I yeah.
I mean obviously I'd have to pay more  er for if I want it to  end at sixty.
Mm.
But even then it won't be  will it be that much?
To get  to get a higher lump sum.
To get a higher lump sum.
But then you see 
Would it be that much more?
Shouldn't think so.
Well exactly.
So it's gonna 
You see it's 
be less than a  want two hundred and eighty.
Oh yeah.
I said so you might as well have that and have a lump sum and a blooming house and
And a pension.
And a pension.
That's what I mean.
Might as well have your pension.
when you get to sixty.
Mm.
Say it's only twenty six years and  course with a pension see you can increase your contributions.
Yeah.
If if you get a better job and what have you you can always 
Better job or whatever or  pay rise or whatever you can increase 
Yeah you 
your contributions into your pension plan
Exactly, yes.
and still, and finish your mortgage earlier.
Yeah.
Fifty five.
Mm.
Or fifty.
Depending on how much you wanna pay.
Mm.
If you wanna pay more into it.
But I still think 
Well see what he comes up with.
See what he comes up with, yeah.
See what he comes up with.
And certainly  say  two hundred and twenty five pound a month it's still worth having.
It's cheaper than we're paying now isn't it?
Mm.
Even if it's two hundred and fifty it  the same 
Well you'd still 
you're gonna have a pension and and a home.
In a way I'd rather pay the same  and finish the mortgage earlier.
Yeah well that's it.
You could volunteer to pay two hundred and fifty a month couldn't you?
And pay a higher pension  policy.
Mhm.
That's what I mean.
And then and then you've got the option  then you've got the further option that if you want to reduce your premiums on your pension  you can do.
If anything happened.
Mm.
If anything  if  if it does  You see again and then you see if you're out of a job you see you  if you happen to be out of a job then you're not eligible for a pension policy.
What happens then then?
If you get made redundant?
Well.
And you've already got it.
Well, then you have to freeze it.
See that's that's the oth that's another drawback with the pension.
Whereas an endowment policy it doesn't matter.
You you can carry on paying an endowment policy.
So it, you know  there's pros and cons either way.
Mm.
There's there's er pros and cons in buying either of tho either of the flats.
You see er that's the thing isn't it?
Mhm.
But you've got to make the decision cos I like both of them very much.
I do.
So therefore you have to make the decision which one, if it comes down to it, would you like to live in.
I mean if we could get that one down at  New Drove what is it, twenty nine?
So that's gonna be, say if you get  fifteen hundred off it  it's gonna be twenty eight.
Call it, it's thirty thousand isn't it?
Yeah.
What is it, twenty nine nine nine five.
You might as well call it thirty thousand  
Well say you get twenty eight and a half.
You're gonna get it cheaper  the mor the monthly payment is cheaper.
And then aff and then you could afford to buy some blooming carpets.
And with the other one you've got to find a deposit which you'd have to pay back.
But you wouldn't have to buy any carpets.
You wouldn't have to buy the carpets.
And  you say we'd  gonna have to have a cooker and a fridge and that aren't you?
Well a cooker you definitely, a fridge  say we could perhaps borrow that one of mum's until we could afford one.
Or pick up a cheap one.
Unless  I say if you knocked him down.
But a cooker's no problem because I know you can go into the Electricity Board and say  I'm moving into a new property, I haven't got a cooker  and they would, you can get them.
No deposit, just added to your electric bill.
That's a way to  because
Oh buying it on some sort of
Oh yeah on er er a financial agreement.
Or  look around and see what there is going in the, in the market.
And get a sort of 
Second hand one.
no percent  free credit.
Yeah.
I mean there's no difficulty in getting a cooker.
Say if we  I mean if, if we're paying say  two hundred pound a month  on a mortgage
Mm.
for twenty eight thousand .
We've got fifty pound a month we can play with and we, to buy 
Well that's it.
You could 
to buy a cooker over the ne 
I might have one before I go home.
Oh.
a wine?
No.
Cup of tea?
Mm, no  no.
I'll have a  I might have a sliml er bacardi before I go home.
Just one.
I 
You can have a diet coke, bacardi won't hurt you will it?
It's not fattening.
Mm it's still extra calories.
I shall be drinking some tonight no doubt and and eating.
What do you want, bitter lemon?
Yeah please.
Ice?
Yes please.
I shall be partying tomorrow night.
Oh are you?
Very nice too.
You alright there?
You alright?
There was  a a house, a bungalow two doors from Stuart's mum.
And I popped out to the shop on Sunday the second of November and came back totally and utterly bemused to see them putting a christmas tree up and  father christmas in the window and fairy lights all over the place.
On the second of November.
Oh well.
That's a bit late, really.
I mean wouldn't you be absolutely pig sick of them by the first of December  never mind christmas .
year I can remember.
Good god.
it was   in October.
Some time by the end of September beginning of October, somewhere round there.
they've got christmas decorations .
Oh well I couldn't believe it.
I come back to Stuart and I said it is the second of November isn't it?
He said, yeah.
I said well idiots a couple 
There you are darling.
of doors away  are now putting their christmas 
mine are you see  the first week in December .
Yeah cos you get fed up of them don't you?
And they get 
December really isn't it?
Well yes but I mean  
It is for home .
For a pub is, is fine the beginning of December.
Yes.
You don't want, you get sick of looking at them and they're dust traps aren't they?
I think christmas should start everywhere in the first week  
Yeah, not not beforehand.
No.
in the shops before then.
Because I mean little kids are seeing father christmas and decorations 
I know.
and they think it's christmas.
Yeah.
then they've got to 
Don't know any other do they?
wait and wait and then they get fed up don't they?
 
As far as putting them up too early as well I say they get all dusty and you get sick of looking at them.
Yeah.
Time a week or so after christmas has come you're you're glad to get them down and out the way.
That's right, yeah.
And then it looks bare.
Then you think oh oh it looks bare .
Yeah, yeah.
You wouldn't er 
Wouldn't what?
happen to have er got er   pound coin or two spare on you?
I don't think I have any.
No, cos I was gonna pay the butchers which I would have had to have changed a note and you said  I'll pay.
All I've got is some coppers for the tin.
So you'll have to change some money up if you  want
Oh.
See.
money, I've got money but 
But I haven't got any darling  change.
Sorry.
If I ask Shirley nicely she might lend me a couple.
Ask me nicely what  
Well either that or she'll have to change you a note up.
well I don't  have a 
He wants to put some pennies in a machine and he hasn't got any.
a little  investment in your money box, but I haven't got any money to put in it.
 
pound coin  
But I have got  erm what have I got?
You want some pound coins which I ain't got.
Ah.
You haven't got any?
Haven't you got any at all?
Only what's in the till.
Oh dear.
There you go.
One two three four five.
I'll try and give you some back.
Oh do  do.
 
But I  can't guarantee that.
Hallo people.
Hallo.
Hallo Stuart.
How are you, alright?
Yes thank you.
Jolly good.
How the devil are you?
Fine.
How's you?
Yeah, probably.
There's you  Bob
pint and a half 
four.
Course she will.
What, for fourpence?
Four glasses.
How many times  that?
Tuppence on each?
Ooh .
Take the whole lot.
Oh  well  just have to pay for them between us.
Shall I give him two straws?
Yes please.
.
I'll have one, I'll have 
We'll share the straw 
.
She's ever so greedy.
Do you want a quick game of ?
Oh!
Thursdays  play it.
We got a match on Thursdays.
forgot how you do it 
Are we?
It's been that long since I played that game .
Lager for you my dear?
Yes please.
Shouldn't have bothered dear.
Fifty p  eh?
handle?
Fifty p  
A little that's not bad  fifty p.
Here, is it easy to lift off, it's not that heavy is it?
Pull it towards you.
Oh.
You see we've got some gentlemen here, they'll do it for you.
Stuart.
Oh it's easy.
It's quite heavy.
No, right away 
 
downwards.
Oh, sorry.
Downwards.
Pull it down.
Downwards  
I'm with you.
And mind your fingers.
That's it.
Then keep pulling it towards you  that's it.
Oh I'm with you.
There we go.
Thank you very much.
You've done that before.
That's how he knackered his thumbs.
You made me look at you, I've overlowed his  
 

That's how you buggered your thumbs, weren't it, doing that?
I was, I was looking to see that you weren't  your fingers and   dear.
what I was worried about.
fifties please, in the change or   five if you've got them.
Oh, look at all that change.
I can give you the total of  
It's alright then, you've got fifty now look.
Hi Harry.
Hello.
Oh, first time I've been out in years on a Friday.
Too busy.
Erm I'll have a 
Say, it's not Monday already.
Can I have a  er I'll have a pint of lager please.
Another shock I've had today.
Three of you came in  Friday either.
No I'm trying to clear the decks before christmas.
Oh.
Three weeks hence.
Another working weekend.
Good.
Well I thought you'd come cos I very rarely get many people in much before er
On the top.
 
.
Oh.
If you pull the cord on the light, your light'll come on then you'll be able to see what you're doing.
Put the light on .
Over here, over here .
This  the other side.
There's a little s cord.
Hello Alan, how are you keeping, alright?
Fine.
Yourself?
Busy busy busy.
Well, that's your problem.
find the timer.
Yeah.
You will go in for these educational  
The way I play  five minutes.
Pull it in, she ain't pulled  
You have to pull that, you have to pull the handle out and it don't start.
Now then,
Right let's have a go.
We'll have a crack at it shall we?
then you pull the handle.
Which one?
This one?
Yeah.
That's it.
Got it?
That's it.
That hasn't worked.
Hey,
Er the keys haven't popped up have they?
No, I think you have to put them up yourself.
No, surely 
You do.
it's not manual is it?
It's, well it's not digital yet.
Yeah, now you're on the timer Grace.
Now I'm on a timer  
Now you pull the now you the handle.
Which one?
Which handle?
No, I said now you  timer 
Oh now I pull it.
So you want a stick.
You want a st a a cue.
Yes.
god only knows.
There are shorter ones in the broom cupboard.
Oh.
Oh I don't know about that.
That's  
 
Sorry?
You don't knock the skittles down.
That's the idea.
Ah dear.
Now put your ball up on there  
Which one?
Oh  white ones?
Yeah.
And where do I go for on there?
 
You don't.
You missed.
Now the red ball counts double.
Yeah.
And here's your scores look.
Right.
I'm with you.
That's fifty.
Ah 
How do you play this?
 
Oh  dear.
while I've got a minute.
Oooh.
Keep your score in your mind cos I'm not sure of it.
Well you've got  
You got  and one and one, which one do you get this one?
Ah it doesn't matter, we're losing pet.
Oh don't cheat.
That's a foul.
She gets a hundred.
Oh!
Left the table.
Go on then.
What do you mean, left the table?
It didn't.
Well it went up in the air.
It hit the back doors
Doesn't matter.
that's a  to her.
Yes it does.
She gets a hundred.
Oh, hundred away.
Hundred away.
I lose my score obviously?
Yeah.
No you lose the score you've got but she gets a hundred.
Yeah well it saves me counting, don't it?
Hit the ball you can see without knocking th , without knocking the other skittle Grace.
Just keep it at that.
She's played this game before, look.
Oh!
Dear oh dear.
Not quite hard enough Grace.
If that had been a bit harder then 
Well put your hundred up.
Oh what did I do?
Oh me hundred.
Which is mine, bottom or top?
And what did you get just now?
Hundred.
Well you can be top or bottom.
Yeah, I'm bottom.
Did you get any score just now?
Yes.
What did you get?
Don't think so.
nothing went down did it?
Yeah it did, it went down ooh
What was it?
Er twenty odd weren't it?
Thirty odd, I dunno.
Call it twenty.
Ten here, this side and a hundred up there.
No you wanna be both on the same line, okay?
Well that's what I mean.
Ten  then there
Yeah.
and a hundred there?
Yeah.
That's it.
Thirty.
Is that right?
I think I ought  Steve Davis.
Yeah, put a bit of chalk on the end.
Ooh dear.
score mister.
thirty forty  forty and twenty  sixty.
Sixty.
ten.
hundred and ten.
for you Grace then .
 

He's getting too cocky.
Getting too cocky,.
She's played it before.
not a lot more than me .
played it about once .
Two hundred.
encourages me to make a comeback.
Ooh!
That's the last thing I wanted.
Two eighty.
Two eighty to play for Al.
Just to let you know.
A good player could be out of this easy.
Easy.
I could actually.
I've seen so many people do it.
Ooh.
Oh dear.
Oh dear.
She gets another hundred.
Mm.
I like them like that.
 
Oh sorry.
You can win this Grace..
I doubt it, I doubt it.
Red, red ball Grace.
Where are you, on the bottom Grace?
Oh sorry.
Red ball.
A red one?
Oh you've got to put the red one up near this?
Well yeah, I mean there's  there's no fast rule about having the red one but it scores you double.
Shirley  give her give her a little bit of coaching on the angles and things 
Well I wouldn't know Terry.
You know me.
Neither do I.
So he's got a hundred now.
Oh why?
didn't hit the ball.
Ah
Next time round.
I didn't know.
Ah.
I see.
You've got to go for a ball that's on the table.
You've got to hit a ball.
Oh.
Right.
So have I, so I've lost that hundred he gave me?
I went to have a go last time and missed it.
Oh.
red ball .
If the red ball goes down the edge of the white ball?
Oh no no no no.
You have to you you have to make contact 
 
to 
As long as you make contact you're okay.
Right.
Alan's got problems.
No, I shouldn't have problems.
I just dropped that silly shot and cocked it didn't I?
yeah.
So you don't go there again.
It's a second chance.
No that's  I can't remember where I went after this.
And the timer's going.
Yes, come on.
Don't talk about it, play it.
Time.
It's gonna be crucial at the end of the game.
Oh.
Red ball on the spot, Grace.
And your white
And the white, white on the  that's it.
There?
You've got to start again cos  
Yes.
So I've got to hit this red?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Just split that  nice and soft, not too hard.
Perfect.
Oh you've definitely played this before.
Oh I see.
Now I've got to  this one?
You could tell that one 
Nice and soft.
Oh!
Oh you didn't  of it Grace.
Another goes down.
Do we get any chalk?
Yeah look.
For that fifty pence.
It's in the corner look.
Oh.
 

Er Trish and Ron lost on Tuesday.
Oh, weep weep.
I weep.
How badly?
Yeah I just thought I'd tell you.
How badly?
Absolute zilch.
Oh.
Who was at  who was at fault?
Pardon?
Who was at fault?
What's that, ten?
Pardon?
She skittled at the last.
Did she?
Oh.
Was that ten, yeah.
Ten.
Seven.
Seven.
Mm?
Seven.
Cos your red ball went down it counts double.
I thought a red ball was thirty?
Well if it, it it, down which?
If it goes down a thirty hole, it'll be sixty won't it cos it's double score.
Did er Trish play the table?
Oh.
You know Trish!
Well table first, Ron second.
Oh got a 
It's a gentle  
I bet we have to buy the I bet we have to buy the umpire a drink at the end.
You damn well do.
How did you guess?
Shirley.
What, table first Ron second, or?
Erm  it it's a  silly table
Red's gone down.
oh.
Sixty.
Yeah but look at where the weight is though darling.
So you've got to hit that white one.
You have to hit the white one now.
 
Shirley.
If it was a silly table?
Even if it's a stupid table, hang on 
Dead right down  
 
didn't tell Lee.
She didn't say to me.,
You've got to go to one side Grace.
One side?
Yeah.
Oh.
Definitely not.
Not there.
Definitely not there.
Let's get serious Grace.
me, cos I haven't got me glasses on.
You know how she You know how  
That's it.
If that was  it would have been  what do they call it?
Take it again foul shot.
 
You know how they're always shouting at me because I hit them too hard?
Mm.
That was the only way.
Oh what  yeah.
If you did that  you you'd get nothing.
Like that.
Absolute nothing.
There's a red yours darling.
So slow.
Did John turn out?
No.
Thank god for that .
No it was so slow.
The only way we 
Like sort of ploughing through a field or erm yeah 
The only way to get a score was to hammer it.
Oh.
That one wasn't bad actually Grace.
Who was that you played?
But it didn't go through.
Tartan.
Oh.
say if you did it slow
Mm.
it, you know?
Yeah.
And you'll have to take time to do  Terry .
What was that?
Twenty?
I dunno.
about you putting your score up because I  
Well I'll say twenty.
Harold said twenty.
Alan old score twenty  
 
How do you get twenty for that one when it went in that hole?
Argue with Shirley not me.
Shirley said twenty, that's good enough for me.
Er five.
Six.
Alright then we'll compromise.
Is it?
Yeah 
Mm?
Oh well they're uncivilized aren't they?
Oh!
Six.
Six.
Not too hard Grace and just keep on potting them down.
Oh well I'll try.
Which is mine?
Do you know?
Top.
You're the top.
Top.
Ooh.
Ooh darling.
You've missed that  Six on here?
No.
No no no no no no, no.
On the the other one.
Six on the other one.
No, on the tens.
On the tens.
Six sixty.
Sixty you got, you 
That's it.
Cheat  you'd have to be cheating  or they wouldn't
Well it can't be six hundred odd can it?
Well you can.
My god, what's 
Ah!
Ooh!
Well you bollocksed you  bollocksed that didn't you?
No.
Gently.
Soft.
Bit harder.
A little bit harder.
.
Just a little bit.
over there now.
Yeah  Okay.
Right hand side of the red.
Yes the touch has come.
Grace.
Just a little bit harder.
Oh ooh.
Ooh.
Oh wonderful shot.
Was that good or bad?
Six seven, you got two hundred just then.
two seventy.
That one was worth two hundred.
Yeah, two hundred and
Seventy.
The white in, er white one in there as well didn't she?
Yeah I counted that.
Oh.
Don't rob me.
Now take it easy.
Don't get panicky.
Oh!
You  score darling.
Do I?
Oh 
That's scored.
Right.
I'll turn that down a bit.
Yeah, please.
What did you think about them?
don't leave me to .
go and get another pint.
I'll erm  at the same time alright?
Every time if you miss a shot 
Yeah.
totally  every time 
Put the white one down the red .
Did anybody count .
Six.
Six.
Yeah I'm gonna beat  I think.
And then five card  nine card brag afterwards.
Do you think so?
Yeah.
Huh!
What makes you so confident?
Just feeling lucky.
What?
What's the matter?
What's happened to your twenty three P?
Oh.
And  and a bit of loose change as well.
Tell me about it.
Oh not now  Shirl.
Later dear, later.
Er  twenty five.
Did you?
No, see you can pull them across here look 
Have you had your twenty three P?
Or have you g paid your twenty three P?
Hey!
Not yet.
We had an excuse.
We're, we're on holiday so
Oh well,
Yeah .
It's an excuse innit?
I've got an excuse 
Twist to the right hand side of the  red.
That's it.
Not far enough.
You're hitting it too hard Grace.
But there again you're getting about ten 
Do I have to use the red one all the time?
Well  the red's beneficial.
You you you don't, you don't have to.
Oh I see.
But it's double score.
I see.
Beneficial.
So if you sort of went  and it should
Who's in front actually?
Grace.
Ooh!
What an excellent shot.
Erm yeah.
Doesn't help you though.
Bloody hell
It doesn't help your  score.
Well there's two up there so  because she can only get one.
Been conning me.
What do you mean, been conning you?
Oh the red's in play as well is it?
Mm it is.
She's playing for time now you see.
Yes.
playing for time again.
Whoa!
You're in the lead.
Whoops-a-daisy.
Whenever you do that Grace it means a non score.
just rub it in Al, I'm sorry.
Lampposts I call them, what do you call them?
I see us coming second.
Skittles.
All you've gotta do is roll up and you've won.
Yeah you don't have to even  put it anywhere.
Beg your pardon?
Good shot.
He's gotta do all the 
It's gone up now hasn't it, the
No.
balls are still coming down.
Harold's gotta do all the work now.
I don't  well he could catch up.
He could.
Er he had more .
Lot more 
If you, if you don't knock a skittle down, Grace, you've won.
Oh.
Basically.
No.
Go for what you can see Grace.
That's what I'm going  
 

You can have a game.
That red's a good  
Not tonight.
good .
Oh yes.
When it's quiet.
No no no.
Foul shot.
I never saw that.
No, take it again Grace.
You sure?
I never saw that.
Cheat.
We weren't looking at the time.
Two hundred now.
 

Not when he's told me he was playing on somebody else's table and not gonna have a game.
I'm not having that.
Oh so vicious 
Oh.
so hard, so strong, so powerful.
Foul shot.
Missed.
Don't do too many of them
No good.
don't do too many of them 
he'll he'll catch up if you do  
I know.
Pardon me.
Five out.
Oh I 
Look at that red one on there?
Yeah.
That's not on is it?
Mm.
It's not touching either so you can play it.
Keep away from it Grace.
Miss a shot.
So what do you do now there's no balls on the table?
Pray.
Pray!
I'm going for easy shots .
That's seven anyway.
This one?
Oh no there's one in here.
There's one in here, so 
Yeah we were  and I didn't know how to go for this fifty one on the .
Or I didn't know where to go next.
Have to have a red  
Nearest.
No, oh the red's
There was Tony here like this  
He was supposed to be scoring.
Not supposed to coach from the sidelines
No.
and there was him with his finger hanging over the side.
Oh.
white up there.
other two whites.
Oh dear.
Did you get this one?
count it?
No.
Ooh.
How did you hit that one first?
Grace.
You haven't played a single ball off our cushion yet have you?
No.
I'm not that good.
Just try it.
Yeah just try it.
I'll try, I will though , yeah.
at the top there.
It's so easy.
Don't lose your position and you've won the game.
Have a crack at it 
Shut up.
If you don't think you can get one just  
I will go for, try for that one though 
Sh Shirley.
Oh sorry, I'm interrupting, I'm interrupting.
What did you say pet?
That's the one.
Just take the bloody ball.
You won it.
Well I hit the ball
you're winning.
The gate's on now.
Ah.
Ah..
Ah.
That's it now.
Points for points there,.
He's he's he's  he's lost it there.
He's 
Erm  can I take any?
Erm
Or not?
Nearest nearest white.
Yeah, the nearest white  .
Yeah.
His nerve's gone Grace.
You've won it.
Just keep your head.
Not necessarily.
Or something.
Just hit the ball.
That's the way, that's the way.
for a chance.
You'll count it though won't you because
Oh I've counted it.
Are you counting?
Are you counting somebody?
The nearest, the nearest white.
Twenty.
Thirty.
Forty.
Forty will do.
Just roll up to that one Grace.
Just hit the ball.
No no no no the one you can see.
Softly.
That's it.
Do you ever feel as though you're being ganged up on?
Not too hard.
Just roll up
No.
two go down.
That'll do.
Ooh.
No.
That'll do.
Now the nearest, the nearest one.
 
The nearest one.
Which is that one?
That's it.
I want thirty?
I was playing for that .
Ooh you set them up beautifully Grace.
Look at that.
How do you do thirty on here?
Well count, how many
Three on the bottom.
Well that one, which, which are you there?
I'm on  
That one?
Well go there  go to there.
And that one will 
And a hundred.
to there.
Where?
Another hundred.
The other way, that's it.
Oh.
That's it.
Som someone hasn't got their specs on tonight.
thirty to me  you know what you've got 
Yeah but you got thirty on  
You had seven hundred and eighty.
which makes it a hundred and ten.
Ah.
We're on your side.
We're ganging up on Alan.
You've got another hundred now, so
That's it, got another hundred.
take the nearest one.
Is it alright if I make a comment?
Grace?
Grace?
Take it off the cushion.
Yeah.
Your bound to hit one of them.
round about there.
Somewhere round about there.
Probably a bit here or there.
I've lost now.
Now you can see that one 
Put them both down together darling.
Yeah  either one down or both down.
Oh  I missed it.
That's Alan's problem then.
I've lost haven't I?
go off the cushion.
What cushion?
Ooh  clever clogs .
That's what he was waiting for.
Good though, I enjoyed that.
Well have another one then.
I'll enjoy it better than er  pool for a change  
Clever clogs.
Aren't we?
He was hanging off that red ball for a four hundred at the end though cos  
There's not many people get that two hundred  
Right then dear.
So you're gonna beat me are you?
Yeah  gonna beat you.
You sure about that?
Yes, I'm going to beat you.
No, are you?
I thought you played very well Grace .
Alright?
Do you wanna game?
No.
Do you wanna game .
Oh rubbish Alan 
He tells me lies as well.
It's the same rate.
What, for a pint?
Now I'm, I'm gonna play you for the sake of the game.
Alright.
What are we playing for?
He tells lies as well Alan,.
 

A penny a point.
Don't take any notice .
A penny a point.
Big gambling eh, what?
There you are then dear,.
Five.
Fifteen for two.
My box.
Thank goodness.
two three three four four five five six six .
And I'll have the yellow ones.
The yellow ones?
Just  oh bloody hell.
The yellow ones were thrown.
What do I do?
Well I don't know.
Ain't got me glasses either.
Poor old thing.
She lost them.
 
Got to put two out haven't I?
But she lost them, she .
downstairs.
We won't mention it.
Oh you want a light on Alan don't you?
See where you're putting it.
Shirley.
Straight game?
Yeah, they lost the first one.
Yeah.
And the second one.
I don't know what to do.
Erm   because it was a dreadful table.
If I keep this hand I've got now I've got two four six eight ten.
I've got a dozen.
All six cards?
Yeah.
Yeah 
I know, but which two?
Ah well.
There you are.
If I don't look out might  
So it goes on the four of that, turn that up.
Yeah well I can't tell you unless I've got them can I?
Shall I put them two in?then I've got six.
I'll put them two in.
Well you've got to put your you've got to put your hand down and hope you turn the rest turn up with the rest of the box.
Right two four six eight.
Then  oh bugger it.
Top one dear.
And that hasn't helped at all.
Oh well, never mind.
See one play one.
Twenty two  twenty seven, twenty eight  twenty nine that's right.
You want the  you want the  you want fifty on three.
You want the yellow ones?
Yes?
Yes.
Two four six.
Put them down the hole.
Well .
Alright now?
Well it don't matter does it  
Well it don't matter now.
Er fifteen  four ten six two eight.
Oh.
Well at least I got something cos I put two queens and that's what I had.
Ten.
ten.
Did I put me king, the ten 
Yeah that's what, that's what .
Yeah.
But I wanted  some of me boxes as well I suppose.
Oh, so I done it wrong?
Well it's not what I would have done 
But actually 
but there you go.
I've got six in the box.
That's what I would have done but  
But I didn't know you see, I 
Course not, no.
I couldn't work it out.
I think I would have been tempted to do that.
I didn't know whether to put two blue queens in or ten things or 
Mm.
Yeah.
a king and queen.
In which case  had both.
Oh, it's like that is it?
Mhm.
My box.
Oh god.
It doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter who goes first.
Who goes first if you win the toss?
Shirley says.
What?
Heads or tails?
Tails.
I can't score, I'm useless at maths.
Oh bloody hell.
It's impossible, I can't do it.
And them two go together, them two go together and them two go together.
All of them go together and these two are a pair.
Well what can I say?
Exactly.
I'm useless at maths.
Now don't get too many balls down too many holes at once.
I'll have to take a chance won't I?
Mm well that's up to you isn't it?
Play 
Well I've got to somehow.
I've gotta
Jack 
Mm that won't help me.
Your 
It'd have been better if I'd kept them two.
your lead .
Sixteen.
I'm going to do a Terry now when we play on Monday nights.
Don't do it like that.
Can I suggest something.
Fifteen two   
Go on  I know I've done that wrong.
Four.
.
Four.
Fifteen sixteen fourteen  ten fifteen twelve so it's fourteen 
Oh.
seventeen.
Five ten fifteen sixteen seventeen.
Nice little turn that.
Oh bloody hell.
Oh I don't like this, it's not fair.
You're not playing fair.
I am  
No you're not cos I didn't know what to put in the box.
You did right.
And bought it 
Oh yeah not right for me.
No.
I'd have been better off keeping that one two.
I had two sixes, two queens one two.
Well I didn't know.
Here you are I've got your two queens and hope for your turn up or you put your one to it.
Simple as that.
The queen six and hope for turn up.
That would split, split your hand up totally.
Mm that's why I was yeah.
Yes well I didn't know you see.
If I don't like playing singles, easy as doubles because you only have to put one in and it's easier.
One in  yeah.
He's not a gentleman.
I know.
I was just lucky with a turn up though.
That's all.
Just lucky with a turn up.
Come on, stop wasting time.
I think I wouldn't 
Top one   Mm try seven.
Oh I thought I was  then.
I'm a gentleman.
Fifteen and ten.
Twenty eight.
I'm on a run now .
Twenty nine?
No.
I don't think I've got anything.
Fifteen two fifteen four.
That's all I've got.
I've I've got four .
I  four.
Oh erm  fifteen two  four six.
Mm nothing in the box.
Fifteen two and four is six.
Nothing in the box.
Five six.
You've got nothing at all?
Ooh nothing at all.
That's a shame isn't it?
blooming street ahead nearly.
No, not quite.
Well.
Oh it went way out.
Yeah but it was  shot.
Wasn't meant that one.
Well it got there.
Yeah.
Is that ball touching Shirley?
No.
It's it's too late to ask I know.
I've got to pay for a turn  
How about a six?
No  well.
Terrible.
Not getting any hands.
Go on then, I'll take a chance, I mean I'll  you thirty for six, no?
Thirty?
Any aces?
No.
No.
Thirty for one.
I ain't got nothing cos I can't get anything.
Two then.
Twenty two for two.
Nine will do for two.
Oh and I'll have one for the last card.
Hang on, two  four  nothing.
Two and two is four.
Ten jack queen for three.
I can't get a good hand.
Twenty two twenty four twenty six.
Street ahead.
Over.
No.
You are.
You are, you're over a street ahead.
Not quite.
Not quite.
Not quite.
I haven't a chance in hell.
Think we'll cancel this game.
Don't give up straight away darling.
There's plenty of time to go yet.
Oh I don't know.
I've no idea.
Waste of time playing.
One.
That's not very good is it?
No.
Got a seven.
Aye another one, go on put the third one down.
Might as well.
Yes.
Eighteen.
alright.
play though can you?
Six.
I haven't got very many.
two.
I've got fifteen two and four is  six, four of diamonds.
Thank you dear.
 
So I've got  one three in.
Oh well there you are..
That's a bit better.
Are you caught up now?
No, that thirty was meant but not th not not the other one.
I'll be honest there.
That was an  an extra.
Am I in a good position?
On your knees is better.
Oh!
I only wanna give you one.
Ah!
Now that was tried for.
That was meant.
I tell lies as well.
I'm walking home.
It was, seriously.
thirty nine isn't it?
Oh it's awful.
Oh dear oh dear.
Thirty nine.
Yeah.
There's four.
Don't do nothing for me.
How many did you get?
I don't know.
Just let's have a look.
No 
Yes I can, I can't remember.
No you, no you can't.
Oh I should have kept the other one.
You'll .
Go on I'll take a chance.
Oh bloody hell, every time I've one down
Thirty one for two.
Oh  twelve.
Three for two.
I had a two as well.
Oh dear.
Mm.
Fifteen, two  
 
Very very lucky but
Two for six eight ten.
I reckon you've won the box.
Nothing.
I'm glad I  I'm glad I didn't listen to you Shirley.
Who's winning?
I didn't say, I just said it was gettable.
No no, yes yes.
I know.
Who's winning?
What do you want?
Two and a one don't you?
Two, two four.
Two six.
No two three six.
Queen king two three six.
I've got eight  two four s oh two six  oh you should put king six on.
Kept jack queen three and three two.
Your box dear.
Yeah and I would have got nothing.
Four.
Oh yeah.
You would have had four.
Oh admittedly you would have been pig sick when a  king would have, but even if the king had turned up you'd have still got the, got a run and fifteen.
Ace turned up you'd have got the run  four turns up you get your runs.
Ten turns up, another jack, queen.
Well I've done, didn't do it right did I?
So there, hadn't got any turned up.
Well I mean yes 
Didn't I?
There you go.
Oh now I'm definitely not giving you nothing.
It's your box.
Cos I've got a straight run through.
It's your box.
Seven  six five four three 
It's your box!
Well how, I don't bloody well know what to put in it.
I haven't the faintest idea, look  three four five six seven eight.
No question.
Easy.
Oh well it weren't to me cos I probably would have given you the  eight   
No my, it's your box.
Try a nine.
You know what I've got now anyway so it don't matter.
Oh no I would have played the nine anyway.
Twenty five.
Don't talk about it, do it.
 
Two four .
Six tens.
What are you up?
Are you gonna do .
Box.
Two in there so
Oh you're putting .
It's no quite easy.
Then you've got the four  three four five six seven eight and it's your box  play the seven.
They're the same suit, they're close, they'd score.
If it'd been my box  yeah it's eight three.
But your box  you, you gotta keep four five six because any four any five or any six you can .
Well yeah but I I'm alright now.
I'm  cos I can see balls in front of me.
Yeah, right.
So you've gotta keep your four five six  and I say it's your box, seven eight has got to be the  
It's very easy this.
Gotta be.
Easy.
So we'll try and lead Al with that one again.
Oh sh 
I  give you that and it's probably a big mistake.
But I hadn't any choice.
I like you.
Thank you.
No, that's not right.
You do, you try doing what you're telling other people.
What,
Thirteen.
No I'm not.
I'm gonna try and work round it.
I don't know, honestly I don't.
That's that's a bad shot isn't it?
 
But you 
I know, oh sorry, yeah.
you're well in front.
Seven.
I'm well in front and I can easy just lose the hundred but I I'll try for it without trying to knock down too many skittles.
There you are, handy little turn up.
Fifteen two  six sixteen.
Sixteen.
I didn't realize that the ball couldn't hit the table.
There you are, look at that.
Four now.
You want you wanted to discontinue?
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen  
Yeah here we go. 
Come on then.
Fifteen two fifteen four and a pair of six.
Yeah.
Whoa!
What a
And got a ball down.
And that's a complete accident.
Come on then.
Fourteen  
 
God that makes me look like a good player that, doesn't it?
. Shirl, any time you want me in the team.
That was a good shot though, wasn't it?
Well, I think I got  

It's your first take.
Give you fifteen.
Oh I've  bloody hell,.
If, if I was playing a game I would actually   somebody else.
Ah!
.
Done it.
I was trying for that one.
Didn't that work out?
So I need to take six.
Oh I, I was trying to get it up there.
Oh it's my, is it your box?
Yeah.
Won't matter will it?
Not really.
You need fifteen.
Oh what do I do?
I don't know how it counts, that's  four seven eight nine 
Got to try holding as many as you can really.
I know but I don't know how many many is  .
That's three.
You started it.
Yes.
Alright alright alright.
What's the chances of one of them coming up?
Well if it  if it gives you the  required amount or
I don't know how to work it out.
Look 
Mm well that's a problem isn't it?
Keep them and one of them in case you get another three or a six.
oh oh oh oh oh  
 
That's only four though innit you see?
No, yeah.
That's what I said, to do that and hope for a three or a six or another five or a king.
You want a six preferably or a king or five, yeah.
Two for jacks.
Oh .
It's your lead then.
Good shot.
Oh!
I'm  
 
Six  sixteen, twenty two.
Cor I'm not, I'm not gonna risk that.
Two  twenty eight.
You know I haven't got it.
you got a dozen though.
Not enough though.
Not quite.
You've done it anyway.
Yeah  
 
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six  two three four six  eight, two's ten.
Threepence after all that dear.
Three P.
That was quite a good game actually, in the end.
Three P 
Didn't I have some bloody funny hands?
Yeah.
Awkward hands to work out.
Oh yeah I'd  I'd agree with you.
Threepence then dear.
You owe me.
Threepence I owe you.
Threepence you owe me.
My box?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Cor, something's shaved that one over a little bit.
Mm 
It's .
You wanna Put  four ten.
That's a lovely table Alan.
Nineteen.
Jack nine.
Thirty, no?
Ooh!
That was good playing that was.
That was a good shot.
Oh I'm sorry   you did didn't you?
Ever so close wasn't it?
Yeah it was a good shot.
You know   
one .
Yeah.
Trying to  yeah.
Oh well, what do you do when you're  seven hundred behind?
 
two.
Twenty for two and the rest three.
table isn't it?
oh sorry I've got to get, move another way.
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six sixteen, eight two is ten?
Yeah yeah I'm trying out shots, that's all.
Ten.
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six  fourteen.
Tut  oh ah  I can't win no matter what I do.
Well you're not  .
All the balls are on the table actually.
Least I know what to put in the box.
Cos I worked out that was fifteen and there were a picture go .
Yeah.
I need ten.
Or a three or a six.
At least I'd  erm four five, what two in one.
You know and that's 
Yeah.
Yeah.
Any ten you wanted didn't you?
Yeah or a 
I mean you got the ten you wanted.
But er
Or a six.
a six or  so I knew what, that the nine was no good to me or the
Yeah, yeah.
s six.
Who put the fifty pence in there?
Who put the fifty pence in there?
Who asked me to?
Yeah  you go and stand in a corner in a minute.
No I didn't.
Go to the headmaster.
Oh bloody hell.
Can't do that seeing it's your box.
Got to get in closer to that.
And I'm hoping as well.
It's anybody's game isn't it, really?
Yeah.
Anybody's game.
It's nice though  what it's all about.
Try two.
In  thirty.
Someone's gonna crack.
 
You don't get interest  
Just th just the  turn up I wanted,or a five.
Yeah I wasn't too bad.
eight.
Seven eight.
Oh you got one two three four five six seven eight nine ten, ten.
Nothing in the box.
Ten.
One for 
Try whatever you like dear.
If you can see it, hit it.
Well I can't see it so I'm going round , I'm going round the back.
I'm in the lead.
Not by many but I'm in the lead.
I can see you're in the lead.
It's where you usually are dear.
That was a crafty move that.
Have the  been in any more since erm  Monday?
Yeah they came up  
Oh so they're all    Oh bloody hell.
They've fallen out haven't they?
Mm.
Can't do that  See what happens if I give you them.
Like that .
You're alright you won't hit  got your box so you're alright.
I would if I give you them.
How do you know I won't?
Cos I know cos of what I've put in 
Oh I'll have to put you a pair in you two.
Probably  eight probably.
Hope you put the right pair in .
Oh good.
I ain't got nothing so  oh I didn't know what to put in.
Thirteen.
Twenty five.
Thirty  yeah, couldn't get away from it.
Thirty.
Want four 
No  
That stirred it up a b oh.
Good shot!
I only want four.
Oh  the last card.
Have you got  four?
Sorry?
Didn't know what to give you.
I got to give you two eights.
Oh that's alright.
Yeah, you wouldn't let me box.
What are you putting, two sevens?
Fifteen two No .
Fifteen two fifteen four four's eight.
And a nine there.
If you put two eights in I did put another eight in, but that's  six or eight.
Didn't know what to do.
Cos I'll have two 
Well 
for two eights or like that for  four that way, so.
yeah, yeah.
That's all I had.
Yeah.
It's difficult.
It's your box Ann.
I thought you said he he lost by a hundred.
No, what did he lose by?
Er  eight hundred and fifty.
He lost by?
I I played canny at the end rather than 
by that many, surely?
Yeah he did.
You kept giving him a hundred.
By not hitting the ball.
That's where it all mounts up.
You know you keep giving, if you keep missing the ball.
Yeah, it does.
Yeah.
Good though.
Have you done?
Can I get up?
Yes, yeah.
Thanks very much.
 
want a game Bob?
What?
Do you want a go?
I can't afford another game of that.
He owes you a pint now doesn't he?
Is it coming out for you?
Four
Put your other one down.
Alright then, I will this time.
Twelve.
Ten.
Ooh.
Twenty five.
. One.
Ooh bloody hell.
What have you got, have you, have you got a hand?
I'd better get mine on quick fifteen two fifteen four   six pairs eight.
Five six twelve eight.
How many have you got?
Bloody hell.
Fifteen two fifteen four two six eight fourteen.
Six in the box.
six in the box.
Now who's in the lead?
I knew what to do with that one you see?
Now who's in the lead?
I knew what to do with that one.
Specially when the five come up, I thought I'll put  the blooming
Two tens.
Exactly, ten in there.
Now who's in the lead?
I could have had two thousand  points ahead and John was on the skittle.
I like that .
Yeah, they did last night, it
Yeah.
Yeah.
They did that last night.
Yeah.
Couple of their best players as well.
playing that.
Yeah.
I like it when
It does tend to come  twenty forty
Now then.
Your lead dear.
You're a gentleman.
Thankyou.
Eleven.
Fifteen 
Well you have to keep your balls on the table.
Pardon?
Twenty five.
He he doesn't put his balls on the table.
Neither do you.
Six.
And it's his go first this time isn't it?
 
I tell you.
Well I dunno, doubt if I've got any even.
Oh.
Oh, does it make any difference, actually?
Er  well  
No it doesn't make any difference  
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen  eight.
One two three four five six seven eight nine ten.
That's a big difference.
No.
Erm
It's just the way it's always been 
I suppose  people are are playing  
I'll have a queen  four, king ten and four in.
You know  played aces and fours  so two.
Two.
Oh I'll just sneak back one.
Sneak .
But it can work.
When when people  table they keep on potting  thirty thirty all the time 
Oh sorry, you've got  cue 
I just took one over there.
Could be yours.
Do you want this one?
You can have it.
No  sit there cos  red to there, white to there.
Five times six 
Now who's on where?
You started first so you're on a 
Alan got off to a  less than 
Bad start.
auspicious start.
So Alan started first so he  on top.
 
No erm  I'm I'm on top.
I'm I'm on the bottom.
Well he gave you a hundred.
Yeah he's skilled.
Still wanna play one?
So you're on the bottom?
Yeah I'm on the bottom.
Yeah I've got four down.
he's started so he's on top.
Exactly.
There you are.
Yeah  Yeah that's right.
Twenty for two.
I've got four so far Shirley.
I know what I'm doing.
Frankie goes to Hollywood.
. Twenty nine.
Don't upset the  cos we'll be back at  you could toss a coin in under there.
Thirty  fifteen two, fifteen  six  is eight.
Fifteen two  six.
Hello.
Hello 
Alright Sid?
Alright Frank.
 

You're back in the lead dear.
You're favourite.
You're favourite to win this one.
Depends on what the cards do.
Frank?
Yeah, the number of your hands are  the number of your hands to mine.
She's refereeing .
No erm  because 
Oh god.
that's four and I won't do anything 
Alright you're cheating me.
No 
Hello Sid.
Hallo chief.
Alright?
Teasing me.
No certainly bloody not.
 
I'm not that bloody good Alan .
Eleven.
I don't know how to play the game.
Oops.
Your lead.
that tap hasn't he?
That's Strongbow 
Oh I'm  
you silly boy.
Your lager's the other end.
You know what's   
Where've you been?
I've I've been 
Twenty two.
You know why?
Cos I was served a pint up last night in  our  social club.
And their pump's on that end.
Twenty six .
So I have to do this job everywhere I go  
Bloody hell you've got about four fives .
No.
I've only got two of them.
You're alright though.
You  till I've got one.
Don't make a mess.
I've got fifteen, yeah .
Fifteen two fifteen four four's eight.
Fifteen two fifteen four  
 
Well, I could do with a good box and that might put me in with a chance.
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six.
Outside chance though.
Thirteen  
Stop yakking and get on with it.
I suppose I've got to get the ice out as well have I?
Ah!
Ooh!
 
Two middles and a paper one here please.
No.
Oh no.
Now what do I do?
Oh no.
Oh god.
Oh.
That was absolutely lousy.
I couldn't understand why you didn't do that in the first place.
I'm sorry, it's taking me a long time cos I don't know what to do.
It's alright.
Take as long as you like.
Well.
Someone's gotta do something about that Brian,?
I think I've gotta do that.
That's probably 
 
wrong but
Top one, top one, top one.
Oh!
It is.
King.
I've done the wrong one I think.
Twenty eight.
Oh no.
Twenty nine for one.
Eleven.
Four is all I have.
Fifteen two fifteen four, one two three four.
Well that's alright isn't it?
Fifteen two fifteen  a dozen.
I know.
I pu I had five.
You've got a dozen in there as well.
You win.
But I had
Yeah but you've won!
but I had
Yeah.
What did you do wrong there?
and I had 
What nine five?
No you didn't have nine five.
No I had three nine.
Twenty nine.
Three five sorry.
Three five.
I didn't know whether to put  that out or er
No.
No no.
I done it right?
Perfect.
Absolutely perfect.
Thank god for that.
No you, it's your box.
I know it is.
Box away  yes.
Not your box definitely eight three but three five on your own box, oh yeah.
Close  you put the five in  keep 
What you've gotta keep your double run?
You're keeping a good, yeah you're keep you're keeping your double run that way as well but 
Yeah 
you're not scoring so many  because you've got your fifteen at the end there.
But  oh yeah, oh yeah.
Absolutely.
And I won.
Yeah you got a dozen in your box.
Wallop.
Straight in.
Bang bang, two hands, thank you ma'am.
Ha!
It's your box still.
Oh, how many's that?
Five six seven eight.
Erm
five.
can I just go to the 
Yes I do, I do.
.
Teetering.
It's my box isn't it?
Yes.
You teetered.
Oh thanks Al.
Don't worry Bob.
Don't worry.
It's only a little bit of  cigarette ash 
Oh it's probably from me from me own cigarette.
Don't worry.
I'm sure I shall have worse than that before I'm done, a bit of fag ash in me drink.
Won't be the first time.
Won't be the first time Bob.
Oh, this is a real balls-up this one right.
So if that thing will shoot off and hit that  yes I have.
Yes I know.
Ah!
Too hard.
Pretty good.
That was, that was almost  
No I didn't.
.
Can't have any of these.
Ah, play it safe.
Oops.
Hasn't helped.
It's done nothing for the box.
Two will play one.
Sixteen.
Seventeen.
Erm twenty.
Go on!
Yes!
Twenty three.
Play for Alan.
Rubbish.
I know what I'm doing.
Now, where are we?
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six and six is a dozen.
Ha!
Fifteen two fifteen four and sixteen that's eight.
Ten in the box.
Two greens.
Level pegging now then.
That's no good on my box.
Level pegging.
That's no good on my box.
Yes it is.
It's quite handy for me.
Is that touching?
No it isn't.
Whose box?
My box.
Oh well.
Try those.
Not very good, but there you go.
So, eight.
No good to me.
Go on then.
Your go.
Fifteen two .
Twenty five  no!
No?one.
One niner.
There's a hundred there, definitely.
Ten twenty nine.
I'll try my best.
A kiss  on the left hand cheek of that red ball.
 
Six.
Eight.
One two three four five six seven eight nine.
And that wasn't a bad shot.
Fifteen six fifteen four four's eight.
Five six seven eight.
Not a lot in it.
Nothing .
Two  four
Thanks Shirley.
Just that little bit harder and that would have gone in there.
No 
How did you get that far ahead?
I've got nine you've got eight.
I pegged some.
Oh.
Gonna say, we were level.
Ha!
You pegged hell of a bloody lot then.
About ten?
Twelve?
No.
We were level pegging
Yeah.
I got nine, you got eight.
Yeah, I've taken about four or five.
But you're all them in front.
I'm only  oh half a dozen in front.
Course I had the box, don't forget.
I only pegged four.
Or four more than you.
Oh go on.
Treat yourself.
Treat the box.
put the right ones in there darling, you've got a fortune.
If you put the right ones in there my love you've got a  fortune.
Eight.
nothing in me hands so it don't make no  three 
Twenty eight two.
Oh.
Any good?
to do that.
Yeah.
Put the wrong one down.
Thirteen.
Twenty eight for one.
Nine .
One two three, four five six, seven eight.
Three.
Three.
Didn't put your tens in the box did you?
Oh, look at that.
Unlucky eh?
Mormon's orchard  four, that's all you got out of that lot.
If you'd put one of them tens in  with that turn up you gotta .
I put ace four in.
And I put ace two in.
And when that and when that four turned up I thought oh bloody hell.
If you put a ten in there you're  well away.
Any ten you got half a doz.
Oh well, spoils a good hand but there you go.
Here we go.
Twelve.
Eight hundred and sixty now.
Oh dear.
Don't know if you put a five down there, I already had it.
Twenty seven.
Twenty eight, thirty.
Might as well turn for a dozen.
Bloody hell.
How do you keep getting them?
Only got two in the box though.
You always get a dozen or  fourteen, sixteen 
 
You do.
Oh we didn't do that.
We didn't do it.
No  out the book.
out the book.
There weren't any, many of us so we didn't do it.
By the end, it was quite fun in the end weren't it?
Yeah.
Well we enjoyed what we did didn't we?
Yeah, it was really good fun.
There weren't, we did it singly and it made more people didn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
There was Tracey and John and  Bob and 
Sorry Alan.
Four.
Oh.
Fiddle-dee-dee, now what do I do?
Your box isn't it?seeing as it's your box.
Oh.
No help at all.
No.
Twenty five.
No.
No?waste paper .
All yours.
Four 
Not a lot.
Not a lot.
What have you got?
Fifteen two fifteen four pay six.
tops.
You jammy bugger.
It's only six.
Yeah I know but  I didn't think I treat I thought no I'll go safe put them  far then you just happened to put two three in the  of two king.
Yeah.
Nearly caught up again.
Not that far behind.
Far enough.
It's your box.
get very many this time.
no competition.
Mm that looks, sounds really nice.
Oh god I don't know.
Shirley's throwing the balls down the table at you.
Should keep that I think.
think.
Hi Neil.
Hi Shirl.
Alright?
Hallo Dave.
Hallo matey.
Alright?
Turn me one up my darling.
Ring the bell Neil.
.
I'll have half.
Your lead darling.
Fifteen for two.
Lager shandy.
Pint?
Yeah.
Mm!
for two.
Twenty nine for two.
Tut.
No.
No.
Nine.
What have you got?
Fifteen two fifteen four and six pair's eight.
Give too many secrets away Shirl.
Oh fair enough then.
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six two is eight .
Mm and I give you some in the box as well so you  that's it, done.
No it's not many in here.
Twenty two twenty four twenty six.
Did they win Shirl?
Yeah, unfortunately.
Really what you want to do is make him hit the ball up.
Oh.
Treat the box?
Yeah go on, she's behind.
Treat the box.
Put the right ones in there my darling you've got a fortune.
Turn the top  
I doubt if it's right.
Turn the top one over darling.
I'm sure it's wrong.
Three.
No I'm not doing it.
For fourteen.
Nineteen.
Four ten five.
Right, oh 
Oh thankyou.
One two three, four five six, seven eight nine and six is fifteen.
Five
Fifteen.
. One two and three is five.
is five.
Six eight nine in the box.
One two three, four five six, seven eight nine.
Oh yeah.
Told you.
I told you didn't I?
I'm favourite to win though.
But  Told you you put  put ten, I put jack queen in s same suit and close and everything.
Had to for that.
Now what do I do?
Mm  I suppose.
ooh it's nine.
Mm mm mm mm    Never mind.
Up to you darling.
Nineteen.
Well  ten.
Thirty for three.
I know you  any others.
four.
What have you got to finish with?
Come on darling.
One two three, four five six, seven eight 
I had another queen as well.
Sixteen.
Into the box.
Oh dear darling.
I've had it I know.
Street.
Oh dear.
You already won.
two fifteen twenty twenty five thirty  thirty five.
And I owe you five so that's thirty pence you owe me now isn't it?
Yes dear.
Whose box?
It's one two three, my box.
Yeah, my box isn't it?
later I suppose.
Pass me a goody darling.
Pass me a goody.
That's not a goody, that's a baddy.
That's a goody.
No it's not, it's a baddy.
Your lead dear.
See one, play one.
Nineteen.
Twenty nine, no?
Seven.
Twenty four.
You jammy bugger.
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six twenty eight two is ten, six is sixteen and one for his knob, is seventeen.
Think I played right that time.
I think you did.
Two.
Can't remember what I put in the box, another picture I think.
Yeah but what else with it though?
Or did I put a picture or ten?
I dunno.
No you put four two in.
Four two.
Four, I mean eight four.
Eight four, yeah.
And I put a pair of twos in so you didn't  very much.
I got two.
I scored five in that .
And you scored all that lot.
It's your box now.
You're gonna get that thirty pence back plus interest this time aren't you?
I doubt it.
You'll catch up.
No I won't.
If, if we were once round then I'd say yes but not
Mhm.
Oh you can't have any of these.
I don't want you to have any of these, so 
Oh I've got to take a chance on it.
No.
Turn up.
Turn up, please.
Seven 
Teen.
Twenty seven.
. Seventeen.
Twenty seven.
Oh six.
Two
Six.
Two four six.
That's the other blooming one.
Mind you that isn't too bad is it?
Oh bloody hell one two three four five six seven eight.
Five six seven eight.
I'm getting slaughtered Shirley, this time.
Are you?
Absolutely completely and utterly slaughtered.
Bob did yesterday.
Bob did yesterday.
She said, yeah.
Yeah.
I'm thirty pence up, but  this game I'm getting absolutely trounced.
I won him about I don't know it was three or four games .
Couldn't go wrong!
to get back.
A oner.
Did you enjoy your little self?
Erm 
makes a change to have a  game rather than erm
Yeah  
Thirteen 
something with an edge to it, you know.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
Twenty, twenty five.
Thirty?
No.
Just takes your mind off your troubles for five minutes doesn't it?
Queen.
No, no I like the game but then I I like to play 
 
the game  .
Mm.
That's right.
That's what it should be.
Well, look at this lot.
Fifteen two fifteen four fifteen six two is eight one for his knob is nine.
Nine.
Fifteen two fifteen four twenty six and three is nine.
Keeps her distance .
Pop a pair of sixes in  don't put, what's on top?
Ace .
Oh yeah one.
Fifteen two fifteen four and a pair is six.
Bubye.
See you Grace, see you Al.
See you again.
Teach  how to play that game will you?
Okay then.
Oh dear, well it's all good fun,.
Ah.
It certainly is.
It's all good fun.
Hello Harold.
Maybe it's getting a bit chilly out there  with that door open.
There's talk of  is it my box?
Yes, unfortunately.
I haven't heard the weather.
And I don't know what er
Oh I've got sweet 
Well we're gonna get a lot of it.
Are we?
Oh.
Okay.
No, I can't  nothing I can do here.
All day.
All day?
Lot of what?
Weather.
Oh well, yeah, yes.
Seven eight.
But what  type of weather?
I might have known the  come on, put the third one down.
Ooh sixteen.
Twenty five.
Oh.
They're dim.
twenty five.
Twenty seven, twenty nine for two.
Mm.
 
my other husband.
Twenty  fifteen  two
Nothing.
Fifteen two fifteen four for seven.
Two for ?
Yes.
Oh dear .
Two for fours.
Ooh.
Caught up now.
No.
Haven't caught up.
I'm still behind.
Well hallo!
Hello.
How the devil are you?
Alright thanks.
How are you?
Alright Johnny?
Alright?
come to see you.
I should damn well think so too.
Are you delivering?
I don't know you Doug, no.
Hello Doug.
Oh god.
Tut.
Can't do that can I? 
That'll give me four.
Gives me four.
Oh I'll do it that way and take a chance.
I don't know whether I'm doing right or wrong.
Oh god I've give you a bloody handful now so that was stupid.
let me have a look.
Oh I only need ten, well it depends on what you've put in.
I give you two.
Your lead now.
Eight.
Eighteen  seventeen.
Twenty two, twenty nine.
Mm .
Ann's take, fifteen two fifteen four two six  six.
I've got two.
Have you?
No  king, ten I've got two queens on I've got to get king jack  
 
No   put king  king ten's fairly safe  jack queen is.
It's your 
Yeah but I'm going to keep the two pictures and a five  and then you had to put two twos in or  two and a six or
Yeah, yeah.
I don't blooming know and I thought if a seven comes up and I've got five and six and
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
I thought oh  I try to work it out.
I can't always.
Mm.
Whoops, I give you 
Still well in the lead my love.
Oh now again, what do I do?
I think I'm supposed to keep that.
Top, top.
I don't know but I think I'm supposed to, yeah that'll do.
King of spuds.
Five, four.
God.
Oh well I've  put it down now.
Fifteen for two.
Seventeen.
Twenty for two.
Twenty two, twenty three for three.
four for two and a go is three.
ended up  right.
Fifteen two fifteen four and five is nine.
Five six seven eight nine.
Fifteen two fifteen four two  a dozen.
Six in the box.
king in the box.
Bloody hell.
Six for kings in the box.
You did well out of that didn't you?
Mm.
Stormed back into the  a very very handy little lead.
Very handy little lead.
Is he beating you again?
Erm  he's beating me two one and then, but I'm winning in this one.
Ooh crikey.
You've been taking lessons.
Thirty pence up I am though.
Oh.
But  she's gonna get some of it back this time.
Aren't you dear?
No.
Mm could go the other way I suppose.
Yeah, put that on.
Try that one.
Give them a, take a chance.
Depends what you put in the box.
I only  
Depends what turns up.
Mm.
Maybe another
Four.
Oh I've changed my mind.
Oh I don't know though.
Oh bloody hell, I give you  I might as well not be playing now cos I've   I've got nothing in me hand.
No.
Nothing.
Your lead.
Your lead.
Nothing.
Nineteen.
Only nine, oh got nine in the box as well eh.
Twenty nine, thirty.
Ah  two four one that would have been.
Three  gets four.
Oh well .
And nothing.
What do you mean, nothing?
I haven't got anything.
Yes you have.
You got one for his knob.
One.
One for his knob.
I only got fifteen two and two is four.
put a nine up for that 
I didn't know what to do.
I know.
I only got fifteen.
Just a minute, just a minute!
Fifteen two two is four, give us chance to count them up.
You've already got them counted up .
What did you have?
The nine jack  two ace 
Yeah.
Two nines.
Why didn't you keep your nine, two nines your jack  and put your king ace in the box?
Or your king two in the box?
I don't know.
Cos jacks are not 
Didn't know what to do with it.
It was all
Hallo Ray.
None of it made sense.
Jack two nines and the ten turns up.
There was just nothing  apart from the two nines was any
Oh no.
then what do you do?
Oh go on, bugger it.
Take a chance on it.
Turn it up darling.
Oh  one go one box.
Try a jack.
Sixteen for two.
Twenty six, twenty nine  two's in time.
look at that.
Try a jack.
One to one.
Fifteen two fifteen four two six two's eight one for his knob is nine.
Five six seven eight nine, fifteen for two fifteen four
Oh wow!
Everything alright mate?
I dunno but I got a wonderful hand  look wha I'll just show you for a start, cos I'm putting that in the box.
 
Cos it doesn't matter
And you know me  I wouldn't put that in the box unless  What are these?
Yeah  
Quarter to six.
Right.
Well please yourself, how long it takes you to do it.
fifteen, yeah I put them on  get a drink  On are they
Who have you bought then?
Oh, five, ten, fifteen, seventeen off thirty.
Thirteen pence darling  you owe me still.
There's a big  up there.
Please
There you are dear.
Thank you  
Now  so that's two each, you owe me thirteen pence yes?and it's your box  
This wonderful person here darling
It wasn't.
I thought you told me earlier on I was wonderful.
You are my love  absolutely 
 
wonderful  don't like those, don't really wanna give you those  there are  right  have I got it on   bloody hell mum!
Turn it round for you  try a niner  twenty  sixes   alright  seven  put five on there  four on this  my turn  fifteen two, fifteen four  fifteen two, fifteen four  fifteen two, fifteen four, fifteen six  three's nine, that's it,seven, eight, nine  fourteen  four in the box  nineteen, that goes up to fifteen  fifteen two, fifteen four, fifteen six  good job I'm honest innit?
Oh ah.
You said four, six
Where's six?
Eight seven, ten five, seven three five
Then take out all of 
Good job I'm honest isn't it?
Cos in a match  if that was in a match  cos you'd have said   you'd have said, fifteen two, fifteen four  I wouldn't have said nothing  take four, I would have  kept quiet  but you don't do you?
Play in pairs, it's different but  when you're just playing singles, you can say  or maybe you could sort of friends that go, you'd probably say something like, are you sure?
Say, yeah fifty four, right, fair enough
You had a choice of an eight or a three  I had two jacks and a king  you chose the three, the two turned up that would've given you  eight and a   but you picked the three  so  that'll give you more in the box as well an three hit your  three hit your hand as well so   
The only reason I've beaten you this time is look at that  sixteen   Don't even know  four one for  are you?
Got a got a pair of twos there  ee by heck!for four and a pair is six  well I think I'll have  I'm afraid  two eights, two o , two eights, two tens and then nine   didn't ask for that  but I had to throw a pair of twos away for that  and go in  there you go.
I lost the last one and I gave my winnings    ha ha.
Thank you very much  twenty four pee and 
Last one, ha ha ha.
Can't you hear me saying to that   They all go in a tin up there John.
Oh right.
 
We put them in  or in the holiday tin with all the change.
so  don't make a lot of difference does it?
It all goes the same way   whe when we went on holiday  in  O end of Octob end of October it goes 
Didn't cost us anything.
Saving bits and pieces.
Oh did you?
We paid for the holiday with just with  change out of our pocket 
Cos I went in 
and purse
I empty into my pocket at night
Yeah
That's what we do 
you know I'll settle up 
Yeah
you know I don't really want   
But we erm 
  
we we saved two hundred pound and and had a  week away 
About three or four days
Well four
Four four days
four days in the Autumn for that 
Yeah 
for  just out your  change not missed it.
What  
Accommodation, meals and petrol 
Accommodation,and the petrol  all we had to find was
Just spending money and he wo had that anyway 
just   what you spent it on  as if you were at home.
You don't miss it do you, not just putting it in a tin like that.
So your prediction  did not come true.
No it didn't, did it
So now what're we playing?
Shall I tell them all what I'm doing?
No no.
No?
Oh alright.
Won't be bothered so
Nobody's even nobody's take any notice.
So what're we playing for now?
Are we still playing are we?
We're playing brag but I ain't got not change.
Oh you give it all to me have you?
Yeah 
Only now I've got a five p now.
Is that all?
Yep.
Well play for five.
Not playing for tenners, I can't afford that.
Well play for penny then.
Give me your five p and I'll use five of these and we'll play for penny a time  probably win it!
I might have sixpence actually but
Oh money's 
Oh I got more than that actually I got about ten p.
Ooh dear!
Got two fives and tuppence.
Oh two fives and tuppence  well we'll play for tuppence then.
Oh wait a minute.
Ooh, wait a minute.
Oh!
Oh I'm rich.
Ooh!
And another one.
Twenty  twenty four pence there.
Twenty four but I've paid him  he's had his other twenty odd p so  ha ha  he's had that  he's reckons it was ten  twenty odd p plus some change we had.
Right I've twenty three worth Bob and I got a bit of loose change as well.
So you ain't getting no more!
That's his lot !
Mhm.
That's another one I've got to 
No she told us, we did ask her.
You haven't been paid yet.
paid you.
Never mind Bob  never mind  So what are you playing for Ann dear?
It's coming off here  Keep moving it   .
What're you playing for then ?
Do you want a  or what?
Oh look at that!
Doesn't matter  Here are Bob, pound of change please  there you go.
How are you, alright now?
Yeah not too bad now, though.
Isn't that  
Hi Shirley.
How are you?
Alright mate.
is it?
Yeah I know.
  
I bought four sets and I'll leave them for you  
Bob!
all these ladies, they're all round him like 
Blooming heck!look at this lot.
Well that's right  well that's it.
Like me you said.
I wish I was twenty years younger.
Shirley?
John?
You've got two, now.
I know.
How many more do you want.
George  was in Wednesday night, him and his granddad,
By the way you'll be getting  stool  first things first.
Well no  spoilt for choice  ace, king, queen  my full flush
He said he might not, you change your will in my favour John  
Change your what?
Will.
Won straight away.
Nothing funny.
It's the way she said it  Especially the smile like that.
Oh bloody hell!
I won the first game  makes a change dunnit?
Yes dear.
It's you that normally wins the first hand and   me for the rest.
We want some change but it doesn't sound too good.
It doesn't does it !
Only five 
You know those erm  chicken breasts 
Oh very nice.
Oh they're very nice, I just had them 
Can you put them in a roll?
Yeah, I could do it,
it's not a sandwich.
No a burger bun.
That's gotta be you as well!
Well I don't.
There's several being done.
Oh yeah, alright I don't want yours  In amongst your   there's no rush for me  
Anyone like 
I'll have the fresh ones
Anyone like mayonnaise?
Oh thank you very much  
Can't 
Mm?
Haven't got any plugs I'm afraid.
Well I'm sorry I can't erm
Sold out, John.
feed the girls, start on your own.
Old screwdriver now.
It's a job for you.
Yeah I know.
Erm
What night shall I come back?
Oh sweet sod all!
Oh well it's yours.
squash
Do the 
pair of pliers
take a break in a minute, okay?
Mine again.
I'm not playing with you tonight, that's it.
Oh  you're not playing with me now!
Played with me this afternoon
Don't be stupid Stuart!
Stuart!
Ha!
Going to be rich.
One, two, three  oh  it's alright
What's the matter?
I asked wrong    ah
Not a game 
Aye?
I've gotta put another five pounds, you could go on all night then, couldn't it?
I ain't got no five Ps to put in.
You put those, you ain't got oh no, fair enough  just play for the one five P then.
I would do if I had any change, you could go and 
Yeah but only the 
get me some change if you want.
No, too tiring.
Oh!
Oh this isn't fair!
No, I want a three  I do I want a three  then it'll be mine
I ain't got what 
Ain't on ten  ten's got it.
Place 
Nearly was yours  nearly was  nearly got it  I'm supposed to remember when I put these tapes on, half past seven till  quarter past eight  twenty past eight  to when  God this is gonna be awful, I shall never start, no leave that.
Oh that's a disappointment.
Oh heck, heck, heck and double heck!
I give up I do.
Nothing else I can do  Nasty, nasty
See you Tom.
Keep well.
Yes cheers.
He's got
See you Sunday I expect.
Right you are then, Davey  Dave
Yeah I will, bye.
, see you Terry.
Yeah bye.
Bye.
Yes.
Bet you don't get a lot of that.
Yes.
Lucky I had the pair of jacks and gone back to  
Oy!
Four, five, six, seven, eight, nine
This is daft playing for  five P  ha ha.
Well we can make it more if you like.
Innit though?
It all goes the same way doesn't it?
Not a  this is yours  three  I've got three pairs, oh and I shouldn't tell you anyway cos you'll bloody beat me anyway, so
No I won't beat you.
Pair of kings  no I've got it wrong.
 
Sorry  Pair of 
 
eights.
How big was your last pair  got a pair of fives  mine again.
Don't take that.
Ooh you're getting down to your last  tuppence.
Then I'm not playing then.
Oh I'll play for your last tuppence  can't you?
Yes dear.
Right, one in there, one in there and one in there  no  no  no  Oh dear  this has gotta be good.
I think  I won't beat you, look at that  one forty two  three jacks  queen 
Yahoo!
Good job I had a four card  had nothing else 
you know the last three  runs 
Yeah  yeah.
I had nine, ten, jack, queen, king  and a two.
Yes.
Mhm.
Here I goes  oh right, one in there  oh, one in there, one in there, one in there  and one in there yes  yeah  no  no, no.
What's it like in the ?
Filthy.
It still is now.
It's absolutely  filthy.
But I  as I say I go in there 
If you go in the loo there's  well for months or during the summer hours counting how many  moths was on the window sill and flies, you know, they sort of got more each week when you went  and the cobwebs  it's wonderful!
And Stuart sat down in, because they got these wooden  old  chairs, haven't they with arms on them  and he he sat there like this with his arm and went, I said  Stuart  whatever's that on your arm?
He said, come off the chair   and all the along the bottoms of the tables and you can write your name in the  dust !
I've got a funny feeling I'm not inviting you round to my  house !
No but I mean it is.
No really  no I as I say I we when I came down here 
Cos I said to Bob, are they managers or what, cos if they're managers surely 
Yeah 
they  they get an allowance for somebody to clean and if they've got a cleaner, I mean, they should have  sacked them a long while ago !
Oh yeah  they have glasses, they stink don't they?
It is it's dirty, there's no other word for it.
Eight, nine, ten, eleven  one, two, three, four  jack    was good.
It is it's disgusting, I mean it could be a nice pub that really  the gardens are about this high  in weeds.
Yeah  
It isn't now  how long's he been 
Used 
there?
used to be.
Well he er
Quite a while now really, hasn't he?
Yeah 
We wouldn't go in at a , I wouldn't go in at all, but Stuart's mum used to live right opposite and she likes to go in occasionally cos she sees all her old friends, she don't see them very often so  she likes to go in and see all her old  friends, otherwise  I don't 
ideally, for me, cos I could 
Yeah.
Half the time that's er, if it's still as bad as it was
You ought to go in the Loco.
Well that's what he's saying but frankly 
That's nice in the Loco.
frankly, frankly 
That's where we played last night.
Yeah and I said I wished I'd  cos of had to come in and 
Yeah.
I think, oh a bit far.
Yeah.
Okay.
It's nice in there
Yeah.
It's a nice little pub and it's all, it's busy as well and
Yeah.
It is busy innit?
But it's s but it's nice isn't it?
Nice atmosphere in there.
well last year we went out  last New Year,times.
Yeah.
Best rave we've had 
Yeah I don't mind the Loco  Oh bloody hell!
I've got troubles now  deep, deep troubles  I might as well go in  that way round .
I haven't got nothing so  
Neither have I.
Don't worry about it.
Neither have I.
Six, seven, eight.
Queen flush.
Queen flush.
Pair of sixes.
Ace,
Pair of fours  Go onto the .
Where abouts do you live then?
Oh are they?
Well no    not that it's the same !
No I didn't know the area when I moved here  erm my wife was  so it was   so er  I'm afraid , it's not bad but  move closer, just a bit closer.
Mm  I used to live  which is 
Oh yeah , which part is that?
erm not far away
Which part is that?
Oh yes, I do  
I know the
I know all the roads, I pedal all round  that way.
Well down the bottom end I live  not where the flats and the houses end, that end.
No, the other end,yep  I got the same chimney as you   
Wouldn't think so.
I do  I know so  Just from yours.
You'll have that and nothing  or  that and nothing.
Oh well ha ha.
Which is the highest, ask yourself, that must be  three fours.
Ha!
Two three fours  to pair of sixes.
Er  king   king, jack and nothing to go with it.
King, queen ten  ooh ooh, my king I just beat your king I'm sorry dear  sorry dear, quid  play this hand and then I'll get you another drink mother  would you like another drink?
There he goes again.
Ooh!
Can't sort 
D'you wanna drink?
them out any better  four sixes  erm and a 
Ha  ten, jack, queen.
King flush.
Queen flush.
Nothing  
No.
Shoo  hello dear.
Hello Baby.
Get you another drink?
Would you like another, same again?
Yeah.
Or do you want something else this time?
No.
Sure?
I'm positive  thank you.
Certain?
I am certain, I may have one before I go over, be real naughty.
Twist your arm.
I'm dieting before Christmas you see and er 
Oh God no!
Well then a then I ca 
Don't need it does she?
No  does she hell as like!
Oh you're on holiday for a couple of days, I mean you'd have thought  you know, since you're on holiday just have a  little drinky or two but  no can't persuade her, can't you tell me why you just come out of a Yorkshire pub.
Oh if I was up in Yorkshire I would.
It's different.
It's a pint where we were  we were on holiday 
Ninety nine P a pint it was 
 

er er er doub 
No.
No, Yorkshire
Tetleys
er Tetleys
they don't do that.
all of them  thi Theakstons  they were all  and double, pound for double spirits  they were  by the pub what we stayed in  stayed at the Black Bull at
Boroughbridge.
 
It's a twelfth century  haunted inn, it was wonderful, the food 
What was it called?
The Black Bull, Boroughbridge  it was wonderful  really was  and they treat us really, and I mean it wasn't expensive  and I had sa fresh salmon and duckling and oh  then I 
And now you're moaning about the diet!
came back and put half a stone on, right, diet!
Stood on the scales and screamed!
It was wonderful, it really was  then we went into Yor me he took me to Betty's and York for
any more  well I got told there's one.
Th th there's a place a coffee, tea room place called Betty's in York, there where  took me in  where you have the head waiter take you to your table, for coffee, you know  wonderful!
They treat you right up there.
Yeah, it's absolutely wonderful, it really is I mean then, so I had to  cakes and so on there and 
never, never stopped eating   eating and drinking .
I notice your 
Sausage rolls or something  Yes that's er  had a  for that  we cou we stopped there at  I've never been up that wa that way at  that's about the farthest north I've been  one of these coaches erm   two, two, two or three times and  er  and er I'd seen that  Betty's on er  on television before.
It's wonderful.
The cakes, the different  the dish of cakes!
I know.
And a tiddly, little just a little plate, you know.
Yeah.
And a dirty great
But when yo when you walk in the door, I mean, first Stuart knew so he  that's why he took me in, and we walk in and there's a head waiter  would you like a table for two sir  would you like a non smoking or a smo and then he showed you to your table and pulled your chair, you know, I mean tha not what you expect in a tea shop or coffee place you know i ha ha  and they have proper waitresses with the  little hat on, you know  she'll get about four tables so they're  looking after you  and even on your saucer where you had your  I mean yo your teapot and everything  on the saucer's a little  mat so that you don't drip, if it drips 
That's right.
it doesn't go on your clothes, you know the whole works it's  absolutely wonderful!
You can't fault it, can you?
No, and there was 
Do you know what I mean   
and the whole place, you know  the ladies loos were like  er as even a five star hotels, you know  ha, wonderful it was, I couldn't believe it!
takes longer to get in there 
Oh yeah there was lots of foreigners, Americans and foreign people there  all with maps out on the tables, trying to find their way round York, which I knew  that Stuart knew so it wasn't too bad for us, but there's loads of people, you know  thought how do we get to this from here and   well  it's certainly a  a an experience.
It was er    Drunken  here.
Is there no more bitter lemon?
Oh yeah, they're scurrying the cellar for some  We've found two more for you.
Thank you.
Enough to keep you going all night.
It's   innit?
Mhm.
And it doesn't say it has to be other people here  probably not, every bit of it
Mm.
but
Some of it.
Mm.
Mm.
I can't do much about that, I mean you can't go sticking in other people's noses.
No that's true.
Oh wrong way round  two kings, two eights.
Two tens.
That's it  that's all you got.
If I take penny there then, that will all make  forty pence, okay?
You're not taking all that money are you?
You'll start getting back now, now you're back to your last four pence  when it comes down  you start getting back  don't you?
Oh, what do I want here?
Oh I don't know whether I wanted that  Bloody hell!
One, two, three on the bounce  three, six, eight, jack  what's that supposed to be?
And a pair  of tens   jack, queen, king  Feel alright?
Bloody man, I don't want to see that   it's got three  on it.
Oh  boys on it.
Well here are, one, two, three on the bounce and I thought well  you know that's a fairly good start, jack, queen, king  king high was a bit dodgy    you never know do you?
Oh I've got a handful of bloody  pairs here, wait a minute  got fo I've only got three  feels like a bloody handful of them!
Can't do nothing here  Ain't got nothing there.
Is that what you're playing?
Well I have to, I ain't got nothing else.
Three fours  eight, nine, ten  queen high  the pairs stuck at the end though dear.
Oh   not one flush.
Must of been 
Yeah but then it split the bloody pairs all in bits.
Yeah, I know, I know  yes.
Couldn't make a lot with that , could I really?
Not really no.
there for three pairs which was just as well I stopped you on the last one.
Ooh!
Ooh!
You bugger!
Oh I want card for run   and I bet I can't bloody do owt with this lot.
No neither can I.
Can't even  bloody hell!
Ain't got eight  ha ha.
Nope  No how's it going?
I don't bloody know  how to play !
Wanna play one, two, three, four, five, six and  haven't you?
Yes.
Or five six seven and  that's what you wanna do innit?
Oh yeah.
No  no I wouldn't do that  I always do it like this  if I was playing that hand  three flu well you could go well  you got a choice  you can go  take a chance on your last hand, not getting through  or  you can go two, three, five, six, seven  two three four, ace  finish them  which is what I'd probably do.
Oh I didn't see that, oh 
One more try
I didn't see that love
three queens  jack flush  ace high, so I mean you wouldn't get any it anyway.
I didn't see that last flush, I couldn't ba , I couldn't sort them out.
Yeah but I mean it's  it makes you one, two, three, you wouldn't of had a one two three to start with 
I know that 
but you had a eight  to finish with which is  finishing  and a one, two, three  might not be  and a  better run  so  I think I would have been tempted to finish with the ace flush there  try and stop me rather than trying to win it  cos you had nothing else did you?
No  you didn't have  you didn't have a finishing hand, you didn't really have a brilliant first two hands  and then the pick of the one, two, three bouncer  I might  I might have been persuaded to play the one, two, three bouncer and hope that that got through  but to finish with an ace flush  but good.
Oh I don't know  I ain't got nothing.
Neither have I.
Oh I'm not playing this, bugger it!
You chose, I can't sort it out     I ain't playing no more, it's damn boring!
There a nice pair of fours  ace high there  er  seven, pair of nines, ace high  about all you got really  that's all of it  whatever you got .
Load of rubbish innit?
Eight, ten, pairs
Nines and a pair of fours 
pair of nines , pair of fours  ace 
That's it.
high  I'm only coming out with a ten flush, pair of aces, and a pair of eights  would have been mine whichever way you played it.
That's it.
about  or either of them  want all your pennies my dear.
Wasn't that a damn boring game!
However  or is that a damn crying shame  however  or is that a damn crying shame  terrible  you know what you need to do for now then, now I've won all 
Cry.
Now I've won all your pennies off you
Cry.
You're not are you?
Really?
Yeah.
Cry, cry  You need a cigarette now do you?
Pardon?
No not with all these people here  no getting me wrong, I'm not 
Ronny's not gonna go anyway  nattering to his mates  I've gotta get a  I've gotta go and get a  to go with it  two and ten eights  fours in that  seven, four  seven and four  seven, four, six  six, five, ten, ace  jack  queen, king, how about that?
Can't lose tonight can they?
How about that?
I think I'll leave the rest of that  tonight.
Sorry?
I'll leave this for tonight now.
More stomach pains  says where's the tablets  so it's alright I can give it away can I?
It is yeah.
Pete wanna come here?
No it's alright.
So    so when he'd done it he said well  two hundred and fifty quid  I heard him  and he said but I suppose you know the  of it  oh I don't know  and he said why didn't you do it?
I said well I , he said still thought you were gonna do the bar with wood  but since you put it like this  if you had a te a tin of beans, would you know which one made you fart!
 
Oh did you like dear, it's good that  
Yeah yo 
e e e he told me you were playing ladies, I said oh I bet you enjoyed them all, bet you go over that bloody table!
That's what I told them.
Yeah, that's what I said to him, I bet you had good fun.
No now no in front of the girls you know, he poured 
Yeah he said you were 
all over the bar for you   start playing now they'll
Said I bet you quite enjoyed yourselves you lot.
Ron's eyes were popping out weren't they Ron?
got the tightest ones on ain't she?
 
 
No they're to buy two sizes too small, that's why it don't look right.
 
 
They played well though, didn't they Ron?
Mo most of them played  they played well 
Actually they do don't play as well as they used to.
That's the car  come and have a sit for five minutes.
You tired?
Yeah  legs ache.
Legs ache?
Did they get it in?
Yeah.
Did?
Oh no!
I'll go down 
Here Bob  Bob finish it there in five minutes.
He wanted me  have a go, but I'm not no I I'll have a go another time when it's quiet, not when there's   be been showing me.
Let's go  
You can go.
You and Stuart will have to  our hair slides.
If you think he's joking.
I feel like I've only played 
Yes.
once and he was showing me how to do it, I could he hardly hit the 
That's alright.
ball!
Well Shirl had never played till she started  Stuart can't play  
I've had one I've had a go.
Well that's it.
Best time to play  is when 
No 
there's a lot in.
No, I mean  
You just 
No it's when it's quiet 
When it's when it's quiet
When we there's only you and Shirley here  I'll have another go cos you won't laugh !
Well you might but it 
No 
won't matter.
alright, do it when I'm here, I'll coach you.
Yeah I bet you would!
I would
He would
I would, I
see you wrong
I wo oh, I mean I  with Chris   if I tell her where to go  I mean
Think she need to hit the bloody ball at first!
She said I'll go  one then and she will go and er give us a shout, because 
Could I?
Gotta a hit the ball!
I'll just get a few  
 
I was 
Oh yeah.
er
Yeah.
you know  It was quite good fun really, I enjoyed it.
I think I'll come and sit down there ou out the way  you're alright, I'm alright on this corner.
Erm
Aah!
Bugger me!
I'll have to pa I'll have to pack this running up and down like this.
What are you doing at the moment?
So I've done it now, I was doing a load of painting.
But er  i outside with the Cuprinol.
isn't it?
Oh yeah  that one, that's not so bad, it's the other stuff this er  was is it, Saladene that that's a wo a wood preservative it's a got a s stainer  now that's not very strong  I can still smell it now  you know.
Yeah.
And er  but it was  only about half past five  I didn't    I never stopped till the   I just kept going  now tha well about half past four, I started to pack up  and I realized my sandwiches were still in my snack box  so I  I'd I'd had one  one earlier on  whilst I was  still working  but yes  the lady there she  made us a couple of cups in the morning, er cu cup of coffee, I think  about what  yeah about half ten time  but the time  I painted a little bit and I thought oh I'll stop and have a fag, with my coffee    and I had a cup of tea later on in the afternoon  but er  I didn't stop, I kept going, you know  and then course by time I got  to my drink, it was cold  it was cool, so you drink it straight down 
Drink it straight down.
and then we carried straight on again  but I wanted to get it done today, I didn't want to go back again    weekend  they want to get the carpets down  inside  and they've got all the carpets there in the house, I mean it's  twenty eight foot long, twelve foot wide  so  erm we got the carpets in  down and we've got it in the house and it's too big
Yeah.
so obviously they wanna get it down this weekend and get it out the way cos they've got some family coming for the day  on Sunday  so they want to get it down tomorrow.
 

Yeah but it's all done
Oh.
now, it was just  the windows  wanted finishing off properly  and I did that  and all the  the catches and fur furniture back on it again.
Yeah.
Cos I always take that off  because it's all brass  the er 
I know.
you get  a bit of paint on it  I'd have a job to get it off  so I take them off, then put them on  just as it's going off, you know, so you gotta
Yeah.
Up market but erm  yes even though I say it myself, it looks very very nice, and the door  erm I did the  the outside with the Cuprinol  erm  one of these hard wood doors with windows in it  do you know it's bloody smashing!
The door really does set it off, it looks
Oh.
yeah it looks a real treat it does  and it's just taken that Cuprinol nicely  but  mind you I didn't put it up too thick I  well it's had two coats  so it does, it looks a treat  so er  I'm a I'm very pleased with it anyway and er  the woman there, Rita 
Oh just as long as they're
she says, ooh yes  aye this is fantastic!
She said  after Christmas in the New Year I'm gonna have a house warming she says, and we'll let you know.
oh that's nice 
You know 
then.
they're they're going  have extension built  I mean I they're gonna use it at Christmas  family coming over and they're gonna have their  Christmas dinner out there.
I see.
Still   well  I mean I know the majority of it's wood  and there's three large windows in it, and a door  and erm  the roof is this  erm    stuff it's just like er  plastic moulding  but it's double glazed  bloody oven in there!
Oy oy oy oy!
Forty.
.
What one?
What do you want?
I'll have a Bacardi now please, one before I go home.
the diet.
Yes please.
I'm trying to be very good but er  I can only so much  of that !
You don't  oh you you don't like orange cos that makes you
I'm allergic to it.
allergic to it.
You alright mate.
 
I heard 
Oh eh it comes across my shoulders.
Oh I get it all over, terrible.
No it comes across my  it don't  come out on my arms or anything, it comes, it comes on my body  if I have an orange
Mm.
er a proper orange
I can't touch orange.
I love them!
I love 
Luckily I'm not  over 
I love 
keen.
I love a piece of orange, I I wouldn't eat a whole orange  but I do like er little pieces of oranges  now I might get away with that  but if I was to have a whole orange
I just get, if someone 
No 
if you sat there peeling an orange  and some of the juice squirted on me, I'd I'd blister.
Mm?
Sore it gets 
Eighty five!
I wouldn't dare eat them I'd be in a terrible state.
Yeah I'm like that but we had a  erm  conifer type tree  it was only so big but  and then I   and when we  we was unloading off the van, this come off and I dug a hole and stuck it in the garden, in the front garden  just by the pathways  right  that's that  but I was washing the car one day, a nice hot day  got my shirt off  when I come in  course I'd brushed past it  I'd got patterns of the leaves on my  on my back.
Yeah.
I mean, my mate, he went to hospital cos  they said he was allergic to something  and they was putting him in a thing that  only  
Yeah  
a  little box
Yeah same as 
 
this.
and lumbered it.
I know a little boy who had that 
Yeah 
.
and all the way down his back
Yes.
you know, and of course, one or two did
Yeah.
come out, you know, one or two were leaves  and you could see the shape of the leaves  well that was just like  me on my on my back.
Funny innit?
Funny yeah.
It's years since I've dared have an orange  yeah if I eat an orange, I'd damn well
Mm.
get blisters over me  wherever it touches  try and eat one, I'd have them on my tongue and in my mouth and everywhere.
Just daren't touch them.
Well I'm the same, I'm alright with  you know that orange juice?
Yeah.
Britvic orange juice  I'm alright with that, mind you I'll only  only have one, orange juice and lemonades  I'm alright with that  alright with an orange drink.
Only look what I've er 
but 
I probably could, it depends  if it's got real orange in  cos when I went to work at  Lockwoods at  Lymestock 
Mm.
we had some carbonated drinks factory I said  well they they asked me if I'd go over there and I said I can't work in there I'm allergic to oranges and he said  oh bloody or I've never seen an orange, don't worry, you know it's all chemicals !
Orange flavours that's about as much as what we'd ever get in here!
There's no blooming  so I mean I could drink something like that, which is purely chemical and never seen as li a damn orange  That's all it is is flavourings and water and 
Mm.
sugar and
Yeah well that you see is just orange.
But yeah, but the pure orange I wouldn't dare to touch  Cos they're some of them canned orange drinks are 
Yeah.
are not orange, they're all
Yeah  but I mean  real oranges, but you peel them and I'd 
Yeah 
be bad that I'd come 
that's it.
out in a rash  
And if someone just  squirted, just 
but 
squirted on, that would be it 
you know those orange drinks, which it says real oranges in  nine times out of ten, it isn't  there's always some additives and what have you 
Yeah.
because I used to have  when I used to go around these   for breakfast  I'd always have an orange juice  and my cereal  and then my  fried breakfast  it's the only time I'd eat a fried breakfast.
It's the only time Stuart does, if they're away.
Yeah.
He loves it, but he wouldn't have one at home.
No.
I've offered him, I mean it's not as if 
Oh right.
it's not there, but he just won't 
Yeah I 
he says no I can't, it's a special and when you're on holiday it's different  you can sit down and enjoy it 
Well, when you're on holiday 
and relax and 
Yes  I mean when we we went on a 
and er if you're going to work or something you don't  er 
well we went on a course, for a week up Newcastle  and of course er erm we had to be there for nine o'clock  so we had to catch the bus, at the latest half past eight  so you're up at  you're up at seven  and you get showered and what have you cos there's a shower in the be bedroom  get yourself all ready  so you're down by about erm  half seven, quarter to eight, like  so you tend to think quarter of an hour to the  erm  bus stop  which is right outside the door  of the hotel we were getting  so  and we use the bus rather than take the car in daily, cos it's easier  so I  and er  and of course I sat down and had a breakfast and I thoroughly enjo , I didn't have any cereals  you know, I says well er  and I had  a little bit of orange  orange juice, but it was this erm made up orange juice
Yeah.
you know  had some of that  and erm my fried breakfast and my toast  and my cup of coffee and I thoroughly enjoyed that, set me up for the day that did.
He does when they're on holidays 
Yeah 
stay and have brea 
and then  at lunchtime  er first  day we went out for lunch somewhere  but erm
Didn't really want it.
not really want it, a a couple of  sandwiches or something, to be going on 
Yeah but 
erm, but actually  near the erm  near the bridge  the the large roundabout before you go over the Gateshead bridge  erm  underneath that  there's a subway and what have you  there's shops in there, there's a little shop in there  that th that used to do these rolls  and  beautiful rolls, any bread you wanted, any filling you wanted  you know they have  vast variety of different fillings  you know, and it was all there in these  erm show cases, and we used to go down there and get a sandwich, take it back to  to the place where we was  you know, this conference centre  and erm  it was great  and then course when we got back
  
we got back  there was a a a meal there by the time we'd   you know 
Brought it in.
and what have you  come down for a meal  and we used to sit with the  landlord having a  having a natter whilst having a few  few drinks  and er  yeah he  he used to say er  when we went up  what do you fancy tonight?
Anything you fa you fancy?
No we'll leave it entirely up to you  and i it wasn't English, I think he was Polish or or  you know  and erm  some beautiful meals  there was a stew that he did  and it was beautiful  and we we told him
Oh yes.
we enjoyed that, what was it?
And he I can't remember what it was now but he told us  and erm a couple of days later he says erm  when we went out  he said  what do you fancy tonight?
Don't mind bu wouldn't mind some of that sweet 
Sweet ha ha ha ha.
couldn't get hold of that actually.
Oh.
He went all over the place looking, but he couldn't get hold of it  I mean it was obviously it was something that he made himself  but it was beautiful!
He was local to the area, I think it was one of these bakers  that used to  used to do it but er  he probably only used to do it once a week  sell it once a week     I think of all the people that was on  course  we  got the best, we got the best place  and er  and it came out that the  erm  tourist information booklet.
Mm.
Yeah, somebody had told us about a place to go to , asking the bloody earth they were!
Yes I  
Wh whe where we go in Yorkshire that Stu Stuart usually gets them out of the  Cameron the  the pub one, where we go and stay and  or  they're dealing with  you know what he's like with his deal, he knows if it's there it's usually good fun  so, you know .
Yeah, yeah  Well he wasn't, he used to be licensed
Oh.
but he let it lapse because
So  
he says  I you try buying 
I'd just as soon stay in a small pub
Yeah  well he used to find that a lo 
rather than wholesale outlet.
a lot of the people  used to come in  and they'd be in in his  hotel, boozing  rather than being at the pub  you know, he says it  for me I got a bottle and everything there.
Well like  Black Bull at Boroughbridge you mean?
I mean I know it's a beautiful old pub  the meals are absolutely wonderful!
Mm.
But, well it was only a pub
Mm.
I mean t to for the cooking that they did  for a pub it was  and we had duckling and salmon, poached 
Mm.
salmon and
Mm.
wonderful meals and she  she was a real good
Yeah well you see 
good cook
if
I mean the only  th there was only about  twelve or fourteen  that she could cater for fo for a meal, you know, she had her dining room 
Yeah.
 
Yeah  like we do we
Yeah.
Yeah.
An tha and that was about it  but 
Yeah.
I mean they were  really lovely meals!
Yeah well you know I mean we could 
look after you so well 
we could do it.
We could do do things like that 
Mm.
if  there was a call for it round here.
Yeah.
That  most people  you know, they won't try  something like that, I mean, I know I'm a bit like that myself  I'd sooner have a steak.
No you see I'd I I'd 
Yeah.
prefer to try
but yeah  and 
if I'm going out for a meal I prefer to try something different, you can have a steak at home, I mean
Yeah
so, but I wouldn't go and get salmon 
I think the most, most people get scampi.
or duck, yeah and say 
Most people have scampi.
Yeah.
You know  they they won't bother with something else.
Me I'd rather try something different.
Yeah, I mean erm
So wh why have so why go out for a meal and and eat something that you 
That you can have at home.
you can have at home anyway and
Well this is when I go, when we go out
That's what I like about  
we always  we always go to Spalding  well not always but a lot of the time we go to Spalding  and I always have what is called the raw vegetable dip  it's all vegetables, you name it, the vegetables are on there  you know carrots erm
Raw?
erm mushrooms  cabbage and everything's raw, completely raw  carrots in th in the middle with two different  two mayonnaise dips  one plai s plain mayonnaise  and the other half of it  is erm  garlic flavour mayonnaise  and erm that's as a starter  I always have that and I thoroughly enjoy it  you know  that's the  by the time I've had that  I don't want much of my main meal cos it's  great 
yeah 
plateful
I I rather have a 
I mean 
starter or a
but that is 
or 
cos Michelle always has their erm  prawn cocktail, so there's like a prawn cocktail 
I always have the main meal and the sweet,Stu Stuart has a starter and the  main meal .
But
Cos I I love the sweets see 
and then nor 
then I ca 
Yeah
then I can't, if I eat the starter then the main meal I do I can't eat the rest.
Yeah well I'm not ove I'm not over struck on some of their sweets that they do, you know  erm
I love the sweets .
the they don't do the same sweets week in week out, I mean the they  erm they vary them a on a  possibly on a  on an eight week basis so it all depends which week you go
Week you go.
as to which  sweets is actually  on that week  and if it's one that you don't really fancy, well  I'm not bothered, I'm not bothered about the sweets.
No I  on a weekly  then you might have four or five dishes on it
Yeah.
and then the next week she'll have 
Mm.
you know, another lot.
Well if you
I mean she does everything, you know, burgers  you know, stuff that people want, I mean that's bar meals, but to sit in the dining 
Yeah.
room you have
Yeah, well basically 
proper meals.
ours  basically what you wa what you, what is set up there basic bar meals but i you can have it in the restaurant if you want.
If you wish.
If you wish  you know  but I mean during the week  nine times 
So 
out of ten
so she did  I think it was four  se special meals then  when we were there there was  salmon, duckling 
at the moment, only on a Sunday  we get the odd meals on a Sunday, we get the odd meals on a  Saturday night  but nine times out of ten they only want to sit in there there's a 
Sit in there.
they don't want to sit in the restaurant  they very rarely do get them sitting in the restaurant    I suppose to a certain extent other than the Sundays  it's just waste of space.
Yeah.
And it's not earning us anything in there, but mind you  erm it sometimes during the week  where erm  the tables are full of a load of papers and what have you where I've been doing paper work and that 
Yeah.
sitting there doing paper work  and the ki erm  the kids use it as a a  an office and what have you, there with their paper work, Sarah does her homework there and    we have our meals in there  so erm  sort of it doesn't really matter  but er  you know it saves them all coming out for a meal, and having to do it  cos trouble is  it's too small to keep an eye on people  to see if they want anything, everything's alright and what have you
Yeah.
but you want  you don't want the door open, because people can go there to the toilet
Yeah.
they look in
Yeah.
you know and you don't want that when you're eating a meal.
When you're eating, no
So we shut the door 
that's right , I know
and you're forever in and out, in and out, in and out of that, it's alright say if we've got somebody in there  that was in the 
Yeah.
kitchen and just keeping their  
right.
and  we can't do that and be in here as well.
No.
But er  I I hope that  I mean Shirley as she is  she's not   cooking  but she will cook   
She don't want to be ,
I mean we both can cook, if it comes to that  I mean I can cook 
Stuart's the one for a cook  marvellous, Stuart is  should have been a chef, he should  smashing cook.
Well my mum often used to say that about me.
Smashing cook, he is.
And my brother.
I'm not that bad but  Stuart can beat me if he gets in the cooking mood,.
Yeah I like to, I like to have a go at different things  I mean the the the other  the other lunchtime  we had you know   he came in  at lunchtime  and er  Shirley had gone somewhere Ann  and er   I'll have the chicken kiev for me please  so  so I went and did it    did you cook that for him?
I says of course, yes  right he says, I really enjoyed he says  you know, so I mean  that made my day that did  Daren't tell Shirl,sh otherwise she'll say you'll do all the cooking!
Mhm mm.
I don't mind but that  getting a  like when Shirl first came  she was   to get everything done  exactly the same time
Same time  that's the  
So everything's ready  same time
Hot and
so it's all hot  on the plate  and served straight away you know, luckily  erm I managed it  but I got in a little bit of a flap  I will admit it  whereas Shirl's now got used to that  I mean I  when we first came we both used to  do our own  help each other out   I used to help out  but erm
It's getting used to 
Well yes yes and Sarah will nip down as well and  then Sarah was then getting used to doing, she started getting used to doing it and that was it  I used to come out and say well no I'll look after the bar from now on and that's it, and er
Who won then?
Who won Stuart?
I I I'm just about to do that 
Oh  getting a clever devil isn't he?
I gotta let him win else he won't play with me.
That's it.
I was lucky though, Ronny did skittle though and er
Mm.
when he got  
and  
In case they change their minds again.
No 
I didn't win, no I didn't win, I still didn't win.
No I know.
You're telling me you're playing la , he told me he plays in ladies teams, I bet you all had great fun, watching them women bending over table.
Oh we did.
Yes that's what that's what I said 
Yeah 
to him, in the
very  
tight trousers he kept saying.
Yeah well they was cracking!
Well they all had high neck 
Said he ain't going no more.
jumpers.
He kept moving round the other side, cos they've all got high neck jumpers  haven't they Ron?
Said he ain't going no more, if I find out it's a ladies team  that's it he'll be banned.
No thank you.
Sure?
Yeah.
then.
Changing the subject quick.
 
Oh.
Where did you put that red, Ron?
I put it round here.
Yeah see what you can do, it's quite a good night actually.
Yeah.
Ah they they're a laugh, they're like this  there's one of them to this  
Looks like yours.
Er  she's always  and jigging about you know but when she plays  very still  and she hits the ball  stands up quick, watches where it goes, she'll go like this, this  up  jump
Ooh 
you know  scatty as anything!
As long as she's 
You know 
, yeah.
she doesn't seem  the type that would be a school teacher  I mean the  erm  that erm seven, eight year old that she teaches  and I just think what she's like at school.
Mhm mm mm mhm.
You know, I don't know  she is she's  she's a real nice that's wh well all all them are but  you know  
there maybe.
Yeah  they're all nice nice girls  you know  this is  like the other week we was here  playing the other team  and one of the other team was swearing   you know, and particularly  you know  the girls in, might have not  they have the  they used to play for Black Bear and you know  the that lady that's up there, she still swears  and we stopped her  from here  used to f this, f that and f the other,we did, we stopped her  said if you can't  find a better word than that to use  I shouldn't bother, you know  As you know Shirl don't like that.
No, she don't.
And er
Why should she?
Why should 
Quite!
you put up with it?
Yes  I just think  I mean you get i 
I mean it's your home as well as your 
Yeah.
pub innit?
I mean if a load of fellas in together  like Sunday lunchtime 
They'd have a fit.
if it's all the fellas are in  right  and I'm in here, and Shirl's out there cooking  doesn't worry me  and  I don't bother to   it, because it's good fun isn't it?
No that's it 
Right?
Stuart don't like it in front of a woman.
No, but as soon as a woman comes in  I always say ah  language lads  ladies  present.
That's it.
well we used to come in here before  went  and that hasn't been the same at night cos it got a bit so he'd say  excuse me, love  there's ladies present here  can't have that.
Yeah.
Felt the same way and he said as you can see Ann's here  we won't be having no more of that.
Yeah  it's it's 
They shut up.
it's right though isn't it?
I mean why should you have to put up with it?
Mind you, like I said Stuart I was in the bar and and if I didn't like it I could of gone in the lounge so I mean they couldn't ha  he wouldn't have it.
More so in here  you see.
Yeah just cos you're in a a an open 
Mm.
plan.
Yeah.
show up 
I really like 
and said they were sorry  you know.
Yeah, yeah.
It'll be alright after that  but  
I know
they said he was a just a    really.
Yes.
But I mean he ju he just stares at you.
I mean it's like when Shirl comes through  like when Shirl comes through  you know, they know all know Shirl doesn't like bad  what it means.
No.
You know  I mean we had a woman in pub,
, so I put her out in the end  it erm  it was surprising  everybody knew what was going to happen  they knew what I was going to do  right  when I come back in after swi place was empty  they'd got out that door before I'd got her out the door  but erm no it's  it's very insulting.
Yeah  she should pay for it and all.
She'd got  thing in her  in her er  yeah  what's  what it is up  she damaged it ooh some years ago  and it's been a bit weak since like, you know  but sh it was only a few weeks ago we got some  computer  big computer, with big discs and  she twisted her hand in in pulling one out, you know it's  I don't how, the fell or something and she went to cash it or whatever    and of course we're riding the motorbike for the  like you have to change gear  it's only a small seater, your bike's open
Yeah.
to get up to the thirty five mile an hour you gotta go through all the five gears  so you're forever  pa going like that  erm  and that made it worse  so that last fortnight  she hasn't been on the bike  and that last weekend when she went out  she went  because we was busy, she got her bike out and she went up to work   one or two of her mates and then come home  she said she'd wished she hadn't of gone up
Oh dear.
because she was in pain again in    had it strapped up again  said come and see me in a week see if it's any better  but erm  she's injured it but  not er you know it's obviously she can't  move it a lot that way which is what's  effecting her, but mind you  once she gets back on her bike again, as it's cold weather
Yeah that won't help 
it'll be back again  Mind you, I feel it  I mean I know at the moment  it's  it's me I   my elbows in the morning I can't hardly move them  when I wake up in the morning  because I get that far  my arms have to be outside the bed  and our bedroom's that cold
Oh I know.
and they kept  I was in  stiff  I could hardly move them  I mean if I touched them now  I mean that one's not too bad  I can't touch that one very much  when you can see them, my scars and all there  If I touch that, that'll be very gingerly   ach aches like hell!
And course we're doing a lot of counting today  this wrist  is a  you know  I don't mind that  you see  what did that wrist was  that elbow I had to have a second operation on it,in the arm up here  because er  I had to have some bone taken away in the elbow  course it stretched  guiders  but they also  erm  disturbed the wrist joint  because it was in plaster like that stretched round  and disturbed the wrist joint  and I ke it's it weakened it  and it's only just  it's only just this  what  last nine months that it's  that it's really started to effect this   but I know what it is  that's because I keep going out doing the odd  jobs
Yeah, it doesn't help.
but I know  that if  it  was really bad  I'd just stop  doing anything for while, for two or three 
And you you have a rest.
days  you see, like I was out Monday  I was busy  all day Monday  and then I  Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday here  yet I was busy, but it was all brain work
I see.
it was all writing.
I see.
Right  and then I   I've been out today  and I probably won't go out for another four days  so I hope I'm alright  you know  that way  it gives me chance to get it right again.
Catching up Ron.
If
Yeah.
I was having to go out daily  I couldn't do it.
Yeah.
I couldn't go out daily.
No   I know that's what you're waiting for innit !
when you like   gotta stop.
Yeah  It's funny we've just   cos it paid  for the flat.
And  it was picked up.
Right, right 
funnily enough used 
First Friday night 
used it before Christmas.
Yeah.
Yeah,?
I mean you liked it at night  but I mean  we've got people  right  but some Friday nights we've only got them in that bar.
Oh I like   Friday night  
Or maybe you could have sat in here 
few odds and 
that's right 
 
but then 
then that  and he just bring me  pack of cards  you know  er but er  that's how it's been  for a while  you know if  I thought well being a sh that that's    now we've done it it's a pity we've not got, mind you I mean it can go potty again in a few years.
It's always goes quiet Christmas and New 
Yes 
Year.
Yes   mind you people are getting used to the .
Yeah well that's it.
We've been here long enough now  for people to know
That's it   by now.
They haven't got one  
No but that's it, that  that's
we like about it  one of 
that's what 
the things
that's what we like, you know when we 
 
when you get  and what have you in  then the officers, I mean I know they're in their twenties  when they get larking about and what have you  I don't like it.
No.
I don't like it, I'd sooner it be like this  you know I mean 
 
Yes.
And especially
We're not, we're not making a fortune
Yeah I know but I mean it's  sort of like small areas so, it will do fine  won't they?
What?
What are you doing?
Everybody's  tired .
I need some 
Is it  is it?
Some apples.
What are you doing it for?
I'm 
A project.
What about, coffee shops?
No I  I'm recording people's conversations for a new dictionary  they want
What for ?
words to combine a new dictionary  and dialect some things.
 Supercalafradgealisticexpealidocius !
Is it painful?
Painful sa too busy yakking!
Oh.
I wouldn't say that.
Well  !
You're not supposed to be aware of it, you're supposed to say normal, we sat in a pub last night and  this man started telling me a dirty joke, so that's on it.
Really?
Ha !
What are you gonna wear it round all town  in the shops and that?
What and you can't have people ?
Yeah about dad and daddy.
How do you do it then?
It's  
I was asked to do it.
What someone ?
What?
You want .
Don't think of that.
Bye mum!
See you.
Bye bye bye bye mu mum!
Ha?
Hello, she's got a tape in.
The lady 
Stuart isn't on.
You worn at pubs?
Just ordinary people  I do it 
What about 
in the canteen but I ca can't take that into the factory  Only do it for a week, you've spilt that, Helen!
Sup it out the saucer.
Dirty 
Ha ha.
devil!
Well yeah I know but  if I do people 
But we right  I warn you now, yeah.
does people react?
I've only 
Don't speak 
got three fives.
the queen's English  I've gotta   
Well they don't want the queen's English they want blooming  in fact up  er
Just about.
they want normal speech, they don't even  people don't even know it's been going on.
 
Oh.
It is now, d'you want this?
Do I walked round with it yesterday and nobody noticed  well actually I had it on my  cardi
Hey  oy.
I had the microphone like that  nobody even knows it's on there  don't take any notice of it.
By the way 
You got to  back?
Yeah but I shall I sh the sound's at the back they'll really know   go somewhere  
Ricky  
speak  or whatever  You can hear  it's just .
Yeah it must sound really 
Probably 
In here?
Eh,so 
recording.
It's recording how many people   
 
They don't to be quite honest.
Yeah.
They might.
What?
They might  wish we had a   
Oh.
.
Still can't you dare to make him an offer on it?
In a 
Right we're  finished.
No they've all gone, mum.
really good 
Right.
to buy.
We know there's a time share  Yeah?
That's why   
Even then we   
No 
a week late.
What?
So  well actually I've been robbed  you got your own villas.
It's nice actually.
Show them council houses 
Yeah.
that will  and right opposite there's some new houses, one of them.
estate.
Oh it's the    pits!
Stuart is, I'm not.
What's that?
It's gotta be a 
What's that?
something do to with  
You've had that  one of them.
Well it's a bit quiet isn't it, with all  
Especially at Christmas.
What's .
With my leg, it's that it there's no 
Er  
What's 
It's not as though you got cars going the same  can't doing any of that.
 
What's your name?
What's your dad's name?
No I am a bit hard.
Daddy.
Daddy.
had a number of people  police were dealing with murder, then they knew straight away.
Say  ha.
That's right  eighteen Ricky  eighteen people playing  you say it.
.
Oh come on 
Is that the answer?
you can't   this woman ran naked 
Can I have 
in our factory and the blokes, like got hold of her
 
and wrapped them all up in this cling film stuff, shrink wrap  and they put her in  she got wet and she was  absolutely covered in shrink wrap  but she didn't get out of the tank  
she started walking
Do what?
ten months
Aah!
Ah!
Rick!
There's  Aah !
Hope it goes 
Alright  
only last a week  it's only 
Be quite gentle with it.
Aah !
What time did you leave that other one then ?
Aah !
you know see 
What?
first, do you wanna  
Yeah.
I wanna a  
You got that pack then?
I'm only glad I gotta   date   and that was it  get on that  just the same as the bloke that's gonna 
Yeah but that man 
innit?
Enjoy it.
Yeah but I'm gonna get it.
That's what I mean.
I'm going to   
You can 
That's what happens when I'm there.
It's too late for that   one?
I reckon it's  
 
even with bill  
but er  well I gotta go.
got out with   the er the 
Then I 
Dad.
Even though we're 
Here are.
they don't pay us anything.
Yeah  I know.
Here are.
I've heard of that.
Then we've gotta   so if   they've probably still got ours.
There's 
Here are.
probably have the usual. 
probably 
Oh I think I'm alright with that.
? 
I like 
Yeah.
Gotta  a work
I
 
am going.
innit?
A nice 
Yeah   
I don't wanna  
Shut up!
It's a week 
I'm doing something in that.
Yeah.
Some 
Let go!
Aah !
Sit down!
  
Okay.
  
Dada 
in shock.
just one last shop.
Oh that 
take back all her
 
 
Ooh!!
In there.
Oh we joke about it.
There please  please?
No.
There ah!
Everybody can turn on the affair.
!.
No  it's for your glasses.
Where?
Jean Claude Van Damme.
My glasses 
Your glasses frame. 
Ricky!
Mind out through the .
That one?
er well 
That one.
You don't you sit in the  basket.
That, that.
    
That.
We've gotta get the things   
they can't do.
Yes.
No!
Is it?
Not allowed to play.
Leave it!
I can't!
The fastest   
And he had to learn the 
Then he'd be
Stop !
 
   
Ah  oh.
Yeah I could be going in the  but you weren't told that.
That what?
What's that?
Leave them alone!
If he thinks he can  and cause trouble, he would.
 
As far as he's concerned I'm still living with  wherever.
No Ricky!
Ahhh !
No!
Yeah   
he won't   we're be okay.
It's pretty certain that you can stay .
He might pop round.
No I'm more nervous that
yeah and that
I used to I've got them, you can hear the proof.
All it is is fear  it's just moody.
Innit, oh the fear, he'll do it.
Yeah.
Ah ba !
drinks, innit?
Mum!
There's that er
Cos I told him we're through.
Well you shou 
I don't mind  Are you going to eat then?
 
You know that 
A boy.
Yeah!
There's a  
Every four, four days.
It is the latest  of the power .
Oh, so.
Ahhh!
Oh!
Yeah 
Oh yeah.
What's that?
And that?
Job 
I think I probably will 
What's that?
go and have a look.
What's that?
Yeah we're going 
Dad won't be any problem.
What's that?
Ah yeah that.
Except for 
Ha.
I think you were right erm      
    

    

Whole load of us 
!
If they'd have known that when they got they got out,
Yes.
Look!
What?
Oy!
Let's see them then.
Bow tie and  
  
Well I don't know any.
Yeah I bet she would.
Can you go and get me the key?
Why,?
Yes.
Hey    I can't hear 
About  Carole's about 
No be quiet  oh come 
Daddy  dada?
Yeah he's going now.
That.
What?
That a at.
Ay?
And that.
What's the  bag?
And that.
Here we are.
that.
But we think we might be going to another do in February, it's actually  in two or three weeks.
Mm.
keep up with it.
Good boy.
Alright?
Alright.
the door on.
I've had a good run all week, I've er
Yeah that's right  thought I'd missed you 
Look  you walk  ooh
.
Where you going now Ann?
Oh  I'm thinking we came out here  all I want is some 
first again  
Oh God!
Think she's off this week.
Yeah but the thing is  you're better off going to Gateway first.
Well yeah but you there'd be, you don't know what you're gonna get then do you?
No that's right.
It seems  everything I get in here, Gateways  I've gotta get some fish paste  cos I don't know what I've got and what I haven't  that's it  in  in  Cos I wanna defrost mine.
Should of done it last night when it was empty then.
It's not empty, it's got chocolate still.
Ha ha ha ha ha.
You can't use my  cos you wouldn't get your stuff back  ha.
Yep.
Ah ah ah  ah.
It needs to be full  somebody said that you can wrap them up in these papers and they  stay frozen.
a lot if they're in there somewhere cold.
I want one of these .
If you're going   those people are they wanting, we'll be away in a minute  ah?
Well I will .
Right  ooh.
Why?
It wouldn't hurt.
Mum!
ee yoh yoh 
Mum.
yoh ee
Shut up, mum !
la la la .
Ha?
from hell.
Bad  bad dog!
Ah  it's okay  if I catch it 
Ahhh!
Ah !
No come a bit earlier cos I want to set  
Ah!
Ah !
Don't invite anyone.
Mama  
John's taking your hair!
I want !
Here it is  you can go and do that.
I want a bottle!
I want a !
What?
Ask Steven.
It's not 
Ah?
fair  
either.
!
Oy!
Gary!
Bottle in that block?
Ay?
Aha  I thought they weren't going to work for him  Did he get the job at 
I think that Gary rang him up and said he was going to back to work, there's only people starting work  he's giving some people some work.
Long way to bloody go!
I don't think there's no choice though.
   
Cost them a fortune in 
Daddy look!
in packed lunch.
Dada.
What's wrong with that?
He's working fourteen hours a day anyway though.
He'll be pleased  to get back 
Daddy.
home though.
Ooh!
for what?
Yes you are  put  on tight.
Go up them  go up them
Car, car  car.
Come here.
Let's have some money ?
Alright.
Car car 
Mind the car  you'll get run over.
Ah!
Don't let Ricky run away Jonathan.
No I won't.
I don't wanna   knowing mine they won't  
 

Yes.
do.
Wanna watch them  at the moment.
Well I 
Unless I  put the straps on.
My favourite.
Thirty nine 
Ow!
crackers.
Yes  
Nana  
Twenty first of January,Otherwise 
Nana.
that would be paid.
Want it nearer?
No.
Pay now and you don't worry.
make sure it's alright for Christmas.
Daddy, stop it!
Better eat this.
No.
Tell you what, the only the thing hurts on me mate,I reckon I'm  I'm doing this this time but   but then it's my shoulder.
It's winning.
Tape recorder's on.
Oh I've just gotta go and see them at sa when they get it.
What about ?
Yeah that's what I've come in for twenty for.
Gets harder the first  don't it?
Well i you have a look and see how much a  Gloria Estefan  tape is.
Oh can't he do it.
Stuart  
 
In here.
Right.
What?
Stay this side     oh you know him  
Ah ah 
I told you lots 
Ah.
of people can 
Can have fish and in the Co-Op.
.
Yeah  I don't like to 
Well you  
I I didn't!
I know  see what the programme is.
Bah ah ah ah  ba ba ba ba bub.
Want some ?
No I'll try that  
No you can share with me.
Alright.
  
 
come on 
It's a real effort!
 
I think I'll go 
No.
I'll go right to the car.
nanny?
Daddy.
Well  that double trick's the perfect thing.
That's not bad for a job  
I know, but 
seven ninety nine.
No it's not too bad really is it?
Can't really afford it.
Not as big as that old bloody
Gloria Estefan at the moment, so I thought I'd just get him the  got a couple of records  LP's or whatever you call them now.
 
Ah!
Didn't say he wasn't 
Ahh!
Yes he'd  rather play the cassette as the  no not his
Ahhhh !
Oh ah  
 
I have that as well.
That's not !
Wanna have a look in here  She'll be coming in, look, follow her
That what?
What?
That one  no.
Wait there.
What?so I can have a bit. 
Not certain.
Think this is it?
Looks like .
Is it?
The wo the one I've got here.
Which one?
Oh!
You can 
Look.
that one.
gate way for them  Gate way for them.
Oh I like that 
Right.
, dunno why.
That one dear with the
Behind this one?
no this one,
That's got a  
there.
Ooh ooh.
That one?
Yeah.
He likes that one.
Ooh ooh ooh. 
Yeah.
David's got one.
Who?
Wha what a 
That on?
freezer?
That   that's what I said he's got one  
How much do you want it?
What his big one?
I thought he'd sold it, he said he'd sold it!
No he's owed one.
I'm surprised  if he has.
Oh, oh, oh, oh,ah!
Ah!
I think he told me he had.
We well where to?
Erm   
Wah, wah  wah!
He's only got a little tiny table top one.
Yeah and he had that for sixty quid   for ages  
Yes it's  freezer  It's the top  , well that's been 
I don't know any    
That's here it is  this is it  
Oh Helen  
That's all in one that 
Dad?
It's quite good that.
It's alright 
Dad  Dad.
It's all in one apparently.
Helen   
What?
you sho that's your freezer.
Ah! ah!!
Alright?
Let me  it!
Ahhh !
What?
Didn't you hear that.
I wanna find out who  them.
Yeah  Stop it!
isn't that Granddad's little hoover still, do you now?
Are we waiting?
 
Sorry!
Hey!!
Oh there you are, okay?
Yeah right then left.
Not yet   you know, absolutely.
We're after the cooker 
I wonder if they got that out, you'll have to have a new cooker.
Oh.
This is nice.
I like the brown one, in it  I like the brown.
It's no good having them, but I've got a blue kitchen in my house, I wo I won't pay seven hundred quid anyway, that's not bad for the money  even if they were only six seventy quid 
 
I wouldn't pay all that.
I like the ones with the wipe over top like that  do you?
Ay?
Hang on  isn't it?
Ain't got my grill on them though  Oh I pulled it down  we got a top on that    like that one has got a  sort of like bit here
Oh that's funny, isn't it.
Oh oh oh Daddy !
Got a top to the oh they can have wo 
Ricky!
Come here!
so you can build it into the unit.
Mm.
Isn't it?
Mhm  that's not what I want.
That's a nice one.
Oh yeah that is nice isn't it?
Hey!!
Ha ha  ha ha.
I bet you don't even like them.
What's up?
No.
How d'you do this?
Oh look!
Look  they do that.
Yeah well they're  safety things for kids  don't like that  Like this one though.
Ah, that's nice.
That's  ours are that one  ours has never even been.
 

!
We deliver it free, we deliver it free  and they  gotta have an electrician do the job so
Mum wa mum!
Yeah  come on then.
That's not your mum, that's my mum.
Nan nan.
Ha ha.
I'm your other nanny.
That's nanny.
What am I?
Your nanny.
No I bought that to  go with it.
Here are  You take them.
Yeah.
Urgh!
Okay then.
Yeah.
Oh I wanted some  didn't I?
Oh yeah.
But I haven't got a  for it though.
Can't have these.
Get that 
Well they pick all those  
Go in and get my money back.
paid ones  not any  
 
oh no
Yeah  might have to 
Unless you go in   can't see it, oh.
There's nobody 
No it'll be alright.
in there.
Awful isn't it?
No, go on.
Nobody in there look.
It's your shout isn't it?
You get the drink  Unless Stuart's 
Stuart's in there.
in there 
Where's Stuart?
Shan't be long, I'll be back in a minute.
Over there.
What do you want 
 
dear?
Drink and er
Oh there's no end  I've had nothing but flipping drink!
That.
And I've I've had it!
Look at that.
Ay?
Oh.
That  
I'll go and  while you get them.
How can 
That 
you do it if it is off the trolley?
Mum  I don't know, I'll just take the chance, they won't like that.
Hello  ay.
Hello.
Well I don't recognise him.
Don't you?
No, I mean I know him, very well, I work with hi I work with his mother  and his his mum and him are in my teams.
Mum  
Mind you I think he does   well I don't know him  boy   lives near me.
I don't know then, I can't think where I know him from,.
Anyone round here can be
a friend of Jean's, not that far from  where we live 
Probably would, yeah.
Yes.
Ha ha.
Believe 
But 
me
no ta well   if I do see him I don't think that probably he'd take very well.
The hard life, no 
She's  though.
Where we going then?
seem to be about thirty quid a week 
Hello  
No Dolls, no  Row doughs.
Row doughs.
That's it.
 
Row do 
!
Have to walk   
Where d'you live?
In a house 
In house
Where  no,
Oh ?
Where?
Eighteen 
Come here!
Aha.
Where's your father?
At the bank again  he's not.
Where's uncle Malcolm?
Run away.
Helen that's on the tape.
Dunce!
Ow!
Do they Mick?
They're first.
What's he doing then Mick?
She's first.
He's dead.
It's a butterfly Mick!
Butterfly.
What?
Be upset!
What?
He's got a arrows on his packet.
Oh.
Have I?
Got what?
Got what?
Not bothered.
Anyway it says in the letter that he's got over her now.
Well that hasn't take him long, did it?
After all of a 
Probably not much chance though, yeah but 
fortnight and he's  
he didn't have much chance  either.
Well 
Hello , hello.
You what?
Mummy's gonna take him in, Neil tried to commit suicide,
She's not a 
 
bitch a bitch, I mean he left  What's she doing when he's coming out?
Ain't got no home to go to.
I dunno.
Bet you'll be lumbered.
I dunno.
Ain't got no mother and father now they're together.
Wait!
Dad !
Cor you're gonna have to  
Mum !
Oh they'll  
 
Dad !
What?
There!
Oh.
Just there !
Come here.
I know.
Come here !
Come here  Ricky come here.
Oh God, I don't know why 
!
I'm going in there for one,
No, I can get the kids in as well.
Mm.
Ah look!
They're nice  the scarfs   hand gloves 
Mm.
but they look a bit 
.
big for her, don't they?
Blooming fiver an all.
should be on there  Just a 
Let we go!
Look,
and pick one with 
What?
all of them  oh my God!
I'm just having a walk round this way.
you tired?
Anna Marie is.
Sit down.
Me isn't it  Daddy?
 

Me and er 
Come here  come here
   
Want nanny  Want nanny.
Pull coat down  Nee ah, that's better  hate this bit .
I've got you, nanny!
Hold hands.
Oh I pulled the  !
Oh don't be silly, that ain't gonna keep her warm!
Come here, hold my hand  Ricky hold my hand  That's it.
That's fair, look.
Yeah isn't that.
Look at that  carry on watching.
Only one pair.
Only one 
That's 
Cos they've not gone over to play,ni night.
Gloves  
I mean gloves are 
Here's the  gloves.
It's a good job  
They do gloves in that. 
 
gloves.
Oh mummy!
You can't afford them, love, come on let's go to  Poundstretchers or next best thing.
Don't want any bed wetting.
 
Come on then.
Daddy  to  mu =ic !
What?
Mu =ic  =sic.
Music.
Aha yeah.
What about music?
Sing in it Ricky.
Mu =ic.
Sing for nanny then.
Sing in there.
Sing in there.
Say hello  you go on  say hello.
Hello.
 
That's it.
Music.
Music.
Music.
Yeah music.
Is that?
Shout out.
They've shut it down, ain't they?
Shout, nanny  yeah they have.
Nanny !
Come on nanny.
Shout nanny.
Nanny!
What?
nanny?
Look where we gonna find  
We wanna go this way.
Richard!
Give it to her, she's dropped a   Ha, I have a  and then 
Give it back.
I throw it back!
Alright.
Right, let go, come on.
Oh couldn't we keep it?
No   
 
you never stop do you?
Here are.
What?
I want one of them?
Honestly?
I want of them.
What?
Might listen to music.
One of those no we ain't got no earphones on, if you got one there, it's got little things you can ha , like you've got.
Oh well.
Got the headphones so   market couldn't I  on the baby stall?
I ain't wandering round here forever.
I know  at least mum.
I know but I'm still not wandering around for hours  I'm warning you now!
Even if they could sell some today,
won't keep them on anyway, chuck them away.
Gonna wait till I get  working and   unless you can get the ones with string on  on a thre 
 
thread through the th sleeve 
Got a pound coin?
I need my  on.
Yes.
I like 
Yeah I like 
Can't afford one otherwise I'd get you one for Christmas, but I can't afford it.
one.
I got about fifteen 
Hey!
quid to last me 
 
the week, after that  
Ee    Yuk!
Urgh!
Urgh Yuk!
We're all  I've got one crinkly bit.
Come on  come on.
Didn't want that anyway.
Daddy,
One bit.
Nanny  
Wanted that.
Who's that for?
  
Mummy  hurry!
I just
Come on mummy!
 
keep up.
You just what?
My sleeves have  cos I thought well what's that?
Yeah  nothing to do with me isn't it 
and not nanny
They would normally go up four feet there, ain't they?
Mm, is it?
So
Look they're two ninety nine, look
Yeah.
they can't sell them  oh  hat.
No  ooh your baseball shirt like yours Ann.
That wouldn't be worth two ninety nine then.
I don't know!.
Where d'you get baseball shirt 
Look 
from then?
I think this stall.
Excuse me!
Is that two ninety nine for the gloves 
Set 
and hat?
Yeah.
I'll let you have the 
I'm sorry.
They're alright  them.
Get those  They're alright for .
Oh yeah I know
Get one for Ricky shall we?
I prefer that one though, cos it's got 
Get one for you?
a lovely  
Yeah.
Puppy dolly 
They're inside Helen.
They're not.
Oh aren't they?
He always likes  a nice cuddle.
Give her a   black and white one.
Nanny, no!
No I don't like it.
It looks alright.
Where my mum?
That'll be a bit big won't it?
I dunno.
Fifty.
!
It's too small  be too big for her now.
Yeah.
That is as well, hanging over his eyes.
You got any smaller ones in that?
In the black, white and red one.
No I 
Floppy head  you got a .
Not like granddad.
Here it is  He must have a haircut, it's too long  wouldn't wear a hat anyway, I'd chuck it away.
Can you pay the boot girl with
What?
the note  pay her, pay 
 
Didn't we?
We've been working.
Yeah .
I'm sure  know what I mean.
Well we've had enough we're going home.
Going home now.
See you later anyway.
Yeah ta ta mate.
I'll get it.
Oh he seemed 
No.
Yes definitely 
Ow!
looks as if she pregnant.
Ain't got no 
She looks fairly big 
Yeah.
She does.
Yeah.
Yeah 
Probably   
Pick it up!
No, there's no good getting at my 
We'll look for you.
You'll break it!
Oh!
Don't !
We'll have
Oh!
back up I weren't only
Oh!
I gotta get thi 
How far is it now?
Thingamijig.
Oh.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's the rate  
Don't do  cos 
That.
you'd never see them.
Gotta look in there look  What do you want next week  
 
Ricky 
Oy!
I say I'll
Ah my kne ahh!
God Ricky!
You want some, get some then!
No I can't!
 

Ooh sod it!
I'll walk round 
Somebody's fingers in a grave there.
Ooh that boy, I'm gonna bloody  kill him!
Mummy. 
Well I know the feeling.
Yeah I do  I do, yeah.
There.
Where?
Ay.
Look down.
Are you haven't that?
Yeah.
Er 
Wouldn't be a  
Where?
Ay?
The man.
Stretcher 
Oh  he's  fun isn't he?
Got my ready feed?
Look.
Fish.
They make me feel 
Ee.
Ee.
Oy!
That was the  !
Look at her!
What you got on?
Looks nice  there that's nice and 
Come here.
warm.
Which hands which?
Ah oh!
I'll go and get them on him.
That's nice isn't it?
Come here  ah push your hand in  come here you  leave it!
Not !
There  thumby in that one.
Come here.
Handy, no this one.
Come here  come here.
Is that me?
Mind your thumb  oh which one's which?
Come here.
in  Helen I can't get one in.
Tell you what  
This one
That's the one I put on, oy!
Oy!
Ah 
Oy!
ah ah,he can't put them on him properly !
 
You do it then cos I can't.
Come here.
Right push hands, push  push your hands  push forward.
Oh look!
That's it  push.
There weren't long enough string 
Push your hand, stretch your fingers out.
He put them on him.
I can't do, you do it, you're his mum!
Ricky!
Stretch your fingers, he's just got his fingers  
Ricky Lee!
You won't get them on, cos he's got his  on  Ricky don't eat that!
Put your fingers like this 
Hands like this.
love  Ricky.
Do that.
Do that.
Oh my God!
Come here  are you walking that way.
Oh baby it's  
Too much work, I was just
Nothing to do  
Don't hurt him.
the corner.
I wondered if they might have  
 
stuck in the  
Push.
Helen, do you think it's  
No it isn't there in here look!
Where?
You put it in.
They're big
They 
Daddy  
He'll never manage with them.
Wouldn't bother.
Come here  come here!
Roll them back.
Oh you've taken it off!
Here look darling  fingy go in  thumby go in 
Put your thumb in!
that one  in that one.
Look wait.
Ah!
Oh Helen this'll never work!
You'll never be able to put his hand in here!
Leave it mother!
I can't do it.
I'm not messing about like that all day.
I'll just take them back to the stall then.
Look people wanna get past Helen!
Excuse me  
Here are.
Here's the bag.
Take them back to the stall and get him pair of woolly ones  come on.
Don't you !
Look come here, out the way!
Ricky!
No !
Good boy  come here.
Come on.
There are.
Gotta .
See you Ann
Tara  Bye bye
See you next Saturday.
I hope so.
These ones   yep.
)
Gotta 
What?
Where is he?
Those are ninety nine p, this time.
Got up all night  and walked round and round and round on his blooming bad leg!
Ay?
then I go home and change.
Don't you mean .
Only a quiz.
Are you putting a suit on?
Good cos you won't get in a
Where are them then?
No   but  he said I did quite well 
Yeah well you wanna 
Well he said I realise I  with a  
Your girlfriend's got no 
What?
It's not going off the rails  
 
with 
the boys at the 
No, you're not last year.
Yes, yeah.
You're sighing.
No I haven't got a he I fancy , no !
Not  not like that  well you now just
Friends.
just, no no  no no !
A bit more than friends.
Yeah but 
got feelings.
Good looking  if she   what I think !
Just friends for the moment.
A platonic relationship.
At the moment.
At the moment    out with me !
Jammy devil!
You're a randy little bugger aren't you?
She'll go with  and go   then you got 
Careful how you're driving.
I'm not driving.
Well if you're driving then.
Alright.
Won't get drunk or owt will you?
Course not  he's never drunk in his life  never been drunk  at all not even 
Come on.
Got something wrong with his blood so he's not allowed to   Ricky!
Come here.
Mind the road!
Come here  Good boy, come here   come here.
now don't take them off.
  
Come on.
I don't !
What's up?
Okay then   what about them ones?
One for only ninety nine P, so I had to make the money up they got  
I want a pair of them.
unless you get them a .
?
Yeah.
Come here Ricky.
 
to pay for it all.
You're going to give me another one 
They've sold out they're gonna get them.
You get five for ninety nine P    who wants to get  
 
You paying?
Yep  I bought the card.
Go on that.
Don't know  I don't like it on the number one!
That's two 0 three  .
That's  !
I don't think er
!!
Look what you , animal  animal!
Okay !
Look  we can if you're not quiet!
You what?
No.
Mama !
Oy!
Pretty good  are you?
What like a Christmas ?
I thought I'd make  this week, I had four last week.
Oh.
Those things up there. 
I had to get one bag  I didn't like to ask her for two.
They're in here?
Ah my toe!
Where are they Helen?
I've got those things in, that's why.
They think they'd have your bags.
Here's your nappy  
 
Got all the toys in, that's why  Oh no!
Sa the throw them out.
You'll have to throw these out.
Throw them out  Where shall I   
Outside , out the way.
Are we 
Yeah.
Wrap it 
 
up again!
An an 
Outside now alright.
Another one.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
Definitely a bit better than .
Where's he gone?
Here.
Here !
Jonathan!
Look!
I gotta go to Gateway.
I know but we gotta  swap that, that's it.
 
We've gotta  brought 
Oh.
that puzzle.
Yeah.
I want that   it's on the tape, turn it off.
He's dropped that bloody bag on my foot with all them tins in it!
Ha.
Look at my foot look!
  
It had nine tins of cream in it.
We were gonna buy a flat up there.
Oh.
We were but they're  tiny!
I know they're like the  
Come here.
No, no no.
No   they were only twenty six thousand.
God they were dear!
Well quite, and then I said 
Hey nanny !
no  twenty six, I'm glad 
Hey nana !
I went and had a look, that one went.
was it?
That one look.
Yeah.
to this.
Yeah it's big enough for one but it isn't it big enough for two, that's the one we went to see.
Paul live in one of them  well, did.
That's the one we went to see.
Look lovely.
  
Yeah but 
pay it all, but  
It's only got a bed in the bedroom you 
No erm 
wouldn't be able to bloody move!
They'd only paid fifty five quid.
Open the door and ju open the door, and jump 
Helen.
on the bed.
What?
You only paid fifty five quid, but I can't afford .
Didn't see me, did you?
Just open the door and jump on the bed, if you want to put a bed in.
No I should think it would be 
No you open the door and 
No I know  no it's it's alright for one 
It's big for one though.
but not for two  I mean me and Stuart 
 
not exactly little are we,.
  
We had a look.
work .
I know well it's not your  don't wanna open the door and  can't open the door properly cos the bed's there,one step and you're on the bed.
Leave it Ricky!
No!
Ricky, I'll belt you one!
today.
Eh?
That's what I said.
Look what they're doing on the bed?
.
No. 
 

Oh I   If I 
Get !
Go on!
much time if I, If I'd been on my own.
Like that  Stuart  is he  up there.
Ah!
Live and learn.
Ha!
No 
No 
it's gone.
it's gone.
Not as if you can wash them.
Yes.
Ricky!
See that !
What?
That bit .
Nanny !
What darling?
These.
The what?
Upstairs.
I think he means.
he's gone now  gone to see if his horses have won.
It's a  nine to four one !
Nine to four, that's what he wants.
On the head.
Half a dozen nine to four winners in the  alphabet .
Four  hundred  hundred to one.
That'd get good house, without a mortgage, ha.
Straight back in  now?
Yeah I've been told.
  

You got gotta have 
Really?
Two pounds sixty to tell them how to do that  six horses  and if you win  good prizes, you get a thousand or two with  if you win.
 

  

Rather than going to church.
You don't have any faith.
Who?
Dad dad.
No  I gotta look in here, where are you going?
I've just got my 
Oh no, I'm not having in there, with the pushchair and the 
I'll be in Gateways then.
I won't be a minute.
Quickly.
Hello.
Can I just slide past you madam please?
Sorry ha ha ha.
That's quite alright, I don't mind.
Just looking .
Wha what can we do for you?
I'm just looking thank you.
You're alright?
Yep.
Mummy !
Helen!
I'll just stop here  to get the erm  I'll stop here with her.
Oh yeah  and I'll run back then.
Only I want  Only  just get me a tin of hair lacquer, normal hold  for tinted  that's all I want.
Normal hold, tinted.
Or  ooh no not  or a  super hold  nothing like that.
Alright.
I'll give you the money, but that's all I want  silly me going 
Put it away!
round, isn't it?
Hey?
Ah ba 
Been a good girl  who's a good girl then?
Hey?
Who's a good girl?
What?
Good girl?
Yeah?
Been a good girl?
He's   
Want to eat?
Only joking!
Er two  please  can I have another one, please?
Bored?
No I'm just resting.
No thi this size, I got one   bigger than the other one,
How much is this?
Eighty five.
Oh  so don't have any.
I guess that's twelve quid then about, I forgot now.
That's a good idea.
Where's my ?
Standing at the checkout .
Well  
How many's in here?
Twenty.
Oh yeah, oh give us some.
What?
Fourteen quid left out .
 
Do you want some?
I bought him some of those cheekies    Hey you know I'm  said I knew I forgotten something out of Gateways,don't you ?
Filter coffee.
No  Where is she?
 
Where is she?
Boo!
Aah !
Shut up!
I've got two bags of cakes in here.
Don't expect me to carry them!
Eeurgh!
You'll never push a pushchair with that lot on, Helen.
This one's got all weekend to sleep in it  and her 
Give me one of those bags, I suppose I've got to carry them!
Go and get them.
Yeah I know she did  Well I suppose we better really 
Go ahead, right open your legs.
I'll be just over there.
Yeah right  good exercises.
what?
Mummy.
Come here  hold my hand  Aha  properly !
Scruffy little bugger!
He's pulling his trousers  down !
Ha.
Ha  He's 
He's got his hands down in his pockets in the    .
Oh ho.
Hands in pockets  he's copying 
Where's he gone?
him  you just can't see him,Jonathan .
Aha.
Kept on pulling his trousers down and putting his out  in his pockets.
 
they're all hanging round his ankles.
Aha ha, typical.
I know  baggy  aren't they?
Bell bottoms.
It's only cos he's doing it.
Fashion freak.
No Steven's  that's Jonathan .
Yeah Jonathan does that, ah aha.
Oy!
What?
Bib bib bib !
Bib bib bib bib!
I was being a car.
That was a car, yeah.
Was a bus was it?
Was it a bus 
 
or a car?
Hello David.
And you?
Alright 
Bib bib bib
yes    it was quite good 
When you meeting your mate then?
Three o'clock.
Ooh have I got a ?
Got time to help her with this shopping and bloody  come and get your mail!
Pick up one of them bags for her  I weren't watching anyway  out  
Come here Ricky.
Come here.
I can't hold that  Just hold the  trolley with the bags in there.
Ha.
Come here.
Er we'll go  
 
Just  Ricky!
 
Doesn't make  round here, you can have the  with  
It's our house   Cos I we had a look at that one, that flat  
What does it say,?
It says go across the back 
Ma  mum!
Hey  quiet  in this shop.
No they're not in there  I thought they it would be dark.
What did you put it on there for?let's sit down  sit down!sit down!.
Oh there's 
Try London.
Lived in London, she's going out with someone, living with someone and she's five months pregnant!
Think I couldn't remember the way back.
Oh my God! she'll be happy!
That's all she ever wanted 
She's staying over there.
was baby weren't it?
She's staying over there now she's pregnant.
Weren't it?
Bloody hell!
All she ever wanted was a 
Erm 
baby.
yeah  five nearly six months.
She's not il a  bloody what do you call it ?
At   No.
Oh.
She left before she was pregnant.
Oh.
Got pregnant over there.
Bloody hell!
What?
Hoo hoo.
Who?
Steven.
Our Steven?
Yeah.
Why what's he done?
Alright   th the car blew up on a dual carriageway  there's
That's right.
a big bang  I'm driving there's this great big bang and the bonnet lit up 
he went.
the bonnet lit up
Oh God!
right
thought great!
It's staying on the dual carriageway, well I went round Steven's to see if he thought to tow it round mine cos the  already been on my back once  oh no he said I've only just walked in from work  I'm having my tea then I'm going to bed he said, there's no way I'm towing no motor for the   he said, just f off!
Well well we'd have 
What did you say?
done it for him!
So you should have said to him 
Going mad because 
wait till you need some help.
Bernie's been out at ten o'clock at night before with him.
Aha.
That really got on my nerves that did.
he comes round, and just say no, I'm not doing nothing for you.
Oh.
What about when you borrowed our battery when yours wouldn't go?
That's what I mean.
Just say no and if he  again say no.
when I come out .
When I , but he won't  I put them all out, in fact .
.
Ah  oh.
Go on.
No I won't  cos the police were at the car  no  .
Sounds like it were a robbery.
come out again  police come out of the ca er er they were at the car there  oh I said that's my car, he said oh yeah, I said yeah, he said, what's your name?
felt like it.
checked with his radio, he goes alright then  phoned back to the police station on his  radio, he said it's not stolen the owner's now here  he said, can you please get it moved?
I said well I'm trying to  I said this bloke what happens to be my oldest brother I said, and he won't even tow it for me!
So he said, oh why not?
Steven thinks that just be I only just got in he said, I'm having my tea  and he said there's no way I'm gonna do nothing like that at this time of night when I've been fourteen hours at work  So then he stormed off back home again  so he said well you'll have to move it cos it's obstructing the dual carriageway  someone might come round that corner fast and hit it.
He said it's not an offence he said if you've broke down, you can't help, he said  but you've gotta really move it  so I went round to Paul  and  there was about seven or eight blokes that pushed it all the way round to Bernie's.
No you don't forget Helen  he could come down 
I don't forget things like that.
and ask for any help in doing his car  don't go to work  or can he borrow this, just say  no I'm sorry  you couldn't help us  and I'm your sister  so now I can't  
I know 
help you.
He has been like that for  since he's been with her  he has 
I know about it.
He used to help us with anything  before he got with her  he'd always help me  he always looked happy, now he  
Mum mum mum !
But now he's with her, he don't wanna now.
Well, you can just do the same with him.
I
You're not that bothered are you?
Well no  but I like to think that Steven's still my brother.
Yeah well I  my son but he don't treat a mother.
But he's not he's not that when he's with her.
He wouldn't of come th wa on his  Saturday before his birthday  he wouldn't of come and seen me unless he thought he was getting something out of it.
I asked him to  I told him to.
Yeah exactly!
Didn't come cos he wanted to did he?
He 
No 
couldn't wait to get away as soon as he got his bloody present, he was 
I was 
gone!
I know.
Ricky.
You should of kept his present.
Don't worry he's not getting nothing for Christmas  but a card and that's it  Can't even come and say hello, so bugger him!
Doesn't bother me  You, Stu and I have been broken hearted a few months ago and I've cried over him not coming to see me but  not any more.
I've not cried!
Well I have.
Yeah and it turn them different.
How do you think you'd feel like she didn't want to know you when she grew up.
Because her daddy drink drinks  in there  in the pub.
He always in the pub.
Does daddy go in there drink drinks does he?
No.
Does Ricky go in there?
No he's never been there.
You've been in there have you?
When you come across here  that bag mum.
I'll just leave it there  he'll be at home with his mother now  watching them on the telly.
Where's your ?
There Ricky.
Who's in there?
Look!
Ha ha ha  Is it big?
Big.
Stuey  Stuey going in there.
Can't move inside there!
Gone home now.
Gone home now.
Gone home to see his mummy.
Gone to see his mummy    Like  mum 
I've had a 
That   that
Oh go on, you heavy boy!
Careful.
Oh boy   
  
Oh boy !
When we get right to the  again.
Oh yeah  Got a tre got and tree and all the decorations are there.
I'm not putting them up though!
He ain't putting them up is he  take them down to Helen's then  some lovely decorations  we'll ask him for them Helen.
No.
Why?
There's a lovely tree and a lovely decorations there  Could do with tree  they're not gonna use it, you might as well have them.
Charge.
For the kids.
Charge.
No.
Why?
Mightn't you?
Did you get in before Christmas?
Oh I don't think so, the way he's going!
So the council informed Seth if I don't move in a month  I'll have to put an application in 
 
and put another one in.
Bloody hell!
Are yo you signed the papers?
Yeah well, no  yeah.
No?
Got  got that form didn't we?
Yeah and it said go in next 
Yeah I 
week to sign them.
Yeah but  George 
Hold onto there.
I can't go  
Where are you?
before so I lent them, so he's gone in  I go by the same time as him  we both gotta sign them 
And you both sign.
together  and he's not going in there.
Oh well   post through there, yeah?
If they do  Ah I don't think I'm gonna be a bit bloody pleased!
Jonathan, do you know back slash?
You know what Jodie and David's ?
Come in here please.
Look all we do.
Ooh  
Lie down dog !
Who's there  mum  
 
I know it's a dog.
Out!
Out!
Beattie  Come over here and take your coat off  come on then    take your coat off.
er
No!
Dog.
Dog yes.
in there
Should of been
Okay!
they've lost as far as money's concerned.
What.
That's not yours for a 
Stinks of dog in here, dunnit?
Ya
Big sticks
hooray!
all over the place.
He's been outside, hasn't he, so there's 
 
bound to be.
Still stinks 
Dad 
in here, well they must have bloody  hamsters then.
whistles 
Something bloody stinks, dunnit?
Can you smell it?
Hey!
Do you want a fag?
Did you have enough money for that prescription?
Oh you don't have to pay do you?
No there was a full time education  I put that  Supposed to pay for them.
You're not are you, on YTS, you don't.
Yeah cos I ain't got a form  I haven't filled out a form, well I have, but I ain't got it back.
Just put that on.
I put full time education on it  ed that's a  aren't I  so I'm 
Mm.
full time education.
Who's  that?
Dog.
Have to go every week on the train 
Who's that?
to
Cat.
Sod it!
What's it for, painkillers?
Transve something.
You should of bloody gone and got it, it'll be shut this afternoon, some of th chemists.
Boots are open, you're alright.
Boots are, I know.
I ain't got a pen that's why I didn't fill it in.
Daddy.
Just have to .
there's     !
What?
Hurt?
Hurts, yeah  getting told where my knee hurts.
Ha?
Hurt 
Okay.
Hurt.
Does it hurt, does it?
Your a right mother  Ooh  yeah it does hurt.
Oh shut up!
Got an  up on top the  thing look.
Somebody want a cup of tea?
Oh well I will in a minute.
This it?
What?
That one  .
Ca you take your coat off?
Yes.
Take your coat off.
A mac  mac
Music, yeah, don't touch!
Don't touch the music.
Ann's wants to be a stress attack at the minute  Ooh .
A Ann
Ann love.
Hat.
Yes.
Looks like Lee, don't he?
I haven't got any headphones so I can't  have a 
Dad!
listen to yourself.
what got  
You can't 
  
Oh I got them but I mean I ain't brought them with me.
Course you could use a normal
It's got a radio and everything on it.
What a play it back, with it?
Really expensive they are.
Hey?
I'm only borrowing it.
You wanna play it back?
I ain't got no headphones with me.
Put it on there.
The recording ones are very expensive.
They're not.
At least it's sixty, seventy quid.
It's only lent to me for a week 
 
bu she's back next Friday for it.
Probably to  record it, what did you expect?
It's got a radio and tape on it.
Now  Ricky !
Aha.
Tell him he's gotta er his prescription.
Come here!
Thank you.
mum?
What?
Where's that  gone?
Why ask me?
 
Well why ask me now ?
ooh ah ah  God!
How can you go to a nightclub tonight like that?
I will, ha.
What?
step last night.
Yeah look what you done to yourself.
Ricky!
Put it down !
Just blow my nose  
No.
Probably.
Oh yeah?
No I read that one, ha ha  read the Sun.
What's dad get now, Sun or the Star, or does 
Erm.
normally get two?
That  having a word with the dog  I'm gonna 
Does he like the dog?
Yeah I 
Or is he fed up of it?
Amount of crap  
Just where 's he craps on the floor, you have a massive pong when that happens.
Don't do it in one, it does it all over the floor 
Don't you like that?
little dollops all over, and there's one spot, little   
Well why doesn't he put bloody newspaper there?
No it does all over the place, wherever  put newspaper down, he does it on the carpet  so  kept doing it by the cooker so we put newspaper down there, and put the toys away, see they was in the way you see, put newspaper down there and then next   wouldn't have that,.
Ooh God!
leave that!
Who Rick?
Who Rick?
Or me   Da da da da da 
Ha!
Oh dear.
Oh da da 
Ricky leave her!
No it should be alright tonight, nothing out of the ordinary.
 
Hoo hoo.
Shall be quite glad.
Ah.
Look at this, look  my tea's made.
Your tea?
All to myself.
It's what we stop  Urgh!
What we did last night, stop for a chicken  on the way over there.
Where did you get the ?
Wahhhh !
Well last weekend I bought a 
No go like that  
bought it for the dog and  about fifty quid of it altogether 
Yeah.
on the way home cos I bought a tenner for that  for forty quid.
 
And all the money went in the bank.
You, you !
So I got  in my leg.
Don't know where to go though  don't know where the best places are  don't know where they are.
Hey, he's out!
Going about  five t , half four, five o'clock time  going to Cambridge first.
Want a cup of tea?
Yeah 
Yeah 
Yes please  you gotta meet him somewhere first, provided 
That's late.
he's going.
Mm.
What's his name?
Brian.
Look, look.
We got a bloke called Rubbles  Why have travellers always got funny names?
They have 
Why  
because if we told them that    
Why?
There's Balloo  Peggy 
Yeah they're only nicknames.
no  real names  Balloo, Peggy  Fibi, Violet  Walter  they're all our, real old fashioned names  there's er  Fibi, Peggy, Balloo  Violet  erm 
 
Walter
A 
Sophie well that's not really a weird name but  she's  there as well Bernie knows them all
A ma 
they all know Bernie.
Ah  yeah  bu a 
And they got all  
 
they've all got brothers called  Ricky Lee,Jo Joe boy, John boy an Billy 
Mm.
Je boy and stuff  like that   they all call them boy at the end of the name  John boy an 
That's why he's only got a boy   
Joe boy 
it's what they call  Roseanne  girls aren't they?
Ricky Lee an all that lot  as if Bernie don't know Ricky Lee is a bloody  name  and erm  Lisa Marie is as well.
That's what  Steve don't call his if he has a girl.
I know  beca that's only cos we were going to  call her Lisa Marie  weren't we?
Oh I don't know .
We were gonna call her Lisa Marie  but then  I said  Bernie said that because mum done so much for me during 
mum 
ar when I was pregnant with Ricky an all the rest of it and called her Anna Marie, after mum
Ma 
cos we called it  changed it from Lisa to Anna  for mum.
Ooh look  look.
He da da 
With 
Lee 
dee dee dee  
girl I'm I'm going out with tonight  see her name's Panja  and it's spelt P a n j a
Panja.
No Tanja  Tanja, I can't pronounce the second name.
Do you want a couple of these?
She foreign then?
Her Dad is  Italian.
I'm not hat, I'm not.
ha ha, oh dear   Noddy.
I'll tell you something as well.
What?
You're paying for this boy.
Got lovely handwriting, look.
Hey.
Say her sister's called Sophia
er   girl is 
Janice 
cos this is 
There's   Tania, Sophia  and  what's her name  can't remember, it's an Italian name the other one.
What am I?
Very weird name, she's got  her other sister.
Don't say anything  ah dear, come here 
 
Ricky come here.
 
Come here.
Kettle's off.
 
Oh dear 
Oh dear  come on  don't cry, you be a tough little boy  you'd be tough little boy didn't you?
Oh no what's happened to the kettle?
do
Try plugging it in, Helen.
I have.
Try switching it on, Helen.
I have !
Try putting some water in it !
Oh shut your gob!
Hey!
No there's  Panja and Sophia  an and I don't know what the other one's name is 
 
very weird.
Me me mo sit on .
It's a seat.
Well  funny girls ' names.
Who?
Said  oy
oy  oh.
What?
 Foll 
That's not her name!
What was the name then?
Amanda.
Who was it, Folly called then?
Amanda .
Oh.
She don't like Amanda though.
Hey 
Name a horse Folly !
Dog !woof woof oy oy   oy   !
Cut two white holes in it, then send them in the bank, it'll be chocolate!
Oy, oy !
Down.
Er, you got a pen then, so I can fill out this  prescription.
Here are  here are.
Somewhere, but I don't know where.
Up here.
You want some new words on that thing then do you?
What?
I'll talk in back slang, if you want.
Go on then.
What?
Shut your face  
He don't like   wanna get on my shoulder.
What shall I say?
Oh oh  oh  
Talk in traveller's  traveller's  
working?
Yeah.
Talk in traveller's talk at me  
Could be  back slang.
What does that mean?
Well you say  I don't know if you watch Neighbours, do you?
No  very rarely.
Well you put another word in between each letter of the other word  sort of like
Ah ma mum 
Put it on Neighbours it's an alibi 
mum 
where they'd say
mum.
first letter of  one word  put  allay and then the  last letters of the word  sort of like He Helen will be   Halibin like that  you see  and that's how we talk at work  if we got a get 
Mum , mum 
if we gotta wind someone up  sort of like  one of the girls fancies a bloke  she'll tell it to his face, but in back slang so he don't know she's saying  they go er, what?
Plenty of women down there?
Loads.
Must     I bet they're all 
Dad!
made redundant,
Sort of like, talk about this toilet, say  I'm going   toalibi to I go, toalibi 
 Allay I    to  loogoo is to   galagy is go   tolagee is two   galaga  tolagol and 
And we all speak like that at work, ha.
Ricky, leave it!
Get out!
I don't want you.
Daddy.
Yeah, kettle's gone 
Kettle has gone off.
I don't  it will  water.
take his advice .
Not you either  Ricky leave the dog alone.
What?
Leave it!
I 
Remember to stroke it gently.
Oh!
er er er  
You  Yuk!
I went to that  at Jasons'  I think I'll go and find that erm
Aah!
I just don't know what was wrong with it, I've work, Jason said  Ja we a subject turned to what he wore in bed  Ja and Jason said nothing, right  but he said when it's winter I wear my t-shirt and the pants  and I cuddle up to my  glow worm   and we was all taking the mickey out of his glow worm, right  so I've come home and I read the paper and I'll see glow worm in it, so I cut it out and give it to him and he stuck it up  in the factory !
So every time everybody goes past and goes   how's your glow worm boy today   and takes the mickey out of him!
Mm.
I said, and Roy was being rude though  cos I said to Roy, I said, haven't you got a glow worm, he said no mine's got eyes on the end of it!
Mine don't light up,it's got eyes on the end of it !
What did our Jason say?
Stroke him nicely, her nicely  whatever it is.
no 
 
That's a nose.
Coco the clown.
mummy, mummy!
What have you called it Coco for?
Woooh!
Cos it's  
You  dog  you   No not no 
What you doing?
No if anybody  go to sleep 
Yeah 
I mean before , so I said yeah  I said er
Dad  dad, hurry !
Hold  I've gotta  my words  on you go  go on  couldn't tell anything else about it, I said yeah it had an orange on  and he said, you got the lea oh course  
Dad   Dad   
should be erm
No.
he said
You want drinky?
Mhm.
Tell mummy 
apparently he's still got  a lead
Tell mummy.
I said yeah but I mean 
Look!
hang on a minute!
I sa I said the lead
You got our gloves?
me  mees 
I've got our gloves.
Dog's got the gloves.
Get our gloves.
Daddy.
Get out dog !
I said yeah,lead.
Tell mummy.
I want a drink.
Hang on a minute, you can have some of mine.
Mummy.
Aye?
I said  yeah the collar on  
 
I said the collar and the lead, match  so he bought the collar out of his pocket and goes 
Mama 
he said  por I said yeah  then I said 
mummy.
can I have a look at the lead?
He said oh you can't have the lead 
mummy .
they match, and he said well he said you can pick it up  
And that's all !
Me me  me  me.
Ah! ah ah ah.
your feet that time and get on with it.
Aah !
.Aah !
Helen.
Yeah alright.
Just leave him, be.
bloody , can't afford no chips,go and get us some.
Ah ah ah ah.
Well you can't get some, when it's late  hey?
Oh!
Ask him?
Will you pop and get some chips if I get you some money?
Get yourself some, if you want.
Ah  ah 
Aye?
Yeah.
Will you?
Aah !
Will you?
Yeah if you let me pay.
    
I don't know 
 
 
we've gotta wait till they go.
If you go in the chemist shop, they have pens
Only have 
for signing 
He had one, two, three
Shut up !
no, one    want one?
Shut up!
Shut up!
Several portions, gave us  all all the scraps  and salt and vinegar.
If I can go to  and get two pounds of  
No better get them  several portions.
Ooh I will pay  I wi 
Get salt, the scraps and salt vinegar we'll eat.
Got a pen then?
No I kept on meaning to get one though.
Oh wah!
Oh  down our chemist.
 
Go in the chemist, they'll have a pen inside 
twenty 
prescription.
What happens  boys out over there.
No I don't have to  cos I always fill mine in when I'm in there.
I know you don't have to, you told me.
That  that.
Matter.
Aha that!
Where's my other leg?
Ee.
Nana   you !
mummy got some, look.
Let's see.
Ee that!
Ricky pass mummy the ashtray?
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
er er er er 
I'm going out 
That one?
tomorrow night then  Have that bit, go on then.
Hold it properly.
Is it there?
Hold it properly.
Don't be too long cos I've gotta go home.
That's nanny
Pu 
is it?
Gotta put this in, ain't I  so I'll say  can I come ba I
Oh Ricky!
I'm gonna say can I come back over for it.
Mm.
get a table   
Yub yub yub yub yub  good girl.
Mind don't spill the tea  shouldn't make it so bloody  
That  pale.
That 
Why don't you come?
Come on Dad.
No.
Come on.
Where's your letters anyway, you should be looking at  
Twelve.
Not nine pound  got fourteen pound and a a bit eight pounds tax, and five pound in National Insurance, so I bought home eighty four pound  Shut the door!
Where is the letters, anyway?
In here  I'll look for them when you're out.
 

Where's the dog?
Don't slam the door  see you 
That's not bank.
Aye  get in!
Bank's usually got a window envelope innit?
Dog!
He's so .
Oh no!
That one's a bit burnt cos Bernie left it on top of the cooker   Where's the dog ?
Out here  go on, get in!
Come on 
Let's just, you know, open the door.
I cou couldn't see  touch my leg   Get here !
Just don't kick it!
Might kick , don't kick mine  leave it  
Come on.
smells burning.
What is it?
No dog!
Let her drink that tea!
Warm, warm.
Yeah, drink it up then.
now cool it is.
Drink it up now.
Yes   
My shoulder really aches.
Look  in there!
Ha  where?
No touch!
Hey  Oh.
Oh dear!
Oh oh.
Then they're be moving  we'll be nearer then.
Hee ah hee 
Come down occasionally can't you?
How many tapes you got there?
Twenty  Got to fill the bloody tapes in a week, if I could.
 
Yeah.
Don't you wear it a does, do they know you wear it at work?
Can't wear at work.
No, in the canteen.
I ain't done it yet.
Oh.
Still gotta  out.
   
Oh  and how you 
 
pocket
Yeah.
and clip the thing on there and they'll think it's a bloody  radio or something!
Yeah you wanna get some headphones for that as well, then that makes all
I've got some headphones.
Yeah well they're not made to work are they 
They're at work 
cos they   
No I can't afford this.
No you don't plug them in, just put the wire in your pocket  then they'll think they can just listen to music.
Well then they won't talk to me  they won't take any notice anyway, if they do, I've got a letter I can tell them what I'm doing.
 
Go on  expla a letter will make a  
Well drink up!
people if they say what the hell are you doing.
You what?
Hey down!
Just drink it 
She's stirred him up.
properly!
If people say to you 
I'm drinking it properly 
what the hell are you doing, you give them that  and if they say they don't wish to be on the tape  you have to erase their voice.
Oh.
Na 
Some people might not object  although it's anonymous
Me.
no one knows whose voice it is but 
It's nanny 
Me go  me go.
I've got about ten of them to give people if they ask  we what are you doing.
Look a 
 Ack is it?
Yeah, can't you tell they're from bloody  dictionary,all the wording on the letter.
 Ack and I got
I get twenty five quid for doing it.
Mum.
Mm.
Mum?
What?
Well I get twenty five quid's worth of vouchers from Marks and Spencers  I shall buy  Stuart a shirt, I'll give it for something for Christmas, won't it?
See that erm  yet together they will provide the permanent record of how the English language is spoken in the 
Ouch!
nineteen nineties.
Yeah.
Mm.
Thought to start, it'd be a bit of fun  no harm is it   
Aah!
You  !
   
 
I'll bite Rick and more Ricky, don't bite back!
Rick.
 
And my turn.
Well leave it then!
Are you weed yourself?
Mm  well 
Leave it!
It's no wonder it bites you Ricky.
It's alright.
Yeah Ricky  yeah  bit.
Helen,he'll hurt it.
He we go girl   Ooh  which one  up here  now sit still!
Keep still.
Me  ear.
Anna !
I don't want it, put it up there.
father.
Shouldn't do that.
Ooh ooh.
Say Nan.
Yes,
Da da da 
likes him.
Look  
Full of moans and groans as usual.
Nan?
Look  nana.
Ha?
That dog's trying to lick that 
Probably wants a drink.
Ma ma .
Wants some food, I know that.
Well give it some blooming food then!
All it eat right, is since the stuff's been back last Sunday, he's had what we eat, what our scraps  left over from dinner.
Cor .
He don't eat   
Ah 
going 
Ah, ah 
get him something dogs 
 
like to eat.
Well go and get it fed then!
Go in Jonathan.
Thought the tin was out there.
Ah ah get off my .
Mine!
Mine!
Na na na na.
Mine!
Mine!
It ain't a bad night   look we got thirty eight pence on  label  and it was twenty nine.
Mm.
Twenty nine pence.
Na na na na na na 
I'll fit in it. 
Yeah go on.
Here boy!
  

Look wait!
A 
Yeah.
Will Dad be in that?
No.
That
No touch  are you a good boy.
Yeah.
Are you?
Where's  dinner?
I dunno if you're supposed to put water in this  dinners or what?
No it's best leave it dry  in a separate 
What and put it in a ?
Yep  it's separate  separate water.
I dunno  
here are  , dinner.
bit of mutton  I   you ought to call it mutton.
How?
Come here away from it, so it can have its dinner  come on.
Oh no.
Come on, leave it alone.
No look.
It's got a whole tin in that dish  that'll fill it up won't it?
Never mind.
Oh  see him.
Well I know, but he didn't have top dog meat since he's been here.
Not since he's been back for a week.
Say that whole tin will do it, won't it?
Today  I tried to get a whole tin every day, it's just because it happened.
  

Say that.
Leave her alone, come on!
You have been feeding it though?
Course I have, been giving it a what we've had, like  when the kids didn't eat their dinner or we ain't eat all our dinner  been giving it what's left on the plate, well
and he's had chops and mash and all that lot.
Bananas.
Had a bit of everything  chips   We'll put it all in one dish an it'll eat it all.
Shouldn't pe leave her to lick the plates though.
No, no  I scrape them from the plates into its own dish  Greg  come here  let's have you having dinner  come on.
Me me  me eat it.
Yeah Uncle Jonathan's gonna get you some.
Me me eat.
That was .
Me me me  me mu 
Ricky come in here please darling.
See Jonathan's gonna get you some
Jonathan's gotta get you some  leave him 
 
alone.
Me mu 
Or out  Ricky it will!
Look at that!
That will bite it back at you, if you just go near it, when it's having dinner  and I don't like  
Woof woof 
for John
Arghh!
Come and sit down Anna  Uncle Jonathan's getting you some  now come on, come and sit down.
Eat.
Michael was it  got ever so big.
Yeah.
Well we gotta buy it 
 
for one  three quid   
Ahh!
Ahh!
well they all go in the pet shop, all but one.
Yeah?
I got to go.
Funny looking thing.
No it's just that erm, Mandy and Jeff  tried it when she wasn't on them  her little 'un  out the way please Ricky  can I have a look?
Oh yeah.
what it is.
Ow ow ow 
Out!
Out  dog.
Daren't lo stick my fingers in too much, he might bite me, cos he got teeth now  Well they're all in there  scrambled up together  Oh there's Bernie  and Jeff.
Hi.
  
Hello 
erm  
Granny.
Yeah  I don't  
Dad?
Dad?
Dad?
Yeah I know.
Look  you can read the questions.
Hello, hello, hello.
 

Oh.
No that was 
Try Bill?
Hey daddy !
Hi ya  Dad.
I said there might be a connection.
Daddy, daddy  daddy?
Do you wanna take your coat off.
What?
Daddy.
Look  puppy.
Yuk!
Yeah.
Is that your Cortina?
Ah  Dada   
It's a Renault.
I hear you want one ?
help.
You got a case.
I hear you want one.
Yeah I do.
Ain't got a case 
Mum?
got a case for it 
Mum?
No cos the dog'll bite you, cos it's having its dinner,
You're not.
Cos it's having its dinner  if you got a case you 
Me me  me me biscuit  me  
It only wants to go for a little 'un now and I'll say, right that dog'll be out the door.
Mum?
Definitely. 
Yes.
that dog.
Ricky!
Tell him.
Stop it now.
Cos he's eating.
He's eating  Ricky.
We haven't seen him 
How?
Don't kick it !
No!
No!
Kick.
Don't take the piss!
No 
did you?
That's bad that is, innit?
Very bad.
How are you then Ann?
Ow!
Alright 
Her tapes are finally in.
Have you finished with your crap, yeah?
that stuff down there.
Cos it's  in that 
What's that?
box  All mine.
What is it?
Identity card.
Oh.
They're taping what you're saying.
Who?
Erm, a man ca 
Anybody.
a man went to mum's door and asked her 
Oh better turn it off.
a oh oh.
Yeah Bernie
mm 
Mm.
Bernie!
Bern!
Hey !
Bern?
What?
Look  
Where I gotta look?
Didn't you bring any Helen?
What, I can't see them  thirty three  I have    you leave them milk tubs there cos I've had enough of them  no leave it.
What have you done?
Cleared out the fridge  leave them  we've got many of them to go.
I know, I see him the other day.
No I asked her to start  but that's all, and I kept that in the  meant to be setting up a place in the posh area but  they gotta have 
Doesn't work, though.
Didn't he mend it?
cos you're not supposed to stick the knife in, are you?
No.
No.
I do that, I've done that before.
Nan did that and buggered hers up.
I know  that'll take a long time  to do it though won't it?
You get some boiling water  in a bowl and stand in th heat of the  boiling water will melt it  what I used to do.
Not so quick is it?
Yeah  get a little bowl and stand it in.
Get  somewhere.
Hel?
I might have to do that wet, hey?
Helen?
What?
Next weekend.
Moving?
Next weekend.
What, next Thursday?
Next Saturday.
What  afternoon?
I don't know.
Because I'm gonna have to still have the Saturday for my shopping, aren't I?
Got work tomorrow.
Do it Friday night  go Friday night.
No  what was I saying, oh yeah, when the machines at work break  we got the fitter there  cos you've always got a fitter about, ain't you, when they go wrong?
And they're always going wrong.
What?
Well anyway this woman  the machine got water on the switch  and every time you turn the switch on 
mummy let me have my blanket.
it bleeps 
Hello.
so  the boy went to Pam and got a
Hello.
hairdryer  to dry it out right  and he's drying this switch out with the hairdryer and all  and everything  turned the switch on and about five hundred volts were on  shock  so they had to call 
Might get one in you.
they had to call a special engineer 
Is that what happened 
out.
Yeah well he reckoned  
They had to call a special engineer 
What a wha what are they?
out.
Who are they?
Yeah you must, did you, did they put salt and vinegar on them.
no.
Have to a have a  slice of bread or something, won't you?
Ah Ah ah!
Here's yours.
Hundred milligrams.
What is it?
Hundred milligrams.
Let's have a look at the  packet.
All readers  hang on a minute   Careto Profaine good stuff.
I 
Alright .
Read all of this stuff 
At that  at that.
Wonder why I gotta  double it?
At that.
Don't know  I sink the ,
I went and turned the bottom as well got i 
It's a blooming extra one you're supposed to have  twenty eight thirty.
A third.
What's that?
Tablets.
You ca yeah 
Yeah you can't 
For Jonathan's poorly leg.
For my poorly leg.
What's that?
Ta.
Oh no!
Put I'm in full time education   tick it   pay for it  she said er  what you on then?
Dada.
I said I'm on a YTS, she went  oh  she said I don't know if you're for them, I said er  well if you don't   I'll find out and then tell you at the  she goes, yeah, we'll do that  she says but I do , I don't know if owe have to pay for them or not, you know  she said I think you're supposed to have a form.
Yeah.
Salt.
Come on you two.
Big Bern.
Mine's alright  you heard Bernie  little thingamy cup with the
There's the salt in the cupboard  ooh you got the vinegar.
Ricky  Ricky  Ricky  me me, me me  me me.
Blow it, it's hot  Pull it down so she can reach.
Ha ha.
eat it   Oy!
What?
Eat it.
Ah Bernie.
Oh  thought  the dog eat it, cos they won't eat their chips.
Thursday the twelfth of December  at eleven am.
No my chips!
What is it?
You are  the Lord  thought you said there were that one it doesn't say  
No, mine!
Me do it.
No because they cou first, that's been here about three weeks  and the little one's only been here two weeks.
Oh  initial training will be on the twelfth of December.
Finished.
Best day to have it on.
We shut down first  Friday something 
 
What  is this?
I don't know  got my Christmas party, that day at work.
Well  they can see you.
No a I've gotta go, I've gotta get on the  training   cos
Ay!
At  atch, atch.
Hot, mm.
Hard work  Got a Christmas due about that as well.
Good.
Ow!
Ow!
Owwww!
Ow!
What?
Don't  
No!
Got exactly the same  haven't you,?
Put it in last year.
!
Oh well     
No!
Wanna drink.
No.
?
First training centre.
I'd say  it's not  Tech was, yes.
No.
Cos that's a girl a college  
Don't they have a day release thing?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well
Is that Hill Street Training Centre?
I'm just saying there was  mine was  Tech, I expect the college   at the old college.
Yeah, cos you been  the college up there didn't you?
Yeah  That's the only bit I hated  I'd rather have been at work all week  and I didn't 
I think you 
I didn't used to like going to college once a week.
In the chip shop we bought some fish out the fryer  and put in the top  and  straight away got them bloody  tongs  picked it up and poured the bloody grease off it and  put it in the bloody  bag  thought it was  terrible.
Well it was if it's only just come through  from the fryer   
Yeah I know but 
 
they had literally poured it off.
Ta take me out.
There dog.
He's eaten hers off the floor.
Yeah.
I'm a good girl    cat.
No don't poke in the head cos  Granddad's   can't work.
Mm.
Got a packet  for when we get home so I  that's got to make my .
I  I ooh  Ah  Oh  Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
Ooh mind Jonathan's knee darling, it's poorly.
Out the way!
Got a scrap .
What?
New carpet then
Ah!
look cleaner than this.
Ah!
never mentioned it.
What?
Leave it.
What?
No!
Hat.
Hat 
 
Da ad.
much more of that without anything 
At 
else.
Ay!
No don't play trampolines  sit down please   now !
She's gotten them all round here 
Sit!
look.
Hello.
Dad.
Look at her look  salty    .
Yeah.
Were not having them.
I mum chi chi chip
No!
Are you gonna sit down with Ricky and eat them?
Yeah.
Hey?
Me  me me.
Are you going to sit down?
Me.
Sit down then  sit down then.
Sit down  Ricky.
Me  i i 
Sit down over there with Ricky  and I'll bring them to you.
Tripping over her shoe laces.
Sit down then.
Sit down then.
You jammy little pest.
Here are.
Look at her all sweet and innocent, and when I turn away she'll nick a chip  I can see you  sit down!
Sit down!
There.
Oh chip!
Here are.
Chip!
Do you want a smack bum?
That's what you get if you got a  throw a paddy  now ain't gonna eat them?
Back nana.
Yes.
Back nana.
She's alright sitting there.
Mm.
Dad   yeah, right 
What?
in there?
Dad.
Nanny soon have to go  where do I go?
.
Where am I going?
Who am I going to see?
Dunno  
Pardon?
  

Stuart.
Stuart?
Yeah.
We'll pay  twelve ninety four  wouldn't you ?
No.
Well what colour they made your leg stop hurting.
And then 
Ha    .
I hope to say if  used to work.
Ooh yeah.
Ha ha ha.
What col ol our?
I wouldn't live with your father if he took drugs, I'll tell you  be dead.
They don't taste of nothing if they're capsules.
They do.
Perhaps   cos there's usually sort of like a thin plastic
Do you wanna taste one?
ar'nt they?
What?
mum?
You wanna taste one?
Usually sort of like a  thin plastic over
Wanna taste one?
over the powder innit?
Do you wanna taste one?
No  they're dissolvable plastic innit?
What is that?
Usually got no taste.
All that matters is your leg gets better dear.
Daddy?
Won't he be wondering where 
No.
you are?
Who?
Father.
What was that?
Oh that lad next door.
Oy !
Now where was that?
Under the table  you'll find a chip .
The one lives next door to me.
Definitely crossword time, I've gotta have a go at it  but there's not a lot left in there  nothing in the teapot    
No it's  
Sorry, do you want another one?
Do you want me to go and make you another one?
No that's alright, I'll do it.
He is erm
He's got a twice as big a cup as you have.
No I haven't.
Oh you have.
Alright?
Yeah.
Yeah, alright, yes.
Yes mum  chuck us the paper mother.
Aye?
See how well we do this week.
Are you warm enough?
Yeah, it's not cold, are you cold?
No I'm alright.
Page.
Okay  okay  one, two, three  that's it.
Really.
Right, are you ready girls?
Yeah.
Yes Stuart.
Alright, here we go then.
Girls, we're called girls now, that sounds 
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
good.
Fish of a carp family, five letters .
Oh  god .
 
Yeah let's not bother 
Perch.
doing it, cos that wo , let's not bother doing the questions.
Could be a perch  it's quite safe.
Yes.
I don't think so  er  ha
A mulch?
but I don't know any others.
Carp.
No, I want one of the carp family  never mind,a riddle in a cracker, five letters .
Mot oh  motto.
Yes.
Motto.
Easy.
Yeah.
Should do it in pencil.
Ancient name for the Spanish Peninsula, six letters 
Erm  now that's one for you.
What is it?
Iberia.
Mhm.
A young eel, five letters 
Elver.
Neutered cock bird, five letters .
Oh what do they call it, what you have at Christmas instead of?
Capon.
Capon.
Capon.
It's not allowed now actually.
Capon?
Is that it?
No can't sell you a capon any more, not now.
Can't he?
Why not, European market again?
I don't think it's anything to do with that, but I know there's a you can't have a capon any more.
Oh you can't an all.
Tree or shrub with white or yellow flowers, six letter .
Could  be loads, couldn't it.
Yeah  here's one
It's white or yellow  forsythia, they've got white  yellow but
They've got yellow on same white as .
No?
No   religion revealed through Mohammed .
Islam innit?
The Russian wolf hound, six letters .
Erm.
No takers?
No.
One nautical mile per hour, four letters 
Knot.
One of the gospels, four letters .
Try Mark, Luke or John.
Ruth.
Better leave that one.
Mark, Luke or John innit?
Matthew, Mark oh eh, sorry  The gospel  it might be .
We'll have to wait until we get  
Or they are 
It's only Matthew that it's  not .
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John  yeah  all those I got.
Meeting for spiritualistic phenomena .
A seance  That's what 
Spell that.
Shirley wanted us to go to.
Who did?
That's what Shirley said, are you coming to church  so she go she goes to a spiritualist.
Oh does she?
I said no  staying at, mum, she said well bring mum  I said I don't think her a her her scene.
Ha.
Wouldn't of minded.
Wouldn't you?
Oh I'll take you some time then, I love it.
Yeah I wouldn't mind it Ann.
I love it, I do.
You been before?
That's  oh yes lots  hundreds  I always go 
Well there you are, why didn't you say?
Well I didn't think you might not be interested.
Ann yo yo I'm not yo a 
Have you been before?
No, but I've told you  
You'd like to 
thing  got a book in here about it.
Shirley's really into it, I used to be.
Is she?
I used to be, but I haven't been for a long while  I used to we can't say that I was there last year but
Alright then, can I go  there is 
Well any Sundays.
It's a 
Isn't it behind  Angles 
Where?
Behind  Angles Theatre on Alexander Road.
Oh that's right, that's right.
It's every Sunday, Shirley goes ev they've 
 
gone now.
She doesn't, does she?
Does she go?
Mm   sometimes in the week she goes as well.
Does she really?
Look sorry, we're talking again.
Sorry dear 
Ooh   .
Alright we'll go then  not next week cos She er Sheila will be here.
Aye alright  alright.
Next one dear, sorry .
One who manages another's business  
We can take it up 
One who manages another's business 
Nosey Parker!
Manager.
Oh innit just.
Five letters, no?
Words of songs, six letters .
Lyrics.
Birthplace of Saint Theresa, five letters .
Who knows.
  

Yep.
Theresa, India  she's the she's the Indian  isn't she the 
No birthplace of  not Mother Theresa, Saint Theresa.
Oh  sorry  sorry.
Italian city famous for its holy shroud, five letters .
Turin.
Turin.
Style of architecture etcetera, prevalent during the reign of Louis the fifteenth
Oh
six letters 
God!
Ico rococo or something like that.
Yeah.
  

Aye?
I think you're probably right.
Yeah probably is.
There you are   you are  I'm not much good at these 
Device for drawing premium bonds winners 
Ah I dunno.
Bird, a female of the ruff, five letters .
Female of the ruff?
Female of the what?
The what?
The ruff.
What is a
A ruff  a bird   
Yeah but you wrote it in, so you must know the answer, I saw you write it in  what's the answer?
A reeve.
Oh.
Yeah.
Thank you, at least as if he knows.
Aha.
A Shakespeare comedy, three, seven, four 
Three, seven, four    seven  twelfth night  The twelfth night?
No.
What is it then?
Not a lot I can I do with this much, The Winter's Tale.
The Winter's Tale.
Kind of orange, five letters .
Seville.
Five letters.
That's six  er what then?
Navel.
Navel.
King of  Tire who assisted Solomon in the building of the Temple, five letters .
Charlie.
Dunno  David
Charlie Bloggs.
Blank I R, blank  
Paddy.
Blank I R
Blank M  know this one  Tira ?
Hieroglyphics.
Tima 
Tiram.
Tiram.
Don't know.
Tiram   One of the divisions of a flower calyx, five letters .
Petal.
What is a flower calyx?
Probably a petal.
Oh.
Portuguese enclave in China, five letters   M A C 
Oh god!
blank 
 
blank   Macau Semi precious stone, five letters   T blank P blank, blank.
Topaz 
 Topez =az.
 Vincenti Biasco writer of the Four Horseman of the Apocalypse etcetera 
No idea.
We've got six letters   Comedy by Oscar Wilde  one, five, two, two, ten .
A
Yeah, a
A something
something, something something
erm  of the no something.
And something of something.
Something of of of erm something.
?
No that's 
No.
Charles Dickens.
Oh.
No we'll have to see if we get some
words and get that 
Sailor, not an officer, six letters .
 Mutloe  
Scrooge's late partner whose ghost appears in a Christmas 
Marley.
carol  six letters .
Marley's ghost.
Native of the largest of the continents, five letters .
Asia.
County in Eire  five letters   C L blank R E  Clare.
The American buffalo, five letters   blank I blank O blank  bison?
Bison.
Mhm.
Lady Nancy  the first 
Astor 
woman MP to take  .
Astor 
blank S T O R.
Well I know it without you telling me the blanks!
Nancy Astor.
Nest of a bird of prey , five letters.
 
Bu not bad, not bad, not bad at all.
At first go through them.
Not bad at all.
Go on then  try and s 
of the carp family, five letters , T blank N blank H.
Tench.
Must be a   the gospel is blank blank R blank, so it must be Mark.
Mark.
Now what we got here   One who manages another's business  A G E blank blank.
Agent.
Agent.
The Russian wolf hound  is the blank U R Z blank blank.
Oh yeah, it's a funny name.
Bu something, Burzoi?
Yeah something like that.
Cos that Macau bit, sometimes they spell Macau with an O R or U  could be Macau with an   could be burzoi.
Yeah something like that, funny name.
Could be Burzoi  not sure.
You got a headache again?
I knew you had  We ain't going out tonight, we're stopping here  well I am 
We are.
I'm not!
What?
Not going to bus stop tonight as well.
No you're not!
We are!
I'm alright Ann.
Well I'm stopping the night 
No you're not.
unless you're gonna chuck me out.
I'm alright,
No you're not you got bad head again, you're  
Well alright, not that bad.
Couple of  couple of tablets.
I'm alright, tell her I'm alright.
Yeah for goodness sake!
I'm alright Ann  really I am, don't be silly.
Couple of tablets.
Tree or shrub with white of yellow flowers  begins in a and ends in a, six letters.
Ah?
Begins in a and ends with a.
Yeah.
Oh dear.
Begins with a?
Yeah.
And ends with a?
Yeah.
I don't know,, I better get my
Gardening book out.
gardening catalogue ready, yes  I got one there  they keep sending me them  I never    Astor no
What about Acacia?
Oh yeah Acacia.
Acacia  Mm  Clever dick.
No  looks as though it's   well no it could be  seeple 
What?
Oh.
Flower 
I don't know what a calyx is, I just thought petal fitted in, I mean I don't know.
Mm  could be  seeple 
What's a calyx then?
Well calyx is in  in the flower, in the
Oh well if it's  seeple then it won't be the petal 
 
will it?
Because isn't in there.
 
six letters  so, all you need is one  two, three, four  Birthplace of erm Saint Theresa is a blank I blank A.
Mm sshh sshh better look that up.
I know.
In Asia.
Erm  comedy by Oscar Wilde is th loo I think it's Woman  A Woman of no
Importance.
Importance.
A woman of no importance.
Is that what it is?
I think so.
Yeah.
Not sure   Burzoi is it?
 Borz 
Yeah it is  But I couldn't tell you ho 
 
how to spell it, but it is some funny name like that.
 Vincenti Blasgo sh writer of the Four Horseman of the Apocalypse is I B blank N blank blank.
Oh, no idea.
I b?
Mm.
It wouldn't be addition, would it?
No  be in a
It's the  Burzoi 
Be in a
In a way your book things.
Be in a dic er encyclopedia, won't it.
Yeah.
Shall I go look it up?
Mm.
If you like   in with budgies.
Yeah.
Well  pu put the cover over them Stuart.
Put the cover on them.
Or shut the gate cos if not they'll come out  you'll find.
Can't fly in the dark.
Yeah but he's gonna 
?
put the light on.
Yeah, they'll come out of it  they think it's daylight again.
When you put the light on then they come out and then I'm in trouble, I can't get them back in 
Yeah I know.
again.
No cos it's dark and they won't fly.
Yeah then yo yo you strip the light off, I've had all that.
Yeah they won't fly when it's dark, they just stay where  
If you come out  and then you put the light off  yo yo they've got to  su the way you put them in the cage.
They can't fly at night.
Yeah, don't worry about me Ann, I'm alright.
You're not right, you're not like you should be.
Well I know 
No a I can't see that that Friday is now Sunday night.
Oh yeah but it's not too bad  I'm alright  I really am  I feel a hell of a lot better.
Maybe, you still got a headache, and you're still not right  you wouldn't of 
I'm alright.
gone to sleep if you were alright  No never mind  and you're going the doctor's we'll make appointment tomorrow  cos you won't and if I make one you'll have to blooming go and  do it .
Oh.
I think I'm a I'm a I am I feel a lot better.
I can't see that that could of been Friday's episode that's still effecting you today.
give it to me.
You don't know, depends on what it is.
No way.
You might have a touch of blood pressure or something, you don't know and i 
Yes.
if you have it wants treating  no good waiting till you're really ill is it?
Better to go in to nothing and then not go and it is something.
You  
I feel a lot better  probably  you're going to be with you, just sitting about 
I know.
makes you feel  tired dunnit?
Does makes you feel tired, when you don't do anything.
It does Ann.
You seem more tired than if you had of been  a really hard day.
Yeah  had a bit of  you know, I didn't  busy place and Friday  was lasagne for the  Ininghams 
They not well?
 
All done.
What is it then?
Who wrote the Four Horseman  
I it's actually spelt Ibanez  I B A N E Z 
I mean I've heard of the Four Horseman and the  Apocalypse but I never know who wrote it.
Ibanez  but it's pronounced  Ibania 
Oh.
and Saint Theresa was born at Avila, A V I L A, Avila.
 
All done.
Very good, is that the lot now ?
Today.
Yeah we're getting better.
And we've got time for a for another quiz now ain't you?
Mm  don't think mum's in the mood for a quiz read.
Yeah I don't mind.
Ha ha ha.
What you want the cards?
It's up to you.
I don't mind  it's up to you.
It's up to you!
No it's not it's up to you.
There's nothing on the telly is there?
No.
As far as I know  no.
No there never is at this time of day, there isn't  news 
No.
an 
Songs of Praise?
The Money Programme  The Cosby Show
Oh yeah.
Highway  Beadle's About at quarter past seven and the Ruth Rendell Mysteries at seven forty five.
What time's London's Burning on, nine o' clock?
Eight forty five.
Oh eight forty five tonight, if yo what time till then, ten?
Nine forty five.
 
What eighty twenty five, what's that Ann?
London's Burning, second epis 
Oh eh that's what you watch yes.
episode.
Don't miss the last   this last of the episode?
Yeah it's the last one 
series as the massive warehouse finally   While Howard is being put into the Ambulance the press are hounding   
Isn't that funny that reminds me of an old girl I had at  Dennis House  the one I used to be on i I used to have to get her in bed  get her all propped up  and then 
Did you?
I used to have to go back up, after the supper  and give her the  and I had to go back up and turn London's Burning on  then I used to have to go back up  to turn it off
but usually when I went back up to do it, she'd be sleeping.
She's sleeping anyway, she'd fall asleep  in the middle of it .
And there would be London Burning bashing away  and she'd be  and I'd go in and I'd turn it off and then then then you know  and she'd say 
I don't watch it regular, now and then.
Oh I do like that programme,she'd say 
But I watch the film 
she  
the film, Jack  Rosenthal wha made a film
Yeah.
which the then they did the series off it.
Yeah  oh it's quite good I've seen some of that 
But the film was really good, I've seen the odd one, if there's been nothing on.
Yeah.
But last week  she went to the 
It was good.
pub an it and it really was good,an and because o these fireman are trapped
Yes.
and that then I thought, and then when it finished I didn't realize it was two parts, you see, and I thought well that's a funny way 
 
I mean you I don't know if they're dead or alive or  and then it said see the next one, next week.
Oh I see.
I thought oh, ha 
Yeah.
We just, I mean I just started I'd  I was ironing or something and I turned it over and it  so I 
Yeah.
didn't know it was two parts, till I and I thought what a funny way to end, I mean are they dead 
Yeah.
or are they alive or  are they gonna get them out.
Where's the cards then?
Where are they?
In the airing cupboard.
What they've dropped down there?
That's right  It's funny when you don't it's gonna be two part, I mean you don't know what heck's going on, innit?
Gotta pick a card, any card.
Oh listen to it.
Gonna tell my fortune, aren't you?
Right then  what's it gonna be  what do you predict for my future,
Is, I say, is Shirley 
The longer the longer you stay with me and Ann the better.
Ooh ooh ooh ooh!
Yeah and the longer 
The longer your health and happiness will continue.
Ooh listen to 
Erm 
him, will you.
Oh for god's sake!
Why you want the cards?
Yeah ge get a pen and then we can add it up.
Shirley wants to be .
Don't cheat  don't look at the answers, take it away from her face.
I'm not 
 
gonna see.
I'll do rounds.
You want a  bit of paper  oh you got a bit.
No that will be alright.
You predi predict we're gonna get a nice house and
Yes, yes.
and live happily after do you?
Yes.
Oh alright then.
we haven't got much paper now.
Mus mustn't make an offer of something before  we lose that one.
But then the thing is  what are you on next week?
Earlies?
Earlies 
Oh well you're not so bad then are you?
Well I mean we're off tomorrow so we might as well 
Yeah got on with it.
Depends what time I get up.
You get up all day, doesn't matter we'll go in the afternoon.
Yeah you get out.
Don't normally get up till three o'clock.
You get up!
You'll be up before three o'clock,matey !
I'll leave you till lunchtime but that's your lot.
I tell you what you do Ann  tonight
Hide the whisky up.
That's the .
And the records.
That's my girl.
Mother!
Your 
Yes.
question.
See he's blushing now!
Mother, your question
Don't have to stop up all night  and 
I 
sleep all day  Ann will get fed up with you  she won't wanna buy house with you if you do 
No.
that  will you?
So
Anyway living in a flat you might have somebody downstairs that'll beat you up.
Yes mum.
Did you tell Ann about the noisy  the television, no?you didn't did you?
Yep.
Good for you.
Well if the people at the back of her were having  terrible row  ah I  I ha I hated it, it was horrible.
Who was?
The people who were lived behind Ann  there's a yo young couple in there  I think he beat her up, I mean that  I wanted to go round me, because I know what it felt like and I wished somebody had come and help me.
What?
She was a scream.
Could you 
No.
hear it?
Oh it was terrible.
You didn't?
Yeah  and Ann was on about it you see and I said oh well  some noisy bloody neighbours and I   and I said oh well it's like your telly innit !
Our telly?
I said yeah well that  keeps us awake as well!
Did she?
Oh, she said  oh oh.
Oh it was horrible  not the first time.
Well have you heard them?
Well she screamed and he  I reckon she locked herself in the bathroom and he about knocked the door down  
Well yo you wouldn't think they'd do that when they know that people can hear you.
They don't ca they don't care  I used to say that a  if I said that to Steven  pack it in, somebody will hear, he'd say well open the bloody windows and let them hear!
Do you have you met the people?
Have you seen them?
I've seen her, well yeah I've seen them both but I don't know them, never spoken to them.
Don't know what they're like?
He looks a bit rough  Police have 
Does he?
been round there once or twice after him for a different thing.
A is he?
Oh dear!
But it's her house  I mean they ain't got no chi children or  feel like saying to her whatever do you keep him there for.
Is he, did you oh I see.
It's her own home, I mean he come and live with her fo he does he belts her because I I y I know the signs and it  oh it makes me go cold.
Yeah.
I feel like going round and
Does he drink?
I don't know.
Does he get drunk or is he just violent?
Oh bloody hell!
Honestly 
What's up love?
you hear of these things don't you?
But I say sometimes when I was i like that I wished somebody would come round and knock on the door, perhaps
Yes.
just calm him down or something but 
I did  I wonder how it works 
see people   
Ann I wonder how it it must feel  if you hear that  and you know it's a kid involved?
Then I would report it.
Would you?
Oh yes.
You feel a lot
I wo i i if I'd of had a phone I'd have phoned the police then, I said to Stuart.
Yeah.
If I'd of had bi I'd have phoned the police and told them there's something awful going on next door.
Yes.
Women screaming.
But they're not interested are they?
Oh they have to nowadays.
Oh do they?
I thought they just called it a domestic 
 
and that was it.
Well they used, but not now.
No.
But if it was a kid involved, I mean, well you would wouldn't you?
Well I would.
Yeah  yeah, right.
Mother's question.
 
Sorry, oh here we go Ann!
Ooh we're in trouble!
Mother's question.
Shut up  
Are you ready for mother's question?
You'll have your peace 
Yes.
tonight, when I've gone to bed.
What is the capital of Switzerland ?
Er Bal  Baddel 
Incorrect, bonus to Ann.
Geneva.
Incorrect.
Oh what is it then.
Bern.
Oh.
Oh.
I put that the other day, do you remember on the quiz?
Oh yeah we had that the other night , cos I got it wrong  the other night as well!
Yeah   quiz, I put Geneva down.
Yeah so did I,
No a no I put Ber I put Bern down.
You put something else, I put Geneva, we were both wrong.
I put Bern down originally and then I thought to myself
Where was this, up the pub?
Yeah.
Oh you've had another quiz have you?
Oh.
So then I crossed it out and put Geneva.
Yeah.
So I got it wrong  But I put Bern down originally  Ann's question   Where is the Orange Free State ?
South America.
Incorrect  Mother's 
It is.
bonus.
Africa.
South Africa.
South Africa that's what I meant,not South America, that's what I meant.
That's a bonus point to mother.
Hooray!
that's what I meant so 
 
I knew where it was
Mother's question   Which is the land of milk and honey ?
Oh blimey, I should know that  the land of milk and honey  Denmark.
Incorrect  Ann, for a bonus.
Here.
No it's
Ha ha.
in  
Don't know er 
Israel.
Mm.
Is it, I've never heard anything so daft!
Ann's question   The Atlas is the main mountain range of which country ?
Ah  America.
Incorrect.
Ha.
Bonus to her mother.
We're not doing very well, you got one, I got none.
It's, the Atlas mountains er  they're in Europe  but where?
Which country?
They're in Spain.
Th incorrect.
Morocco.
Oh.
Mother's question   What is the modern name of the Muscovite Empire ?
Pakistan.
Incorrect, bonus to Ann.
Russia.
Well the card says the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Oh USSR!
Yeah.
So I think I'll give you that.
Yes  
Yes  
We're not  very good are we?
Well  
What's the matter?
We're doing te I tell you these are rotten cards.
Ann's question  Oh  what are rocks with an imprint of an animal or plant 
Fossil.
called ?
Fossil.
That's two points there  mother   In which country are goods and services paid for in escudos ?
Not   Erm Yugoslavia.
Incorrect, bonus point to Ann.
Portugal I think.
Correct one bonus 
Good for Ann.
point.
I've heard of it Ann, but I couldn't 
Ann, Ann's question.
I thought it was blooming escudos, yeah it is Portugal innit?
What is the epicentre of an earthquake ?
The centre.
Might not be though.
The core.
She said the centre, the core, what are you looking it up for!
Well, yeah alright then, okay.
Course she is, what is it then?
What else is it?
Point on the surface  immediately  above
Above the core.
the actual   I'll looking up see if I can see   mother   Are quakes stronger on the moon than on the earth ?
Quakes or quacks?
Quakes.
Quackers!
Edd the duck!
Is it stronger on the moon, or is it 
Are quakes stronger on the moon than on the earth?
We've never had any quakes   er I should imagine, so yes.
Say no instead.
No.
Alright I'll give you that.
Mm.
Ann's question   What is the sea between Italy and Yugoslavia?
Adriatic.
Correct, two points.
You're doing well Ann.
Mother
What?
The distance from London to Moscow
Oh God!
is approximately fifteen hundred kilometres  two and a half thousand kilometres or three and a half thousand kilometres ?
Three and half thousand kilometres.
Incorrect  Ann 
Two and a half.
Correct, bonus point  Ann's question   In which country are the ports of East London and Port Elizabeth ?
South Africa .
Correct.
Ooh you are doing well.
Ha.
Mother.
Yes.
Which are
Ask me something I know  
which are the two major religions of She of Japan ?
Ooh
I only know one.
 Ishitu 
Yeah 
Yep 
it's the only one I know.
And the other one?
Christianity?
No.
What is it?
Buddhism?
That'll do, two points to mother  Ann's question   Is it possible to re to traverse under the North Pole in mid-winter ?
Yeah in a  in a a submarine.
Yes  mother   What is the Yucatan Canal ?
It's a canal!
No it's not actually.
A waterway.
Yes but where?
Where?
In the ?
Where is the Yucatan?
In the  Yucon 
No.
Japan.
No  no.
Ha.
The Yucatan peninsula, you know if you look at th the map of the South America mi Central America
Mm.
and then sort of the bits will go round like that and then 
Mm.
and about  goes like that
Mm.
then Cuba's about there
Oh.
well that's the Yucatan peninsula.
Is it?
Yeah.
Oh.
And the Yucatan Canal is the  waterway that separates that bit from
Oh  not many people know that.
Alright?
No  I certainly  didn't !
And  Ann's question.
Not many people know that.
Which are the only mid-ocean group of islands made from Granite ?
Mm  mid-ocean group of islands made of granite?
Seychelles.
Correct.
Good for you Ann.
That's only a blooming guess, I don't know of any  mid-ocean bloody islands !
Good for you.
Mother's question.
 
Very clever, very impressed 
Impressed?
I am.
Which country has the largest number of people employed in manufacturing ?
Oh my goodness, that's   China.
No.
Japan.
No  no Russia.
Oh  well they're not doing very well are they?
I was gonna say they're not manufacturing much.
What's the matter, what's wrong with them then?
I thought Japanese manufactured everything.
Yeah, they don't make nothing.
In which country is the
His card's already out.
in which country is the  Quirrinelle Palace ?
 Quirrinelle 
Who's that  question, Ann's or mine?
Ann's.
 Quirrinelle 
 Quirrinelle Palace  which country?
I dunno  no I dunno.
India.
Nope, mum?
No, Italy.
A few miles away, we were !
Just a I think you should give us that, it's only a few miles away!
 
Ah?
Give us that Stu, it's only a few miles away.
Mother.
Yes.
The Asian capital  
Let's go through that again please .
No   is called what, foreigners ?
is called  what, by foreigners ?
 
 
The Asian capital!
For crying out loud!
It sounds like a Welsh
 
The Asian capital!
Oh shut up!
Shut up  Ah but it sounded like like a Welsh name didn't it?
Aha  Karachi.
No.
What then?
Bangkok.
Oh bloody hell!
yo you're kidding?
That isn't a question is it?
The Asian capital 
Oh shut up!
 Krumfettmahanamanahulamoranosecanosemahanaritiraoosalalaramalapalapapopapopobaalacataltootoochepereelong 
 
is called  we that's the question  read it for yourself!
There it is 
 
Good job I didn't have to read it !
So did I, that's ridiculous  Our baby's kidding us!
What is odd about the fact that admiral  Horley ruled Hungary between the two War World Wars ?
Hungary?
Well it ain't got no sea so it wouldn't have an admiral.
Correct  two points  Hungary had no navy for the simple reason that it did not and does not have a sea .
Why the hell did he get an admiral in
He must of been an admiral of  title  somewhere else, ha ha.
Mm.
Somebody else's navy.
Ann   sixteen.
Good God!
Mother 
Must be about most 
twelve points 
I've ever had !
You did well Ann.
You got most of them right.
Yeah you did  you did well.
So that's twenty 
Didn't she?
four
Most I've ever done, most of them  
Who's question's this then ?
That's a  seven out of ten, on her own  and the top three  top  so
Well done Ann.
Well done Ann  sixteen play five.
Do you want me to  you two now?
Can do.
Gonna beat me now, I should get that, can I have that card again please,that was a good one !
Where's the cards then Ann?
Stuart's got them.
Oh come on then.
Why, I ain't got them.
Well I haven't 
You got them.
I give you them.
No you didn't.
They're   by on the fireplace.
Oh down there, I didn't know.
You put them there, I give you them.
I didn't there, you put them there!
Did.
No I didn't, stop arguing!
Mark that one, a
Yeah  
cos that for hardness 
for Christmas  I'll have that !
Mark it a for Ann.
Yeah.
These are Ann's questions.
Oh yeah but in, better make  a   Stuart's .
 
Oh yes.
No oh no that could be Sam's Ann.
It could be Sam's Ann  It'll be S M  not S A, no  A S put    be fine now.
What?
I'm not, he'll beat me this time, you watch, I'll have a real hard one,I won't be able to answer anything !
Mhm.
Well I couldn't answer any of these.
Mm.
Right.
Don't, stop shuffling them!
I'm not shuffling them, I'm just running through them  that one
Can't see without my glasses on.
That's Ann's  Right?
Yes  Yes
And I'll pick one out for myself  that's mine.
Alright.
Alright?
Yeah, Ann and Stuart, okay?
Right.
Are you gonna
Yeah I'll keep score.
Yeah, you keep the scoring, alright  that's Ann's  Ann's  Stuart, okay?
Right  Ann first?
Yep.
Right  Right away you go then.
Ann   Hibernia is another name for ?
Could have somewhere in Scotland   
Hibernia is another name for  a country .
A whole country?not just Scotland  Oh I don't know then  Scotland  no, dunno.
Ireland.
That's right,, yep, Ireland 
Oh I  I thought  Hibernians !
So did I.
I I I didn't know they was .
Mhm  Stuart   Where do  meteorites come from ?
Meteorites?
Met M E T E R  M E T E O R I T E S
Where do they come from?
come, yeah where do they come from?
The sky.
Yeah  well it says outer space but
Outer space, yeah.
Yeah  alright?
That's you, that was easy wasn't it?
Mm, was for him 
Right 
He knows all about them kind of things, I don't  well I knew where they come 
 
from but
Ann   In which large  sea  is the   oh that's a funny word,in which large sea  is the Aegean sea ?
The Indian oce 
There is that's what it say.
The Indian ocean.
Mediterranean.
Yes  there's a funny question.
I told you I wouldn't answer any of these.
Yeah but that says it, which large sea is the Aegean sea  it's not in India 
Is it part of another sea?
Bit of it is 
Yeah, part of it.
Just like Adriatic's part of the Mediterranean
Yeah Right 
Alright 
Stuart
Yes.
Which ocean
Yes.
washes the North  Carolina coast ?
The North Carolina coast?
Which ocean  
Atlantic  North.
That's right  Stuart again  Ann
Mhm mm mm.
Is la is Labrador  part of  Newfoundland ?
Newfoundland.
What was  no, I dunno, no.
No  yes.
Yes.
You're right.
Do I give the point to?
Yes
Oh.
She said yes.
No she didn't, she said no.
She didn't, she said yes  I wouldn't make it  Ann, a bit hairy.
Oh I see yeah.
Newfoundland is not only  the  the island on the south coast of  but includes  as a continent.
Oh.
Didn't know that, do you?
No, no.
Stuart   What does Rio Grandee mean ?
Rio Grandee.
Big river.
Mm?
Big river.
Yep  yes that's right  Ann  Ann    Forlosa meaning beautiful  in Portuguese is the other name of which island ?
Taiwan.
Yeah, correct, Ann's got that one, yes  good for you, Ann  Stuart   What  and where is the Great Barrier Reef ?
It is a coral reef
Yes.
and it is off the eastern coast of Australia.
Yeah, how many kilometres is  is it?
Fifteen hundred.
Yeah, you're bloody right!
Oh bloody hell !
Can I have an extra bonus point?
No.
it's f is, it is.
It is, really.
terrible!
Yeah you've looked at these, haven't you?
He did.
Either that or   special !
You cheating.
No.
He's had this before, hasn't he?
Mhm mm.
Well how did you know that?
Yeah.
Well anyway, never mind  here are, Ann  Oh  which three European  countries  breed the finest , oh this should be in racehorses ?
Dunno, which three?
A european  country breed 
Ireland 
the finest  racehorses.
Be Ireland  France and England.
Correct  good for you!
It's teaching me a little bit, you see.
Yeah you're getting good, very good for you, good for you Ann.
I thought that would be a trick question that  but you're right, see  now  S Stuart   which is the sunshine state of the USA ?
California.
Wrong  Ann.
Tex Texas.
New Orleans.
Florida.
Mm, of course.
You don't get anything for that.
I know.
Aha aha.
for that  Right, Ann   what wine   oh God!is made in a  oh, Departement of the Marne, M A R N E ?
I've no idea.
Which wine in the Depar D E P A R T E M E N T
Departement.
Departement.
But call it departement, it's like a cou it's like an English County.
Yeah, oh.
No idea whatsoever.
the Marne, M A R N
Grand Marnier   no idea.
Do you?
I know a , the Departement of Marne, what was, I would  but I'll have a guess at champagne.
Yeah you're right  it is champagne  is that where it's made is it?
Yeah.
I thought it was made in Champagne  th the district, Champagne, France  that is a district innit?
It's obviously in the Departement
Oh I see.
of Marne.
Ann   what  
No!
Oh Stuart, sorry
My question  
Yes your question now sorry, sorry
Yes, yes, yes, yes 
what is  tundra ?
Tundra!
Yes.
You really wanna know what tundra is?
yes.
What is tundra?
Mm.
It is arctic wasteland  erm  it is the
Yeah,, it's sub-arctic actually so I don't think you should get that.
Doctors  not   encourage you to
Wherever.
Yeah but nothing     cookers  cheapest in town actually  if you can find a er er  the same make  elsewhere 
Oh yeah.
for cheaper, they have to refund the difference.
Aha.
That is their price  that's their things  their  I mean it has to be a
Alright?
Hello!
the same thing  got the same make, I mean I can say well  this is cheaper we'll  you know  
And we'll see that microwave we were thinking about.
Yes   see  reduced to a hundred and nineteen, took twenty quid off.
It's already got fifty pound off.
It's a quite good one, isn't it?
It's got a hundred thirty nine up there, and it's got a hundred   
Yeah but 
voucher.
What voucher?
It's .
Not too bad is it?
No.
What colour is it?
Some of them are
Our size
Well whatever, what we have to do, we have to fill out a form and er I think  erm  
Yes, fill out a form,There's my one.
Bloody hell!
A bit complicated innit?
These 
Yeah.
Collect it right away  
in it.
Use combinations   with the microwave and    This is my one  
It's a .
Well, if you want it      Aye ?
Course you can and then,it because erm  the way they stain it  if we can't fix it
by the  we'll take it.
Similar to that.
What to see if you  
Those will , those will do   .
That's good, yeah.
Otherwise you just .
fifty eight.
Feel it.
What do you think?
Before we go 
My 
Are they 
Yep exactly as it came.
My mum's.
No excuse me, he thinks  taking him ages for   
should of
I I'll I can you pick it up tonight?
Yeah, hope you can  for you then.
Right.
You can get that one as soon as they  
even the one in the 
It was bigger though weren't it?
Yeah, but the thing I'd smu my mum would   we don't want one as far as these.
No it's too big innit?
Like that one, like that.
Not necessary  blow my nose 
he's gone to       pay the extra    that will do I mean if  I think I've I've  but are you?
.
Used to the my whole  down there than it was hanging up the , really I mean
No.
doesn't matter anyway.
Yeah.
We could do with one for that  in fact they'll be    both  
Oh I like that , it's like that, it's like that .
Me, I didn't.
I want this one  cos I don't  they probably haven't got any 
Yeah  yep.
Oh and it's   , to get a home   over there 
Have we done?
a microwave
Have we done?
The whole lot?
come on    
Oh I know the 
overcharged me    Gotta have bloody  carpet 
  
We haven't got there yet though  we got 
She, he seems quite er er  from the place.
Yes  
You've better make this appointment or they won't know her name  and
Oh  
Aye?
Okay?
Fine, thank you.
Don't forget 
Yeah .
Yes, thank you erm could you come before five o'clock, because of their staff .
Oh I'd like to make an appointment  to see Doctor  please.
Oh good.
Just got married you see, she hasn't changed her address.
She hasn't changed her address.
We're together thank you.
Thank you.
Can I make an appointment please?
Next there's one on Wednesday morning,
Er  okay.
Pass me the erm  yeah,
Right.
Ethel's just gone in there.
No   and er  I checked with
Hello Ruth
I wasn't 
Penny's 
Oh and I  
you see I put it there.
There's a real panic now!
here we go!
Here
Yeah  fine.
Did you have one last week? 
Thanks  ah  that one.
Oh right,
Get him to come    
 
Sorry!
He's not here at the moment  
so tired they really ought to find out 
Mm.
About nine o'clock, you'll need to bring about a quarter of a bag  
Well I'll have to admit I do like that  a lovely   there isn't a fridge in er  in a my  either.
What about one like that over there?
What one?
The one over by the  
Yeah , which one?
That one there.
Yeah, see that other one with nine two sixty nine and  electric bulb.
Yeah.
Like mum's.
Offers seventy quid back on your old one.
And then you got seventy pounds worth of food vouchers as well, that's two hundred quid innit?
wanna take that over 
Yep.
Hello.
Hello.
Colin  how you getting on, alright?
Not so bad thanks.
Good.
I'm not  I'm concentrating on  cookers, microwaves and 
Cookers, microwaves , carpets.
Bugger the rest!
Freezers as well.
Ha  what did Stuart buy for Christmas?
Well a cooker, a microwave, a fridge.
What did you buy him?
Well erm  set of braces 
A Sony.
 
A Sony 
Oh god!
Hi!
Hello there, how are you, alright?
Yep.
Yep.
I wrapped , I wrapped a set of braces for him.
Getting my room for Christmas  good god!
Could possibly  could possibly.
No I never thought that  they will be  a few  days !
What is it?
Relief   can't want it in a fortnight  it's not quite re another month's rent
Yeah well we'll
must go and do that quick.
a day, a fortnight  ha
No.
I'm not paying another month's rent, I know that  won't be   two hundred and fifty quid would buy enough curtains 
Alright?
to 
Hello.
 Gatey way then now?
Slim folk  us  So I'm not even looking in their shops any more.
the other shop  Oh god!
Too much   don't tell me they sell cookers in here   Right  look at these  marvellous  no I mean the 
It's the thing on your cupboards  the thing's the same  yep
Top fridge one of these    wait a minute  all the same.
Yep.
Are they any good?
So you can get the three in there, and bung them in as one package  you get them  while they got them voucher things on offer.
That    or that door?
Whichever door you wish to go in darling.
Oh.
Ha ha  I'll walk past this and open the door and then run down the other one and open that one!
Yes  
Where's mum's fridge?
I don't see what's  carrying or any of the  colour
Can I ride?
Can I sit in?
No I want to.
You want to sit in, oh.
Any way you like dear  I will breathe in.
Ha  can you get by?
Think so?
Might enjoy it,all these tellys all over the place.
Look will you promise you won't open that.
Give them ten for it  .
Right  what do we need?
, mincemeat, dried cat food 
Get mum a tin of soup 
Ahhhh!
cos she ain't got any soup.
You mean you'll have it!
No mum can have it.
She won't have it, you know very well she won't, what do you want?
Er
Mulligatawny, American  and bacon, curried chicken, ham and mixed peppers
erm not sure I think  
or Batchelors?
We'll have a look at them  banana or  oh no I won't say it.
She might have that  she might, if she's cold, one day   
That's 
.
More aisles are down there.
Nothing down there.
Let's have a look for the flour, I think 
Flour and mincemeat should all be round here.
There's the flour  what sort of flour do we want?
Plain  you pay for the thing  I'll pay for these   go on.
Oh 
I've got ours  for the  so that's one fifty two and how much are these?
Thirty seven 
Get a couple of these 
seventy, yes she is, two pound twenty, there are mum  ten  I'll give it in the change, two pound twenty up to now  wanted a big one  I looked at that but there's a heck of a lot of  erm
suet
suet in it  I think it'll end up  runny rather than with nothing inside of it  and if you've got  unless you want one as large as that   I thought to myself.
When sh when she makes that   for me.
But  ha  won't   toilet rolls for you.
Ta  almost 
And sultana and nutmeg.
She's got in a lot of .
Mm  tea bags, we must take back with us.
Tea bags.
Oh you 
Mm.
What colour?
Aye?
Which colour?
Oh bloody hell!
Don't think it makes a lot of difference what colour.
It doesn't, so you won't mind?
No, no, no, no  
What do you want, a four or two?
Make it a four, take it .
Well they're seventy three for two and one twenty seven for four.
Well better make it a four then.
That's what I usually get, the four  mind you, there's a cheaper one still, there but you want one of  one of them.
No.
They're not very good.
Bog rolls.
There's a twin pack here or will she want the bigger pack?
How much?
Eighty nine P.
How much?
Eighty nine.
That's one seventy nine cheaper, they're only one thirty nine for four.
I know.
They'll always come in handy.
I just hope they wo , they didn't have any the other day, did they, twin packs?
They have now.
I mean still use one
Yes.
and so, they'll need to buy two  that's  
And for when people stay  cos the other ones might go cos they're normally  put in together.
Leave one for mum,the rest of us.
Mm, it'll go yeah.
Course it will.
Nothing down here  we want cat food, lard and Ryvita  Ryvita will be down the bottom here, I suppose and lard  is right  she wants brown Ryvita  quickly.
That the one  that's the one she has  ah yes  yes.
So we we'll try lard up that 
Are we gonna
it's 
are we gonna get the cat food from here or are we gonna get the cat food from  somewhere else?
Get the cat food in here, it'll be cheaper.
No I mean Julie's  loose  loose in the pet shop.
One of the old kind in there.
Coffee we said we thought we would get her some coffee while we were here  didn't we?
Yeah.
Might as well cos I mean  might as well get a special offer as  and she wouldn't carry a big one you see.
Three fifteen  plus  two what, did I say?
Two twenty.
That's five  thirty 
Well you getting that 
five.
aye?
Why  is that for us?
No it's for   .
Might as well be a big one  take them home, leave some at mum's and take the rest home.
Well I thought if I get one this size, that will do for a few weeks  rather than take some of them home and mess about  better than   there's a big packet like  a big one at home I've just opened  this morning so it's
packets of bog roll.
Well cos she can't.
You get
No, no!
every time you go loo.
No 
I want that one.
Five thirty five 
Where else?
Where else?
No I can't ge I'm not buying
I'm shopping as well all we want is cat food  do you wanna go to pet shop or   butchers along    so
Anything special 
Yes  dried cat food.
What does it look like?
get us a couple of tins as well.
Yes
No, no, yes.
Here?
Change your mind now, what do you want?
Want 
Rumpole tonight.
Yeah Rumpole and 
Last one.
Coronation Street.
Last one of the series.
Yeah I know, they weren't very long series was it?
Half a dozen, that's all it's been.
Coronation Street, half past seven till eight, Rumpole from nine to ten  so you can come out between eight and nine and ten and ele le le le eight and nine and ten and eleven, so  you got time for  couple between eight and nine  and a couple between ten and eleven, how's that?
I've got time?
Yeah.
You mean Stuey's  got time !
 
Well I'll stay and have my bath between eight and nine and you can go and have a drink  no I don't think I'll be going out this evening.
The accelerator is the one on the right sir!
He is an old gentleman, dear but er  he isn't in a hurry what so ever.
Look he's slowing down there!
Now he oh, oh he's found the accelerator!
Bloody hell!
He's found it!
He's realizes which one it is  bloody hell!
He's  getting too fast now!
Might be up to thirty.
No, no.
We're actually going a bit  over thir we were going forty five, we're now back to forty now.
Perhaps she's told him he's going too fast!
 
Careful, slow down!
It's forty mile an hour zone anyway, so he's in the right and you're in the wrong anyway.
It is not a forty mile an hour zone, so  you're in the wrong !
What, when you're getting into town?
Not now it's not, it's still sixty odd.
Oh  well it is a Lada darling.
The deal the deal i a 
Ha  it won't go more than that!
the  zone starts  the  zone starts there, thirty.
Yeah but perhaps it won't go more than that.
So I'm now within I'm now within the limit  ooh!
So normally you are  way past the limit?
Cos you don't go as slow as this, even round here  something like that Ann.
Ann  thirty five  and he's speeding now.
Going too fast!brake!
You'll be old one day  just think when you're a little old man sitting behind 
I am 
the wheel.
I am old.
Aye?
I am old.
What, thirty  three !
Well one day you'll be about eighty, dear and you'll be the one sat there and someone saying, bloody hell  look at that old codger behind the wheel !
Only I won't be around to live to see it.
I dunno.
Well when you're eighty odd  I doubt it dear.
Dunno.
I think I'm  pretty  confident on that one  when you're eighty I should be  ninety five and the 
You never know  
I don't think I'd be going shopping anyway.
You never know dear, you may be a very very fit ninety five.
Oh Ann's gotta go and  definitely have an operation, it could be before Christmas  I'll start 
Oh.
packing Friday on the way to  mum  Peter's mum  she told them  she's just in so much pain, she wants it doing  so he's gonna get in, I said, it's poss  that she'll be in six days  and probably off a few weeks after when she gets home  it's operation on her neck and shoulder  they're going to release the nerve  they reckon it's  it's a  she told them   and do what they will with it.
today  running over cyclists   out the way.
you are in strange mood today, now you wanna run over a few cyclists, well there's an old lady and man there, I mean, why not pick them!
That old lady?
Ha.
Do you know who's that?
Shame about that bungalow next door but one, cos that'd be a nice bungalow but it's  not very lovely  they don't look after it very well.
Oh dear, they can't get the stuff up the stairs dear!
Got a wardrobe like ours and then  oh no it isn't it's a  combination one  it's having to go up through the window  let's hope they don't drop it!
One with shelves in  gentlemen's wardrobe.
Mhm.
Is it gonna get through the window, anyway?
Not now the window's shut!
Ha.
Oh dear!
I'd go and give him a hand but I do not like ladders  Fun isn't it?
Shall we take photographs?
Get the camera out!
Well the chap next door's finding it very amusing!
I think everybody's finding finding it very amusing at the moment.
That's not gonna go through that window anyway, is it?
Well, it's gonna be a tight old squeeze.
Why can't they take it through the back door and up the stair?
Perhaps it er  you don't know where the stairs and what kind of stairs it is  but them kind of units usually come to bits  ours does.
Cos Rita assembled it for us.
Certainly having fun.
sat here watching him.
 
Aye?
Quite interesting.
It wouldn't be if it fell, would it!
Well then you'd laugh I should think, knowing you!
Stuart !
  

Stuart!
Hello.
Do you think you could just open the door for me   please !
Hold on to this   
Coming back, I've gotta I've gotta stand here so I can turn the camera on!
Ha.
go and get the camera!
Ha.
Aye?
Ah  well that's what we're all waiting for, we're waiting for you to drop it!
They're watching  Neighbours   Come on, get up you lazy bugger !
What time of day do you think you call this!
Shut your mouth!later.
A man trying to get a wardrobe through the bedroom window over there.
I know, what is going on!
That's what we said.
Aye?
He must have a  awful stairs!
I'm watching these.
Yeah.
He's alright now
He's just about got it 
Yeah they've got it 
through.
Is it in?
Have they got a 
Yeah  just
What were you shouting then?
You know him?
He's  you're on 
I just 
candid camera!
Go on 
said smile!
drop it he shouted !
Smile , you're on candid camera!
Have a laugh and joke with Dick.
Dick?
Have a laugh and joke with Dick.
Dick?
Who's Dick?
He's the 
What the old man or the young 
The 
man?
the elder gentleman.
So you know him?
Through his father, yes.
How are you?
Not too bad.
Not hundred percent either.
Want a cup of tea Jean?
No.
Have you rung the doctor?
Tried to.
Can't get through?
No  .
We've only popped in to see whether you would like a lift into town now, before we go, rather than go into town and then come back  just in case you want to
Go into town for a li little while.
Oh  yeah I would.
Thought you might want a lift.
We don't want anything up there.
Shopping 
but er  I don't know, if you like it  see what I mean?
Have a little drinky-poos.
No course not.
I'll ha I'll do it I'll I'll made the shepherds pie.
What with?
A shepherd.
A shepherd.
I've got the carrots here for .
No I've I've got some!
I had some.
Oh.
I had some my dear.
Come on.
I found  yeah there is some out there, they were alright so I I I boiled them up  they're alright.
I told you to leave it and I'll do it!
Ah?
No that's alright!
You don't look well, you're not right, I can see, cos you don't look well.
Aye?
You don't look well.
No I didn't feel al alright Ann.
Ah !
I'm alright.
You're not!
You know, I don't feel myself  anyway I can't I can't get through to  anyway I'll try so it doesn't matter.
While we're up 
 
town I shall go around there, you can drop me and I'll make an appointment there  while we're there.
Well it's getting up there.
Who do you want,Do Doctor  or
Yeah  anyway it 
if possible?
doesn't matter I'll, I'll keep phoning.
No might as well 
Don't worry  I mean i to start with he  Sh Sheila's coming over tomorrow, I can't go tomorrow really can I?
Why not?
Unless tomorrow night.
She can go with you.
And Ve Vera phoned this morning, Joe phoned this morning an all  I didn't want them to go out, anyway I've made arrangements to go round to see Vera on Friday afternoon    and they  they went out to  where was it?
The  she thought they were due a special run, cos you know  they didn't.
Oh dear!
She said you'd be the   I mean,and family when Wendy and that go  and er  she  they had to  with a la carte, oh it cost her a bomb!
Ha  oh dear!
They do a dinner special inside there, I mean most places do roast 
Yeah on Sunday they do.
Sunday lunch six quid 
 
you know that kind of thing  oh   they had to pay a la carte.
We had 
Oh.
No you watch it, we're going.
It's alright, I'll see it later on, it's on again 
We're 
at half past five.
We're popping in to  estate agents.
Erm  it's a load of rubbish anyway!
Absolute rubbish!
We're going to estate agents but we thought 
Are you?
we'd pop in see how you were and
Yeah I'm alright 
See if you want anything up town.
no I feel about a I I'll I've said to Ann, no I feel alright Ann but  you know just  I dunno  I'm not quite myself am I?
I don't feel 
No.
very energetic  and I should be alright now after  been to sleep  should do  I'm alright  I can't think of anything I wanna get  I want up town anyway  nothing  think of anything 
Just that norm normally  
I don't , very nice, thank you very much.
Washing powder or  big  bulky stuff that 
Can't carry it.
do do walk back from town with, after all.
No I did that the other day yo 
Struggled with it  a little 
I want some mincemeat.
Get some up town, if that's what you want.
No.
She doesn't really like his stuff.
Mm  if you don't mind.
You want some mincemeat?
Well yeah, no I've   light bulbs  I mean I could make you a list down but it doesn't matter I can get that tomorrow Ann  I'll go down tomorrow  you know, I'll be up in time.
Just the thought 
Yes fair enough  thanks very much.
you did say that  you'd like to come.
Yeah I did.
You ought to  Rainbows  or something  got the car at least then
Yeah.
Is that what you want?
Well I ca I can't think!
I can't   I can't really think  I'll have to make a list out  you know  but er  you know I got   just think of anything that's, you know  as I say I've got  got some fo cat food  will get some dry cat food  yeah  Oh I cou sta if I start thinking I'll I'll I'll  
Start thinking, got nothing lose,sta start 
Make a list, I'll get it for you.
thinking we'll soon get them and save you carrying it tomorrow, then.
Get  and that and all's there anyway.
Yeah cos I might I might not go up, you know, I see what Sheila says so  
Well that's it, if you don't feel like walking round the town tomorrow.
Save you, save you carrying them.
I'll tell you what  I've I'm alright, but I feel a wee dizzy  you know I feel as if I'm a bit 
no I'm alright Ann, I mean, feel a bit ba ah I mean I'm sorry I do have to buy a   feel a  bit of , I feel a bit dizzy  you know  as if I 
 
you know I need new glasses or something, you know  that's how I feel.
A change your mind 
Hey yeah,
 
alright, yeah  I am o I mean I'm not alright, I feel very dizzy, like I say I feel I feel a bit kind of  heady  you know  but I will go and have a check up.
I'll try again  bloody lucky!
You see I mean
Lunch time is no good!
no, you s I've been trying all morning.
Don't start  
If you Ann will you, I'm not, I'm 
we will go in and do it  
I'll tell you what 
  
I'll tell you what I said  erm ah ah ah ah she's talking to herself, but Ann will get on to you she'll think I haven't done it!
I knew I'd be in trouble!
Well we'll we'll  
We I'll call in 
We'll call in, that will be better than phoning  at least you know whe you know you're gonna get there.
And I'll make appointment.
What for tomorrow, if possible?
Whenever you wo I mean yo yo bothered when when they'll wi wi wi will be, you know.
If you can't get it done tomorrow  I'll try and get you a Doctor  so she
It's getting up there as well lo , you know  I haven't got the strength and energy to walk there, I don't think.
It's  we'll make it in the morning, one morning and then we can come out at erm 
That a 
take you up.
What are you this week?
I'm on .
Oh you're on lates this week.
Two till one.
Ah?
Two till one.
Two till one, yes  I'll try again Ann.
No, don't bother!
Sit!
Ha!
We'll call in.
We'll call in   
Well I mean it's not, it's not 
We'll call 
an emergency, is it?
No but  no but you want to see  
Well just say  and just say that I had a bit of a ba an and I'd like a check over that's all  just say that to them  if you want  alright?
Wh where's the estate agents anyway, you're going to here?
There's
Its in the 
Do you get one of these Ann?
Sometimes.
Oh they're,t you remember you were on about it yesterday about the services  they're all there.
services are in aren't they?
They're all there
Let me see.
whole lot.
Just want to  I just want a  that will do me 
 
upstairs.
Could you get i , get some of them?
Do I get
Well I mean I can get that up the end.
We'll get it in town while we're there mother!
Might as well get it in town.
We're gonna be in
 Horse Fayre so 
Gonna be in  erm 
Oh eh there's a place there, no there isn't, is there?
The one that do the 
Gateways in  Horse Fayre 
Aye?
Got Gateways, we're going to  Horse Fayre 
Do you er   
Oh you're going to you're going to Gateway.
Going there anyway.
 
We're in town, just in town  doesn't matter where we go, does it?
Well you can get  ah bring my mince back.
Budgie food  do you want any budgie food?
Millet?
Sand sheets.
No  no  got all that.
What else?
No  get a couple of light bulbs.
Yeah.
 
I've got to get some , what sort of  will you need?
Aye?
I I've had to bring 
yeah.
you one,
No that's alright get me a 
 
get me a pack, you know.
Sixty.
Yeah.
You know.
Sixty watt light bulbs 
Yeah  I've got a hat.
Fags?
Yeah.
Cheap fags or cheap  
Yeah you can, yeah  I'll give you some money  light bulbs 
 
and mincemeat, that cos that ain't very heavy to carry, innit?
Oh,I think they're about two pound bag of that?
Yeah  yeah might as well I'll make the mincemeat , mince pies this  and give you some Ann  that'll save you doing them, won't it?
When are you gonna make mince pies?
Any time.
Not today.
Not today, why?
Cos he'll eat them, he'll be stood there waiting for them coming out of the blooming oven!
have some for tea.
Mum don't feel like making mince pies, today.
Well yo you'll have to er
I'll make you some at home  got some 
Don't forget 
mincemeat  at home .
You use that?
Don't forget to get  er cooking apples .
What did he sa he say?
Don't forget to get cooking apples, to put in the mincemeat.
I've got some cooking apples out there  Oh isn't he, I could hit him!
Why doesn't he make th make your own bloody mincemeat then!
Yeah that's cos I make the pa the pastry and you can  
Oh I'll don't know I  pastry, I can't do that, I can do the rest but I can't make the pastry.
Have you got  in your hand    did I say, dry cat food?
Dry cat food, light bulbs and mincemeat,
Aye?
Want some ketchup?
No, got some   
Salt?
Tomato puree?
What about flour and things, have you got enough flour to get
To do the mince pies.
nutmeg?
Oh I haven't got that long to make them, yet am I?
I know, but you shall have to bring it home won't you?
You've got  you've got, you might as well buy a big  bag of flour and  
flour and then  to carry home here.
Go and have a look, see what you got.
Oh alright  
Well you might as well, mightn't you, and it'll save you 
Yeah alright.
carrying it.
Yep, yep.
At least you won't have to carry it, at least we've got the car and we can  we can 
Yeah 
carry it between us, that's no problem is it?
Yes,
Cos if you're not feeling up to it, as well lard ?
No it's the flour and  things like that we said it's
You can buy
carry it home here.
That's what I say, you buy three pound of flour and two pound of mincemeat in a jar.
Yeah  and cat food and
Don't sound a lot of weight but
No I know  time you get it back here it is.
I know we said make a list, but bloody hell, she'll filled four sides of foolscap here !
Cor!
Hell!
Come out   No wonder you can't get a only half of them in there!
Look at that tree.
she's only one that's left  she's got to do her own  
Oh.
When he's caught them.
Ooh!
I'll strangle them!
What about coffee?
No I'm alright, I think.
That one comes
Special offer at the moment.
What is?
Special offer in Gateways.
Where !
Special offer in Gateways.
Well seen a jar of Maxwell House 
Large 
coffee.
large jar of Maxwell House and three free packs of mini 
You get 
Hobnobs.
You get Hobnobs free with them.
There are  now that might not cover it  anyway that's
because it will.
What, twenty pound note, yeah that will cover it.
Oh   on at the moment 
Easy!
Well if it isn't with  with sauce  
Special offer on the big jar  big jar of co , you wouldn't have a big jar of coffee.
well why don't you just get what you think!
I'm not too worried.
Well I'm just thinking of you, love.
You sure I've tried this?
No well  we'll do that as well, don't worry!
Hang on, leave this er, I've already got it.
Shepherds pie.
But I didn't have a large pack, I didn't   and if I make a cup of tea.
Okay.
Right  so I bet I      don't know the .
Aye?
They never go up the other side.
Well that that  
That will be alright.
if that hasn't got any
That bit's
Ann Ann can have that.
Yeah.
What about that?
Yeah, but it wants to be, but that's not very big unless you 
But er, no fat in them Ann.
Done more than enough.
There's no fat i , there's just a teeny little drop of oil in the mince  and I and I poured the fat off after I'd done it  and I didn't really need  butter in the  potato  so that 
He wouldn't eat them, cos he thought they were in the other potato.
Yeah I know, but that's
That's not much is it?
that's as I say in the 
Not that much.
Well only a little bit anyway  so there!
Okay.
Ah so I made it this, as s s skinny as I could.
Thanks again  maybe I 
put  , oy, oy  
Get on the basket!
Do you wanna think?
No I think we'd better move.
You better stay and think.
Mince pies you want us to get do you?
Yeah mi mince pies  mincemeat.
Want the meat.
No.
Oh !
 
, I'm not thick skinned.
I've got the flour, plain a 
I'm not  am I?
Mince pies, you were talking about mincemeat.
Mr Kipling mince pies.
Yeah, six for about two quid.
Yeah  that's it.
If you have a look at them and you wouldn't de you'd eat them 
I was gonna say 
you'd eat them before  what  tea break?
 
Yeah.
He'd have them eaten by  tea time !
You would.
Definitely.
I said we'll have a  I think life is gonna change Ann.
Mhm mm.
Life is gonna change for my mother to say oh bu but I'm gonna see a lot more of you know.
It's nearer.
Yes  be rather nice.
Yeah course it will!
I'm pleased but  e I I can tell.
Ha ha ha ha.
Have a trip to Linda and  Peter  
Yeah.
and Alan   
Oh yeah , but I can see  directly  J it was Joe on the phone, you know, hello you bugger he says, you know and oh my!
And he said, I've got the photographs that they took on Friday, I said, oh already?
He says yeah  I'll have to come round and see them 
Would have found out what 
Yeah.
that photographer was for.
Oh no I  
No?
no I'll have to phone your mum that, won't I 
Yeah.
cos he didn't know  but you did  he said and  you have to ge , when yo can you come round is tha 
I said our  you know, she's always sitting here with her feet up, drinking coffee and Tia Maria!
That's the way!
I said ju , I said to him  then she came on the phone I was o ages on the phone  and she said er  I said you just take it as if it's a day off  and 
 
no it's true, think 
It is.
of it like that  Anyway she said could we, I said well I can't come tomorrow cos Sheila's coming over  they said Wednesday, now that was, no I know  how about Thursday?
Cos I gotta go and do the bar on Thursday night  she said, alright come round  for my tea.
Mm mm mm.
Have to go round and have my dinner wi , you know  tea with her.
Well is it  
Go round there in the afternoon and stop the  you know
And stop the remainder.
Yeah  so  then I I'll ask her round here.
Yeah.
Yeah  ya but as I think, as I say  she's got  a few things to do today,sh near the oven Ann.
Yeah, lovely.
Only   that, that's it.
That it's  we only need 
Anything else?
a little one.
And where are you off to now?
Town mother.
I know!
Estate agents  Gateway, doctors.
Erm
What you gonna do with these with estate 
I knew something  
agents then?
We're gonna have
We're gonna buy the house mother!
Gonna buy it.
Going to buy it.
Yes I know but I thought you had to wait till you get this quote from  from a regular 
Yeah well we can carry on  
No I haven't it don't matter about that.
Oh it doesn't matter 
No.
about that oh how what do you mean it's what that what this place was all about.
He'll sort that out.
Oh alright.
That's neither here nor there, they'll have to wait for it, it's up to them.
Paid?
That's right 
As long as we tell them we definitely want it.
Is that what you're gonna do?
Yep.
Oh yeah.
Big decision.
Big decisions  we talked about it and  and that's what he wants to do, so that's what we're gonna do.
Fair enough.
Yeah.
me, well I won't put this 
Oh yeah.
I can't  as soon as you warmed up the pie  
Browned and 
Stick it under the grill 
Yeah.
to brown it off.
Alright.
We'll be back before
Yeah we won't be that long 
we'll be back  we'll be back for tea, afternoon tea.
Alright  so  we'll we'll have erm
well there's not many tea bags.
Oh we better bring some of  them then !
Get some tea bags and the mince Ann.
We got that .
Yeah I'll bring some.
Alright, yeah?
Yep.
So we could come back, we'll have afternoon tea, we'll have er  scotch pancakes  and
Don't because she's likely to start making you something!
chocolate cake.
Yeah I think I will.
No you won't!
You're not well enough, you just sit in a chair  there's some cake in the tin if he wants a bit of cake!
 
Ann, don't, as I say, don't make the doctor's appointment for Thursday night.
Not for Thursday.
No cos mum's going to 
Don't mean that well you know what I mean.
She's going to Vera's.
Yeah.
We'll try and make it in the morning.
And then we can take you up there then.
Alright , fair enough.
About dinner time and then we can  and then 
Take you up and then go straight to work then you see.
Then go to work or we 
Well yeah but I I I might go  I'll 
minerals and the
doctors
Yeah.
don't go ) I'm having my hair done Thursday morning.
Yep.
With Claire.
Any day but Thursday.
Yeah alright.
Right?
Okay?
Yeah  Don't look well does she?
No, not quite right  not right  Have a  check up  for her.
Yeah  I definitely think she ought to have  have a check up  better  to have a check you and it be nothing, than just keep hanging on saying it'll go away and it doesn't, it just gets worse.
Mm.
Yes.
Mhm  Corner solutions  new bathroom shop there look.
Yep.
Looks nice dunnit?
Look they're all just starting work darling.
Mm    Unlucky for them!
Yep.,,
and nice for us  but on the other hand, tomorrow, it will be
Oh shove that tomorrow!
I got twenty four hours yet dear !
Yes.
Lot of cars for a Monday!
Oh plenty of room up here.
Yes  I hope so  appeared to be .
Well at least across that way anyway.
Yeah.
Up this end.
In there, I could have gone in here I reckon   I'll go round the corner  don't matter does it?
No, quite happy wherever  They all squash the nearest one to the exit   don't they?
Shall I back in or shall I, yeah I'll back in, I'll be  I shall be awkward  I shall reverse  in.
Where's that  car belong.
Ferrari.
Double five, double four R F four seven.
Yeah.
Not English.
Not English  French registration number  How's that?
Alright dear dear.
That will do me fine darling.
No it doesn't look very important does it?
Er er  no  no, no no no  very  me thinks  Lloyds Bank.
Wrote to Lloyds Bank telling them, that if they try and keep 
Dear customer
You're usually sir, madam and esquire on the bank things.
I don't what 
Are you satisfied with their  service?
Yes  that sort of thing.
No Stuey, it's not very exciting by the sound of it.
Well it could have been a cheque for a
Yeah, could of been, yes.
cheque for a few thousand or something, that would have   but it weren't.
I thought it was just a  or something  which I'd a  owed   stodge   
Look at that.
god knows why you're at
In here.
When did you go and get that ?
Last week it was   Bless me.
Is there anything you want me to do?
No?
Aye?
What's the time Stuart?
Please.
It's eleven o'clock  near enough.
Right.
Not quite, but
Near enough  That's ooh   in the oven and the steak's done  If it's late I can  grill it  then you  have it when you want it.
Aha.
Minute for the sp before I get there.
Come out here  that one  Where do you feel it  wonderful .
Didn't sleep very well did you?
Too excited.
No, things going through your head innit?
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's how it is isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah you're sort of thinking  when my why  got a card and then they tell you to look round, how much it's gonna cost you and  I mean, you know,jus jus just  you know is everything gonna work out, you know?
Carpets down and then we got their cooker and the fridge and that  and, well you know  and that goes through your
I know.
they just go through your mind, don't they?
What it's all gonna look like?
Will it look nice?
Yeah, will it go in?
Will it fit and how tall is it, and how wide is it?
Will we be able to get in before the day  to check up on what colour we want things and yo , that sort of thing, you know you just  you know?
Yeah I know.
As you know  cos you have the same trouble.
As if we were both tossing and turning and
Yeah  I know  I know, funny one yesterday, you know but not to worry.
Bound to be like that.
Not to worry.
Bound to be like, you know, a little bit
Brian knows  Brian knew everything more or less or  arranged quite a few things anyway
Did you?
Brian knew.
It's the 
Oh yeah  definitely.
Aren't you tired now?
No, no jus just clearing the old eye out.
When I did go to sleep, I went  I don't remember but it was a long while.
Yeah  yeah I went, well eventually but like you say it was long wh it was a long while before I actually did  get to sleep but  got there eventually    I'm been to solicitor today Annie.
Got it out the way, just to warn him, there's no po point him getting all these  letters about  mortgages, you know they're who you are or well  can't do that, can you?
No  got any more  Annie?
You got any more?
No, there's a packet in my bag.
Oh is there?
A whole packet, yeah.
That's alright then.
My bag  the weekend in case you were in trouble.
That's fine then  good  should have enough for weekend until, until the weekend.
I'll have them on Friday, if necessary  but Thursday I  get you a packet down.
Oh yeah   Pardon me!
That should be alright  Yeah we've got to go up town Thursday haven't we?
Yes, I know  We're going to be investigating some carpet shops while you're signing on the dotted line, won't need me  in there now will you?
Really.
Really  at all er  apart from the  mor moral support.
Moral support  well you need that other stuff first 
 
side.
Hold me up while I sign, you know.
No well I'll go with you, if you want.
It isn't very long  Shouldn't be in there long  just a matter of signing all the things, checking all the  details over, putting in what he hasn't filled in already.
And I'm hoping that they get that letter, you seeing them  weekend .
Yes.
And you're not working Saturday morning, instead of going to work  late we can go a bit early and  do a bit of shopping ourselves.
Go to town next Thursday 
Before Monday.
Thursday morning can't you?
Don't know if I could do the electric one  definitely  Guess that's about whether the   I'd like one of them, one of them and  yeah but we don't know when it can be delivered, so we can't do it that early  you can't say yeah but  but er we'll let you know, well we can  so  it's there  that's what we wish, they'd  the bills go and we'll let you know when you can be  the keys can be available for you to put it in.
And so the  Can't  first .
Mm, I know.
That's the first job  first one in   then you  get the carpet sorted out.
Yeah cos it's much easier than dragging all  
At least at least you know how  you know  if he says you can have this one or this one  yeah cos the choice between one or the other  and he says well I can fit this one immediately, but, this one I've gotta order.
They've gotta send for.
I mean it might  might just sway as to one way or the other if there's a bit of a  well we like them both, but which one, you know?
I don't wanna get carpets without you with me  cos you have to live with them as well.
I can have a look at them, now  in the catalogue.
Yeah but they won't be exactly the same in shops.
No, true.
Similar but not the same.
No not the same, that's true.
Mind you I suppose out of a catalogue it's  at least you can feel them and see them  all that.
Oh and I'd rather
Only on   see the whole roll.
I'd rather go in the shop and see it  cos sometimes, especially if it's got a pattern on  turn out to be better than the catalogue  cos when it comes, it don't look the same, and then the same colour do you?
Cos a  reproduction's never  perfect is it?
No.
In a photograph it's never  true  then you go in a shop and what you see is what you get.
Definitely  There's only a, there's only really  what two carpets  and these are   
carpet  
two main bit.
for a bathroom, I mean  neither were very good.
Yeah but then again  yeah but as I say i i if you  if you want the same in the bathroom and the bedroom 
Well I don't 
and the same in the hall in the living room
So two colours.
you only got two carpets to sort out  and a bit of lino  rather than having a different one with this one and a  different one for that one and then  a different one for
Yeah, I'll go and put that  together those
Alright.
Alright dear.
Hey Ann !
What?
Did you read your stars today?
No.
You didn't?
What's it say?
Saturn your ruler is in exceptionally  mood now  so it is likely that you will have to put up with rather spartan conditions  but you know how much is at stake for the future so you are happy to do without   
That was .
How about that darling?
Well, that's all that ready  just popped it in the oven.
Okay.
Are you ready     
 
well.
It's the only thing you wanted really.
Yes.
Mm.
No  I'm sure we are  Yes we certainly are dear.
All seems to have happened in such a rush.
Well yeah but
There's so much to think about.
I know.
But we had to really because 
No because we wouldn't have got that fifteen hundred pounds  they hadn't agreed to do us a service.
No.
I wanna get it through.
Well they said they'd wait, I mean fifteen hundred pound ain't he would pa put a deposit down, it's only five percent  innit?
Fifteen hundred pound  if he was prepared to put a deposit down  or something that would have been fifteen hundred quid.
Yes.
So  we got it.
He must have been looking for  bathroom.
Yeah.
Otherwise he wouldn't have accepted without any
Without any quibble.
No.
I thought it was worth pushing for the extra  I mean when he said a thousand, I thought it would be 
Yeah.
worth pushing for an extra five hundred, and did get it.
Yeah well he said a thousand because he knew he could get  he'd carpet that  er er  for a thousand.
Yeah.
That's why he mentioned that sort of figure  if all you wanted was a or , a fridge, a cooker  and some carpets, you could do that easy on a thousand.
Yeah  but now we got the extra  five hundred and which I say is th is, makes up for the  which is five percent of the purchase price  we've got  an extra to play with  and get a bit more.
Yeah.
Not too bad.
Gotta be careful when I'm cooking, I shall have to have the window open  me I've got smoke alarms all over the place darling  which is good in a flat.
True, true.
Mm but erm  you get steam up in the cooking area and er
Yeah.
Ding a ling a ling a ling a ling a ling  
Right  yeah.
You think bloody hell, what the hell's  going on here !
There is a smoke alarm in the airing cupboard  in case that overheats and there's one
In the hall ?
No.
I've only seen one, I haven't  seen any more than one at
There's supposed to be one in the airing cupboard.
Seen that one.
Case the airing cupboard overheats, but it says on the spec  one airing cupboard when it, will have , hot water tank and smoke alarm.
Oh!
Ooh, ooh, ooh!
In case you let it  hot water tank starts playing up.
Mhm  It says it doesn't, but  like I say,i in a way it usually starts 
 
.
Oh yeah  Fire services, recommend everybody to have it
Mm.
especially in an upstairs flat.
Mm  mm.
It's a   and plenty of warning to get out.
Mhm.
That's why he's had them put in  cos the flat's more than house in in  the only thing is I would say to you to let a  heat from the kitchen and the 
Yeah.
smoke and steam they do tend to  keep going.
Set them off.
Ha ha  and everybody starts running out the door  and all you're doing is frying some breakfast  or something!
Burning the toast !
I'll be dissuaded buying a pussy cat altogether now won't I?
Ha ha  Yeah it is 
Once it starts  that upstairs flat.
It is a little bit er
With a deadlock on the front door so he  can't get in and out or anything.
Oh yeah  can't jump on the window to get in or anything.
Mm, no they wanted to be in, but you not hear it  no I think pussy cat is  gonna be a no no about us  you'll have to .
Well it's certainly gonna be  certainly won't let it .
Looks like a 
It's gonna be a little bit tricky isn't it really, having a
I think I would just about give up over that.
It's a shame.
, but I mean a downstairs one wouldn't be quite so bad
Yeah.
but those stairs won't  like, I mean, I wouldn't like it that if it was just indoors forever  would you, honestly?
Not really.
It's not fair on an animal even.
It's not natural  no.
Cats or something.
Not really is it?
No I know and I don't fancy litter trays and things either.
We might do one day or  see
Yeah but  but not while we're there, I don't think it's   must get another budgie sometime  get Steven's budgie or something.
Yeah a cat's a little bit out on dashing upstairs now innit really?
It's a shame, but, there you go.
Definitely is up here, it's 
Yeah.
not fair on a animal as I say, he's bound to  be trapped at the bloody door for hours before anybody come in and
It ain't fair.
No.
Actually that's something we'll have to  negotiate with our  er  opposite neighbour
The stair carpets.
stair carpet.
Hadn't thought of that, well that's gonna be noisy anybody coming home late at night  wooden stairs.
Don't know who you got  we'll have to wait and see who we get.
Well fling that rug out the hall it'll be a start, bung it out on the landing  for a start.
Yeah  yeah.
So at least there's something up there at the doors to wipe your feet on and what not, but  I'm not splashing out on stair carpet  until somebody else has been 
Oh no.
in  as well.
Yeah.
Well there's something that will have to be will be 
 
needed eventually.
I say a negotiation with  next door neighbour  or something like that.
But you come home late at night when people are asleep
Start banging up the stairs and
and you lot, and stroll in after half past four an five o'clock in the morning, you know, you do.
Yeah.
If I don't get up till nine, it's a bit 
Yeah.
It won't be very nice  so we'll have to just  manage  as for as  the stall light  the hall lighting  who is responsible for that?
Cos the staircase has gotta be lit, I mean you can't get
There is a light out there isn't there?
I noticed that.
I mean who who cares for the electricity?
It's gotta be on someone's electric hasn't it?
You can't, one flat's not gonna be responsible for having the hall lit up all night long which it will be and then  length of time, unless it's on a timer switch.
Mm  that is something we will have to investigate.
I know.
di discuss with our
I mean with
 
Steven's flat the council are responsible for lighting hallways but we  th they're not 
No, no  that's right.
They must be on some sort of a  one of the meters or somebody's meter or somewhere.
Yeah.
That smells  mm mm.
Mm mm!
Well that's gonna be alright  I don't understand  why every time 
You
Give it another ten minutes, make sure the top  the bacon
Yeah.
Nice.
I've gotta nip upstairs.
Er  yes.
Cos I  wouldn't know  I've done enough   okay?
Yep  that's fine.
I think we need to a empty the ashtray darling.
Yeah.
Or do we get a new car?
I think so  I said  said to the bloke before 
Yeah let's have it.
!
Bless me.
Oh!
got a cold, you better go home.
On traffic lights?
Yeah definitely   poorly  mother's sick for a fortnight.
Well off we go, back to work.
Won't use so much petrol from now on anyway, to get to work will we?
Wouldn't be a lot of difference actually.
Oh won't it?
No  By time you  I mean it's not that far  but  by the time you get there the car won't have a chance to warm up thoroughly.
Oh, use more petrol, I see.
So you'd be on automatic choke for a bit of the way, most of the way anyway so  
Mm.
a little bit, but not a great deal those gears most of the time as well the ones that we  cruise in  top gear  I don't think that's really for me  
Oh.
Not appreciably amateur.
Ah  sorry  won't do it  perhaps  you turn li little bit there.
A little bit perhaps    I wouldn't of said it would have been  
No cos they'll still be popping out to the  an will we not?
I hope so.
Yeah so do I  don't wanna lose touch with them now.
That would be  stroll up to the Royal Standard.
Yes, that's it  some odd nights we was on our way home from work, it's  going up to the   even when we're on earlies and  and weekends we can  go there can't we?
It's not that far  there along the bypass there, it's not that far away is it?
About that again, it's a similar distance I would say.
That's what I mean, it's not
It's as near to the   as it would have been from there   
So it's not a lot of  lot of bother  the only thing is that i you gotta drive  in town rather than drive  on country lanes  to get to the main roads    little bit more  dangerous  as far as getting caught is concerned  ha!
It's   we can always walk up the .
Yep  walk in the town if you're going
Walk in the town.
if you want a good drink, doesn't matter does it?
Can you get through to town   there's no through road that way, other end, but couldn't is there any short cuts you get into town that way?
No?
No, it's a longer way.
Is it?
Yeah.
Ah I just wondered, I mean I don't know out that way.
No  erm  might as well continue now  half way round  do a u-turn.
That's going the wrong way dear.
Yeah looks like it dunnit?
Not sure of where he is  mm mm.
No the only w 
He's forgotten something.
The only way to town is  come up to way 
And come back again.
towards  Boy's School  then Corporation Road and then in town.
No I didn't know if you could walk  if there's any  short cuts if you wanted to walk into town.
No  no there's not.
I jus just wondered, not knowing the area as well as you do  wondered if there was a little 
You go down to the bottom of these roads there and  .
Do you end up sort of metal box end?
No, there's metal boxes  at each 
Well 
end.
Yeah I know that's what I mean, if you get walking down there you'd come to all the factories I presume.
If you come up  er when you're at the  Weasel Lane
Mm  mhm.
instead of turning up towards the Royal Standard you turn the other way, that comes down past .
Mm.
Then you go right down to the bottom of  Road you  cos that's a dead end anyway,.
I didn't know if there was lanes going off into town,whe or oh I don't know.
Mhm.
I shall have to be looking out for a second hand bike-y  just for the occasional trip into town  without getting Stuey out of bed  so I be a bit more independent than just  bothering you all time, if I just wanna pop anywhere.
It isn't a great problem  not really.
No I know my but it  it'll give me a little independence as well will it not?
You got a shop at the top of the road ain't you?
Yeah it's not far is it?
Shops at the  top there.
It's not far from Rainbow really, to do you main shopping if you  in a hurry, is it?
No  that's up  that's just up the  
Yeah  not far.
The new Tescos  won't be the other way will it?
The other way, no.
Yeah  yeah that's what I mean it  we're nearer to the both of them really.
Always fascinates me that, a little person driving a big car.
Mm  a bit odd.
It looks very odd, yes, when the heads hardly go above the  the seat, you don't have   is it a kid driving or a  an adult or   is anybody driving !
Or is it just trundling off on its own!
Hello  er I need a solicitor, to act for me  er if that's possible  please.
It was mentioned that  Mr  might be able to help me.
Yeah but if you'd like to come back though cos he's at lunch at the moment.
Wonderful!
Want to make an appointment to come back this afternoon?
Working.
Ah.
So it has to be  Thursday morning.
I need to get Jo to come down and make an appointment   What's the name please?
.
Erm there's a Mr  in reception can you come down and make an appointment?
Right.
Alright then   
Hello  did you say Thursday morning?
Thursday morning  about ten o'clock.
Bit later if possible.
Bit later than that.
about eleven.
About eleven  yeah.
We've gotta go and see the estate agents as well.
What did you say?
Mr   yes 
eleven  eleven o'clock 
eleven o'clock 
yeah that will be alright.
Thursday morning   
Yeah that will be alright.
That will be fine    yes  alright then  yes eleven o'clock Thursday morning.
Eleven o'clock Thursday morning.
Okay.
Bye bye.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Bye now.
Bye  
Have you?
estate agent.
Who says?
Might do when we win the pools    oh you're alright   tomorrow.
You 
Yeah.
That's right.
I've only got  the one!
Yes but mum, suppose you might have to.
Don't wanna go to work yet, do you?
No, its a bit, little bit early, where d'you wanna go?
Go for a walk.
Can't go up the King's Head, it's shut.
No I wasn't really thinking about that.
I think so.
got some   on his hair.
it got darker   what it used to.
You know what it is  
Why?
I know, but you don't wanna do that, you don't know what it, what   silly innit?
Yes.
Oy!
Oy!nice 
I know your type!
I just want a clean staircase,!
No we're not.
Right we've made a decision  I know we can  but er
Not being a driver darling, I don't know really much about such things  never had to worry I've always found somewhere chain my bike to a lamp post or er  ha
That's quite often why I like, when I go down  Norbet Street I don't like parking in  Norbet Street itself cos it's only half an hour  if you park down  Royal Place  it's 
It's a 
an hour
It's an hour.
Then I could have an hour, you see so it just gives you that extra breathing space if you
Yeah, cos half an hour's 
 
not really long you get talking to somebody and
That's it you go to 
you've 
the butchers or the bakers or
Yeah.
you have a couple of bets in the bookies  that sort of thing.
Half hour can soon be gone.
Quite normal to be a little bit more than half an hour but el traffico wardens about an whoever  takes your number  sort of jus just after you parked then it is half an hour but sometimes it's not for
No why that's why they come round.
yeah but you don't know that do you?
No.
If you're in the bookies and   you don't happen to see them.
Well they're just doing their job otherwise people would park anywhere, all the time  Oh dear!
Take me home!
I'd love to.
I'm having a sudden attack attack of  I don't know what but 
Morbidity.
ah, what's that mean?
How's that sound?
That sounds wonderful, yeah  look good on a  signal.
Morbidity.
What's that?
Well  not feeling very happy  morbid.
Morbid.
Mm  yeah.
Yeah, oh yeah I've definitely got attack of that.
Workitus.
Yeah, definitely  Idolitus  more like it !
Oh no you're not idle are you darling?
No way are you idle.
I don't know !
I could quite easily become.
Now now .
Yep.
Where shall we park today Ann?
Wherever you think is suitable.
Dunno  I know where I'd like to park  Not here.
Not here.
Anywhere but here.
Well park somewhere  else then !
Hawthorn Cottages .
That's it.
Will do for now.
Or draw a villa so we can have 
Just 
another explore.
Mm be very very nice  get more of an idea there erm than the whole of the shape of the kitchen and the shape of the bathroom and
Yeah   Villa  That okay darling?
Yeah  as right as I'm gonna be I suppose.
Yoh.
Don't forget your biccies else you'll have no tea  lie down.
Here  That's your little lot    What they for?
Oh Ted's having a bit of  help.
Ha  Not  in the full work  where else would they rather be?
Got John today anyway.
just don't want.
Yep  Morning  yep  Wonder how his romance  is going or not going.
Why do you hope everything's alright?
Stuart !
Ha  that darling, was not called for!
Tha oh you were walking is it?
Mm.
Oh  so Ann's  awful idea she's still having him on  he's such a great giggle.
Oh.
Getting him all  hot 
We'll 
and bothered  
we'll  
Just thinks it's a great giggle  pretty cruel really  I hardly ever do it.
Ha.
Mum.
Can't really be forced
Er
I hope they don't want 
Bit of a smelly job up there I would have thought.
What?
Hello ugly!
Oh hello ugly!
Ah 
We can't help you improve your looks like.
Ain't improved yours either!
Who had a go at your haircut?
Well we'll get him for you!
Ain't left you with a lot, you didn't have a lot before !
I 
Steven !
What?
I chucked an overall  last night with forty pence in it.
I'll see you 
What?
And nobody  
That's a fix innit?
I was gonna say I 
Yeah .
Bet nobody in this world's gonna win back forty pence.
Thank you.
I'll have his, he'll only lose it.
I  
Yep.
What's it with?
Thank you.
I say.
Thank you  What shall I do?
I don't know.
Hi Annie, enjoyed your days off?
Yep, lovely thank you.
Good.
Hi Jeanie.
Yup. 
No he  Oh dear!
Maybe he didn't get the job, we got a new supervisor coming.
No.
Hi Ann  had a good 
Hello.
week?
Yeah lovely.
Great.
I think it is.
No, no one told me  getting the push, just said we were getting a new one so I mean that must have meant that we  that he hadn't  Commiserations, but never mind 
Oh yeah.
you went  right away didn't you.
You know if I got in a   
That's it.
Mm.
Like he's talking to Bernie 
Are we getting a lady or a man, do we know yet?
No he didn't say.
Man I think 
Hiya.
I think.
You might have something to do with it.
Go and see what's left for me, I think I'll open the mail today.
Why, what's the matter?
last week, I I cleared up every day 
Every day.
alright, you see I'd go in and count everything, do everything
  
out.
cos
She had a water leak,the top, you know where she works.
Yeah.
While I was doing that  all the drums I left last week for them just to do  they hadn't done.
Okay there was thirty two baskets  brought them all out made them  gone off.
Dear!
Yeah but I'm doing it and they clock in 
Last week she kept up to it all , I mean she done the lot and it was all weighed up and finished a before we went home, all done.
Yeah but it's not good that I'm clocking, slugging my heart out.
Mm.
I mean, no, I'm not kidding when you drag them from where I am, down to the scales  that's fucking hard work mate!
 

Ann, did you have any draw tickets?
I've got them 
You checked 
off Marion.
You've checked them?
I ain't checked them, I've been on holiday  I've only come back today  that's been drawn has it?
Oh Val won ten pound on the  monthly draw again, didn't she?
Did she?
Yeah.
Oh I wonder where my tickets are now.
I think they're in here.
She said you were gonna
I won I've been on holiday mate so I ain't  Stuart's got some and I've got some  L seven seven one to seven seven five.
Alright.
and L seven seven eight  six to eighty on the blue.
Seven seventy three.
Yep  I got that.
In the white.
That's mine.
Ooh lovely!
Erm  bottle of whisky.
Ohhh !
 
I like  
my tickets there
seven seven three, so I'll have that ticket.
Yep.
I like the sound of that John.
seven seven
It would be that wouldn't it, bottle of bacardi for Ann would it.
Number three.
And then I've  eight  two one to eight two five and
That's one then Ann, and you go and get that.
Yep, I get that one at tea time.
Now what else you got then?
Eight se eight 
Eight 
eight two one to  eight two five  eight 
Have you eight a that's that's on the white is it?
Yeah.
I got white on 
Eight sixteen  that's on 
Yeah.
the white.
You got that.
Twenty nine, snowball.
Ooh!
That's ni I like th I like the snowball, so I'm alright.
Oh that's alright  
Oh we're set up for  Christmas now !
Ooh lovely.
You can come along.
Two prizes.
Any more?
That's smashing.
Be nice  Sh shake them up.
That's lovely.
 
Worth coming back for weren't it?
Whoops!
Say you're on a a green right up that green, eight hundreds.
Eight hundred and twenty one to eight hundred and twenty five.
more than thirty five.
Make it a  green John.
That's it.
Eight forty eight.
No  no, twenties.
No?
No.
Oh well.
You've only got two right?
You got two.
That's if, if you've got two 
 
I know.
that's lovely , one off each strip, one for you and one for me, have to go and claim them at tea time.
Wonderful, wonderful.
You won't have three  not bad, three  whisky
Yep.
and a snowball then.
Lovely!
Right.
Smashing!
What you won Ann?
Bottle of whisky and a snowball.
Oh lovely Ann!
He's quite happy to win the bottle of 
thing.
yeah he's quite happy with the whisky, yeah.
Favourite tipple, it is.
won?
Quite happy.
Yeah.
Don't know what the time is, I didn't even look when I clocked in.
Anybody 
 
know the time?
No it's about quarter to now.
Oh, I'm not in hurry.
You you've got two 
Yeah  oh lovely  Smashing!
Yeah.
Oh.
Getting quite good on these raffles, dear.
Yeah.
Ha, ha ha.
You're going good  
You think when I'm   no obviously not.
Hello.
Hello.
Good holiday?
Lovely thank you  didn't wanna come back!
No I don't blame you.
How's Shirley?
Well she said her arm's still hurting her.
Hello Tina!
Hello.
How's Tina?
Nice holiday?
Yeah smashing thank you  and you, alright?
Yeah.
Still got a cold?
No I can't   clean the floors  Saturday, up   and I think  she's scrubbing the floor with the brush  done all the muscle.
Might show her that 
I only looked at .
Never used to so much hard work, you see Tina!
Well we I weren't feeling very well.
Yeah.
Tina!
I think it was a hangover
Oh yeah!
But it it had last all day  but 
But how how poorly is  is Wiggy?
Poorly
Is he  will he give us a hand?
Is he alright to
Oh yeah he's alright
Just we got we're on the move
Your moving?
and we need s we need  Stuart gets a van he'll need someone to help him lift the washing machine and so on like 
Yeah  he said he's alright 
and help him do that.
he's  he's alright but he just 
No I mean we wouldn't ask him if he's not well.
No he just don't  wanna come to work and that.
Can you ask him how much that van he had  you know he hired that van with  
He hired a van, how much it was.
Yeah,yeah.
Yeah  well can you ask him how much it was?
Yeah.
Just like to know, just 
Yeah.
a rough idea so we can  we might  I dunno whether we'll hire one, we might ask
See if we can borrow one from somewhere.
Cos that er  cos that weren't the one he hired.
No I know it weren't.
He wanted a bigger didn't he?
Yeah  but tha tha 
Yeah I'll ask him .
that'll be plenty big enough  cos there's not that much we yo we need to move.
No.
Oh I thought you was buying that one  so Ann told us.
They wanted 
We'd like 
too much money.
We'd like to.
So Ann told us, so that's  
They wanted too much money 
Hello, hello, hello, hello 
Too much  where you off to then?
Somewhere
just bought one there.
Oh yeah  oh.
So
And we might ask  a depending on how much it's gonna be,ask, I dunno if Rogers still got his van or 
Or somebody, you know give them 
or young Simon.
twenty quid or something, if they'll me theirs or
It's only really the bed, the washing machine, the table and a couple of wardrobes.
Cos I'll be having a new three piece 
Yeah.
so I shan't take that and 
No.
carpets we're 
Oh.
having new and 
Yeah.
I mean another thing
Yeah I'll 
They wanted too much money for it, I mean we paid three thousand in rent and that was supposed to come off it, he still wanted
Oh.
the same a as what Ann had  for theirs  I mean we've had it for a year and paid all that rent.
Yeah  Oh!
So we decided it weren't a good enough buy re he 
No.
wouldn't knock  he wouldn't come down at all and then the  everywhere else were  knock some off if the market's not very good at the moment.
Yeah, oh so
So we've got quite a bit off this one
Yeah, oh 
so  so we went u 
and you sort of round town.
Yeah, it is  it's near enough to town but out of it.
Yeah yeah.
Out the way.
Well it's a, yeah you 
We been li that's what we've doing, house hunting.
He's alright.
Yesterday we made our mind up to have that one and we've set a  sign some papers so 
Yeah.
it's all going ahead  they want us in as soon as possible that's how we got such a good
Yeah
thing but my 
I know.
rent's up the sixteenth of  December and there's 
Is it?
no point in paying another months rent.
No.
Yeah we're going to stay with his mums's for a few days sh sh 
Yeah.
she's quite happy.
another two hundred fifty quid rent and  
I mean that'll go towards solicitors fees.
That's it.
or whatever.
That's it innit?
Yeah he's alright
Physically.
Yeah it's just a bit of pain.
I mean I wouldn't ask him if he isn't very well.
No he's he's a lot better  not got .
I say I don't think I can a manage to l help Stuart lift the washing machine 
Yes.
and the big wardrobe it's 
No, yeah.
I'll see how it goes anyway, but if you ask him 
Yeah.
Yeah.
how much it was, I'd like to find out.
Yeah I'll fi I'll find out for you.
So we've got an idea of how much 
 
it's gonna cost us to move.
Say, if not  
Well I'll be moving to mums' for start anyway, put them in her garage, unless we get the keys  ever so quick.
Yeah.
If they're gonna put it through as quick as they can for us, cos they want us
They want us in.
We've got this bargain  through
Anyway I'll see you later dear.
cos we agreed to do it quick, we've got a 
Yeah 
bargain, you see.
Well yeah.
When they want a
Near where you are and where  where I am.
Are you  oh they are    twenty five past five  for me.
Yep  alright darling.
See you later then Ann.
Yeah.,.
just wasn't a good enough
Buy.
buy.
I'm staying 
I thought that when  
 
to bargain and now I suppose I can't sell anything 
  
that's the price really 
did he say for me and I thought I was going to go 
 
I though urgh!
wanted se six thirty six with a  ours is only thirty five.
Mm, well Ann  and she got it for thirty two and a half!
That's what we offered.
Oh but 
With the three thousand we've 
Yeah.
paid, but he won't 
Except 
have it!
He wouldn't  so  we said no.
.
Not when there's so many bargains about.
at work, it's a tip!
That'll do
She wanted
alright?
Hello Barbara  
are you?
No I'm having 
Ah no!
She couldn't find the white one!
Ain't got no  to do Jean?
basket  well I was just saying  and them chairs to do.
Well you been doing  with Ann have you?
Some of them take it back
It's not it's just the packet  well it's nearly half eaten, he'd chewed it 
 
Have you turned it off?
But she does look a bit silly  though in it?
Yeah.
Ooh I know what I've got to do.
What's that?
Go and collect my prizes  What did I do with the bloody tickets now?
I lost them  Oh I'll get them in a minute.
claimed it  well Betty's got a receipt anyway.
Yeah I know, but they got a queue, I'll wait till later when they're  not so busy.
Done well for a change.
I'd have, I've got some good prizes just lately  get two in that, that's bloody lucky!
Stuart was very happy he's gonna get a bottle of whisky  it couldn't of been a bottle of bacardi for me could it!
He said that'd be my winning ticket, I said, you haven't paid for them so how can it be!
I don't know what the snowball is.
D'you get them?
Pardon?
You got them, have you?
The prizes, no I'll wait till 
No the 
till the queues off.
tea, the tea 
The tea , yeah.
Yeah  I know  I know it's got a lot of milk in and I did ask for it for you, but she still give me one like that.
Oh I don't worry about that.
All the same.
Don't matter about that  cheers  .
No I'm not.
Ahhh!
I haven't been up here many minutes  quarter to twenty to five now.
Ha!
How you doing, alright?
Yeah 
then.
Yeah I know I'm  .
Gone now  must drive up
No he
Oops!?
No I better not.
Not even just one?
No  not even one.
  
I was  no I'm not having one  just  seeing them
Oh well!
Ooh that's 
Go on have one, d'you wanna be  famous?
How old is that Graham Gooch cos he doesn't wear his
No.
pony tail.
famous    skin 
Who's the third one?
Looks like it from here, looks like 
That's what I thought.
Can't be him, if you'd have paid five quid a ticket.
No it isn't him.
It looks like,.
Nobody minds paying  Oy ey!
Bill might.
Cos he thinks he might win.
Wanna see his opponent, he's an old bugger isn't he!
One's Jilly's husband isn't it?
Billy's husband!
Jilly's husband, she's got one for herself and one for her husband.
Don't work here does he?
No  and she get one in .
A rotten   Wish I could walk 
Doubt if be in there, cos he knows we're not   I don't know what the snowball is, it might be a plastic snowball!
If it is, I'll just get some and  give one each the kids  I think we've got enough sweeties.
Well we don't eat them  do we?really!
they've had all  and oh   lunch  he'll manage dinner  can't swap them about  Are you alright then?
Mm.
Done any   they're all, as soon as you walk in, it's yours innit?
Cos you ask her, or did you just start doing it?
Tom, I just stood there so hanging around waiting to see what were going on and I had to  .
Back to the old job then.
Every time you're in there you'll be doing that and next minute you're on  so  next fortnight.
Why?
You're on the divisors, strimmers and  and we're on cutting  our lot 
Well 
You're on  strimmers and skimmers.
Well
I hope !
Why?
Is somebody off?
Dick and Wayne.
Both of them?
On holiday, one's leaving.
Oh you will be then  that's what I say to Kev  bloody well ask!
Bloody can!
Don't struggle.
Mark
Mark
Rolfy 
Rolfy 
Bet she made you struggle last week, during the week so as  they wanna ask for somebody.
Wouldn't mind it but
The queues gone shall I go and get our prizes?
Give us fag.
Oh I heard   that's what they had innit?
You're favourite.
Oh they're gonna    approached him.
 
They're locked in here , so she's gonna get them for me in a minute  no worry  Is a drink snowball, she thinks  It might not be.
What d'you win?
She's  lot a trouble 
Who?
It's is a drink snowball, might as well put snowball  don't mind do you?
I asked.
Will that do you,
I'll settle for that
You'll settle for that  I bet it won't last long!
I'll wrap it up for your Christmas present.
Hey!
got something.
Fair enough, fair enough,Do you know all the 
This snowball is   Bacardi 
It's a drink Ann.
Yeah.
Who?
It's a drink.
Thank you.
What you going home?
Yeah.
Ha ha  I paid for the tickets  I'm gonna drink it.
Do you like snowball?
I'll drink it yeah you can have a  snowball !
Er no I'll have 
 
I'll have the whisky  I'll settle for that.
You'll like that 
Yeah I like snowball, I don't mind that  that'll do for my Christmas  drink  Is that half or a ?
Might buy one.
Better than rolling them out.
won't go  
 
Rod Stewart  you    keep them talking
but he seems nice   not bad is it?
No?
It isn't  now for the rest  nobody has got them.
No problem.
The  was nice.
It's not that I need them 
 
no not  I don't think.
with lemonade, advocat and
Lime.
Lime, that's it.
Lemonade as well, lemonade 
Yeah I might want that one  you have 
Yeah 
other ones.
Not that strong.
Ay?
It's more than eight percent.
Is that proof?
Not much is it?
Ay?
Is it?
Oh steady, I'll have to go easy then!
Yeah we know what you piss artists are like!
Ah I don't mind Christmas  pass them on.
let mum have one  No she'd 
Probably under the circumstances, probably better if she does!
Sheila might.
No   well Sheila's got her a bottle of gin.
Oh yeah.
I bet that, that'll  her Christmas actually.
Good idea really.
And the microwave  she's got her cat book, a bottle of gin and a  just buy her something else to go with it, out of that twenty five, spend the rest on mum  that's what I was thinking.
Money  that'll do her  we'll have a 
She's      she's got a cat book.
Spend the whole lot on mine  couldn't you Ann?
I wouldn't do that  gave vouchers   looks as though you can't be bothered  she knows I'm getting that voucher of that  I'll probably go and  see something .
Yeah and goodness knows she  can't she?
Well I'd rather  I'd rather buy something  and I   no point buying her jumpers, I think she's got  jumpers  ha   so
Pair of trousers.
Mum wants a pair of trousers for going out with, you know  well she's got plenty but like I say it's  but  then you get   I'll     no it's not very personal to give somebody a voucher though is it?
No I suppose not.
I mean it's not as though you made a lot of effort, it won't take us long to nip over   can always have look around that furniture place and  our carpets  I know that's one of these cos I got that .
Do you want any draw tickets anybody,?
Mind,
I dunno dear cos I don't think I've got any money.
More money for more tickets!
I don't think I got any money.
I'm 
I ain't got a lot, that's for certain In there  I have got I had enough for tea break.
I got some.
you got enough  I've got enough for   yeah?
It's alright, I got these.
Don't know 
Yeah it's  lady.
Say I didn't   right
It's this er 
Oh we'll have a pound each then.
There's a lot of bottles in that one  prefer the Christmas one   they're the most bottles, I won a bottle of sherry  I didn't   thing last year everybody   wine
Oh yeah.
We should have left it there  could of been more than this one.
It's 
I dunno, how many  pints of bloody wine!
Three pints each.
Yeah something like that, in a cardboard box with a tap on.
Remember that thing  as well. 
Fourteen ninety nine  Out of that   it's all bottles ey  or most of them bottles.
Yeah  make a  in here, just the two in it 
Won it in the raffle  gonna have a drop in our tea, warm us up!
Oh  I  bloody won a bottle wine and   I could of won  .
John  come to me and he said is  that your number?
You've won a bottle of whisky, Stuart said thank you.
Oy!
That's my ticket, not yours  why are you saying thank you!
I dunno just 
I said to him I'll wrap it up and give you it for your Christmas present!
I paid for it didn't I, a pound in a draw.
Yeah I know.
Christmas present, a pound.
!
Ha ha  Oh!
Want to  it.
Middle of the week.
Not that bad, that's it.
Not that bad.
First he's never seen, surprises he's always .
Yeah.
Very true.
especially on paper he
Yeah.
always such going on.
I know, yeah.
I'm not keen.
No  I've had 
Ooh!
Ooh!
That's close!
Here  Only me about me getting drunk, as if I would dear!
When?
Anytime  But I remember bloody you coming in on a Sunday morning sometimes you, bloody can hardly  the bed!
Ha ha.
What a bloody night was Stuart.
Shut up!
Thought you might know a  and all,in about five minutes!
But yeah, he told them!
No I didn't.
Yes you did.
Shut up!
You did.
You probably did, not me.
No I never  swore everybody to secrecy but they all know it  you    cos you told them !
As you always still continue to tell them  yes you do.
If I want it spread around.
That gives you your bit of character.
Yeah  can't grumble.
Yeah, we don't row, luckily, ha ha.
Yes we do.
World war    that bloody no good fool!
Must be that !
Can you blame him 
I can't help 
What?
be amazed .
You replace the  
We ain't got a , just a mad man!
He won't last for a ten now  done the , done the Welcome Break, they done the Char Grill, now they're on the Tescos.
Can't go any more, Ann.
We got a thousand more  do a Sainsburys and that's it.
Yeah that's what Ann said.
That won't last till ten  I'd rather go and rack.
never used to go on the 
Oh it's  by the  the van   Teresa 
Yeah.
and John  a bloody  at Tescos.
If you ask me
Why are they doing it, if it's not to do?
I dunno, what can you do Ann!
Ah yeah, that's my game.
Did you get ?
Got radio yes 
Why are they doing all that and there's nothing to do?
Should of  I got a  somewhere.
Well, you'll have nine  bulbs and lights out  got a thousand to do  Ann's had
What?
Ann's had, Merv, John  Teresa, Paul and Vi's  all trussing  done the rest the of my trussing, I've done the Char Grill, I've done Welcome Break, now they're on the Tesco.
I've only got a thousand Sainsburys to do and we'll be all done by
Nine o'clock.
or not long after  so why have they been doing that if there's nothing much to do?
Why is John,and Ann and  Paul and Teresa and all them been on that trussing line, and Merv.
Probably trying to get ahead for that , one of those .
Oh yeah, but I wonder if we're gonna all finished by nine o'clock and you'll have us all in your ha ha  ha
Don't forget  Ann, in fact it's probably one of   and in the back .
Well we would, but we'll live.
I've had a go but obviously not
Not much else to do.
not much about  no.
Well, with all the trussing the might carry on trussing and get that done.
Or else we go in the afternoon and truss  your pvc .
I don't know mate,o I only know that that's take us  Ann and Paul and Ann  and John  and all them all doing all the others so
We really ought to be going to some  to truss  .
There we go,dear.
Ooh thank you.
that in your tea.
Is there enough in that cup?
I'm going.
See you at my mums.
But Stuart when we've done the  we're gonna book that.
Aunty Mary.
Alright?
Okey dokey See you later dear.
Yeah  see you at the car.
Oh dear, oh Lord!
I better go and 
Well we certainly won't last till ten, not
No.
So we got a thousand letters to do that's all, well it might be over I don't know they're  but 
isn't he?
Sort of jewellery you see .
Do they?
for Tesco and 
Yeah 
quite casual erm  Sainsburys.
Ooh!
They've all finished early, they've   unless they  came in late with the order or something, extras or something.
I know five hundred and sixty was extra cos Stuart gave me two hundred short of a thousand.
Mm, cos somebody hadn't  up wrong then  Where is she?
Probably ain't calculated enough have they?
No that's what I say if calculated wrong 
We're always out    they always tend 
Mm 
to go over don't they?
Yeah, little bit over.
And they probably do the  very small bags without .
Yeah and that's .
Bags that weren't that have come over there and need a recount  Kerry!
Hiya.
How's it going?
Not too bad.
Are you on tea?
Yep, just going  .
Ten  ten fifty eight.
I've go I've been in work  some of these
His next victims!
Ask yourself 
They've gone on holiday.
Which one?
Yeah and we're supposed to do all of them 
 
you see  put John, one of us start trussing early but we didn't need one  Ann's got another team in the  other room doing it.
There still in there.
I'll I'll be finished before long.
Yeah?
Well, about another hour.
Have we got some more Birds Eye pies up to truss?
Yeah
they didn't do them!
Actually they perhaps let us go back on them then
Well
tomorrow
if you do that, I think perhaps that's the best kind of action, have a word with him and go down  I mean 
You mean go back on them, cos we didn't finish them cos there was three pallets  and we didn't even do two.
There's only twelve with a  last week weren't there?
We didn't finish them cos they wanted to start trussing early 
It's what you had last week.
and then Ann started that little line trussing you see, so we've  done it between us but  I've got a thousand to do and she's got about four d t 
Ann, even if they do some 
I bet you feel like a  now,give them in when they can't truss them  dunno.
That I've only had
We give them in when they came trussed with the though we had before.
It's not very heavy    Really to start a truss that's 
Well, with the two lines going yeah  would have been about right then but see, John  I don't suppose he realised Ann was gonna  fetch all the people out of here there and everywhere and start that up.
What did he do, did he say  
Well I pa 
Ann?
No
no so she started trussing, helping me.
Yeah yeah but he wouldn't 
I suppose that's what John thought, we might not get them done, start early and get them finished
That's good.
He just said leave the Bird's Eye pies and  start your trussing.
That was gone seven o'clock when 
Yeah.
By time we've cleared all that especially the 
All that pvc, Ann!
are fourteen.
and T D C  when we come in, I mean they hadn't checked any goujons, they hadn't checked any of the fillets.
Bag here 
Perhaps they'll get them.
There was two baskets of bones.
Fillet drums    
Jeanie and  Hilary are doing that.
Go back and get some more breadcrumbs 
Yeah tha yeah and I mean  yeah  We'll definitely be finished in about an hour
one.
Won't be till ten anyway.
And  getting all the  Bird's Eye.
Didn't we have a   we're getting  
If we get in trainee.
in the daytime  I'm going home I'm not putting up with  like that!
They didn't want me!
Never mind  you got as far as you could,so at least you got that far Deirdre.
I think I'll work nights only cos 
Yeah.
Joe and I mean I come a long way   and they said he told them I wanna pop in Friday morning before we go  He was surprised  He said well I weren't surprised, I said but er you know I want a name  yeah well, he just said well I can't  he can't fault me on anything.
Yeah it's just nice to know if there is something wrong 
I know.
isn't there?
Any
Well, hang on a minute I said if I've gotta problem 
time er, put it right.
Yeah.
if there's any weak stuff then I said 
Er yeah 
I'll work it out  
yeah you can 
and I can work on it.
yeah that's it.
Oh I went  we were absolutely    you know everybody claimed something
You know what he's like
well he told me when I claimed 
that sort of person 
, you took three of them didn't you?
Who's that behind?
He had Peter, he had that Peter who's 
Peter , David, didn't they and
David
Over Cook's side, he only lasted about three more weeks, I mean 
three weeks  
Glenys has been doing it ever since,han 
that
Ian only last about three or four weeks, he was gone.
That one   he went didn't he?
Yep.
And that Peter.
Yeah.
He couldn't even do your 
He wouldn't d , he didn't wanna do it, did he?
He took it back.
He said he wanted office.
Ha!
You know, I remember him 
Yes.
coming in cos John 
Yeah.
said well you do what you did with him  and show  showing him how to do 
 
all the jobs, he said  I don't want to learn them I've come to supervise, he said I don't wanna get mucky!
Oh no!
I couldn't believe my ears!
I said Oh!
So why John said would I show you how to truss nice, I don't wish to learn thank you!
Is that what he said to you?
Yeah he said I 
Oh I didn't know that!
He said he'd come to supervise, not to do it!
I've no no wish to learn it thank you.
I said, well fair enough, I'll go to do something else!
See John when he we as soon as John arrived he said to me will you take me  he said, I don't wanna learn it   proficiently but I want to know every job so I then took 
And then watch 
up and down every line.
every line.
You got to expect to be
and i and when this Peter come he said well you know, just show him  everything and  like you did me and  he said he didn't wanna know thank you.
I didn't know he said that to him!
Yeah he said 
Yeah.
he said  I come to sup be supervisor he said, I don't know, I don't wish to learn all that!
Well can you supervise if you don't know what the hell's going on!
I sa said to John 
That's what John said, he wanted lo 
I said last week
so he good, a rough idea 
John , I hope you don't mind, I said  gotta call   he said you 
Mm.
he said you should have asked Jim 
Yeah.
because it was between you and him,.
Well that's certainly my feeling  I'm naturally disappointed but it  I say, you did well and i er
Mick said to me last night, he said to me you can never fit  not used to it, but 
No point is there?
No there's certainly  
That's it.
I said I've failed!
I said I just haven't got .
That's it.
You're not forgiven!
No  I'm listening to them,I'm doing a project.
Aha.
I'm taping all your conversations  anyway 
Oh right.
not in the factory  I didn't li , I could of asked Tom.
What in here?
Everywhere I go.
Oh  I shall be quiet.
It's all anonymous, you're not e e e nobody know who it is, it's for  it's for a dictionary and they want  new words that are commonly used  and they don't want  and all old words that never get used it'll be dropped in the next edition of the dictionary.
I go I  anything.
No it's er  I'm taping all my conversations I have with everybody for a week.
What if people don't want you to?
Oh yeah you you have to erase it  but nobody's gonna sa , I mean to say, nobody knows who you are, what you've said anyway  at all, do they?
Well I don't know, if you're just gonna  write down 
What?
what you put on there and that
I don't write anything, I send the tape in, they don't know who you are  you're just a it's just a voice speaking  nobody knows who you are or anything, they only know me  nobody else.
then!
Why?
Who's who's gonna know when they lis to compile a dictionary and what words you use  who's gonna know who you are?
Ha  dunno speaking 
That's all  well if you want it erased, I will I mean it's up to you entirely
Well you won't have any trouble with Jeanie.
but 
 
Ay, I I've I've said that to them I said well you might have, if I take to work you'll certainly hear some  they said tha well if that's common usage words that's  what it has to be  and words that we never use at all that are in dictionaries and nobody ever uses them, they want to know common  ordinary speech  words that we use.
Can't get more common than me!
Ey I told them, I said you might hear some right a I was in the pub Saturday night, mind I did tell afterwards  and he's ever such a nice bl fella  he comes over  door
so he's killing himself laughing   I I've got to tell you Ron, I've been taping   he said I don't give a monkeys you tape what , he said let them all hear, they'll all be able to pass it round!
It ain't, well it wasn't really disgusting but it 
Are you ready  ?
said he wouldn't.
I said I got a good joke for you here,started to laugh and  he said I ain't said it yet!
Well I didn't tell him it  he can wind it  just erase it  I mean I don't  I said I'm alright love  just to do all that, I've got twenty tapes   !
Someone asked me whether  , I thought it'd be a bit of fun  But as I say nobody knows who you are, or what you've said or anything  so it doesn't matter does it?
It's the words they're interested in, not what you actually say and the 
 
words that yo people are using  I've got now, so I don't even think of it, it's just there and  I just talk normal  that's the idea really  and if anybody asks you what you're doing, then you tell them and it  and you say, if you don't wish to be on it, well
  
wipe it off  but nobody knows who you are anyway so what difference does it make?
Unless it got personal, I'd turn it off, I mean  I mean when we went the estate agents and solicitors  
Be Alan, be Alan Whicker!
sort of sit there  putting what the solicitor said in your 
turn them off
  
Or if anybody told me, I mean I wouldn't   and talking in confidence about their private life or 
No.
just turn them off, and that's it  Just normal conversations  the words that people use in common  different areas of the country, with accents and th dialect and  one thing and another  it's for the Oxford English Dictionary  the next edition.
It is very old 
We've got to take that specification thing with us this morning, it will might help 
What time?
Seven foot six by seven kitchen, plus units  so you would get two metres  it's not very much at all 
At least you'll know exactly rather than sort of saying well 
I know it was fourteen by nine foot something, I'm up to nine, ten which is exactly which she said 
They'd rather do that than having to piece  twelve quarter then you've got to have  join the bit then all the pattern that will be matching exactly er  you'll use more.
to cover er a metre 
you have to  cos they can't do nothing with the bits, they give you all the bits 
Well yeah you do, you can't end up quite a lot of it  
Mm.
suppose they have to match the pattern otherwise it does look quite silly  which is what they've done in here, they haven't matched the patterns   that wall there is it, it ain't joined
Isn't joined.
walk in, here, this is the end of the where they all went too and that piece is a piece cut off and it's not, it's gripped together underneath
Yes, yes
but it just knocked the cotton sticks out, just put the piece down, there's no way I'm gonna do this, so it doesn't matter does it?
No.
That's definitely, this is the raw bit and that's a bit of the end of the cut-off, probably have  the landing or something  can use the rest of it through 
Oh I say this is nine foot nine  just gonna get a bit for it,tie a little bit on edge and that's it.
Bedroom has got a, it's in an alcove  so you'll have that piece where it's  bottom of the stairs or wherever, I mean, the, stand on  slip mats  you're gonna get that because of the, the airing cupboard is part of the hall, part of the bedroom and  nothing you can do about that one, and on the wall it's just gonna be one length of each room,cut off,perfect,, actually they don't normally do that, they usually just  the measurement, cos I not, never understood why they don't have  measurements there all standard , you guarantee use the one strip of another roll 
The new houses are pretty standard why don't they convert them, you know , you guarantee if you use six rolls of wa wallpaper  you'll need one to  seven, something silly like that 
Way it always goes, an extra roll  need to buy
Need to buy, you have done.
That's a lo 
To do underneath the window or on top of the door or some silly thing like that 
a lot, a lot of places where you can buy eight rolls and only use seven 
eight  back and er  
Certainly when we get settled in after Christmas that should be  and I'll shall say about six rolls  but I'll shall say six rolls   and just the   every time I get one roll of wallpaper up and you you'll think oh I'll do the rest tomorrow  just a bit more, then you get one more  looks alright there,the other wall and er, I'm sat, I've been up all night doing this  shall do one more then I'll go a bed   , I get from the wife bloody hell mother what time did you go to bed, about an hour ago , couldn't leave it     wallpaper.
No.
Never attempted?
No.
Same with me  paster
I'll be your  I can be your labourer.
Yeah   paster.
Wallpaper, wallpaper .
I'm not an expert, non professional but I, it goes up.
Vera turned up for a cup of coffee dinner time and ended up staying there rest of the afternoon dinner with us, oh  no come on in, give us it,where you sitting, off she went 
You start
By the end, by the end of the afternoon she'd done it all.
You start at the right hand side of the window
Well I know about that
That a way.
I know that.
You don't start
You start here 
Is there any joint and seems  light, if the light were on the light catches them and you can see all the 
No it's not   sit and watch somebody else do it  it won't hurt her
Mm.
Just the  actual joy of starting and, and seeing it transformed while 
Yeah 
you're doing it and all  imagine that, somebody else, I didn't , it will be that's not quite straight or erm  or
do apply 
, no I won't be doing that   folks there , that's it the  
Right,That's a  
Don't treat me like a naughty schoolgirl.
Naughty girls, naughty schoolgirls get their botty smacked.
Ooh,
 

I might like having me botty smacked.
 

What they putting in there next?
got a bit there 
 

There's a puddy tat, hello puddy tat 
certainly don't think where we going is suitable for a puddy tat,hours and hours on end and not being allowed to go outside  and even when we're there, I say, we can't be running up and down them bloody staircases letting cats out, I couldn't, I couldn't bear the thought of it never going out.
It's unnatural really is it?
Yeah, they like to roam about and explore and  and, and er, I'm not sure I wanna cope with litter trays for ever, would you?
No.
Would rather a cat be out cos it wants to be out.
Yeah.
Does as it wants to do when it goes outside rather than inside.
I mean  when it's warm though,litter  stuck in the erm, erm  it maybe greeting you and   .
Even a modern cat litter nowadays
Oh yeah? 
unpleasant.
oh yeah?
remember ours, it would not be   flat smells of cat  but not only that if it weed on me carpet as much as I love it I might get a
, er  I think it would be get your cat out of here .
Your cat of my 
Exactly ,my cat, it mine when it was good and yours  when it was being horrible .
Not on , not only do they wee on the carpet but they also have a tendency to try and avoid, cover it up
Cover it up, yes, pull all the threads.
Pull all the
pull all the bits.
, I'm very  I like, if they haven't got a scratching board, scratch what's in the 
Yeah.
no I don't think we'll have a pussy cat for the foreseeable future, not shut up, I say it's different if they can go out, sharpen their claws on a bit of bark or , unless I end up with a goldfish  
A goldfish, get hungry, make a few chips
yes darling.
What's for lunch dear, well, ready 
fish
Yeah  oh I'd have to call it James
,,dream occasionally innit strange?, help is one  goldfish is male or female, how's one know whether to call it James or Jessica or  I haven't the faintest idea  how you sex a fish.
Neither have I.
Oh, one of the mysteries of life, how do you sex a goldfish?
Pretty trees 
Yeah, that's why a, that's all it is you see,, there's no mention of any   advice you or whatever, she said she , just don't see any point of  anybody else buying cheaper  , somebody hit the  the thing in the middle of the island there, smashed all the glass  one of these things  there's all got smashed   ,
Summer again.
Are they?
Yeah,
Oh  mm.
Bulbs to
Yeah, no  such a, I mean you  
 
what was the point of that now we've got one?
 
That's it
You can buy a car for  
Yes, that's it, that's a new one , or a relatively new one.
Got 
Yep.
Perhaps 
I mean they might not be  from this, so
True, very true  we have erm 
I don't know,no.
.
That's it that's  
 
Oh well.
Never mind, have a look and I might have a   there we are how's that, alright dear?, you have a look  
yeah  coming to the empty that was
Yes.
David  
Yes, same type of thing as mm, mm  
Don't like that 
, I don't think he could  , that's three hundred and ninety nine  oh
.
Nice isn't it?very good, it's quite nice isn't it?
I'm more than happy with something like that.
Do we  second hand suite   second hand suite, the whole lot.
It's that  
We go for a second hand suite as well or 
a microwave.
Go for a microwave or do you just go for
We've got nine hundred pounds approximately, after the cooker and the fridge.
Five hundred pound for carpets, leaves four hundred pound, two hundred pound for suite and the microwave 
say, there's so many combinations that's the thing isn't it?
Yep.
There are so many combinations of what to have, what to get, what we can't get, what we need really I think is, what we need is obviously going to be priority isn't it?
Yes.
Carpets, cooker fridge
Yeah.
they're the definite needs and erm 
That was eleven hundred pounds
approximately, you've got four hundred pound really to play with,approximately four hundred pound  left over, say five hundred pound, six hundred for electrical goods.
Pardon?
Seven hundred did you say, oh no two seventy nine and three twenty something weren't it?
Yep.
Er three, two
About six hundred.
Six hundred, yeah.
Six hundred for them two and five hundred for carpets.
Eleven, you've got four hundred pound, you got   so it's a good second hand one or  a cheapy  no, well it would be a cheapy   I told him most of them around about seven hundred and ninety nine 
Decent 
A reasonable one, I mean you can go up to two thousand for a good one, but a reasonable one you wouldn't get nowadays under seven hundred and ninety nine  
I think you'd be better off with a  with a new cooker and fridge
Oh yeah, definitely I think 
, you can go second hand 
rather than go second,
but, er, you know er, at least if you go in there at least you've got
got  
got a guarantee for six months 
yeah, yeah, but  
but, at least you know you're going to get a decent amount of  
Two or three years on the others.
As with a new one you'll probably gonna get four, five, six, seven,eigh 
I don't like, just, I couldn't be like Deirdre and , put me overall on and in go in without collecting me thoughts  getting myself together  Deirdre never arrives till about three minutes before she gets in the door, she's putting her overall on saying come on ladies, its time were , but she's putting her overall and  on , and they all sit there looking at her and so 
 
they all sit there looking at her and saying bloody hell she ain't got her own hat on , we've been here quarter of an hour  and  she walks in the door, takes her coat off and says come on ladies  you're suppose to be off your hind by two o'clock , leaving here at two 
She's right.
I know she's right, but she should, set an example in some ways , mm  people are so used to her now they just look at her and carry on talking  silly old bugger, you know,, shut up Deirdre  I'm  don't want to do that, shouldn't be, cos there wasn't much to put on, although they left, left quite a bit off yesterday, they cut short, there was five hundred breast portion short and two hundred oyster eggs, so Deirdre informed me     but they injected six hundred too many  and four hundred eggs to Tescos  all quite ridiculous.
Pardon?
Put them off today's
I know but it's just,waste of time in it?they'd been better spent to finish the order that they did have, and inject that, ha  oh be fair to do that to use though, no doubt they will, pick out all the things we didn't do right   bloody should done too many of this or not enough of that
Ah, yeah.
difference  wasn't worth putting that down.
Not really, not this time of the day is it?
Mm, it would bounce up and down like a yo-yo 
Can't I do nothing?
Lovely, thank you darling, oh we didn't get much further on  there, what we started with this morning, no  so 
 
 
Erm, I've left my bags at mums.
Oh dear.
.
No,working till twelve.
Oh, it 
Yeah 
Yeah 
Oh wow. 
No .
Seems like  
why you like you like to  
Thank you darling 
 

 

Yeah alright, I'm off  next week 
That's that one, yeah,, yeah, oh and, Ann, Ann  that's  
Yeah, John's already decided , that's alright.
Yeah
yeah that's lovely, we did put in for some in February, we have this one in the  we haven't got a  cover that one.
We'll have to have one less
Oh, sorry 
Women on there have to come off 
oh no, hang on, no 
There's four days on now.
 

We'll have the Wednesday off when you cross   
Yeah    they haven't actually  February, she would of done, but
be the same,
decide on the Monday, so you'll have to cancel
the Wednesday then.
cancel the Wednesday, cancel Wednesday, yeah, that will keep the  days and 
Thanks dear,
Yeah, can you put me down, the name down for the  , alright, okay.
Right, thank you very much John
Thank you, bye now 
order my 
Hello
Hello  what the , have to  oh yes 
Yeah, must be used to the   must do it sometime    
Well at least you're not a 
Er,
were moving and one thing and another, there's so much to do.
Oh is there?
Anyway I said to  I said I left today, I  .
That's the trouble when your at work and you got all  
Yeah it must be 
You gotta be at work.
Yeah  do they?
Oh I  
No, no, I come in the car, I was coming on the bus when I had this bloke next door doing some work like, I used to go out with him years ago, so he come in and had a cup of tea, I said, come in about half past eleven  went home at one, he come 
Hello girls
Hello Stuart, are you alright?
Mm.
Oh.
Better 
he's got, he said he'd be better at ten o'clock.
Yes, I'll be better at ten o'clock , I shall be better at ten o'clock  by Friday  
I dunno who shall be the worst 
Yes.
for the third of January, then he goes back  tenth cos his 
Bloody hell, hello Dawn.
Hello.
Good morning.
Yeah I had somebody come round and stuck their bloody 
 

No
Yeah, I did, so I have  
Right then dear.
Yeah  right as I'm gonna be for the time
That's it in it?
Hello Mr and Mrs
Jean
How are you?
Very well thank you.
Good, good, good.
is it in here?
Yes,
Key, give us key.
is she?
No, but getting  
Might as well sit down for a few minutes mightn't we?
Yeah, we got five minutes.
.
.
 

.
They never got here, I was  all morning.
 

but when you come and sit here at night 
Have you not been well Jo?
Life's not 
Was he, oh er, what was that did you eat something what you  
Dunno,
Oh.
 

Yeah, I'm going in as well darling.
Fine.
.
Ta, see you later on.
See you later on yeah, about er about the usual time
Yeah, usual time.
time.
 

Hi ya
Hello
 

Sound cheesed off, what's the matter?
I'm cheesed off .
So am I, fed up, bored.
go back and   go back and take  when you go back.
Fed up, cheesed off 
Yes
Oh
yes,join you all 
I've got 
I hope  .
Yeah.
Why you cheesed off  
This is strong 
That's the way I feel, am I not allowed?
What, no, I thought there might be a reason  yeah but,
I'm on the P D C and it's  it's going and the phones  six baskets  about twenty baskets to be checked  minutes 
Should of been done any way.
 

Should of been done hadn't it?
Yeah.
It only , pushing out the  lasts,line, just emptied the line and he walked in.
She doesn't stoop in and  
They didn't do any, they did one thou oh two thousand pounds each and one thousand of that was sovereign  
Me and  reckon that  up in the canteen.
They just use to  rest of it, yesterday, didn't I, last night.
All Dave's flavours were done  apart from the odd few extras,
No, I done that.
they had, all they  was the roast  roast  
 
its all the frozen people's fault 
I can't  spoonful.
See, I don't bother.
and  roast puddings, roast  tikka twice  and a few extras. 
many people.
so
Well we couldn't  so  I don't know.
it was a big pub  , oh yes .
I dunno what's up I just, that closing date's tomorrow innit?
Mm.
last week when we were on holiday.
Think up a good think for sponsor.
It seems a funny day though.
Yeah well she's got to start  tomorrow  try.
Whatever 
 

It 's  up 
Sounds like .
No, I've never heard that before, put your name down for your Christmas lunch 
I would of thought it had been easier to erm  to put down the name of 
Mm.
oh there 
what you want   what you want,Could be a , now.
 

What was it last year was on Thursday?
have it tea time  Oh, we, probably have it about five o'clock everybody, and Lyn and Michael come in early and have theirs as well.
.
Think  later, be about five o'clock or quarter to five, or something like that depends when it's on,have to come in early if they want to have it with us.
We'll try one to one.
Of course got to cook so,depending on it will be about five o'clock so that they can get washed up. 
Probably.
 

I'll tell her not to cook.
Yeah, well 
Any thing pastry you know,.
I cook for Stuart and I don't eat it.
I don't, I cook for Stuart, but I don't eat it.
So I mean, I still cook for Stuart, he still eats, even though I don't have it,.
I couldn't.
No, no, not when it comes to  pastry, a nice bit of apple pie and
Oh yeah 
 
, yeah.
Mind you, when we were over 
What they gonna, what they gonna  by the pound?
 
 
No, you wanna  pound.
What they doing another sponsored slim are they?
I wished I'd of done when I lost all my weight
And we're gonna do it, for, for a 
when I lost my six and a half stone 
mammogram thing for the hospital.
What are they doing, having another one, what Wisbech or the one at  
No, no, we just bought it up 
Yes, I think it  
Well it will be the local hospital that does all that
They've got one at  cos I mean I went and had one so there must be one, another one 
No, it's  I think,
unless it for, it must be for Wisbech
It might be for Wisbech one, they've gone to , cos erm, I mean they've got two at Lynn, so it must be Wisbech 
So its probably  
Ah
Just make sure you squeeze their knickers off, make them  
would you?
I probably come on with, on, on, on you with it after Christmas as well cos I'll probably put some back on 
Yeah, we'll do it for three months 
over Christmas.
three months 
It will take me bleeding years to reach my goal 
Why I've been , it will be ten months that's all Rita, ten month it took me to lose six stone, you don't want to lose that much do you?
Yeah, Tina can go on it.
What?
You're going on a sponsored slim 
Sponsored slim 
after Christmas, er and Val and me
No, going on holiday 
It's for a good 
she's going on holiday in January 
 
 

You'll have all them warriors chasing you round the jungle , they have their little blow pipes 
Yeah, ooh, all them dingle dangles yeah
they're not, they're not little either, I saw a film and it was hanging past his knee caps  
 
good to use them for swinging in the trees.
That's  in it.
No, that's what everybody thought 
blush then.
Yeah 
 

 
Trade you in for a couple of camels, he'd come home with a couple of camels
Yeah.
I 
She'll, she'll think that's an elephant's trunk in her pocket and she won't realize 
.
you ain't blushed like that for a long while  have you?, yeah, that will be a holiday, watch your camp bed don't fold up love  
I say, I'd 
, I'm only telling you what to expect you know, when you go  on holiday 
Been there
Eh?
Mm, you watched
I've been there, yeah.
You wanna watch them old  mowmows yeah, they come there with their little carving knives, yeah, cut all the dangly bits off   that, that's right though innit ,
shut up 
you tell her.
.
shut up.
It's impossible.
They get them little knives 
 
You be 
Yeah, I've had an away day today , I never said a gay day, I said an away day .
You finished eating?
 
Why, what you gonna buy me?
What?
You done?
why what you speak to me, what were you saying?
That erm
  

Well
for
You should of said well alright, I'll take them away then   took them right away then ,
Take a bit of interest, what's going on 
Somebody 
Make the most of it.
Just let her do it.
Yeah,
I've got another weight watcher's order form,four,
.
look as though you book it then 
Yeah, you don't want to  don't miss out on any thing do you?
She's gotta eat.
Got to eat 
Chips, fish
Yeah and you feel like a bleeding rabbit.
Yeah, you get bored.
Especially when you have to have a bit of salad cream on  
Well I don't feel   
Fair enough, I think I  work
She's investing it for her .
Yeah, I 
What  now?
, 
You, getting all  put some back in , I need some  by six o'clock, I said  comes at six thirty, you can't have it we're bloody cooking , any way  I though you done  John's said his got  because  come on.
John's told me to tell you to go and get it, right  I said  I said Richard  coming, for four hundred pound I  you're not coming for it so that's it  oh  you think it was  pub machine or
.
well if it isn't, well what can you do?
I can't make the machine go any bloody quicker, well I can, but I  so what's the point in that   come and have a look at it and then they said come back and do it when you  on the skin, you know the skin  bring it forward  well it don't go back, it just gets all tangled.
He come in Saturday, not that he , we've heard all that before, said that  you can get  give it a good wash and squeeze it back , that  I can't put one on now, give me a ring when you're done
, so we've been doing a few  need a good wash 
Monday's the twenty third, Sunday's the twenty second
nothing to do with, he stood there, he said, it's not working, and he paid the bloody bill  I put them on right.
Same old story      getting it underneath  cos they're going higher up and underneath 
last week, we ought to go  
 

Oh yeah, yeah.
Didn't tell us about that one did you?
Everyone starts on me
what's happen with the .
They haven't mentioned it this year, have they?
No,
Have they?
Yeah,
Yeah, but  last year  
Oh we were waiting and waiting in the end we got in the car.
Oh we're being 
I was gonna drive anyway 
We'll be at mum's anyway, so
I take  I take, only occasionally I go mad and let ripe and have quite a few, other times I just be on an orange juice and lemonade 
but the other, the other do I really made  
Pardon?
You've been to see him haven't you?
How is he?
Be alright?
Well the two 
er three days , I've asked Dave 
Mm, mm.
Did he know you were going?
Yeah.
Dates from the last day of 
, not too bad.
At least you keep in touch, some of them get shoved away and they never, nobody don't bother with them do they?
the worst  yeah
Yeah and its cost us forty two
ticket up
Pardon?
on what tickets?
Well, like I say if I want to bring my family, I've got to pay five pound which 
Five pound, yeah 
yeah.
Go and get nine tickets, or I start right up all the bloody year round for that.
Well, that's what I said.
Yeah, we pay all the year round for that don't we and that's all we bloody get out of it.
I mean it's  
When my Helen comes,she's gotta pay 
 

No, you have 
Yeah, I already told that .
Why it is, it's very, very, very wrong, say we pay all year round for that, I've paid for a year for my ticket
Nobody asked for my clock number when mine and Stuart's, just gave me me ticket.
You've just got to give, you know, we've put by  and we said .
Nobody put, nobody asked for mine or Stuart's it's just
When, when I went to get my tickets she said 
I had eight 
Evening  he's earned a pint of beer I think tonight.
What?
Anyone would think we were what?
Yeah.
I went in the  today they like mad animals running round without a head on 
God knows what's it going to be like in a couple of weeks time.
This time in three weeks it will all be over, we'll all be sat there thinking well was it bloody worth it, all that hard work  money and rushing about, is it worth it?
I like Christmas.
Well I like Christmas, but it's just getting one mad  money, money, money innit?
Well yeah.
More than it's ever been
Trouble is there ain't money about and  
, what can you buy little Dean nothing, can you?
It gets worse every year, but this year seems worse than ever.
 

Bloody hell I just sit down and it calls again.
Oh you can't sit down, do you want another one?
No, no, I'll have a very, very, very, very weak shandy.
.
.
I'll have a, a shandy.
A what shandy love 
A bitter shandy .
Pint?
Oh sorry.
I bet he would and all.
 

Same again please , could I have a Babycham please?
And a half  of bitter shandy 
Come on Neville.
Yeah, I might
 
 
Oh the  he should of done.
We've got company for Christmas, are you on your own this year?
Oh, I always have erm now the kids are grown up, and my mum and dad and my brother, but we will be two short this year.
Never mind.
I shall 
You will see that, that the
I'll have the other company.
yeah 
Ah, squeeze over.
Ooh 
Oh just fell in 
Ooh 
Have you got any company this year?
We're going away this year, I'm not, he said that won't be strange not cooking Christmas dinner.
Won't you feel funny not cooking it?
The first time in twenty five years, we've cooked Christmas  for a blooming great load of people
So you're  
It will be nice in a way, but, be strange 
Yeah , yeah, cos it, it's the 
not 
smells of the cooking and sitting down bloated out innit?
That is it.
Well I shall still be sitting down bloated out no doubt, but er, it's just not doing it, actually doing it.
Up at
Do cook the turkey and baste  
up at dawn to get the turkey in  
Although I enjoy boxing day cos I have all the family there
Mm.
but,
We're going to mum's and having all her company aren't we?
Ah Lynda not 
Here are Lynda.
Thank you Neville, you going to hotel are you?
No, we're going to his mum's
Oh lovely.
I've got all his family some of them I've never met.
Oh so that will be nice then won't it?
Yeah, that will be a nice change.
Be nice to be waited on.
Yeah, it should  I go 
Yes 
I go every Sunday though
She's got to do the work.
Blimey.
I don't mind, if you leave me in the kitchen I'd be quite happy, I'd do it all.
Any women is ain't they mate?
Quite happy for you to stay out the way while I do it.
All go to the pub and I stop there
Yeah.
them all in.
Yes, as long as you'd left me to 
Yeah, I don't m , my dad will do that, my dad cooks you see, mum don't cook at all, dad normally does, and when dad comes to mine he wants to get in my kitchen
So he is
so I have to say go on father bugger off
he's like that aren't you dear, always has to come and have a stir and there's licks in the, look in the pan
Yeah, dad would say, not enough garlic in there, that could do with a bit of cauli-head in there and I  will you 
Mm, mm.
 

Blimey 
Yeah, you  at the pub 
At last.
Well, we've got to go down
.
there wouldn't, you would of 
Oh you coming as well are you?
, wouldn't she?
If you don't go I'm not going
Christmas gone   go and see Helen otherwise I would be 
They are, set him up again.
mm, mm, I don't want a bit of 
Oh apparently you go  dad's Christmas Eve
Oh am I?
Oh 
well she doesn't know about him,an invitation, but
she said you will still  won't you, you can't do much if you just turn up , I don't know though,their Christmas all freezing and bruises and 
it's entirely up to you, but apparently  what you want to do, make it an evening then?
Oh 
just with 
An hour   you know what me mum is she's got to have a little
Mm, mm, have a little dig
yes.
 

dad, dad didn't say nothing about all evening just pop in for an hour , but I couldn't see Stuey and me sitting there  disturb him,scared
Oh.
Christmas Eve
Yeah, probably.
, it's only an hour he might  an hour but after that he'll be thinking bloody hell the pubs will be open
wouldn't you?
No, not exactly
you would, huh, you'd be looking at the clock , I know you well enough for that now dear 
denied.
No, I'm not gonna deny it.
Won't deny it dear, I won't deny it at all.
It's entirely up to you, if you wish to go on your own, I would not resume , yeah, presents on him without an invitation
Oh I see, yeah, have to see what he says 
Mum's 
Mm, mm, see what she says  our Sheila and, see what .
Comments I had earlier on in our relationship hadn't, he didn't seem very keen did he?
Thought you were a bloody idiot 
must be mad.
Don't   I get old enough and  did me best perhaps he might change his mind
Mm, maybe.
a blue suit on or something and 
Yellow suit?
yeah, something really, no don't go overboard 
Do come in  
.
Somebody's been very busy 
looks nice doesn't it? 
I like to see them all up but doesn't it look bare when you take them down 
Yeah 
You gonna decorate when I take them down?
Mm, we've not got any option, we're moving anyway apart from that there's erm, we're not gonna be there so it doesn't seem much point really does it?
Not really no, a lot of work for nothing.
Yeah.
Ah, that come out, that nearly 
You ought to be careful cos of your clothes
Yeah, I 
I thought I'd give it  
You got a new place to move to eh?
Yes,needs doing.
There you are dear.
What you say?
What you gonna  
I wouldn't want to say that, I'm  
well all  yeah.
Mm.
huh, won't she though
Mm.
I thought she was talking about you, I mean she never mentioned no names when she came  rushing up to the top just the same, don't know what's the matter with Wynne today,the edge there Lynda.
nothing  when I want it and oh,
It's childish  
don't know what's the matter with Wynne today, she's been quite,you know how she does and  
What amazes me though he just  don't seemed to of .
you know.
Yeah, I mean, but he never  gets a  panic or not and he just lets her get on with it and he just stands there.
Some men are right arseholes aren't they, eh?
They got to 
That's it 
I've come out without me purse, cos I didn't know 
That's a good word to go out isn't it, without your purse, yeah.
You emptied the fruit machine Brenda?
Yep, twice
Twice 
Well we won't bother then .
Yeah
I put a couple of quid in and I got four pounds something cos er went and bought some fags out of the machine and then I got the er the brown note flashing, from ten P   so I stopped  I  have stopped.
Probably in a good mood you gotta carry on
No, it feels like 
 
it feels like, I went up the club last week and there, cos er, we didn't come in here and er
You didn't finish the 
I put two pounds in the machine up there and I got fifteen pounds, I got the three bars, er, not the three, two bars and some nudges and I nudged it
Yeah
down and it hit the two bars not the three bars, cos you get one, two and three bars don't you?that's five, ten, fifteen pounds
oh, something like that and you get three, three bars and that's a hundred pound, I got fifteen pound didn't I, don't you start.
I leave you to score I'm just gonna sit down here, I'm a little bit warm
Can you score?
No, I'm
You scored for us didn't you?
don't matter , just gonna sit quietly
Haven't got a lot to score anyway have you?
Pardon?
Ain't got a lot to score anyway have you?
No  
 
Oh what a shame
Lost all the scores,.
About five hundred to mum for 
That's, that's the time to do it
That's the right time to do it Lynda, to win the game 
 

Move that.
Sharp innit?
Creep
Oh dear,
She not prepared 
Have you been in my handbag?
I'm gonna put a mousetrap in there as well as my er kitchen drawer. 
Oh, she's a bugger for going in my drawer after Polos .
I'm gonna coat them, I'm gonna boil there some Exlax and coat them with Exlax 
 
oh
Got trouble with constipation
No I did know, or else I stop you, I'll coat one with some bitter  alie see how you like that, or  allen whatever it's called.
Put a  on it.
Yes, now that, oh that was me.
Mind you don't slip up 
Yeah 
Go on in there  I've got the  there.
No you didn't.
I know I didn't, but it's nice to say innit?
Yep, gonna need it 
Mm.
Need to sort a gentleman out about a van, you asked anybody? 
Oh, here we 
What he say?
Go on hock the middle one then.
I think  mum's
need drawers as well,dr drawers out of a chest of drawers make 
Eh
do that, get quite a bit in a drawer if you 
, good boxes cos they're solid you see. 
sign of woollies and things like that can go in there 
woollies and other thinkable clothes 
Yeah.
Won't take me long once I get going its just the getting going bit  busy day tomorrow haven't we?
anybody  done that  wouldn't they?
Once you know you've got your mortgage then its contract signing and , then we go 
I do my  then you can nip round to  see what you come up with.
Saturday morning with got to level it.
Somehow I use the sledge hammer I 
I think that's the best bet, but  I'd rather , no I think I'd rather have a  or 
Mm.
Oh yeah.
Three to 
Time I got  approximately though  on or off for all  
Do as much as we can,the money 
I say I'd like a 
and that's all we want.
That's what I'm saying.
coffee table and
next of tables like  yes, and we will want somewhere to put them,
see what room we've got, then measure up, then with what room we've 
suites and carpets 
There I've set you up there to 
Why don't you 
.
is she?
Yeah.
Alright, alright
 

 

Try, you can hit in there.
Bag of nuts please.
Ooh.
 

Tell you what, I'll give you a tenner if you break a 
But, you didn't put it on.
Yeah
Thank you Ann 
Will you stop crying and 
quite a lot, I mean I've 
They have been really horrible haven't they, them monkey nuts?
Yeah, I think it is, when they, when the  Ayatollah was getting on his bike  
I don't know, it's  temporary job, I know someone that might be interested, I think I know what it is but, but I just thought I  luckily  we won't mention it again.
So I 
Gonna have a shock if she got it  
Yes.
Oh.
team,out then.
Don't help them 
, by Donald and 
At least I didn't knock the middle one down.
I don't think so somehow.
He 
I've never seen it,I've never seen it.
Well I didn't ask for it because 
But, he's, he's probably under someone with a 
I didn't 
They probably know what you mean 
Yeah, that's right
Leave my nuts alone 
Those are mine actually 
Oh look at her knocking all them balls of that 
So, so, what do you really do with pumpkins 
Cook them.
Yeah I 
It's like a marrow
Why, I don't like marrow 
It's like a marrow 
but I mean, er 
Oh what a shame 
I, I, I know you burn them, I've heard of pumpkin pie, but I mean
Well it's, it's, it's a lot like a marrow.
all watery.
It's, it's
it's quite nice actually, it's quite nice.
Don't be put off by saying it's like a marrow 
So you boil it?
Yeah.
I like it.
You mash it, er do you mash it?
Get out of that.
Do what you like
Yeah, or you can have it as a pie, 
No I don't like that 
 
Don't put them down cos they go  they don't like 
They can't go down  
Give me a  
I might according to that cos I like 
yeah.
Oh yeah cos I always 
Oh no, gotta have it all you got to have it all er 
 
you've got to have it like that   
No I don't 
ain't you Lynda?
I've had that
Aha, yes 
 

That's why I like  
See what  
 

Yeah, but  yesterday 
There's so much to do,
Yeah, yeah.
only done two thousand pounds of bloody  and one of them was ,just got finished.
Weren't that .
Really  and that was 
ain't got many  
  

That's what I'm working on 
Mm
Did they 
cut them down, yes, they'll have to cut more  not many drums in the 
Did you win?
Did I win?
You know when I get to bed I can't sleep
Yeah, but it's the herbs, it's the herbs 
oh
Don't ask.
Pardon.
She wouldn't have a  cos er, like I said carrot, swede, parsnip, onions
I don't like that
potatoes, leeks, swede
herbs, celery
Yeah but you know I don't like any veg  you can take all that out
It's not a stew without veg, you can't make a stew without 
Yeah, but  , you know I don't eat every veg
There's not a lot you can do with the pork once you've cooked it so  only  
 
What?
You didn't want stew 
We want two rounds of toast with baked beans 
two poached eggs 
and two poached eggs and potatoes 
We're  mad
Cor am I 
Last night you had two fillets of plaice and he only had one.
I know that was yesterday.
He didn't moan.
Go hungry one day.
I didn't fancy my plaice so I give her mine  I had a bit of beef.
Mm.
You won't grow into a big strong girl you know if you don't eat your vegetables.
Well she won't eat no veg only corn on the cob
and I buy four of them and they do her a week and when they're gone that's it, she's gotta wait until I go shopping again.
See I'm hard done by aren't I?
No.
brussels sprouts don't you?
Er .
Brussels sprouts,
Only fresh not frozen.
Yeah, but you can only buy them for a little while in the year 
Loads cabbage with plenty of butter on or sprout and broccoli  
Bubble and squeak now you can't beat that.
I love that I do.
Good for you.
You'll eat my bubble squeak when that's cooking, but you won't eat it.
And  eaten cheese and that and she says that looks nice, but she won't try.
I don't like cheese and I don't like garlic
Well I could substitute it, put a bit of parsley in it 
what?
put some parsley in.
You like your trout when I do them, but you won't eat one.
No, cos it's got all them herbs on it.
Well that's the object of cooking them in herbs 
Herbs are good for you, they're a medicine 
You know the TV 
That's why you suffer with constipation love, because you don't eat no vegetables, you wouldn't need,laxatives, if you eat veg.
In my herb book, what  on the  years ago that's all people had for medicines was herbs 
Yeah there wasn't any when I was
and that's why I feel  medicine comes from today. 
finished.
Oh 
There's this butcher he made all his own  and he got varieties in, you know, they got garlic in and herbs, everything, you know
Yeah I like 
ale and, they looked ever so 
I tell you what though, if you, like, I, I never forget when we went to Austria and you went into like a delicatessen place and this place was about a quarter of a mile long, right, never seen so many different looking place with sausages 
sausages 
and  
not  
not  and they had like from end to the other 
 
and that
I can't do it.
you looked at it and you try and look the same  cos like you know, you go in there and 
Let's go up.
I mustn't be 
I can't remember, but years 
Are you sure?
and years ago we went
I know I couldn't believe like the extent of the different meats that 
Yeah.
I don't like the smell of  and all that 
I, I, mean we had erm, we went out for the day and they give us it was sandwiches  
Oh that's right, I couldn't stop laughing looked like a  they gave us then.
Yeah, was like the  or German's 
I don't mind breakfast, cos I don't mind 
I don't mind saveloy, I haven't had saveloy for a long while.
You got one in.
Got one in.
Oh have I, oh well, right then I'll 
I've, I already  I say try it, but he won't.
But I will know, I put, I try and  
I will try things, and most, and most adventurous things are spicy 
Are spicy yeah
don't like spicy, I wish I could be like that, but it don't  like I mean
I'm the opposite to you.
Yeah, I can't 
Yeah, I was like that, curries,
Boring 
yeah
What did they
Jeanie moaning, Lily  weeing, she's got a water infection so she's been about to the loo about five thousand times 
Oh bloody hell 
Lisa's friend burst into tears in 
Oh 
she's got problems she's split up with her boyfriend,
Oh dear.
She's also got a little debt behind
Tony hasn't been paying the bills.
oh gawd.
she's been contributing  that's one reason one , she's, discovered other things, this morning somebody turned up  apparently they took a loan out 
He's not paying it 
apparently  turned up this morning and  they want a hundred pound by tomorrow, and they're coming back tomorrow for it  paying him ten pound a week and thought it was  gone and he had er none so  find a hundred pound by tomorrow and she didn't know where she was going to get it from, she just stood there and  burst into tears and run off  going on 
Yeah, that is not good.
but she saw him on the way to work in town, had a bloody great barney with him on the market place on the way to work, just say, she was in there about ten minutes and burst into tears 
Not very good 
He said twenty  in that, I said yeah I've already done it, so I've dished it up and then out comes the 
.
When I, I didn't put any extra on mine and I don't  thought oh     did tell you I put some in it , he said but yeah but you don't normally put much in it he
Oh I love it,
and I've barred it from the house.
he's barred it from the house.
I said, I said I'm not having that here 
If I buy it I have to wrap it up so  because it  
, I said that it's I said you ain't having that in  cooked it.
You, I didn't cook it, I bought it, it was already done .
Well what you you eat it and it's 
dear,, we do, we do tons and tons of it every day 
 
I love it .
You wouldn't if you, you wouldn't if you had to deal with it all day long 
 
when we down to London last week, we went in to see a friend of ours, she works in the sandwich bar
and erm, he said oh we'll have something to eat so I said to Chris  they had this great big bowl of chicken tikka, ooh
It's very expensive .
want that bit he won't talk to me  if I had that.
Ever so expensive 
Ooh lovely 
Yeah it is, I mean the first time I bought it 
Its two pound thirty five for six bits
yeah
or er, half a pound er
yeah, that, that's how I bought it in Sainsburys a few years ago 
About six, seven pieces 
How much is it?
Two pound thirty five,half pound
Half a pound?
Yeah there's a lot goes in apart from the chicken there's a heck of lot goes in it in the 
 
 
Put cream and the  expensive bits, not like the  chicken and the time it takes
Oh yeah.
Yeah, but that  
 
Yeah  
So does Stuey and so does Bob, don't you Bob?
It's tandoori that he likes.
It is that tandoori, he loves that 
I don't like any of them and then when you've seen them all day long it puts you off a bit don't like none of the  
I like chicken  cos I like that.
Can't get hold of them.
Its a shame innit?
Used to get them a lot, but we haven't seen any for ages.
Hello dearest 
Hello my darling
All right then?
Yep 
You 
Yep  and what's the plan of attack today?
Oh plan of attack  erm  down.
I'll go and tell the estate agent you'll be a little bit late.
Yeah.
You go to the solicitor and then I'll see you  on the wa , on that part of the shop 
It is a problem  estate agents' name, look as though it  
Yeah, on the appointment you could get from the solicitor was 
  
Get those soon as poss, and I'll go and look in the carpet shop
Yes
find out a few  details and I'll meet you back at the estate agents
Oh  
or if you're out early, well  forms sign, so you might be a little while  and if you've got, oh we're going to mum's then aren't we?
Said it's still very early, we could pop to Leveringham, oh we don't know where it is  we might have some details in this, what we gotta do with my money.
My house, my house, my 
I shouldn't think until you at least gone to the mortgage he's gonna give us authorization to spend his money.
 

I'm not gonna use authori to go and spend one thousand, five hundred pounds and it all falls through 
That's true, that's true, that's true,
after we've spent it 
very true, very true 
And what we having for lunch?
Don't know, I don't know what we're having 
Taking fish to mum's or find something when we get there?
You taking  depends how old it will be don't it, don't know how old it will be.
No 
No point in buying  fish extra if we know we're gonna be, have to wait or something 
If we're gonna be late, we'll have to buy the fish, cos we won't have time to cook anything.
Oh fish and chips you mean, from the chippie?
Yeah, yes I'll just have a piece of fish and you can have  fish and chips, we won't have time to cook anything will we?
That's what I mean
Depending on the time.
or I say  chicken alright?
Depending on how long we're gonna have to cook it, well I mean,, oh well  what I can  still you'll have to  fish and chips 
still you perhaps have to buy fish and chips
Why?
cos Ann hasn't got a lot of pennies anyway
Nor has Stuey.
hasn't he?
Oh bloody hell, we're poor streaks then dear.
That's wise you know.
Bloody hell,then, it's chicken 
Right oh 
yeah well, we've got some erm cordon bleu or some whatever, you know,
It can go in microwave.
or whatever's
Go in the microwave that's all, I ain't got much money at all, I didn't have that much left, I bought mum's cigs and that bit of shopping the other day and that was the end of that    we will survive.
Pay day late again?
Even if we only have a tin of soup, that will do me.
Yeah, I don't mind   so it's pay day today
Yeah  but you can't get it till tomorrow  there is a little bit in the bank, but not a lot, go  wait till tomorrow  and we must get to Chester Hill today .
I like that, I don't like Jason Donovan but I quite like that, do you?
Not bad 
I don't like him, I never have but I, try not,quite pleasant isn't it?
Oh yes pleasant, oh yes pleasant.
I've never liked anything else he's had,particularly have you?
But I just find that  pleasant listening.
Oh it's a pleasant sound.
Pleasant and nice songs I suppose I don't know it's just, quite like it, it's now big, it's about the most thing he's ever recorded that I have liked,
Mm.
I've absolutely never been a Jason Donovan fan before  Christmas number one's going to be Bohemian Rhapsody which I do like you know 
I know, will do.
yes, it's already going to the top of the charts  to be number one for Christmas  all the other Christmas songs are 
They're all coming down and that one's er
yep
going up 
that will do.
They always  prices keep falling.
Well, I understand its  reasoning , but, I think if you've been very hard pushed  list, with this money, don't you?
Mm, mm.
Considering I'm not supposed to have that  cos I had it when Ann and  bought it  not sure if it's now  are you?
Not really, was, though I thought we were offering a reasonable price taking everything into consideration
upstairs and
price market 
market 
erm, how long we've been here sitting tenants er
I'm not thinking it object the sitting tenants 
the  , I thought that was fair 
as it stands at the moment.
fairly good deal.
Mm.
See here, they're gonna get thirty six for it as it stands  put it on the market as  
Might do, yeah.
Might even  two years .
When you look at, look at the old houses on the market, erm, yeah, I think he might just, he might wait a while, there aren't that many buyers,
Oh that's it, that's why they're coming down, that's why  are quite pleased to see us dear, especially at this time of the year, not many people will buy Christmas time, think oh we'll wait and go and get Christmas over and the spring and 
I think looking at the market you can, you can get a, erm detached, semi-detached sort of one you know one bedroom I suppose,
You can get two bedroom
two bedroom at a push for about thirty four, thirty five, thirty six, thirty seven,
oh I don't know, I don't know, I think it will be a while getting rid of it yes, but I think he might get his price eventually, but it will take a long while to get it , it's up to him if he wants a quick sale,you know, thirty five yeah I, thirty five thousand I think , as I say taking everything into consideration, I mean, failing three okay I know I did the  thirty three  so take thirty five, thirty three and a half, oh  he ain't got much to worry about 
Well
 

I'd better get some clothies on  cause a bit of a stir round the estate agents , naked from the waist down,darling
 

What  that's ten minutes slow   Just a-f-bout done all your paper work on them teams
I know.
got a  he's coming tomorrow  you know, got the bird  as well ain't we, that's why I got up early to I, go through  deeply objective.
Why, what's been 
it's completely anonymous number you know it's only  to be on that, said I'll wipe it off then, you bloody well won't, I think he wants to tell people before he can say  very wrong, could say something personal,if it was personal, no longer it, no you weren't  personal to you, but I'm quite happy to arrange it if you wish, no, no, no, no, no,, I shouldn't have to tell you not to take my points in full, there we go   it's driving me doing that in the factory having without people's permission, I want to know, I  ask permission if I'd er  wanted to as a  without being asked to do it, I would of gone and seen personnel and asked, I would not of dreamed of doing it in a work's situation unless I was asked, say anything personal I'd turned it off  not that it, apart from me and Stuart
Go on.
apart from me and Stuart there's nothing personal on it really, we went me and er telling me about her problems I only put that on a tape do you?
, its not er
you know, anything personal like that you turn it off don't you?not that they know or care whi anyone's personal problems anyway, they don't know who we are 
Cos a conversation like that very well be  a private person will not be a 
 
but then again you, you might, you might come up and say, say something that  that they wanna hear, you wanna hear?
Yeah, but
No, but you said you
yeah
that's what I mean
the person have a private conversation and let someone say it to me and it, what they, problems it's not something that you wanna be on somebody else's to listen to is it?
You just don't do it, you know its anonymous.
Deirdre's the only person that's erm  got one  I  on there 
Saw her car
Well 
I thought I was gonna hit a tree  
I suppose I had better make a move to get some clothes on you think?
Well you needn't bother.
No  won't go nowhere  that I do 
Get a pair of scissors cut that out and stick it on these 
 

 

What do you think?
Yes it will be good, I hope so, I'm getting nervous now.
Well he don't usually turn up till  twenty to and then we was there a little bit early as well 
Yeah  
Yeah,get some sticky tape, I know that, well they do twenty  bit of table put a plant on it, stick it on the   mm, mm,
Cup of tea 
on the road, yes 
I'm  a few minutes  
gonna get busier 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons, and evening and er    
It's  house Sunday,out Christmas at least it will be a bit more  that was the  instead and you and I  sleep on the settee.
turf her out on the bed she might  sleep with me and you sleep on the settee or would be a bit better than two beds than the settee, an extra bed space for her  mum's house too much for over Christmas, that's not fair she's not  all over the place .
about moving, I  chest some things, she won't be there, I'm not taking it all up there.
No.
She got  I don't fancy that at all, sleeping in the  to her garage  looking my things,
 
It 's all his stuff in the garage, that belongs to  oh
Oh.
exactly, it don't sound very good does it?
No  
Cor, he's low, bloody hell
 

What have you lost?
I can't find the car keys.
Oh we won't go far without them.
Took them back in 
I lock the door  you lock them in?on your knee.
I must of had them on my lap and normally put it straight to the ignition.
And off we'd jolly well go.
Broke my nail  look at that.
Oh dear you  
It looks horrid doesn't it?
I caught it on a  rack in the 
Nasty, nasty, nasty.
It was hanging on so I had to take it off   they are a bloody nuisance them racks you know, dangerous
Are they?
It's a wonder people haven't had serious injuries from them really.
Yeah.
Don't know we get away with it  they want the whole lot bloody scrapping and the new lot  all the rust ones, there's hardly one decent  is there?
No.
Chucked all the duff ones out 
At least, yeah, I should think nine tenths of them would go, very   there's yesterday's winner darling.
Still trotting along .
That's where all my horses go.
I got  ride on a horse, poor horse with me on it 
There's heavier people than me that ride , jump jockeys are nearly as heavy as me that ride.
That's true  true,not that
No, she's
that er she's not 
She's not fat but she's a big lady like me.
She's  same sort of weight as you?
Yeah  yeah, she's a big  lady like me, solid.
Tall isn't she?
Yeah   jockeys are eleven stone aren't they, er jump jockeys  jump jockeys are 
All the weight and that are  aren't they?
Yeah,and going over jumps and god knows what else which one's   quite a way really isn't it?it's quite comfortable eleven, eleven and a half, eleven stone over jumps innit?
Ten stone's 
Is it?
Ten stone is  race, why I 
do they have  weights  do they  jump jockeys,
Some time you get a  to carry ten stone, he's got seven pound  from, so carries nine stone seven 
ten stones about  twelve stone   it certainly is a 
I think I quite enjoy a ride  yeah .
Did you like horses, you don't fancy getting on the back of one?
No.
Oh, thought you would.
you are a large, but
Yes, what I'm saying, yeah whatever cart horse 
Especially this one it does say, it will have to be a bloody great stallion wouldn't it?but er,I think it will be quite enjoyable.
 
Wash the curtains today in the pub  Oh god, I got a frog in me throat.
 

Where you going to park? 
 
 
No,
I can't understand why people who do, who work in town don't use that one really.
Pardon.
I doubt they do as well.
Oh I don't know, cos there's a hell of a lot of people parking, same cars in that multi-storey in there.
Let's have a look then.
can if you want, in the  it's not that far to go around and  use one for the whole day.
Pardon.
I suppose.
Yeah, that gets pretty full weekends but  I don't like that one  every week in The Standard there's always a, you know, this break in, that break in and
When you park your car you've got the  breaking in.
I know, but that one seems worse than anywhere, isn't it, every week you know stolen out of the  car park  car broken into, I mean who's, I can't imagine with all them cars in there that nobody ever seems to see anything.
No.
Or they do, and turn a blind eye.
Quite often that happens late at night, doesn't it, you know
Yeah
after chucking out time.
I think a lot of people are just, you know, I'm not getting involved in them, they might belt me one, walk away, anyway you can't blame them, sad, people can't, people can't say it were you and your boy, you know, leave that, leave that alone or else I'll go and get a policeman, the fear of them
Young
belting them one.
go and get a policeman, time you've gone and got a policeman they're off 
They're gone 
you know, so, there's no
seen so much of it that it, that somebody will see some of it  but then, well maybe there, and he didn't really erm, you know, you get out of it quick.
Turn a blind eye don't they?
Yeah, cos they don't want to get involved and they're frightened of the consequences.
more police statements and probably hours  police stations
Yeah.
that to find out that you shopped them they just as liable to put a brick through your window, or belt you one, or damage your car next time they see it.
Yeah.
So you can't blame people in that respect really.
So it's, if you want to get it done this will be one hell of a big car park won't it?
Yep.
If only 
That's er, quite full dear.
 

No 
I can't make out what they're doing today  it's all parked all fully today.
Oh, get anywhere.
It's Thursday  can you not park next to that
No,
Oh
yeah.
Oh well, is there a reason why I can't park there 
No, there really is erm 
how much room have I left in front   , yeah park the car there  
That lady's gonna come next to us  look as though she's looking to see if it's available 
There's the .
she's getting through all right and that one's getting through all right, yeah she's coming next to us. 
Where's she going?car park there.
She is,
Have to watch way you go around it's a pity gone over there really  
 

I don't know where I'm going, wherever you're going  you're going this way , you see my watch says quarter to twelve   you going on market, I'm going .
turn up 
got you a  darling.
new car park
Mm.
and nice  , no, erm 
It was  
If I buy some carpets  fitting or do I  extra for the fitting?
Well the price you actually see on the er  we don't say free cos it's not 
No, well you know what I mean it's, was I, I didn't know whether you had to pay  
No 
some places you do or whether 
Yeah 
it's all included
It's all included.
I mean if you do buy hessian back carpet the only thing we do charge extra for is two pound fifty on top or two, seventy five, two seventy five for underlay  and that sort of stuff, if you buy foam back it's the price you see  So everyone's on that training scheme now I suppose aren't they?
Marvellous
Yeah
marvellous
shame that 
Drive me nuts, what make you do it, what too old?
Too old they said, but,
Now it's, now it's gone up to twenty four now, was eighteen, now it's twenty four.
Typical, I could of done that.
Yeah  gone on it, I don't know why, I said to our  how many years is it gonna take you to do it?
He's never there to do it.
No, it's proper  actually just er
Is it, oh, that's  
Huh, he's a good, good lad, but he's er  he drinks rather a lot and suffers quite a lot from hangovers, he comes in dries up and goes 
 
home again 
He's got hangover at night er day actually
Oh god
yeah
awful   cos I'm first-aided I usually get, I'm the, the lucky person who hangs his head over a sink and sends him home again 
Quite often  
She's doing very well.
She started before me actually.
Yeah, she's  now 
What you got,
I am getting, I'm moving into a new flat soon and I want a living room, a lounge, a lounge, bedroom, a hall, a bathroom and a kitchen 
Ah, well, now
erm, I, I'm looking
we bill for all that sort of stuff 
Yeah.
Well these, all these sort of ones round here suitable for living rooms and that sort of stuff, erm down the end we've got ones for bathrooms, kitchens, erm  what did you say?
Bedroom
Bedroom, yeah well these 
these 
these ones are 
yeah, but they usually get, well quite a good duty bedroom 
we have got some good heavy ones, heavy 
deciding what colour ceilings I'm having.
Erm, I'm not absolutely certain, I ain't got the keys, I mean we're waiting for the mortgage to  that's just being decided, draw the contracts after the exchange and er all that lark, but it will be a few weeks.
My girlfriend's  trying to sell that.
Yeah I know, I had Maureen on the phone to me last week
Had somebody down and 
Yeah, yeah 
offered them a ridiculous price
the rate  last week and every time she  she has to stay in bed like you know, someone rings up, she says, Maureen says get up because someone coming round to your house.
you can't have, be in bed while there's someone looking in your bedroom.
Well dad said you tell them he said you're ill, stay in bed.
, she's off today isn't she, aren't they going to
Yeah Lorraine's got
going to tribunal 
tribunal 
or something, yeah Maureen said she was going.
She wanted her mum to go with her really, cos Lorraine had 
well it's not very nice is it?
I was gonna try and get a bit of, day off, and see how they got on, don't know.
Oh, well, I'll keep it in mind when I get the lights  then I'll come and pick the colour  see what's on offer 
when you do
I mean I can't go until I get a key 
When you, when you, when you 
and some date and know when I'm gonna be able to do it.
when you do get the keys or whatever, if you come back we can always come round and measure up and
Well that's it.
that's, that's no charge on that 
Yeah.
just come back and pick your carpet, or we can bring some round and show you.
Yeah, they're completely empty so they might 
Yeah  
I want the carpets putting in before we get anything else in.
Yeah, right.
, make a start.
bathroom carpets we always do  it's the warm back
Yeah
cos they seemed to  we can go low, low or high, high
yeah, aha, it will be sort of medium I think
Medium, yeah  we've got all sorts.
I say, I've got a lounge, bedroom, the hall, and the bathroom  and I've got about seven hundred pounds and that's about it, so erm
We'll squeeze you in.
Right, I'll be back
Okay
thank you.
bye
It looks like a little bit longer than we first 
Oh 
great rush to get in ain't we
No 
what we're, what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna transfer the  this afternoon, okay, so what money you  full address of the account 
Won't be long 
I'll leave you to it.
Yeah, alright.
Have you any questions you got at all, or you're not sure?
I don't think so , no thank you very much 
 

 

Probably, don't tell the tax office what you earn anyway, I 
Yes, I mean, somebody's gonna, can I, can I just take say, two, three, and I'll just photostat them and I'll  
What I've , what I've brought, and I've brought three
Yeah, that's fine
one I've brought that basically
yeah, okay, yeah
that's all of an average week
yes 
we can expect most  
yeah, right, okay 
so it  throughout the year
yeah
that's sort of a rough average, but that's er a better, you know a more, that's 
so, I mean, yeah 
that's when the season's in
yeah okay, I'll just do that 
see,obviously we, we do more overtime 
I can't think, what else have you brought?
I've brought everything that you've told me to
Yeah 
and more
just in case 
He just brought his  things.
Erm,arrange your sort code and post with national insurance number, tax references and pay slips  that's  
That's what I was told to bring and that's what I have brought.
Yeah, I'm, I've got another form, I can just take note of any other er personal pension, not personal pension, any erm other insurance you've got, just put it on there and, and that's 
Just in case 
it, it ties it up, yeah 
Alright?
Yeah,oh god I don't understand it  me, but erm 
Is that alright?
Assuming, assuming that's thirteen per cent  
pension at the moment
See you can always increase sir  .
So you've contracted out of serps?
Yes,
So if I can just put a tick there
erm, yeah 
I'll put you down anyway, okay.
 

There you go, I think with everything you, you, you can't get too many details can you?
I mean, it's all relevant to somebody 
Er, do you want my membership number?
Yes, okay.
 

That's with Prudential  When did that start? when have you , you see, there's two parts to it
Yeah,
contracted out of serps and there's also a, a frozen loan
a frozen pension also comes  into it.
So when, when do, the one, the one that you just give me, the 
Yeah
what does, what was the start of that?, the commencement, benefit commencement date, sixth of April nineteen eighty eight, that was the contracting out 
Yeah, that was the old
yes, twelve hundred, mention the benefit drawn from DSS  and then your transfer
transfer which says you've got a number, a reference number there
It's all the same.
it's all the same 
Yeah.
so the scheme, there's a scheme number as well, I don't want that  yes, that's one, and that started on the first of August nineteen ninety  good that's fine, yeah, so the information's there 
so that, that's the contracting 
And you don't think we'd need anything 
you don't actually have a  
Fine, can you bear with me for five seconds while I'll just make a phone call?
Mm, mm.
Just to make sure that everything's done  
Now, they've done all the paperwork for the 
Yeah.
okay, the two  filled in, one would be pensionable, one would be  insurance, okay, what other in , piece of paper do I need?
Yes, erm,
It's just the application
Alright then, thanks very much, bye, bye.
Oh you need the mortgage 
okay 
They must be used to that, or got out of practice.
Yeah.
Yeah, cos he must of dealt with blooming  all the sign here, I remember signing, he signed, I signed, he signed, witnessed it and witnessed yours, remember?, he must be quite used to it  
Mm, yeah.
 

Hello there, how are you?
We're erm,
Yeah.
and then she was getting 
Okay, yeah, lovely, bye.
bye.
 

You weren't actually on, on this, I think he needs two illustrations   that's right yeah, so, don't, don't 
According to them we've done it alright 
Yes, well, I know the problems.
Yes, everyone passes the buck and  
Yeah, they do .
I've given you two, two administrations haven't I?
Yes
Last one and this one  and that's what we want, two administrations, that form er 
Okay, well, by the way  
The worse thing is having to come back in
Right.
to sort out, to sign a bloody great  
Yeah, and it's all held up 
Yeah, I know 
for one bit of paper  .
spend five minutes now, than you'll have to sort of come in again.
Mm, mm.
Right, when you're actually doing the busy outside, not from an office, when you're sort of going out and see people, it's always the one that's, the furthest away.
I used to work for a furniture  and I always had the  King's Lynn I think was always easier
from Newmarket , it never was King's Lynn ever.
Just for one, for one signature you had to drive twenty miles
Absolutely
ten miles there, ten miles back
yes, that's right
to sign this form in it 
Hello there,please, thanks a lot, bye 
The, the, the, the, the number that you've just quoted me is  yes,
oh yes, I, I need a  that has to be signed for the people in er Norwich, okay, yes, so, you want a F P, F P  and 
Its a  you need  two illustrations and a , that's a , yeah, well, now I'm not actually   no, well I won't , so .
I did receive your new forms yesterday which were the  for the illustration, they're, they're gonna be  but you're not gonna have to send er, erm 
They're in duplicate now, so I mean that's better 
Okay, so that's it, so you go one, two, three, four, five pieces of paper 
Right at the back of there, what's that?
That's fine, yep.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, and I'll, I'll get that  I'm gonna go over to Peterborough this afternoon, I'll drop it all in, they'll send it to Norwich and I'll get it off to you  okay, great, thanks very much.
hang on a second, when do you actually wanna a,when are you actually moving into the house 
We want it done as soon as possible to 
as soon as possible   yes, right, so I'm
Right, with that sorted out  okay 
I'm, I'm, part of this er  is, is his name and address, I presume that you will, you will contact  , yeah, well we, we, we  want to do  so I mean, what, what do I have to do?
Shall I, do you put a lot of stick on the  saying   it's not  so, do you know the  in a position to exchange contracts.
No.
No.
So I mean.
We're in a position to exchange contracts at any time, but the solicitor, it's up to the solicitor
Yes  okay, so as soon as he, he comes for confirmation, then we'll exchange .
I'll put, I'll put that one anyway, cos it sounds like  okay?
Right.
Thanks very much for your help, okay, bye.
That's okay, she's also given me the right words to use to put it through urgently, okay, cos I mean you, I know you haven't exchanged yet, but you want to do that fairly quickly.
What is that, that'll be with the solicitor when he's, when he's gone through everything I  
Okay, well that , that, that can go on risk on a phone call
Mm, mm.
okay, so if I mean if you come to me and see and say we wanna exchange on tomorrow 
Yeah , yeah.
and er, erm, that's, that's already got, you know, so if I put that in today
Mm, mm.
Mm, mm.
is what Thursday, Thursday, yeah, at the worse that will get there Monday okay, they'll try and put it on risk for, or get something moving on that 
Mm, mm 
as soon as possible, if you give them to me some time next week say Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and we can say right, I want it Friday or Monday, okay, I've just got to phone them and they will, they will put it on risk for you
Mm, mm.
it usually, it only takes a day  once they've received it, if that's alright?
Yeah.
Fine.
We'll try and get it legal before 
But we done, what actually, what actually happens now, I mean what, I mean my mortgage, what 
We just  
what is that, what happens to that thirty thousand pounds, that I've now applied for?
Does that go to the solicitors or 
to my solicitors or where does that go to now?
What, what, do I just have to sit and wait until it all gets accepted and they sit on it or
No, it's a, it's a, it's a hundred percent mortgage isn't it?
Yeah.
Okay, so, we tie that up with the solicitor so, so it's 
On a, yeah 
so the solicitor has to be er, he acts for you, he doesn't act for anybody else
Oh I see.
and he protects you, and he says that's okay to go ahead, so once we've er established when you want to exchange contracts and everything
Yeah.
it's just a matter of him sort of saying that's perfectly okay, I mean, you can get a copy of that or phone call from them, well, if he's, if he's not happy with anything, they, they're quite willing to contact him direct
Mm, mm.
okay, now, er, as long as the standing order's kicking okay, there's not a problem, you have not got to worry now, erm, all it is, is, it just falls into like 
 
the payments come out, twenty five years, one pays out the other, end of story.
Mm.
The one, when, when, when, when does the mortgage payment actually come out?
The actual two hundred and whatever it was  
Er 
Seventh of January if we've got it 
Onc , once you know the date of exchange of contracts
Yeah
okay, it's the nearest to the fifth, the fifteenth or the thirtieth
Oh I see
so if you do it say, if, if it was exchange contracts today
yeah
you could, the, the next payment is due on the fifteenth.
Oh I see 
But if you exchange contracts on the fif , the fifteenth 
so we start paying for the mortgage when the contracts are exchanged?
Absolutely
Oh I see
yes
yeah
till then, it's everything's in the air, okay?
Ok, right-y-oh
But if you've got any more questions, I mean don't hesitate to come back, because at the end of the day I'd rather you know too much than not enough
not enough, that's it 
well I mean if you've been in, you sat the opposite way
Yeah, yeah .
you know what it's, I mean it only costs me, five minutes on the phone and I've got the information for you, but if you've got a sleepless night, that's not worth it.
No.
One small 
Still that doesn't matter if, because if I put 
yes because,
in case it makes a difference to your
hang on, I have got the figures here 
Erm, twelve ninety, twelve ninety four, erm I, I don't think 
you're absolutely spot on, cos you had them on the other one didn't you?
So I've altered that to twelve ninety four and there's a twenty eight,
So have I
that is an eight  O, one, okay
What number?
and in fact you 
smoker, it's on your medical thing 
When, when we got access to the medical thing
it said non smoker
It said cigarettes,do I smoke cigarettes and I said no,
which is honest
which, which is  
yes, yeah  
so make it out cheaper
they'll make them out cheaper 
a little bit cheaper 
absolutely, yeah
Fair enough, as long as though we  honest 
Well I think you know, you, you, you, it was an honest answer to, to both questions, cos they didn't say do you smoke a pipe, that you smoke you know or whatever or just said cigarettes.
Don't smoke cigarettes and I thought no  when it comes back it may work out much cheaper.
Yeah, that's right.
Right, okay, thanks very much
Okay see you again 
Bye now 
Bye  
Yeah.
Not good is it?
No.
I mean this is a bitch.
I'm not the best to s pick it up on the stitches and  
No I'm not either.
I'm not either.
Well how's things?
hard.
Oh fine.
Are you now a house owner?
Well  subject to him getting the mortgage.
He's signed er for everything and seen the solicitor.
We've just got to see if the
Yeah.
There's a letter for him there.
Yeah I see .
We brought our own dinner.
Have you?
What have you got?
We've brought some fish and chips.
You didn't want any did you cos you're going to Vera's?
No no I'm going to Vera's.
That's alright.
That's what we thought otherwise we'd have brought some.
No no.
Did you hear that pussycat?
Fish and chips.
Fishy chippy.
Do you wanna set up table or do you want, or?
Not unless you want to sit at the table do you?
It's up to you.
I don't mind.
Wherever you want to sit.
So that's it then is it?
Yeah we've just got now wait for solicitors  an an and the mortgage .
Have you got in touch with a solicitor?
Yeah he's been to see him.
Oh he's been to see him already?
Yeah.
Ooh.
So that's all arranged and now it's just waiting for everything to
Yeah and how do you think, how long do you think they're gonna take?
How long do you 
Well the mortgage people have said a couple of days
Ooh well.
then we'll know whether he's got it or not.
I mean all the papers won't be through but they can tell us whether it's
Yeah?
alright.
And then you can exchange contracts  solicitor.
But he said he's got a lot of things to go through before he
Yes a  a week.
he can advise us so
You might have it in a week.
Mm maybe next week you'll be
We can exchange contracts probably next week some time.
Well when you exchange contra that's it.
Because you don't have to wait for anybody getting out.
You know it's not like 
No, that's it.
like
You  need to 
Eh?
partake?
Fine thank you.
 
You want a cup of tea?
Yeah I'm gonna put the kettle on  
Yeah alright.
Yeah make us a cup of coffee Stuart.
Well  we'll probably have our dinner first then I'll probably do it.
Oh alright.
That's a  beau Help y , do what you like.
So, it's all up to the solicitors really er their solicitors and and Stuart's solicitors they will  get everything s sorted out.
Yeah.
The legal details.
Yeah.
Yeah that's it then.
Mm.
Getting exciting now.
And once we've  exchanged contracts then we can have this solicitor's letter for this fifteen hundred pound to go ahead and all this that and the other.
That's right.
So we can  start  deciding what we're having and where.
It's funny you know, we went to 
Well you sh when you j er er j er you, you think your contract, you should get the key Ann.
Just about.
You will, it won't be, take long
No.
after that if you
No 
I mean the contract's the  
They're trying their best to get it done before christmas, so
Ooh.
shouldn't be that long.
Did you tell them that you've got a  you're now living, you know?
What are you gonna do 
Yeah  
about that?
That's what you've got to make up your mind about.
When you moving out?
Well he's got to ring Mr  and see if he  if he really pushes for a month's notice well we'll have to just pay another month and stay you know?
Yeah.
And if if he doesn't, if he says that's fair enough, well we're erm  there's no point in paying another one when that money can go towards something else can't it?
He's had to pay forty pound this morning.
Still have to have a search.
Isn't it 
 
ridiculous.
Even though it's a brand new house and they're not gonna pull it down tomorrow to build a bloody  factory on top of it.
Yeah I know Ann but see it could be a er a jerry-built.
He's had to pay he's got to pay forty pound this morning for a search.
Yeah.
Solicitors.
Yeah.
You see it could be jerry-built.
What are you doing?
We'll sit here.
It's alright.
Sit here.
It's no problem.
What do you want?
Do you want 
You can get her, get her get her 
I just want a piece of fish.
Salt?
Vinegar?
No.
Mustard?
Just, just put a bit of salt on it for me.
Bit of salt?
Yeah.
Sure?
Yeah.
You could get er, it could be a jerry-built.
No he has to pay, it's forty pound for this search.
He said there won't 
Yeah I know.
be no problems as far as he knows.
He's already dealt with the company so
Yeah.
That's what I'm saying but  aye oh well they Ann they have you 
They have to do it.
by the short and curlies.
They have to do it.
Yeah.
You you
To make sure it's not gonna have a motorway going through in next year or whatever and
I know but as I said  they have you by the short and curlies.
Yeah.
You just have to
You have to just sit  yeah 
Yes, say yes and  and get your chequebook out.
pay up .
It's true isn't it?
He paid that forty pound anyway, that's
Yeah, yeah.
made a start.
Yeah.
Yeah you you you er  oh they are er you have to .
But at least there's no stamp duty because it's less than thirty three thousand.
Yeah, yeah you're
And that's quite a bit of saving cos 
Thirty three thousand?
Is that
It's thirty three thousand under 
You have to pay stamp duty for  
Anything over that.
Oh I thought it was more than that.
I thought it
No.
erm I thought the limit 
Thirty three now.
Ooh god.
No I thought the the limit was higher than that.
I thought it was about fifty thousand.
Oh no it's it's
I know a lot of people used to 
thirty 
used to  
thirty two thousand five hundred.
Yeah.
Anything under that you don't pay.
A lot of people d used to ask  the pri make the price of the house just under the stamp duty.
Yeah so they could so they could, didn't have to pay it.
So they didn't have to pay it.
I mean what is stamp duty?
It's ridiculous really isn't it?
Oh god that's government.
That's it.
Why should they have a cut of it?
That's the government.
Oh well  you
You buy a house and have to pay the government for the pleasure.
You have Ann.
You have to pay for everything.
You used to have to pay for the stamps, you know there used to be a stamp  
Had a stamp on it, yeah.
Do you remember the little stamp?
Yeah.
You used to buy the  I don't know whether they do that or not now.
I don't know whether they do that.
I know it's quite, the stamp duty can come to a lot of money can't it?
Yeah.
And mine did.
Yeah.
I read that
Yeah, you had it out the other day.
It's a lot of money.
I didn't think it would be that.
Well the solicitor just took that off the price of the house.
Well that's it, they just they just see to it all.
You don't know how many, how much 
Yeah but see they can't do that with you cos you're not selling a house.
No.
You're just buying a house.
Mm.
You know, so  ooh they're crafty aren't they?
Never mind, not to worry.
Not to worry, all these things come to try you.
Yeah.
We signed all the forms anyway so that's something.
But with his being tied up with a pension he gets twelve thousand pension as well.
Oh, that's alright.
But then if he if he ever needs 
Once he retires.
Yeah but what happens if he snuffs it?
Is that house paid for Ann?
Oh yeah.
Oh that's alright.
That's covered.
It will be yours.
Yeah that's alright.
Mine?
 
Ooh ?
Yeah.
You're his next of kin and you're the one on the paper.
He had to put your name down on it.
Did he?
As you're next er his next of kin and you will   the property will become yours.
You'll have to 
Is that alright?
You'll have to make a will now then.
If you don't want all the  chips don't bother 
Oh I don't want as that, I didn't want as that.
I said a couple.
Well that is a couple.
I say  he'll have to make a will now.
So that you'll be the beneficiary.
Don't matter does it?
No, but you should do.
Aye it does matter!
Does matter.
I say I can't see you saying right  he's died tom today, out tomorrow can you?
I didn't think I'd get anything anyway.
You're his next of kin you see.
Am I?
Mm.
How about his father?
Yeah, how about his father?
he didn't mention it.
Your name's on it now.
Yeah but his father's his next of kin just as much as I am Ann.
put that out, I'll put that out  cos you'll not get any peace.
You won't get any peace Ann.
I'll put that out.
Well your name's on it so that's it.
Yeah but I was just saying, when you think about it.
See, there's all these complications.
If anything happens to me.
Yeah but if you're the named person.
Yeah.
I don't know whether his father is   probably is isn't he?
Mhm.
See if you think about that don't you?
It's the same with anything to me, if I leave this house to Sheila and Bruce  if anything happened to Sheila Bruce would get it.
You know.
Sh Sheila's dad.
Shouldn't, he should really but I don't really want that to happen .
And that's the law isn't it?
Shouldn't say that, should I?
I know.
When my mother met, we were met you know  when we got married the solicitor had us in because he wanted us to make a will because see  we didn't take the money that we got from mum.
But if anything had happened to me  any of her husbands could.
Is that alright dear?
Lovely thank you.
Yeah.
And me mum used to live off the interest on what, you know dad  cos he didn't leave a will.
But when we got married see that complicated things because  if anything had happened to me 
Your husband would have been entitled to it.
yo my husband was entitled to it.
That's it.
Well there you are.
Yeah, all sorts of funny things can happen, isn't there?
When you think about it.
Kettle is boiling if you want a
Pardon?
The kettle  
I'll make it in a minute.
No no no no.
I'll wait until you've had your tea.
It's alright   I've had my hair done.
Yeah it looks nice.
So I see.
Yeah, she only charged me two fifty today.
It's nice.
Mind your fish darling.
I know.
She's already had a little bit.
Yeah, I'm gonna  I I'm gonna let her put her out Stuart because you gotta get any peace when you're eating.
I'm just wait till I finish this  few stitches  then I'm ready 
You don't want me any other time, do you?
Eh?
She's been in a funny mood this morning.
She's been jumping about and going all  larming And I don't know why  no reason.
She's been hiding behind that chair and 
mm jumping about.
It must be spring coming  or something.
How do you feel now, any better?
Mm.
A bit better.
I went out for a walk yesterday.
Well I went along to get my .
It was shut weren't it!
I didn't realise what 
Oh Wednesday!
Course.
Yeah, I forgot all about that but it didn't matter anyway.
I'll let her out  I'll put her out.
alright.
No she's not.
She's alright mother.
She's al mum  leave her.
I'll give her some, leave her there.
Well sit there then.
You can annoy him.
Well she is annoying.
I've had it.
You sit and you try and eat your tea and you can't.
She nearly has it off your plate.
When Bruce and Sheila were here the other night we had  fish  she was on the table.
She was sitting on the chair with her head 
 
Oh.
I mean that's not right.
I don't agree with that myself.
Here you are Ann.
Look at this.
Lovely.
It it's taking  taking shape.
I've I've just  look I've just got the neck now to do.
Which I'm doing.
Hope I've got it right.
You could wear this inside out you know.
It looks just as good as the other way doesn't it?
Yeah.
Just as good the other way.
Yeah.
Now I haven't got any knitting.
Oh gawd.
 
Puss!
Come here.
Behave yourself or a smack on the bum.
What time you going down to Vera's?
Some time this afternoon?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Be nice.
Had Freda on the phone this morning but I told her that I wouldn't  doing the .
Not not this week.
Not  tonight anyway.
And I've been in next door.
Well  
Ooh.
Somebody left some coffee, you know that man comes with the coffee Stuart?
Mhm.
He, they left the er they'd gone  said leave it in the conservatory, then he went out and and and and er  shut  his conservatory so they couldn't leave it  so they asked me to keep it for him.
Ann, don't let her do it.
She's a bugger isn't she?
Ah  .
we we we've started.
What?
All the house and the, it's all  all in motion.
What was the letter then?
I don't know.
He hasn't opened it yet.
You'd better open it.
It's obviously from the so solicitor or something.
I didn't know whether you needed it before   when you went up there today.
Yeah you'll be alright now.
And he's applied for his job so.
Has he?
Ooh.
New house new job.
keeps saying to me new house new job new baby.
Baby that's right.
No, not possible.
That's right.
That's what happened with me Ann.
Oh.
When we bought Devon Road.
I wasn't in there long until I was pregnant with Sheila.
Mm.
Yeah 
I forgot to do my football pools.
You know I am going funny.
I put the dustbin bag out on the Wednesday and it and and and  it should have been Thursday and  .
And when he came I said what are you doing here?this is Wednesday.
I'm in a right muddle.
Better not look at your numbers then.
No.
He would have stayed and while I did it but .
Right what's, what do you want?
Taking your fish now.
Mm?
You'd think she was starving wouldn't you?
 
Oh I know she is cos she told me you don't feed her properly.
Oh lie lie!
They got in touch with the solicitor for you then Stuart?
They've done all that.
Yeah.
Have they?
We just had to go up and see him and 
What, the solicitor?
Yeah he's been to solicitor as well.
Oh you've been to solicitors this morning?
Who's your solicitor then?
Pat .
Who?
Pat .
Oh aye.
Doesn't Derek  work for him?
Yeah .
He's still there is he?
Mhm.
Did you see him?
Mhm.
Did you?
How is he?
Alright.
Yeah, he used to work for .
He still does.
Does he really?
Oh god.
Is he getting old looking?
I bet he is.
He 
Not really.
Eh?
Not really.
Isn't he?
Has he got a, still got a beard?
Oh yeah.
Has he?
Mm.
You're gonna have to see Stuey now cos Ann's eaten her fish and he's got .
Go on  cat.
It was a lovely bit of fish.
I never had one bone in it, have you?
Where did you get it??
Yeah.
Up the road here?
Mm.
Yeah.
We don't have it very often.
I suppose you appreciate it more when you 
Yeah.
We cook it as I say I mean but I don't often go up the chip shop.
Well how, how much was that?
If you don't mind me asking.
Your fish and chips.
What, altogether?
Yeah.
 
Eh?
Three quid.
Well, Sheila brought some fish round here on Tuesday.
Admittedly .
And it was four pounds.
Mm I know.
The fish!
I know.
On its own!
Well the last time I bought some then it was three pound something for me and you.
Yeah.
I mean I give Bruce the biggest bit you know  
Admittedly you get more don't you, for four pounds.
Oh admittedly.
But it was four pou it's three pound something a pound Ann.
Yeah.
That's what I paid.
Cod.
Just cod.
I just had just over a pound
Yeah,isn't that dear?
of fish and it, it was three pound something.
Isn't that dear?
Mm.
I mean admittedly you don't get that much fish in there do you?
No, cos there's a lot of batter 
There's a lot of batter.
round it.
Mm.
But that's what it cost, the fish itself, four pound.
I know.
It is expensive.
Yeah.
It used to be a cheap meal Ann.
You see we moan about paying  three pound a pound for meat but you pay it for fish.
Yeah.
It's no different really is it?
Yeah.
Yeah but I mean fish we we used to consider fish
Oh it was cheap.
as a cheap meal weren't it?
Yeah.
No wonder people don't buy it and now, you know I mean the fish sales have gone down.
No wonder.
meat's cheaper.
Mm.
I mean that was cod.
What did we have last time?
That wasn't nothing special.
Just cod, ordinary cod.
Whether we had haddock or something, didn't we?
Yeah.
Or plaice, was it?
Well it it's not that much dearer now than the
Plaice I think we had didn't we?
Something like that I know 
Salmon's a bit salmon is
Trout's the cheapest and
Yeah.
That's what I'm saying 
That that's ever so cheap, trout isn't it?
You could get a nice 
It's only two pounds a
That's right.
You could get a nice pound of trout for
Mm.
two bits of trout for  might as well get  trout.
Mm.
Don't forget you're gonna get a lot of  if you have a whole trout you've got skin and 
Oh yeah, but not that much.
Not that much.
You can eat the skin anyway.
That's it.
I like the skin.
Mm I do.
Only the head and the tail and the  innards
Yeah.
and then the rest's all edible.
Yeah.
Do you want erm  an apple crumble?
Do you want Ann to go and whip you up an apple crumble?
Not today.
There's a bit of cake there.
Bruce didn't have any cake.
Is he alright?
Yeah.
Or is he a bit, still a bit 
Oh I don't know.
Oh.
I didn't ask.
Try not to talk  about it .
Well he doesn't talk about it.
I'm waiting for him.
I told Sheila that.
That was, that was li like that day wasn't it?
When we were, that Sunday when we all sat here waiting for somebody to say something.
Well
Everyone waited for Stuart to start and he wouldn't .
That's right.
He wouldn't, he wouldn't start the conversation off.
said to him, say something.
No, let them say something and nobody said anything at all.
We, they went in the end.
some tea Ann?
There's some skimmed milk there.
Semi-skimmed I should say.
Are you gonna get something for  Sunday Stuart?
Yo you know, your  It's for the  the gannets.
I'll sort out the food.
?
Well I don't know.
What do you, what are you gonna get?
It's up to you, pork?
Pork would be alright.
Cheapest isn't it?
Mm.
big bit of pork, what do you, what have we had lately?
Don't want chicken.
Pork or beef.
Whatever you like.
How about that?
Mm?
And some veg.
If you don't come here first that's what I'm say I'm saying.
Cos you might not come here first might you?
There you are.
There you are.
Did you hear that?
 

Is that a weakish tea?
Thank you dear.
I've got this organized now, I'm alright.
Look, see?
Oh yeah, that's nice.
Be alright won't it?
Do you think it will?
Yeah it's a nice jumper.
It's
Big.
Big isn't it?
It is quite big, but then 
Too big for him Ann?
Well, it don't matter does it?
I'd rather have it too big than than
skimpy on him.
be lovely and warm.
Oh it will be warm.
You ain't kidding.
Mm 
Eh?
Lovely and warm won't it?
Yeah.
She begrudges you every little bit of that.
It's mine.
She does, doesn't she?
Her head goes up and down every time you put a forkful in.
Yes.
I get fed up with her at tea time at night.
Cos she, and then she gets f , she get's cross.
I give her a clump, you know.
And she starts to miaow eeeeeeeh.
Little monkey she is.
 

You know last night it was funny  I watched the  telly.
I don't know what time it was.
Thanks Ann.
It was about eleven o'clock, you know?
Time for bed.
Thought  well I had this fire on  so, I gets up to go through and make myself a l you know a drink before going to bed  and I put my 'jamas on and dressing gown.
And  she was on the beanbag.
When I get up, go through to get, when I get back 
On your chair already .
Thought you'd gone.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She she she mistimed it last night.
All gone puss, look.
She she mistimed it last night Ann.
She thought I had gone.
Gone.
But I hadn't.
But she was on this chair so when I came back cos she, I sat over there.
She looked at me.
What you doing sitting over there?
So that's 
Time you time you were in bed.
So that, yeah.
So that's where she spends the night.
Sitting up  she couldn't wait to get er, you know 
Ooh.
I was getting a bit late so  she she couldn't wait.
Mhm.
Aren't you crafty isn't she?
Take your knife darling 
Yeah it's clean and I've got dirty fingers.
Is it?
Ah.
I'm sorry.
Er  Have you had enough now?
Yeah, lovely.
I should have made you something really shouldn't I?
No.
Oh it won't hurt him for once.
You don't often have it do you?
Very, very rare.
Yeah.
We don't have many chips at all really.
We used to have it, when was it?
Used to be, I think it was a Friday night sometimes it  it erm, you know?
Get er 
I'm not a great one for chips and and fish  
No.
I mean I like, if I do fish usually I, I do it myself.
Yeah well I do.
I like it, it's best isn't it?
Yeah.
I like fish.
No I do.
I like to do it, there's very few fish that I don't like.
I love fish.
And the only trouble is the only trouble is with the fish you get up there, you don't get enough of it.
No.
It's all batter.
It's all batter.
Which annoys me.
You know?
I, I mean when you buy fish 
And it's not cheap.
No.
It's not a cheap meal.
I mean you can make a  a proper meal for what you 
Yeah.
pay for fish and chips really.
That's right.
Yeah.
Mm.
You can get a decent bit of fish can't you?
Occasionally it's just handy isn't it?
Well yeah.
It's gone  gone twelve o'clock.
By the time we got here and started cooking something it would be  rushing to get it eaten so.
Yeah.
Go on then.
In you go.
Do you think you'll be working weekend?
I doubt it.
Not the way things are 
You doubt it?
at the moment.
Oh.
It's so quiet.
Is it?
Oh dear.
Done half of tom half of today's work last night.
Eh?
We did some of today's 
Half of today's work last night.
You haven't have you?
Oh you're not gonna be laid off are you?
Oh god that'd be terrible.
And you've just bought a house.
Never never known  ever to be laid off in five years.
No, I think it's just  I think they plan well according er to John  yesterday they planned it this way.
They planned it this way?
How  
And it was quiet and it it's quiet.
The they haven't taken the orders for this  week and so they can  next week it will get busier.
So that we're all caught up ready for the  christmas rush.
That's what he said.
Oh I see.
They didn't plan a big order book these few weeks before christmas so that everything could get caught up and we're all
You're all ready.
all straight ready for er
Yeah I see.
extra orders the week before christmas.
Yeah I see.
Cos I said to him I've never known it as slack as this  in, in the few weeks before christmas.
He said oh this year it was planned like that.
They've done this deliberately so that you can 
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well that's alright then.
Cos other years we've been  two days behind with orders you know and 
Have you?
rushing about and everybody working all hours god sends and
Yeah, yeah.
and he said it was planned for this lull beforehand.
Oh well, that's alright then.
See what more money they want out of him he'll scream.
Or cry.
Is he, is he getting 
I don't know.
upset already?
You'll have to get used to signing your n n name on ch 
      

Oh shut up.
That's an interesting conversation.
Isn't it?
Mouthful of biscuit.
You're having biscuits is he?
How about Ann?
You haven't offered her one.
He knows I wouldn't have one.
There you ares, that's it.
I'm all ready just to do a few more  look Ann.
Just a, just a dear Mr  thank you very much for
That's the wool I've got left.
That's all.
Good heavens.
And you said you didn't have, you had loads of wool left .
Surprising isn't it?
That, that and then that bit there.
That's all the wool I've got.
That's only just gonna do it isn't it?
Yeah.
That's what I thought, I thought oh my god.
Oh, is there gonna be enough ?
And I thought yeah.
just about, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
I mean I, oh
By the time you
Oh yeah I've had 
do the neck and cast off.
Yeah.
There's only just gonna be enough.
Yeah.
Just to say we've er 
So that's worked out very well.
You  you didn't, you bought one less didn't you?
Mm.
What's that ?
Oh you're not telling us.
Not telling us.
I told you!
I read it to you.
You didn't!
He's a cheeky 
It said what?
Give it to Ann.
It's private so 
You let Ann read it.
It's just bumph  basically.
Just saying you have put   
Put in an offer for this house.
You've agreed to buy this place.
Your  this is something something something
Yeah well you keep that Ann.
We hope 
Keep all these bits of paper because you're really, I mean
We hope it goes satisfactorily
You want, you want a file.
Have you got one of these file things?
No, we could do with one to keep everything together cos contracts and that you have 
Do you want one?
keep safe and solicitor's letters and that.
Do you want one?
There might be one in the desk or out in the, in the  there used to be .
Let us see now if there's something you could keep them in.
You don't want a ring-pull, ring one, you know.
You  where are you then?
Are you there, you being good boys?
So it's now sold subject to contract?
That's what it'll have on it.
Nobody else can have a look at it now.
No, that's what they put on them now.
Nobody else can have a look.
Can't they?
I thought there was still time to have a look at it just in case it falls through.
I don't think that, they can't put a better offer in can they?
When it's sold subject to contract.
Well I dunno, but I mean
They can't gazump you at the last minute  cos it makes 
But I mean if that goes if that goes through  if that falls through  somebody might be interested and  and somebody might erm  I dunno.
Like you say, probably  they put subject to contract on and
Here you are I got it Ann.
Have that.
I've I've gotta find 
that's usually what they write on them isn't it?
Sold subject to contract don't they?
Here you are  It erm  you can have that.
I'll, I'll probably find 
Yeah.
Well that will keep everything together.
you a better one but  Sunday.
No that's fine.
Mm cos you've got to keep all the bits and pieces together.
Yes you do.
You do  
It just says thank you for your  you have applied to par apply for this house  subject to contract and that's it.
You're subject to contract now then?
Yeah.
Like I say that's what they will put on the  thing isn't it?
Sold subject to contract.
Contract yeah.
It's a matter of, what  what are you waiting for now?
To see if you've got the mortgage?
No.
You've got it?
You've got the mortgage?
As far as I know.
You have.
You don't need a 
Well he said a telephone call will just  will tell him that won't he?
Oh.
If you come in Monday the tel 
You don't, you don't 
a telephone call will tell you whether you've  the papers won't be drawn up but they will be able to tell him on  through the phone whether  it's okay.
You don't need to have a medical?
No.
Doubt it.
I think , he had to give his doctors  how long and what illnesses 
Yeah but I just wondered he might need a medical.
Dunno.
Doubt it.
You doubt it?
Don't see any reason why I should not that  they've had nothing wrong 
He's had no illnesses or  
I've had nothing wrong with me.
I don't suffer from anything.
I know, I know but that's not the point.
You know, they you the you might have to get in touch with.
Well we give his name didn't we?
I mean really anybody can say anything if you don't, if they don't look into it.
No that's 
I could say I've never had an illness in me life and whatever can't I?
Anybody could s 
That's right.
Yes I think they'd have to do, they will do.
Cos otherwise you could say anything couldn't you?
Yeah, course you can.
Course you can.
You know I mean anybody could say anything.
I could say no I've never had an illness.
I mean it wouldn't be the truth but you, if they didn't look into it you could say it couldn't you?
That's right.
And no doubt some people who would try that kind of thing isn't there?
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
If they think it spoils their chances.
Although  does your, does your health 
Yeah because this is a pension mortgage you see.
Yes.
Yeah.
You might have to have a medical.
But you don't think
For the pension purpose, for the pension plan a medical is not needed.
That is, doesn't matter.
Oh well.
Oh.
The only thing that I might need a medical for is my thirty thousand pound life insurance.
Oh.
Well, that's what I mean.
I mean it's the same kind of thing isn't it?
That's the, I won't need, if if I just did the pension
You can bump him off now you know, from the fifth of January cos you get thirty thousand quid if you bump him off.
Do we?
You do.
Oh well I won't, if y 
You're his beneficiary.
If you put the glass, yeah I'll  
So once he's paid the first payment by the fifth of  January .
If you, if you do the bumping off  Ann if you do the bumping off 
Ha  we'll share it?
Yeah.
We'll go fifty fifty, how about that?
Yeah.
Alright.
You're you're you're the beneficiary of his er hi hi his f thirty thousand pound.
Yeah, alright.
Fair enough.
You do the bumping off and I'll
We'll go shares we'll have a  
I'll have to  see if I can get some banana skins put on the stairs.
Bahamas.
How about the Baha what do you fancy the best,
You you wouldn't  mother!
No mother!
Bahamas or or  Australia, we could go to Australia.
Yeah, we could go via Bahamas couldn't we?
Mother.
Yeah.
They go that way around.
Mother.
Yeah we'll go  .
Cruise.
Mother  
What ?
Can I just
 
 
can I just intervene here and
Via New York.
You know 
Can I just 
we could stop off at er  at erm
Yeah.
at Hawaii
can I just intervene here just a little bit because
Shut up, we're booking our holiday.
Shut up.
if
if  if I'm bumped off that thirty thousand pounds go off to, goes to pay the mortgage.
Yeah, well then we could sell the flat.
Oh well we'll flog the f flat then.
So we'd still have the money.
Wouldn't we?
Well you'd have to sell the flat then.
Oh well  
Yeah but I mean we'd have a  a flat without any  any mortgage.
It would be completely owned by your mum.
So therefore she could do what she wanted with it.
Yeah but I you you put me down as as as er next of kin  you see  
You can name  he said, who do you wish to name?
Yeah.
And he put your name down.
I mean it doesn't say 
But it has to be your parents.
No, it can be anybody I suppose, couldn't it?
Yeah I suppose it could.
I don't know what
He put your, he he just put your, you down and that was it.
Oh thank you very much.
Oh well, definitely  
So that's it.
Mm.
Bahamas, yes.
Hawaii yes.
Yeah we'll go that way round.
Mm.
To Australia .
Visit to Australia cos we might as well have a long cruise .
What, yeah yeah.
Mm.
Better watch your step next time you drink whisky  
That's what 
few things on the stairs   
that's what er  that's what you used to say er er er er you should never ever be worth more dead than alive.
It's dangerous .
He used to tell me that!
Didn't you?
Yeah
he used to always say that.
You n don't ever get yourself erm  what do you call it?
Worth more  I'm worth more dead than alive.
We all are aren't we?
Most people are if they've got property aren't they?
Eh?
Yeah.
Yeah I'm worth more dead than alive.
Never mind.
Well I hope  I hope  you're gonna be very happy.
And I hope you've done the right 
Yeah, we are  
Here you are.
That's all I I'm hoping 
I hope you 
that Stuart's done the right thing.
It's him that's signed it.
Well why?
Why shouldn't he?
Well 
He's done it with you, you're, he's got  he's got you with him.
Yeah.
Hasn't he?
It's not just him Ann.
Well at least he knows with this  m mortgage and that, he knows what  it's all about.
It's not like one of us going in and not 
Yeah.
understanding and just signing papers.
Yeah.
At least he knows and he
What you're doing.
questions and he, he understands it all.
Yeah.
Which a lot of people would, say they go and sit down there and they say  blah blah blah sign here and 
It's not fair but that is what happens.
It's what happens because you don't understand all the
No.
terms and the things they use.
You don't know what they're on about.
No you don't.
I mean even today he'd made a mistake on that thing and you spotted it where I wouldn't have done.
Oh my god.
He must be
He didn't take tax relief off.
Cos Stuart will get tax relief and he hadn't put that down.
But Stuart noticed it straight away.
I is he much cop, this bloke?
I think  I mean, it's something, a pension mortgage is something that doesn't crop up  every day.
No, not many peo you've got  I don't know why.
They don't know how to cope with it.
I don't know why it doesn't crop up because it's cheaper than an ordinary one, so why it doesn't 
Because they don't want  yeah well you you'd better tell your mates at work that.
Why it doesn't I don't know.
I don't understand that.
And not only does 
Is it cheaper than an ordinary one?
Well it is as mu it's  it's worked out a few pounds cheaper.
It can  it can be yeah.
It can  
But not only that at the end he's also, as well as the house he's getting a pension as well instead of just the house.
Well that's what I mean.
That's what I mean.
You get a pe just an ordinary pension, thing, you know  mortgage.
You don't get a pension at the end of it.
You're gonna get a pension as well.
Well that's it.
Well that's not bad.
Well er I'd never heard of it.
I'd never heard of it.
Not only that you see  alright the mortgage rates might go up but  I mean if you're working your wages are gonna go up Stuart.
Aren't they?
You'll have a pay rise and and you're gonna still be paying s you know?
So as the years go past 
Pay an average amount of your wage, whatever.
As the years go past  I mean if the wages go up as they have done, you know, regularly  your mortgage is gonna gonna gonna be smaller.
Yeah that's that's what happens with people now.
Yeah.
People who are paying seventy eighty pound a month mortgage who've had them for years and then 
Years.
That's right.
And the same thing will happen to you, see.
And then you'll be pleased.
Yeah.
You've started.
I mean I know it's hard to start with.
Isn't it?
It is difficult.
But we've got all that side sorted out haven't we?
It's difficult.
I mean we paid eight qui , eight pound a month 
Er er 
and that was a hell of a lot of money.
Yeah well that's it, if your wages are only eight quid a week  if you're paying a month's wa 
That's right.
one week of your wages out it's 
We were.
I remember that.
Halifax Building Society.
Used to, I used to have to pay it.
has to come out of his bank.
Every month.
It'll just be took automatically 
Yeah well they didn't have them in these days Ann.
out of your bank, won't it?
Direct debit.
 
His money his money will be gone and we'll live on ours, mine.
So I mean it's just  the same whatever isn't it?
That's it.
You can survive.
Oh yeah we'll be alright.
As I say if they took my wages into consideration they would have let us buy next door even.
Yes.
They would.
I mean it would have been a hell of a lot of 
I think  nice as this next door here.
Well it would have been a hell of a lot of money.
How about that one across the way?
Well that's it you see.
But if if I'd have, if we'd have gone joint we'd have had enough 
Wouldn't you, if if if if you had Ann if you had the choice of these two  what would you rather have?
Seat-y belt on Stuart.
better put her seat-y belt on then hadn't she?
In case mister police-y man decides to stop us and say why haven't you put your seat-y belt on Mrs M Mrs woman?
Sorry, sir.
It's your responsibility to ensure that your passengers have got their safety belt on.
Cos that would be nice wouldn't it?
To be fined twelve quid for not having a safety belt on and on top of the ninety quid and the forty quid and one thing and another.
but  show you Pat  's house if you like.
Would you like to see Pat  's house?
Okay.
Show you Pat's house.
If you look to your left coming into the the junction  say I presume, I don't know whether, they may even have moved now.
See that one, oh you see the one where the trees are?
Yeah.
And the front wall  that sort of set back one?
Yeah.
That's Pat  you can see it just there, look
Yeah
oh the one with the  that's Pat  's house.
That's if he still live there as I say.
Should think they've moved by now.
That's where he used to live anyway.
Pat's wife  and daughter are  erm  they call Mrs   and Mrs  .
WI or 
something like that.
Women  it may have been Women's Institute Guild or something or I dunno.
Townwomen's Guild.
Townswomen's Guild, yeah.
Something like that anyway.
It may, she may have been associated with  WI, I dunno.
Used to  
Did he know you?
Pat?
Yeah.
Oh.
In a w I kn I do know of him  I don't know him to
But he, did he know who you were?
Yes.
Oh yeah, I think so.
 

Yeah exactly.
But when I walked in
Or your dad or your
when I walked in I, I said  you know I said Mr  we meet, we meet again I said.
He said ah, Stuart isn't it?
Oh, well.
I said  yes.
Thought oh that  that's fair enough isn't it?
Yes.
Where shall we park today?
We'll back up to the fence today shall we?
If you wish.
.
How's that?
Right, yeah.
Is that near enough?
Yep.
Yep?
Yep that's  
Is there one for Ann or not?
There  is, yes.
very sharp frost tonight.
blooming cold 
Think it's supposed to be going to be a cold  more  tomorrow.
Aha,
Well that's what the weather forecast was.
Was it?
pinched it this morning.
Paul's cast offs.
Yes yeah  
That is for 
That's my bum warmer .
Put this on .
look naked.
Why not?
  

Cause a stir if nothing else wouldn't it?
Cause a stir!
Stood there naked  dishing the overalls out.
Everybody would be going home, feeling sick.
Bloody  feel sick 
 

Alright dear?
I've now got  there's now in the bank, after I've paid me poll tax and paid me
, yeah.
paid me poll tax, paid me s search fee  and  got a little bit of cash out  for  readies and s , there's now at this moment in time, there's four hundred and fifty pound in there.
And there will be another hundred and twenty go in today so that's six hundred and  six hundred and seventy in there at the moment.
So  there's a few hundred in the building society 
 
What do you mean, crossed fingers?
That's what there is and 
It's not gonna come up to any more  than anything .
That's what I was sa , that's what's in there at the moment.
I thought
I'm making you destitute aren't I?
Like me .
I've got three hundred and 
We'll we'll be starving in our garret  together darling .
And a few hundred in the building society.
And I've still got my unit trust thing but I know it's gone down.
I don't want to touch it if  I'll leave and leave it if I can.
It, no, I mean that  was always my plan if ever you need the money 
Okay  alright.
Hallo Mr .
Hallo Stuart.
How are you?
I was alright till I see you.
Cheeky bugger.
I was gonna be nice to you today and all.
Yeah as I say, that unit trust thing I was  I know it's not the safest investment but it never was the  safest  investment.
It was a  at the time it was a  I'd got the money and it was a bit of a speculation.
But unfortunately it's not quite worked out  to plan.
But I mean if 
If it, if if 
I mean even with the market being depressed there's still gonna be eight hundred pounds in there.
So it's
that's mak but that's mak making a loss.
I mean I'd rather leave it if I can until it does 
Yeah  if we absolutely
If we're absolutely desperate then 
We'll have to do it.
Is it hard getting them out?
I don't know, or I can't remember.
Few  few days.
Phone them up  phone them up.
Find out what 
You don't want to make a loss if you don't have to.
find out what the price is and if the price is  you know whatever then you take them out.
Just say right I'll cash, take cash and you  and they will send you a cheque in the post more or less.
But as I say, yeah 
unfortun unfortunately I mean if I'd left it where it was erm would have, it would have been better.
So  say if we have to we have to.
You know, I'd rather wait until  you know till 
Until it's taken out.
till then.
That's right.
Until the market picks up again and 
I mean it's not a good investment is it?
Speculative.
yeah  yeah but the  when I was 
It's alright 
when I was advising 
Well well well that's it.
when I was advising people on unit trust things  it was always the  price of your units may rise and, as well as fall.
Er
I mean there's safer investments.
That's what I meant.
Oh yeah I mean it was 
If you wanted to 
at the time, I mean it  it was 
It didn't matter so much to you.
Didn't matter so much at that particular time.
And the  market looked as though it was gonna be  quite buoyant.
I wish I'd have took them out a long while ago when they were  higher.
Mm invested them somewhere else.
Well yeah, but like you say you don't know do you?
No.
That's one of the things that you don't know about.
Say I don't know what the latest price is on them, but
They're being rude up that end.
Are they?
They're being rude.
No!
And you wouldn't be?
No no.
No as if you would!
Yeah.
Tell Hilary what I said .
Are you alright my darling?
I'm alright.
Okay.
You alright me darling?
Hallo Freda.
Oh it looked like a dice you was chucking in there.
No, me 
Enough room for Julie on the end?
Yeah.
She's only small.
Well
I laughed at Ann last night.
she's, she might be small but her bum's big.
What did you call that erm  Tony?
Oh he's fucking horrible.
He's a pig.
Told him he's a ignorant pig .
I couldn't help it, I was so angry with him.
Ooh
He's taking the piss out of me pulling a rack through.
He wouldn't get out the bloody way.
Laughed his head off and 
He pushed me the other night.
I fucking pushed him back.
I said you're just you're just a ignorant pig.
Shut your bloody 
But he is.
mouth or   .
but I'm glad he didn't come 
And when I walked away I thought, oh fancy saying that but I'd said it, it was too bloody late.
Yeah, bet you felt better I bet.
It was too late, I'd said it.
Yeah.
But he is.
I think he's fucking horrible.
I thought oh Ann you shouldn't say things like that to people but
it just come out and you're a bloody ignorant pig and I'll 
I said 
belt you one if you don't shut your gob.
They don't have hooks and crooks here but they have fucking wife beaters.
I know I shouldn't have said it but soon as it come out me mouth 
I don't like  
I thought
but when it come out me mouth, as soon as I said it I thought  you shouldn't speak to people to people like that but  I'd said it hadn't I?
I'd done it.
Well he  I tell you you thrilled 
It was too late.
It had come out and I'd said  it's what I felt at the minute.
Taking the piss and w he wouldn't get out the bloody way and I'm trying to get through with that rack.
He, he roared out the factory the other night.
That's what it was.
He roared out the factory.
And I told him.
I said your limit is, is five or ten miles an hour.
Like that.
And he didn't like it.
So, when I was at, I always go to the fucking front, I don't care who it is.
Age before beauty I say.
Aye that is nippy .
and the boys always save me a place.
Anyway  he fucking pushed me and I fucking pushed him.
Fucking lucky I never had a knife in me hand weren't it?
Well I could have quite easily hit him last night.
Yeah, now I  
I really could I said to him if you don't shut your bloody gob  I'll belt you one .
I think he's fucking horrible.
He went oh she's getting angry!
He's meant to be good that good he weren't fucking no good last night keeping up with us was he?
What, on trussing?
No well he's  oh on racking?
Well he's never done it before.
Well he  
That's why.
won't he?
Yeah.
I wouldn't help him!
if I can fucking do it.
No and I wouldn't  
I wouldn't.
I'd sooner  
the boys did at the end.
Maxine said  oh he's struggling up there look.
He's got a basket full there's bloody chickens all over.
I said let him bloody get on with it.
I'm not helping him.
No.
I don't like him Ann.
I'm sorry.
I don't.
I admitted I don't like him.
Looks fucking sly when you just 
Yeah.
There's just something about him that you just  ugh.
Mm I really hollered at him.
Mm.
Shut your bloody gob  otherwise I'll shut it .
I said you're an ignorant pig, that's all you are.
You should have heard them all.
Whoa go on Ann, go on!
It's horrible  isn't it?
No, it's horrible when you don't like somebody isn't it?
You can't 
Yeah I know.
can't help it.
You ca I can't hel I'd I  right from the day he walked in I didn't like him.
When he poked, when he poked me in me arm and said 
Some people you do hate   yeah 
.
Going to the bog.
I said to  I said cos he'd they'd been talking about me.
Cos she heard my name mentioned when they was talking
Yeah.
you know .
getting, what do you call it  say you been talking about me  you know.
It's only cos I fucking told him about it the other night.
Yeah.
They're not supposed to charge out this fucking factory.
No.
he roared his fucking back wheels  were hitting the muck up, you know hitting 
Yeah.
the things up so you know  
Gravel and, yeah 
going, yeah.
Yeah.
And I told him.
I said erm there's a time limit I said.
Five or ten mile, if  had fucking  he would have gone, he didn't  Maggie with it.
Do you remember when he come, yeah 
Fuck me he made her get 
Went after her didn't he?
Fucking ran out the office 
He ran out the office to er screech about it when we used to park down here.
Come racing out the bloody office.
Really bawled them out.
He said it's not a bloody dirt track.
Mm.
He said there's a speed limit, and there's people walking round you could kill bloody somebody.
He went barmy to him didn't he?
Mm.
Mm.
Oh I remember that one.
That was Mac's wife.
Her on the night one  
I know it was somebody that he come chasing at, chasing after.
Yeah Mac's wife.
Yeah, what's her name?
She used to be .
I know who you mean.
J erm  Julie.
Julie.
Yeah.
His face was scarlet.
But he came ra racing out the office after her when he heard car go roaring past the office.
Yeah.
Cos the office was there then weren't it?
Yeah, yeah.
 

looks .
Doesn't she?
Mm.
Oh dear.
Count the time  
Well I wonder what delights await us today.
They can't get much mate.
I  
They've done all today's racking.
You did it all last night did you?
Apart from the drums and thighs  
I know.
Well look at it last night  all be done.
The  trussing up was covered, the other place was covered.
Mm.
I mean  people don't want the fucking chicken.
We've had enough.
We want something else for christmas.
Mm.
I mean like old age pensioners, you know they will buy the piece like that but
Mm.
not fucking  
Only be drumsticks now for  for parties won't it Jean?
Yeah.
They don't want much else.
Say I know say I know the order was high for today on drums.
I mean even the drums for us mate.
I'm, and fucking fillet and all.
Yeah done.
Done, put them in  now.
Oh  fucking hands  er hurt.
You know what it is, holding
Yeah gripping them, them drums.
you're holding like that and then I'm cutting there
Yeah.
and here then oh there, then there oh.
Four fucking cuts I do.
Oh I'd better go  
We ain't got Maureen today so we'll have to find somebody in place of her.
Where's Maureen gone?
On holiday.
Is she?
Oh look at that, that's been .
What the hell's  like a  or something
There's something inside  the rib isn't there?
Hi John.
No, I say I'm not sitting here much longer.
I'm shaking here.
Don't you want your overall Jean?
Ann.
Can you remember when we went on our first aid course?
When?
Yeah.
No.
No I can't.
Should think coming up, must be a year now mustn't it?
Yeah I should think it is that.
No I can't remember exactly what month.
I'm going in cos I'm cold.
Under the, just under the  .
What's the time anyway?
I haven't a clue.