

They're not really  are they, the Chinese or  Oriental dancers?
I don't think so anyway, they seem to be 
A lot of cars at the school this morning.
I parked right on the end of the erm  the lane, just 
Mm 
in, there was just enough room for me.
Mm?
Course we were late anyway  well not late for John's but 
Which way do you go 
When I came back 
into ?
Cos you can cut through that  
I turn round and go back, yeah.
Mm.
And of course the coach had come up the hill  couldn't overtake where I was parked, blocking off the entrance to the lane where I'd just come out of so that the string of cars coming down the road and the first one wanting to turn in and of course the coach had covered it.
Oh yeah
It was completely blocked off  coach couldn't go backwards because there was cars behind it.
So I gingerly walked down and crept into the car realized that I was the one that had caused all that 
 
and drove off   
And ignored  
Slinked off into the mist.
So he couldn't back back then 
No  no that wa that was it, completely stalemate.


big Volvo estate was facing  if he'd go down there, I can get through and he can come back again and  he wasn't gonna do that.
Too much  brain damage  
there's a big notice at the end of the lane which says 
Well he'd come up from Totnes this morning.
Oh, yeah.
What they usually do is they go up and then back down by the church
Yeah.
and turn and go back again.
Mm?
 

It is eight o'clock though  
Mm   Perhaps I'll do some gardening.
Did you do away with your  or  just put a plank over the top?
I put  back so  and then I put  against the fence.
Oh Alex  came in today.
Ooh   
 

Yeah
 

Well  he's got  he's got plenty of money, right?
And er the car arrives  I looked  all I could see was mother sitting in the car and puffing this  smoke puffing out through the window
Mm.
and erm  in came  he'd had a  a little tiny switch out of his black and white telly
Oh yeah
and he said it's a  and the switch won't work.
I said how long have you had this set?
He said ooh about six years, I said yeah and the rest.


I said where did you get it from?
He said well  I used to work at  I got it from .
I said how long is it since you retired from ?
Said ooh it'll be erm eighteen years this year.
Yeah.
I said you've bought this since you left ?
Well I was trying to find how old it was.
Mm 
So he said oh no since I left.
I said well I, I'd still reckon it's about ten years old now.
Oh no it's only six years old.
fix the switch on I said you'll never get a new one anyway.
And  oh they were talking about Rod they was  they were saying that, you know, about Rod getting married 
Yeah?
Well I said well how old is Rod?
I dunno he said er Steve how old's Rod?


I said well come on you're his dad, you should know how old he is.
So he went out to the car and asked mother  how old is Rod?
She says I don't know    don't remember having him  mind you I remember having him but I don't know  I can't remember when it was.
He's thirty something.
Hard to put an age on him.
Ray was thirty eight 
Is he as much as that?
Mm.
Well it must be ten years ago when he worked for the B B C and that, he must have been in his late twenties then
Mm.
so  anyway he's  he's engaged and  it's taken him two years to get engaged  so it's gonna take another couple of years to get married.
Yeah.
He's still got the M G and it's got three twen twenty three thousand on it now.
It's 
Mm 
S reg, got it from new of course,.
And some chap came down from the M G B Owners' Club and said he'd offer him six thousand for it.
Mm
But he said he thought that was  price cos he said it's worth at least ten   the mileage originally, you know?
Mm.
it's absolutely like new.
?
Mm?
Where did he get it?
He bought it from brand new somewhere,
 

In Devon, yeah.
Mm.
He's got a Metro at the moment they're driving around in, she drives, she passed her test at sixty eight.
So  he's seventy eight now  she's probably about the same I think.
Mm.
But they had a Mini before the Metro and er  the day they bought the Mini they saw an advert in the paper saying that if you buy a Mini in the next few days
give you a free colour portable with it.
Oh.
Of course they didn't get the portable with this, they rang them up, said where's my colour portable    said I'll put you on to the manager  anyway  they had some deal that night that erm to launch this Mini Mayfair or whatever it was  wine and cheese thing  so he went to the wine and cheese thing  and  worried he was gonna kick up a fuss  so they gave him a telly anyway .
yeah.
He's a penny pinching old bugger he is, god!
I can't quite imagine 
No.
coming back in a minute.
Yeah   What about ?
The dust wagon came up to the warehouse today, the usual   they'd got halfway to emptying the first dustbin in the back
Oh yeah.
and the hydraulic hose on the back of the dustcart broke  there was hydraulic fluid all over the


all over the car park.
So the driver said can I use your phone?
He came in  and trampling this brake fluid all over the carpet.
He got through to the  base camp to find out when the  chap was coming to fix it.
Five minutes later he came in trying to tell  tell us jokes and each time he'd been paddling through this brake fluid and the carpet is just  you know, brains
Mm.
Hand picked for the job I should think.
Well we didn't notice the footprints until he'd left.
Mm.
  

Yeah  of course once they get to know where you are
This is it 
and you don't o do you open weekends?
You don't open Saturdays now?
We don't, no.
No.
Are you going to?
No we don't.
I dunno, we're thinking about it but, you know it's erm
Well if you're doing enough to keep you both happy and keep it
Well you see we're a bit further from home now and if we can do it for five days, great, we haven't 
Yeah 
got that extra travelling, you know, this is the problem.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You're looking better for it though.
Oh yeah I feel alright, yeah.
Yeah.
Frankie give me a b g er as I get stuff I'll bring it in to you, alright?
Yeah, okay lovely.
well you know you've only gotta give me a ring 
Alright 
Yeah.
You've only gotta get me, you know  I'll be  
Picked your cheque up?
Yeah it's in there.
Yeah.
See you shortly.
Thank you very much  
See you  
Tata  
 
See you got a  on those, yeah.
Bye now.
Yes, a little drinkypoohs would certainly help.
And they say it's never been so good!
Well this is it isn't it?
Mm.
A little improvement certainly wouldn't hurt.
Make sure this doesn't kill it stone dead.
yes.
No with these is extra, is, there's  on the main board so I think I can get away with just one  
Varying degrees is it?
Yeah Phillips usually put two of these on but  Right-y-o blast off.
innit?
That's a bit more like it.
Cor yeah.
ready  
See those are cheap  sets we can probably buy them for about twelve quid apiece couldn't we?
Yeah  that's right.
You can always get  twenty five quid off the trade    double your money, quick easy money.
Yeah.
That's not a bad  is it really?bit of blue perhaps  bit more like it innit?
Ooh.
Cor, fair near jumps out at you.
Compared to what it was it's bloody brilliant innit ?
She'll be well pleased with that.
Yeah it was a big  over to the main  you know that   
and had a look at the, the  but  Right, whereabouts  down there 
Erm 
Oh it's down there  
That there 
Ah
was really black.
Yeah.
That's that  actually I'll do I'll do th no I've just been round most of those.
I'll do this end as well I think  be on the safe side.
I've been right round the lot anyway so that's  jolly good.
over a period of time can you,
Yes that's it .
I think some do.
Yeah,
Did you say it's from out of town this one?
industrial estate  she lives down  somewhere.
Oh this one is?
Yeah.
Oh.
Yeah.
She phoned this morning  and I said I can't come and collect it cos I'm here by myself she said oh I'll bring it in, that's alright, no problem but er we're going away to Gloucester at two o'clock
Oh I see I 
oh I said we'll try and see if we can get it done I says, so 
Oh I see.
I said if it doesn't come in at two anyway and I'll lend you something
Mm very good.
so  
Oh well that's good, right.
otherwise we'll go down 
I think we could let her off this time.
that's er all your overheads paid innit?
That's right, yeah.
I think Ian used to sell these  things, whatever they are.
Yeah that's what I said he said no it didn't come from me he said but I think they did used to sell something like that.
He popped in a couple of times.
His missus earns nineteen grand a year.
Pardon?
His missus earns nineteen grand a year at the bank.
Cor!
And he gets about, he didn't say what he got but it's over the twenty three thousand drawings that er they're worried about the level of er tax, you know, for the next 
My goodness.
So he must, they must get forty grand a year  
Between them, yeah.
Well I did a proje projection for the erm guy at Nationwide, I said well it's probably gonna be about a hundred and fifty grand turnover  and about twenty five to thirty percent clear, you know
Ah
net profit.
Which is about right I suppose, yeah.
So I said 
 
I said my share'll be about twenty five grand roughly so he's quite happy with that, yeah.
Yeah cos I mean  come the winter we'll  we won't know ourselves.
We will, I shall have to stop playing golf again.
 

Still it hasn't stopped me yet.
No.
I took  erm  bank the other day I took  hundred quid out
Right.
so  I mean you would still've got your golf thing out  
Oh right 
money out there and I had the hundred quid that 
Okay 
that I gave Alan so 
Oh that's alright then.
we're all straight.
No we seem to be s 
wages  cos we've been giving ourselves under wages over the last  
That's true, yeah it's all worked itself out hasn't it
really.
I took the two videos off the shelf and re-boxed them and as soon as 
Oh yeah 
come back I'll put on the shelf.
No my friend's in the trade I said they're basically working but they've got a halt on somewhere because they've come back  you'll have to sort out the  you've got but er they're only one ten 
Yeah.
I think they both actually probably work it's just they couldn't figure out the  programming on them.
you know?
Yes.
Yeah.
I mean if I'd had the money  
I think so.
first did it, you know and er
Yeah.
And Jim, when he comes in, they're both, they're both all, I've pr priced them up on the top and er 
Oh they're done are they?
Yeah.
Oh you
Yeah that's, that that's 
 
yeah they cured that fault, yeah.
Yeah, that was the springs off.
That was the springs off
Oh that was the springs off
heads clean, that was the belt that was gone
Oh yeah 
plasticine.
set back in the  inside?
Yeah.
But I told him about the telly that it's a bit beyond  redemption.
Mainly for where it's lived for the last three or four years I think.
Well yeah.
If your person don't have the er  over there, I think Gary's helping out this week, he might 
Well I can always ring Bob and er confirm that.
Oh it was Bob weren't it?
Yeah.
And then if he don't want it then         
dee dee dee dee  dee dee dee dee  
thanks very much  ta ta   council.
Yeah?
That's very nice of them.
Yeah well we, we couldn't push for a new   
No, no
I was just happy to  
Well yeah it's 
You're recording now are you?
Yes, I've gotta
Well you've got to get, get something on haven't you?
gotta get these tapes filled up.
How many tapes have you got to fill up?
There's twenty tapes altogether but  
 
there's no way I can fill up twenty tapes.
I don't speak that much 
No   Should have had one in the bedroom last night with next door upstairs.
My god she was making a racket.
Was she?
Cor!
Grunting and groaning  
Really?
Oh that sort of a racket yeah.
Yeah that sort of a racket, oh dear.
Well next door but one are having erm double glazed back window, you know that main  lounge window and the  the guy's parked halfway across the drive with the van, left it there all in disarray  you can just about get your car up and round and  brains that some of these people 
 
No.
Hmm neat little telly innit?
Yeah, it's er  it's only 
Not working?
it's only frame collapse.
Oh  well done then.
service switch   ah!
Hang on  that's interesting 
Yeah  
If the worst comes to the worst Dave's found a place where we can get new tyres for about twenty five quid each for the M G.
Oh yeah.
He's still trying to find some  he's phoned a bloke in Plymouth see if he can get them.
That's a nice tyre we got for the erm caravan for ten quid.
It's er
would be nice cos they look ni we had on the other white M G and they're a nice  
Yeah 
.
The other one's all arrived over safely and the bloke's driven it and he's all happy with it
Oh good.
and waiting for his next one to come  
Oh marvellous.
Er
Is he selling them over there?
No he's keeping them for just fun cars for himself, he's just got the money to burn over there 
Marvellous
so  he's only, he's got a  one of the new  B M W seven three five that er no the big Merc, a big new Merc through that's right, not the  the latest Merc  so he says er er he's a bit disappointed with the brakes on the M G but  Dave said they were a phenomenal brake for an  M G he said   
Yes.
compare it against the latest Merc 
That's right.
He's all 
I expect 
he's all been paid all his money and 
Mm but it's good in a way that he's got his money because he can sort of, sort of finance ours
Well yeah he is, he's got a little bit anyway  
till we, yeah yeah, I should imagine he is.
quite a few bits and pieces.
It's getting Kevin in to finish it off.
I phoned Kevin, I've got Kevin's mum and dad's phone number off Dave and phoned at home but he's gone out for the day or something they said.
 

But he's got to strip the bonnet so Dave said well I'll get my lad to strip the bonnet this afternoon and er  you know,few hundred quid for the day we'll be glad to be able to finish off doing them and  He's got too many  
Yeah cos you haven't been able to 
to play with really er we c to clear ten we've still got two and a half grand left
Have we?
and so there's twelve and a half grand we're owed
Yeah yeah 
so if he charges, you know, fifteen hundred for his bit and then another grand to finish it off we're still clearing ten, you know,
Oh well that's good then.
we might even clear a little bit more than ten but 
Bit more than ten, yeah.
I mean if he charges two and a half I wouldn't be disappointed cos it's been in his garage, he's pushed everything along and he's always  so
Yeah, oh and he's been pretty reasonable hasn't he?
we're all going out for a drink with yourselves I think.
Good.
That sounds like a good idea.
 

Me, I don't drink.
No don't drink  any more  
Not at this moment.
starts tonight dunnit?
It was funny 
I'll see if he can arrange the old erm 
the guy's er filling out the form for the er mortgage and he's er  said non-smoker?
Yeah, yeah and Lynette yeah non-smoker, you know.
When we got outside I said I couldn't very well offer him one I only had two left in the packet  
That makes quite a difference on your policy, the premium 
Yeah 
if you're non-smokers.
She laughed, she thought it was hilarious.
Yeah.
Couldn't really offer him one.
Ah the well known tube company of   Shung Wa 
Yeah 
Toshiba tubes  
 Chung Wa yeah.
 Chung Wa 
Wonder where these are made, oh Taiwan.
It must be the big companies that have gone and set factories up  mustn't they?
Yeah.
I tell you what, what a beautiful little chassis that, I mean that's 
the technology just from a
I mean that's so easy innit?
It's beautiful innit?
Easy to work on.
Yeah.
All you've gotta do is find out what's wr gone wrong with it.
Well I should think it's this little frame chip here, I'm 
Oh 
I'm gonna check all round I mean I should imagine that's what it must be.
Standard one is it?
Or something weird.
Well it's bound to be something weird I suppose.
fifty, oh  looks like a five five one thread 
A N?
What do you make it?
I think that's
Well  have a look.
I'll get the t the torch, that's what I want probably.
Ah  yep, perfectly correct.
A N five five one five  you won't have one of them in stock will you?
No.
Have a check see if the  go in that direction, pretty sure they do.
la la la la la   yeah, that's it, that's the frame output chip.
I think I might just give it a solder over because it's er a bit dry in that area.
Oh yeah.
That's  I've done all of that plus them others you  
Yes I'll just try these erm  solder up this service switch and er   everything else seems alright, there's no  anywhere, mind you it's nine times out of ten it'll  
Oh quite a nice design innit eh?
The leaves are long enough to   
Yeah  I can leave the speaker off for a minute.
I can just about get in behind without blowing myself up I think.
No, that's what it'll be then
 

Yes, okay then  thank you.
That's alright   or anything  just ask for what you want and  that's it.
Oh you wanted something else did you?
That's alright, that's something in Gerald's little telly, it'll probably need one of those little  but I'll, I'll look it up first, check it out first.
 

I'd better be sure cos this  it's not a cheap one that one so that 
No alright.
It's no problem.
Well that'll be the day  
Lexy's not coming up till, what the weekendish?
Wednesday Thursday Friday  
Oh right.
should be here today  the old 
They did very well there actually didn't they, overall?
I mean er we did alright as well but
Yeah.
Oh they've only gotta get the two   done and they've got their money back haven't they?
Yes, that's right.
If they get that going they'll get two hundred and fifty for that.
Yeah.
He was very cagey about the fault on that, he probably knows it.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
Well didn't we, no we haven't told him what the fault is even though have we so
I told him it was a  there when it, it shut down but that's all, yeah.
Oh 
Didn't tell him about the er row of eights on there.
It's probably a processor fault.
Ten quid'll have it fixed I expect.
Mm.
If you could buy those  that sort of thing   we'd make good money with it er non-working.
Yeah.
It still came in as an F S T didn't it?
Mm.
Mind you it's true he'd''ve got more for it probably if it'd been working but 
How much  
how much more how many people want that sort of thing?
You know.
One twenty five, one twenty for the trade I suppose 
Yeah.
Innit?
At a push.
Well I think we've wo er I think we've won that little erm  forklift.
Yeah.
Doesn't seem to be  a hire job does it?
Usually  have them painted all over.
probably quite expensive things 
Yeah bet they are.
It's probably been left by the guy that was here before you know.
Oh probably, the  
Yes, pallets of frozen stuff around, yeah.
Yeah.
If anybody comes in for a car radio cassette, I've stuck one at the top there twenty quid if anybody  
Ah right.
Is there just that, that big goes  in front was it, or just pushed in?
What's that?
That bit.
Oh I see it's just the front loose.
Just the cover that's all.
Yeah.
There!
I think I shall have to get is a decent FM radio, I use a radio more than a tape actually in the car, but mine's only a long medium wave job.
Yeah I use the radio all the time now.
Must get Robert down here.
Yeah, any excuse to er contact him?
Besides asking 
Er 
him for money.
diagram for  for that erm mark five out there  could you ask him for one of them?
I've got that from the lads.
Oh.
Yeah.
He doesn't know that.
Well is there anything else you want?
That's true.
Mm.
Wonder what the chassis, that must be  
Well I wanna order some more Toshiba flaps through him.
Yeah.
down there.
I think this is the same  I've got the manual for these.
six ninety nine wannit or something?
Six ninety this one.
Six ninety.
Yeah.
Oh that'll be alright for er  assessing 
That's a thought, yeah I can  wang it on.
This was working when I picked it up, I'm pretty sure it was.
What does it do, anything at all?
I can't remember.
It's just erm  like a sink innit?
Dunno I haven't seen it on.
I think.
Stand by.
Oh.
That's better.
It's doing something anyway.
Yeah.
I should think 
Perhaps that's what it is, lack of s 
lack of stink.
This looks alright.
Contrast, colour
It's all there isn't it?
brightness 
Could really set off a disgusting


Oh that's alright.
Oh  colour's dropping out, let's have a look.
Oh it is a flap, I thought it was red tape on there.
It's a red flap.
Yes.
These Names of er well they must  enormous fortunes mustn't they?
Well yeah, and yes they've just asked them for forty grand more haven't they?
Tony Jacklin and people like that.
Just to keep the thing afloat.
Oh it's starting to drift now  that's where the colour's disappeared.
Well that should be a  freezable job  if it's warming up and going wrong.
Yeah.
Did you see the Nat West profit, they lost  three hundred million last year.
Cor!
Erm not, they didn't lose it, they went three hundred million less than the year before profit though, two hundred millio er  bad debts
Yeah
two hundred million  Maxwell.
Really?
Lloyds made about six hundred grand didn't they?
They didn't do bad did they?
No, they did very well.
But erm
See the shares jumped.
I mean how did they lend him two hundred million without absolutely secure collateral?
They wouldn't lend it to anybody else would they?
Well I thought that was funny about that guy that   watch Wogan on there last night, that girl that
No
just been on that film  Barry Norman was on there and er
Oh  the one that  Drop the Dead Donkey, that girl?
Yeah.
She was in this film and
He got, that's right, he got two hundred grand  
Two hundred grand from the bank.
but I should think that's security, it's the bloke's house probably that.
Probably took a chance with it.
Yeah but it's a lot innit for a film that you never know is gonna
It is, yeah.
be any good.
Ah mind you he could probably sell it to the TV companies for about that I should think.
Yeah    very good though,card number again or anything.
Oh it's brilliant that is.
They're so cheap.
They're ever so quick.
And they do it, and they've got it in stock, you know so 
Yeah yeah  very good.
Not no we're out of stock on that one, we're out of stock on that one.
Very efficient.
Pity they didn't do other stuff besides
Yeah.
I suppose that's how they've managed to be  
Yeah.
Yeah just get the chips and that's it.
I phoned a customer last night and said that the  system should be done  by the latest I would think next Monday like, you know?
And I said I'll bring it round personally and er  you know, get it switched on for her.
Yeah I want a lot of grovelling she says, I want an enormous amount of grovelling when you come.
 

cos they've seen exactly the same one for five hundred and twenty five quid  
Well it does look a bit like a T X ninety  T X eighty five, that's a new one on me.
Well
different again.
The plug's hanging off.
Eh?
That plug's hanging off.
Which one?
Oh that one?
Oh yeah.
Yeah I don't suppose that happened when I pulled it out.
It could do something.
Cos I thought these were all working actually.
Oh it's funny this one doesn't use a mains  tranny like the others do.
Remote control.
Hmm swines 


This is
 

tricky though.
Yeah that's maximum colour.
decided to go up to Malden I think it was to stay with a mate of Derek's  twenty years
Yeah?
er Derek's forty  four  erm year younger than he is and er  he's got  he started, he bought a station and er, years ago, and a station master's office with a garage and all that, you know about twenty years ago and he dealt in tyres.
Oh yeah?
Er then he, there's only three houses in the road that he lived in,, the next one along the road came up for auction and he sold his station and moved up to that and he said he's just bought the one at the end of the road now which is er  seven hundred and fifty thousand he paid for it, a hundred and fifty thousand to have it interior decorated.
Cor!
There's a five acre lake, forty five acres island
My goodness.
This bloke's got two  Lambourginis in the garage and er the latest BMW  all from, he said he works seven days a week for it he said but he, you know, he's just an ordinary bloke who  got it all just working   
Well it was  but whether it's erm  try it again from cold I think.
Right, let's stop and have a sandwich shall we?
I've ceased trading  erm I'm now selling off all my stock which is left from my home
Goodness.
over the weekend, done four grand.
unless you're gonna  for it.
same price  no guarantee 
 
Yeah  
 
he's being greedy.
Cos we had a twenty, twenty two and a twenty six didn't we?
And he, the first bloke come and he said oh I'll have all three of them.


Yeah 
He, he didn't realize that I had more stacked in the other room ready to come out  
 

Yeah.
We sold one telly the other week about  no we sold one, one telly about six or seven times didn't we?
Yes.
T V and a video we sold six times.
Yeah.


We're not doing nobody down.
No 
No.
nobody wants to trade that way, I don't 
No.
I don't wanna trade from home.
Don't want 
But last week 
people coming into my house buying gear.
When I go home 
Last week, yeah 
of an evening 
last week we had 
Do you tell them you're a trader then?
No.
Not up until last week.
Right my wife was selling as far as I was concerned.
Not up until last week.
But now this week, from what I put in the paper it's obvious that we're traders
Mm
now like innit?
So
We had one bloke come last week  he lives about fifty yards from the shop.
Yeah.
Yeah ?
Comes all the way home to buy a telly


for fifty quid  b bought a cheap one
Yeah
for fifty quid and he only lives, well, hundred yards, if that, from the shop.
Get off !
He could've come in the shop and bought them, yeah.
Yeah.
Oh I said  you'll have to go in K T V for servicing.
And he never, he never queried it.
He never said well are you anything to do with it or nothing.
Yeah.
And there's a photograph in th I never told him that
Mm
photograph in the middle   and you know, but 


Oh he was thrilled, he had a good deal.
Well he had a nice little T V.
No we don't stitch them, no.
Oh yeah a nice  no.
He had a Phillips G eleven, he took it home and plugged it in, it ran for two hours 
 
and the fuse went.
So he phoned up, he said I know I didn't have a guarantee, can you do anything for me?
I said yeah bring it back and have another one.
Well the next the next 
 
the next one was a joke.
Bloke come and bought a Teletext with his friend, come all the way from Falmouth, he pulled on the front, paid me his money, saw the telly working, put the remote in his pocket, my son carried the telly down, put it in the back of the car  the bloke shut the boot, he drove off the front, I picked up the phone  he er and he just swung round off the front, the boot come open  out come the telly!
Oh goodness.


So he just got out, picked it up, shoved it back in and drove away.
Get off!
And I give him three mo cos I'd give him three months guarantee with that, I thought yes  and I was standing there on the phone and I thought  you dare come back!
Oh yeah  
We haven't heard from him have we?
Oh.
No  he probably ain't going to is he?
 
No.
He ain't going to is he?
No 
Oh did he?
Mm 
Yeah.
That's like a skating rink now then.
It may be alright though, it may be alright with a bit of luck, you know?
I would've tried to help him out if we had a  if we had a, a shot one with a case like, you know?
Then we could've put it together for him.
You know you can't be hard on people can you really?
Or I don't think so anyhow, we'd've nailed it together for him for nothing and  
Well  
Yeah 
?
It depends on his attitude, if he'd been trying to pull a fast one on you and er 
Yeah  
this was like this when I bought it off you
Oh no no, if he, if he tried to pull a fast one  we've already had one like that  th that came in and bought a set  unfortunately  his father paid by cheque, oh no, well he paid by two cheques which, they had a card on them I know very well they can't stop them very well  and he went out and er, and er the T V was only in the car and he went round a corner quick and he went brrrm like that you know 
Yeah 
and split the case and all on the T V and he come back in he said  oh I picked this up he said and the case fell to bits.
And I was there 
Yeah, yeah 
 
there and I said no  my handsome you didn't pick that up and the case fell, fell to bi he, cos he was going on this is inferior  not up to standard and so I said 
 
I said now you can shut that up right away, cos I said you know it's not  I said er  now if you want us to try to help you out  on this you just tell us what you did.
Anyway his father was there and his father had paid  and I said no  you know, you've done that.
So anyhow he, his father said well that's right he said we'll be probably covered on the house insurance.
And they were anyhow so they had a brand new telly.
Mm.
And we had that one back and nailed them together and sold them again.


 

But he tried it, you know
Yeah
sneaky  like that.
Mind I know there's some that when you can pick up if you're, you know you could pick up something like that if you weren't careful and just pick it up from the inside
Yeah.
and the bloody  will fly off won't it?
Yeah.
They're only stapled together in the corner aren't they?
Yeah
And then er    That one just won't erm  tune in in case 
Oh.
Toshiba
aren't they?
Yeah we should  get sixty pound for them I should think.
That much you reckon?
Yeah.
Well if you wanna pick the  up for them you've got one two three  four  I don't know what you're gonna do 
Yeah the little Toshibas are remotes aren't they?
Yeah.
They're only a couple of quid, the flaps for those  
Yeah 
if you wanna bother or not.
No I shall shove them out as they are.
Nice little cabinets anyway 
Actually we may have, we've got one or two mashed up sets, we may have flaps  for them, I dunno.
It doesn't detract from them anyway does it?
I mean 
Not really.
That's what you want really, you want about a thousand of them now
Yes.
Yes if we could buy a thousand I think we'd have a thousand of them.
Yeah, yes.
 

You can get plenty of what you don't want and a little of what you do want.
Start of the season you just don't see  start of the season and Christmas you just don't see 
No.
Well I'll be quite honest with you, when I came in the other day you had a couple and I'm amazed that you've still got them.
We don't let them out.
Eh?
We don't sell them.
We don't sell them unless people  
Unless people buy big sets we don't sell them.
We won't just sell a portable to anybody.
You won't?
I mean you're lucky to get that one mate, I mean you must have been, caught him on a real good day.
I got forty six at Christmas.


Yeah if somebody's loaded down with them, if they've got  
End of season's the time to pick them up.
forty six videos.
Yeah, that's right.
Oh yeah, yeah 
Oh no I don't blame you.
If you've only got  
Well it's unfair to everybody if somebody has the lot and then everybody can have a couple and keep a few of their customers happy.
You can always sell them  within a couple of days of them coming in  
Thank you for the coffee.
I dunno who you were gonna make it out to but make it out to 
I've just made it out to nobody at the moment.
Just make it out to nobody 
Right.
 

I was thinking Rex might like that little G E C out there, that's a nice little    
Less ten less ten percent he said for being a good customer .
He ain't got that written down there has he?
That's true, no I haven't  
 
You must, you must get fed up with hearing it.
How much do you want for the, the little er?
Well I want forty quid  really.
It's a very nice one owner set, we took it in 
I don't know if you want  
part exchange actually.
See the G E C down there?
It's just a basic
It's absolutely mint.
but it's a minty one.
The chap's had it, a single bloke 
box out there.
On the far side 
I can't even see it.
Underneath the  
See  portables.
Yeah.
There.
It really is tidy.
I'll put it on if you want.
It's just a twenty two inch basic but it's extremely 
It is?
And it's in 
 
perfect working order?
Oh yeah, I'll put it on for you.
 
But we, I know the chap  he doesn't watch telly that, he's a lon lon long distance lorry driver and he had to have remote and text so he swapped it, you know, and er
Oh well don't bother about it, we'll soon sell it.
No problem.
No let me take a look at it, let me take a look.
 

Right, I've got some money for you my man.
Right you'd better see the  cashier  big fat chap with the glasses.
 

No I think  on that one.
Okay fair enough.
Only to be quite honest I pick up some stuff and mainly now the basics we get free.
No er when we get somebody in that
Yeah.
that wants a reliable one owner, not ex-rental sort of set, you know?
No no I know what you mean yeah.
Yeah yeah 
We'll er 
I've had some basics  we got some nice, cos what we'll do if we have a set is stick it on the bench, we've got this foam cleaner, we spray it with the foam cleaner and clean it and when th 
Yeah 
that set comes down you see 
Yeah 
it's clean  as he was when he was new.
Yeah.
He may be scratched  but he's as clean.
And then we just spray them with a polish and when they go down they're good.
Yeah but I mean when our loads come in we've got a chap here that p just purely cleans them.
Yeah, yeah.
Well presentation is a great thing  as far as er  have you got a loo handy?
Yeah yeah  it's that first  first door there.
This one here?
Yeah.
Right we'll see you an hour and a half from now.
Right, okay.
if you're looking for one.
No this is just a pr it's a private, it's not an ex-rental one,i it really is in mint, it hasn't been used a lot.
And erm we allowed 
What that set there?
forty quid on it, well th that's what I've gotta get for it.
Oh
But it is very clean, great pictures on it.
Is it text that one?
No it's just it's 
Basic  
it's basic but I mean it is a nice
Yeah
clean
No I've got a  
reliable set.
Hitachi chassis type job but er the tube's gone.
Yeah.
Well you see that was like mint that one.
So I'm just after the tube really.
Mm.
swap places with this gentleman  I can get him  loaded up.
Right.
 

Looks like it'll be a brilliant one if you get it going er  just the   things.
There
Oh yeah.
It's like the tuner's dead innit?
Oh  
 

It's getting colder innit?
Get through alright?
Mm?
Get through alright?
That's a nice one.
What's this  Kaitung one?
It's sold to those lads that just came in actually.
Ah.
It's not working.
 

It's it's  it's not a worker.
No.
I know, we're not er we ain't af we ain't afraid of a few bum workers cos we  have got er  good engineers like, you know?
This won't tune in this one, it might be the tuner itself .
But these aerial sockets on these Toshibas are in a, such a funny place that er 
Yeah yeah.
See what you want is a little workshop out of sight don't you?
Well I've got one in there but I'm just doing this as a  to save me lifting it.
Oh I see.
 

Er  no they're  all about the same depth aren't they?
Bring the  through?
That's the same, yeah.
 

If they're gonna go towards the window  shove something 
Yeah I know 
in between them.
yeah.
I  is doing.
Right, okay.
Oh  reckon they'd get rid of some of this stuff 
No I don't understand it Rex.
I suppose they've got a, they've got a certain contract to take new stuff all the time haven't they?
Yeah.
I would've thought they could've  like somebody with an older text, they could've took the old one out and shoved one of these back into it.
Yeah I mean that is, that  is current now, that's what they use now isn't it?
That is their current model.
Yeah.
They use that chassis in Thorns and Bairds and things.
Yeah.
So what's the  tube alright on that is it?
Yeah it comes on, a  comes on and then it shuts down so it's some sort of shut down fault.
Yeah.
We haven't looked er we haven't even got a manual for it.
No.
No no no.
Well anybody that's anything like an engineer, as long as it's clean and tidy and not been chucked around
That's right.
they can fix it can't they?
Yeah, oh yeah it's all fixable.
Long as the tube's alright, that's the main thing.
Yeah that's the main thing on that.
That's a nice looking machine that one.
Probably would actually wouldn't it, yeah.
Which would leave us room for the   
What have you got one, one more to g 
two more.
different.
Put er that on top of those  put a portable
Have you got the little portable?
like that?
Two more?
Yeah there's that one and one more.
Wonder if they would go  cos th n n they're no different on their ends are they really?
Not really, no they're practically squares aren't they?
No they a yeah.
Which is the smaller of the portables?
They're all about the same, there's hardly any difference in them.
Hardly any difference at all.
the blanket   portables on the blanket.
We're not taking the blanket all out erm from underneath all of them.
 
Well we've got plenty of cardboard plenty of cardboard  
Plenty of cardboard, yeah.
With the blanket though he would, they would stop them from moving like, you know?
yeah.
Yeah.
Erm  haven't got anything like a blanket  
And we've got them two to go?
Yeah.
Can't we put the bigger, the bigger of them  in  under my feet.
I  
If you put them on their sides they're too  .
They'd go on their sides wouldn't they?
Perhaps.
If we had a 
blanket though we could have done that easy enough.
 
Oh I see you're gonna turn them on their sides are you.
catching on reasonably well for the time of the year?
?
Yeah.
Yes.
They've converted people to it  so they they find that they 
 
Well th they, they're used to selling cheapy stuff, they don't know if they can sell this, they've taken a couple on
Yeah
trial
Yeah
and they say you know that they've sold 
Yeah.
I made myself a nice  profit out of it.
I think those two on the sides one on there er f put that on its side as well perhaps.
Oh no it's not any better is it on its side that one.
And Toshiba could go in there couldn't it and the other one on its side in there.
What erm top to  top to top  
Top to top yeah.
And side to side.
is easy we can pack  
We're gonna need to put something in between that.
 

A bit of cardboard between that   useful.
Gotta fix that aerial back on.
If I lift it could you  slide that in  
And I've put something in there so we don't get any  there
Yeah.
We're away.
but er  I can't work out where  
Well if you put that one across under that one  and then I can get this one up through the middle, it's just the depth in the middle there innit?
Yeah.
Oh I see, put this one
Over there.
Alright?
And then something in between these to stop any rubbing
That's it.
on there.
I need a little bit of wedge at the back there  just to stop 
again.
The keys are in the car then?
 

Wonderful sir.
Alright?
Excellent.
Is your catch alright there?
See if that closes alright.
Lovely.
Lovely.
down on the axle.
Smashing.
Nice to see you again  
young man 
Yeah see you again.
Cheers then.
See you again.
Got your hand sets?
Got the hand sets?
I'll just have a word with my chief accountant  
 
Got the hand set?
Right.
Right see you later.
Bye then.
Good trip.
Thanks a lot 
That must be the  the right hand set for that  because  two five five R seven B, the R is remote innit?
All the others are T for   
Oh yeah?
aren't they?
Yeah.
Yet we  didn't we?
So it was the wrong back then, probably.
wrote to them  complaints and
No.
they switched on alright anyway .
Right do you want ?
Well I've tried all those, I'll see what  switches on, just do one more.
Cos the tuner se seems to be working itself dunnit  
Yeah I mean I assume it's the same tube in this as the er Grundig innit?
Is it?
Yeah.
It's a  innit?
Er 
Oh 
 

Mind you I think the Grundig was a little   might require a
Yeah.
But this is only a basic set so I mean we'll know when there's a tube   yeah 
seventy five and this is a basic ?
Yeah.
Let's try a different number 
Tried a different number 
Yeah yeah
Yeah I thought maybe number one was worn out and 
Yeah, it's a knackered tuner innit?
Oh colour's gone, why's that?
blank screen then for a sec.
Oh, that's where they  that's where they are innit, round there.
It's either that or  
?
No it's a little erm  well I should think it's gonna be the tuner innit?
Mm 
sixty quid and one tuner, I mean you know  don't mind if it's just 
Yeah 
a couple of quid on them do you?
And they go nice and 
No 
quick.
Mind you it's had some spillage in here in the I F strip.
Ah  oh yes it has.
Lots of spillage, that's probably the problem.
Yeah you see it  you see it all round the chips
Oh yeah, yeah  on it, yeah yeah 
all green, all green along there  I wonder  I was just thinking it's got all the bits in it to make that other one go
It's still switched on so  
No it's, it's got all the power bits to make that other one go.
It's got a tube that would make the  the other one go.
Dunno.
But it's losing a set that way innit?
See the tube for the Grundig I think  it won't help  
No be worth trying won't it?
Mm.
And I could get  fifty five or sixty for this  
Yeah.
won't tune  and erm  
Well I'll tr I'll try cleaning up that spillage.
Shall I do it with a toothbrush and a ?
You can if you like, yeah,i it pulls out, you know, you can get at it.
innit?
Yeah.
Yeah it's not underneath it's just  you can take that out the way 
Well there's twelve hundred quid in there.
Mm!
Well  a little drink 
All in cash.
Very good.
Old Rex, I see he had a pile of fifties there.
Hmm.
He did s yeah he did speak to her.
Yeah?
Yeah.
Well I've seen the toothbrush somewhere recently but I'm buggered if I can remember where.
It's not on my desk  
Mike  will be useful next time he comes up to erm he probably knows how to connect those  extension wires into th on the telephone doesn't he?
Oh I should think so, yeah.
Do you want anything else to drink or are you alright for a bit?
No thank you I'm fine.
Thought I'd leave that little erm portable running  this afternoon.
Yeah.
Nice little tube in that one innit?always good aren't they, as a rule?
Yep.
last night  
And those last three portables, he talked me into those going out the door.
Jim that was.
It won't happen again.
No .
I don't know though, I don't think they're quite as busy as er they profess to be.
No  not after that conversation yesterday.
Get a few more like Rex and we've cracked it.
Yes.
Well we've got Terry  
And Terry, yes.
he's waiting to come up for another load.
Yeah.
There's a, one of them little  it's probably meant to be that colour, one of them little clay coloured things has got a black end on it there but er 
Oh yeah that's just erm
A marker is it?
a marker, yeah.
You, you've left a message for Derek didn't you about his erm  telly?
Oh yeah.
Mm.
He phoned me last night at home and I said you got your message then?
No  well I'm sure his machine ain't working, it's knackered.
This little erm  Sanyo I've got on the bench in here, I think we'll just keep that for spares then.
Right.
that, it's funny innit?
Oh 
Yeah, have a think about that one.
 

Two little switches 
That one the tuner just keeps hunting so maybe the aerial cable's not connected to the  tuner, we had one of them before didn't we, where they?
Yeah yeah  I'll just box this Sanyo up  out that way.
I'll box this one up again and er   tuner.
You didn't happen to see this new series last night  Mulberry did you?
Yeah.
Weren't it good?
I quite enjoyed that.
I thought it was bloody excellent.
Really   out of the ordinary.
Lyn wanted to see it but she slept right through that.
Oh  
She said what time's Mulberry coming in, said oh it's just finished.
Well that's the trouble on that one, alright?
Oh  and you thought that the other one fitted did it?
The other  
Yeah.
Oh.
Yeah it's this little panel.
So we can put that in the duff one and  anyway then can't we?
That's right.
It's on that one erm  it's off a text one actually I took this one off but er
Well that's alright.
If we just get fifty or sixty back for the  
That's right.
we do fifty will tempt them, we'll lose a tenner but
Yeah.
we'll get fifty to spend again, that's the important thing.
Yeah, true.
Well they seem quite tempted.
I can't remember what their names were, did you get their names again?
No I didn't.
I know it was Princetown T V but
Yeah.
Probably serve the prison I should think.
Well I must remember to memorize this this time.
Lovely tube on this innit?
They're pretty good sets aren't they?
Yeah.
I should think it must be that one there or   James  Wattana 
Fancy living here in preference to  
Yeah!
He must be doing very well over here.
Very delicate.
Don't suppose he's  in his part time.
No.
Cor he is good, there's no doubt about that, look at that, right between the two.
Whoops
Ooh!
oh dear.
Cor 
Mm.
Excellent.
I know Jackie  said well you shouldn't, you should try the Toshibas they're as good as gold those are.
Telling the truth there.
It's er Hitachis are the ones he didn't er rate at all.
Oh yeah?
Hitachi as well I think.
That's a duffer innit?
Yeah 
Still if we move them on  fifty five quid I reckon  nice set that'll tempt somebody.
Yeah.
Or we could buy another one  then don't we?
Yeah.
Right  Oh that's right, that's what I ordered off Eddy today, two S D seventeen ten.
Yeah.
That one.
Quite a good set.
Mm.
No I think I can probably make t one out of two of those.
Well we'll get three of them, that price.
Getting these done aren't we, gradually?
Yeah  
The non-working stuff.
it helps dunnit?
Yeah.
I mean some of these you ain't even looked at, the Panasonic and things like that, it might be
Yeah
something simple.
it's a bit long in the tooth that one.
Still it's worth a look probably.
It's thirty quid innit, to somebody like Jack ?
Yeah.
Looked at the Sony  that needs erm   
Er a tuning fault or something innit?
Yeah it's just got erm  blank  in it.
That's another Hitachi isn't it down there the same as we've got over there?
Oh yeah.
F S T Tosh there as well.
Shouldn't be too serious should it?
We haven't looked at that have we, that one?
I'm not sure.
Don't know.
Or is that the one that has got the burnt out bits in it?
But I can clear these out for ninety quid apiece I think I'd move them just to get rid of them don't you?
Yeah.
Yeah.
He lives in Bradford, my goodness what a choice.
James  Wattana 
In Bradford now is he?
Yeah.
Must like the food up there I should think.
Ah that was a brave shot.
Well   they don't have a  test signal then.
Mm.
Seems to have a bit of a 
Tried a tape in it?
No.
Just for a joke.
Just sending out a pulse on them   stopped there.
You can always  the tape    It's actually running.
That mains lead in front of you  wants plugging in.
Ah.
Ah right.
Stop, stop, stop
Mm.
I really should er phone Breezy up and call his bluff and find out 
Which of these is  tuner?
That's it.
Yeah you run the tape don't you to tune these in.
Run it without a tape I think it is to get the test signal.
Still 
Oh is it?
you'll find it that way anyway won't you?
Should go all the way up and then back down shouldn't it?
Yeah they do no they do go round.
Pretty sure they do anyway,Blinking slow innit that direction?
Or is it blinks fast in the other direction?
Oh I see.
Ah.
One of them is a fast tune.
That's it, that's fast tune.
isn't it?
Unless that plate comes off mm  somebody's hit that with a soldering iron at some stage.
Mm
I mean there's no  
Yeah, I know you can feel those there, they're just more or less flush with the heads.
Perhaps  we could try another one and see er
Are all heads the same  
 
 

Well it's the later type innit, that one?
It's just that a lot of the heads have worn they 
Mm 
don't look to bad.
Oh that's quite a tidy looking one as well innit?
Yeah  worth switching on anyway, quite a few of them have got these er carriages in?
No well they're not sure if that's the whole carriage but 
Quite a few have got them in.
See what they look like on this one.
Oh it's a different ki different, totally different innit that one?
It's got nothing underneath that one has it?
If that bit can, you know, that's fixed  there's nothing for the  unless the tape just slides and sits
On the plastic.
on the plastic.
Probably it does.
Plug it in and find out shall I?
Yeah.
Looks quite tiny that one doesn't it?
We might've been, might be pleasantly surprised with these.
Yeah    
Right ah  I'm gonna have a delve and see if I can find a similar model.
There's one at the bottom there.
Bloody hell!
Rattling around.
Oh this has got  as well.
Head's gone on it anyway,he you know I looked at them closely, there's nothing there at all.
It's the same type as this type.
Yeah.
Well if the other one's just head and the  it's not too bad.
Let's have a look, it's a Phillips  six four six two.
Come on dad!
I'll get you!






Eh!
  
 


Don't  no
Well  have it   Have a break, have a Kit-Kat   
I don't feel I I don't feel I need any  
doesn't it really?
twinges taking off the hinges 
No 
 

then.
Hold the cup darling cos


Down a bit!


Put it down a bit!
Stick it in your ear in a minute won't I?


Stop shaking 
aren't we at the moment?
Pardon?
We're lacking some tools in  at home.
I must have them 
What do you mean?
at work I suppose.
You have never looked in the garage  there's a load down the steps.
You dump it in there  and then you suddenly expect me to know where it all is and I don't.
Ah!
It's wicked innit?
Whee!
My little , can you hold that a minute?
Okay.
Jonny there's a glove in there you can have look, there's a new one in there.
New?
Yeah it's brand new 
Brand new what?
A glove, a golfing glove, it's brand new 
What inside?
Yeah you can put your hand in it.
It's just an ordinary little glove


but it's for playing golf in.




Dad, look at the golfing glove.
It's nice innit?
Mm.
just take that down  glass bowl was there and that tea pot underneath.
I was only taking the  out.
Yeah  but you would, I know you, you just start doing it  
Dad, try this on and see if it fits.
Daddy try 
He's pinching your cake while you're looking 
Mm mm 
Oh oh no it's mine.
twinges take it off the hinges  we was getting nowhere  What shall we 


Can I try this glove on?
Oh it's just right for me.
Then you can play golf 
Do you like that?
with it on.
Oh you can play golf with it.
Come on have a bit of your 
no thank you.
Don't you fancy it?
No I'm not 
Oh.
You can turn it inside out.
Oh Jonathan don't  
Sorry.
that's not very kind is it?
Oh dearie me.
Having a drink out the bottom.
No, look you've got juice on the table and that's enough.
Finish that cake if you want it.
I don't want to.
stop mucking about.
Erm  all you need to do .
Jon!


Enough.


Let's see what's on this  cos one day  knock this cupboard  aren't I?
Yeah.
Now that's the sharp blades there that belong to that knife thing so watch it.
I'll be very careful.
I'll see if it still fits in
Go on then.
with, only with the bag getting on.
Yes, if you keep the bag on you'll be alright cos it won't catch you.
Yeah.
Let's see if it still fits.
Ooh it still fits.
Look at this!
Mm.
You should be able to press the 
That?
That's it and then it should slide in there .
I do like this
Mm
when it's got that on.
Look at the blades!
Even look at them when we're allowed.
Mm.
I won't, I won't I promise, I won't switch it on  cos when it's switched on it's dangerous.
You can cut yourself even when it's not cos this is so sharp.
You've gotta be very careful.
Yeah, put the cover back on just in case, cos you can cut yourself, it's never been used much and it's really like new sharp.
sharp 
Mm ever so!
 

Now I see what you mean.
You can even move it up and down when it's  when it isn't s you can really even move it up and down look.
Yeah.
Oh this is , oh that's useful.
It's ?
Mm.
You don't know that did you?
No I didn't.
I did.
Well   
I  the end.
 

Tomorrow's an ordinary day for you Frank isn't it?
Yes.
Steve is on his half day.
Yeah.
I think he'll probably only take a half won't he?
I think he's dead keen to 
He's taking  half day tomorrow and all day Friday.
Mm.
So I've got two full days 
So I've got to ring Phil and see what time he's going to pick up the freezer in the morning?
Yeah.
Mm?
Or afternoon as the case may be.
Dunno, some mutterings about Wednesday morning.
Oh is it?
 
So we still promised we'd see nanny and we haven't, and we still promised to go to aunty's and we haven't.
in the way  
Half term week goes so fast  so of all the things we were gonna do this week.
really we might as well of gone away cos   anyway   
See if it had been nice this Saturday we could've gone and got the   wheel back on the caravan but
Yeah  wasn't it?
Mum you'll  the cupboards out.
Yeah but then you had to have lunch, and I think it was three o'clock, and then we had to do  
No it wasn't!
You don't half exaggerate sometimes to suit yourself.
I am not exaggerating!
What time did I take the dogs out?
Half past two I think.
Look mum, don't look now.
 

I'll get it dad.
Good boy.
I got this
actually.
The whole cupboard's 
Apart from the side it's only hardwood at the sides.
I'm ready when you want   I'm going to  this time daddy.
I'm ready  This is ready for daddy to give it to
twinges taking off the hinges and we was getting nowhere 
Anyway you're not really  
had a cup of tea  
But this is a very hard screw isn't it dad?
Dad look at that screw!
Yeah.
I will 
stand back on the stool by daddy.
daddy I got them, where do you want me to be.
Alright.
Look how far I am  your side.
oh it's hard going this really is.
There's nothing holding her I just haven't got the screwdriver with the right shape tip on it, you know?
Oh.
Well  
It's a really thin screwdriver I should have really.
  

 
Wherever you want the screws to be daddy  the little pot.
Dad put the screws in the pot.
With the lid  
Dad, how did you catch the shelf  when er it was just about to fall?
shelf 
Yeah, I just bashed it out dad.
I'm bashing that bit out.
Whoops!
Sorry, I shouldn't do it the other side cos it wobbled.
Pretty well look dad.
Yeah.
Cor!
Daddy hold on to my back
Yeah
cos I sure might fall.
Oops, and I    Big noise isn't it?
Dad I want to screw it.
Yeah, I've just gotta get this bottom one out.
Can you give it a tap underneath there?
Oh yeah.
That piece.
  

That's it   tap it up about here a minute.
See this piece goes up?
Yeah.
Right, and give it a bash that way now.
But the screw on the top  cos I can only screw 
 

Mum, look what I had to do.
Oh  
  

Mm
  

I'm just seeing if I can get these two shelves out.
Well you give it a good bash then.
Look I'm turning it that way.
That would be 
Yeah    
the ceiling 
I don't think it's fixed to the ceiling actually that, I think it's just purely a  a framework bol 
 
nailed to the wall  
It's only a piece of wood that's  do you know what that is?
That's only 
So you could take the framework off the front
Yeah I think that's just 
which leaves the superstructure on  
Yeah  Screwdriver's  
Now that must be wobbly.
 
 

That won't come off.
Well these shelves won't come off.
Should happen   now it's got bended.
Well  
Mum do you like the sound?
No 
Then  cover up the ears.
it's okay now.
It always amazes me  build things like that 
Yeah.
So how does that come off the wall, the wooden ?
It's held on , it's gonna take some doing actually.
What the wooden part?
Those slats, this back piece
Yeah
are nailed to the wall 
Yeah and that's only wall 
Well, well I was just maybe wondering whether you might use a part of that to support the new cabinet  
Do you know that's only wall  that bit is only wall.
Ten to one it won't match.
too terrible to get off.
Listen listen please 
Oh it's, you know  
That's only wall 
Only wall?
Yeah, it's only  
Right  do for that cos  might 
I don't whether, I'm trying to think if he goes
I don't know, I can't keep up with him but I expect   I think 


Don't fall, you're hardly on the stool Jon.
Erm 
Ah!
When they done those windows down the bottom there it sounded though they were in  right next door.
Mm.
But you look there  that's wall 
those bits should come out.
Oh don't knock this though cos 
Why?
Because look 
if it's 
Those are very useful.
Do you realize that?
You can have , you can take them 
Yes  but the thing is what I would really like  is get two there  then waddle it in  one there  and then 
 
waddle it in on there.
No I want them like that.
Dad could you nail them like  
No I haven't got any nails have I?
Why?
say why I just haven't got any.
Well I just want them there  now I'm going to hammer them.
So I suppose you want a coffee my dear man?
Well I wouldn't say no, is that, that's reconditioned of course?
Well 
They don't need to be reconditioned they're only about two or three year old aren't they, you know,
And how much ?
One ten plus the VAT  
One ten plus VAT!
For the trade, they'll probably 
cheap innit?
Oh it is cheap
Innit?
Mm.
What is it you're after actually?
Rebecca.
Well she's lost her C D, she's lost her  twin deck tape, she's lost the works, all been pinched.
Yeah.
Don't forget that one's sold
Camera
Steve, that midi-system.
Is it sold?
Yeah 
That's sold is it?
And it's definitely a good buyer is it?
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh well.
Coming in tomorrow er  Friday, yeah tomorrow.
Oh right.
Well she'll have to wait till Easter that's all, and when she comes back at Easter time 
 
Well you'll have some more in by, by Easter won't you?
By Easter we should sort someth 
 
yeah we'll have the Samsungs in won't we, by then?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah they're er
Alright.
Actually we've got there, two there we've got to check through 
Eh?
We've got two actually in stock  to  
You've got two to be checked over?
Yeah.
Bloody  innit?
Good picture innit?
It is a good picture.
Well I've got to be back  by  ten to eleven, we've got a bit of a battle going on with  SWET 
Have you ?
Yeah because they, they're  y you know the Copper Dollar?
Mm.
Well they're taking all the power lines down in the village, or down through that part of the village which, fair enough, gets rid of the eyesore  but they're gonna put now a bloody big transformer,abou thing about seven, eight foot bloody tall in, in the field  right on the Copper Dollar
Right.
and originally they were gonna er mount it on the wall up against his lawn area where 
Mm 
people and all sit out erm  the landlord turned round and said no way hos, I'm not having it there sort of thing.
Of course then they change their attitude  SWET said well alright we'll put it right down there in the corner.
Now right down in the corner, bearing in mind my parents' garden shall we say is there and the field height is there
Mm
so the thing's gonna tower above their blooming 
Yeah 
wall for a start, plus the hum  you get from these bloody things, in other words basically, as my parents spend a lot of time up in their top garden in the summer time, in the sunshine and all, you get the continual hum from that bloody 
Yeah.
thing  and I had a blazing row with them on the telephone 
And there's enough hums in the countryside without that.
Well and er yeah, exactly.
Look at this Frank  see these are fast text  it's got the memory on it, it's er  one 0 eight, one 0 seven
Oh I see.
Memory text.
Yeah.
Well that's alright, yeah but 
a lot but it's  a little faster in that respect  
Yeah.
Yeah because my erm  mark four had that, memory pages, it didn't have fast text as such.
T X L rotate, I don't know what that is.   what the number is.
Yeah mine's got this on it, my er video one.
Nice little set innit?
Yeah  
You pick you pick out a code of numbers with this one 
 
Oh I see
and then it'll memorize the next three or four pages from that one.
Oh so it is a fast text then?
It is, yeah.
So this is the right hand set for it then.
Didn't do it with the others, this has got a  and a
Ah right.
Yeah that's what has gone on mine er you move along to wh with the cursor
Yeah
hit that and then you can have that number and the next four or five pages.
Does it rotate along there then?
Erm  browse, what's browse?for this
Well you don't need a  here do you?
We've got one.
Oh you've got one haven't you?
Yes.
yeah.
Did you put that up yourself or was it here when you come here?
No we had it put up.
You had it put up?
But er  we did it as a deal with a  a bloke wanted a telly 
Ah well fair enough.
Cos we're doing a s we're doing a system now for two hundred and ninety 
With two sugars?
Yes please, two hundred and ninety quid fitted.
That's very good.
Good price innit?
Very good, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, two ninety five all fitted.
Er  so it's er  
Oh well 
No, fair enough.
Thatta boy  thatta a boy.
Yeah Becca had one of those pinched too.
Very similar to that one down there, very similar.
Yeah  Liverpool you see, bloody kids  twelve to fourteen years of age 
They've caught them have they?
Only two little kids who was up in, well keeping watch on the outside, there were two in the house and two at the back, driving a bloody car at that age
My goodness
Yeah!
She said it's appalling, she said, in Liverpool.
We don't what it's all about
No.
, we don't know what it's a 
No.
every bloody house, every house, I'll tell you here and now, has got  fire, er burglar alarms fitted, every bloody house
Yeah.
down all these Coronation Street type houses, and erm  one of her friends was on the telephone the other night and er this chap draws up in the car and she says I, I won't be a minute,and he comes straight out of his car, he said I'll give you one minute he said, I'll drive my car and come back down that ro up  back to the telephone box  and he said if you ain't gone by then he said I'll smash your fucking face in, that's exactly what he said to her.
Cor!
Yeah!
Yeah Rebecca saw some chap going around, course Becca was mugged, I probably told you she was mugged in er Liverpool.
No you didn't.
Yeah she was mugged  er ooh about six months ago  and erm  and she said she saw a chap walking around a fortnight ago with a gun in his bloody hand.
Cor!
Yeah!
And she said erm where they have their big discos in the universities er you know, about two thousand five hundred of them come round of course they've got fire alarm systems  there, then she said you get the underground so called Mafia, whatever you like to call them she said, they are chaps she said in their thirties, and forties, arrive in shiny big white and red Porsches this that and the other and deliberately, cos they're club owners
Mm
or paid by the club owners, deliberately smash the break glass course everyone's gotta get out, the fire brigade all come in
Oh yeah.
the, the police all come in and of course the kids are not gonna hang around
No
they want their evening entertainment, then they go off down, then on down to the clubs.
She said it's horrendous up through Liverpool.
You've got a button here, choice of fast or normal text, when you press the fast all the colours come on the bottom.
Oh my goodness .
It's a different hand set again this one.
Mm.
Brings it up  
Well I'm blessed.
Does anyone want a cigarette?
Not for me thank you.
Do you want one Frank?
Okay.
There you are look  the fast the r the  number changes to yellow and the colours come at the bottom when you  normal 
Marvellous 
they disappear and it goes to white.
And do that when it gets to one two four again 
Mm
the colours come up on the bottom again.
That's interesting, I didn't kn didn't think you could cancel it off the screen, I thought it was there always.
Ah!
So that's the right hand set for that one.
So how'd you get on?
He, he can't because th these are a bloody expensive one
Yeah.
and these aren't so expensive, but I mean these we know are fifteen so these have gotta be twenty five, twenty six quid
Mm.
so he said it's across the board  put four thousand quid's worth off him the other day and I only give fifty pence off he said so I can't do much for you.
Yeah.
So he gets it at four quid but 
Yes.
Yeah.
Or if we take this whole lot up to Malcolm, say that you know these are six quid across the board you know?
Yeah yeah.
Well we could sell them to him well we we'll end up with one  hand sets for  
That's right yeah.
Cos it's super, he was selling that for eight or nine quid  you know.
Cor yes!
Yeah
It might be worth giving him a bell to let him know what's happening cos
Mm.
Brand new Toshiba hand sets, give him the model number.
The only problem is you see I'd like to try and get more Toshibas off him.
He might sell a lot more if he had the hand units.
That's true.
We might be
Toshibas do sell well don't they?
We could do him a deal couldn't we with all, all Toshiba  I'd say how much  Toshibas.
Yeah.
Probably get the black stripe  
Yeah   
Well those two are  the ones that  
is it?
Yes.
It's, he's got some erm  oh what did he have there?
Forgotten what he said now  something else was cheap.
He's got the little loop aerials at the back of portables, you know the 
Yeah 
for twenty five pence each   He can do the er, if they've got any three thousand chassis   for us if we want any.
Mm.
If you come across it.
Oh the Toshiba, the Toshiba  transformers, that's what he's got a  good range of and he's written down 
Has he?
the model numbers here as well.
Oh very good.
Is it on  the fax coming through?
That's  transformers there.
Two five five seven B  it is, yeah.
seven B that's the erm   innit?
Mm.
What's the price of these?
Hasn't it got a price on them?
No.
Do you want me to find out?
No it's alright, no.
Loads of speakers   but er  The nine three eight four, which one's that?
Nine three eight three  five hundred of them  nine three seven two, he's only got ten left of them  popular one that 
Ten left after our thirty?
No 
he's only got ten left in erm
Yeah.
nine left now cos we've got one.
He's got two hundred and seventy six of  them but erm 
Yeah.
two hundred and twenty nine then hundred and seventy five  but I mean  if we could sell them  six quid a time well  
Yeah 
but as you say we wanna get the tellies off him first don't we?
Otherwise he can just give them with the bloody tellies or trying to buy them with the tellies and the dealers have a lovely time
Well yes.
Well he could charge a tenner and the dealers would be happy wouldn't they?
Oh yeah.
He would too.
Yeah.
He'd charge eight anyway.
And he said er  these Toshiba tellies have a, a timer on  thirty sixty ninety one twenty 
Oh yeah
you set the timer and hit the buttons whenever you want it'll turn itself off off the 
Switch off yeah 
If ever you pick it up and er you get that bleeping noise of a fax somebody's trying to send
Mm
if you just hit the start stop button  and just hang on to the phone it'll  come through
Oh right.
after a little while.
Well  those Toshibas go with a bit more of a swing, they were a blooming nuisance before.
I wanna try it on a  one to see if anything's working  
Who had my monitor, Gary or  Dave?
Er Gary.
Did you have that Phillips hand set long ago?
I put it back in the box again.
I'll go and get it for you.
No it's alright I'll probably manage with it 
Well I think that's a bit prettier.
Oh that's a bit livelier innit?
It's more solid innit?
I'll get you the hand set  
Mm   should  back.
Perhaps it wasn't  anyway.
Think it goes by itself alright.
When you get past  it's not too bad.
That should er do it.
Oh that's still a bit high innit?
Got the width there.
Quite good these fast text ones  aren't they?
Yes excellent.
Well you wouldn't have known  fast text without the right hand set would you?
No you wouldn't.
said fast text on it.
Do you want your picture back so you can see 
Yeah I'll put it on mix.
Mix er  I'm not sure what mix is on this one.
That's it.
Mm typical dark screen at the top.
I don't know, you can't tell can you?
No.
Let's got back to another station shall we?
Looks like it's alright.
?
Yeah, that looks alright.
Yeah that's alright.
Yep.
It's a  innit ?it's just the edge of the screen innit?
Or is it?
Oh yes it's the black edge of the   reflecting on it innit?
Yeah, that's alright.
Yeah.
Yeah super.
Brilliant.
It's not brilliant but it's a lot better.
 

Had to laugh yesterday towards the end of er our round, it was really tipping down, misty, fog, couldn't see a hundred yards  I had this almighty s I said well I'll let the six iron, I did this almighty swing  the ball went one way and the club went right up the top of a tree.
It must've been fifteen foot at least up in the air  teetering on a top branch.


I thought oh my god, lost me six iron, all of a sudden crash, it came down.
Old Louis he didn't know which way anything had gone.
He said well I couldn't see any of that  didn't even see the club go up the tree.
different hand set works the black stripe.
Does it?
What one of Alistair's?
Yeah, does it work everything though?
Doesn't work that does it?
No, it works the text  doesn't work the  colour  the on screen display, one of them, innit?and one of them  and that  er and that.
That one didn't work either   gonna try and  there's no on screen display on these is there?
So  
Shouldn't think s 
won't work will it?
This type.
So these are the only ones we can't put them with.
Oh right.
All the later ones we can  but I've got a couple more of these ones that work this one coming anyway so 
But it changes channel dunnit?
And  does it give you volume or not?
Changes channel and does volume I think  
And  and everything.
Erm  yeah that one does  
So I mean it'll do everything barring   
No that other one doesn't
No.
the one we got as a  a master text one doesn't
No.
but one of these would.
That one would.
Right.
So if we want some of these as well well we ain't gonna get cheaper to go with these whatever happens we know that.
Yeah.
albeit the wrong one.
They have got manual settings on there haven't they?
That's right, that's what I thought.
I mean it's
Yeah.
you don't, how, how often do you use the brightness control on the
Yeah yeah
telly?
Channel change, text  0 one  four 0 one  oh
just gives hold dunnit   yeah.
don't work on that one then.
I'll try one of these others.
well we haven't got the right one for those then.
Still 
Don't see so many of those now erm 
I should think this is the same as the non-stereo one, for hand set-wise innit?
Yeah.
Try that last one.
Well it won't text will it?
No.
come in the bags do they, that lot?
Yeah.
Mm.
Yeah  bags.
know what they go with but
just give the bags.
Nice little 
Yes.
Mm 
This one doesn't even text.
No well that's alright.
We've got the two most important ones.
I suppose there isn't a little knob on it that would just happen to work zeros?
er   no  text  well 
Very nice,
So we've got one two three four five six  seven eight  nine  timer   You'd of thought it would erase that time on time off thing innit ?
Yes.
Yeah.
hit again usually.
Dunno.
Maybe   no 
I suppose it's cos it's the wrong  unit is it?
Could be I suppose.
couldn't it?
Yeah.
Right.
Has Jim been in yet?
No.
No.
Oh  put that back into store now.
So when erm  Robert comes in we've got one  two 
There's three there I think.
Oh yeah that grey one.
Erm  still got  for Sanyos.
Do they?
Mm that's interesting.
Is that Fidelity  have we ordered bits for that or is that er 
Yeah we did.
Well we tried to order a manual didn't we?
Somebody wanted to buy it as a non-worker but I said well I said we'd ordered a part for it so 
Er now did we?
I'm trying to think.
That's right, we ordered a   manual  they couldn't get  
Oh yeah they've got one forty R on there but, I mean you look at the set and it says er  where did I get the number?
Fourteen 0 four R. 
Find out what to do about  taking that band saw away I dunno.
Yeah, I saw, I passed him this morning going down to  the garage with some wood 
Was he?
on his roof and all that.
I mean there's all that wood we bought!
Yeah.
It would useful!
 

Be useful in here, you know.
Or e 
I wonder if he'll sell?
No.
I have difficulty  some of them.
They're always, I'm taking stuff away from them.
Erm  cos I'm a right bastard really I think!
No, does me.
But erm 
Hasn't got much to say to any of us.
Find out about er  you know, if that is going through we're gonna have to start flogging some of the stuff off to get some money back then.
Yeah.
He was on his way to the garage you say?
He might bet there 
Yes.
now mightn't he?
Yeah.
Should be there.
So which is Paul's number at the garage?
Oh, hello it's Frank here!
Is erm  is Alan  there do you know?the little workshop, yeah.
He's not.
Who's that, Lloyd?
Oh it's Frank, you know, from the darts team.
Oh!
Alright.
Erm  you could, yes, you could if you see him.
Yeah, he he's got my number there, yeah.
Alright.
Cheers Lloyd!
Bye !
I think I'll try him at home.
Alright.
This should be funny!
I bet bloody  what's her name won't talk to me! innit?
Hello Sandy!
Ho how you doing, alright?
Is Alan about?
Ah, right.
Alright.
Can do or I'll ring him later on.
Whatever!
Yeah, alright Sand.
Cheers then!
Right, bye !
I don't believe that at all!
What's that?
She said he's out and I don't know what time he'll be back!
I bet 
Oh!
she knew exactly where he would be and   what time he'd be back!
She, she's got him on a string ain't she !
She knows


wherever he goes.
That's right.
Oh!
Oh I tell you what he could have done for us  have a look at that master  that  matchline thing.
Yeah, well he's he's going to look at that for us.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think he was gonna get a circuit for it or summat.
I must get  a little tiny erm  filing cabinet sometime.
Well they reckon the weather's gonna be nice for tomorrow don't they?
Says 
Yeah , bright in the morning clearing off look.
So does this morning, but yesterday it was supposed to be fine all day!
Yes!
You know!
We really got caught out then!
Yeah.
Is that all your  there's a  ca cartridge in there  er, cost us, pick up one like you know  er  and there's this Japanese bloke, Pan Wang somebody te ten a month he turns out !
At one thousand six hundred and fifty pounds per cartridge!
Cor!
These my cu erm  Alan's?
No I bought it.
Brave chap!
See things in there  make your hair curl I bet!
But, what
Yes.
you know, you just wouldn't, you wouldn't go to that  
Mm.
I mean that is unbelievable!
See you're detached now, you can go to any level you like!
Well yeah.
Yeah.
I can't wait to get back to detached, I'll go back into some big hi-fi!
Heavy stuff!
Can't beat like the .
No.
A pleasant sound.
It's all stripped apart at the moment!
I thought to myself then, I thought  black spot  rack system
Oh yeah?
, thirty eight quid!
Er  all the  there's three shelves on it, twenty by  eighteen I think they are.
Er  the  Goldring one.
Mm.
Er, and the shelves were spiked onto the sa stand and, and the stand was butted to the floor.
But I think, but that was  just too big, I don't need all that bloody
No.
!
No.
Well really I got   buy something else off his stall..
Yeah!
.
I wanna try it with one of these three, twenty three hour systems, supposed to work it  the last
We might well do actually.
He's had it played, no guarantees  for eighty five  but that's good!
Is that with a guarantee?
I thought, I dunno  picked up a guarantee for twenty quid.
Ooh!
That much?
Find it hard to take a chance for six months    for twenty quid.
So he's gonna take it and try it, play through the .
Well done!
Oh they do try it on!
They do!
They do!
Well you're not wrong!
Er ah er ah!
Er ah er!
You don't know what's on channel one do you, at the moment?
Off hand?
Er, I'm not sure.
I can't tell with these  blooming things!
No I dunno.
I'm just a  all tuned in but I don't know what's on one.
Oh!
Er  er
Er, no!
Well got  double frequencies shouldn't you?
Oh I dunno, got it?
No.
No it won't will it?mark is it?
Yeah.
See I've got one, I can see, cos that frequency's funny on this  
Go on to I T V, maybe that tells you on there.
When you're on the right one.
That's I T, channel three then isn't it?
I suppose.
Yeah.
Th it tells you automatically then what station you're on does it?
Yeah.
Tune on to the next one then you'll be able to tell then.
I usually cre 
Mm, it's going up.
Four one three two innit?
Yeah.
Four one three two.
That's four  that's one.
Oh I see, just carries on 
Well 
through!
Don't it?
Yeah.
Just cha programme search innit, that was, I expect?
And nothing tune  four
Four for four.
cos that might not be what  and it's up there then, perhaps, I dunno!
Suppose it must be mustn't it?
I'm just wondering
Well I go through one of these and see what's on there.
Have a look.
Forget what programmes are what on there!
Try these stops and .
That's four then.
Ah, that is four with the .
Oh that is the one with the
Yeah.
So is one or two?
Yeah , that's the one!
Yeah.
Well that'll work,.
Yeah, getting it going, it's
Oh!
it wouldn't tune in, it was something to do with this  arrangement up here.
So, right that should
Yeah they did work alright, they
Which one's that?
Oh yeah!
Mm.
I got another set, I've got  just got going.
Yeah, it's probably the erm   ace head you know on the side?
Oh yeah.
On the other si 
Have to watch the light on that.
Aha.
Well
That's a lot of light coming in on the back I think.
Yeah.
Cut off after number fifteen with tho the top one as well but I'll
Yeah.
Oh!
I'll turn it off and er  try it.
See if the counter's going up and things like that.
Yeah, the counter's going up it's er  electronic one.
Yeah but even so it's  volt 
Oh!
volt driven.
Forged stop?
Oh, I wonder why it says that then?
That's five seconds, reset  then .
 
It's got that again!
Mm!
Record that
Mm, it's not  not rotating somewhere is it?
See the caption's not turning round right,.
What's that?
Is it anything to do with this ?
I can't drag away from it, while you're doing that.
No, it's alright, we'll have a look.
Do it later.
Tube blew up.
Well do they play?
Does it play?
It played for a little while, I didn't play it for long but it did play.
Oh so, oh it switches itself off does it?
Oh it's designed, it's giving me a fault .
See it did play.
Taking up.
Wasn't bad play back when I fi oh it's not  not doing as much as it did before now!
Then catch it.
Can't figure out what's actually stopping.
Oh that's this one?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Is that the drive belt as well I think.
Yeah, it's probably the idler wants to be cleaned in it.
Oh.
Right.
Right!
Shall I do that from the top?
Yeah,yo you can get up this ca the carriage only four screws and erm
Right!
You might get at it without the er  where's the instruction?
Does that wanna go from side to side does it?
Yeah.
Probably.
Okay.
Might even get at that one there.
Yeah.
Right!
Also, that one could be  that looks very shiny too!
Right!
Do I do it with that pencil thing of yours or with er   Amber Clean 
I'll try  Amber Clean Just give it 
Right!
a little spraying and  and wipe it round.
Yeah, the front just  hinges off at the top.
It's not at the back of the  here is it?
It mi , it may do, why?
Have you spotted something?
Dunno if it's the second one  down that way or not, but there's a crack across there.
Or is i is it a crack or a scratch?
This is the right one.
Yeah, that's the right one.
Oh I'll get my  magnifier.
Thing is, you're actually using, your eyes are not too good!
Well I go get the magnifier to read the bloody  magazine sometimes!
It's ridiculous!
I'm going back to the  opticians with the , the new glasses I got are still flipping worse than these!
No, it's just a scratch I think.
Mm, somebody's been  working on this though haven't they?
The sound chip's in the wrong place.
Crikey!
Well this  is high enough!
Yeah, it's probably worth changing the control innit, to see what happens?
They've evidently looked  you can see where they've scratched to get a screwdriver through there  to try and get the sound  the sound out.
Couldn't you tell with the meter er  th th th the control whether it's worth it or not?
Yeah, you should be able to.
Yeah, but I don't think the  it'll do what you want .
Yeah, you'll have to.
Mm!
Want a se , want a screwdriver there?
I got one there, yeah.
?
Yeah, I got one, yes.
Gonna turn it as well?
Yeah.
If you can  oh, let's put it on.
around from one end to the other that is.
Yeah!
Right!
Right now  one end to the other.
Is it?
Oh!
Go that way.
No.
Well that's .
I'll get there eventually!
That's not reading through anything that one.
That won't read through ?
Yeah , I think so.
Now, one end is joined  so  a bit.
Okay?
Nothing!
No.
So it was circuit then.
Just try the one above cos I think they're  oh wait a minute!
I'm not looking at 
You don't want to go there.
I'm not   silly sod !
Right!
Right, that moves.
Not much there.
It should go right  across at one end.
No!
No that's
Oh it is open circuit then.
Yeah, it's trying to go that 
Yeah.
way.
See if I reflected to this one I'll show you what the affect is.
Tu turn 
Tu 
that ?
Yeah, turn that one, yep!
Even the .
Remember where you can get it back to that's the only thing.
Oh!
Oh it's back where it was.
at one end.
What are you doing this?
Ah ha, let me just twiddle it.
Hang on th check this up and twiddling time.
Yeah, see this is the wiper this should  well assure itself back to that one.
Goes when you touch it there.
Yeah, just touching the ends together.
Oh!
Mm!
I'll try the other one  cos I've got that in bits.
If you can  twiddle that one I'll er 
Yep!
second one down.
It  reads totally different.
That's it!
Up one end  down the other.
More positive that one as well.
Yeah.
That's 
Yeah.
what it should read like.
So it's definitely on the circuit.
So it's down to the chip  and we haven't had the chance of being .
We might have to, we might be able to get away without having to take the board out, if I  if I use the old de- solderer  might be able to just hook it out and put the next one in.
Yeah but yo , that's what they did change, you looking for the fault?
Yeah.
Mm mm mm mm mm mm   Ah ah!
What was that in the ?
I fo forgot now!
Oh  Feverack 
Oh yeah!
Oh!
Oh don't!
Oh my good God!
I've done the old  all been done in the packing!
Oh yeah?
Do you know this bloody thing's jammed in the works somewhere, this control, it's fallen over!
It won't come out!
Swine!
What a duff!
Oi!
Oh !
Oh I thought it was crack, it was only a hair anyway!
Oh is it?
Brushed it off.
have to come off with it.
Mm.
Oh that's probably what's wrong is it, oh?
Don't e too much!
Just  Got the control out anyway!
Dad?
Interesting old thing 
Where's 
isn't it?
mummy?
No so 
And why have you got ?
I don't know what this is do you?
Some sort of time switch.
No, it's erm  it's a bit of a clock daddy!
Is that what it is?
Mm, yes!
Night and day.
Mum!
What's that you've got?
Washing.
Mm!
Ha!
That's an interesting old time switch that innit?
Yes!
We thought it was a bomb!
I 
Mm.
that's right!
I there's a clock.
It is a clock isn't it?
There's a bit of the clock.
Yeah, look there's a winder in the middle there.
If you put a clock bit on there 
Yeah.
you could wind that up.
There's a big spring inside that!
Looks like a bomb!
Yes!
But
Oh it's a time switch with a bomb on!
A could be I suppose.
Yeah.
She is 
It's in there
she's never out  the money in't she?
Oh I dunno!
Hang on!
Oh!
That's a long screw innit?
Mm!
It is.
What is it?
Oh it's a big sort of erm  Rawlplug type thing.
to the Oxfam shop that tall thing hopefully.
What about this thing here?
This one you don't like?
I put, no this one I don't like.
Oh those!
They're 
Yeah.
horrible aren't they?
Don't like those.
Can you take them out  with that one.
This thing  is an old cape which Andy wore once.
Oh yeah !
Yes!
Sylv said that   over it.
What are those little things there look?
Candlesticks, are they?
Yeah they are, and that's a candle.
This is Ken's though, when did he ?, that's the bedroom ?
What's that?
That's the bedroom.
What's this?
You have to wait a minute!
Look what animals  comes down!
Is she filling  over there?
I don't suppose there's  much been done?
She was, yeah.
She was, well she's doing very well!
The shelves, I quite like these shelves they're nice!
Is Petra still out?
No, she walked down.
Oh!
Right, what have we got in this little box here then?
That little , I know she won't !
Oh yes!
Oh no!
Don't get rid of those!
No, I'll take them back to her.
Mm?
Do you want to get anything out?
Mm.
These are very good!
These are er
Yeah, just coming to those.
What
There's the most beautiful little owl too, look!
Yeah.
So they're either supposed to go to a car boot sale  it would help.
They're absolutely  we can keep our   and then we  ooh!
I haven't got a clue what they are, look!
Look at these!
Alright!
Anything to do with the ?
Well 
Mm.
There's some chap's initials on all these.
Mm!
I'll take those  that little teapot .
Mm.
Oh, can if I put those
Put them where I do!
Here!
I don't know quite what this is!
Oh!
Isn't that strange!
It's like a big suitcase!
The pair of white mice are funny aren't they?
Quite !
Now, if you lifted the lid up then I think you could
Cor, I can smell them even without taking the lid off!
They're very smooth!
Erm
Is that a teapot?
Yes!
I think that's pretty!
. Loads of pennies!
But they look like  I thought we'd have a look through those, they look good!
Mm.
Take them up to.
This thing .
There's still a pound coin there look!
Ooh ooh!
Makes up for the one lost .
I don't like the jug.
They're the same.
And tapes.
Upstairs is the .
Look at them knives  !
Yeah.
She thinks you, if he thought you'd turn them out, he probably likes them.
Ah, lovely car boot sale stuff isn't it?
Well it is really.
If we could  taking it for her it'd be worth it.
We've got to  that, people will really enjoy it.
Mm.
What if I got rid of the clothes and kept her stuff  till we're ready to do a boot sale with it.
Dad, but are you doing  are recording all this?
Yes.
Oh!
Lovely !
Oh oh no!
In here.
Did you look in here ?
Look in there for anything?
No, that's it.
That?
Mm.
Rose on the tassel.
Oh it's ideal stuff isn't it?
Yes.
What sort of stuff is in there?
Okay that's it.
Don't !
That little room's for all the jumble sale  of course!
That little red hoover, is that a car hoover?
Yeah.
Shall I hoover it?
Do you want me to hoover it?
Yeah!
It's got a fuse in it and everything!
Hang on!
The second  has got to come inside.
Could we, you can play with the other one.
Probably a good idea, yeah.
I'll have to wash it out.
Smells of fish!
We'll need the hosepipe.
Mm!
There's a jar!
And it   and it's .
You smelt inside it?
Cor!
Yeah.
Might leave the lid open all the afternoon.
Anyway, this is the  this room!
Certainly no weight to it is there?
Just awkward.
Just the  and I, funny we put it in the car  and  Jackie 
Mum that had 
her new neighbour from next door came out  to give us a hand  he was off taking it back in the house again!
Oh no!
Ooh, and we said  what's he trying to do?
Ooh I know!
Put it back in!
That's .
No.
I will  sort these , or should I?
That's your belt isn't it?
Yeah.
Could I put them in  the soft box?
Yeah.
Well that's good!
That'll save me .
Look at this gigantic screw!
Oh!
And these little black
Ah!
We'll try that on Mike.
They're nice aren't they?
I like that sort of thing!
I might keep those for myself at home!
Is there two of them?
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's one up there.
Oh nice!
I think we'll keep those over there.
Yeah.
Oh that's a relief I thought!
Is that ?
But  you know, inside is a gigantic screw!
There's some 
It's a big Rawlplug.
screwdrivers there as well.
Yeah, but it's a big screw in !
Yeah.
They're both , you could do.
Yep!
Yeah!
Yeah!
Do your  a real good screw isn't it?
Yeah!
Very !
Yeah it is a screw.
And, my mum would go er  oh look  you wanted to know what it is!
Frank, what about these earphones?
Shall we see if they're any good?
Yeah!
You plug into the telly?.
Ooh!!
Dad, look at that, a gigantic screw!
Yes!
Isn't it?
That's a big Rawlplug on there.
No it's a big  gigantic screw!
I think.
It is isn't it?
A long one!
Yes.
What does it actually do?
Well you know when we had the ne , the new roof on the warehouse?
Yeah!
And that's how they screwed the  the roof on with those.
Er, yeah, they had a big electrical drill and they  screwed them to the roof with those.
Anyway, this could be  fun!
Oh yes, here's a jacket look!
I thought I'd keep that, if ever I wanted to go fancy dress or something  it's ever so pretty on!
Yeah.
I don't remember Sylv wearing that do you?
Perhaps it's new, she bought  I expect she bought it in the States I should think.
It's got one of those kind of belts with that 
Ah yeah!
and some Nell Gwynn stuff.
Yeah.
Very pretty!
Dash that .
And, she said would we like these shirts?
That's just a T-shirt  and this 
Mum!
is a new sweatshirt.
Mum!
You remember when they screwed it in  daddy's old
Oh they're nice!
roof?
That's nice innit?
And put some new  big tiles on the 
They're new, they must be.
big roof mum .
They would be!
Mum I, listen!
Yes?
listen!
Do you know 
Yes!
Yes!
Yes!
when
Erm, they put some screws in the roof, yeah?
Well this is one of them!
Is it?
Big!
Oh well you can keep it in case we need to screw up the roof again then.
Big isn't 
Aha.
it though!
Right, those things then can go up in one of the drawers, I think they're .
Yeah.
Good!
Did you find  to test them?
I don't know, they might fit in the telly.
See if they're working or not.
Can you bring me  the things up  we can't find  .
Am I right?
Do they go?
Yeah!
.
Now plug it in there.
Yeah, they're fine.
Just keep them for the telly then.
That's an idea!
Yes!
Alright then.
Save using my good ones.
Just get these out.
Oh the they're keeping that wood!
Oh well, that's nice!
Yeah!
The erm  he said  soon they want to do  for the  room  in the porch there.
Dad!
Can't you hear me?
Ah you're talking to me!
You shouldn't have done that you see!
Yes, what is it love?
Up through Wales it said!
What rain, up through Wales?
Yeah!
You listen!
Frost in Scotland?
Yeah!
What have we got in Devon?
Oh, six degrees  tonight!
Rain tomorrow.
Rain tomorrow, aye!
You're recording it.
I know you are!
You're recording it!
Yeah, it's plugged in  and over there!
Right!
Mm.
Going!
Wash your hands!
Ooh ooh ooh!
Daddy!
Daddy!
Thank you.
Ooh!
Now mummy said that this was some  special mixture for you.
Oh!
Dunno what that is!
Must make bubbles I should think.
Oh ah.
Yep!
Just nice!
Ooh bubbles!
Just  that  put some in see if it's real bubbles!
Did you see Sylvia's cats today?
Mm, yeah!
Don't go in that!
Out!
Is she getting this hou house ready to move?
Yeah.
Just fill it up.
Wow!
Oh these!
And yo yo well how did you know that they're ready to move  then daddy?
Well because I work with Steve.
That's how I know that they were ready to move.
Cos you went to see them?
No, I haven't seen the new house yet.
No, you all went  to  today  own house  till they kept  you know!
They er 
What the house you went to today?
Their old house.
Yeah.
Have you seen the ol have you seen what's inside there?
Yeah!
How?
Mm mm mm .
Well all where it came from.
But do you know what they did?
They gave us some swords  too!
Yeah, I saw those.
Ha!
But what they  wonder why they gave us some swords!
Mm.
Perhaps they got too many!
Yeah, he ke 
 
he save, he keeps swords.
He saves those.
Well  oh do they save them?
Mm.
Why do they save them?
Well he collects  things like that.
Mm.
They collect  things?
Oh I do like these  bubbles!
Look at, that's !
Don't go and yell!
Did you get in that house?
Yeah!
I meant  having to curse now and again.
Well what was that problem then?
I just put it on.
Oh pressed the wrong one.
Yeah!
Put it on  why did you have to leave it on?
Right, I'm gonna tip this out now.
Alright.
Ow!
Could could
Come on you!
Right!
  
I'm gonna tip this so soapy water
Ooh!
Daddy!
What?
You should of did that!
Why?
Then it needs some more in now!
Well you can put some more in.
But I don't want you to do it!
That?
It's alright!
You can't leave it there to get cold!
You may as well put it in the water.
Well can't, if I did it that way  it would use your  because it might all, take all the bubbles out!
Oh!
That's, that's it.
Ooh!
You can't see the .
The water can't go through.
Oh!
Yes l
How's it going?
Oh not too bad.
No!
Ah ah !
Let's have a look at the first then?
Got rid of that cylinder thing have you?
Yeah!
Three, mm.
Did you bring the machine with you, by the way?
With that base or not?
It didn't have one.
It didn't have one, right!
I didn't have one.
It's erm  but I erm, I have actually ordered one.
Have you?
Ah!
Mm.
Mm.
Mind you, it's twenty, twenty five quid for a base but  the thing is these  that particular tube in there is in  most of those tissues isn't it?
Yeah.
So  and they, what they will start to get a bit low  so  that's, I mean if erm  if that one ne , if he comes in, he'll probably be here  Monday.
Yeah.
Or Tuesday  erm
That one, just gonna have a little look at that one.
I think it's the same base again.
Yeah.
Oh well 
Or the 
see if I can get them out and do this.
Mm.
If I move this bre straight back is that enough room?
Ya,.
That's alright.
This one's dead I believe.
It's got
Oh, yeah  I do , I don't remember what's er  I think it's  well it's three isn't it, altogether?
Yeah.
We got a nice, cheap supply of Toshiba hand units now!
Have you?
Yeah.
Six and a half quid a throw.
Cor!
Brand new ones.
Oh!
Mm.
I just bought one for that twenty erm  that twenty  four inch I've bought, he was
What fast text?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It was er  twenty odd quid.
Yeah.
Do you ever deal with  Grandata 
With who?
 Grandata 
No.
They n , do chips mainly, chips and transistors.
Yeah.
No I
Erm  I think these  quite common, you know the erm  T D A four five O  five.
Mm, yeah.
They're like six quid from H O S and they're thre 
Yeah.
three quid a piece from  Grandata 
Oh are they?
Yeah!
Their stuff is, sort of half the normal price.
Wonder why that is then?
Dunno.
You just send erm  they've got our credit card details and we just phone them up and it's there the next day!
It's half the price of normal stuff!
It's always good!
Mm.
Oh bloody hell!
And the T V make.
Is it?
Yeah.
They do things that you don't normally get from  average  places 
No.
you know.
Ah!
Very useful!
We still haven't seen anything of that chip yet, you know from
Eh?
Fergie hasn't sent that chip yet.
What, sorry?
Fergie hasn't sent that yet so
Oh 
he said it will be.
Well I'll have to pop out won't I?
Oh!
Seeing that one  what di , what did erm  what are they running out at?
Haven't we got any left?
We haven't got any left at the moment but 
Aren't they ?
No, his  transformer's O C, and C D don , doesn't work.
It's a wrecker really that one!
Aha.
Only I've, somebody asked me about one with erm  S C B, B grade one or whatever 
Yeah.
they are.
There's a lot more to come down.
Yeah.
So they will get some more.
Alright.
What are they like service manuals, Toshiba, price-wise?
Er, we can 
Er , well we get stuff  well, actually I've bought a couple out my case.
I'm trying to get one for this model here, we have a lot of these erm  similar chassis in them.
What model is that?
This is the new stuff I think.
It's probably too new.
Twin amp power supplies, he uses that erm
Two O four.
Oh well I'll have to try, try keep going down to the courses down to Toshiba.
Yeah?
Mm just 
They hold them in Plymouth do they?
Yeah.
Yeah.
They do all the bloody .
You haven't got that patch lead through yet I suppose  for that
No!
I dunno why that never arra 
I mean it's not a problem, it's
Was it two one five volts then cos I'm tuning , comes on okay but by the time you've   tape wrecker that was!
Yeah I remember, ooh!
Something flashing  the picture.
Always useful, for the future because we'll be getting a lot 
Yeah.
of Toshibas through.
Well this is older stuff you see.
Yeah.
The two five eight, that's the one like I had weren't it?
Yeah, I've got them round here but it's a  label.
The other, throw it away.
Two one nine.
Say that's erm  mm.
Two one five.
Mm mm, we have lots of two one fives and two one fours.
That's a two one nine.
Oh!
Goes on lower levels there.
Mm.
So erm  keep the, well I'd like to keep it.
Can you copy that off?
No, I work i I'll copy that off, yeah.
Might come in handy.
Yeah I'll get the machine under.
Right!
This thing you've got, it ought to go to Devon.
What this?
Yeah.
Just gotta work it out er
Do you want a copy of these?
I've got that one?
Have you?
Yeah, I've got that one.
I've, I went into .
Went in there.
A actually I, I went next door in the bank yesterday and the bloke in there sa one of the blokes said can I put this up here and ?
Yeah.
I walked in there and  I can se he had a  he had a  er some copies and  and er  he was getting one in the bloody phone!


It's gone.
We went the bank the other day and er  the assistant manager was showing me a picture of his Range Rover.
I said I recognize that Range Rover I said, left hand drive innit?
It's co I said it's come from Dubai or somewhere?
He said, yeah!
I said Steve used to own that.
He said, he didn't!
Really upset him!
I said, yeah he sold it to some bloke out Ivybridge for er  erm  off, off road racing and stuff.
Oh he was really 
Oh did he?
upset  you know !
I said did it come from Ivybri ?
Yeah, he said it did.
Oh dear!
Ha!
Oh!
That put him off!
He was gonna spend a lot of money  converting it back to right hand drive and  I said it's air conditioned and everything innit?
He said, yeah!
That's right, that's the one.
Mm.
Oh no!
That's just, no isn't it?
Erm  de depends whether it's path or not.
If it was path it would point one five wouldn't it?
Mm.
Point one will do, thousand volts then won't it?
Mm.
I'll see if I've got one out in the van.
I say, I'll pop in on the old .
Yeah!
Certainly, yeah!
So I I'd do it today 
Fix you up with something.
but I'm a bit pushed for time 
Yeah.
today.
Cos I'm
The F S T's 
Cos I'm always, I'm always down here you see,e anyway.
Yeah.
The F S T ones with the guarantee about one fifty, but that's 
Yeah.
about  a four hundred  could set you
Yeah.
But, we get cheaper ones as well.
Yeah.
Alright!
Alright!
Lovely!
Cheers then!
Two boxes from Toshiba handsets.
Ah yes!
Have you got any  zero one two seven?
Yeah.
Well actually I want some Toshiba  zero two eights.
Have you got some?
Yeah.
Got some.
Ninety pence each, not too bad I suppose.
Cheap!
And he dropped in a twenty seven inch Sony this morning.
But it took  should of taken four of us to lift it really but
Somebody dropped one of them?
Yeah.
It was a struggle for two of us to get it out of the car and  weigh a ton don't they those?
Yeah.
It's only the tube isn't it, where the weight is on those?
Well  .
is a bit whatever.
Does it fit there?
These bits
Yeah.
Yeah, it's like a   crank case innit?
Bloody thing's blown everything in creation!
Is it?
Mm.
Mm.
Blown that  blown  blown that, blown that, that one's gone.
Sue wrecked it for us!
Oh!
Oh I'll do it myself.
Hundred and fifty ohm.
Think I've got one of them, yeah.
In fact this particular chassis I've never had er  never done any work on.
That's why you said about that mod just now it's er  it's all green to me!
I mean I'll, I'll have to find out about that.
What I'll probably do is try and get some running, I'll take that one and that one
Yeah.
er, and then bring them back when they're ready.
But if 
Right.
this one don't go either I'll probably take off of there.
Er  oh I got my  didn't I?
That's the last of that.
Right !
Get some more of those.
Keep us amused in the winter months, er  it's er  gone quiet.
I say, they're both the same board.
That one's fixed.
So is that one.
Yeah,th th th the guy thought it was erm   spot killer circuit fault but it's not a monitor fault.
Yes I know that, yeah.
Cos one board works differently than the other.
Does it?
This is the same board you say?
Same game, yeah.
And er, it says the fault on both so we keep
Er er, two two different faults.
This will shut you down to a spot  will take 
And 
the scan away
and then it's that, that's that board?
That's that one.
Yeah.
And the other one, I think, when it shuts down  it's just sort of se a semi-sa er scan  .
Devon T V, good afternoon!
Just about!
No.
Right!
Yeah!
Yeah.
No, you saw Steve actually, he's actually moving house today but  erm  any chance you can come in Monday?
No.
Right!
I'm I'll  I can't manage it this side of the weekend.
I'm on my own here today, you know.
Erm  what was it you actually picked out?
Right.
Right.
Right, okay.
I T T, yeah on the mo I'll go and have a look, make sure it's still here  cos a few went out yesterday.
Er, this is a ninety two which is a non-remote  I think a remote one went out yesterday.
Yeah.
Oh, I know the one!
Yeah, that's still here.
It says remote control on the top but it's the wrong front, I think, on it I saw yesterday, yeah.
Yeah.
That's, that is still here, yeah.
Right.
Er  whereabouts are you?
Timbersfield.
Gonna be a bit difficult, we don't erm  don't actually go that way.
No.
Erm  no, I'm normally  I'm, funny I was over that way last weekend cos er, you know, pop over to the beach and things.
But I'm not over there this weekend, bit tied up with it.
Yeah, I know.
I should be on a golf course really!
I'll hang on to it anyway  erm  so that it's  safe, you know?
And er  five o'clock.
Yeah.
Okay.
Right, lovely!
Thanks a lot.
That's it.
Oh yeah, D T V  D T V  alright?
Okay.
Bye now .
Do you want my number?
Oh right!
I'll give you our er
Erm
Ooh ooh!
Just go in your Cortina then?
Ne nearly anyway!
Nearly !
Yeah, just!
Lovely!
Er, I mean that's the only thing about it.
Oh er!
This thing  that's where I'll be .
They're remotes aren't they?
All remotes, yes.
Got two bits of string.
Probably got a bit of maintenance wire somewhere.
Cheap repairing a  fuse they should be about right shouldn't it?
For the er  repair?
Cheap tube, I mean.
Oh yeah!
Yeah.
Mm.
They're .
A tube.
I'll er look out for some  tubes, for you.
Yeah, but it's just  really for the  making up for the odd one I 
Yeah.
really.
Might be able to get  one board out of the two mightn't you?
Those market boards.
Yeah, well I mean if you've only got to  the one  machine you don't need two boards necessarily do you?
No.
Except er for spares.
Now  where are they gonna go?
Ah!
Down below the bunker I think.
I've got miles of telephone cable.
Alright.
Yeah, I've got a Cortina estate, I mean they're good old work busters these aren't they?
They are aren't they?
Yeah.
I did quite well with this!
Se six hundred pound, only forty thou , well less than forty thousand on the clock!
Mm!
Very good!
Which wasn't bad at all!
I got a two litre G L.
Yeah.
Sixteen hundred, well  it doesn't pull sometimes but it's very economical!
Yeah.
Got some slips on the er
Yeah.
I've got your .
Okay!
Right then Frank!
Okay John?
I'll give you one of our er  cards.
Okay,, I'm on the card 
Right.
here.
Okay.
Thanks Frank!
If you hear of anybody that  wants a   any, well a as I say I get to the point where  I've got to need the work somebody, you know?
But er
Yeah.
I'll see how things go.
Well we haven't
Mind you, it's always the sa like it's the work th getting on with the machines I can sort of work through the
Yeah.
the summer really.
Yeah.
But er  come sort of January it starts getting tighter and tighter.
Yeah.
I think it's a question of hanging on until 
That's right.
Ha!
Bu but you normally start .
Not so much money coming in these days.
No, I mean we're, we're ticking over basically but 
Mm.
er
Yeah.
Well you  presumably ke presumably kept a lot of your customers and to do
Ta oh, we've got a lot of new ones actually.
I haven't 
Mm.
seen many of the old ones.
Haven't you?
No.
Since that advert, I mean we've picked up customers that would normally go to Bristol.
Yeah.
And they find it easier to come here now.
Yeah.
They find it very difficult to get into Torbay to try and trade  cos it's  very, I mean it's  another hour on the trip really isn't it?
That's right.
Going to Torbay just for 
Well that's what  the people have got to measure it up against isn't it?
People up at Avonmouth haven't 
Yeah.
they really?
But er  and I suppose your problem is competing with them really?
Well we, we have the same price structure as them, so 
You do?
it's no different really, no.
Oh that's  innit?
Some people  if you do that you'll  
Yeah, we should do alright.
Well you got , got to take  
We got a lot of Plymouth trade now.
Yeah.
That's good!
Mm mm.
Well yo your  replaced really .
You corner i unless somebody opens up in Plymouth  all the people that come here.
Yeah.
Mind you, you could always open up in Plymouth as another branch couldn't you?
That's right!
 
Alright John!
See you Frank.
Nice to see you again!
Bye bye then!
Bye now!
I think   when we take that off.
Right.
I haven't got a room for  and that bloody 
Yeah.
Metro so frigging small!
Yeah.
Er  I'll take that one  when I bring that one back  I'll whip that one away.
Okay.
Alright?
Yeah, lovely!
Seeing as I'm  sort of got half into that one really.
Yeah.
That one's alright.
I've put that  I've tipped that like that on the board is it alright?
Yeah.
Good!
Oh it's fast text as well, oh that's good!
Yeah.
Well I haven't got a handset but
Well we've got a handset somewhere for it.
text as well.
Right, I'm gonna go!
Right.
I left my cards there you can have.
Oh I got them, yeah.
Yeah.