

It's running.
And I've placed it in a strategic position.
Where it can pick up everybody's conversation.
Yeah.
Right?
But er 
You're not supposed to s 
 
What?
This is when you go dumb.
No, you don't have to worry about that.
We  
No, I say you don't, you do.
You go dumb when you er  when they switch on a
I think it ought to be made clear that the  the voices that you can hear, or will be hearing in the next half an hour or so will be that of the television.
Yeah well that's a fact of life.
She  she has to make out a form, with erm what was happening at the time and everything.
The duration  and all that type of .
But so far she's managed to record five minutes of conversation between me and her.
So  and she's got twenty tapes  C  nineties to do .
What was this tape?
It wasn't bedroom er ?
No no this was just 
 
just some conversation we had during the day.
Oh.
But  if I can leave it running and it runs out it will  suit me down to the ground.
There you go Dennis.
Eyes down for a full house.
Cocked that up properly.
That's Loretta Swit.
Have to get your eye in won't you, on this?
Yeah.
that one.
Well I couldn't go to the bottom of the table because of the  Eeeuk!
Bit like pot black really isn't it?
Clink 
Yeah.
clink clink.  conversation off this.
Oh dear  
Ooh,
Oh I'm sorry.
I didn't realize you .
Erm, I broke so you .
Yeeuk.
That's all they'll get isn't it?
That's all they're gonna here, eeeuk.
Oh well, that's broken the duck anyway.
There was too much power on that one.
I definitely haven't got the action .
Definitely  erm what I was trying to do was  not do what I've been doing which is to jerk .
Yeah.
What are you making?
Thing is I had some wool  and I had the  thing.
And I tried to do a pattern but it sent all my eyes crazy counting these
Yeah.
holes.
So I'm just erm 
mixing up the colours that will go.
?
Yeah.
 

Choice   Almost.
Not good enough though.
Put it up then.
Oh yeah.
Yeeeuk.
Pink.
Mark it.
Mm
Probably happy with that Dennis.
You got one didn't you?
Don't think they're getting their value for money off this tape.
What do you reckon?
Do you want a tea or a coffee?
Sorry?
Do you want a tea or a coffee?
Cup of tea please.
I've just been filling in my books and reading all about it.
I rang mum up.
Mm?
And said to her about erm  putting the kids to bed.
Mm.
And said we'll try and get something sorted out before you babysit on the  nineteenth.
I said we didn't do too bad.
I said Ben was wet but I didn't, his bed wasn't, so  god knows  
Is it a marketing exercise for the Sony Walkman really?
Sorry?
Is it a marketing exercise for this?
I don't know.
Oh I've just been listening to your conversation with Dennis and Iris.
Yeah?
Was it any good?
Mm clank, click pheew clank click .
I couldn't understand what you  you were saying to Iris though.
Couldn't you?
No.
Oh well 
Well you, all I heard was something about her sorting out some wool  and
She was doing a tapestry thing.
I'm a little bit erm  concerned with our Darrell.
Yeah oh I think he's just peed off with his  father.
or 
Yeah but it just st strikes me he's losing perspective of who's doing what for who.
I appreciate that the long term we gain as far as that property, yeah?
Yeah.
But the short term, he is not making us rich is he?
Not by doing it the speed he's doing it.
If he'd have taken his time and he'd have got himself some more work  yeah?
Yeah.
Well I think he, it's just Friday night and  he's coming up here tomorrow morning.
Is he, why?
Oh, I just said do we see you over the weekend
Mm.
and he says he's coming up tomorrow morning and erm  but he's got places to go and people, you know how he says it, places to go  people to see  tomorrow afternoon and Sunday.
I asked him if he was going on his boat and he said no.
No, he's put it in his winter mooring hasn't he?
No idea.
Fair weather sailor Jim.
Despite all the rum bum baccy stuff.
I think it's just Friday night and he's  yeah, basically.
I don't think Billy's telling him enough  to be honest.
Why?
I just don't.
What, he knows something's happened .
But he doesn't know what it is.
He doesn't seem to be involved in that many  discussions about the company does he?
Or what's happening.
I mean  he was moaning about erm or those trade accounts weren't he?
Mm.
well it's not for me to say.
I don't know anything more about this business than he does.
Oh no.
go as far as to say we probably know less about what's going on than he does.
Do we?
Oh.
Such is life.
I had a word with Steph on the phone.
Oh?
She's getting fat.
 
Yeah.
She goes to hospital on Thursday.
Eighteen week appointment.
She's had another scan.
Got to work on Sunday.
They're gonna work from  nine thirty till four thirty this Sunday.
Mm.
And then every Sunday up to Christmas.
And if the  trading's good enough they're gonna carry it on.
So  how that will go with the Sun Sunday laws I don't know.
I'm waiting for Tesco's to  foreclose on what they said they were gonna do.
And what's that then?
Well they're supposed to be opening on Sundays but didn't Texas and all those get fined last year?
Mhm.
For opening on Sundays?
Yeah but because there's a  European Court  ruling outstanding  local authorities aren't gonna take them to court.
Oh.
Because the  shop can just put an injunction on them, stopping them taking it any further.
Or they can sue them for loss of income.
Uhuh.
Yeah?
Are you having this bath?
Yeah.
Are you happy about this car situation?
Yeah.
You sure?
Yeah.
It's work I'm  concerned with.
Why?
enough done.
You've got Monday haven't you?
 
You've got Monday haven't you?
Sorry?
You've got all day Monday.
Yeah but I need to do some typing.
I'm trying to think how the fuck I'm gonna conduct this meeting  with half the company round the table.
Yeah.
How I'm gonna run it.
Well how many's gonna be at this meeting?
About twelve I think.
Including Jeff?
Jeff, Fred.
Brian  who's their manager of operations.
Jo?
No.
Oh!
She's not getting a look in?
Sorry?
She's not getting a look in?
Not so far.
Ha ha, I bet she winkles her way in if there's a free lunch going.
There isn't a free lunch on it, it's company internal software.
Oh.
Do you want mum to come to Argos with me tomorrow morning?
Why?
Well she isn't, I don't think she's doing anything tomorrow morning.
Are you asking me?
Why are you asking me?
Cos you said you'd come to Argos with me.
I said I'd stay here with the kids.
Oh is that what's the plan of action?
Yeah.
Sorry.
Right.
Okay.
Erm, I said I'd try and get over and see Steph one day next week.
Sorry?
I said I'd try and see Steph one day next week  and take her some maternity clothes and erm  I'll wash some of these baby things.
If not I've only got to put them up in the attic  and bring them down in  three month's time.
So I might as well take them over there and get rid of them.
She said she don't mind having the stuff in the house.
Those new twenty pound notes frighten me.
Everyone's .
Sorry I asked.
You have ain't you?
Twice.
Yeah I was lucky.
I  some meat  and  christmas pudding and brandy butter.
I said I've got some boring people coming on Sunday  for lunch.
So, oh they're vegetarians  oh one, no the wife is vegetarian, she's a real mare  .
I mean I don't mi the husband's alright  the husband's alright.
But she's really pathetic.
And erm I got the vegetarian cookbook out this morning so Rob said what you looking at that for?
So I said well Janet's a vegetarian I said, I can't give us lot roast lamb and give her  you know.
Said I've gotta do her something a bit decent.
Said I know what to give her  he said ever so excited.
So I said ooh I said, what's that?
He said Birds Eye frozen dinners.
He said you can   I said you can't do that.
But she  she ate, the only meat she eats is chicken.
She's vegetarian but she eats chicken.
see what I  I might 
She isn't a proper vegetarian then is she?
do something with that tomorrow and freeze it and then reheat it, give it on Sunday for her.
She isn't a proper vegetarian then?
Oh no!
Too pathetic to do anything properly.
Yeah that's her.
I remember her now  
Well I'm not gonna laugh when she comes up here am I?
No.
No 
Well no it was the way you said the jumper.
No I said  jumper.
Oh I see.
.
Oh that's nice.
Will that be okay?
Yeah.
Something like that?
I want it quite 
Yeah do, do you want in chocolate and vanilla?
Yes please.
Right.
Well I do, I do them all, try and do them all a bit different but it'll be something on that line.
It's nice innit?next one?
No there's  enough .
No, it's just literally sponge and buttercream.
It's all yours.
Thank you.
Oh it's  it it's on a  it's on erm  it's on a plate so you er I don't mind  I'm, you know I don't mind not getting it back for the next month.
Well you won't get it back till next week.
I'm not I I I 
You don't want me to take all this  now?
No, I I'm not  no, I've got enough plates to keep me going.
just have to wash an extra one out.
Yeah well she
Sure you'll have enough for Sunday?
Yeah well she might have a paper one.
Not really, no.
I've just got a bag of crisps.
I'll go.
Go on!
No!
I 
Come on then!
She's a worrier.
Why, what's the matter with her?
She 
Why?
I don't know.
Is she like that at home?
She's obviously scared.
I thought  I thought if you spend time  my kids.
. I put  the two of them are sleeping together in the same room  and the other one's in, we've put her back in with us.
When  if one wakes up then we've got three up there I said to Robert no way.
if one of the eldest wakes up  got to go back to bed.
Er Robert said  Charlotte who's two and a half  she's always been pretty  but erm   Robert said right, mother's babysitting on the nineteenth so  organize  I I've been getting them into bed  and then I've gave them a little bit of milk or whatever  they want  and then they've had toast with jam on.
When they've had that I say right you're going to bed now .
Well we had to  drag them down the hall .
The first night I took them to bed at quarter past seven.
Literally quarter past eight when the I mean oh god knows how many times I went in there.
But I didn't lose my rag, I was in the right mood to deal with it .
So at quarter past eight I said right I said  go to bed said gonna turn that light out .
Saturday night I put them to bed  erm they went to bed at half seven Saturday night.
But I actually got .
So then Sunday night erm  we was there for twenty minutes  for ten minutes.
Oh no.
So I  better now.
Mind you last Monday when I got home they was all up.


They was all in bed  it was only Joseph who was up when I come out  but he was nearly gone up.
Rob said within twenty minutes of you gone, he said they was all up.
Oh dear.
It's quite a good idea though.
Cos I say that, that makes the money for the christmas party.
the raffles I want  they've got some prizes  .
Yeah.
Your Barry's in here.
Oh right.
Cos I said I think I should have 
Oh my god.
.
I said Gillian you see.
she said, has she  them?
I said 
Who was that?
Mrs , the funny, oh no I think that was Mrs erm  not Mrs , what's the other one?
Can't remember .
Mrs .
!
Short hair.
Grey hair.
Straight, straight short hair.
Always  
Quite tall .
Never wears anything jazzy.
Very plainly dressed.
Rather tall and she's very 
Mind you she's French  she's taught French 
Yeah.
tell me what they were singing?
Who?
Wheels on the bus.
Oh wheels on the bus that was.
on the bus goes swish swish swish.
yeah Charlotte sings that bit.
Pete's starting to sing  kind of mumbling the first two lines and all of a sudden she goes  on christmas day  .
I dread to think what Ben's gonna be like on chr christmas.
Why?
Well he's so hyped up now.
I know, all the shops have got father christmas.
Tommy goes shop father christmas father christmas 
Well this is it.
Yeah.
is he coming tonight?
No!
He's so hyped up  it's unbelievable.
Three twenty  then she started shooting off  
number one eight six.
Green one eight six.
I've got it the other way round look.
all day long   something 
Yeah.
beep beep all day long .


Dark blue nine seven o.
Nine seven o on the blue.
Eleven.
Ben's already tried to get one of his christmas presents, to get it out the box.
Which one?
Well I mean I'd bought stuff they'd all share.
And this is a sort of erm a  car station.
On the yellow number two eight two.
What?
A sort of a car station thing.
You go up on it and  it's  Mr Chuff So I got him that.
I got Charlotte the   Mr Loops Yellow Bus.
It's got all little people inside it.
What, the toy bus?
Yeah, that one.
Is it any good?
Well I ain't got it out the box yet.
I ain't had ch I mean I haven't had the opportunity to erm  have a look at it yet.
And Joseph I got a couple of toys for as well.
Yeah.
Well I might be going out, going to Pet 
On the red number two eight six.
going to Peterborough to erm 
Two eight six on the red.
get myself something to wear if I don't hurry up and  if I don't hurry up and get something.
 
Yeah.
So erm  I might have to go to Peterborough yet on that day and get myself kitted out.
Well I've looked round Wisbech and I've looked round Lynn.
There's absolutely nothing.
Evening dress .
I mean either that or they're right up to your backside, you know, and I mean 
pink number four five five .
He just kicked the bucket.
Do you reckon that'll ?
No that's that's well sellotaped up look.
Yeah.
Blue nine four five.
Nine four five on the blue.
Did you see anything for dad, for ?
That's what I say.
Was that jumper alright?
He ain't tried it on yet.
Come in, we had tea then he went out again.
Well what else is it ?
Tea and biscuits or tea and sugar 
Back on blue number eight six seven.
Blue eight six seven.
I wouldn't have it, she's supposed to be spending it tonight.
Well I think I could make  twenty quid go further than that.
Well look better should I say.
Look better.
his cake.
Pink four three three.
Four double three on pink.
Well what's in that flat box?
Has anyone discovered yet?
Well whatever it is no-one don't seem to want it.
On the yellow number three five six.
Three five six on yellow.
I honked up this morning .
Pardon?
I honked up this morning .
Rob made me a cup of coffee  and erm I forgot it had been standing there  and er  I went to take a mouthful course I got a mouth full of skin didn't I?
Ugh.
I thought now what do I do?
Do I swallow it or do I, and I stood there debating over that was it, I went wheeuuu.
I thought well that's made up my mind for me .
Oh god it was gross.
I said to Rob I said well I'm a couple of pounds lighter.
He said why, cos I've just honked up.
He said you're not are you?
I said no  I had that bloody cup of coffee you made .
On the white now six two two.
Six double two on white.
Well  that black  that black .
Well how much are those tin of Cadbury fingers?
Well I ain't seen nothing like that on there have you?
That's it.
Ten ten pound box of Quality Street  
Yeah.
at least that's something worth having.
Precisely.
Right it's on the white number six two three.
Six two three on the white.
Oh  god well it can't be anything that exciting then can it?
Yeah.
The last one on the green number eight four o.
Eight four o on the green.
No  nothing folks.
Right, let me turn the cake round.
Think it's used to you in that  I don't know what , I don't tell Ron, well he knows how I felt cos I said course I'm , god he said, is that a performance, he said I haven't sat on your knee for ages, I said no I just feel like it , before we went out and er, I said well I don't think there's anything the matter do you, I said with him back there saying make sure Mr Hudson has the notes, and he said no, he said, he said he wouldn't leave it seven months he said
No
if he thought there was something up he would of sent you for an x-ray, or 
Mm .
a blood test  he said I should think what's happened, that guy who's seen you, has, I, cos I said it was his understudy, yeah, cos he said Wendy had seen Mr Hudson so obviously the notes weren't in there were they?
No 
You see, and, I, I now I've handled it a little bit better, but I couldn't focus much at all this morning.
Huh, I think I had such a good night,you know what you've bloody well done he said you've got up he said before you was ready he said, you knew you wanted to get on he said, and you've got up he said with the intentions he said, you had them bloody cakes he said before you had breakfast, well I had to with her coming 
But did you know that erm, you was having Emma?
No  she went,
Well next time she does that to you, you're out to meet somebody  
I would have thought if she would have sat in the chair, I mean  well she couldn't go the week  aha   I don't  young enough  yeah,about a month ago she just peed of somewhere and some , I don't know, she's alright, I said yes she'll be alright, I said I'm going to start cooking  so she said I got to take these Heather, I said well they'll travel better in there, your father said you know Jane he said if you'd given her a hand
Yeah
yeah, she ain't got a minute has she?
I said I want them back today and I said erm  this morning  cos I said er I want them to put my cakes in, oh she said, oh, well are you going anywhere?
So I said no, so I'd better get on with my cooking, so she said oh she said done it on pur colour co-ordinated, I'm a bit more colour co-ordinated than that I was yesterday I had a 
You're doing very well
I had a red jumper, but this was a, to be a honest this was a bit grubby down the front so it meant  today


 
meeting last night
I ain't got a jacket with me, cold innit?
I think it's  I think it's 
cold innit?
I've   Ron's well chuffed with this car
Yeah.
went down to Horsham yesterday and erm  went down there and came back filled it up with petrol, and it worked out to five quid
No
said we would get  a mile   B M W 
Oh well
Small world then, life's  I mean erm, child seat, there was one child seat in  that was strapped to the  and erm there was erm the, the other car seats in the front of the  not strapped in  I had to hurry up and put them in the back, cos I was running a bit late  I was running a bit late anyway.
I was six , I could have got another four little ones, I'd used like  and I thought well  er  I perhaps get us  you see and you 
Think about that.
Raffle tickets Gilly, have you planned your conservative raffle tickets?
Yes, I've got them in my bag.
I've said to Jay I don't know whether she don't want me to help her, I don't know, I, this is the second time I've said to her, and she said oh I don't know where they are, and I ain't gonna ask her no more, if they get there they get there and if they don't  
No, I've put mine , put mine in the envelope so will you hand them in on Saturday?
I'll tell Ang push them through the door  so they can get  
I thought you might stand a better chance of winning if there weren't enough votes.
I won last year
Yeah 
even if it was just  
So er, but I thought, Gemma's got  if you can come er Joseph in front
I bought, I bought his pushchair in.
Oh, then I can just go up to Co-Op 
I thought , oh
I thought I'd go into erm  I'd go to the bank on my way to  this afternoon.
Alright.
How about that for an idea?
Yeah.
There's more than five minutes left.
So which, which car park would you want to go in, the Rainbow on the roundabout going
Why?
well they don't have  do they?
Oh so it's the  yeah 
and you 
No.
and then if you two let er  with Charlotte
Caroline, yeah.
Caroline.
Oh, it's, it's Westgate.
Yeah but you see it says Co-Op you see.
Oh I'm thinking of Rainbow  why am I thinking of Rainbow, is that Co-Op as well?
Yeah.
Oh well, that's where I'm getting right confused.
at the top  
yeah well as long as we get to school for half past, I mean  but she'd got a nice little cauliflower and, I think she'd got a carton some sort of .
George Benson   
Yeah I did notice 
well at least we've got a  keep an eye on .
That's what I thought, I'd bring the pushchair in, so we don't  there .
A lot to fiddle with, but you know we'll use.
poor Derek, I mean I don't know whether Derek's away,didn't bother to come up on, if  if he didn't bother to come Friday  well he's still laying on the bench, but if it's Jack you see, the other day she   well  give did you ask him, I said no I don't mention it till Friday to him  and then when I get the next one I'll say well is it this week's or last week's?
Yeah.
I don't want him to say well she didn't come round, she didn't ask me for the money, I mean I haven't ask him for the money and, he'd like to on a Friday, when one come up, when the next one comes you  can you?
I thought going out tomorrow, so I said to Bob,
Well you know what a great big  appreciate your trip tomorrow won't you?
No wonder you 
That's right, it's just that I worked, I think, yesterday I couldn't get into  erm, I just couldn't get into and yesterday I must admit  I felt really rough and erm, I thought at three o'clock I was going to have to ring Iris, cos I knew you were still out you see and at three o'clock I thought I was going to have to ring Iris er just to come in cos I can't  like your head was  my stomach was churning over, it wasn't till, soon as I get some food in front of me oh I get , you see I didn't feel too cracking in the morning and I thought well there's lots of stomach bugs going about and I thought well I'm having one of them, and I didn't know what I fancied for lunch and I cooked the kiddies theirs, they had fish and what have you, and erm, I thought well what can I have,I thought I what, I thought I got a little tin of salmon there, so I thought right I'll have a salmon sandwich and I had that and believe me I felt, by three o'clock I could see myself picking me up off the floor, I only got spots before my eyes as such, but, I just had, I had four, five cups of water, I didn't drink any tea, and I wish then, well I don't know whether I could have felt any worse when I had the sandwich or not to be honest.
Your father said er David was poor yesterday, Monday, he kept coming over sick.
But, I felt, I know, at one point I really thought I was going to have to ring Iris to come and just sit with the kiddies, but I thought well if I drop down what the hell, devil this house gonna look like in, with three of them  let loose in.
But do you feel better today?
Yeah  I feel one hundred per cent better 


Are you 
No, I was, I was, came over all, I didn't feel right when I got up in the morning, I'll try and park outside Westgate, I didn't feel right when I got up in the morning, Kelly get round, yes I can go and oh  find Robert   erm, yeah I didn't feel right in the morning, but as soon as the day went on as soon as I had this salmon salad, sandwich, and Rob said to me well you sure it wasn't that, cos he said sometimes that salmon could make people feel a bit, nothing wrong with that, it's just a tin of salmon, you know.
Yeah, but I mean if you were like that in the morning well its worse  
Anyway it's doing  feel hundred per cent worse  you know  but erm  I got the, I had quite  and when you come I was, I was playing peepo with my jumper weren't I?
When you came to door I was pulling, pulling the head 
Well  I was coming  didn't I?
Yeah, yeah well what time was that?
Ooh,
Fourish?
Just after that.
Erm  well just as you come, that's the best I felt all afternoon and I, all I was doing was playing peepo with them through me jumper, cos I  games  
Where's he there going?
No he's chin wagging to someone  well I'll drop you off here, well that's not a lot of good is it?
Cos you won't know where I've parked.
But no, but I can have a 
Meet me outside Frank's, alright, I'll drive round and park outside Frank's
Mm, mm.
If I'm not parked out, if there's, there's anyone going about I won't park out, erm if I haven't parked where that silver car is
Mm.
just  can you nip in and get me a pound and a half of liver?
Yes.
And can you have a look at the price of Mr or someone or other circus, it's Mr Toots or Mr Loots or
Right
turtles or, leave, leave her in here nan
You sure?
yeah, yeah 
She can come
No leave her in here.
ok 
Hello
Is
hello
hello, you ooh, oh she's gone.
hello
Yeah nanny's gone look.
hello, hello
Yeah we'll go with nanny in a moment lovely.


Nanny's not going without you, we're just going to get in another car park, right but nanny's got to nip in that shop quickly cos look, we're late picking Ben up, we've only got ten minutes and we've got to be at, be at the nursery, alright, and nanny's gone into that shop and we're now gonna drive round the other side of that, that square and then erm, nanny will be back, alright?
Right lets turn of this machine for five minutes.
But it's still, it's still cheaper in Argos yeah?
It's cheaper at  twenty six ninety nine, I had to ask about that cos I couldn't see it
It's Mr something  is it flying circus or
I don't know I said a circus one you see and er
Yeah
Hello, hello, hello
I know, she's eating a  
 
She thinks she's going 
No, Charlotte 
Oh erm  let me slow down this bit, erm  no it's twen , oh it is twenty six ninety nine anywhere else, I've seen it but in Argos,Wi , well William looked in the catalogue on Tuesday for me, but he said it was nineteen ninety nine in Argos
Yeah.
but erm, had a little  with the children's Christmas presents 
Who?
Was it Monday, no it was yesterday, I was in the loo and I could hear this paper being ripped and I thought oh they've got one of my club catalogues, I didn't think any more of it and then I could hear Joseph going weee,I thought what the devil's he got, so went out, Joseph has got the flying circus bus that was meant for Charlotte and him and, Brenda and Charlotte was sharing the, the, garage thing that I've brought  so I thought well now it's out, well they're not going to keep all that till  I said to him whatever is Father Christmas going to say, I said he's supposed to be taking these away to bring I said er, what's Father Christmas gonna say?, no Ben   forget, so I thought while they're out I could see Joseph's playing a lot, way with this bus thing, he was having a whale of a time, he thought that was great, so I said to Charlotte I said do you like that bus?
Cos that was meant for her you see, she said no, I want the house, she meant the garage, so I said don't you like the bus then Charlotte, no, bus for Joseph, bus for the baby, so I thought well that's decided it then now I, she, she better have Mr Toot and
Don't make a lot of difference really does it?
You see all 
when it's 
all the figures all erm sit er all the same 
yeah 
things you see, so erm, I thought right well that's it Ben can have the garage, I'll go and buy her the flying circus, Joseph can have the bus and call it a day.
Mm.
You know, I mean they've still got a couple of books each and I've bought three 
Swing 
the swing and I've bought them a couple of wooden puzzles where you pick the bits up  so, I thought well then I'll call it a day there, and that'll be that 
Well this is this is it Gilly cos I mean
Oh you can keep going though  totally over the top  I thought well Joseph's was twelve ninety nine and Ben's was fourteen nineteen ninety nine and that's just tough that I've got you know, I can't get Charlotte's any cheaper than that, but, I mean they're not gonna know how much I've, they're not gonna say well you've got five pound more than what I have cos they're not of that age so, that's how I've left it, that's what I'm gonna do, I'll get her the circus and then they can swap them over and Joseph will be happy that he got something on wheels
Yeah
I said to Robert 
He has got something on wheels from us
yeah, I said to Rob you can't keep buying them learning toys, they've gotta
Yeah 
play as well haven't they?
well that helps them as much really don't it?
Yeah , so erm cos then I had the argument about putting them back in the box.
Tell you what I've got, I keep getting, I, I shall think I'll have another one tonight, is a great big egg box
Mm, well you see, these, these are big boxes on their own there, putting them in another one 
Yes, but I should you'd get one of those boxes in the end 
Do you think so?
Well, those size of those boxes 
Yeah, yeah 
I've, I've got three of them now
well I could do with, I could actually do with one cos little bits and pieces, but erm, course then when I've  them in
I do  rather use the  one, like me I'd like two, cos I've got one full of bits and pieces  and the odds, odds and ends I keep 
Oh   I've got, the one that I've emptied this morning .
I think I found  just the tiny  
Yeah 
So this  
I  come up to that cow upstairs alright,alright
Mm.
you know er, I think I've got to get me eyes tested, cos this can make 
Well you said that months ago
this, well this can make you feel, can't it?
Mm, mm, I mean, its probably got to the st 
Sometimes I look 
its probably got to the stage where you want glasses all the time now, just you know erm 
Yeah 
I mean that doesn't help as well, I know  Sainsbury's or Tesco's and you have to keep taking them off and putting them on
Yes.
that doesn't help cos your eyes are not having time to adjust erm without the glasses before you put them back on again .
And I can't cope walking around in my reading glasses but I've got to
Mm.
when I want to look at prices.
Pair of bi-focals or something.
Oh my god.
No, I meant the ones with the half moons in
Yeah.
or where they change half way down, so you haven't got to keep taking your glasses on and off 
Yeah, they are got
Are they?
I think bi-focals with the half brim bits 
So erm  Which I thought well where's that all  about the cake, other day, that three pound one, and then two of us went
Oh god 
there must be a reason  you know, they, they went well so I've got sixty of them, they take them with me tonight and they said would there be any cakes available for Saturday and I, I think and I nearly said to erm, well last year you reckon you couldn't sell cakes, but anyway I helped her
Nan, nan, nan  
so, and er I said do you sell  butterfly ones, and she said I was going to have a go at making them, but she said I can't make them like you,
Aha
I thought well I ain't  
It involves , it involves too much work, that's why she can't do them like you.
Christmas fillers you see, so I, she, cos I've, I'm going to make a couple of fruit cakes, I said well I was going to bring in a couple of fruit cakes and said if you need them not, if not I said I'll take them back I thought no way is Sue  gonna eat them, eat cakes like she did last year, or year before
Yeah.
she only had the bloody cheek to charge us last year for a turkey wrong, but I mean I did get that sorted out afterwards.
So are you helping with the catering side or are you running a cake stall?
I can't run a cake stall Gilly cos when I got a book a someone erm wants to 
Oh yeah
 
That's right, oh 
say ya, nay, or  and er, so I
Well as you said last year they really wanted something for nothing, for it 
Yeah , so what I'm doing, I'll  these, gonna make about a hundred  or one bit or a couple of bits and some butterfly cakes and the cakes and plates and cling film, charge them a quid, eight for a pound
Mm 
and that, that would be 
You're not telling me this Council driver can't go any quicker  cos he'll try to get back to  before, before twelve o'clock 
I can't  twelve o'clock dinner.
 

No we had a reasonably good dinner and, and we didn't want no tea when we come home, this could have been some of it cos all I had then when we did about seven o'clock when we decided we'd have a bowl of soup, erm,we stuffed ourselves, we had toast and breakfast erm, we had one or two sweets in the hospital, er while we were waiting and then er, we went to Asda and then we got er
er pie, chips and peas, hot actually, bread roll and butter, for one ninety nine, I wasn't half pleased, well that just suit us cos it, we would have gone somewhere else and had coffee and a cake it would of cost you, one fifty each 
Oh yeah 
so erm, we decided that we'd have this fish and chips before we got going,cos it  we didn't eat, you know, an awful lot yesterday
so, erm, last night when we came home I looked at this Argos ticket which I couldn't find and I've, in that I've found what erm  a Weight Watcher  er menu, so I picked that out, so I've had erm  don't know what you'll call it today, boiled egg and toast, eh bread and butter 
Get down 
Yeah, alright my love, just a minute.
You'll have to come out this way because there's lots of cars on the road  Oh, one, two, three  be careful and walk
Oh it's very pretty 
Yes, just a, yeah go on then off you go in the house   in the gate.
I don't know whether Wills is here or not.
See if your little boyfriend is here  hi  up the stairs, hello Charlotte, love his nursery, hello Joseph
Hello Kelly, what you got?
He got 
Yeah,
He's got his 
A bit of peace and quiet.
Oh that's golly, on the shelf,here, you've got  on your hair
I'll make myself at home .
Which is mine, which is mine?
Over there.
O K.
clean your hair for you now?
Yeah, he's got mousse on him 
Yeah I had to come to erm  so I thought erm, I tried to ring you yesterday, your phone was out of order.
Well, she's having a new one put on.
Why we was paying the bill actually we paid to  Sunday us connect us the following Friday
Why?
so I had it disconnected, had it disconnected  and so I've asked for it to be re-connected, they can't do it until twenty seventh December
Oh no
and he's got to pay forty five quid to have it done.
What did you have it cut off for?
I didn't have it cut off, he did
No, why, why did you have it cut off?
I didn't want to talk to 
Oh, so it's alright with one but not with the other?
Yeah.
What's this?
This is yours.
Oh yes, I can see what you've done, I tried to ring you and it said erm out of order, cos I was ringing to say I'm coming to the bank this morning so I'll pop in for coffee.
I thought  god is it ,
three times up the 
A mask, want to put it on, want to put one on?
No.
Oh Chrissy, I use that  where's your eyes oh , ooh, show mum, Gilly put one on?
No, no, no
You got a black eye?
No, no  they're all fighting fit and in the best of health, eh,
 

Mum, I'm bored
Where's your little gun?watching Play Bus and Hannah's asleep and 
A gun , a gun
Pardon?
Do you want to put this one on?
 

I had Jehovah Witnesses round this morning.
Oh that was nice for you, oh so you've had three visitors then that's lovely 
Yes, the end the end of that one  
It's a  on the er 
Bloody hell he didn't stop to take 
You mean a black one?
Yes, with all his gold and rings and  is that real gold, he went berserk
he didn't start mate, they, they tried to get  on him.
having him on 
Sure, bloody Goldilocks,everywhere 
So I haven't got to pick them up from nursery today, Jayne's picking them up.
Oh that's all right 
So erm, I thought right
yeah 
go and have a coffee.
I rang up Mandy yesterday
Oh yeah, how is she?
who was rather sarcastic, sarcastic, I said to her erm, oh you're still alive then, as if to say you haven't rang me  rang you .
What she say?
Yes she said we're going out to a dinner party tonight, I thought golly 
Here we go 


She's fallen I think straight on the face.
Come on  let's have a look.




There we go,


There we are all done, all done.
how did you get on with 
Erm, he was, on the first and second day, he was second in class and sixty fifth over all and then he was, the next day he was sec still second in class and fifty fifth over all and then once the prop shaft or something's broken, yeah I've got a spare one, but the car came back in one bit so erm, he's got an interview with T V S next week I think or the week after because erm when Rob lent him something that erm, did his, did a lot of  it's nothing to do with  erm, they sponsored him two thousand pounds
Oh good
See you later 
so er , mind how you go
bye, so erm, he's got an interview with erm T V S and these two guys that erm  sponsored him for it
Brilliant
and er, in a,and then Top Gear they want to do an interview with him for er, erm racing for the disabled.
Do they?
Yes, so he's really
bully for him.
getting into it.
Cos I've watch it,recor record it a couple of times, but I didn't realize they each had different days.
Yeah.
there look, it's my fork, stop biting my nails.
Pardon?
Stop biting my nails.
You have?
Yeah, yeah,.
Will see 
What, where you going to go?
Well I 
You on your own or with 
No, me and Derek
Oh
I think he's great as that, I think he
He's really quiet actually 
after his wife, I said to Ron when erm
before we come I said, erm, I said you realize I said that you gonna be under pressure really cos
Why?
alright he's met you for five minutes but he's come here I said this gang of children, I said the poor bugger's not going to know what hit him I said alright if it's just for Sally's three I said he's gonna be, he's not gonna be relaxed I said I know that for a fact I said I know what it was like when I used to go and visit your people when I was  
Yeah, yeah .
so I know he's not gonna be relaxed  but, but after you went erm when Rob come home he said well he said what time did the party break up?
I said oh just when it got dark really I said we're having it down the house, I said erm  drank more port I said every time we went to the loo they filled up my glass
he said eh, what do you think Gill?
I said I thought he was a right  in fact I've never seen Sally like it before I said I felt quite  really
 

No, but he seemed to be great, he said, he said well he said to, to me he said she's  with the real thing and she wants to go for it 
But he said all he did was people he'd met quite a few times now, they say that you know like  cos he's very funny, he comes out with me, god Sally what's the matter with you, you've been drinking or something, I said no, that's how he is he's not 
Yeah 
himself.
No, I think he's, I said to Robert I've got quite a good streak cos I've never seen Sally
We are competitive I know that 
more with someone than  it should be like
I know what it should be like but I  
I know we have people round here for actual .
Everywhere I go like he follows me know what I mean, I'm sitting up there at one stage and he, he'd spend a day sort of  curls, curls up and cuddles me.
That's what it should be like Sally 
He goes to bed sometimes at eight o'clock
I don't wish to know that.
No, no, he lays there talking to his wine and stuff you know, it's really
That's what, that's what is missing out of Colin and I, Colin and I
Mm
was conversation, we just didn't talk at all 
Talk about it 
that's right  I mean when, when you ask which position you want, you know,


you think god, you know, and after five years of marriage you think well have we tried everything, yeah 


five years of marriage and three children you know,
it gets better every day.
Mm  oh I'm pleased about that, I'm just waiting for the wedding bells, I said to Robert I said if they can't get any one to witness it, I said we'll be there,, he said, well you  I said what do you mean?
He said you're the one who kept saying go for it
Go for it  yeah
he said but don't wait he said I've only got you to blame  and he did 
What you doing on Saturday night?
Oh we've got, I don't think we've got anything on Saturday night, erm, Sunday that we got, Graham, Graham and Janet and  for lunch, mum says why do you 
 
why do you invite them, I says well, I said well you know
Obliged to.
it's that sort of time of the year when you have all sorts of people there, but I mean she's such, so pathetic, words  gonna come over for lunch, I mean we have them over every year sort of Christmas time
Yeah
although we never get invited back
darling
we never get invited back you know, I think erm,
We will have you round here, we're thinking of having a party, erm, like an evening party.
Can't, erm Rob's do, erm you know what we've got to get to this year?
Erm
Well I'll tell you, Christmas party you know it's really 
I think we will have one.
We toyed with the idea of having one on the twenty first of this month, but if we did, but now that we've got someone interested in the house
Yeah
erm, I don't think we will, I think we'll wait erm
wait for New Year, when everyone's finished partying.
Yeah 
Make it an engagement party Sally.
Oh
Come on, I'm getting right excited about this
yeah,.
No we've got them coming over on Sunday and she said oh don't do anything special just do sandwiches , oh you invite them over for Sunday lunch, cos she's a vegetarian, except she eats chicken and  vegetarian that eats a chicken 
Oh no not a vegetarian 
I think it's, I said to Robert it's just an excuse to have chicken every Sunday for lunch so that they can save some money, you know,
Yeah, more than likely
so I've decided I'm going to do erm something called Sunshine Chicken, which is just chicken e , chicken casserole, a bit different, she doesn't drink alcohol so I can't do anything in wine, erm so I'm doing that, I'm doing four portions of chicken of that cos the daughter eats chicken, erm 
take that off 
and I'm doing
What you got for Christmas Day?
sausage meat loaf with bacon and bits and pieces
Cor lovely
jacket potato
What instead of just doing 
yeah, erm, what else am I doing?
Oh cruel dude


Erm, veg, vegetable curry I'm doing, there's something else in the savoury line, there is four things in the savoury
Something
that went with salad what was that?
We're going to a party on Saturday night it's my friends birthday party, see if I can get you an invite  
Erm, yeah just let me make sure I can get a baby sitter, it just depends what mum and dad are up to, I know they should have been out on Friday night 
Is your mum Mrs E ?
No B
Oh, cos there was a little leaflet 
over there.
I won a bottle of wine on that yesterday
Did you?
Yes
Good for you.
Children had erm  er craft erm stall and a cake stall to raise money for the Christmas party Father Christmas so it doesn't come out of 
Yeah
and erm, Jayne presented me with a bottle of wine this morning when she took er a bottle of sherry  
Bottle of sherry 
yeah, yeah Croft as well you know, oh,we're away here .
I've got quite into port though, I'd finished that bottle of port by Tuesday night
Cor we drink port and brandy 
well I, I drink
I'd gone off of it until we opened that one on Sunday when you came over and I'd finished it by Tuesday, I was getting quite hooked on it
Yeah we usually
and thought this is no good  well  we came up today
Yeah
yeah, who was on it today?
What's today Thursday?
Was it the  bird?
It was  today was it?
Was it, was it 
Speak properly, pancake
She's going through a stage talk about cakey, cakey goes to  it's all sort of pathetic, oh yes hello Joseph, and erm she says  pardon,pardon, she said daddy.
is that a pinafore?
No it's shorts, culottes
Is it?
Yeah,
Ooh, ooh, ooh.
Hannah got to go to Victoria hospital on twenty second of January.
Oh how's she getting on?
Erm alright, she   you're alright, aren't you now?
I can see that this one's still not on his feet you obviously noticed, he'll walk about when you hold his hands
Yeah
he just won't go  he just takes a, but he's fine 
heavy 
, yes I'll talk about you 
You know I am as well don't you?
You've got a big tummy , you got a big tummy.
Give it back to Charlotte, well let her play with it then.
Why?
Oh that clock's right I hope is it?
Yes
Oh that's alright
it's twenty five to eleven
as long as I've gone by, or I'm leaving here by eleven  give me a half hour to get home.
I go to Tesco's this afternoon I 
It's like old mother hubbard today, old mother hubbardy
Oh   Oh Chris goes on this weekend?
Does he?
Yeah.
My god.
there on Friday have one of these,should be on on Friday
so there putting they
was really impressed by that.
I don't think it's that big and Dick came over the other day and erm he wait 
He wait till you get in there?
yeah, and he went up the plot and he come back and he said cor you can have plenty old erm cold sheds that he could have got, I said what do you really think, I played a free hand, you mean mum and dad's hand 
Is it?
made to look so small.
Yeah it does actually.
So if it was me walking his dog as he goes by he said we'll see what, he said we're rebuilding a new bungalow on the insurance claim .
Why does their house, their house shakes
Yeah and they've got some  cracks in there
Yeah, they're not on a  are they?
They own nothing, I mean, it's over a hundred years old, so it's just, it's like  built on the soil
Think about where  probably out that way somewhere.
Oh hope so, it'll be really good.
Mm.
Yeah move out that way 
Well .
and what we doing now is London, London yesterday and you, you should have been at home today but he had to go back to London again so I didn't keep him very much, given up is it?
No it's not  
Given up smoking?
who Rob, why?
He gave up yesterday  no you have to laugh 
 
he Monday, he hasn't had one since Monday night.
I've got 
and he made me feel right guilty yesterday  I, I had to buy a packet about three o'clock, so I didn't have any until three o'clock and then    talk to the cat  and I thought no it's no good, Margaret I'll have to hide this packet up 
ooh does the cat understand you my love?
me and my mother have erm arranged it all, she's invited us down there 
Oh god.
Let them get on with it Sally.
Yeah, I couldn't even fight the thought that she'd asked him at  no what I mean.
It really upset me, erm, but then
Well it'll be nice for you and Greg to have Christmas on your own
I know it'll be quiet, but
We won't stay here
true, that is what I mean you, you'll be able to go away
Yeah
I think that's the trouble with Christmas, I said to Rob, in a way, I said I hope when I get to mum and dad's age I won't expect  my children to think oh god you got to go there for  you know I said that I'd love to just once take the kids away and go somewhere
Yeah
for Christmas, but I mean erm, it's expected I mean they all come to ours anyway so, but erm
I mean our, the more I think about it I think the main, we might even go to Germany to see my sister,so it might be next year, but I can't get Tony to talk at the moment, I don't know  erm,
Oh thank you
sister's on Christmas Eve, she lives  somewhere  they've got this brilliant pub down there called the , Christmas Eve and then over to his mum and dad for Christmas Day, but I , I wouldn't want to stay here 
Oh they  organized Christmas let them get on with it  cor this is the first bit of peace and quiet
Mm
amazing what a sweet will do.
Yeah.
Yeah,you cheeky little monkey, oh what you mean here he's got a black eye?
Mm
Yeah, he dropped, he was playing  kitchen table he dropped it, luckily it just caught the bottom of his eye 
I've been offered a job Gill
Who by?
You probably won't believe it
Not Bernard, oh no, did they ever come back to you?
No, Ian  
Mm, I thought they were on the way here, I saw loads of for sale signs but I didn't see any new  ones
This part of the conversation has been wiped off, it'll continue in a few minutes.
You'll have to come out this way because there's lots of cars on the road  Oh, one, two, three  be careful and walk
Oh it's very pretty 
Yes, just a, yeah go on then off you go in the house   in the gate.
I don't know whether Wills is here or not.
See if your little boyfriend is here  hi  up the stairs, hello Charlotte, love his nursery, hello Joseph
Hello Kelly, what you got?
He got 
Mind you I can't talk, I looked in the mirror a couple of weeks ago and my eyes are, I mean are really they're having a rough time indeed 
Oh my eyes are really  
and my eyes under here were black and I
Mine are most of the time
and I thought god I've got to do something, I've looked in the mirror and I though Gill this is disgusting, you know, it really is 
It's horrible isn't it sometimes?
So erm, I went out and I had my hair, oh I've had me hair permed again but you can't tell unless you put a brush through it though 
Got to get mine done again 
and erm, I went up to mum's and she's got a load of Unique make-up, and she said if there's anything in that bag you want it, you'd better have it, so I said 
 
I went through, and we did 
 
destroyed all mine and put it all in the , I mean lipsticks ten quid a time or whatever, seven quid a time, so I went through and Mary had a  she got this moisture , oh I thought what does this mean, she said it's for removing lines, I thought right we'll have a sample this 
Yes 
so we  put it under there and round here and everywhere and I went over to  on Saturday and erm  crumbs she said you look, you look really good,I thought 
What's it called?
yeah  it's erm, moisture sturgeon it's by Clinique
Oh it's 
oh I don't know, this is just a sample pot, but er, it was one that she, if you buy, sometimes  you're buying make up you get a freebie gift, thing, and it was, it was in one of those
Alright, don't panic, here you are, quick, quick, quick, need some of that 
and er, she said my eyes really sparkled she said first time I've seen them sparkle for a long while so I was right chuffed about that.


Mum.
Hello, oh that's pretty  Charlotte and Benjamin found their Christmas presents the other day.
Did they?
Yep
I was, I was in the loo and erm  they were, they went into the office and I could hear this rummaging of paper and I thought they've got a club book, I didn't think any more of it, and when I came out they got, both of them out of the boxes.
Ben had got erm a Mr  garage thing and I 
Does he  as well?
and I bought her  but when I came out the loo he is playing with the bus going wheeee, he was having a great time with that, I looked at him and I said got to give that to Charlotte, no, no, I don't like it I want the house, meaning the garage, so I've gone out now and bought her a circus


cos when I went, when Ben went to nursery school  erm he wanted a box out of the break out of the office, I said no you're not, I said Father Christmas is going to come and collect that, I said he's gonna wrap them and I said he's gonna come and deliver it
Oh dear
no, no, no, I thought oh god I'm gonna have to get them out of the house
Well we've had all this trauma about you know, cos I  do you, where do you want the  he said well don't see much of daddy or nan and granddad and nana and granddad said they moved in on Christmas Day  stay here and Rachael and Steven wouldn't come up,stay here on Christmas Day, it's quite likely, quite likely to go with daddy  he said but, in many ways I  he said I know what we can do is when we send  up the chimney we could put nanny's address, nanny's address on it, shall we?
I said yeah ok.
Well that's alright  .
We had a new battery put on the  Jenny  
 


I did, I  to it  disconnected 
It's not on, I mean he is, it's as much to his advantage as yours, what if he was taken ill?
I know, that's what I said, that's what got it 
And you need an emergency you, you gotta well,
He's only recently started to take notice of Hannah like take her swimming and that on  and since he found out that she's got a heart murmur and  that's what it's like, cos he  for tea on the way back, and then he bathed the children and put them to bed, and last night  no, what he put them all in the bath again, put that down again
No, it's 
, he er,he, erm,
Charlotte can you get any more in your hand?
You know, I mean, what you've come to stay the night?
He put the boys 
 
in the bath last night,
I think Sam accidentally kicked Hannah, or kicked Hannah I don't know I wasn't there, but he came flying down, really got to curb that child he said, I said I beg your pardon, he said you've got to curb that child  kicking Hannah, I said if I'd seen him kick her , he said that well I'm not sure that he actually kicked her it might have been an accident
Oh
but you've got to curb him of that, I said  make matters  I said Dan get yourself down here now I said did either of you kick Danny?
He said no, so I said don't lie to me yes you did, I said you just said you didn't know if he kicked her or not, and this argument went on, Danny ended up in tears and I ended up really angry so I said well I'll go down then, leaving all the kids screaming  fuming, but he actually knocks on the door now  .
Oh Sunday it was really bad cos he had these people turn up for lunch and erm, said it's Sam   arranged to come and collect him quarter to six and then we went up to Fore Gate for lunch and then we came back here and had erm  we were all standing in the kitchen here, knock on the door, a  walked in, I'd completely forgotten about it
Oh no
was standing near the washing machine,, Simon gave him a filthy look, I said look I apologize for  I'd completely forgot that you were coming to collect  he said I know I can see that, he hadn't really  what with  the kids all running around and, so quickly got them  and er, I thought he got, did you bring your cheque round?
He said no I've forgot about it sorry, no I completely forgot about it sorry I'll bring it round later and give it, he posted it  
And he's the one who sent it.
What he's, I bet what he doesn't like about it is that you're not running back to him saying look Simon come back to me I need you and it  
 
Oh
Wynne my supposed friend fixed him up and .
Oh
Looking at them next stage, distribution centre then are we?
Yeah
Mind you this is getting quite frightening at his age lark
Age?
Yeah
I mean Rob was saying he 
 
watched a documentary on it the other night and he said even by kicking someone now, if you don't  haven't, isn't an accident  it's like kissing someone you 
Ooh
Now it, now it, he says it's getting quite serious now, cos apparently  came up with erm these four cases where erm the people have lived an absolutely normal pure life
Yeah
and the only thing that they've done is if you kiss somebody, kissing someone whatever you know, erm or  someone's dirty  and that is the only thing they can put it down to
Oh my god
its quite frightening when it gets to
yeah it is
things like that  
Mum
What my love?
No you don't want that, oh you're making a lovely train here  well we're going to stay at a hotel on the nineteenth this Sunday
Are you, ah
Yeah
second honeymoon 
No we're going to erm Horsham for the Christmas party, the works Christmas party  and erm, the hotel where Rob stopped at last time when he was down in Horsham, that's where they're doing Christmas party  this year, so we obviously we staying in  a double room
Oh lovely
for the night, so, cos the woman at the hotel said er, oh she said want a double room this time not a single
Oh yeah
so he said I did say I'm bringing my wife, she said oh yeah how many times have I heard that before   
 
, it could be really embarrassing 
 
, so what we'll do we'll stop over the night and erm come home Friday morning, and mother's 
 
going to stay the night.
Stay the night at your home?
Yeah, yeah, get the kids organized and that's 
Oh that'll be lovely.
So, well I haven't got anything to wear yet,
It's my bodyguard , so where's he having that?
Oh I don't know 
Where, is it his office?
yeah 
a lunch do or
I finished at lunch time today,
Oh I wouldn't go for anything like that, he knows that as well  

Laugh if you said  I'm coming  and you didn't turn up 
Yeah.
I'll suggest that   I thought  is fucking crazy, you know
, I don't think you've got anything to worry about, have you seen that advert for Babycham no  erm the advert with Babycham, erm, er running on about true romantics and he goes through all the differences his  and this woman marrying this guy and she must be and she must be fifty five, and he's about twenty three, twenty four and Rob turns round the other day and said,she's got  
I haven't though, cos, I mean when he gets to those  he's not a normal twenty two year old, he's way beyond oh yeah, twenty two, but
Does he want to go out?
Yeah at the same time I'm aware of the fact 
Mum where's that cat going?
that he's maybe on a learning curve, do you know what I mean?
I mean his little friend that came around on Sunday, Mat
Mum what's that called?
and he's he's six feet seven tall , he's twenty and you'd think he was thirty five 
 
Oh, I might come round in that case , that 
 

Hold on, go and get  Charlotte
What do you want?
Bread
Yeah with what?
the bread
Where's 
He's got 
He's gone to the 
Oh yeah 
What do you want on it?
Erm, erm butter
Get down then, so I can do it 
yeah  
through a snow a couple of weeks ago
Do you want some bread and butter with jam Charlotte?
Yeah
Please
please 
yeah, bring that one here then
paper
Paper, yes,
Oh, that's 
paper,
about eleven o'clock
oh god,
Why you got to go out then?
cos erm, Val will be home at half past eleven and 
Oh 
Yes, Sally says we'll do it, we'll change it in the car  alright, just as I was saying we had erm,we had roast dinner, Charlotte don't aggravate him, we had roast lamb, erm and I'd washed up by two o'clock 
mum 
and you know the first time since we've been married I've been able to actually cook a roast dinner and washed up by two o'clock on
When was that, last Monday?
yeah 
Well this Sunday we left all the washing up  
Mum 
gone and left us, half past eight, we were in bed by quarter to nine and  
mum , don't want some on mine
You don't want jam on yours?
I like it
You do want jam or not?
No, I just want butter
You just want butter?
Yes mum
There's yours then  sit up 
That's 
 

So you gotta say so by  and David, you've got to travel down there on the Saturday.
Well I've got to get to King's Lynn on Saturday
Oh King's Lynn, oh that's not too bad 
I want some more jam mum.
Ah I knew this, I get this every tea time.


Alright, alright let's see if you like it
I'm going through a stage where erm, I'm cooking them lunch and they just have a 
I've got  on here mum 
is he alright like that or?
Yeah, put it there he'll feed it, he'll have it, hurry up, that's it hurry up and eat it cos we've got to go  erm, and they'll have sandwiches or something for tea and er if you point something they say no I don't want it and then when the other one  can I have it, oh   you're digging your finger in it
Yeah 
Erm Graham and Janet little boys have got them at 
And what have they said about that?
They're not doing anything about it
No, they probably won't back down 
I mean when  tests and god knows what else
Oh, oh no
What are these?
what's that called?
Charlotte, she's a girl,


she's like a  tiger
She's like a tiger is she?
Is she pretty?
Is she pretty?
What?
 

Tell Gill where you'd go this afternoon?tell her 
Mm
you little slug


he is, I call him a slug


Look Charlotte can't do anything without being messy, look, the other, the other erm morning I went to school to pick Ben up, er and I put her in the car seat, she's lovely and clean, and I give her a biscuit, by the time we got 
Oh no 
by the time we got there, it was all, I mean it was only a plain biscuit but it dry all way round here 
That was like yesterday, right, it was all over his clothes, all over his jumper and all round his face and all in his hair, you're a slob,a slob, shall I go and get  yeah 
I can't sit on seat.
That's right you sit on there and I'll get the kiddies  together
 

no Joseph
right, you gonna hurry up and eat that, because we've got to go sweetheart
Oh
 

if the baby  right, let me go and put Joseph in the car 
Why?
you sit here, you sit still for a minute and eat, eat your sandwich and I'll just put Joseph in the car  oh what 
hands
yeah, eat it up then
just let me go and put the baby in the car and I'll be back for you in a minute, alright?
Yeah, if you sit there and eat that
What?
There's none there.
, yeah  in there
don't want fork,
baby
baby 
baby , it's baby 
that's Charlotte, that's his hattie
hattie
hattie
 

look 
there you go 
, mm,
oh my mummy said hat  just smack my head
No she doesn't want to smack your head  there you are 
get off her, there she is 
I'm back, hello my lovey
she's looking at Charlotte
Cor,
no gently with her would you?
Let her go, let her go 
Where's that  gone?
Pardon?
That's alright Gill leave them
Are you sure?
Yeah, after the devastation we left you in the other day
Oh god, don't matter about that  right then have you finished eating?
Yeah, eating
Right let's just quick, can I use, have you got a cloth, I can just wipe her hands with?
Oh yeah there's a  you'll have to use 
I've gone to work
I know I've got baby fresh wipes.
I wonder what you was
Yeah alright, well I think you've eaten what you're going to eat  you don't eat crust anyway, right that's it put it down
Got 
don't you leave anything will you?
Put the cards back up please
got 
You've got some, oh,
you can't pick up, yeah
oh
Oh, come on Charlotte cos erm 
Come on darling you've got to go, we see you another day, should we?
No.
Yeah, we'll come and play another day
no
when we've got a bit more time
shall I find out cos I think I'll see Maria tonight, I'm sure she won't mind if you come, to the party on Saturday
Oh it's Maria is it?
You know Maria do you?
Your baby sitter, she's the plumpish one
Yeah, yeah she's the big one  I was being polite.
I think she's got about eighty people going so it should be quite good and we got a 
Hang on, just wait
I'll have a word then I'll give you a ring tomorrow
yeah
Friday, yeah
mm, yeah I shall be there, I shall definitely be there in the afternoon anyway
Yeah, ok
as far as I know, when, when is it her party?
Saturday
Saturday night?
yeah
Oh, in the meantime I'll just see if mum's available, she can baby sit 
,
yeah,
I haven't met, yeah, erm, where's he live?
Up the road, big  
 
No, I haven't met him yet 
and Mat and  are coming as well.
I mean I'll wait, we wait there and , but I think she just wants as many people as she possibly can, do you know what I mean?
How old is she?
She'll be twenty three
And she's just had a party party
Yes, her mum and dad just gone off on a cruise for er, I don't know 
Oh god , booze up time
Ok, well give us a ring then
I'll ring you tomorrow afternoon then
erm, I shall be there as far as I know and in the meantime have a word with mum and dad if they're free
right bye, bye then sweetheart
wave bye, wave bye, bye
bye, bye darling
bye.
So  woke up and Will's now gonna show off for you, right we'll see you soon 
Lovely to see you 
yes, I thought I'd just nip in, let you know I'm still alive
thank you, bye
talk to you later
bye.
let's just do the door  right off we go  look where you're going
step
that's right, now we've got to hurry up and get home, we're late  say what's new mummy 
So you had a good day yesterday?
Yes dear, very, very nice 
I thought about you, about what time was it, about ten o'clock and I thought well it's no good gasping for air, she'll soon be able to have some yeah .
but as I was saying erm, it was erm  when you think I sort of tend to worry if I see like Neville you know 
Mm 
towards  or anywhere, but then you see it can be your weight as well 
yeah
to climb the stairs, and I think then you tend to panic a bit, I  and I felt most of the time I felt fine, and then you see getting up at five o'clock yesterday morning, by the time I got off, it was your father that fell asleep on that last drinking session, but I mean, as I said we ain't used to drinking in the day like that 
 
I mean some of them at the  going in at dinner time and have a couple, three pints it don't hit them does it?
No
And erm  I  they had to have  a couple of  I mean I think 
yeah?
and er, well what they were saying on bus cos he had a sleep just in front of us last night, somebody said we're  Park Row and they said oh he's asleep in front there, well that was him you see, so I reckon he comes from there, see I mean, the rest must have just come in here or King's Lynn, well if they fell out 
Yeah
they could get ready for half past where with rather doing the 
oh
we had our alarm ooh after five, William called us just in case we laid late, so we was on the move ten, ten past five, so I mean we've been on the go perhaps two hours more than anybody else  and eh, and then cos when, it was just  like that, but it was down here now I thought to  went to  that down on his  and a little 
yeah 
bit here and I thought god that  so I thought right I'm gonna change places in that seat but your father's sitting on,alright, I said  go in that back seat, just behind us there were  there or I said or I'm just coming to sit where you are, I said I can't do four hours sitting like this, I mean I'd have been boss eyed before I got, well I was I, I, all say look at that cloud 
mm 
I would have been boss eyed before I got out of Lynn, I could feel it you know, squint through
yeah
and I thought there was no good putting up with it just by not saying
yeah
perhaps he's been forewarned and just swapped over sides with , but I mean we had a full wind and light  through then, well sort of 
yeah
and er so that was ok and, you know, but they  I didn't know quite what to do with myself when I got home  then I watched, see the news, see about this Sharon  er, no Sharon 
yeah
er I was listening to 
well, I mean all erm  was erm
erm Wednesday night was a, an, an engineer
yeah
well it's the next door neighbour  and they said it's alive and  I asked Jayne cos I said what the,hospital, yeah cos like it, it's that neighbour, well it's a neighbour
yes, but 
neighbour either side,
yeah
but, I reckon it's the guy when they went down to Aunty Queenie, to that stream that day 
yeah
because they, she said  that has this hay and straw,so   so all in all  
so er will go on another trip?
Oh yeah   I mean they were good company to go out with and I said to you  at dinner time and then since they've joined us, so we was all the same 
yeah 
time, I  sort of thing, bit like  and Barbara did, but they were
What?
where you looking  this is the combine here look
but I mean they weren't  you know and I mean someone we didn't even know at all, so er  you know all  erm  but I mean Lionel sat with the guy that organized it and the bus driver so he didn't feel out of it, you know,
Mm
so you know all in all erm
When could you go on one of these  
, but when they asked us to go, you know, I mean they  two seats to spare and old Bert wouldn't speak and came and said would you two like to go, he's on the committee, you see so he went and mentioned it to Lionel and Lionel got them out and said would you like to go and right I'll put your name down so
How much did it cost?
nothing.
Huh, you can't complain at that can you?
Erm,gone in that museum it was eight ninety five to go
and the meal would have cost, I should have think, well Dan said the Christmas meal was being advertised, it was gonna be served any time, erm  
I mean you can't , you can't go any, I mean you can't even go to the Bridge  for er, erm, a meal under a fiver so
I  eight or nine pounds
yeah
I think it was, was it six fifty for one lot of meal and eight for another?
, it's got the  
Just got erm , I mean  was out in the stick  I like to just half a dozen little flight of stairs perhaps with a dozen steps 
Don't know, well what have you done with it?
Alright, well look, dear I can scrub that  and I'll, I'll get it for you so all in all er can you see the boat, you look and see them in a minute
behind this one
erm, oh
I came along here the other day and I thought oh heck, if you were living in  actually 
Yeah.
Mum, there's a boat
Pardon?
boat
I don't know what you're saying   we're going to go to the shops
shops
That's right, we'll change the subject , so er  erm  oh, forgot whatever I was going to say to you  oh  are you doing anything Saturday night?
No
Oh you got your market all day haven't you?
No, I ain't promised I'll be there all day Gilly because I could 
well,noth nothing's happened as yet, but Sally's erm been invited to a party, her, her baby sitter's party
mm
and there's only going to be a couple of people there she knows and she was gonna ring Marie and see if Rob and I could go, you know, really as a, to keep, make up a foursome sort of thing
yeah
and she said it's on Saturday night so I'm sor , you know, I'm sorry it's short notice and erm she said I'll ring Marie and find out, I said well you know ring her but I said I can't make any promises I said, I know mum should have been out Friday night and  I don't know what else she's got on 
Oh it's only a 
so erm  it might not come  
Mum
Yes Charlotte
Pardon?
I said I would make them a hundred butterfly cakes, and they either they'll eat them or they'll sell them, and I'll hav I'll try and have them ready for when  rings up at half past one and if they sell them and she brings me any  I wouldn't mind knocking a few more up for tomorrow, but I'm not gonna give them all
Oh no
You know, I shall say look, er, a I'm a  
So, what's the plan of action then, is dad going all day or
I don't quite know Gilly, what tomorrow?
Yeah.
I don't quite know, er morning always seems that much busier as regards food, so Ivan's going up in the morning erm, you know  why?
Well is only, only asking 
Father's gotta be up there as tomorrow night to take  to bring his stuff
Mm.
when they shut at three you know four
Well I mean his erm, his father's up there and, I mean if you want to go up later on I'll run you through
yes, oh
if you decide you want to go sort of four, fourish or threeish
oh it closes at three
oh well
so I mean I should want to sort of come home  sort of then  you know, er 
Mum you should be alright for a lift home with someone shouldn't you?
Mm.
I mean if you decide you want to go
But I don't want to go from eight o'clock
no
or nine o'clock till three
no  cor look at this tractor and trailer look, can you see it Aysh?
Yeah
it's not got a number plate on it
tractor
and a trailer
   

No, er, we were sort of saying to Jayne everything was so pricey in that museum
Mm
you know, erm, I said well we'll take them a little something home.
Well, that's how a lot of these places make the money isn't it?
Yeah 
Tell you where I wouldn't mind going to have a look erm,Crystal
What's 
Well, there, if the things open today, cos erm I haven't got anything for Jayne
mm, mm.
if they have got Aunty Jayne's present
Yeah
have a, cos I bought her that umbrella
yeah,skirt
yeah
and earrings
mm  you couldn't wait could you?
I don't see the point in going mad cos you're not going to get there any quicker 
Then you get some  clown like her
mm
or him
god, they're half asleep today
with no 
perhaps if we can quickly, I mean I don't want a lot out of Tesco's, it will just save turning out, I don't mind turning out this afternoon but, if the traffic 
It'll do more good at home can't you?
Well it don't seem a lot of point in wasting petrol to come
Cos I don't, I don't 
 
hoover  my house  but I mean father's now put irons and toasters on side the bed and oh Gilly 
Oh, get this Christmas bingo out the way 
So I got I've, I've have a
you'll be alright
I'd rather have a couple hours 
me 
a couple of hours tonight wrapping up presents and rest and you know
mm
rather be up there with them  they sanctioned to go up there on a Friday night and they said that, that lot of them do er  you know, what you call it, there you go up and everyone's in the mood to sell you something, they let you, you know
mm
and course with that Ron on the , of course you know, he tells jokes and some of them are a little bit crude, but, they take all in good part, you know, I said to dad I said you don't always, he's that dry
mm
I mean he went to school, he went to oh  school, but he lived at Enfield and erm, you'd have never thought then that he had got it in him and, so dry I said to dad I said he never ought to be a bus driver, cos the things he comes out with, he'd have to be a comedian, I mean he's, I mean as er, what, they used to call the comedians didn't they, three or four of them on the telly, and I mean
Mum 


they're all animals,
, I know, I think he wanted a pair of binoculars.
er, so, with that er  he never ought to be on the buses, I mean he  old Bernard Manning and Charlie what was that, his name, Charlie what?
Williams?
They called it the old comedians 
Yeah, yeah , yeah, er well he was a half cast,wh 
yeah
oh god you definitely said they're out today, oh where's he going?
Oh  ah, and they talk about women drivers, ain't got a patch on him 
Where's he gone?
Oh, oh, well he's still reversing, he's waving his arm about for everyone to overtake him but, he still sits in the same position   oh dear  
So I come there at  this morning with cramp in my leg and I said I've hardly had that,
Oh there's that little old man mum 
oh yeah, she came the other week with somebody, I reckon he ill treated her 
I, he looks a bit weird don't he?
Yeah
Oh come on, stop having a chinwag    I see if I can park round by the post office first  do you know what you want out of Argos or, oh you've written all the numbers down haven't you?
Yes I did.
That's what I call super efficient 
There's the Argos ticket  I don't know whether it's in 
What's the matter?
Alright, can, can I just park up then I'll get it for you
  

Yeah, where, look see where this light is up here, look, as soon as I've parked I'll get it for you but at the moment I can't reach it
alright?
In a minute I'll get it  that's a school like Ben's, look Charlotte
Can you see it?


That's a nursery like Ben's


What's the problem Joseph?
Well there are then drink it.
There look there's the serviette.
isn't it?
oh what is the matter with everyone today?
I think you might have to have a look Gilly, just to double check cos I've got two numbers on here.
Oh, what was it you wanted?
The police one
Oh the police Lego, erm, Duplo?
yeah
Look at the digger Charlotte 
Oh where the hell have I put that now?
Digger
look here  well I, I know which one it is cos they're on a separate page in the Argos book 
Oh no , no
yeah, so I know what you're talking about  well didn't you say you got the police one the other day?
No, no, I couldn't get it 
Oh I thought you got, what did you get from As Asda?
father got another set of lights
No from Asda you bought two Duplo things, well  
No I bought one
one
that farm yard set
ah
the farm yard set for Katie  but then, cos I haven't got her so much, so I thought we, she, I don't think she'd be into police, I thought if I bought police and that was dearer and the amount that I bought for Ben and Charlotte
mm
they'd better share the police and if it comes to the crunch I can get a farm yard for the birthday
you know what I mean?
Oh look at this, for a handy spot
  

Well I don't know where I put the Argos ticket at all now, got the one you want, in  given you that one because er 
Mummy
Yes
mummy
Charlotte
mummy,mummy 
pardon?
Try?
Try?
yeah
Try for what my love?
try
Try 
There's my thirteen pound and your
Oh you've got a speak problem today, the brain's not quite functioning with the mouth, is that right?
don't want big one.
Now is there anything else you want in town?
Don't think so Gilly.
Right, if we erm, nip off to Tesco's now, what's the time, half past ten  are we going to go into Tesco's now Charlotte and have a ride in the trolley?
Trolley
Trolley
Are you gonna be a good girl in Tesco's?
I ain't got the reins with me, going to have a ride in the trolley, no
trolley
yeah you can ride in nanny's trolley, won't that be nice?
In the front  oh come on  Argos has now open, open on erm Sunday 
Sunday , yeah it was in the paper
won't be any different to any other day of the week then will it?
Rainbow,
Ah?
what I've seen in the paper today, we're both gonna join today, er this week, er  Council erm, er are looking forward to it, they approve of it  bet you bloody  County Council will 
So we're gonna catch every traffic light on red now  there was something I wanted to go into Wisbech for but I can't think for the life of me what it was, I must get stuck into this Christmas shopping again, really must  so much to do and such little time to do it in  oh he's, he's put that car down five hundred pounds, that price of that car was, that he got for sale on it seven, seven, nine, five,
What,yeah 
then it went down to seven, fifty, now it's six fifty  it  looking good a nick in, he'd be lucky to get five I would have thought  is there anyone you want a bit of crystal for?
Crystal 
No
mind you it's perhaps not a good idea to go and have a look not with this
no
No, perhaps go one day 
I think there's only one I actually need to 
No, but give me a chance just to have a
oh  with the women, it's men I haven't got organized.
What colour cords does Rob want?
Erm  black.
You got the men sorted out?
Who William and Dad?
Yeah
No 
Well do you want that Littlewood's shirt that I've got,still says that we're going, I get up on  Sunday and go to  and , no we've got to go to  with that coat, take that coat over 
Oh yeah 
so if you wanted to go  see if you change William's thing to the colour I want and if they had, he said  he thought the shirt that the guy got  with it matched it better than the smaller check, so  do you wanna give him that check shirt that I bought him?
Yes, how much is that?
Nine ninety nine.
Mm 
It was just a thought that I 
mm, alright 
 
can take it back
 
that it was a nice one , it was a brushed one.
No, that'll be al , I, I just haven't got a clue what to  what to get him, I, I mean I'm still stuck for father  women I, I seem to be getting on quite well for the women it's just  finding some 
What col , what col 
come on granddad move your bottom.
what colour did you say?
what colour 
cords?
Black  why?
Well I don't know.
Oh I see, either black or navy, but erm, he's got more jum , more jumpers to go with black.
I've erm, I've got him a sagey coloured pair  now you're gonna be a good girl today aren't yeah?
So is he alright for sweaters?
Erm
You know, I've got to work it out
Mum
what I've,
what William's will come to and
Well he's alright, he's got a navy sweater and a grey multi sweater
He'd, would he be into one of these?
One of these what?
Waistcoats?
Yes, for his cars
Well actually I've, I've, I'm toying with the idea, I haven't quite made my mind up, erm I've seen some wax waistcoats
Oh
wax jackets but they're a waistcoat and I've, I've ordered one really just to see what it's, it's like, because erm at the moment I can, I just try and get a bit closer to the door, I think we'll go round again, erm  cos in the, in my club book at the moment, I, I can get twenty percent off and which brings it down to, it's twe well say thirty pound so twenty per cent off it brings me down to erm  brings it down to twenty four pounds and then erm with my commission off that brings it down to just under twenty one pound
mm
so I'm toying, that's what I'm toying with at the moment, is this erm  wax jacket
Oh.
well it's not a jacket, it's a sort, as I say it's a waistcoat.
Oh there's one right in front of us, look, blind as a bloody bat Gill.
Dad's just got in
Oh gawld, move forward a bit, so that's what I was going to get, but erm in  BeWise they've got erm checked shirts and they're five ninety nine this brushed cotton thing, so I thought if I get him that waistcoat and a pair of cords, erm and get him one of these brushed cotton shirts   that'll be that sort of colour 
How much are the cords then?
What in the club book?
No
Cords in general?
eh?
Erm 
Mummy
yes, we're now going sweetheart, erm
mummy,
I think they're about fifteen something like that, fifteen, sixteen, really depends whether you buy needlecord or erm this thickish cord
Well what do you want?
Well I'm, I'm easy, I mean the thickish cord erm, washes ni , they wear better I think the thickish cord but I mean erm and they're a bit warmer, but if you shop about usually you can get them erm the same price as the needlecord  I'll leave that with you, right.
If we've got to go to Boston at some point, for the bras you see, so erm
Mm, oh, oh I'll leave that with you anyway 
I'm a bit concerned you know, about this, just this one week's wages you know because I would have thought once Jack got his time sheet out he would perhaps realised that
Just ring Derek up
no  but on the other hand I've got a certificate till  then, so if the, if the money has run out for what he pays me
mm
and he claims back, I'm still entitled to er,
oh yeah
sick pay from somewhere aren't I?
yeah,you're allowed 
and I,
you're allowed twenty six, er twenty six weeks off
I thought I was.
I'm sure it's twenty six weeks off on full pay and then you go on
Mm
whatever, whatever 
yeah 
they call it this week, it changes names every week
yeah
so you 
it says 
I wouldn't know that
statutory sick pay
yeah, but I'm sure the, the first one's for twenty six weeks.
Yeah, but I'm su , you know I did debate whether it was twenty
No, no, I'm sure it was twenty six 
I thought it was six, twenty six 
if  Derek and he went away last weekend he perhaps stuffed it in here but then he drops it in when he finds it
mm
but Jack is so temperamental these days, I mean the other day he went by he said oh  
 
I nearly forgot you, I mean one week  he rang me and had it pinched out of his car
Yeah
and then he found it, stuffed down the bottom, so he don't know what he does with it
Oh so he found that?
Yeah it was in his car 
He reckoned it was pinched outside the post office 
yeah he said oh Margaret wages have been took out me car  he said I ge , I'll get it at some point for you Margaret he said when I go at the bank but he said, yours was taken out Jack's car
What?
he said yeah  and then 
then he found it 
and then er, I whether Jack or Derek came up with it he said it was found in the car.
Well I think you ought to ring Well's 
Oh I will after this weekend, you know, because if 
yeah, but 
if they just bring one, I shall say well I've got choice then to say well is this this week's or last week's, now I don't want to give them that opportunity to say well she's worrying about one week's wages, I mean Jan could love that  and that's given him chance to bring er, whereas if it pops through the door, or he comes
mm
I shall say to him, what's happened is this this week's or last week's?
mm, and if he says well I've already got last week's here.
Oh well then I'll say well that ain't.
Right come on then off we go.
Hello there  right, and what do you want, some mushrooms  which mushrooms shall we have my love?
Two lots of these  two lots of mushrooms
oh, right a cucumber  you're being a very good boy today,
yes,
no
you're not  right, peppers  I've got green peppers at home so they'll be alright, better have a few tomatoes,
right will you just sit there for a minute while mummy gets to pick the tomatoes  oh, oh don't panic, no-one's going to run off with you 
Oh sorry darling I'm not running off with you.
right tomatoes 
Oh right, oh what cauliflower  of course, yes   can mummy just try and clip this on her cardigan cos it keeps coming off?
That's right, let's just hope we meet someone we know and have a decent conversation with them shall we?
Yes.
 

Right let's quickly catch nanny up, do I do cheese board for tomorrow?
No
Oh why not 
green
we'll see if nanny can get us a celery tomorrow, I think cos that is really green
Mum, mum, mum
right go nan, nan, nan, nan, nan
nan, nan, nan, nan, nan, let's see if we can find her, shall we?
Daddy wants his chocolate
nan
oh I think we'll take him a bar of this 
oh let's have a carton of custard, seventy nine  right, we've got one of those, right I want  pasteurized milk  four pints one oh five, oh that's not, no great saving is it?
If I buy eight pints, right this will do 
Oh
Oh, right let's just have a look and see what's here
no cream cakes today we're on a diet  mm
no, eat by the seventh so what's today's date the sixth, tomorrow's the seventh  there's  no hold on sixth today seventh  eighth is Sunday, no it must be the ninth, oh god I'm totally out of date I don't even know what date it is  let's have one of these that'll make a change
apple and raspberry, apple and rhubarb, no I think we'll have apple and raspberry, well that's one less dessert I've got to make  right were alright for coffee we're alright for tea,
Mum
Charlotte, now what's nanny picked up?
I can't remember 
Oh I see  can you oh,here 
mum
Charlotte
Christmas
Christmas, yes my love 
Christmas
Christmas again, well, goodness me, can you, also see if you can get me a stick of celery tomorrow?
Cos they're sixty nine here, but they're green, you know 
What's that?
Oh what is it my love?
Erm, yes they did, er yeah you can pass me one actually, how much are they here?
Forty five, ooh
ooh
ooh
mum
His face is black, whatever do you get up to in the car?
Mum
Charlotte
mum
right we'll have another ground black pepper erm see if Charlotte can tip that one down the sink.
Where's the 
Well I should think they'll be with them the 
when we get in the car  buy one get one free  oh might have, have we had it?
Oh here, might as well, I wonder if nanny saw it  oh it's one of these where you've got to send away for it 
mum 
well in that case then I might as well have a tested one and be stingy with it, erm  oh where's sage and onion, oh here we are, sage and onion  Right quickly go and find nanny again cos we seem to have lost 
Mum
yes, we need one of these to make, clean out the deep fat fryer  oh I want a french stick  What's the problem?
Mm
You getting a bit excited?
Yeah
 

Mum
Charlotte
Yes when we get in the car   anything else  
I don't know where nanny is, here, here she comes  I think this is a waste of time.
Thank you, I mean, we'll turn this off put that on when we get to near the check out shall we?
Perhaps have a conversation with someone up that end  erm well I, I, I can't see anything 
Oh they seem to stick in my mouth.
I don't hate them or anything I think they're really quite vile, oh 
Well you can just wait, you want  you can go in mine , erm  do we  could do with  and that would be it for the interview
What
he was out moaning again yesterday, so  I just thought it was getting a bit long round where the old septic tank used to be  oh shan't  and we've done Tesco's so that clock's right isn't it?
That's that out of the way  
She  
Want to go back via erm South , want, see what he's got, I keep, every time I come  have a look
Always go for fish and chips
That's right , that's what he had the other day when they came in  There you are, good girl  er, what's the plan of action this afternoon?
I'm gonna make a fruit cake  
Mm 
Oh did I give you my library ticket?
No.
Bet it's due now  see if I can win any of the luxury cars  , I don't think it's possible to get that   there was the,, you, you, you realise  make an insurance claim for it, oh, now, now what's he doing?
Got his hazard lights on but he's moving 
but he's moving 
he'll have more problems if he carries on moving  don't panic, all is under control  I think there's one  driving round the bend perhaps   talk about it all, where's  really first year he gonna know 
No,
what it's all about  oh pork chop, no it isn't proper pork
No.
all what erm
 

, what you thinking about mother?
You look deep in thought.
I, I   I should have gone about eight o'clock tonight
Mm, mm.
you know so I, I    you know   you know it's just a peculiar
You know where all this stems from do you?
What?
Well from when you first had the operation and you was frightened keep bumping into you, and it's, I mean that's taken an awful lot of confidence away and you still got
 

Oh dear  I feel worn out 
Pardon?
 

Push it down then
Joseph's a good boy today
Yeah, very good.
Is daddy at home today?
Yep,he came, he came home from comes about 
he comes in about late  
Yes, cos you just walked in didn't you?
Yes, it was eight, half past and erm  pardon
that's enough you two.


Excuse me


what's that over there?
Is that a train?
Is it a car?
Is it superman?
No
No, mm, mm, oh dear it's  again, god.
wafting over
and erm Health and Environment people you know


and erm, it can't be good for your health 
  
 
er 
Oh it shouldn't be   what do you say?
They're clean
a right cold old weekend.
I don't know  one for you, good girl, there's a school there look like what Ben goes to, but that's a bigger school  , god I've got to get myself organised yet for next year haven't I?
Oh god  .
I says I'd rather can get Ben to  next September, Joseph, Charlotte starts on September and Joseph will be the next one.
Which September could she go now or 
She can't go till Sept September coming
Oh  
ninety two , Ben er start, erm prim primary infants September ninety two, Charlotte will go at half days primary in September ninety three and Joseph's go at half days  erm September ninety four.
Oh they start when they're four ?
Yeah , yeah and then they'll be able to stay Joseph and Charlotte will be full time in January  they're allowed to, I think what it is, is, they're allowed to start when they're small part time but they're not allowed to go full time until the term they're gonna be five in and you see Charlotte will be five in March and because I think that comes before the Easter of the Bank Holiday, erm she'll be able to start January  full time, where you're supposed to, you know, three years they'll all be
Why do you  this three hours  did you see it on telly the other night?
They were interviewing grown ups in the street and ask them er, so many figures and add that on, she said 
Oh god
I don't really know, you don't know, well the answer was the whole education  wants 
yeah 
to bring it back, said she didn't know, she said I don't know, and they asked another one, it was about what's a hundred and thirty one and thirty eight and something, not,
she tell you it was a, the answer should have been a hundred and twenty nine  and they've got a thirty one in it  yeah
Oh it's lovely 
Eighty eight, forty one, something, something of that effect.
And he's got to add them together?
I think add them together, well there was an old woman of about fifty, sixty, she said a hundred and twenty eight, well he said you're one out madam, a hundred and twenty nine, well they were amazed themselves, the girl said well a hundred and twenty eight
Oh no
a hundred and twenty eight




What do you say?
Please  you gonna get another dent in the back if you carry on driving like that 
I was gonna say do you want 
I don't know if I agree with this, giving  seven year old, three hours tests, erm, I don't, see the child is, I mean can you just see sit Benjamin sitting down for three hours doing a test?
And they reckon what, what it, that's all it's going to be a three hour test  I don't agree with putting a child of that age through a test  I mean there's none of this nursery pick out who is slow on what, where, why and when, who's good at something who's, who's not so good at it, erm apparently  and er, put a seven year old through this exam, find out what they're good at and what they're not, well the teachers obviously aren't doing their jobs very well.
Mm  there was Ben's 
He's quite good, but you know he, he, where, where he had that bash on his head 
 
Oh god it stands out a mile, quite a good photo, it looks as though he just about 
Yeah.
It is quite good, quite  of Katie
Yeah she's  Katie she bought  what were her chances of re-ordering it you know 
Well there was, but I can't remember what prices they want  
Now, you've had two  of me ain't you?
Yeah
and I owe you seven, is that right?
then what about the shopping?
I haven't sorted that out yet, I'll sort that out this afternoon.
why do you owe me  seven?
Oh no, I paid you three, didn't I?
I don't know 
I gave you three for the bird box, you gotta deliver me a bird box 
Oh, right yes, yeah 
I want Barry to find that, oh I see you owe me a fiver don't you?
Yeah 
Yes cos I gave father the money for whatever  it was, so, yeah, I gave him five pounds worth of change
and then there's erm, that shopping, bit of shopping you got for me 
 
last week
I knew I owed you five 
oh dear 
You've got Christmas raffle tickets, get them all together, I've got you pounds worth on shelf the other week,and then I got your two pounds worth, I, two pounds worth on
Oh put it on the shopping list
No, I'll treat you to them, I make my lot to the nearest bottle with Unicare if I can, how many you've got?
Erm, I've no idea, not 
Well I sent three 
But I mean if I think, if I think erm, if I remember rightly you were, you were buying erm couple or three weeks   that's my first lot, oh dear excuse me 
 
Now what are they doing?
One's pushing it over and the other one's pulling it back, oh  there isn't enough of them around as it is  he's late isn't he?
He was late yesterday, got a brand new vehicle and, yet I mean if, if was getting here at one and yesterday he got to ours at half past eleven, so erm, it was half past eleven that's right, it was dead on, so erm,erm whatever's he going to be like when it gets near to Christmas?
Oh my goodness, they are out today.
Whatever is it going to be like nearer Christmas?
I mean he can go it's the bus that can't.
Yeah 
Is this grass that you bring being delivered tomorrow morning?
Mum
Yeah, don't they come and 
No that was the erm  oh whatever was that called, it's the piece of wood that runs along the brick work
Oh
that the rafters sit on, on the  
gates 
Oh bum I ain't paid the mortgage, oh only in the  I'll pay it  probably tomorrow  Charles had his money 
 

I'll try and nip up there tomorrow , if not I'll have to go on Monday  I don't think any, I don't think  run away, what will Monday's date be, the ninth?oh well  There are those new Chronicles that have got to come out
I don't think any  are coming up now.
Oh I thought erm, they said they chartered them cheap 
No, I thought they're all up there watching and 
 
Dear me  I think Daryll was hoping the roof things  the best they can do was Saturday morning.
No, you're not getting out today, nanny's got a lot of work to do, and she's got loads of cakes to make and all sorts.
No, I'm sorry darling, come up later, we've got to go.
Let me get myself sorted out and 
Nanny, nanny will probably have you up later when Ben helps Gramps to feed the dogs, and he won't do that either will he,feed him
Cake, cake, cake
Nanny hasn't got any cakes at the moment cos you've got to cook them, say bye, bye
No
yes, come on
Bye, bye
say bye, bye.