

Oh, has it gone round a bit?
Yeah, it's gone round a bit now.
Yeah.
Well  we had  oh I'm  trying to think what we had today  oh got out of assembly  because  I had to go and speak to this maths teacher who's dead boring!
Mr   but like  I pretended I had to go and see him  not because I had to go and see him just because I didn't wanna go to assembly really!
Oh!
Cos I'm like that!
We haven't, we haven't got assembly at the moment cos like  you know that erm  musical ?
Oh yeah.
It's all, all that but  ooh, that's a groovy  stage !
Oh What!
Oh yeah  
left over  left over at  and stuff which
Oh yes 
Oh  we've made these telephones !
 
And well look 
Well we know that now !
Yeah but it's just 
Ah gee  Have a look if Shaun and Joanna are back, oh yeah they are.
I said I'd go down there but the, like the car wasn't there so I didn't go back.
Oh dear !
I didn't, I didn't know Joe was out actually.
Yes.
Isn't Scott down there?
No, he's gone to a  play at the college   and a   yeah  I was er like  when I realised  that had come on I thought  does he know?
Just don't say anything !
 
And thought that they were picking his nose  !
Maybe he's not in !
I thought, oh never mind !
Put the phone down again.
And then I thought, well you can always and like say, can you tell Scott!
And I will  
Can you tell I've come on so I'm not pregnant!
Alright?
And I thought like  his mum might not find that really amusing or anything
Yeah.
so  and I thought I could just leave him sort of like  a message that was subtle enough 
 
so he'd know, like  erm
Tell him he's not a daddy!
Yes !
 

ring  , could you tell Scott that er  that erm  oh God, I don't know!
Actually I was thinking of some really good, funny things I could say earlier 
 
I can't think of any now!
Things like erm  oh yeah, could yo could you tell Scott that  er, he doesn't have to go to church  and pray any more, something like that !
Tell him he doesn't have to go to confession with Helena!
That's right !
Oh gee!
He doesn't have to book me an appointment  at the clinic !
Ooh I wonder what that could be about ?
Er, like this morning at break  I walked, I walked straight past Peter  right  and er  come up to me and he goes  that's not very nice is it?
 
I thought what !
He  just walked straight past me, oh well I'm so sorry and he goes  what's wrong with you anyway lately?
Nothing!
Nothing wrong with me !
Nothing at all!
It's !
Oh Pete can I talk to you about something ?
Oh   Shrimpy made me laugh me about it  cracks me up like !
Ah, look at the, look, just look at this letter he wrote me!
Ah Pete , yeah  he was saying 
I i 
Joe was saying how  how he was really embarrassed cos he showed your mum or something!
My mum goes what letter's that?
I goes oh it , you read it.
Like  like all the way to it I was thinking 
Helena, I don't really know how to put this but I  I'll have a go.
I thought he said I've got to go!
I was gonna say bye !
That's a long letter then!
I'm sorry about being in a mood Saturday but I wasn't really in a mood with you.
I know I told you that I was but I was feeling sorry for someone, not Emma  or anyone like that.
Oh dear !
 
I care for Emma more than  I can say, but I also care for you and I'm really sorry if you were hurt.
Excuse me!
Excuse me!
Excuse me!
 Wuargh!
Oh  .
I had to   in that!
At the moment everyone has been talking about other people behind  people's backs  yeah Shrimp, you got good English!
I didn't tell you what Emma thought 
Just in case you're catching this bit !
 
that's cos I don't know.
I don't think a person  told, who apologises isn't really an apology but I thought there must a reason why you didn't.
Yeah.
Ah oh!
I know he, he can't write!
And Joe told me on Sunday 
You're illiterate!
why yo , you didn't.
I was going to apologise for being  stupid on Sunday when you both disappeared.
Me and Andy looked all over for you both  last night I had a few things on my mind 
Didn't look very well, we were walking down by the side of the road !
but  
things on my mind  er, my  my mind to  be able to apologise.
Oh   I'm sorry !
and hope we can still be friends?
Love  to be  !
Well whe , when I got to that 
 
bit I went  I mean I was feeling a lit , wasn't , I'm gonna barf!
Oh I'm going  urgh!
I just thought  get a life!
You know how  
Give me that !
He makes me laugh  he always writes in capital letters doesn't he?
Mm.
And 
Join in !
Oh you sound like Mrs 
Yeah!
!
Wow!
Well  and he wrote me this letter saying erm  saying  I, I realise that there's been something on your mind recently  and I hope you can talk to me about it.
Oh yeah, by the Shrimp  I could of got pregnant!
 
Things like  and I know you can talk to me 
 
because you've got the world's problems and everything !
Ah, it ju , although, I mean, just when you said that just reminded me that time Hannah !
I'll never 
Oh God!
I was just bor , the rest of my days!
You joked me about what she should of  in the day?
Yeah, yeah  oh
When.
God!
What, what what exactly 
I was staying on  I said  oh er, yeah  cos yo , had Joe saying you were disappointed that I couldn't say it to your face!
And I said, ah yeah, but she didn't say it to my face, did you see 
 
and er  and erm  and  Joe was saying this to Shrimpy I think, or so I think she was saying to Shrimpy
Mm.
and erm
Hannah    
Yeah, Hannah  Hannah  's got a twitch!
And  was going, I know what she said,I was there !
Oh!
I'm thinking  I'm sure you were Hannah because actually you were inside and they were outside, there's like a door and the rest of the house between you!
 
I think, ah gee!
But  I can't believe that girl  oh Scott tells me everything!
Like I ju , honestly I 
Oh yes!
Scott , Scott, Scott told me what it was all about and I was going,not to me!
It's me here !
Oh yeah !
It might be and oh ah  I was just sat there going  mm, yes I believe Hannah!
You 
Yeah.
you don't actually know anything that we're talking about!
Because  we hate you!
But there you go !
No I don't hate her she just annoys me badly!
That's all !
She made  ee she made a Heather a birthday cake the other day  and I, I've got say actually this cake was pretty good  but like, she had to take it to school!
I mean, the girl is sad!
If you're gonna take a birthday cake to school  I mean, that is sad isn't it?
My brain's  just died !
But that is very very sad!
But like er, she took it sch to school  and Scott was giving us a lift to school  so didn't have to walk  and she's in the car and she's going if this gets  if this gets all smashed up Scott I hope you realise I'm blaming you!
And she was serious!
I was thinking
I would of turned round and ge get out 
I did 
get out the fucking car!
I sa , I said  I just went  I just said to her look  Hannah you don't have to come in the car!
And like, I said it jokingly but wi with 
Mm.
like a sort of  you know 
Sort of with a sort of I'm dying to stick this knife  in your back !
Yes.
Oh!
Oh, did you see Inspector Morse last night?
No I saw the very end bit.
Did you see the  where's she  where that girl stabbed er  her  what was that girl in?
I was sat there, me and my dad were going,what has she been in ?
She was in erm
Got a really irritating voice hasn't she?
You know where there was that  there was the young girl  and there was the old wo , oldish woman who was supposed to be a film star or something?
Oh yeah!
That thing where erm  she, she worked for him so that 
Yeah.
she lived in that hotel.
Mm.
Oh yes, I know that!
Oh that thing that was supposed 
It was crap wasn't it!
to be funny!
That stupid 
Everyone thought the 
irritating little dog and th , the  and Ted out of Grange Hill   porter !
Yeah.
Did you watch the one where you wanted to go  mm I'd like to casserole that dog!
Yeah !
Ahhh !
Ah dear!
What a mouth!
I wonder if they let you 
Look 
keep the tapes?
 
I've only used one!
Keep all the rest, I've had nineteen !
Your .
You know?
Look
Say nothing!
this is, this is sad I am and how worried I've been  this has been round my neck!
 
My luckiest lucky pendant !
Lucky is looking bent  which has been bent and battered !
It's like, got scrapings out of it and everything and  and it's in this little lovely   container or something down my neck!
I, I bet, I bet i I bet it's the first time in your life you felt   shi , yes come on  !
which I'm saying, you can hold m , you can hold me to this, I will never ever ever complain about being on again in my life!
 
But I think 
Ah dear!
I'll just  boycott that now  and start complaining!
 
Ah dear!
And we nearly made Andy sick yesterday, it was so funny!
We was going like  because like, we was talking about it  and er   he goes 
About what?
Periods.
Oh, being on!
Yes   And er, like I said  er I was, like I was talking to  like he was 
Yeah !
I goes  yeah it was  you know i the worst time is in assembly and you think  oh Jesus!
And you stand up and you like  you like mm, accidentally rub your hand on your arse 
Yeah.
just to make sure !
sure, yeah !
And you look at the chair just to make sure there isn't a pool on there!
Yeah !
And you walk away going   like this  you know  ooh let's squeeze my legs in as much as possible !
Yeah  .
We thought we'd start with  an interesting topic !
Well why not!
It's what we talk about all the time anyway!
Yeah !
Yeah.
I tell you when we'll have to put this on  on Saturday night!
But, when everyone's gone when it's just us three!
Oh yeah!
 
That'll be a right one!
My dog's a virgin !
My dog's a big  dobbo !
 
 
I'll never forget that  I will never forget that, I had, I'll told my mum like that we  I told my mum we'd be sleeping over and she said that was alright  and she sort of looked at me as if to say  mm, yes  will Helena's brother be there?
Yes, Helena's brother will there all night, mum!
Jimmy Hill!
Not that she's sleeping at Clare's are we ?
No !
It's a bit.
Oh wild !
He will be back about  ooh eleven o'clock in the morning !
Oh no!
Look at me weep !
I'm really disappointed cos I don't think my mum will let me stay now!
I think you're just gonna rush home and tell her and everything else!
Yeah!
Course I am!
Oh mum  I've decided not to sleep at Helena's because  her nice brother's gonna be there!
Mum goes, well do you wanna stay there if the dog's gonna be there?
Oh no 
No 
I'll put the dog in the shed!
.
No mum, actually erm  I'm not gonna go down to Helena's and wi ,wi , you know  with the dogs 
I'm gonna come home   
Perhaps have the riot you know!
They're all gonna be  being arsed out their faces!
Everyone's just gonna be laying on the floor going  God  I'm arsed!
I'm blood thirsty!
Everybody's just gonna have a real riot!
And then  Helena, Joanne and me would be sleeping over  but because they've got a dog I'm not going to sleep!
In case it spits on me !
Yeah !
Again !
Again !
No but like  I said to my mum it'll be alright because  your do , your brother'll be in all evening won't he Helena?
Honestly, yeah!
Honest guv!
My brother, my brother really wants to   did, did you know Pete  like, phoned me up yesterday
Yeah.
and like  I thought, I had to make up an excuse why I went out!
Cos ever , like my mum and my brother were in when I got home.
So I came home   and I goes  
 
and he go and mum goes where have you been?
I goes, oh there's been arguments again!
Oh there's  you spend all your time sorting out other people's arguments and I'm not as thick as that!
Actually mum, I'm not!
Stick the V's up at you mum!
Behind the wall of course!
I don't think I'll go  I don't want to have a broken nose!
And er  and er  
Got any nail clippers?
Yeah  er  there!
Ah!
And er
Dog brush  ooh!
Yeah.
Looks like a dog's brush  
Ooh! ooh! ooh! ooh!
do you think?
Just see if you 
Erm 
can say it before anybody 
excuse me!
else!
What?
I've got a red one of those !
Oh!
Yeah, but it's not as big as  it's  not the same size as that is it?
No, cos yours is a cat brush and mine's a dog brush!
Oh sorry!
Dog!
You calling me a cat?
Yes!
Are you calling me a dog?
 
I hope so!
foxy chick !
Alright then, I'll let you off!
Ah!
Erm  did I tell you about that Lucy and Ricky?
When Lucy reckoned Ricky didn't want her any more?
And I goes  do this to Ricky  go up to Lucy and go  yo, hot chick!
Come over to my place I'll drop my trousers and we can have a quickie !
And he did !
And what did she say?
Er  sorry  
Nothing could of told her that I, I to , I told her and she goes
What did she say?
I told her say something really, really stupid like   like  okay then steaming dude  or something !
 
Alright then.
Okay!
And then, where was I?
Oh yeah!
So I came home, my mum goes what you be ,wha what's happening anyway?
I goes  ah Shrimpy's been having a massive go at Pete he's threatened to punch his face in and  all this business !
Gosh you ge , I bet Pete was worried!
I know !
But he was, he was threatening him anyway  and  he said Pete was 
What from Friday night?
Do you know about what?
No, no he's been befo , been  after that!
Yeah.
Why?
 Woh,Christ  
She's been in a  shop with him I think.
They'll .
Yeah, they'll  !
Erm  why, why was he doing that on Friday?
Yeah, well apparently right  well in case you didn't 
Well she's got a theory but go on 
in case you didn't notice  I was in rather a little bit of a mood on Friday!
Were you ?
 
 
I didn't try to hide it oddly enough !
Oddly enough!
I went  cos  it was then I goes to Pete, oh no I ought to go out really, and he goes no you're not!
 
Sort of looked at me and went  okay 
Well if you 
I'm not arguing !
if you want my body, you know  you've got it!
You only have to ask once!
But like erm
I wonder if they listen to these?
If you are listening
er  I know I look like a real goody goody and everything  I'm not really !
Anyhow, the man 
Go on.
with the man
I thought  Woh!
I was so tempted to sit there and say  excuse me dear  you need a shave!
Or, excuse me you look like my dad twenty years ago!
 
That exci , it's alright this thing from the past, he did remind me of someone actually.
Mr   that's who it is !
Mr ,.
Ooh ooh fiddle with my moustache!
I bet they  know you 
Anyway, right what was it about 
cos they won't be able to understand a thing we are saying!
Going ooh!
Er er er er er!
I I !
And we're talking at the same time as well?
Oh let's not all talk at the same time!
Let's be Magic Roundabout people!
So  they want a realistic conversation 
 
then do they?
No let's  let's loo 
Anyway, where was I?
I was saying, oh yeah  erm Shrimpy like, we, me and Scott were playing snooker  and I, I came in to see if like, either of  you, anyone else wanted to play doubles  and like,Swimp , Shrimpy was just sat by himself in the middle of the floor, cross-legged just sat there like a little pixie or something!
Well, no not a little 
And I just went 
six foot three pixie !
Right, so a six foot three pixie, never mind!
But like  he was just sat there!
And I went over, I goes you alright?
He goes, yes!
Oh sorry!
Please forgive me!
I goes, do you wanna go, go and play snooker?
So he goes, yeah alright then.
Oh come on you can be on my side  cos it was obvious, like, he was just sort of sat there.
Mm.
And erm  and then like, he went back in after we'd finished playing and me and Scott carried on playing for a bit  and then erm  what was he going?
Oh yeah, he told me afterwards right, that he, the only reason he was angry was because Friday night reminded him of the time in his past or something!
And Pete reminded him of, him of the person that he hated and all this!
And I was thinking  Shrimpy, you're stupid!
Get a life !
You sure!
Oh !
And then, cos I thought boy!
So what did he do?
What did Shrimpy do on Friday night?
Oh, he told Richard  Richard  that he was, he was gonna se , he wanted to smack Pete's face in!
Oh yeah!
 
So what did Richard do?
 
Course, Richard who keeps everything to himself !
Richard  not known as Mersey Tunnel Gob  or anything !
 
Oh dear  !
Oh dear I couldn't believe it though!
I mean that is sad!
Ahhh no!
I can't believe it!
But  Pete reckoned it was because like  cos like  Pete's seeing Susan
Mm.
and like 
Then he was with you.
and he was with me
Yeah.
and he reckoned Pete was a total bastard and everything!
Even though he doesn't know Susan he a 
Yeah.
he reckons  Pete's cheating on Susan, he's been really bad to Helena as well he's just using them and all 
Yeah.
this business.
But, in a way I mean like, I thought that as well, but then I thought  well that's stupid that is because  you weren't as  as bad as Pete was were you?
I mean, let's face it
I mean, who's taking advantage of him 
You were ta , you were taking advantage, not him!
I mean, on both times it's been me taking advantage of him, it really 
Yeah.
because
I mean he 
he's been  both times and I haven't.
Let's face it  you fancy him don't you?
He knows that!
And 
Mm mm 
like  he just  I mean he just  you know, he's there isn't he, at the time?
 
He thinks like, okay fair enough  lets have a bit of snog you know, fair enough, whatever else!
But like
He's so funny though!
He cracked me up, he goes  like, like with that I mean
And Shrimpy fancies you rotten anyway!
That's the only the reason!
He's probably just jealous!
Well like I said, I said that, I said that to Pete and Pete goes, God I wish he'd make up his mind!
Yeah.
So he'd obviously sa not said it, I mean Pete was really shocked!
He'd 
Yeah.
obviously not said anything to Pete about me
Mm.
so I dunno!
He said it to Andy though, and I mean  I don't, I don't know, Andy really surprises me because like  he always seems to be like, the quiet one doesn't it?
I mean, when we're all like, laughing and joking and everything he's like, oh yeah really in with it  but when everyone's like arguing or whatever he  he 
Mm.
doesn't get involved because everything revolves round him doesn't it?
Yeah.
But like  everybody,eve 
It's his house everyone goes to isn't it?
Everybody seems to  Andy seems to know everything!
Like, Andy knows about me!
And like, Scott told me  and  thinking about it  if I'd of been in  in the frame, frame of mind that I'm in know for example, I would of sort of   pah!
What right has he got to know or anything?
But like, I don't mind  cos I know he won't say anything.
Mm.
I mean  flipping talk about keeping it a secret!
I went to the door last night  ten minutes after Scott had told him  and like, I was crying  at the door, and he goes  ahh, is something not wrong like, you know?
And he was being nice, but sort of, jokingly nice  and I goes  oh yeah, you know?
And er, he goes  oh I don't expect, has it got anything to do with Helena and Joan?
I said, oh no nothing to do with them  and he goes ah, Shrimpy then?
I said no.
And like, I'd no idea that he knew!
And 
Mm.
erm  like he's really nice like that though.
Yeah, I know  
I re , I'd  I mean, I don't fancy him, no  fair enough  he's ugly  in my opinion!
Yeah.
But, I really do like, I'm, I'm always  
He's a really nice person!
I mean  the  I mean, like, I mean, people say it that a personality makes up for like, looks or whatever, and with hi , he's the only person I've ever met where it really really does!
Yeah.
His personality is just so nice!
And he's 
Yeah.
such a lovely person he really is!
You know  and I 
Yeah.
just think ahhh, you know?
That's, I tell you what that's the one person that, sitting here thinking now, I can't think  of any time  where I've been angry with Andrew
No.
at all.
Like I get, I mess about with him and like
Yeah!
cos like, he told everyone about me and Pete and everything, you know?
Yeah.
Like what him and Joe had an argument about.
But er  you know?
So you're not gonna say that on the tape  then are you Hel ?
No, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna say it on the tape,!
But I mean  he did, well he, he knew, I told him
Mm.
but I mean, him and Joe were in the room at the same time.
Yeah.
You know, and I  you know, I sort of told him.
Well I did 
Mm.
tell him !
And he, but he didn't actually tell anybody.
Mm.
I mean, he made a few comments a but  nothing that anybody could tell.
No.
I mean, everybody knows now anyway.
Yeah.
To do , can you really see them all?
What?
The
What?
The  them  things.
No, I di , I had one on my neck
Yeah.
I had one
The things that we're not actually mentioning!
I had one there 
Yeah.
you might just 
Well a 
be able to see the last little of it.
I can't actually see it, no.
And I've got a ye nice yellow bruise there.
Yeah.
And I've got one on my back.
And can you see that one?
Let's have a butchers!
Where?
Thought it was  just there somewhere.
It's probably gone now actually.
Yeah 
Just there.
think it has.
It was just there.
No, I can't see anything.
But there wa , I've got 
Just there.
a nice yellow bruise still there.
You can see the one that Scott done the other day.
You know I've got that school shirt with the big collar?
Mhm.
Like
Joanne told me about that you 
the 
can see it straight through it!
the shirt and the collar and you could still see it!
And it was like, I'm not joking, it was the colour of that!
Mm.
And it was there a week, oh well, at the last, the last thing I saw of it was like, Monday night  and when did he give it me?
The Sat , the we , the Saturday a week before!
And I swear, it really hurt!
And it right on  as well, just there!
Mm.
Really really hurt it did!
And it wasn't, oh God!
And we only did it as a joke!you !
I didn't even know they were there to be quite honest.
I got 
Mm.
up the next morning  and, cos I had that  you know, that stripy top on?
Yeah.
And my mum, my mum was sat in  The Weathers with me  and I'd talked to her and everything and I didn't even know that that 
Yeah.
one was there!
And like,but like, I got 
 
up the next morning and I just went  oh Jesus!
But there was 
They were like 
this one
still 
and 
up there and the one on my back as well!
And Scott, Scott did this and like  and erm  he goes  oh it's not that bad!
And I goes, oh you stupid git!
Why did you have to do it there for, you know?
Put my school shirt on, oh you won't see it!
Oh no won't see it with that flipping big collar on my school shirt!
Actually, you couldn't see it, but you could see it through anyway so it didn't make really that much difference.
But like, I got the mirror down and like, I looked at it  and whether it was the light or whether it just hadn't come up cos it was only like, a few seconds afterwards
Mm.
I looked at it and it was just like sort of, light brown  and I thought oh that's not too bad!I got home and it was like, glowing  and I'm thinking oh my God!
There was like, arrows pointed to it still !
I mean, I only had that one on my neck and I thought  and like I was  I was   !
Wi , with your polos on !
collars !
all round you!
Like, my dad le , like I was doing the crossword or something my dad leant over me and I went, yeah, oh really!
Yeah.
I haven't actually got a neck !
Yeah, that was like me, I mean like  I'd, I wasn't bad  like, cos all the time I was just wearing like polo necks or like  shirts with high collars and stuff cos it wasn't actually on my neck it was just like on my, this one.
Mm.
I don't know what that is actually?
It's a collarbone .
Collarbone yeah.
But like erm  pyjamas, cos you know I wo , I usually wear those ones with like  low neck or like 
Yeah.
my babygro or something.
Mm.
So like, there was me sort of all of a sudden wearing like  old T-shirts and stuff in bed so that I'd got quite high collars and mum was sort of going 
 
aren't your pyjamas clean?
Yeah, they're clean but I wanna clear up spots on my back!
Yeah, still wanna clear up the spots on my back.
Can you see through here mum?
 
Oh dear!
I mean, I mean it wo that was pro , the lightest one on my 
Yeah.
neck!
That was lucky really in a way 
Oh!
isn't it?
And I was thinking, oh  I wa honestly I didn't know they were there.
But like, Scott was going to me  he was going to me, oh stop complaining or I'll give you one your tit, like and  I goes  well I wouldn't mind so much if it was on my , I wear a bra all the time 
 
you know I mean
Yeah.
you don't even take your bra off to do P E or whatever!
I mean, no one 's gonna see it there are they?
You're flipping  massive one !
 
I dunno.
If  Zena saw it  and, and made a  a subtle comments like 
Mm.
you know
Oh got a nasty 
Ah 
bruise there!
Yeah, actually se , I sa , actually she said  oh what, have you been walking into this time?
Hah, shut up!
Shut up before I punch your face in!
But like erm  no one else saw it.
But, I tell you what, it was so embarrassing!
The, it was the Mo , the Monday after the Saturday got, the Saturday it was done, I had P E  oh great!
So there's me like  I'm sat in first lesson we have  P E last lesson  sat in the first lesson  and I'm th , I've thought  God my bra strap feels really lose!
So I'm right  I thought  oh my God!
There's a gap in between, they're not attached any more!
What would you do ?
.I mean, like, okay it wasn't bad I mean  let's face it and I'm not exactly flipping  Dolly Parton am I?!
 
exploding everywhere wouldn't she !
But like, I was thinking  this is gonna be so embarrassing like in P E!
With ha half a bra on !
!
my cups down  my cups down to my waist !
I sa , I was sat there and  and then we was in maths, like the lesson before and I was going Zena, I don't wanna do P E!
I just do not want to do P E!
And she's going, why not?
You like P E, I don't wanna do it Zena  will you write me a letter to get me out of it?
She's going  no I won't, you know, not unless you tell me what it i , why it is you don't wanna do it!
So in the end I wro , I wrote her this letter because I couldn't say it out loud  in case anyone else heard me!
And say that I've busted my bra strap !
So she goes, oh don't worry about it.
Like, we go into the loo and like, you can mend it.
Mm.
So of course I've thought oh yeah that's all, okay, I thought, cos like, some of them have got the loop actually on the, the like on the top of the cup haven't they?
Mm.
Did this one?
No!
The loop's attached to the end of the strap!
It's a bit of the cup that's actually come apart, unsewn!
So that meant I had to get  the part of the, the top bit of the cup, thread it through the hoo , the hoop and then tie it in a knot!
So like, you can imagine  I had to have all the strap completely undone  so like  the, the buckle was like down here!
And above the knot!
Comfortable then?
Well  it wasn't, it wasn't that bad but like  it was really weird because like  you could see like, people like, especially the lads, just sort of looking at you  and then like  not meaning to be pervy but just like, looking again as if to think  why has Emma got a, a extraordinary lump  on half the top of her boob, you know !
 
It's like a lump there!
They're thinking, mm, a shame !
But like, it was alright then because like  means that you can changed up in this one corner of the changing room all the time  and so  I'd got my shirt on while I was putting my T-shirt on  like  for the reason that my bra strap was bust, not actually because I'd got a gigantic  love bite around my neck !
 
But like er
But I mean 
So that was alright really.
But, I couldn't believe it cos I  he goes to me, what do you think of love bites?
And I goes, I think they're horrible to be quite honest, I don't 
Yeah.
like them!
Same as me!
I goes to Scott, I really really  hate love bites   and er  and he goes, yeah and me.
The only time he's ever had one was at this kid's party  Fran , Franny someone, he's  actually a bloke !
Ooh that's  
I said that's   he went to this party and he he was like really hard and he was really drunk  and he gave  Scott, Noel and Ian  a love bite  like  for a joke !
He just decided to do  just for a laugh!
Oh, how sick!
Ah what a gay !
I know like, anyway  but like, Scott had gone home  said to his mum  like, is his mum isn't, going what's that on your neck?
You know, woh what you been doing, sort of thing!
And he's told her the whole story  so Noel's gone home and his mum's gone, what's that on your neck?
So Noel's gone  oh  someone tripped me up, I fell down the stairs and hit it on the coffee table, right!
His mum believed him!
So then his  Scott's mum and Noel's mum met in town  and they were just talking  and Scott's mum  it's dis , God it's disgusting isn't it  that lad given all them little lads love bites!
And er  Noel's mum's going  well what?
I don't know what you mean!
Noel said  he'd hit it on the coffee table !
Next day at school, Noel's come in and gone to Scott, you bastard!
 
Why do you have go and tell your mum the truth for !
I'd never tell my mum that!
Like, luckily they're 
Oh God!
no , not very big but I've still got the one, I've still got, and it's right next to it as well!
Mm.
Now it's yellow now it's going!
Yeah.
But, ah 
Ah gee
ah Jesus!
I think they're 
At least 
really disgusting!
Cos like, Scott was going I've never gave anyone one, you know.
And er  Hannah's going  we started off the conversation where was the perviest you've ever had one  I mean, knowing that I didn't have one, ever had one before  and that was Mark , feeble attempt that lasted about ten minutes 
 
I think !
And I was really upset about that as you can imagine!
But like erm  what was I saying?
Oh yeah  so I was going what's the perviest place?
I was thinking, you know, Scotts bound to have some pervy ones off Mandy !
But like er, and he was going oh I've never had one except for like, this Franny  bloke!.
Girls don't do it to boys as much as boys do it to girls though do they?
No I know.
That is really sick though!
I certainly don't think so anyway.
I think that's really disgusting, they look silly!
I think it looks awful on boys!
I mean, it looks bad enough on girls but I mean
I know, it looks really cheap doesn't it?
Yeah.
Sort of like  eh eh eh eh eh!
But I didn't  that's why it's 
I'm a big slag!
that's why I 
Ha!
I didn't tell anybody.
Yeah.
At school.
You didn't tell anyone like, except  Joe then told Stuart,Mr  !
Really funny!
But I ca , honestly when Pete phoned me up  and like, I was getting so worried!
And he's going 
Yeah but I swear you should have heard Pete  mouthing off at Joe!
I know.
And because like, he didn't even know about the love bites!
Cos Scott goes to him  cos, we were talking about flipping  biting other people's nipples  or something !
He did, he 
And 
he did actually bite me!
Yeah.
That's right 
He did.
he's really strange 
Well 
though!
it killed !
It really 
Yeah.
hurt!
Well Scott does that 
I screamed!
all the time!
Like  he doesn't think he doing it  but it really doesn't it?
I mean  like  keeh God me    
I went  I went 
God!
I actually went   arghhh You've gotta to!
Yeah.
And  and like  then, like them two they're being , and they goes what's up?
I goes, nothing!
Nothing!
You know, and it really hurt!
Yeah.
But I mean  but Joe said they were actual bite marks and it wasn't 
Yeah she did.
there wasn't actually bite marks, but he did bite me, but 
Yeah.
they was like love bite marks.
Mm.
And  I think, so  Pete wasn't right  and she wasn't right either.
Yeah.
But
But like, he was really sounding off at Joe!
And like, I mean  he didn't know about that!
And Scott goes  oh it's a good job  it's a good  he didn't give her a love bite !
 
And Pete's gone  what, I didn't did I?
And like, everyone was just sat there going, oh my God drool on the floor man, you don't even know!
I've only got three!
But oh God!
I mean they weren't very bad or anything but 
Mm.
I mean  Jesus Christ!
You've gotta be sad not to notice have you?
I mean  he's got about  !
Ah, but is he coming on Saturday?
hasn't he?
He's
Oh  I asked him 
You've asked ?
I asked him whether he was and 
Yeah.
he said  that he wa he didn't know, he was either coming now or was going to Tramps .
Yeah.
Cos someone said last night they were going to Tramps but whether that was just like, they might be going to Tramps or what.
This bra's too small, I'll have to get a new one!
But
I think he'll probably go to Tramps to be quite honest.
I think 
Mm.
prob , I think Susan might be going actually.
Mm.
And if it's a toss up between me and Susan it's,yeah Susan !
Yeah.
You know?
But I I 
I can't believe it actually, I mean  and no, no offense to you because you know I do , you know I don't mean this whatever  
No.
offensively.
Mm.
But like  he goes on on and on, don't he about how wonderful Susan is and then  you know  he gets drunk and that's it isn't it?
But  like, he even said it, he said to me when I was drunk and I, and it pissed me off a little bit actually cos like, he goes to me  you know  like I I was saying about it and he goes erm  well she was the one who wanted it all casual and everything, and I said oh yeah.
And he goes  he goes  yeah well, I do it because she does it!
Oh that's nice isn't it !
And I'll, I thought, I goes
Go on then!
I'll  I'll 
Flattery's the way to a girl's heart!
No, I go, I I went, oh thanks very much!
I don't think he heard me!
Yeah.
Under your breath, something.
Yeah and I went oh thanks!
Well I didn't actually but he was arsed  I just said oh thanks very much!
Like 
Yeah.
and went and sat in the corner of the bathroom and went, scowled at him for a bit!
Yeah.
But  you know.
Oh gee
I dunno!hey?
I don't know!
I wasn't even gonna tell Scott I hadn't come on!
But then he kept going on about how brilliant your party was gonna be and everything and I'm sat there thinking  let's face it, if I come on between  you know, because like, it would have been alright cos I'd be finished like, today or tomorrow  and then it would have been like  nice and ready for  the party!
Mm.
How do you do!
But like er 
But erm  like, I'm putting out of bounds signs on my mum's and brother's.
Yeah.
Well I said to 
I mean I said to Scott 
You can  you come in here.
I said to Scott  look
As long as I'm not in here.
Yeah.
Three people !
I said, I said to Scott
Or you can go in the bathrooms.
like  ooh  can we have it in bath please?
Cos you know what  I mean that's   as you know  I, I can't even lie in a bath any more, it's not fair !
Fiona was saying to me today at school, oh Emma can I have a bit of your height please?
I was thinking, oh yeah I'll just chop my legs off at the knee shall I?
It's really bad 
But 
now!
like everyone's jealo ,a , like everyone's jealous of me at school  and I wouldn't say I'm over tall!
But 
No.
like  you know, loads of people are smaller than me!
Mm.
I'm, I, you know I'm going off 
You know 
with one of the tallest!
Yeah, you know those  heeled shoes I've got?
I mean the heels have gotta be what  two inches?
Mm.
When I've got them on I'm taller than my dad!
Can you believe that, I'm taller than my dad!
That is disgusting!
If I grow any more I'm just gonna  flipping  start  chopping bits off myself!
Stop eating !
Yeah, but eating doesn't make any difference anyway does it?
I'd rather eat loads and at least then I won't look so lanky!
Mm.
But  actually I'm com quite  quite pleased with my body at the moment, my legs are still a bit skinny but  apart from that I'm doing okay I think?
I like my legs.
Yeah.
You have  you've got a really nice body anyway!
Actually, me and Joe were saying the other day, like  ever erm  who was it, someone said something about  people being fat or whatever and someone's gone, oh yeah, like Helena, you know jokingly  and erm  and me and Joe both turned round and said yeah but she's not fat though is she, she's like more  you're more wide aren't you?
Yeah , I'm not, I'm not fat that way, I'm  like that way.
You're sort , you're like your mum aren't you, you're like, wide?
Mhm.
But like  I don't know, I don't think there's anything wrong with it, I mean
But like, like, I mean   Andy, Andy goes  yeah, like, cos we were talking about that, and he goes, yeah you've got childbearing hips!
Yeah.
He goes, unlike my sister who's got  house-bearing hips !
And I go, no it's not in that 
Yeah, I went Shhh!
!
Yeah, I felt, I feel a bit sorry for Hannah actually cos
I do, I mean actually
she's alright, but
If she wa , if she wasn't Hannah inside, she's got a dead nice body you know!
She's 
Mm.
a really nice shape and everything!
Yeah.
She's got nice hair.
She eats
But, she's got a bit dodgy eyes though!
Mm.
She is a bit!
Yeah.
Oh,.
I feel really sorry for her actually 
 
cos I'm  I know if I had it I'd just feel really awful if I had  BO 
Yeah I know!
Same as me.
That's why I always hate that people tell me!
Like, even if it meant writing them  anonymous note, you know !
And like, you always think to yourself  like  you always think to yourself, yeah, you know I would tell someone  and if it's what you would 
I can't!
.
You know  I would, I'd just sort of 
If it was someone really close to me 
Yeah.
I would.
I've told 
I'd say 
my brother he had it before.
And I have  told my brother.
But like, your brother's alright, cos you go, oh you smelly bastard!
!
I go God, oh your breath  stinks can't you?
Mine probably does actually.
But it don't matter if you offend him does it?
No.
Really?
But like, I could say to you, you know  ah, you know, how are yo , you know, and I'd probably make a joke out of it!
God you stink!
I might say 
Yeah  
oh you run out of deodorant or something, you know!
But you can't sort of turn round to Hannah  and say  Hannah, you've got B O !
I know it's like
You smell !
it's like Fiona at school right  he ,o , Vicky and Iona were having this ma , major crisis about whether to tell her she's got B O?
Cos  I don't know whether it's  BO , but she just  smells to quite honest!
And she's a really nice person, right, she's a bit portly
Mm.
like, she's coloured right, but she's a bit portly  and  she just smells to be quite honest!
Mm.
And she's got this smell,yo , it's her smell  do you know 
Yeah.
what I mean?
And like  you da , can't tell it, like just walking around or whatever, if you're sitting right next to her and she leans over you
Mm.
or when she's on the trampoline  and you're 
Yeah.
standing by the trampoline.
Oh it's just horrific!
And everyone just goes
Yeah.
You know, and it's 
It's like today at school 
really awful!
there's this girl right, you know Lisa ?
Yeah.
Remember she was at Ricky's party 
Yeah.
well  we've got this thing against her now cos she's flirting with Ricky!
Ricky and Lucy have finished by the way.
Oh have they?
Finally!
Yeah.
He, he was up town with this other girl, holding her hand  walked past Lucy and smiled at her!
That wa , that is sad!
And wha 
Anyway Lisa  's been flirting badly with Ricky for ages!
I mean everyone knows she fancies him, but like, she's been getting really flirty!
So, like, we've got this thing about her, anyway, she was com and she was talking to Fiona today and she was stood next to me, and like  in a way, I was laughing at her  but I felt so sorry for her cos she really, really stunk!
And like  I wouldn't sa , she's not the sort of person who you'd think  oh you know  I mean like 
Oh you smell!
yeah like, not being nasty but Hannah   to look at her you think  you'd think, oh you know she might sort of bit  bit pongy!
Mm.
 
 
And like, Lisa  's like, you know  so 
Yeah she's like, really clean cut isn't she?
She's like anyone isn't she?
She's like us  sort of thing, you know?
I mean, here's me saying  smelly bum, you know !
Even, even, even no, but even more 
Radiation!
than that, I mean  I mean, I'm not being nasty but I mean  look at our  hairdo's!
I mean we're not exactly , well I'm so worried about  you know
Yeah.
how I look just at this second or anything!
Yeah, but she does doesn't she?
I know, but like she says, she's  hair and everything isn't she?
And all her make up  and she got  and she's really pretty really 
Yeah.
isn't she?
She is actually.
Pete said she  Pete said he'd give her one!
And I said, oh God I wouldn't!
And I to also admitted to him that I  
Have yo , have yo 
female.
have you heard about the wallet fiasco?
No.
Oh yes, I did!
Yes.
Shall I bring it on Saturday?
And I just went  mm!
Yeah.
Ha!
And I knew  exactly what it was you they were talking about!
What she was talking about!
But  do you know  I went  why?
Why did I do that?
Why am I  
Honestly, they don't care!
Ah!
But I 
 
knew exactly that he was talking about me and I thought what?
And  I goes  but I had to, I had to, I goes why?
And he goes  well I've got some money in it!
I've got my Visa card in it!
I goes why Pete, really evilly!
Mm.
And he went  and he went well what do you think?
And I just went  Jesus!!
I was just so  ooh!
I just think, oh no what am I gonna do now?
Well  just tell him no.
Unless you want to?
Couldn't really 
 
leave it.
I shouldn't imagine you 
No.
would?
No.
Not really.
But Clare is going  like I told Clare about it.
Is she coming to the party?
I don't know.
It depends really does , cos Joe said something about it depends if her boyfriend's got any money to come up or something or
No, her boyfriend is up
Yeah.
but I think he's going home tomorrow.
Is that Joe?
I've no idea I'm just having a butchers.
Having a butchers  ay 
Having a butchers!
Shall I turn the light off so you can see?
No, it's okay I can see.
Oh no!
Shame of all shame, it's my brother and Steve and  Sam across
and I'm just staring out the window !
See if they wave back.
Yes, my brother is waving back even though he's  !
Oh!
God!
Oh!
Why is he
Why is he hanging round Steven  again?
He must be sad character, and that's the only reason why!
Sad character!
Erm  I tell you what it's dead windy outside!
It is 
Yeah.
really, really windy!
That's why I've got my hair like this!
So have I.
While I was taking the dog out.
I put mine like this and  that's why it hasn't  stayed very well actually !
Do you wanna poster?
What of?
U 2.
It's that one that used be up there.
Is it black and white?
Yeah.
Yeah!
If you don't want it?
Yeah, have it!
Thanks.
I tell, I put  I tell you where I put that  where I used to have my erm  my Berlin Wall poster.
Oh you're taking that 
Which 
down?
No I took it down cos like, it was behind the wardrobe wasn't it?
And I've put it in the middle of the wall.
It's been there ages, you have seen it.
Oh yeah , yeah, yeah!
I thought you meant you were moving it from there.
No.
I'll put that up there.
That's great!
Thanks.
And then I can take that down, that flipping  Marilyn Steven, the really ugly Just Seventeen model!
 
Have you seen that one?
I'm not joking, this must have had   collars  and right  mm,!
!
Oh dear!
But erm  oh what was I gonna say?
oh they're all about Malcolm  bless you!
I couldn't believe Clare though!
Horny bloke!
Cos she goes erm  she goes  I told her right and she goes well you're going to aren't you?
I goes what?
She goes, she goes  well you might say that now but when you actually get there you'll really want to.
And er  I goes  you know, I was a bit, I was a bit shocked really, cos like
Yeah.
Clare's never told me that she'd done anything with Stuart.
You er  but when we were talking about this she told me that
Yeah.
he'd asked her to go on the pill.
Yeah.
And has she?
No.
She didn't want to!
So she's not going to.
 
But erm  I'd, I don't  but  like chat to her cos she's, honestly she's such a nice person and like
Mm.
she's one of them people who  she might be a little bit like  hard to talk to at first 
Mm.
but if you like, just go absolutely crazy  like I do!
Cos she's used to me being crazy !
Yeah.
Like going  ooh, ooh!, you know !
You know the way I do.
The way you do  like.
And er  ah, she'll be alright.
Yeah, if I mean, if she comes in everyone'll be fine with her won't they?
I mean  flipping  two sips of cider and I'm anybodys!
 
Have me in the bathroom if she wants me!
Ooh er look!
But er
Give her a blow job !
What do 
Did you catch that one ?
Do think they'll work it out?
Oh dear, so  like I say I'd  you know  chat, you know chat away to her because  I 
Yeah.
think, cos she really wants to come but like 
Yeah.
I mean 
She's  she's such a swot it's  unbelievable !
Dear oh me!
I mean, she reckons I'm a swot, and I reckon she's a swot, you know!
It's really funny!
But you know me!
I'll talk 
 
to anyone!
That's what er
Even a cassette recorder!
Hello darling!
But er 
Ah dear!
I hope she does come actually cos like  she's a real good laugh.
Yeah.
You know, she's really nice!
And  an anyway I wanna get her drunk and chop all her hair off so she's looks hideously ugly!
 
 
I know, her hair's gorgeous isn't it?
Mm.
She's so pretty as well!
Could not believe it!
Rachel  come up to me today, she's deadly serious, you know like   lovely gorgeous ginger hair!
No.
You must of seen her round town.
Well she's got the most gorgeous ginger hair!
Really thick, quite long, bit longer than mine.
I don't know her but 
It is really nice  and like, she's the most gorgeous looking girl you've seen in your life!
I've probably, I've probably seen her but
I've, I've talked about her haven't I?
Mm.
About Rachel.
I've heard the  name.
And erm  come up to me today and she goes  have you got any scissors?
I goes  no why?
Oh it doesn't matter.
She walked to Zeena, Zeena got any scissors?
No  why do you want them?
So, oh it doesn't matter.
Oh come on Rach , come on tell us, you know!
She's going  I wanna cut my hair.
And she was deadly serious!
I'm going, no you're not, don't be stupid!
She gone, I've had enough of it, it's really getting me down!
I thought, and she was really depressed about it!
Oh my God!
But like, Mr  really really bad  like  maths teacher, he goes erm  he goes to , she goes to him the other day  oh you're only picking on me cos I got ginger hair!
Yeah, you're right I am!
And he was being really nasty!
And I thought, I was thinking  God that is really, really nasty that is!
But like  then er, she, she just turned round to him and she goes  tell you what, I would really, really, love it if you woke up tomorrow and you had ginger hair, cos that'd really, really give you a dose of your own medicine!
Then  then er  and he was going, oh don't be childish Rachel and all this!
And, it's nothing to do with that!
And she goes, oh yeah, as if you'd know!
And like, he's really getting her down!
Yeah.
I feel really sorry for her cos her hair is gorgeous!
I mean, I'd kill for hair that colour!
I think if you've got a really nice colour ging , you can have, either have a hideous colour ginger 
Yeah.
or a really, really nice!
No, but she has got like, it's that  it's dark ginger.
Mm.
Dark gingery-red, it's gorgeous!
Like, it's not  it's not ginger, it's sort of like  auburn.
Rusty.
Rusty auburn.
Mm.
Oh it's gorgeous!
It's really nice!
Well you see that  you see, she probably looks at it every day and thinks, oh hideous!
Yeah.
But, you see, you see it every day and think, ah that's so lovely!
Ah that's so gorgeous!
Yeah.
But it's everybody, everyone thinks they're ugly don't they?
I mean like
Yeah.
You don't want what you've got do you?
No.
I wake up every morning  and think, oh my God it's that acne!
Mm.
Oh,
got up.
Oh look at my split ends!
You know, my hair's so 
I can hardly see, oh 
boring!
tell a lie I can see one spot on your face!
That one.
Oh alright then, two now you've pointed them out.
Let's have at me today.
I'm doing quite well actually, mine are clearing up a bit.
Yeah, but you see, I'd look at you and I wouldn't even notice!
One, two, three, four, only four!
It's like, I look at you 
Two.
and I would not even notice one spot!
Not even the one in the middle of my forehead?
No!
I tell you what I noticed when you first walked in  you got  you got thick eyeliner on, that's what I noticed.
Yeah.
Before anything else.
Thick eyeliner on the top of my eyes, I don't wear eyeliner on the bottom just in case you think I'm a tart!
Oh dear!
Oh I'm sad!
I must be bad!
You're talking to a tape recorder now Em !
I know.
I've done it before!
Oh gee, tomorrow right, mum has gone to me  the other day  oh, there's this woman at bridge she wants someone to baby-sit for her on Wednesday nights.
Do want, do you wanna, you interested?
And I said, yeah alright then, you know, fair enough.
So she goes  well she reckons it'll be a good idea if you went up to meet the little lad, he's only six, he's called Mark.
I thought  oh alright, fair enough.
She's goes, oh she's gonna phone Thursday night, she phoned me tonight  oh I'll pick you up at half four is that alright?
I thought, yeah, fair enough  she goes, we can go and pick him up from the child-minder  and then er  you can come for some tea  and you'll be home by about half seven!
Oh fucking hell!
No way!
I mean, cor blimey, I've never seen the woman or the kid before in my life!
Mm.
I mean, I don't mind going up to their house, sitting down having a cup of tea and biscuit 
Difficult situation or whatever! and saying  oh yes, hello Mark!
Are you going to read me a story and show me your bedroom?
Oh  goodo Right, well, better be off then,bye !
But like
She must be really picky if she's doing that!
I know!
But mum said like  she's  she's divorced  so sh , she's forty  she's got like a six year old kid  and the kid is really brainy!
And I'm sort of thinking, oh my God, modern woman!
Mm.
Modern woman with modern brainy kid!
And that she's got 
And thinking oh my God this kid's gonna be better than me!
Yeah, she's got this  gentleman friend.
Oh yeah.
He takes her out and  spoils her rotten like!
And she wanted me to baby-sit last, like, last  no, what day is it today?
Thursday.
Mm.
Yeah , tonight.
And erm  but like, she wasn't gonna be back till quarter past eleven!
I mean, I don't mind that but you know what my mum's like?
So er 
I wouldn't do it in the week.
I mean, I'd mean I'd do it, in a week 
Yeah, that's what , that's what she said, the woman going  well I suppose that's a bit late in the week really, she's got school the next day?
And mum just goes, yeah.
She goes, well I didn't know if you'd wanna do it so I just said that.
And you know er  but she goes like, she's like, like she said to me, once you've done it once  she'll expect you to do it again, and again!
And like, it's alright say like, once  every so often but like  once or twice 
 
a week or whatever  in, like staying out late, cos that means I wouldn't be back till like, quarter to twelve!
And get ready for bed 
It's too much , yeah!
it's too much isn't it?
But like erm  my mum was saying, you know  she's like  she's  got a, definitely got a good job and like, the kids really sort of 
You get, are you alright?
Comfortable?
Yeah.
sh , he's really sort of like, dead brainy and goes to the child-minder and  goes to school and whatever!
But like erm  she said like, he's a really good kid.
Well 
Mm.
I mean  well I thought to myself, God what a life!
I mean, I know it's not her fault  but like, every Wednesday she has  all the people from the college bridge  go to her house to play bridge.
I mean the kid's 
Poor kid!
just sat there on the sofa!
I mean, okay, he goes to bed about, what, eight o'clock or whatever?
But like, I mean  God, do you know I'd really hate that!
I mean, I used to hate it with like  having  flipping  anyone come up to our house when I was little!
Yeah.
I remember, I remember once
Apparently his mum's hardly there!
Because  the baby-sitter she's got at the moment right  she said she doesn't mind doing  Mondays, Tuesdays and Fridays  as well as the weekends  but she doesn't wanna do every day  each week.
Ma , how much does she go out?
I mean, God, the poor kid I feel really sorry for him!
Yeah!
I mean  ooh!
That's why she's asked me to do it, but like I said to mum  you know, I'm not gonna say to her, oh yeah I'll do it whenever you want, I'll say like  they're gonna do this extra course on Wednesday nights  and she said, like  unless she could get a baby-sitter she couldn't go  which is the reason I'm doing it.
So like
Just say you'll do it Wednesday night.
Yeah  say I can do it Wednesday nights, apart from that, you know  it's too bad sort of thing!
So I think I'm gonna change my nights  this, of staying in  to either Mo , Monday and Wednesday or  Tuesday and Wednesday  something like that.
I don't know really!
But like, like erm  that'd be quite good because if I go to someone else 's house like, you don't wanna be sort of like, messing about with all, all the stuff, you haven't got anything to  mess about with, do your hair or whatever can you?
No.
Mess around with your make up.
So I can get loads of homework done  and erm  like I can count that as one of my nights in.
Mm.
So that'll be quite useful I reckon really  as well as getting a bit of money.
Well, oh my mum's having such a fit about like  on our er, exam leads  like er  she goes to me this morning, like my da , her and my dad were talking about it  she is saying, and she'll do it!
Cos me 
Yeah.
and my, my, me and my brother are gonna be off at the same time
Yeah.
like be doing his A levels and that  she's saying that she's gonna take both of our stereos, lock them in the, lock them in the shed all day, take 
Mm.
the keys with her  and take the er, plug off the telly  so we've got nothing to  occupy us!
And she's serious as well!
Mm.
Because  we're both such weak willed people, honestly!
Same as me.
I mean, I've got a, I've got a French homework that was due in today  told Mrs  I'd left my book at home, I accidentally bought the wrong book!
So she goes, I want it first thing tomorrow morning, and I mean like  this is talking like, we're talking major  here!
Mm.
And like  I started doing it, I'll read it out in English  I started writing it in French  came to a word I didn't know and thought  ah leave it!
And I've left it now!
Mm.
So like I'll go in, half nine  I'll get a drink, you know  sit down, look out the window, see if Scott's in, phone him up if he is  say  helloee darling!
Ah, erm
By the way I'm not pregnant !
God this subject keeps coming up doesn't it?
I'm gonna 
Oh!
get dead bored now!
Whoever it is that's listening to our interesting conversation!
Don't you reckon that'd be dead boring though, I mean  I mean 
 
,
I know, but like, I thought 
I bet they're looking forward to this tape !
Yeah but like  think about it, first, I mean the first couple of tapes of people like saying  oh yeah, so then we had sex, and then we gave him a blow job!
Yeah but I mean
And then he licked me out while we're on the phone!
 Oh God !
Emma, you sound so crude!
But I mean
The twelfth
of the third  ninety two.
ninety two.
Well done dear!
What time did you start recording this side of the tape?
Twenty five past 
 
nine.
Twenty five past!
God!
They're big tapes aren't they?
I thought it was only supposed to be forty five minutes  long?
Nine twenty five P M  ready.
Ready.
This is gonna get really tedious after a bit isn't it?
I know, it's gonna be totally boring isn't it?
Er  chatting
Chatting with friends at home!
with friend.
I wonder who's gonna go through all these tapes?
there.
It doesn't say anywhere doesn't it?
Is it gonna be University students or
Hopefully !
By the way, I think you're sexy!
I hope you're not female?
I don't mind if you're female at all!
I'm not, I'm not, I'm not , I'm not quite like that!
I am!
Er  who spoke first?
I can't remember!
I think it was me.
No it wasn't it was me cos I was saying that if yo , if your pen didn't work.
Oh, Emma.
Oh, I was the one saying if you're pen doesn't work and my name's Emma dearest!
Er  student.
Student.
Anyway, what was I gonna say?
Oh yeah, I reckon all grannies are gonna be taping this they're the only with loads of spare time, we're just doing this for a laugh!
Mm.
But I mean
It's gonna be dead boring though isn't it?
Listening to them  complaining about the usual stuff!
Yeah  so I reckon  whoever's doing this  I, I bet whoever gets this tape, I bet there's fighting over this tape!
I bet there is  cos no one else will talk 
Yeah.
BJ's or anything!
Are you listening to that, then?
Bj's !
Oh God!
I think that's .
Did a  did erm  anyone tell you about  James's dad?
James?
You know James ?
His dad's called  his dad's called Barry.
Yeah.
You must know James  's dad.
The one we were hiding from at the fair.
Oh!
Remember him?
No.
He goes, well anyway, he's this like, really really mad bloke!
He goes to er, Ian  and like, Ian's gone to him, oh hello Mr , you know, and he's gone  ooh, don't call me Mr , he's from Wales you see!
He's not Welsh 
Ooh!
or anything!
Yeah, he is, he's Welsh.
I wouldn't put on an accent because they're cha , they're they're trying to  well never mind!
Oh okay.
Who cares!
I'll put on my accent anyway.
thinking I'm Welsh!
 
He goes  oh, don't call me Mr , call me B J!
Ah no!
And like, there's   
It is, yeah!
And like, Ian was just, cos he's like Barry  and Ian was just sort of stood there going   oh my God, I'm gonna laugh!
Ah 
Oh!
did I tell you whe , when I went to the opticians?
I've lost my 
Ah!
shoes again!
He was the most unbelievable person I've ever met in my life!
Oh!
Oh yes, he was wasn't he?
Oh God!
My brother went  my brother went yesterday as well.
Gotta have glasses?
Well he could have some done.
Yeah.
Cos he, he couldn't read the bottom two lines.
Oh yeah, that's good though, and I can't read the top  two lines !
You know   well what can you see with your left eye?
Erm 
Erm 
H
Nothing!
Ha ha ha !
Oh!
Ian's so funny!
But erm  yeah.
I dunno where to take this next, shall I take it downstairs and  yeah well, my half on this is stinted.   quite interesting.
Cos we all just sit there and watch telly and we don't talk!
We had a, we had a really goo , it's a pity you weren't here earlier actually cos we had a stu , a nice conversation about politics.
Oh, my dad kept going   shhh I'm trying to watch the football all the time!
And I was  cos I had, I had a massive argument with Vicky about party politics!
Right, cos she's such a selfish conservative bitch !
Mm.
Yeah.
Going  well, I don't care why should we have to pay for all those poor people!
That can't keep jobs!
Oh I put down Clive!
Oh he really makes me mad he does!
Me an , me and Natalie were having a  real bad go at him!
Sort of going   just cos daddy'll sort you out then!
Yeah!
Oh God!
Oh he drives me mad sometimes!
It like sh , I couldn't believe it she was  she's so conservative!
She sat there going  well why should we have to pay for poor people who can't be bothered to get jobs, they're so lazy!
Oh yeah, like there's a load of 
And I like, I 
jobs going round!
Honestly,
Yeah!
I was going absolutely  eppy This is in the middle of class, I was going  eppy And she goes  and I goes, oh yes just cos daddy's got a very nice car and you live in  Inkborough like this!
Yeah.
And I was  hon , I just went so mad!
And everyone in the whole class  Julian  Julian 
Mm.
was going to me, hey Helena calm down!
And I was going   No I won't calm down !
And I was screaming by this time and Miss  goes  oh be quiet everybody!
Mm, yes you're hard, I'm really scared!
Ma , it's like, it's like 
 
my dad this morning  he woke me up by  pulling me up by the hair, bashing my face into the pillow a couple of times, I just looked at, then go, and I looked at him
Got a comb anywhere?
Comb?
Even if it's one of those   tremmy pretend combs you get with a Barbie doll, oh this'll do!
Don't know what it is, but it'll do!
Hope you haven't  brushed anything pervy with this one!
Pubes!
Oh yes I'm always brushing my pubes!
Oh, I know !
How did you know?
.
That's my pu , pube comb!
Well you've gotta admit, it does look   it does look like one of them sort of things !
Have you, have you seen what pubes,?
Yeah !
Oh  goodo !
Erm, anyway, what was I saying?
Oh yeah, and I just looked up from the pillow and went  oh, watch me shiver!
 
In a very sarcastic voice !
Oh did you see erm  Mary 
No.
Whitehouse the other day?
No, I missed it , but your  get on with it anyway!
Ooh wasn't that weird it sprays at once!
I like this, it smells nice!
I think it smells awful actually!
Ah, I think it smells really nice!
Naomi  always wears that.
can smell !
Well at least I ain't got B O!
This is disgusting!
I did this top bottom up so that my dad wouldn't call me a tart as I walked out the house and I forgot to undo it again!
You're getting a bit prudish aren't you?
I know !
Ah dear!
You know,touch my pen!
Was there a minute ago wasn't it?
Ah, here it is!
Oh it's on the floor!
Emma the hero  finds it again!
 
Oh dear!
Love can I say !
What time you gotta be in?
I, I haven't actually got to be in at any time  except I did say I'd be in at half nine.
Oh!
Oh, it's half nine now!
Oh ha!
Slap my thigh!
You look really worried though Emma!
You look like you're about to rush home!
Oh dear  I must rush home  because it's half past nine and I'm going to get told off 
Ah !
for being late!
I've just missed Red Dwarf!
Oh never mind!
Oh oh oh Go ho od!
What?
Missed Red Dwarf!
Never mind  you see  mister tape recorder person.
They're coming in  Ah  !
I'm suffering a lot though!
You've caused us to miss Red Dwarf!
Cos we just enjoy talking to you so much!
Because you're such an interesting person!
I will do up my button again!
So you're dad won't call you a tart!
Actually, he shouldn't be in.
Listen, listen to your 
Oh well!
lucky  you're lucky, I'm not pregnant penny.
Yeah !
Right at the end of  somewhere.
Lucky  I'm not pregnant  powder case!
Oh dear!
Well  are you going to leave that on?
No I'm turn it back.
Gonna switch it off?
 Cheerio then darling!
Cheerio then man!
Oh dear!
Bye!
Sam  shut up!
So this means I gotta walk home all on my little own-some?
Pardon?
This means I gotta walk home all on my own-some?
Yeah, well it'll be erm  at little bit light anyway won't it?
What?
It'll be light.
Light?
Mm.
Suppose.
It won't be dark!
Yeah mum, I do know what light means !
Actually!
What have you today?
What lessons?
Mm.
Graphics  er  maths, science  english and R E.
What did you miss the other day?
When you was off?
.
Oh, a few other things.
I've caught, I've caught up on most of it  I've got to copy up some maths but I'll, I'll borrow someone's book this weekend.
Cos I won't have any homework cos I did that homework last night.
What, for the weekend?
What?
No, but  she won't give you two sets of homework  other.
What the , maths homework you mean?
Yeah.
So I'll be able to borrow somebody's book and  copy that.
It's only algebra anyway!
The stuff I was doing last night.
Shouldn't be too bad.
Is Joanne and Emma coming to  sleep on Saturday night?
Yeah.
Where are you going to sleep?
Down there  in the front room.
Well, we might as well I mean it's just  easiest place really.
And that  yo can keep the dog and cat upstairs  a bit can't we?
If he'll go.
If he'll go.
He won't be very happy if everybody's down here and he's up there!
Will he?
It's .
I know, but he always sits on Emma and
!
Don't she like it?
used to it.
I mean, I don't mind it if he comes and sits by me  well they're not used to him you see.
They're not used to little Sammy!
 Shush up!
wimps.
What?
Wimps.
No wimps?
Oh dear!
I nearly forgot how old you are when I was putting you in the book.
I put forty two.
I'm not quite forty two yet!
Soon!
I will be.
But not yet!
Pardon me boy   da doo dee doo doo doo .
Are you going into town then tomorrow?
Or 
To 
not?
Tomorrow?
Yeah.
Dunno.
Mm,!
Haven't made up my mind yet !
I never make up my mind until about
What about?
Half twelve tonight.
What about Shrimpy, have they got over his  tantrums?
Oh I think so.
He, he's just  he picks someone to have a go at!
So he's been having at 
Yeah.
Pete has he?
He's been having a go at Pete.
And it's a bit, it's a bit nasty of him really cos when, like, all this thing was with Emma and everything  Pete was the one that was really nice to him!
Mm.
He's always taking it out on them  I noticed!
Yeah.
What we having for tea?
Chicken.
I can see it's chicken !
Chicken what?
Chicken and er  rice.
Well, what we normally have you know, in the  sauce and that.
Yeah.
I wouldn't know the  posh name!
Chicken chasseur.
If you like!
Emma was the happiest I've seen her in about  two weeks!
She was er 
she said her brother wasn't getting on didn't she?
Yeah.
When she came to the door  and I  I didn't know whether to invite her in or not  like I went  come in  and,an she like, looked at me and I goes,don't ask !
 

Well it wouldn't matter if they were ?
What?
It wasn't  it was a bit strange, a bit naughty!
Well erm  I think it's dead interesting actually!
Oh!
something in   a bit of sex.
Different things, and I remember the woman came round the other day   about drinking whisky.
On a Sunday she came!
Mind you, I mean, we got no whisky anyway so I said  she's looking for somebody who  erm  drinks at  erm  a spot of whisky.
I says, oh sorry you've come we don't drink whisky.
She says, not even at Christmas?
I says no.
Shouldn't.
Which we don't do we?
We don't go in for spirits though do we?
No.
She wanted to see dad.
She should have gone to see Uncle Alan he's and  alcy 
er
She'll go and drink shri er, not drink Shrimpy!
Er  go and see Shrimpy.
Does he drink like that?
He's always drinking whisky!
Ha!
That'll rot his innards then!
Aha.
Oh Dave  let me!
Got a letter David?
Have you got a letter?
Yeah.
Can I open this one?
No!
Have you got two letters?
Yeah, but they're, they're both from the same place though mum.
What is it from?
Is it from Nottingham?
Cheltenham.
Not Bristol then?
Is it?
Oh it is  
Apparently that's  all that's from there actually.
There, in that  that  Picasse or whatever it's called!
Oh dear!
Rejected.
This is nothing!
Oh, it is as well!
Rejected?
Yeah.
Oh!
Oh that's a shame!
That's the only one you've had!
Yeah.
Oh!
Oh!
That's where you wanted to go, Woburn.
Oh well!
Never mind!
Never mind!
Try and get in Bristol somewhere.
Make it weird   is that what 
No this is from 
you said?
No this is from er  Sunderland.
The fourteenth place 
B A!
from at least two G C S E's  G C E O level.
You get a B A from that mum!
B A honours degree, yeah.
Flipping hell!
Mm!
Bit of  yes?
My brother a B A, yes!
And I spent ages !
That's a shame!
Wonder why that was?
Probably got too many people.
Probably filled the course already.
Yeah.
And it is a popular place.
Probably thought   hoh oh, we're not having him!
Oh no!
 Hoh oh no!
A   from Lincoln   No !
Can't have that!
Fourteen points.
That's a shame weren't it?
Yeah but
Mind you, Bristol's popular isn't it?
Yeah.
I'll just wait to see what  turns up.
Don't that dog ever shut up!
Oh shut up!
Alright!
I do to.
Oh!
Well that's a disappointing isn't it?
Yeah, well  you ca 
You're bound to get in  one of them somewhere.
But all the poly's have accepted me  still 
Who?
haven't heard from  Bristol 
Bristol , Bristol  
Yeah.
and  what's that one what came?
What?
This one?
Er, fourteen points  erm
About three D's this.
No.
The two  er
Ah yes, you see, that's Sunderland I mean that's up in the
James goes there.
back country isn't it?
But, the accommodation will be cheaper.
Yes I know, but it's such a long way to get up there!isn't it?
I mean, he's not exactly travelling everyday is he?
Well no, but you still got to pay to get up there and get back on  !
See what I mean.
I told you it'd be chicken chasseur!
 Erh 
You're dead disappointed  aren't you mum ?
I liked that one!.
Ha ha ha !
Mind you  wou , oh  you couldn't!
What?
Well I mean if, if it was full  and  they didn't all get the
Oh yeah, if erm
You know, qualifications for it, like  wha , what would happen then?
Well  on the  a lot of  places like, they advertise in papers and stuff  for the  places that are still open, places that are still open.
Like, and you phone up and  you can get in.
Well I mean, it's not necessarily to say that  you know, that they
Mm.
are all going to get it is it?
No.
I knew that one  as soon as I saw that it was from   that is was a reject one.
Well you got that other one from  didn't you?
I thought  what was that  er  South , Southampton or Portsmouth or something?
And Portsmouth 
Portsmouth 
wa was straight from  Picasse but  Picasse don't necessarily send out  just depends on whether the poly's send out to them as well.
But 
Oh!
they sent me  erm   or sent me a load a  load of material with it.
I really wish that they wouldn't do that though!
Oh dear!
Pasties!
You, you're worried about it than David is!
Well, it would've been handy wouldn't it?some of them.
Are you making as much noise as possible?
Yeah.
I can't make up all the time .
Mind you, Bristol, I mean that's not far.
That
No.
you know, if you
And York isn't.
I suppose it's a  mile round trip.
Twenty five pound up on the train, return!
Return.
So  thirty five.
That's  really clear !
as well!
!
God this dog is  !
Well I hope Bristol accept me now.
Why who have you got?
You got 
Sam!
Just York and  Aberystwyth.
Hull.
Oh, Aberystwyth  yeah.
But this is  this is one of the most popular ones in the country so 
What Nottingham?
Yeah.
It's got very high  arts intake as well.
Very high?
Arts  intake.
Oh!
Like  you know  English, sociology and all that.
Oh!
So that'll be why it's full then?
Yeah.
You were  you were late in sending it weren't you?
And that's because you were going to go .
you might be, get a place.
If you buck your ideas up!
And get a  with that in.
What's that supposed to mean?
Dog!
What's that supposed to mean?
You better get your exams!
Yeah.
But  buck your ideas up?
Buck your ideas up?
Yeah.
I mean  sort yourself out and
But I am sorted out!
Get on with it!
Instead of messing about!
But mum, he don't do much messing about does he?
I didn't ask you!
He was messing about yesterday morning!
What?
Look at him I'm .
Give him a  loaning 
It's only for three months mum!
Well
When is it?
Next week.
Next week.
 Gizzmo keeps trying to persuade me to go with her  but I don't really want to.
No I shouldn't worry  
Cos er , she's gotta go cos her brother's in it.
shouldn't you?
I thought about asking  actually.
Her brother's  Knuckles  oh,he's huge!
He's only about five foot !
A B and a C  that is.
Yeah, but A, it says a two  I mean, if you get three then you can get Nottingham couldn't 
Yeah.
you?
Yeah.
Well  three C's  must be over the points then.
Right
Er  
 
Not like that feller yesterday said that  really they can er  they can refuse if you get
Well yeah!
a di difference of their point stipulation
Oh, yeah.
and er  their gra , grade stipulation so  even if you got  three A's they can still refuse you.
He said that  he said it doesn't happen in York, but it has happened in some places  you know.
I could understand them refusing you if they'd asked for  say, a B in english and C in something else
Yes.
and you got D in English and D in so , although it may not be the point, or C.
Yes.
Because  then you  you wouldn't  certainly up, be up to the standard would you?
In that particular 
No.
Mm.
er  particular thing.
But I suppose  espec , like if you got really really good grades  you'd be  different to the group.
You know, say if they wanted to get you three C's and you got three A's  shut up Sam!
You could be lot  a lot different to the group.
The higher standard?
Yeah.
Mm.
Which might make it more difficult to teach.
Yeah, I suppose it would.
True!
Would it make an effect?
Mm.
I suppose I, I better go and get hair done.
Yes, you'd better had, it's twenty
How are you then chicken?
 Okey doke Groovy!
Seen Emma?
Well, this morning.
Oh!
Is that alright?
Yes.
Oh!
Didn't walk home with me cos I had to go  I was  and wa , was going to the other side.
How come the  had the school photo in it?
Was it?
Mu mine  !
I've got a bad habit of shouting like that today.
Like  in science today I goes oh for God!
!
What ?
I got into
I'll show you 
What?
I'm only saying  thank you.
I know!
This is really good!
Doo doo  and I took the best .
Are we going up to York tonight?
Yeah.
We've got, we're going, ooh  together now.
But as long as we've got  can't enjoy myself, can't even have a fag, might as well have, not be going!
Shouldn't have to worry cos  she's 
Shhh!
shh, oh don't else a man might come in .
Like, oh yeah I know he means !
And dad goes, I'm  I think I might only just have orange juice!
Besides , I mean I can't have a fag!
I goes, can't I just have two on a Friday?
No you can't!, might as well not bother going then mighten I!
Cos   anyway!
Especially if you can't have a fag!
Is she, you know, really bounced up about it?
No, she just like, cos he's going down the club.
From High School  kids, you know?
So I might  make a trip to  .
Mm.
He's just too daft, cos he won't even let her have two!
She hasn't had any since Tuesday!
No, she hasn't had any since Tuesday.
She's doing well then?
Mm.
She did be , better than she did.
Yeah, but dad'll .
Ah!
ah that's it, run back and tell everybody, run run!
Ah, like she always does!
 
Yeah well  I don't want Gary , she's .
She must be!
Instead of going like quarter past, goes oh  go down, let's get boring now, yeah yeah!
I said, oh go a bit later then, I goes  cos I'll make it quarter past seven I'm not sitting round for half an hour, not like  kiddos 
Oh dear!
Cos  cos my mum and dad won't be able to get that cos my dad's working.
Well the outing's in that area the next day.
Ha!stay, stay, stay with ah haaa !
Oh, had an exciting date at school today then?
No.
I rushed last night, I did  two of my geographies  I did one of them this dinner time, and other he didn't ask for my book in!
Couldn't believe it!
Ha!
Course, that was  didn't want to come and she said oh they asked for it in so I just pretended I didn't  I'd handed mine in and didn't say anything like, you know  in ca like, cos I had to go and get them yesterday.
.Flipping Johnnie  is coming tomorrow!
And his laugh!
Tomorrow?
Thought he was coming Sunday?
No, tomorrow.
Between two and four , cos I've got and do the papers tomorrow afternoon, they don't come till four, I do the papers about half  four to half  go out, you know quarter past five 
Still having over to me 
I'm going out 
tomorrow night though aren't you?
Yeah, I'm coming down yours about half seven.
So you won't see him anyway.
Maybe I'll come nearer two.
Mm.
And then it'll look as if I've hardly been .
about half seven .
Is she pissed off ?
We've gotta be going fairly early anyway.
She goes to me, oh how you getting to   well I was hoping like, you'd take me, she goes, oh yes?
That's a surprise!
And I goes will you?
He goes yeah alright then.
Gonna take us down The Square.
Last night we were shopping, I wanted to go and get something cos I said to her right  can you ?
Can I spent all my money!
Yeah.
And he goes  yeah alright then.
What's wrong?
I goes, can you go and get and some beers, yeah  cos otherwise, I should, you know you said lend us a pound, he goes yeah, I goes well you can yo he goes not a pound, one pound four P!
I goes, well have .
He goes  yeah alright then.
So he got me last nights, we're gonna have to go tomorrow  so we'll have to go tonight now, gotta tell !
Speak up a bit!
What for?
Gotta get near the microphone!
Oh, heard about that!
You're not putting that on!
Why not?
Joe, don't switch it off!
Yeah, well it's embarrassing!
No, it isn't!
Should of heard what me and Emma were talking about last night !
What?
.
Anyway
And everything else!
Is that all it is jus , that's how he give you?
Yeah.
Emma wants one.
And all the tapes, and all the batteries and everything.
Yeah.
Anyway  so we're adding up
Just don't think about it, I've got used to it now  you know, so I'm not shy.
so  you know  he got something so he went, he went, he went, he went  I think you give me, he goes, not one pound four, it's one pound  it's gone up innit?
I said oh yeah!
One thirteen.
So  no!
They're not!
It was one  it was one  it was one eighteen, with the matches and everything  so  the matches 
Where from?
the matches are,, the matches are eight P, they always have been.
Oh yeah.
And then  sti they've gone up to one ten now for .
Mm!
So now  he'll get all the drink tomorrow.
are a bit worse  he said  you know  get some women.
I don't know whether Clare's coming or not.
Oh, why not?
Because  well she's got a load of work to do, she's such a  swot it's unbelievable!
And her boyfriend's down  and he's staying till Sunday.
Well why can't he come round here?
What else are they gonna do?
I dunno  but, she's gonna phone me up anyway.
If she's coming, she's coming, if she's not, she's not!
Mm.
Oh good!
But I'm not , I'm not bothered either way really!
Yeah, I'm going to Pat's  on Tuesday.
What for?
Well, Bozz at school had some free tickets  the music's usually  twot when you're given free tickets!
On er, this something of Luxembourg, I dunno,so 
Oh!
Duke of Luxembourg.
Some crappy thing, you know!
About .
No.
Some crappy music thing!
Yeah..
Anyway, so
I think our
well 
drama teacher might be in that!
Well, he's given me a ticket  and he's gonna give , loads of us going, there's about ten of us!
So we'll go, gonna go there for about seven, it starts at half seven  come home that night.
Bit of  doss you know!
Oh!
Well we're get 
You got 
up town about seven  I'll see if  Bozz's mum can take us  and Cathy's dad can bring us back  cos dad's at work.
You know, we can walk round town a bit, you know and  ahem!
Yeah,that's , have another 
Yes,, yes, that's right.
Don't tear my shirt, oh  sorry !
I like that.
I get a real  erm  I've gotta take the dog out.
Right.
Look at my cold sores!
 Ta They're not, they're not too bad actually.
They are!
They're massive!
I've stuck a load of perfume on them!
I've run out of bloody cold sore lotion haven't I?
What's this all in aid of anyway?
It's a survey.
You taking ?
You're not taking it to my house!
Why not?
No way!
Why?
No way!
Why not?
No way!
Why?
Cos .
No way you're taking it to my house!
I'll tell you to get knotted!
It's my house, you've got no permission!
Did you 
Well we're not gonna be doing anything!
Well like, upstairs!
Well I'm not gonna take it round, why?
It's only gonna downstairs in the living room!
.
Right  I'll, I'll ju ju I'll just pretend I'm listening to it.
I'll take the things with me.
I'll just pretend I'm listening to it  and I'll just put it on the side and just the switch the thing on they'll never know the difference.
The answer is  So  is he paying you?
About twenty five pound.
Do you?
You kidding me or what?
No.
Why didn't he come to my house for?
Oh!
Honestly?
Yeah!
And how long you gotta do it for?
A week.
Barry's so mad!
How many tapes you got?
Twenty.
No way, man!
I wanna do it!
Tell him to come to my house next time!
Twenty five quid for doing that!
Trust you to in!
You don't have to fill all the tapes either!
Trust you lot to come up .
He just, he just wants to go into my house.
Trust you to be number one!
You cow!
Aha!
That isn't fair!
I want money, I've, you re get blooming all that money a  blooming week anyway, don't you!
It's only a voucher from Marks and Sparks.
Oh.
Twenty five pounds worth.
What you gonna get at?
Dunno,something for my mum .
Just for starters I should think.
Na , ahh!
Can't talk now I gotta stinging armpits!
What you at er  you know that razor I've got?
Well I thought, well I can't be bothered to get , so I got it and I went  chee chee!
Yeah, I sprayed my arms yesterday and I went
takes all the ski , like top layer of skin off 
Yeah.
I was thinking, God, did it sting this morning?
Well, I'm kee , keep forgetting every so often and 
Mm.
like  it stings a bit.
You ought to get like erm  Soft and Gentle  it doesn't sting.
It's not that though, it's cos you're not supposed to use it under your eyes, it's a flipping face shaver!
Oh, no, but I mean, it don't make any difference!
Yeah 
You 
but I like that
but if you use that Soft and Gentle it doesn't hurt anyway.
Do you know what Shrimpy's decided to buy me for my birthday?
No.
 Immac to do my back of my neck!
I said, you do it, you don't, no way are you getting whisky from France!
Oh !
Wasn't me , best impressed!
So it is funny!
It wasn't funny!
And all he kept doing was twisting my arm last night, and my leg  bummer!
Ahhh !
No don't wanna put my name down!
You've gotta have name, goes on the tape, you big girl!
I thought she said it was erm  Emma said that it was
It's anonymous.
Well who's in that!
That's not very anonymous is it ?
Yeah, but thi this, right just gets shoved with the tapes.
Like, they don't know  who it is  i it's not, after they've taken it away it's no connection to me whatsoever, they don't where I'm 
Do that.
from at all.
Yeah, but you've got my name down there!
What, what shall I put your accent, as Redditch?
Mm.
You put Redditch for whoever that was.
Emma?
Yeah.
Who else put in, what you?
What's that say at the bottom bit?
Friend  no .
I'm not , put no friend of yours in that box!
Hello darling,
Is that tape six?
I'm on tape six am I?
No.
No, you're on, you're on  that's only tape one side B.
Oh!
That's all I've got onto so far!
You're, you're the 
 
sixth person on the side.
Yeah, well you weren't here were you!
I don't wanna do it anyway!
Me and Emma used up a whole side yesterday just us two talking!
I thought you weren't coming out last night?
I wasn't!
She came round here!
 Tut ha !
Here's me, farting around with bloody  Shrimpy and Andrew!
Da doo doo doo .
Ah, I was so angry , I was, he had my arm right, I forced, pushed him back it was, like, behind my back  so I lent back thinking oh he'll give me his arms then  anyway old flipping hag came in didn't she!
And I went, ha ha, just turn over the cassette!
She called me an old  snout , flipping thing is right, like  thing like the noise that I've
Yeah.
I was going  making like the sound was down he's singing this song and then he went  and Pam comes in, and she, I mean how comes then he knows her?
God, who is it the  the  what's it, paediatric or whatever it was?
Somebody like that, you know some doctor 
Is at the door!
Who the bloody hell was that she goes?
I went out, come back in to ask   and there was Shrimpy, me and Andrew, me and Andrew come in  I left the door open  Cav goes  shut the door!
I said, oh is Pat coming in?
He said, I don't bloody care!
I went ha ha!
You stupid cow!
I really ache!
Go on!
I hate 
Right.
Pam!
I'm scared now!
Is it dark out!
Yeah.
Good!
Right, do you wanna ah, walk go and take the dog?
It's not my turn, it's David's 
To the shops.
turn!
Yeah.
Why can't David do it!
Because, because, I'm going out!
Oh please Helena will you take him for me?
Oh, he's such a waster, he's unbelievable!
Come on then, I'll take it outside with me.
Give it to Sam in his mouth !
Yeah  you should have told me I would have bought them out with me if you'd said.
I didn't realise did I!
Shall we have one?
Sam, come on boy!
will you?
Don't be too big!shhh!
Ah dear!
Be, he's being all really nice to me at moment, he's really creeping to me!
Yeah, well he isn't being nice to me!
Hasn't he?
No!
Twisting my arm, twisting my leg!
Telling me I'm a stupid bitch and all this lot!
Fucking  turds and all !
Wait for the dog.
I feel a right  Bozo 
oh, the dog's having a shit!
Ah   It was really funny though!
Like, me and Emma last night, honestly  the first, about five minutes, like we were all, both going  mm, yeah, er, ah, and then we just thought oh fuck this  for an idea !
And we just said absolutely anything!
We was talking about the love bite Pete gave me and everything!
Yeah.
Said, like she thought she was pregnant!
Like me, I was a, how did she ge has she?
Must have done!
 Ergh ahh So when was this then?
Oh didn't you know?
What, has she done it with Scott?
What?
You on about Emma here?
Yeah.
She's pregnant ?
Yeah.
Didn't you know?
She'd done it with Scott.
No, when did she do it with Scott?
Didn't you know she thought she was pregnant?
No.
Oh piss!
Ah, don't say anything!
I thought, cos you said down there  you said in my house  you said something about being pregnant.
No I never!
Yes you did!
No I never!
Oh I thought you knew?
Have they?
I've really put my foot in it now haven't I?
No,whe , when did she do it with Scott then?
I don't know  but they must of done it sometime.
It weren't when, the other when we got all pissed?
No, but I mean
Why's she think she's pregnant then?
I mean, didn't they use anything for
Yeah!
But she  well she didn't, I mean she didn't tell me the intimate details or anything  I don't even know whether she has, she wo , she might have ju ge , been getting over dramatic or something!
But she  but  her period was a week and half late  and she started well panicking!
Yeah, well she  
And you know , you know when we thought, yeah  well she'd, she'd just come on when she came down to my house  and she was really, really, really in a happy mood!
And er  you know, you know when we saw them two walking
Yeah.
the other day?
That was what she was upset about  she thought, oh dear,Scotty's a going to be a daddy !
Fucking hell,!
I hope she hadn't done it that Saturday when we all were outside and we watching
She might not have done it, done it  but like  she might have 
like  
like  yeah.
Cos you never know, I mean  Andrew  wipe spunk all over somebody, you know!
Yeah, I I should think she like  she's done some  done naughty things 
Well we all do  though 
and, yeah
If she's given him a blow job, I mean
But I mean, she's probably done something like that  and  she's just got over dramatic about it!
Guess what  she's said she's gonna write to go on the pill!
Did she?
Well not to me !
She did and she says, she goes, I wanna go on the pill while I've got the courage!
But I don't think I can rely on myself to take them everyday!
If you was there you could take them, too pissed I should think!
Probably!
Like a hangover the next day!
fucking Emma in a minute!
But don't say anything cos I don't know!
Cos she, she said it to me cos she was on such a high you see  cos she'd just come on, didn't you see her last night?
No I didn't because you 
Oh!
stayed and Andy's and we'd just gone over to the  shops and .
But er  yeah.
But, you see, she was on a real  pardon me!
A real big high about it, she'll probably tell you.
But she 
I know!
probably didn't wanna tell you  in front of Hannah  and everything !
Well she rushed up today , she hugged me  and ha hugged Hannah , and then  
Yeah, well that's it's so happy about.
hu hugged er  Hannah !
Can you just imagine though, hugging Andrew, his face!
Oh my God!
Oh no!
She said , I live at , I'm the best!
Oh she thought I was pregnant.
Where's the dog gone ?
Wait 
He's down the bottom.
Wait here, I'll catch up with him.
Ah there he is!
But er  but er  yeah, so  but like, she's been saying to me  cos she's been thinking about whether she is or not  she er  she's been like    like everywhere there's babys and prams and  everywhe , on the telly and everything,do you know what I mean ?
It's been really bad actually  and er
Yeah, but unless she'd done it with him she wouldn't be panicking that much!
No.
I bet she has.
I mean, and she really known him for six months you know?
Yeah.
Ah dear!
So that was a bit of a giggle!
So  do you 
What?
think Clare will come?
I don't, I doubt it, I don't think so.
Ah ah oh!
Pity, Emma's decided she's bringing a camera now  and she reckons he bringing his!
 

And I said no fucking way you'll get any pictures of me having a bang!
And Andrew goes  oh, is this going to be  let Joanne  everybody with a picture!
  

I've
Well it's gonna be really bad because I'm gonna be doing this and taking pictures!
You're not doing it at the party?
Yeah!
Oh God I'll be so pissed!
Well so!
 Wahhh 
I'll do it, I'll do it 
You'll be doing it while we're going to sleep.
No way, when we all lie down
fucking hell are you, no!
Picking up all the juicy gossip around here, you're not doing that then!
No, I won't do it then I'll do it  I'll do it in the early evening when no one 's too drunk.
Then a bit later, but not well don't do it when we are gonna go to sleep because  cos we end ups tal talking about  who's dad's got the biggest plonker!
  
Is your, is your dog still a virgin?
I know.
Like, you know what, my dog's still  a virgin !
Virgin !
I always say, you're drunk that night.
So they all go  and all.
Are they?
Tonight and tomorrow.
Oh Jesus!
Andy's getting eight cans of Strongbow  three for tonight and five for tomorrow.
I said I'd  bottle of wine off my dad just for us three, that's just for us three.
Oh yeah, of course!
You know.
And then er  we'll have that .
You gotta ask your dad, remember, for a bottle.
No, cos a I won't be drinking it anyway  it's only gonna you and Emma that's drinking it!
Yes, I know!
You just ask him for one!
You're not gonna have a bottle each!
I had a bottle and I was absolutely blabbing!
And I threw up, that's how strong it is Joe!
Oh I'll have my dad's then, she can have your dad's.
No,ha , I mean, Joe  like, you won't be able to handle a bottle each on top of all that other stuff!
Yeah, I  wannoo 
Ya ha , Joanne you're going to die of alcohol poisoning !
You're only selfish!
I'm sure you're mum and dad have got a lot!
Oh John, he's not that close for God's sake!
Flipping cold !
Ooh it's not   Come here Sam!
It's alright  leave it.
Oh God's it cold!
That much perfume I've put on my cold sores,.
He's gone..
So will I !
And then you're dead  if you  undo them there !
But
Er
Oh we'll forget he's !
You're so nasty for getting his bit !
What?
He's a miserable sod!
Well he couldn't help being a miserable sod,he looks a right miserable sod !
No!
He's not a miserable sod.
He probably just forgot.
I'll bring my matches  when I  like  take the dog in  I'll nip upstairs and say I've gotta get something  and I'll just grab my matches out of there in case he's lost them or something!
Like he  probably would do!
In my book I'm gonna have to write down Mark, and put in brackets  all the way through he's called Shrimpy.
m
Out in a minute,changed.
  

Quick  
What?
Put a tape on 
It's like M I five or something in here .
Don't, no not not that 
 
I don't believe you I swear  the tape.
What?
We ain't got a tape.
I can fill it in for .
It's a different tape number.
I know.
Er fill that in.
Oh sugar, I've gotta start filling all these in now.
Do you think that's right?
Thirteenth of the  third ninety two.
What time?
Five past seven.
Seven.
Redditch  eh eh eh eh 
Visiting friends.
Who spoke first?
Me wasn't it?
Yeah.
I don't have to fill it in again.
Once I've filled it in once in the book
Mm.
right they know who it is.
Yeah you only need to write their details on the first page in which they appear.
Go on then, put it back.
otherwise.
Do you think I ought to fill Andy in quickly?
He'll be the next in.
Yeah he will won't he?
This lot'll be Shrimp and he don't matter.
Andy  insurance  clerk  age?
Nineteen.
Nineteen  now  Redditch
He doesn't call himself a clerk though.
what?friend 
I'll tell him you're a friend, he won't believe that.
Oh thanks.
According to you I've got no friends.
Exactly.
Oh thanks Jo.
What's the point in lying?
can't find my pocket .
Helen nobody's coming.
What?
I can't get it in my pocket.
Do you want a piece of pasta?
You can't   Alright And!
 

What you done?
I  across the  to get some  and ended on my bollocks.
 
Oh that's nice.
That's the last time I 
No it isn't.
You do it all the time.
That that smarts.
That's not gonna do much.
Do you want a Band-Aid?
I've got a split sac.
I've got one testicle down here somewhere  and the other one's still embedded in bedroom.
What d what did you land on?bed?
Was it you who went bloody hell?
One of those cab yeah  it was one of those 
It was really loud.
it was one of those cabin beds.
And erm the rim was like about that thin.
Mm.
And that split my
Mm.
Nice.
Not nice.
Ha!ha.
Mm?
for a long time.
This special  what was it called again?
It says on it somewhere doesn't it?
 Dynamike 
 Dynamike 
how embarrassing, is that.
You go  smack, straight on them.
Yeah then I get a drill with a wire brush on it and go bzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Out.
Okay.
Yes alright then.
That was my mother's suggestion for a bog roll
Oh.
sit on a drill with a wire brush on it.
Works wonders.
Nice.
Scratch.
Erm what drink you getting anyway?
I was gonna get  well I'm contemplating but I'm either getting four cans of Strongbow and a bottle   or just eight cans of Strongbow.
For tomorrow?
Or today?
Well some are for tonight as well.
Well you know what'll happen
  

if you get the  that'll all be gone by tonight.
No that'll go, that'll go right through tomorrow.
Oh.
Yeah, that  bppppprrrrrr 
Is that all you're having for tomorrow?
What?
 
to myself
Oh.
Oh, right.
There, you've recovered now.
er can.
Ugh I don't know how you can drink the stuff, it's ugh.
Strongbow?
Mm.
It's n it's not ugh.
It's cider.
It's ugh.
I prefer Tesco's own myself.
Oh I'm not buying that, cos it's not strong enough  for me .
Oh you man.
It depends if you get the strong stuff you dipstick.
I don't care what you do with my dipstick.
But I am 
Don't 
drinking lots of cider.
don't you go to band rehearsal any more?
I thought you'd be at band last night.
Well I was supposed to be but erm every single time they arrange it  and they either tell me the wrong da well they told me the wrong day last week cos, they told me Tuesd they told me it was Thursday when it, when it was actually Tuesday when I was getting pissed at Scott's house  so erm it was too late by then.
Then they said erm there's one on Sunday, oh no there isn't.
And this 
What do you mean we didn't get pissed at Scott's at all.
and this
Didn't we?
Yes we did.
It was birthday  last Tuesday.
Was it?
Oh we weren't pissed.
Merry.
You two were, I wasn't.
I was not  was I?
I was .
A little bit.
I wasn't .
I was .
You couldn't see.
I couldn't.
I was not at all.
I could just about hear  Carter in the far reaches of my mind.
But erm 
He was I was fine.
Course Helena  Mrs Hold My Drink, not that I get a hangover every single time or anything.
Hangovers 
I don't!
You do!
What is a hangover?
Not after that I didn't.
What's a hangover?
Shut up Andy else you'll get a punch in the face.
I'm just going to  
I bought my long sleeved Carter top today.
What?
Oh yeah.
Why aren't you wearing it?
I had to buy another long sleev no I well it's, it's a special purchase for tomorrow.
What's this?
Oh thanks And 
my sl , my long sleeved Carter top.
For my ace party.
Go and get it then.
No.
We 
Well I want, I wanna wear my  and I can't have it till my birthday.
I'm gonna be really annoying, I'm gonna cut my jeans off  half way down the shin.
No you're not!
No.
I am.
You're not cos you're gonna look a twat.
Well I am a twat.
Can, can I  can I feel your leg ?
Go on please?
Easy access And.
What do you want?
You've got a choi you've got a choice of three.
 

I'll have them all.
 

Bit tired then?
Yeah well I didn't get up, didn't get up 
Where's Shrimpy?
didn't get up until seven.
Oh.
Course Shrimpy said I'm gonna go and get you some matches, so what does he forget?
You've got it
Matches.
I remembered everything else I wanted.
Oh it was so funny at work today, Greg fell off his chair.
Packet of condoms fell out of his pocket  
 
And they were ripped .
Ah no he was, he, he wouldn't sit on his chair cos he'd just called me an arsehole  and I goes oh sit down  Greg!
I said sit down Gregory and shut up.
So he went to sit down but his chair weren't there.
All I saw were this pair of legs sticking over the desk and him going aaaaagh!
And his condoms  
And he got up and then one of the girls said  hi Greg  dropped your johnnies.
 
I've never seen anyone go so red in my life.
How old's he?
Twenty three.
He's married.
Well, so?
He got married si what three months ago.
Maybe he doesn't want any children yet.
He we he went redder than that.
redder than that?
Is that your mum happy?
I  in the bath.
I walked in I, I had to lock the door with the penny, walked in, got the bog roll
Do you realize you haven't called for Emma?
Well done.
  

Oh what cos  that'll be alright won't it?
 
It'll be alright.
Scott  come round and she'll meet us down here.
Yeah.
Er?
Oh well
Well when er when them two, when them lot go and get the stuff  
Up above the streets and houses rainbow's flying high.
Everyone can see them flying  in the sk oh did you see the rainbow today?
No.
It was about what, four o'clock I went over Tesco's
Did I see the rainbow?
I was in it.
It was abs shut up, it was absolutely  massive.
What, in the rain?
In the rain, yes.
Absolutely massive.
So was I.
Absolutely massive it was.
Cos I had to walk home from school today.
By Tesco's it was it was coming out the field.
goes let's 
Ah!
rush over to see if we can find the pot of gold.
Well Andy is erm general errand boy for  at the moment
Mm.
and
What's your actual job?
What's my job title?
Yeah.
Is claims  sorry  insurance claims correspondent.
Insurance clerk.
No, not clerk.
Oh.
I'm not a clerk thank you.
No I'm a  claim correspondent.
Well if someone asks you what we, what you do 
I deal with claims.
Oh.
deal with insurance claims.
I say whether or not we're gonna pay them.
Which is a fairly important job but I get paid shit.
So there.
It's only to five thousand pound And.
Eh?
It's only up to five thousand pound.
Only what?
You only 
You can only do claims to five thousand pound can't you?
Ten thousand.
That's a 
Ha it's gone up!
No it ain't.
It was, it's five thousand without manager authorization.
How much do you get paid a year?
Just to be nosy like, you know.
Six thousand.
Is that all?
So you can give away more  than they, they gi than they pay you ?
For what I do my, my pay is shit.
Pardon ?
Really.
I'd tell them where to go.
Well Shrimpy's on twice as much as I am.
You can't tell  anything when you've 
Well all he 
got a car.
and anyway all he does is spring  inspect springs.
And people wonder why I've got no money.
Mm.
People why, wonder why I've got no money.
Become a spring inspector.
Oh that sounds really good.
Oh god, is Hannah singing?
Tell her to sit on that and swivel three times.
Better make sure she wiped her arse properly first.
oh, oh dear  oh dear .
 
What ?
Come here.
What ?
You dumb fat cow.
Don't be so nasty to your mum.
Oh dear oh dear 
What?
when he finds out.
He'll probably try and wrestle it away from me but
It's no good quibbling.
I wanna be famous.
I'll ask, I'll I'll ask h I'll tell him afterwards
I wanna be famous he'll say.
but it'll sound really awful if I  I tell him now.
Tell him at the end of the week.
Mm.
If he don't like it I can record over it but 
No you won't.
I know you.
You're nasty-pasty aren't you?
No if he, if he really doesn't like it then I'll     oh dear 
just tell him the truth.
 
There it is, there it is.
Mm mm 
Oh that's nice.
Ugh it's horrible.
Mm 
What's it got, about thirty something?
Yeah.
Why?
Oh Jo !
It's only the name of the album 
Well I didn't know!
You thick cow.
I'm not a Carter fan myself.
You thick cow.
They look like they're on something.
Yeah, so?
They probably are .
They're on the stage for singing.
Yeah  but, right, they're on drugs I reckon.
So?
So Andy doesn't like any such thing do you And?
I don't.
So you shouldn't, you shouldn't
But I think the music's good.
Don't, don't put that on very loud, I've got a bit of a headache.
You'll have a lot of headache by the time I've finished.
What?
You'll have a lot of a headache by the time I've finished.
Now would I?
I don't play music loud.
There you go.
Thank you.
I couldn't have done that myself.
I'm only helping.
If you don't want any help just 
Alright, okay, fair enough, alright?
Thank you.
You can say it as loud as you like Jo.
I know, I don't want to say it as loud as I like.
Go on, you shout it.
open the door.
There we are  there's no-one in there.
 
It wasn't exactly a joke was it now Andy?
It didn't make anybody laugh  because it was funny 
You both laughed when I  shut the door.
No it's just cos you're a twat 
Yes it's   vagina.
We know.
See the tufts of hair spring out  and the clitoris bulge.
   

 

Shut up.
No I know but   
It should be quite  
What are you looking at him like that for?
What?
That  to you dunnit?
What?
No.
 

 

listen to it.
Yeah, it's dynamic.
Bit louder cos it's 
to drown you out.
 
Andy  Andy  Andy   Andy  How could you?
What?
How could I what?
What, bought that?
What?
Have I what?
Well one, how could you have bought that and two, how could you let her  drone through it like that?
Well 
Oh.
I bought that cos it's good.
Nobody wants to listen to it,.
  

Well you did.
I could imagine   
It's fun.
get hours of pleasure out of this.
What are you  complaining about?
You would have gone out and bought it.
No I wouldn't.
Well   Dynamike 
 
Mm?
She plays on yours all the time  about her, your  Dynamike 
Mm.
Mm mm mm
Mm.
If it wasn't f 
he's going to be dead.
if it wasn't for your  Dynamike I don't know what I'd do with myself of an evening.
in the front actually.
Ah 
Carrots.
With wings.
With wings.
Oh really?
Mm.
Alright Clare Rayner.
Oh by the way, if Clare comes tomorrow she's bringing her boyfriend.
Is she?
Mm.
Right on.
Long as he wears a kilt.
I wanna meet him actually,
I'm not wearing a kilt 
What?
What?
I said I'm not wearing a kilt.
I don't love you any more.
Alright I love you then 
 

you can .
  
Alright we'll we'll arm wrestle we'll arm wrestle 
No cos I can ar you can arm wrestle, I can't.
That's your  for being such a  all day.
Come on home 
Laura got done for skiving yesterday, they all went to Pam's house.
Skived Tuesday Wednesday Thursday off.
Lisa got caught  
 
Her mum saw her   and she  Laura  and erm  to get caught.
 
That's mine.
though.
Mrs  wasn't there.
How many ?
What ?
Don't!
Give it here .
Hey it's on.
What?
I know it's on.
I'm recording you.
Are you?
Yeah.
 

Er  maybe, hold that a minute Jo.
Maybe I'd better tell you what this is all about.
She's getting a twenty five pound voucher for doing this from Marks and Spencers.
 
What?
Not just you, everybody.
Twenty five pound voucher for what?
Oh yeah!
You looked shocked there And, when you spotted that I thought oh my god.
Oh that's my things, it's alright.
But don't you say anything to anybody else cos 
 
 
What?
Yeah I've got, I've got all your right ups and everything.
Oh yeah!
E even before you came home I switched it on.
Oh I was just 
What?
Get out.
I could sue you for that.
I know.
No.
No she'd record over it if she didn't  
No but you see I couldn't tell you at the start because you'd sound, you wouldn't have said half the things you did say.
I would.
And you've gotta, you've gotta like talk totally normally you see.
never normal 
Yeah  on there  
No but you normal for you  
I wanna hear it.
I wanna hear it.
What, what is it 
Yeah but 
in aid of?
You've go you've gone in the little book 
Oh!
Except you've gone in as ins insurance clerk cos we couldn't, we couldn't decide what you were.
 
Oh!
That's really gonna cock things up innit?
An insurance clerk yeah 
Yeah you've got all the  you know a condom dropped out of his pocket and everything   
Oh good.
I bet you feel ace.
Don't tell Shrimpy, we 
Did I say  on there?
Yeah.
Insurance er   
No do no  it's it's it's totally 
that's me.
it's erm it's totally anonymous anyway.
But like they're just doing a survey
Where did you get that from?
It's a bloke come round.
A bloke came round and gave it all me.
And I've got 
Cos they got to her house first cheat  
I've gotta tape all my conversations for a week.
And like
Keep it and run off.
What?
No I  
like tomorrow night  
Oh yeah!
I, I had to sign a bit of paper.
We'll be arseholed.
I know.
It's gonna be so funny.
Ah no!
 
You were shocked.
You should have seen your face!
No I looked at it, I goes oh it's recording.
I thought oh, I thought it was like one of your tapes and I'd pressed record and it had started recording over it.
Sshh 
 
Hello Em.
Alright Emma?
He just found out.
Found out about what?
Nothing 
Aha  
Oh well how are you doing then Scott my friend?
Oh alright, just about.
Now did you see it last night?
What?
No.
Me and Emma were talking 
You know I'm babysitting on Wednesdays?
upstairs for ages and we  
You taped it?
No.
 
I can't believe it, I've been slagging off  for the three weeks  this is crap, this is really naff.
Last night
So you babysit  Wednesday ?
Yeah.
remember I've got the equivalent of high graphic B S E?
She's going a-raving in a red  red and white checked dress with a big floppy hat with pigtails and this little glove puppet penguin called Mr Flipper 
Every Wednesday is it Emm?
Yeah.
 
 
and it was so stupid .
Bridge.
Playing bridge for some .
Eh?
Well erm someone fell off a chair to  
It was you again?
what?
It was you again was it?
No it wasn't me  
Oh by the way Scott  
Don't tell him.
Alright.
Nothing.
Don't tell him hey!
Come on, don't tell him he's being recorded on tape, you know
Oh!
Oh dumb!
Don't tell him.
Thank you.
We all are.
Oh  good job I wasn't 
 
No if you know you don't talk normally.
He's just been telling us about how this bloke's condoms dropped out of his pocket.
Yeah I said 
Oh it's this thing?
What?
Oh this bloody thing that you've been 
Yeah.
ah.
Except Emma has already told .
talking about condoms and me throwing up and all this.
They've got me down as being, you know,insurance clerk.
No a 
Oh yes!
no it's
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew.
Andrew insurance clerk 
Cos it's ano i cos it's anonymous 
It's anonymous.
Anonymous it is.
Anonymous  
Cos on once it leaves me  they don't know who it is.
They just get the book and they get all the tapes.
Well I told them what it is now, Insurance P L C 
All the claims come in .
But you're not, you're not allowed to talk to it see, you've got to talk to each other.
Claims to be the pervert.
Yeah.
Like we were last night.
You're not suppose except we did .
We    Yeah 
Well that's really taking the whole thing seriously.
The only, see the first thing I noticed 
 
the first thing I noticed about you when you walked in was you'd got, you'd got   that's on the top of my eyes by the way, not the bottom because of our   
 
something.
I was listening to it t oh I've got a letter for you .
Because I was writing it in R E
 
Yeah, you owe me a letter.
Who?
You wrote me a letter Thursday 
as well.
Cos  went up there on purpose Emma.
Cos I phoned you
Emma?
and you said you had a letter.
She purposely went up
A letter.
to get the matches out the bedroom.
What did she do?
You guessed it 
Whoops.
Why do I owe you a letter?
You wrote me a letter.
Thursday.
Yeah I know but I weren't gonna give it you.
They're strange aren't they?
Well why do you think we kept turning the music down??
No  it's just that you come in my house, fine.
You can record my voice, fine  but you turn me music down
Yeah .
you're 
That's why I did it see?
That's why we kept turning it down.
Oh sorry.
Hey!
Won't do it again.
You'll kill Shrimpy.
Talk amongst yourselves.
No 
I fancy Bungle.
I was watching Rainbow earlier.
Did you see the rainbow over Tesco's?
No.
Yeah we had one.
Bung Bungle had his sun hat on he was dead sexy 
 
you should have seen it.
 

One missing
It were really good it were.
And talking of  did you hear my song?
My  one 
Yeah please please don't  
 
under a tree people are making the rubber johnnies  
Oh god, no not this.
red ones, yellow ones take your pick    it all depends on the length of your dick  or prick .
Or prick was my little ending.
Cos I thought I was cool  
 

You'll have to speak up now everybody.
I watched the end of the video.
On one thing that really drives me mad about Carter.
Why does he rest his nose on the microphone?
Yeah.
Our house 
 
She thought you said  knobs.
why does he rest his knob  on the microphone ?
Perhaps his name's  
 
No, he wasn't on about knobs, on about  
Oh.
Gonna say yeah.
Gonna say  you know my mum put that bloody card up don't you?
What card?
The one you sent me.
Oh did she?
The  card .
I just left all my cards in a pile that night cos  I was a bit 
 
Were you?
And erm  and the ne oh oh about two days later I'm looking at them  oh  on the mantelpiece  I better
I can't move it cos it'll be conspicuous by it's absence
Did she laugh?
I dunno, she just put it up.
I thought it was good.
Mr bulge.
Yeah.
So no-one saw Mr Bean's  I Wanna Be Elected?
You know on er  on Monday?
he goes oh shit yeah of course 
8
This is a quiet bit, just talk amongst yourselves.
Don't talk to it because it ma it sounds stu I was listening to us this morning.
Piss on my grave!
I was just going  I was listen I was listening  
You , I'll urinate.
I was listening to the end bit, I was saying  what were we  about at the end.
Is, is Shrimpy coming or what?
Yeah he is.
let's, let's shake this.
 

Yeah.
I can hear your penny shaking in there ha ha ha  and I was listening  oh Jesus .
What's the matter?
That could be him now.
Yippee.
Andrew.
 
Oh, wasn't I supposed to say anything?
Andrew.
What ?
I'll finish the horror tape one night.
Turn over.
We're on to tape two now?
Yeah we're on to tape two cos this A side of tape two.
 

Oh I've lost a quid!
Have you?
Yeah I ate it.
Where have you dropped it?
You paid, you paid me with it.
Well it was in here
And now it's not?
when I came down earlier and now it's er gone.
Shrimpy 
Whoops.
Er no
Whoops  whoops quarter past six.
excuse me but a ninety pound deal sort of like knocked the  stuffing out of me for  
Yeah but you were supposed to put it in last night, not  this morning.
Can I have them now ?
I haven't got it.
You haven't got them?
Where are they?
Probably at home, I got bollocksed for having them last night as well.
Why?
said you're not starting fires again are you?
I said oh yeah
watch me start a fire.
Oh  boots.
Can you get me some of them boots?
Yeah.
 
Pardon?
Can you get it?
I haven't had one yet 
Oh ch 
I'm getting  
What?
I don't know what's happening.
I'm just gonna get 
Ah!
That could have been painful that could you bitch.
Ow!
It could have been.
That ninety pound bill was painful, I can tell you that much.
What ninety pound bill for what?
I hit my car on the kerb.
The wheel had a bulge in it, I went to have it fixed and the  
 

I'm alright thank you.
Good.
I don't believe that.
What?
You've only had that car a fortnight and you've already done about  five hundred  about four hundred and fifty pound worth of damage.
Who's fault is it?
Oh no look it was the invisible man driving the car.
 
It's all my fault.
You had that Allegro  
Three hundred and fifty pounds worth.
not my fault, it was the, the other driver's fault.
Well  it was.
Yes, exactly.
I was just 
Right we're going out, come on.
Are we?
Yes.
Our house 
And how are you Andy?
You're looking jolly.
Yes, good.
Did you switch it on  last night?
You know when it was going really weird?
Yeah, then I turned it off.
What did you switch it on for?
To record.
Cos everybody was talking.
Don't  tomorrow.
What you writing?
Only a letter.
Ah 
 
ah  aha!
Well it's got my name in it!
So?
So?
Yeah so, you don't need to know do you?
Oh thanks.
And I'm only putting  Helena and Emma were talking to each other on the bus.
That's all I've put.
Well just tell him I'm not getting involved with it, alright?
I know, he never said you was.
You tell him.
I told him I'm not getting, I'm not even seeing him.
And tell him no arguing tonight.
You tell him!
Alright.
It's your party.
Alright I will.
I wonder if Pete will come tonight?
Dunno.
Sh when er  when Emma told me  that erm Richard said that they probably weren't going to Tramps I was, I was walking around going  oh  boo hoo boo hoo I'm so sad  all the time going  oh boo hoo boo hoo
oh don't look at my letter.
I saw you you crafty sod .
And  and  er Scott kept going what you doing?
I was going nothing, I'm just being sad.
Boooo hoooo .
It was really funny.
Oh I was laughing all   still dream of love    oh dear.
I'm so tired .
That was I'm so tired.
And who can say   begin .
responsibilities  
That's very nice.
What?
Bastards.
Have you only just noticed?
All the times I've played it, have you only just noticed?
My mum hasn't even noticed yet.
I were playing it really really loud this morning.
I had mine on this morning     and er  but she was out  anyway.
My mum nearly said shit yesterday,a nervous breakdown.
She goes er  she goes ssshhhh  no I'd better not say that since, seeing as you're in.
I goes mum I've heard it all before!
For goodness sake.
I don't know what she thinks I am.
You know, someone, you know?
I'm not a flipping nun am I?
I've just finished.
Lovely  I'm so pleased.
for long are you?
About five days.
I was blinded     What time are we gonna chuck them out tonight?
Dunno.
Half one?
If you like, I'm not bothered.
It's your party.
I know it's ace.
First time I've ever had a party.
How do you spell disagreed?
D, D I S
A G 
A G R double E D. 
R E E D yeah.
It was just the D that was wrong.
Oh dear  I'm really really really really really looking forward to it.
Not that you can tell or anything.
I can't get anything out in the crossword, I've only got thirst.
First guardian citizen   don't know.
Heavenly.
Don't know.
How do you spell saw as in looked?
What?
Sa S A W.
S A W?
I can never remember.
Oh I didn't know W H Smith's had been around for two hundred years.
I thought it was twenty myself.
Two hundred?
It must be.
can't be.
Does it say on the bottom?
No.
But it must be mustn't it?
Oh aye.
What's that?
Fifteen seventeen  ninety two?
Suppose so.
Didn't think they had shops in them days.
Oh yeah Jo.
Only joking .
Oh  Two hours left, ha ha ha.
Bye bye mummy and daddy.
Watch me weep.
cheek .
Not cheek cheek but cheek as in  cheek, you know?
It's just spelt the same.
How do you spell it?
C H.. double E K.
You can't spell anything you.
I know, I'm crap at spelling, I'm sorry.
But nobody's perfect.
I know.
I can spell long words, I can never spell short words.
spell it .
Have you seen my nail file?
No.
Can't find anything in this room, it's so messy.
Scott then had the cheek to tell me  What can I put, good luck?
Yeah.
Cheek to tell me good  luck.
Wish me good luck it should be.
Got any Tippex?
Please.
Er  no, just cross it out.
No I wanna keep it neat.
It's one of these important letters.
Oh never mind it doesn't really matter.
No  in your bag .
Is it?
God  you lazy sod.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna get Scott tonight if he makes any comments and this fist is gonna go strop  straight where it hurts.
He's just got me mad now telling me to good luck.
He really has, he's got me really  aaaah!
Oh, where's my nail file gone?
God this Tippex stiff enough?
Yeah.
Andrew  I said something about stiff right, and he goes what?
I goes I didn't mean it like that.
Can you un o can you undo it?turn it?
Oh
Give it here.
Sounding very kinky.
Oh not your teeth!
That'll do now.
I always get Ti ugh it's all over your face, Tippex.
Is it?
Oh never mind.
He has got me annoyed now, he really has done.
Oh dear  
yesterday  meaning  when  you  come  
Er  think I'll put a bit of Beatles on.
Oh no.
Emma said 
I'm in a Beatles mood.
I'm telling him all about it now, Emma said  she  doesn't need it
What?
Good luck.
Oh.
And I replied  Shrimpy's fine aha 
nail file  
Shrimpy's fine.
He phoned me this morning  this morning  and put  and  he's alright.
Love love me do  you know I love you 
You'll start writing that if you're not careful.
What?
Cos if I sing, when I'm doing my homework if I sing along to a tape or something I start writing the words down.
You're weird then cos I don't.
Anyway 
Oh.
we left them
Oh that's the letter Shrimpy se sent me.
Oh right.
Left them and said  we left them and said 
He had such a go at me for showing it my mum.
anyway we left them and  and said 
Whoops.
I said  come to mine at four.
Somebody new   oh.
Right, that's all my clothes put away.
Scott makes 
love me do  
any comments  tonight 
please me do  
he's getting it in the gones.
You love Scott really.
I don't.
How do you spell 
I'm going 
you spell gones?
G O N E  G O N  E S 
Gones that is.
Gon gon double O?
No cos you spell gonad G O N A D.
G O?
Just put gonads.
That's, what's it?
A 
A D S 
Yeah.
Gonads.
as he  is an  interfering  what's the word when you say he thinks he's perfect and he's mister hard man?
Big head?
Interfering  big head
overprotect protect protective  bastard.
Oh you're not gonna start a massive argument tonight are you Jo?
No.
No, I'm just telling the truth what I think of him.
Er     although
You're such a good singer.
So?
I don't care.
So Helena wishes  that  there will be  no arguments  or slanging, slagging matches  is it slanging or slagging off?
Slanging.
Slanging  matches  Don't worry there won't be, I'll just hit him.
Won't be as after I've give him one
he won't be able to move.
Oh I'm looking forward to tonight so much now.
So am I.
Joanne  please don't start a massive argument.
I've give him one he won't be  able to move let alone talk.
   

your letters look nice and neat, mine are always scraggy, I can never understand them.
Dear Helena, I don't really  rea really know how to put this but I've had  I'll have a go.
I'm sorry about being in a mood on Saturday but I wasn't really in a mood with you.
I'll now tol t no  I know I told you that I was  that I was feeling 
That, that's 
sorry for someone not Emma or  
he's done a sentence wrong there.
one like that .
Yeah.
I care for Emma more than I can say but I also care for you and I'm really sorry if you were hurt.
At the moment everyone has been talking about other people behind people's backs.
I didn't tell you what Emma thought because I  don't   is that a blank page?
Yeah.
I don't think a person told  I don't think a person told to  apologize isn't rea really an apology so I think there must be a reason why you didn't and so told me on Sunday why you didn't .
What a load of waffle.
Oh I know, he just waffles.
I was going to apologize for being  stupid on Sunday when you both disappeared.
Me and Andy looked all over, looked for both of you.
Last night I had a few things on my mind to be able to  apologize.
I'm sorry and hope we can still be friends .
I read it and I just went  what! for a start and then 
 
I went, and then I went  well he can't have looked around for us too well because we were walking by the side of the road.
But  yeah he probably come past  no he probably went up there as we come down that corner  by erm  Ipsleigh and when they come back we'd probably gotten here by then.
But we, I mean we were walking by the side of the road all the way up Greenlands Drive.
What did I say, Scott then had the cheek to something me?
Wish me, that was it wasn't it?
Scott's not your best friend at the moment then?
Oh you may not have, you may have gathered that like anyway.
Erm enough  enough  of slagging   slagging  the little shit I think  
The little shit .
shit stirrer.
No, yes, shit ?
I think that's, I think that's good actually  stirrer, how do you spell stirrer?
S T double R 
S T I double R E R. 
that was all.
Stirrer  and  on to more  important business, I think that sounds quite good actually, important   right at the bottom of the page  business  drink
Drink?
 

Will you go with him and get it?
Yeah.
Drink  erm  can  you, what time is it?
Half one.
Can you come  to  
?
No.
Oh I'm surprised.
He's had his hair cut this morning, reckons on having it cut short, really short.
I said don't Shrimp 
Ooh.
I said it looks nice as it is and I don't know if he will or not, I forgot to ask him on the phone.
Can you come to Helena's at  seven forty five  pardon me  and 
 
er isn't it?
I don't expect  Scott and Emma  will  come  in  your  car  but  I would just go  with  you  if  that's  okay.
Don't let anyone listen to this tape.
Why?
Cos it's got all me reading this out  all about Scott hasn't it?
Jo no-one listens to my tapes anyway.
No I mean like  you know?
Emma and Scott?
Yeah.
Course I won't!
Well er on their Walkman, on the earphones.
Mm.
Yeah yeah yeah 
go with you if that's okay.
Helena reckons  she  will chuck  you all out 
No I'll chu I tell you, I'll chuck him and Scott out if they both start.
No I'm not on about that I'm on about lea chucking them out at one o'clock.
Ah.
Half one
at  one thirty AM 
-ish -ish
one thirty AM-ish, there we go.
depending on what we're doing.
hold your hand  
No I'm only 
I'll ask him if he knows whether Pete's coming.
coming  tonight, not in a sperm way.
not  in a  sperm  way
Sperm way?
I'm being really funny there.
Wasn't that funny?
Ha ha.
Oh it was hilarious.
I thought it was quite good for me actually.
You laughed so just shut up.
It's such a feeling that my love I can't hide, I can't hide, I can't hide  
that my love I can't hide, I can't hide, I can't hide .
Bring this down so we can listen to this.
Yeah you got that something .
Is, yeah you're a good old Beatles fan you are Jo.
I want to get down and boogie, do that head bashing like we did at that gig.
Oh Jo  
Wanna hold your hand, I wanna hold your hand, I wanna hold your hand  mm mm mm mm mm mm I feel happy inside 
I feel happy inside  
feeling that my love I can't hide  well blooming  er what's his name, Julian won't disappear  will he cos Liz isn't here.
No.
I'm not disappearing all night anyway.
I'll put  erm I'll tell you  now  shit, is that how you spell now?
It's not it's know innit?
What?
That's know, now is N O W.
I always do that.
I always put K's in front of it,always forget.
I think I've done it further  actually.
Well further behind actually.
I can't hide, I can't hide  I think I put new actually.
and I'll kiss you tomorrow I'll miss you  
you tomorrow I'll miss you remember I'll  aaaaaggghhh
Always be true
and then while I'm away
while I'm away
I'll write home every day
I'll write  alright!every day
and I'll send all my loving to you
and I'll send all my loving to you  I knew that bit.
I'll pretend that I'm kissing 
pretend that I'm kissing  alright then
the lips I am missing and your  dreams will come true  
lips I am missing  I like this one.
Have to put this on tomorrow night if Pete ain't here.
If Pete isn't here?
I'm away write home every day  
There's still gonna be music on even if Pete can't .
No this song I meant.
loving to you 
What do you mean, if Pete isn't here?
Lips that I'm missing.
loving I will send to you   have to tell him we're boogieing away.
We  are 
All my loving  
boo how do you spell boogieing?
Is it B 
B double O
Alright I know, I don't wanna s oh put, I'll put bogying I know me.
boogieing  away  to
bogying  
Yeah  Beatles  what was this one called?tomorrow I'll miss you
Erm
and remember I'll always be true 
it's erm  oh damn!
don't matter.
Yeah boogieing away to the Beatles, they are ace.
All my loving.
Alright.
And we are going  to listen to them tonight.
so tough shit
So tough shit .
Ooh an hour and a half 
I think that'll do.
boo hoo bye mummy and daddy.
God you're counting!
I am.
Helena is counting  the minutes 
Until mummy and daddy  ha ha  are going.
her mummy
Mummy and daddy, ha ha ha, childish .
and daddy   love   
If you could have just seen yourself then, you leapt up  
till her mummy and daddy go
buy you diamond ring my friend if it makes you feel alright  I'd get you everything my friend if it makes you feel alright  I don't care too much for money, money can't buy me love  
ring my friend if it makes you feel alright  it's ace if you just sit down and listen to the old Beatles isn't it?feel alright  I don't care too much for money, money can't be me love can't be me love   
say you love me too
Anyway
I may not have a lot to give but what I've got I'll give to you
good luck 
I don't care too much for money, money can't buy me love, buy me love 
but you need it  I don't 
everybody tells me so   oh I'm such a good singer, ha ha ha
anyway good luck you need it I don't 
no no no no  
no   in fact  don't worry  about
I wouldn't let anyone else find that letter if I were you.
don't worry about Scott's  how do you spell opin oh opinions, right
O P I N I O N S 
I know.
If my mum finds it I'm dead.
Basically.
Basically.
love    don't want that pound back   squirm.
Oh god  piece of paper now.
no diamond rings and I'll be satisfied  that money just can't buy 
that money just can't buy  
I don't care too much for money money can't buy me love  love love  can't buy me love  
Oh dear oh dear oh me.
It's only half  well twenty to two and I'm blooming tired.
I want to go to bed.
God you're such a lazy  have you got an envelope?
No.
Only cos then if we sent them nobody's gonna likely to spot it.
Please, you must have an envelope somewhere.
and I've been working 
and I've been working 
like a dog, it's been a hard day's night boom boom boom boom  sleeping  hope they don't come too early, although  then we'll, I can just leave a note.
that you do will make me feel alright  ta.
work all day   money  
work all day to get your  oh talk of the devil, Richard  's out there.
Ha your lover!
Oh I, I was so frightened yesterday when he came round.
He were just   made me laugh  come on then I'll just come out with you, in the garden.
And I come out he goes oh it's cold I'm just gonna get me coat, I'll be back in a minute
Ooh  he's dead creepy though isn't he?
Yeah.
He's alright though.
I know he's alright but 
no problems.
he kep I was laying there and I was just dropping off to sleep, I was oh it was , and he, in h in he waltzes  oh I, he, I, he goes what you doing in here?
I goes what the hell's it look like, I'm going to sleep!
He goes  he goes you can't go to sleep, and he sat on the edge of my bed for about quarter of an hour.
Your bed.
What do you mean your bed ?
You was on Andrew's.
Ooh ah 
Well I was only going to  sleep Jo , I wasn't doing anything, I'm just tired.
Oh I can't put it in there, it's not going to fit.
things that you do 
will make me feel alright 
And like he just, he just sat there  and it was, ooh it was so creepy.
And like I thought I'm not gonna look up in case he goes for me or something, so I just kept my head in the pillow and pretended the light was blinding me  oh ha ha    cos when I get you alone   what?
in their car.
What?
home  
What's the matter?
I don't think    holding me tight tight   
 
Can see me tonight can't you?
Ah you are going to be so arsed, it's going to be so funny.
I won't be that bad, I won't have any ci er  get one  gotta get some, have to  now cos we're not gonna have any.
I doubt if I'm gonna get  Phyllis is there.
Phyllis and Johnnie  .
I call them  but it's not, it's .
Oh I've got a sore knee ooh
It's no wonder!
I've got fluid on it, it hurts.
Ooh
Well you go to sleep bef when they've gone, when they go out 
Yeah, have a bit of a kip for a bit can't I?
I doubt if erm we'll be down here before she goes up to mine  I don't reckon.
When?
Yeah she is, she's dropping in
for after, after mum and dad go  have the hand slapping and the  yeah they've gone!
Anyway I wanna have a bit of a talk to her.
What about?
Well about all this business with Shrimpy.
Yeah but you, you must admit Shrimpy's trying his damn hardest.
I, I, I mean I don't know, I wasn't there for half the things she was talking about last night, I mean I was upstairs for three quarters of an hour trying to go to sleep  
Yeah well I mean I was there and all they did was they didn't say anything to each other, in the same room, just acted totally normally but didn't say anything to each other .
Shrimpy's trying his flipping nice to try and let this drop and just .
We all know he still fancies her  he's just trying to, you know  keep it  he's just trying to forget it and try and act as normal as possible with her and hopefully things will get back to be back to  what, what they were.
But flipping Scott, mister interferior
Interferior ?
Yeah interferer.
Flipping  no, it really annoys me that does.
They're always going on about how much Shrimpy  gets other people involved and  can't  stick up for himself aren't they?
And bloody  Scott runs rushing off and thinks he's mister hard man.
What sort of things are you gonna say anyway?
Well I'm just gonna, I'm just gonna say that Joanne's a bit worried about Shrimpy  which is true
Yeah.
you know?
And I'm just gonna say  you know, I think it would  be better if Scott didn't rush in like that, you know?
I can understand why he did it, to be quite honest.
Yeah but you say to her  that they're always on about how s Shrimpy can't do anything for himself, and it's between Emma, it's not between  it was al even Scott said to me at the beginning oh it's not between me, it's nothing to do with me, it's between Emma and Scott.
Emma and Shrimpy.
Emma and Shrimpy then.
And erm  he's been, then he rushes ahead full storm  don't he?
Mm.
He shouldn't have done that really, he was a bit naughty.
He,sh she ought to learn to sh she's, they was all on about how Shrimpy can't stick up for himself, and then flaming  Emma does exactly the same but worse cos she gets Scott to do it for her.
She's gonna have to one of these, I'm not being funny but she can't stick up for herself, that girl can't.
It's about time she had the courage to do it, herself if she's in a strop.
There's no point getting Scott, cos what's gonna happen when she finishes with Scott?
She really 
Oh
As you've probably gathered.
oh I need your love babe
What's this?
yes I know it's true  erm  
Where's the tape?
hold me love me hold me love me  you 
What was this af what was it after?
What's just been on?
hold me  love me  Eight Days 
What  
a Week this is   love me  ain't got nothing but love babe
It's not on here, eight da oh yeah it is.
eight days a week 
And I Love Her no I mean I Feel Fine, Ticket to Ride and Yesterday, oh yes!
I like them.
Help I need somebody  that's on side B. 
Can we sing the song we're on!
Yeah alright.
We've got
you all the time whoa whoa hold me 
I like Daytripper as well.
love me
Michelle  Michelle
Michelle 
Paperback Writer's good as well.
Eleanor Rigby and Yellow submar I like all of them really.
You like all of them don't you Jo
Yeah.
really?
You make me laugh .
When you're in a mood like this you're so excellent.
Ooh ooh.
I'm just excellent all the time, can't help it.
No when you're in a strop you're not excellent.
Yeah well you can't expect me to be perfect all the time.
No yeah, just follow my example.
Flipping heck!
No.
You was in a right  moody the other day when I told you 
When?
When?
What?
When?
When you showed   
When I went a bit mad .
Well, stupid fool.
He isn't a stupid fool!
Leave him alone.
I'm sticking up for the little bless him.
eight days a week 
Well he's done a lot for me really, hasn't he really?
He takes me and picks me up from school and  takes us where we wanna go you know, off to the shop, off to here, off to get some  get some drink and  takes us for a drive and 
Yeah I mean he's  mm  he's 
He's a do anything for anybody sort of person isn't he?
Bless him.
I've got a dead itchy back, oh!
Ah!
Hurt me boob.
Hurt your boob ?
Bashed it.
I'm dreading tonight now.
I've decided I don't think I can go to 
I thought you would g , oh I thought you were about to say I've decided I'm not coming.
Oh I mean I don't want it to be a party where everybody goes off into different rooms, you know?
Yeah.
And there's about three in the middle who go right, this is a good song
move my little finger, you know?
Want to have it where everybody's together, boogieing
Don't know whether Clare's coming or not yet.
and having a laugh.
Well you'd better phone her up.
I said phone me if you're coming but don't bother if you're not so it looks like she's not.
Oh well if she turns up  does she know where you live?
She does doesn't she?
Well yeah, she can find it.
What's this?
I Feel Fine.
Did Jason Donovan sing this, afterwards?
No.
Alright then.
Oh 
Why?
just gone the road with  Bev!
she said so 
Can we turn it up a bit?
No cos it'll drown the microphone.
Oh!
I feel fine  let me flare my nostrils.
Unless we can turn it off for a bit.
she said so 
No.
No, why not?
I'm in love with her and I feel fine   afterwards  it's only 
I'm so glad that she's my little girl  she's so glad she's telling all the world that her baby buys her things you know 
so glad that she's my little girl  she's so glad she's telling all the world   bleagh 
he buys her diamond rings you know, she said so    
diamond rings you know, she said so  I'm in love with her and I feel fine  
I feel fine  
flared nostrils 
I know, I am  
Penelope Keith !
Thank you!
I don't think I look like Penelope Keith.
In tune now.
  

all the time 
Well I wish they'd stop changing the words on the tape, it's ridiculous.
 
I feel fine  I'm so glad that she's my little girl  she's so glad she's telling all the world that th 
so glad that she's my little girl  she's so glad she's telling all the world   Turn it up a bit then.
Got to tell him about the party.
oh  what you doing Jo?
What?
What you doing?
Looking.
Can't see er
Oh  piss!
What?
Oh quick, quick 
 
What?
Oh there's two.
I'm looking at magpies.
Oh what's happened?
Two 
Wh what  for?
What's up Hel?
What?
What's wrong?
I just  made the whole bed and then realized I'd put it on the wrong way.
Erm  fancy.
Oh I don't know.
 
I fancy some toast.
You want some toast?
Yeah.
Loads and loads and loads of it.
Loads and loads of toast?
Can I have some of this meaty stuff ?
Meaty stuff?
Yeah.
She said to Andrew 
Shut up  
Didn't get much done actually after you spewed on me.
to have some toast, alright?
Alright.
Funnily enough I didn't feel like it afterwards.
 

Yeah but you were feeling it before.
That's what made him spew I reckon then.
He got over excited.
God I swear  
Er 
does it pop itself up or do you have to ?
Yeah no it pops itself up.
Oh 
I wondered what the bloody hell was going on, I really did.
Ooh
And then I realized  
my head hurts 
Oh there's that pouty Jehovah's Witness girly
Oh yeah.
Erm I think 
 
 
I think I ought to go and put them in the dryer a bit longer.
Helena it's soaking, I've just felt it.
by himself actually.
Ooh feel your bum.
Has the heating come on yet today?
No.
Is the heating on Emm do you know ?
I'll have a look.
Is there heat coming out anywhere?
No it's not.
No it hasn't.
I was exp it's amazing the neighbours didn't come round actually cos we wasn't exactly quiet was we?
You couldn't hear it outside.
You could.
You couldn't.
No you could hear  outside though.
Could you?
Mm.
Alright then.
Yeah but I don't know what they're on about anyway, they have erm wild parties all the time.
Do they?
Don't you remember when we  snook out of Helena's living room to go and see Marky and that lot when they were, we were gonna, when we were gonna go over to Davy  's over their garden and they were still having a party?
And it was flipping half past two in the morning or something.
What?
I don't remember that.
You must remember that, when we were gonna go, we were gonna over the fences instead of going round the close.
Oh  oh yeah yeah yeah .
When they were well they were all in the garden having a party.
Oh yeah.
They had all their lights on and everything?
Yeah and I went 
 
no, maybe not.
Oh it was so funny that was.
Oh yeah 
Well I do I do can't remember that.
You were 
Oh you must do.
It was when you and David were shoved against the wall and you kept complaining.
What?
Comments like  I've got a pole up my bum!
Got a what up me bum?
A po pole?
Yeah.
A pole.
Nearly said polo then.
 
Ooh baby!
No I was not pushing the time  have you got this, put the other side on
Er
I don't know what I've done here.
Oh that'll do, they won't mind.
What's the first one on this side Hell Bell?
Er  dunno.
Your toast's done .
Thank you darling.
Who was the first person to speak?
Want salad cream?
Was it you Emm?
Yeah.
Salad cream?
Oh I've entered you now, ha ha you're on.
Oh I love Morrissey.
I really really do.
Hairdresser on Fire, Emma!
My favourite.
Eh?
Is it ?
That smells burnt.
No it isn't, it always smells like that.
I've got 
 
What happened to the heating in this place?
It's like a squat.
No heating, no  
I'm really hot.
no coleslaw
Hell you  ugh dog  you.
Oh no no no,near me please.
Oh leave him alone.
I could be allergic to his hair you see.
What?
I might be allergic to dog hair.
Yeah, might be.
It's nothing to do with the fact that he stinks.
Oh he doesn't stink.
Okay, he just reeks  mildly 
keeps doing that today.
Just timing him.
Well he, he's ten and, and collies don't usually live to be much older.
Exceptions that prove every rule.
Bet he'll live till he's twenty.
Yeah,even older.
Yeah, well that's life.
What?
Especially cos he smells.
Oh.
Well I'll be gone soon from this smelly household, so 
Hel do you want anything to eat?
No thanks.
What are you ready to move out as soon as possible?
Well  I'll have to stay for the next two years  unless we go back to Lincoln.
Cos if I go to the college I might be able to get a flat.
Probably not, but  depending on mummy and daddy live.
You've gotta pay for it Hel though.
Mm.
for free you know.
But you see if  if we move back we'll be able to get a bigger house.
And er I'll be able to have more room to myself then cos David won't be there anyway  so I might be able to have one of the bedrooms as like a sitting room to myself or study or something.
Shag palace.
 
Shag palace !
Well it was really good in our old house cos we had, we had a front room and a back room  and a kitchen  all downstairs.
And so the back room like, you could just go and sit in there on your own or whatever.
But I was, I was a bit too young to turn it into a shag palace.
A shag palace   I'm gonna sneeze  
Shut up.
Hairdresser on fire  I love this, sing it  
Neither can I.
Oh.
Oh 
Oh s sad.
What?
Oh sorry don't you like burnt toast?
Here you can have one of mine dear.
I quite like burnt toast.
I'd like to set the hairdresser on fire who did my mum's hair, it looks hideous.
Oh I'm so sorry.
Your mum likes it though doesn't she?
No she's growing it now.
Oh  
Alright thank you dear.
Gonna have it rea no, well she's growing the back of it  and having it permed and highlighted.
Ooh 
Go on, look at me.
What time's your little brother getting back?
Lunch time.
Where is he?
Clare's.
Shag palace again.
No, her mum and dad are there.
Ah.
I think.
abortion.
Swap partners 
just got to close down armageddon, come armageddon, come armageddon come 
As long as her dad don't start singing.
every day is like Sunday  every day is silent and grey  
Cat's having a fight by the look of it.
Yeah  good old cat's having a   Mum'll be dead chuffed, I've cleaned the toilet.
I'll tell her as well.
She'll be dead suspicious.
 
I think I might I think I might just tell her actually.
I won't tell her that he, he puked on your head  else she'll wonder what you were doing.
I mean 
Well, put it like this  if you mention that everybody stayed here  it'll get back to Jo's mum and dad.
No it won't.
It will.
It will.
It will.
Don't breathe a word.
I, I wouldn't say anything  because I  if my mum and dad find out  I'm dead.
You're dead!
Okay then
if mum and dad find out  Scott's dead .
Yeah because you slept in the same quilt as him, you  
Yeah well I'm not gonna tell them any gory details am I?
Yeah but my mum and dad aren't stupid.
Don't say anything.
Just don't say anything.
They won't know anyway, how they gonna find out who slept, nobody's found out so far.
Yes, crossword time.
Oh you're 
I mean what's the hassle there?
Do you have stars on Sunday?
What, in here?
Yes, there are stars in here somewhere.
Good.
That sounds gross.
God dog go away!
You smell .
I don't know where they are.
I was only reading it off there.
Oh here?
When you find the stars 
Sam be quiet.
Ha
Don't say anything cos my mum'll kill me.
Alright I won't say anything then.
But if my mum asks  like what the  is I'm gonna tell her.
What sick where?
Well yeah you can tell her, tell her that Andy was sick all over her but you don't have to say he slept over.
No.
say he was sick  well you can't see where he was sick anywhere anyway.
It's all been cleaned up hasn't it?
 

Ooh I feel much better now.
I feel like dying.
Does anybody want a chewing gum?
It's been in my pocket.
 
It's all nice and  nice and bendy.
Hel?
Er  oh go on then, force me.
Scott?
No thanks.
 

Libra   money is a major source of aggravation this week.
Do not let love or sentiment cloud your judgement .
Emma 
 
must tread gingerly this week or things will backfire on you.
Circumstances beyond your control will pin you down until Friday .
 
What's mine?
Eh?
What are you?
Scorpio.
How many page you got?
Pluto in your own sign is making you more secretive even than usual.
Life at home is a bit of a battlefield and work is sadly staging a go slow but you have survived worse difficulties  before and this tough period is nearly over  Ugly  what are you?
Aries.
Aries 
Oh you've answered to my ugly name have you?
Hairies 
Well it was just 
Hairies back .
Sorry
just started going  
Not until the sun enters your own sign on Friday will you feel that life is worth living.
Love is so highly charged you want to be left in peace   or left with Andrew's piece.
Of sick  of leftover baked beans.
Oh that was really so  I'll swear, I don't know what that was that, that clump that was in your hair but it was, oh god!
It looked like an eye Jo it really did.
I goes  open the bathroom.
I just walked down   and I walked in and there was Scott with his top off, Emma nearly ha Emma half naked.
I thought oh shit.
Oh dear.
God it all happens in your bathroom doesn't it?
I know.
It was like flipping the channel tunnel on the landing when me and Andy were there.
Every three minutes people were going to ch I goes I don't believe this, I just don't fucking believe this.
And he just kept  
It was like the channel tunnel?
Well
Where the hell did you get that from?
Don't know, I just felt like saying it.
Well that magazine's crap.
Do you think they have a proper magazine in the Sunday Express?
Like Clapham Junction then.
 
There usually is one.
There usually is one.
It was like Clapham Junction in was .
Every flipping two minutes they were coming to the toilet.
Shrimp kept going up for some water, trod on Andrew.
And I shit myself cos someone took a picture but   
I didn't take any.
 
Oh there goes my dad.
not likely to all take it.
Having a fag as usual.
Fag or a cigar?
cigar.
don't stop the car 
Erm
when we get that  photograph Shrimp Shrimpy took  of me Andrew  
She's gonna take them and do them, get them done  at the thing and then take it home.
Well how many have you done anyway?
About five.
Who of?
Of people down here.
How many have you got left?
There's only one gone.
It's going to be ages then isn't it?
You'd best, you'd best remember 
Better not be one of 
better not be one of me.
Yeah there is.
There is.
There's that one of you kneeling down and me  sort of 
Oh you're on your back.
What?
I was kneeling down and you had just fallen on the floor.
Had I?oh good oh.
That's a nice one, yeah.
Emma just like sprawled on her back and Scott with his back to the camera obviously just about to undo his flies and pork her.
Ah!
I suppose it was good at the time that I wasn't kissing Andrew, otherwise I would have had a mouthful of sick.
Oh gross!
That would be so funny.
Rather funny  
Not as funny as it actually happening and you getting covered in vomit but I mean  it's still vaguely amusing.
That was highly disgusting.
Cheat.
There was loads of  
No it's not cheating.
at the time, he sort of went  I thought hold on   
I can always tell if I'm gonna be sick.
You get like, you get really really like hot and  
It's when the vomit comes out your mouth that does it isn't it?
No but you've got like, you get loads and loads of phlegm in your mouth, and then it starts going all acid and you go 
I can always tell 
and then and then you get this feeling down here like something's rumbling then you go aaaaaaah I'm gonna be sick!
Jul Julian got out in time.
Yeah.
That's like what I am.
I can hold it down till I get to the toilet I can.
He was far too pissed though, Andrew was.
Julian really made me laugh though cos I  he was just fine wasn't he?
And he was just wandering round and then he just went  bleugh and bombed in the garden 
I didn't see him actually bomb.
I saw him like on the right, on the path and I goes  I goes what you do I goes  gonna be sick.
He goes alright then.
He goes Helena  Julian's being sick.
actually sick  
Mythology.
What do you want?
Beautiful youth chosen as cup bearer to Zeus  is it ?
How many letters you got, none?
It's eight letters.
Eight letters.
Beautiful youth
It's, how many times did he spew up the stairs?
Julian?
Couple of times.
Once you tell me I'll know it.
Well that's handy.
Handy Andy.
Is he really?
I dunno  
 

Wouldn't know as he spewed on me.
Zeus is  Roman?
No, Greek.
I don't know how you get any enjoyment out of doing that.
Why are you doing it?
It's erm
I like to stretch my mind.
I don't 
having a  chest expander.
Is it nasty  
I don't think it's that either.
No definitely not .
No,
No
What are you barking at dog?
Grrrrrrrrrrr smelly dog, ooh smelly dog.
This is crap this   Do you know what a flat, a top roof  flat roofed houses you can't have a mortgage.
Can't you 
You what?
What?
You're what?
Because if they're flat, all the water collects on them  and it's more likely to like, something's more likely to happen to it.
So you can't have a full mortgage   but they couldn't get a mortgage on it because it had a flat roof.
I mean like ours has got a flat garage and everything but  all of it is.
It's a bit weird  it's an old council house.
That was funny
 

the Decameron 
The Decameron?
Ooh dear
Is it Miss  or Mrs ?
Miss.
Not surprising is it?
No she's alright actually.
Yeah.
 
Gilbert and Sullivan  
Well try me on Gilbert and Sullivan.
No  I like these ones I can guess.
How do you know him?
Go on, Emma   snatch that and read me the Gilbert and Sullivan clue.
Cos she won't.
Oh  operas
Gilbert and  Micado  Pirates of Penzance  H M S Pinnacle
 

I bet the only thing that dog smells when you've had vodka is vodka in your shit.
No 
Vodka don't smell.
He's  his bum.
No but it couldn't really have agreed with him much could it really?
Well no maybe not 
but I should think he'd have a smelly vodka  vodka shit.
But unlike you and your cider shit
No it did though, it really really smelt of cider.
shit now.
Go on Bob, play your mandolin, ding ding ding ding ding ding ding
Oh erm   god
Belinda  no it can't be Belinda, that's er 
What, what you talking about?
Decameron.
Oh.
Go home green breath.
be no fun in it.
Why?
Because it's cheating, you should know.
I'm not cheating.
Course you are.
It's a general knowledge crossword.
Yeah but it don't mean you have to go and look everything up.
There's no fun in looking things up is there?
Yes it is.
I find it i interesting.
Jeremiah 
Ugh ugh
Could have told you that.
No you couldn't.
What's the clue then if it's Jeremiah?
What, what ?
The name of one of the dolls on Playschool.
Oh that was Jemima.
Jemima.
 
that's what we could call her 
What  
No, Jemima.
What the child, your baby?
The girl, you couldn't call it  we haven't agreed on the girl yet.
I say  I say Rhiannon.
She says Meg.
I like that    
What?
What did you say?
Rhiannon.
Rhiannon.
It's Welsh.
It's shit isn't it?
It's crap innit?
that name.
I like Irish names.
No-one ever look  look 
Yeah.
you've got to be practical right
I'm not calling it Sarah
No, but when you go to children's parties 
or Helena 
no-one's going to be able to name,na er be able to write it are they?
And when people send her christmas cards everyone's gonna spell it wrong and she's gonna be pissed off for the rest of her life.
Do her good.
Don't want a Welsh name,Irish gaelic names are the best.
Yeah  
Irish gaelic names are the best, they're ace.
Specially with the surname 
Erin, that's a nice name.
Erin?
Erin ?
That sounds Welsh 
That sounds like sounds like what's it.
Sounds like she's got a flipping long dress on and a straw hat.
It sounds sounds like Emlyn Hughes.
Emlyn Hughes .
Yeah let's call the lad Emlyn.
Well why don't we call her Sam?
No way.
Sammy's a boy's name.
Samantha's disgusting anyway.
Never said we had to call her Samantha.
No I know but everyone would think she was called Samantha and she'd be pissed off for the rest of her life.
Well Vicky at college  on our course  she's not Victoria she's Vicky.
She was christened Vicky.
Well
Vicky 
No I know but they'll probably christen her Victoria.
Delilah  that's a nice name.
They won't.
Oh
Delilah?
What about Ermintrude?
Samson  call the lad Samson.
ugh  Delilah 
go on Samson go on put it in the goal, go on Samson I'll bet.
Emily.
Ugh
No way  Emily 
there's an Emily in my class, hideous.
It's funny innit how you know people and it puts you off their names?
Gemma 
Rachel's boring.
Sarah's hideous.
Catherine's crap.
Ooh 
Ryanne  one of the yanks' names the other night, Ryanne.
Yes I know  fancy her  doing quite well.
Yes.
Oh we talk about her.
No that's the one that Martin fancies.
He spent the whole evening trying to  
What is the name  
Oh my god haircut  haircut 
Wow great 
haircut haircut  haircut .
We're all pointing at you Davy  haircut 
He sort of went he just went    
Er
It was getting long an' all.
I know well he was growing it weren't he?
He said he was growing it to me.
We'll have a look in the back of your dictionary.
Cos they've got lists of names in the back of dictionaries haven't they?
Ancient names 
Oh good oh 
Eleanor.
Eleanor's quite  
There's a list of girls' names in here.
What was it we were gonna call my dog?
Er 
Knob bait 
I like Chris for a boy.
Knob bait  
Chris as a K?
Chris?
Or a C?
No after Chris Akubussi 
Prawn cocktail.
Here we go.
That's with a K innit?
K R I  
They're boys' names
What page is it on?
girls' names.
It's like from two nine six to  three o three.
Okay, chuck it here then.
As in criss cross  
I've got it.
No, I've gotta have it.
No way.
Emma Emma, criss cross
No I get it first.
Yeah.
Oh thanks.
Come on, go through some of them and I'll tell you how  how crap they are.
Edna
June 
No thank you.
What?
Oh depends how many letters I got.
How many letters do we want in it?
I dunno.
Daisy.
Daisy 
Not calling her Daisy.
Daisy
About five or six?
la la la la la la 
Five or six ?
Okay we'll go for five now.
Abbie?
Abbie
Abbie 
Nellie?
Nellie, I like Nellie.
Abbie's quite nice isn't it?
I know, I know Abbie's sort of like real sort of  turned up nose 
Abbie?
I knew an Abbie at guides and she was a snobby nosed cow.
Yeah.
You really started her going then 
Adela, Adele.
Aggie
Agnes 
Agnes 
Allie, Alice 
Hate  I do.
Alana 
Alana
No, Alana  
Sounds like she's an animal.
Sounds like a hyena 
No that's a llama.
That's who I was thinking of  
It sounds like it's a hyena 
Oh my god what a name.
I meant llama.
Alvin
Alvin Alvin 
 
Alvin, Theodora and Simon.
You're gonna have three kids?
I was having a rest, I didn't say I'd finished.
Beryl 
Beryl?
 
You can't call it Beryl.
By the way, by the way, what about Hagar ?
Hagar?
What about Hattie?
No.
out of Eastenders.
Oh god  What are you putting in?
You'd better not put any bum ones in.
Marge.
Well I've just realized that there's  there's a five letter space here so I put penis 
  
Butter 
Call her Marge, we don't call her   
No I haven't.
How about calling her Marge  Helena, Helena  Helena  
Parish post held by Mr Bumble in Oliver Twist .
Beadle.
What?
Beadle?
Helena
Beadle.
Oh.
Call her Marge, you might as well call her butter and go the whole hog mightn't you really?
Nancy.
Flora.
Hog   that's a nice name .
Flora how about Flora?
Flora, the margarine.
What's her name in Labyrinth?
Call her Flora Marge, there you go.
There you are two names, call her Flora and Marge.
The girl's name in Labyrinth  
Flora Marge  
How about Aline?
Aline?
Oh my god.
Saline!
Saline drip 
Don't get that.
Helena's crap, I reckon 
Let's call her shock  absorber 
Call her cauliflower.
nudge nudge.
Let's call her  fireguard   fireguard  
Nose  I reckon we ought to call her.
Just think, if it's a girl what a poor cow having a nose like that.
Type of spaniel, dead.
She might have my lovely nose.
What?
She might have my lovely nose.
No I mean that's gonna  that, that that gene's gonna is gonna  
No  
got it off then?
He's got  papers.
That's crap.
only helping me with the 
Oh jesus christ 
two o'clock.
Why?
So?
Why?
I'm rehearsing all day.
You won't have the pleasure of my company this evening.
Oh  
Oh
Fucking me up as well 
oh  the  are my faith 
Oh watch me weep.
Acid tears.
Only joking darling, love you really.
Right  you know, it's fair enough   
Go on Jo  go, go on Jo, go and get your word in  that we've missed off a few times.
Go on
Anyway you smell his bum 
Yeah   
 
Oh good 
So why did why didn't you have a shower 
We could have had a shower together.
No you couldn't, not in my shower there's not enough room 
Yes there is 
were they, last night  
 
Your flipping shower curtain's disgusting.
covered in 
I know  
brown scabby bits.
My mum bleaches ours.
My mum used to bleach ours but we haven't got one now.
No we've got  a shower with a glass thing  and you can see through the glass thing  
I know it's horrible it really is.
I don't believe it.
You never know when your dad's gonna walk in to  
What?
He's fucking going to sleep in the car.
That kid is a dickhead.
Oh leave him alone.
What a lousy turd.
perhaps Andy smells  smelly baked beans probably.
No he don't smell.
 
after he puked on your head 
So, it's horrible it was.
What, his head?
You shouldn't get off with him 
 
His helmet?
you shouldn't get off with him 
His helmet.
when he's that drunk then should you?
Well I didn't know he was gonna spew, I didn't think to myself oh my god 
Yeah well didn't have to do it on my bed.
Oh the dryer!
Well I'm sorry like but I was getting a few interruptions on the landing
like flipping  like Clapham Junction.
Oh you should go in the bathroom, it's good in there innit?
I wouldn't know.
Yeah but I guessed you'd wanna go in there  
Give him one, go on give him one.
last night.
Ha ha ha ha.
I reckon that's what made me ill, it's your fault.
Sorry dear.
sick 
Excuse me.
Oh you didn't swallow it?
Why, what you done?
Ugh that was   Bonjella 
Ugh shut up, ooh ooh 
We were discussing how you  spunk with Bonjella, she swallowed it last night.
What ?
She swallowed it  last night .
What?
Spunk.
I said  uses Bonjella 
Jo do you ask  these things?
You know you're not really supposed to ask  private.
I didn't ask.
Did I ask?
Did I ask  or not?
She told me.
You were the one who raised the subject.
I said, I said I'm sorry you know Helena you stupid cow if you had been in here, accusing me as usual I said she goes cough up now.
she said the bathroom.
 
She said she  because I left it to you in case you wanted to spit in the sink she goes oh I didn't last night, so I never brought it up alright?
this she didn't even  
 

Bonjella we was discussing that  
It's probably why he's so thick.
It probably is, that's why  
I know.
No he's probably wearing that shit on it this morning.
Well at least you was lubricated.
Oh I'm gonna fail my oral tomorrow.
Oh yeah?
Lovely.
Emma passed hers last night.
What?
Er?
Oral dear, oral.
No, female.
Oh dear
Mrs 
You are joking me ?
It's embarrassing 
No chance.
You must wear sensible shoes says she.
She's Welsh.
Oh that's even worse.
 
 

I'd hate to be Welsh.
Everyone picks on the Welsh don't they?
 
Oh god  
I'll tell him that when I get back in.
Wanna what?
 
Dad everyone hates you.
She's sitting there  wondering what's going on .
your dad 
My surname's  by the way Jo.
I know .
I know I just don't think it was a, I don't think it was the slightly bit funny.
Thank you I  
  
He's got some music on cos he's dancing.
whopping huge clitoris
It isn't.
Doesn't it feel like it should be about four o'clock in the afternoon?
Emma put your  
Well I don't think so cos you'd feel like homosexual desires who doesn't get any thrills so I don't  clitoris.
What footie's on the telly  sarvo 
What?
What football's  
Translated as  what football's on the te television this afternoon.
I don't know.
I don't really care either to be quite honest.
    

Flasher.
Yeah .
Are you stupid?
He's looking at the numbers on the houses isn't he?
No.
Yes he is and that's why his brake lights keep flashing on.
Oh yeah that was really sensible that was.
I mean that was incredibly sensible what he just did.
What?
Looked at one house then looked at the next  oh
Yeah well maybe he wanted to see if they were going up in even and odd numbers  side of the road.
Manchester City and Southampton.
If you ever get the, if you ever  ever get  again I'll hit you, right?
Right.
What's on the other side?
What, when the match is on?
 

I bet  
Oh shame it's a bloke  works up the bank
Kung fu 
and he's going to Oliver's.
All the shit films, that's all you need to know.
 

Go on, go on just  just nudge the handbrake off.
Just just 
Yeah just nudge the handbrake so it comes rushing straight down towards us.
So?
He'll have to pay the damage.
No hopefully a car will be coming out of the end.
Yeah and the car will be laced with high explosives.
So when  and he gets blown up.
not as if on here you can actually only swivel round.
How come I got my head  his head was here 
I beg your pardon?
shut up, when it was at that end my head started at?
On the  there was me Ian and Noel all sleeping in the  Ian in the middle.
We woke up at three o'clock in the morning and Ian was the other way round
with his head at the bottom of the  and we don't know how.
No
Swivel  
cos he would have he would have woken us up if  unless  
Talking of swivel in Boots there's a thing above shave .
And Helena goes  swivel 
Swivel on it, I felt like shouting but I didn't.
Oh tasty 
Well we're going Jo 
Where do you actually do the papers?
Redditch
Marvellous.
I know.
 

Well do you do a round?
Yeah that one on the corner.
Where's Barnet Way?
Cos I used to live on the top floor.
The big one we do first.
All those photos of me .
What the ?
Yeah up the big hill
What near where I go, all those houses?
Yeah.
You know when we cross over to do that one, when I cross over to do that bit on your side?
The little 
 
the little 
Yeah.
Yeah.
The first house I do is 
I hate doing that, drives me up the wall  the first bit cos I've got all them houses in the first bit haven't I?
You've got three or something like that  ten.
you've got two I've got ten.
Yeah but like  I've still got more than  well it's about the same cos you've got less at the top I think.
 

Don't you reckon it feels like it should be about   half three?
That's what I just said a minute ago.
I know but I felt like saying it again.
Except you said four o'clock.
Oh.
Let's get together and feel alright  alright.
No I don't.
Don't you?
No.
Why not?
 
 

Well what do I go and see her on a Sunday for?
Because  you've got three weeks to do a fucking musical.
We're starting our video projects tomorrow.
It's a bit late.
Why didn't you do it, start it earlier?
Because Debbie is a stupid bitch.
Fact.
Which now means that for the next  oh and Alex, Alex is being a stupid tart as well about this  thing.
How old's Julian?
Julian's about twenty now.
Twenty one soon isn't he?
What does ?
Yeah, Alex  this fucking stupid  project  which means I've gotta stop after prac after rehearsal.
Sometimes rehearsals can go on till about seven thirty or something, then Alex wants to do a rehearsal.
It's the way she said oh can we rehearse in the week?
And I thought oh  okay.
She's gone oh it's alright we'll be finished by nine o'clock.
Well that's no bloody good.
Mind you, mind you  Julian is.
Oh god he's really skinny isn't he?
What?
I know.
Did you see his trousers?
Julian.
They were hanging off him, he never wears a belt  
Swear when he was sat at the top of the stairs shivering he looked so thin.
And when he had that flipping, that blue blanket round him 
We were all going looks like he's doing a Romanian thing here.
Bit nasty I know but 
Oh, I know but god did you see him?
He was sat there and he was going brr brr brr brr brr
 

he, he goes, he reckoned that, he reckoned that, that my blanket made him feel worse .
What is he doing?
Just ignore him.
Well he's just locked up the car ooh  
Is he out the car now?
Oh he's out the car, he's probably gone to sit on the bench.
It's only raining I mean  
slept.
So.
Can't believe it.
do?
Ah but what's   
Dunno.
I would if I'd said I was going to sleep, stay with Hannah 
believe you 
They'd still  they'd still say oh er was Scott stopping there as well?
Yeah, probably would actually.
See if I said to my mum and dad  I'm stopping at  Hannah's tonight  she'll say is Emma stopping with her and I'll say  yes.
Now her reaction won't, won't  wouldn't be  
Yeah 
yeah her reaction wouldn't be erm  you know oh you you're not doing that, you're not stopping.
Her reaction would be does Emma's mum and dad know.
Just say yeah.
What can they do ?
Phone up and ask  Hannah .
Hello.
Well I mean did you  I mean she knows that  Emma was sleeping here last night doesn't she?
Yeah but she thinks 
What you told her?
Think what I shall say is, I shall  myself quite simply, if it ever gets out I'll say well look  I know full well that you wouldn't have let me stop at Helena's  you would have objected to it  I said, but  Andy's mum and dad, Andy was like pretty bad so we left him there and I said I stopped up to help look after him.
I stopped to try and look after him .
I think I did quite well don't you?
My acting skills.
What acting skills?
I was so pissed last night.
Shit I was so pissed.
Oh yeah you really were.
I   I was so pissed.
Oh  er I thought mm you're really far gone aren't you but
I didn't say anything.
It was later on when you c you lot are all sober now, you can go home, that everybody was  I just went   
I said that didn't I?
?
I was drunk yeah, but I was nowhere near as drunk as
Don't give me that crap Helena cos you told me oh god Scott's really pissed, he'll have to stay as well.
So don't tell me 
No 
don't tell me  
Emma said that to me, Emma said that to me.
No I didn't, I said can Scott phone his mum and you said yeah.
And, and you goes is he really far gone and I went yeah  
when you come upstairs you goes oh god  looks like they're all staying you goes oh it looks like they're all staying cos Scott's pissed.
So don't tell me you knew full well he wasn't, it was all an act.
I a I goes to Emma is he really far gone and she said yes he is.
Well I thought he was.
He had me tooked in as well.
You lying tart.
No, so don't pretend you did know  you, you thought he was acting cos you told me he was well plastered.
Well I thought I thought he was a bit but I don't know
No you never you thought he was pissed  
some people you can't tell, it's like Andy isn't it?
Yeah.
You can't tell if he's bad or not.
You could last night.
He spewed over my head  
Yeah but when he got down here he was as right as rain wasn't he?
When he spewed on me he sort of give it away though.
Yeah.
Give it away a bit really didn't he?
Brrrrrrrrrr right, we off up?
Yeah, in a minute.
Meet us round Andy's at half ten  it's five past.
Mm.
I've only got to put a jumper on and get my bag.
Got to go up yours though haven't I?
Go to the toilet
I shall walk  save any unpleasantness about lifts.
Well  if I left at the same time as you  he mi he might feel obliged to offer me a lift but if he did 
I doubt it.
I would say no.
Talking about?
Who do you think?
Well we're going home now, we're not going up to Shr to  Andy's straight away.
Oh is that what you meant?
I thought you meant 
No I've gotta go and get my bag and my jumper 
Oh I thought you meant you were going straight to do the papers.
No, we haven't got the 
They're at Emma's.
I've got to go and get my bag and go up to Emma's and put all my pa 
put some clothes on first as well.
have we got a leaflet?
No.
Good.
put some clothes on first.
got pneumonia.
wearing last night.
Oh shut up.
She was wearing enough and I was h warm blooded.
horny then, I was gonna say 
Hug your comfort blanket.
What?
Nothing.
Oh bollocks.
Oh god I've  them b two beers are down there and all.
Oh  
Hel will have them when we've gone.
Our  didn't stay long did he?
Just picked up the kids.
You know where he's sleeping don't you?
Where?
No.
Oh!
Got some gossip about Mick and June before we go.
In his bloody warehouse.
Oh yeah?
Eh?
His warehouse  where he keeps all his stuff.
Yeah  gossip about June and Mick.
He's got a girlfriend called Diane right, well you knew that didn't you?
Well er  he's, she's got two kids, little ones  and has moved in to a house  dunno whether it's with her or not but he's very touchy about the subject when anybody asks cos Johnny  said oh  I'm sorry to hear about you and he g he go goes oh I suppose you know it all do you?
And he goes no, he goes oh I'm surprised I thought Johnny  would have told you all of it.
And John goes no he hasn't said a thing.
Goes  honestly, he goes, he goes  he goes  look Mick he hasn't said anything to me, if you don't believe me then tough, you know.
And he said anyway  according to mu dad's suspicions, and from what mum's been earwigging, erm that's why he left her.
Not because he didn't love her any more, it's cos he's having this fling with this Diane.
Ooh!
She's tall and thin with red hair.
And she's got two young kids.
Yeah, like but like erm
Totally the opposite to June really isn't it?
Yeah.
What I thought  because that, because erm
He was a fish 
because he like, oh he got over it real quick didn't he?
Cos he ha he had a girlfriend didn't he?
Mark said he had like  lady friend whatever.
Yeah but that's why he left her.
Yeah I know but like  he didn't sort of do it very con inconspicuously did he?
No.
Like couple of weeks after, after he'd 
Well he's moved 
moved out he'd flipping  shacked up with someone else hadn't he?
He well he's, he's moved into somewhere, dunno whether it's with this woman or not  but she's got two young kids.
Ooh dear.
The bastard.
Say no more.
Two young kids.
How young?
Where's my shoes ?
Up my bottom.
 
Alright then chickens.
 
see you later, you're not coming out till after tea are you?
No.
Get on with it .
Sue what  
 

Oh dear.
our conversation's even more riveting than it was before it went on.
Actually it takes a while to get used to.
When we first started  like we wouldn't speak or anything and it was really bad.
But then me and Emma got going and we  got a bit drunk and  we just said anything  and it was really embarrassing.
So what's the  
So what are you doing this for?
For erm  research I think.
Like they're looking at people's accents and erm
How did you get it?
I wouldn't do it.
This man just knocked on the door and said will you do this  for me?
Why?
Twenty three tapes 
You're joking!
And you get twenty five pound at the end.
Ask him if he wants to come and knock at my door.
No no don't tell him where I live.
Crisp anybody?
Becki 
Thanks Clare, nice chips.
 

I was waiting for Mr  to say something to me then, I was sat there going 
And yes you can nick some chips  
Oh 
 

No Tim's gonna , he's gonna say something.
No  let him talk
She's gotta record the conversations so don't say anything.
What about?
What have you done?
Nothing.
I can hear you say  don't say anything.
 
What are saying don't say anything about for?
are you going down to the hall?
Yes you are, I just heard you.
Cos you're paranoid.
Are you going then or are you stopping in?
 

Does she know what's going on?
No.
Why didn't you  school this morning ?
What did they say when they saw you shoplifting?
You what?
We didn't have French this morning.
What do you mean, you're a secret stripper?
What are you going on about?
What do you mean your dad's in prison?
That's not funny.
Yeah my dad is for armed robbery, for poundstretchers
's dad who's in the I R A.
Of course he lives in Redditch.
And he's  dad.
Susan's dad employed me.
 
Just peak just speak to each other normally .
I've gotta listen back to all this and write all your names down.
Hope you change my name.
Well I'm Clare .
And I'm Becki 
And I'm Becki  and I'm madly in love with Andrew .
So tell me Clare, how much do you weigh?
Only eighteen stone  on a good day.
the twenty stone I was last month.
If you're eating your lunch why don't you have a chair?
I'm not eating anything.
I can eat standing up.
Now you'll get indigestion and then you'll feel sick and then you'll be moaning to me all afternoon.
And then your painting will be in her 
Come on Sue, let's leave this lot
my chips if you want to darling.
Excuse me  argument?
No put it down.
Did they send you the microphone as well?
Where did you get it from?
And the Walkman?
Where did you get it from?
It's a survey.
Why doesn't anybody come, ever come round to my house and ask me?
I know!
Come on, carry on.
Oh great!
Well done!
Well no-one's gonna know.
What do you think they put it on radio or something?
recording it for?
Well the the it's just a survey to see
what, what words people actually use in everyday life.
Oh ya, ya.
 

Great.
Andrew   well at the mo at the moment  is the most used word.
It's a nice name that is actually,
Yeah
Is it Italian or something?
be Becki  
I think a really nice name is is  
This isn't gonna be shown in the school is it?
Yeah.
Ooh 
Where's it going?
Just send it away.
It goes to London.
Nobody's gonna know Becki, don't worry.
Alright and guess who lives in London?
Stephanie  
Yeah well there's qu there's quite a few million people actually who do.
So I don't think that actually   
can't really miss her, such a fat cow.
Speak of the devil 
Oh sit yourself down you fat cow.
 

Steph  any cards?
Stiff.
Have you got my card?
Can I 
Stiff?
have it a sec?
How did you get on Steph?
Was it good?
Excuse me, speak up a bit.
Don't worry I'm only recording you.
Do you know what I'd do?
I'd put it underneath the drawer in my mum and dad's bedroom at night.
Specially in a caravan  they're going  rock rock rock  rock rock rock  
 

Ah!
Oh that would be funny that would.
Whatever you do don't panic.
She will think you're manic.
Whatever you do don't pale because you're bound to fail.
 
Just give us a big cheesy grin and you know you're in with a chance  
 
squeaky clean.
Good luck  sorry about the  
 
I had a dream last night, there was a mega earthquake.
And Clare was supporting it?
No
Clare had got flatulence   sorry that was nasty.
Can I use some big words?obscure  antidisestablishmentarianism
Ooh!
She's got a dictionary somewhere.
Read it.
That's the longest word in the dictionary.
   
Pardon?
That's the longest word in the dictionary.
Sad.
People s started sniffing 
I reckon the most used words are things like the
And sex.
No I don't.
And.
Yeah.
No like cos people go  you mean like  you mean like 
And if you come from Man if you come from Manchester it's 
Aye.
It actually picks up voices really well.
Cos I had a load of music on and you could still hear  voice.
Well how about the background noise?
Will it, can it do the background noise?
I dunno.
I haven't listened to that much really 
pick it up if I farted?
Not with me, no.
Oh yes I have in my bag.
Have you?
Shall we listen to it in a minute, please?
Alright then.
I wanna listen to it, you've already listened to it.
Do you mind not using this  obscure words.
It doesn't matter  you can fart if you want .
You should pick up a chair and throw it at me  but 
Me and Emma was talking about the flipping things she gets up to with Scott.
Well that's not much.
What?
Emma who?
Not much really.
?
I forgot you knew  her actually  just then.
  
Becki, do you know Emma ?
No, sorry.
On her first day there she asked  yeah 
 
Hang on, let me switch myself off.
Why bother?
Stick it in your pocket 
Helena
and she goes why, I goes well  every time I got, when I went out  the other night and when I come in the other night there was Helena with her arms round Andrew, so it's not that I, I'm worried about it but  I just think it's a bit tarty of her cos she's  fancies the pants off Pete and as soon as my back's turned and Pete isn't there she's all over Andrew.
And I goes yeah I know what you mean.
I goes 
I'm not really, I only wind you up.
I goes erm  I know exactly what's gonna happen when I go away this Easter.
I goes I'm not bothered about the fact she's getting off with him, I'm just thinking, you know, it's not fair on Peter.
Oh yeah it's not fair on Peter.
Oh poor, poor angelic little Peter.
Yeah he's not taking me for a ride or anything.
Well you as well because you've  but er you're using Andrew really.
I mean I 
No I'm not!
I wouldn't do anything.
I got off with Andrew but that's all a p only a  who I  get off with him and I don't fancy him, I know I don't want to go out with him I just fancy him for the occasional snog, fair enough  but I'm just saying like you know  you  fancy 
I 
the pants of Peter but if my, my back's turned and Peter ain't there you're all over Andrew like  bloody  
I know but I mean I, I only, I only wind him up, I only wind you up, I don't really do anything.
I mean I used to fancy him really badly.
You will do when I'm in, at Easter.
I won't.
You will.
No I don't  unless I was drunk I wouldn't, because  because I know he do 
Yeah but you're gonna get drunk so what's the problem?
I know I, cos I know he doesn't want to really.
And to be quite honest if Pete's there everyone else can just go and drop dead  cos I, it's true 
Exactly.
it's true I know it is.
I really fancy Peter like flipping  god's sake I mean I really do.
You know and I, I, I only wind you and Andy up, I wouldn't really do anything.
Honestly I wouldn't.
Come on then.
Oh dear .
But 
I wouldn't really do anything Joanne.
Don't you trust me?
No.
Not really surprising .
No I wouldn't really.
Do you trust me?
No.
Good.
Don't know where Scott's taking Emma  last night.
No.
Probably take her out
He won't take her out for a meal.
Don't you think?
No, said to him are you  he goes no.
   

Who sings that?
   

Oh it's the same song innit?everywhere you go  
everywhere you go   
Hello Smokey  ooh I've had such a bad morning.
It's all taken such an effort.
Felt like not going to school I can tell you.
otherwise er  I'm gonna be skiving off.
but I had to inform people.
Who have you told?
My mate.
Everybody.
My mate.
Have you, have you been getting any strange looks or haven't you noticed?
 
But I told Isabel and Clare and Stephanie  oh and Lisa and  Emma 
 
they all thought it was really funny.
I ain't told Lee  yet though.
Oh and er
Eh?
I ain't told Lee  yet though he's been away I think 
oh and Sarah 
but ne he'll get the treatment on Monday.
I'll get it off him and then I'll say  
oh and Sarah and  
I told Danny 
I told my boss as well and he killed himself laughing.
Oh and Nichola
 
 
Lisa 
Well bloody friends you lot are, you and your fucking 
goes how did your party go?
I goes oh really well.
Andy  
Andy vomited into Joanne's hair!
  

What?
You.
 

Hello Sammy darling!
the mail box bomb  you need  two litre bottle of chlorine
it's a
How many bombs are in there?
There's about twenty different  
No listen, listen you need a two litre bottle of chlorine which must contain sodium hy hypochlorite
You can get, that's bleach, you can get that in bleach.
Yeah.
sugar and a small amount of water 
 
mix all three of these equal amounts and fill about a tenth of the bottle.
Screw on the lid and place in the  
   
Ha!
Oh that's America 
Yeah it's all American.
It gives prices in dollars and everything 
I know.
Don't say anything about this by the way cos it's illegal.
I know it's illegal.
Oh this joke today?
Er right  walking on the beach   and he  a genie came out when he rubbed it and he goes oh no way man.
The genie comes out and goes you, I can only grant you one wish, think carefully.
He goes right  thought for ages and he thought right what do I really need?
Yeah, right I've decided what I really want is a dick that, that, that drags on the floor.
So the genie cut both his legs off.
Same with you, don't say anything about this.
About what?
About this,
Let's have a look.
Don't  napalm bombs, no do, do
What?
They can put  napalm.
Make bombs, yeah.
the I R A 
but you can make a bomb out of erm  bleach and that 
 

I thought that was quite funny at the time.
Er
I have more days off than you have.
Have you got whitsun off?
Have you got whitsun week off?
I have.
Have you got  pardon?
Yes.
gotta have whitsun off.
 
Oh  what, what erm  what's toilet rolls and er  Starship Enterprise got in common?
A load of crap.
They both go round and try and get rid of cling-ons.
I've got two weeks at christmas, I've got a week's  two weeks in the summer  I've got an extra week  and christmas  no hold it, christmas  so
Ha!
Thirty nine days a year I'll be having.
Who gives a shit?
Me, cos it's  and groovy and you're 
So there!
Pardon?
True, true.
But there's one called operation fuck up.
got a bomb, what you do you know  
Only just switched it on.
car  you, you er  you break, break open the window and get it  and er  you cover their seats in syrup, all over so that you know, really sticky, golden syrup.
Er you then  fill their car with  whole car  and this is the really sick part of it  you put, you er rip, slash their, you put s you put their car  and then  your tyres and fill it with, instead of air you fill them with cement.
So when they do finally get their car  it goes about three miles to the gallon, and it, it really  
it on  with the music blaring.
it's worse when you've got 
put the kettle on.
I'm not picking on Emm.
I'm not picking on Emm.
None of those people know her so it doesn't matter.
Oh it don't matter, don't matter.
Nobody knows Helena  shall I?
Would you?
Well why should  me?
Nobody knows  shall I?
You then open up their petr you open up their erm  petrol tank 
Drink?
and tip
Yeah
Please
Yes please And.
Put it down a bit.
two bags of sugar into their petrol  and when the engine heats up it turns to caramel, you know like  like toffee.
And it blows all the gaskets and they have to have every single part of the engine taken out and cleaned 
 
that was hideous
I would love to do that.
Well it's a waste of time, you'd have to scrap the car then.
And then you and then you get that magnesium oxide, you get that magnesium ribbon and that  thermite and you erm you, you  
put that in.
and it melts your engine block  
Shit.
I'll forgive you 
 
Joanne  Joanne   Joanne  
What?
thing is  that men's dicks should be as big as their hands.
how small Andrew's hands are.
that Y-front.
Yeah it's about that wide  
Does it sprout five different endings does it?
They'd have to be, they'd need trimming  
Yeah 
Andy's got small fingers.
Stubby  they are stubby.
short and fat then?
hands, that's how hands should be 
They that is piano hands they are, they're short  they're long and skinny.
If you got a piece of A four paper you'd ha you wouldn't be able to fit it on 
A five.
got your hands full.
Hey And, I can see you better now.
Oh can you?
Yeah.
No, not really me is it?
Oh you look like  have you seen that er what's it  the hyperspace hotel?
Have you seen that one that
hotel.
on my head  on my head 
got that irritating voice and you sou you look just like him.
Yeah I know him well.
But he, he's got dark hair.
Ah yes
save me some.
ah  yes please!
Can't usually read them books.
I can't. 
sighted are you?
Are you short sighted?
Yeah.
Yeah not badly  are you?
Well
You will be soon.
Glasses could really fuck up your eyes.
I mean I can't even read that. 
What?
I'm not getting pissed this weekend.
Pardon?
Said I'm not getting pissed this weekend at all.
Nor am I.
So  we're gonna  Saturday week, Sunday week.
I can't afford it.
Nor can I.
mad  going mad.
I am yeah  
 
He's not going  are mad
Bye Shrimp .
See you tomorrow
See you tomorrow Shrimp
Bye, see you.
Bye
exactly what I'd do.
Oh I feel sick.
 
What you eating?
What?
spare one in there.
oh you're sick.
Yeah they're nice.
What are they?
biscuits.
dog biscuits  
 
Mm.
They're horrible  Bonio they're gorgeous.
Yeah lovely.
I have them for my tea.
Have you had them marrow bones?
Don't like them.
Sick ain't they?
Not the Bonio.
Go on then.
Shut up.
Look they already think you're a yob.
Yaaaaaa
 

I've gotta give that to somebody tomorrow.
Can't help being an animal.
There isn't, no.
What?
The whole first of the s er 
Ah!
I love this song.
Yeah don't beat me up now.
It's ace.
Is it you is it you fat dad?
It's my dad.
My dad 
You have  
I told, I told my dad that was 
What?
I told my dad that was   I chucked his  in the bin  and it had sort of stains on it  and I told him that was  
 

I wish I'd put on  Rich.
Eh?
Shall I put on 
What?
I don't like  Carter 
I like this.
ugly geek at the door.
This one's ace.
Ugly geek?
Mm.
It's  
Er  other two.
other two?
Shrimpy's gone home.
gone home Joanne's outside.
Joanne's outside smoking a weed.
Fagging.
She's in the kennel.
Smok oh smoking weed.
You really hate that so much  don't you?
In the kennel 
fagging.
Fag  before school, before I go in, dinner time when I go round the back  
Drinks mead 
   

bottle of mead.
Imagine Lee sat in a bottle .
He'd be upside down when you're drinking it.
Yeah.
it's crap.
That was a crap joke.
one of these we can try now.
We've tried  bomb and nap napalm.
Salt.
It looked like Colgate.
The other 
Salt and weedkiller works.
We tried it with diesel  no unleaded petrol we tried it with  didn't work very well.
Unlead unleaded petrol's better.
It, it exploded but not in fire.
It just went pwooooh and shattered glass everywhere.
Alright then.
on the floor?
Which is the one 
Not all over the top, there's all the glasses .
which is the one, which is the erm  like you put it erm, you can't see a flame like, it's alcohol innit?
Yeah 
What?
Alcohol burns and you can't see a flame can you?
No.
Yeah cos I was burning  
You can.
Dad, dad used to use it for the bonfires but when he, when he didn't have any petrol he used to use it on the bonfire and he had it in a secret bottle  and erm he got it too near and he didn't realize and all of a sudden it goes really really hot and he threw it and  everywhere.
Well in this  bomb it's  potassium permanganate 
you need potassium permanganate and petrol 
Have you ever thrown one?
No.
Never done I've never made a bomb.
 
on his face and he's going oh I've got, he says I can't  he's going no no my face is stinging and  he goes my face hurts, his face was red like, he goes it hurts, it's stinging and he's rubbing and everything   and he goes oh it hurts, it hurts and  laughing at him.
What?
drip down there
Yeah.
big red mark 
a nasty person.
He was a real  so and so
A real rotter.
say bastard   
The worse thing is when it gets in your eye when they put it on at the hairdressers after  ugh
Yeah I'm allergic to perm lotion.
Oh.
And it, and it like, it run down me face there and I had a big red mark on me face.
Oh yeah I saw that.
It's acid that's why.
Yeah they they they 
Acid  
when, in the hairdresser they put it on my hair and it went in my eye.
Probably 
Ah!
went aaaah
you know er all the blokes at work are going on a rave in Newcastle this weekend.
Yeah  oh  meant to be
They're going Saturday night  
have hair cut Andrew?
Andrew.
meant to be good for nightclubs.
I wanna go to  
have it shaved  
Did I tell you the name   They're place is called, oh there, there was er  couple of weeks ago, they had a strip show 
you know layered  
Yeah?
Yeah.
What?
 
well in, in erm  in erm  Plymouth they've got, they've got this band called Erotica, they've got another one called Boobs  and all these different  and he said they live up to their er names like.
Andrew.
my hair done .
Who gives a shit?
I'd love to have mine  shaved off from about there back.
I'd love to have my hair about 
What permed?
I'd like to have my hair 
No shaved from there back and then as it is at the moment in the front.
I'd like to have my hair about that long, about erm 
Oh A why do men insist on doing disgusting things to their hair?
I want my hair that long and er 
probably have it cut  the same way  
I I I I  I er I couldn't have it done cos of work but I'd love to have it done.
If I wasn't at work I'd have it done.
Oh 
and and that's what I want done, my hair about that long erm
You'd look a total knob Andrew.
be excellent.
And then I could put it all back in a ponytail except for a bit at the front dripping down.
Excellent 
 
It takes honestly it takes so much willpower to grow your hair it really does.
I know it that's why I cut mine.
It get, it gets, it gets to about that length 
no it gets to shoulder, it gets to shoulder length  well remember mine did,mine before I had it cut
Oh that wasn't shoulder length.
Yeah.
No well it was like down to there.
It was when it grew from here.
And that, and that, and that was a like a really .
It began to annoy me.
Yeah my hair was that long when I had it cut.
It really cheesed me off.
If you, you get it to a certain length  and it's a bit too short to have the layers cut out, cos you need it all the same length really and it pisses you off so much.
It's too, it's too long to do anything with and to short to
Yeah.
it's too short to
Cut  
like 
It's too sh 
Style.
look, start  yeah, too short to look stylish and too long to do anything with
Yeah.
so it just sort of there  
Yeah, too heavy innit sort of thing.
Yeah.
If you can have it c if you can have it cut all one length it's alright then.
Your perm's quite  now innit?
I was thinking of having extensions actually, in my hair  till it grew.
Having what?
Extensions.
Do you know how much they cost?
Yeah about forty quid.
Yeah that's not for a lot though, that isn't.
That's  for your whole head .
It is, forty quid.
I mean he just leaves the
You've gotta have your hair longer than that though.
you have, it probably you can't,ye yeah but my hair was the right length before.
That's when I was gonna have it done.
But er
Wanna keep  wanna keep mine short at the back now.
Yeah I think, I think 
You, you can't wash your hair for about  er when you have extensions 
I don't like men having long hair.
you can't wash your hair for about two months or something like that.
Don't suit them.
Cos   had it done, he never washes his, like erm went for about four months without washing his hair and it, it really did reek.
It was horrible, it just smelt.
If you leave it for so long though 
Really bad.
it starts cleaning itself and it's alright then.
Well his didn't.
But you have to leave it for like months.
Are you growing your hair again?
Are you?
Alright this is a good one 
I thought about having mine permed actually.
It won't suit you.
What?
It won't suit you.
Don't start that.
From my experience of perms  I wouldn't bother.
Perms are okay if   
Yeah but it depends whose hair it is.
having to look stupid  drop out and look okay  
Here you are And this is a good one  diskette fire  you  computer  you need a disk, some scissors, white or blue kitchen matches so  and clear nail polish.
The reason they've gotta be those colours is erm  and clear nail polish.
Carefully open up the diskette three point five inches for the best effect and it's like my Amiga one  remove the top covering from the inside, scrape a lot of match powder into a bowl  match powder.
After you have a lot, spread it evenly on the inside disk.
Using nail polish spread it over the match  mixture, let it dry, carefully put diskette back together  nail polish to seal it, do it on the inside where it came apart.
When that disk is in a drive the drive head  to read the disk which causes a small fire  inside  disk drive  ha ha ha ha, let the fuckhead try and fix that.
It melts all your disk drive.
Start all, start a fire.
Excellent eh?bomb, this is good.
Well on mine she did it once, it didn't work so she did it again for free and then it all started breaking off.
It fell out the day after.
It's probably your hair then.
Then I grew it out
then I grew it out and then it was all brittle still so I had it cut.
And now I'm growing it.
I shall grow it down into a bob and have it a bit long steppy bit at the back  and keep growing it.
I think you'd look good with like an asymmetrical bob.
at the back?
Yeah.
I hate them.
Do you?
I think they look nice actually 
at the back  like their bob's there and they go up at the back.
Like if you have it like there 
You know, you know Dawn ?
With really dyed blond hair and dark roots  curly?
yeah.
The one 
What?
Yeah.
yeah.
Goes up at the back.
She's got 
I hate them 
What?
They cut a small hole in a tennis ball, stuff all the match heads into the ball until you can't fit any more in 
Oh Rich 
that's gonna probably gonna cost you about
she's recording this.
So?
So?
So that's gonna ma that's gonna be about three quid's worth of matches.
Giving away secret information of how to make bombs.
Then tape over it with duck tape, make sure it is real nice and tight then when you see a geek walking down the street give it a good throw  you will have a blast.
That is ace.
It doesn't matter, it doesn't matter what you say.
Say.
Say.
Who are you giving it to?
 
Except that this is highly highly illegal information  
?
What?
what?
They're doing a survey 
Here you are, napalm napalm lightbulb.
on like what words different 
Heat kerosene and  gasoline in a double boiler, melt soap chips and stir in slowly, put somewhere and allow to cool.
Heat the thread of the bulb very carefully to melt the glue, remove thread slowing drawing out the filament, do not break the  electrical  or filament will, just won't work  pour the liquid into the bulb and slowly lower the filament back  dipped in some .
Redo the thread back on and turn it into a socket frequently used by the victim and get the hell out.
and like what accent people are talking at
Yeah.
Well it's how we, it's how we usually talk isn't it?
that much usually.
What?
We don't  that much 
No but I mean   conversation, it's conversation with my friends and conversation with my parents 
When the victim switches the switch he will be in for a big surprise.
Basically you've killed him.
It just blows the whole room up.
Have fun it says underneath .
till tomorrow.
I've only done three tapes, he gave me twenty.
He gave you twenty tapes?
Yeah here you are this is a good one, calcium  carbine bomb .
This is extremely dangerous.
And they wanted you to do all of them?
No.
You only have to do as many as you can.
Exercise extreme caution.
Obtain some calcium carbine this is  and can be found at nearly every hardware store.
Take a few pieces of this stuff, it looks like gravel 
You've brought a load round with you now have you, to do?
What?
Are you gonna do a load  tonight?
No.
I'll give him whatever I do.
and put it in a glass jar with some water, put a lid on tightly.
The carbine will react with the water to produce acetylene carbonate which is similar to the gas used in cutting torches.
Eventually the glass will explode from internal pressure, it will leave a burning ragged hole and you get a nice fire ball.
Be excellent wouldn't it?
Giving away trade secrets of how to make bombs here you know.
Is it a good microphone?
What?
microphone  
I don't know, probably not  probably  but at least 
It'll get you it won't get me  
Somebody has been spraying my aftershave.
What?
Yeah I can smell it.
Oh 
Obsession.
Mm.
I can smell 
Go and have a spray  get rid of the whiff.
It was probably yours weren't it?
Yeah.
Don't matter then.
No, what your whiff 
Don't keep mine in there cos he uses it.
What?
You use my deodorant if I leave it in there.
No I don't.
You do.
No  it stinks.
I bought one bottle of that and that stinks.
Have you smelt yours?
Haven't got any in there  
Not that one.
What, which one is it you had  not, you got yeah and you haven't got it any more.
It was really sick it was 
I though that  
What the one Shrimpy sprayed in my hair?
What?
Adidas.
I swear people hate my hair.
I've had 
No I like your Adidas,
What?
I'm not sure, it was sick whatever it was.
Andrew's deodorant sprayed in it I've had Andy being sick on my hair 
 
What?
One of, one of 
And
 Solo 
You know those little bottles of 
No it weren't  
Put, let's let's turn this crap off.
well I don't put any of that st 
Well Solo ain't very nice but th I ain't on about that.
No, the only little bottles about that big that I've got 
And
What?
you know the little bottles about that big that I've got?
And 
What?
you know those little bottles I've got about that big?
Six of them in that pack what you got from .
I got one of them and I had  and it's got that  in it.
And er that's the one you know with er   it's the one with the golf ball in it's lid  anyway 
Ah yeah.
and I spilt the entire contents of that over my shirt  one of my old shirts  and it's the only one I had to wear, I actually had to wear it, it absolutely reeked.
It still does smell a bit cos I haven't washed it since then and that was about three months ago.
Come here you fat animal.
Leave my dog alone you smelly git.
If you turd on the carpet you're eating it.
And your turd.
Here you are, this is a good one 
Sam, come here Sam.
Here is a recipe for a hell of a smoke bomb.
Four parts sugar, six parts 
Come here, come on Sam.
six parts potassium nitrate  which is, I dunno what that is actually, it says salt peter  next to it  someone called Peter and it's salt
Yeah.
nitrate  
 
Heat this 
 
heat this mixture over a low flame until it melts, stirring well.
Pour it into a pewter container and before it solidifies embed a few matches into the mixture 
Sounds like a  actually, low flame  
to use as fuses.
One pound of this stuff will fill up a whole block with thick white smoke.
anyway
What?
I'm telling you.
One pound that's hardly anything is it?
 
Dunno.
Selling it in August 
How do you stop this?
One pound is about er
Selling what?
My megadrive.
Oh.
How do you turn this off?
Oh yeah, why?
Buying a  Virtuality system.
heard that one.
Are you?
Two hundred and twenty nine quid.
Yeah.
What 
er portable home one.
oh what  do you get games on it 
Comes out in August.
or what?
Or is it 
What?
What is it for, games?
You know Virtuality?
Yeah I know what it is but 
The 
I mean is it
yeah but is it for  creating your own 
No it's erm  well it's 
worlds like?
You get, you can buy the games for it.
Yeah.
Don't know how much they're gonna be though cos if this system's only two hundred and twenty nine quid 
I thought it was like  driving but you're sitting in the car properly aren't you?
Well you've got shades on  so when you look around you see whatever's around inside the game.
 
ace actually.
show a different view
Yeah.
just go like that, excellent.
It will be quite hard as well cos say something's coming up behind you, the only way you can see is to go like that.
You have to keep looking, unless you have mirrors or something  you might  mirrors on it.
Yeah, might.
Yeah but it's 
You know 
still hard though innit?
They'll have a scanner  
animals.
That was our can of coke wasn't it?
It's only one can, they're not exactly gonna notice are they?
Yeah  
Your brother nicked three er bottles of lager and brought them round to my house on Saturday.
My dad knew he took them.
And he, you know, he's not gonna know if Andrew goes through there and suddenly disappears and don't come back through that door for  
got a proper keyboard lead.
 
Cos he, he went through he went out the garage, come back in here, shouted to Jo as loud as he could 
Jo I've got them.
He goes Jo got them and laughed as loud as he could, and then blew off down your house.
He didn't even come back out through that door, you know my dad wasn't very suspicious or anything!
He didn't give a shit.
He knew.
Yeah but he didn't give a shit.
I only drunk one of the, you
He didn't give a shit cos he knew you  
I think there's one still in the fridge actually.
What happened to the other two?
There were two.
 
Well  drunk one 
There was two, what happened to the other one?
My brother drunk it.
You got  album ?
Somewhere.
Put on Civil War.
I haven't written down 
Think it's the first one or second one.
Yeah but it's in no order  I just, I  record.
Eh?
I du I dunno  w I dunno which tape is which.
Oh.
so no way.
Alright?
Leave  alone.
What?
 

 

Oh yeah  eh has it been up someone's arse?
Ah
Put it back and have another one then 
They taste better.
Got  
Go on.
Oh great, give me loads.
Are there any oranges there?
Mm?
No there's  one banana.
shouldn't I?
Mm.
Yeah that would have been dead funny wouldn't it?
head whack into that.
Yeah literally dead funny.
Dead funny.
You'd have hit 
I wouldn't urinate.
You would.
Only cos I'm incontinent.
It's what?
Africa?
not.
We are.
Caught on there didn't I?
 

Is it  ah!
It's a drip 
I don't believe it!
Mr  's wife is in this.
Have you got the Advertiser, my cousin's in it   And, have you got the Advertiser?
Somewhere.
My cousin's in it, he looks really silly.
My  
Look.
Look at that look at that.
Alright then.
No 
Is that still on?
What?
Yeah.
Oh well.
Yeah 
Yeah 
permanent orgy.
Ha ha ha.
Excellent I think.
Mm.
That is shit that is.
What?
I know.
the music 
 
Where's   fag for two weeks.
Boo hoo.
 

What's he in it for?
Mr  's wife that is.  so bad.
is that the one?
Yeah what's he in here for?
Being ace at something 
Your cousin ?
Oh at ?
Yeah.
I saw that.
It's a crap picture.
Ah that's him  
Which one?
That one.
Oh how  
Yeah I  
 
 

  

And have you bought the new  one yet?
Not yet.
Why?
Ow!
 

Deputy head    what a name.
Better than Mr  though.
We are very pleased with the results indeed  wow  
Our deputy head's called Mr  
How did Pete cope with that?
What?
What?
What did you say And?
What did Helena say?
What did Helena say?
Andy, what did Helena say?
What did he say?
All I said was 
No  
How did Pete cope with that.
Yeah but 
And he 
yeah what did you, what did she say?
Nothing.
She didn't catch on at first.
Yeah but what was you on about ?
Watch where you're kicking woman.
Give us a nibble.
That's Emily.
What did you mean, how did Pete cope with that?
What a stupid cow she looks there .
Emily who?
 
No Helena you're meant to hurt him not give him enjoyment.
What?
Said she's meant to hurt you not give you enjoyment.
What?
 
 
I'm afraid.
Look at my hands.
Oh excellent.
I think Helena deserves all she gets.
Why?
got some excellent CD's here And.
Cos she's got a big gob.
Oh yeah.
Look.
Andrew.
Yes.
A coat like yours is in here for sixty quid.
The one you knackered, no thanks to me.
Red Dwarf's on in one minute.
She deserves all she gets.
Why?
Well she 
What an honour for you.
I said I was sorry.
 

She    Actually I, I  
about Pete.
Shut up  
Not a lot.
Just ask about love bites and you'll know it all.
Go on Helena.
ignore you. 
Oh it's not a tape recorder either.
So?we've talked about everything on tape so it don't matter.
When?
And when did you get that?
We, we've talked about 
Oh I see 
And what's that like?
What is it?
It's crap.
Is it?
I bought that and I bought 
Yeah.
and they're both the same thing.
No And there's no need to worry mate.
It was on the first tape.
Oh that's okay then.
Oh I'll see you.
 
tomorrow.
Two twenty five pound Marks and Spencers vou er Marks and Spencers vouchers for doing it.
It's crap innit?
Jo,
Er this is shit yeah, take that.
Love bites go all around the body     
Where exactly were these love bites?
Oh there's Helena's mum,ring Sheila on 7tel;.
Where exactly were the love bites by the way?
For hot sex.
Patient patient lady instructor, professional instruction, door to door service, excellent rates 
Where were they Helena ?
and very reliable .
Would I tell him, no?
I'll leave my imagination to run wild.
 
What?
Now you know what it's like.
Richard  trust your petty brain to think 
it does it automatically because   the Beach Boys, ooh that sounds good.
We don't  
No thank you 
 

He wasn't doing anything on it.
It's alright, it knows anyway.
What?
Got a nose?
No Scott's got a nose.
  
What?
What?
What?
that is   Remember that time in France  when you went  on me ?
You went ape  you went ape poo on me 
You deserved it, you're ugly.
Fact that I was calling him a murderer had nothing to do with it.
Called me a murderer .
Kill the bastard.
We didn't.
Smelly.
That thing there
What?
that thing in black
Look, you've got some as well except  
 
You, you planted them on me didn't you?
Oh you're socks are disgusting.
Ah you caught it then!
Ha ha ha  ha ha ha  
Yeah butterfingers.
Ooh!
See er  I made it 
No I didn't, no.
Genoa beat Liverpool 
Liver if Liverpool scored off all their chances and if Genoa   theirs Liverpool would have won about twenty to four.
tough shit weren't it?
No that's the time they would have won, twenty to four
Oh, twenty to four?
Yeah.
They played for ages
Yeah.
What happened to the referee, blow the whistle too early?
No, no he didn't, he didn't blow it at all no, it's not on till four twenty this morning er three forty this morning that he blew it in, in the end.
Jeez.
Yeah.
And they're all knackered?
They are  yeah.
Bet the pitch is a bit messy now.
So long I don't think it was, it ended quite soon  
soon 
that's why I'm changing the disc to put in something else that is a bit longer and slightly better   
Like your willy  
Like your willy   Don't think so.
Your willy?instead of open and close.
Cos your a dur
I'm a dur I'm a dur brain .
A dur a dur brain.
A dur brain 
Dipstick.
You're chronic Rich you are.
Ah yeah?
You are chronic.
I'll give you some grief if you say
I'm wearing a pair of  griff actually.
that's, that's
That's true.
that's, you what?
That is.   good one on Rich?
I am
Which one are you putting on?
The 
Put  on.
Not yet
Yes!
not till I've heard it.
You will.
Will not.
You will.
Not.
I will slap your end.
I will not properly put it on then.
You  will.
Ee  you're obsessed 
I used to have a teacher called Mrs .
Your obsessed.
I did.
At nursery school I had a teacher called Mrs .
Okay, no-one's interested.
But everyone laughed.
Richard
Yeah
 

How can he have athlete's foot?
He's a lazy bastard.
Me lazy?
The second remix on the er on the  twelve inch.
What?
Yeah.
We'd have put remix two on it.
Tell you what it's 
It's crap.
No it isn't, it's good.
It's crap.
It's not.
It is.
I've got a brilliant cure for that actually.
Just chop your feet off.
Chop his head off.
You wouldn't know about athlete's foot would you Andrew?
Considering you've never done anything in your life athletically.
you try it.
You try it.
What time do you get up?
You're hardly ever up before I go to work.
If I, if I get up at seven
You're lucky you are.
I got up at eight this morning  
I got up at seven which is late for me 
just go back to bed.
I get up at eight every morning.
Ah you're lucky you are.
I have to get up at quarter to nine, how do you think I feel?
Shit Rich.
If I was you I'd give it up.
And I, and I finish at half four.
Eh?
Tell you what Rich  
you fin you finish at half five you do oh yes, but me, I have to wait all the time till half four   minus one hour longer that is.
Yeah you actually have to do longer 
It works out the same but
it works out the same yeah but you go twenty five minutes over don't you?
about five minutes early no  
No they fi five to  they break at 
We don't have  we don't have an hour for lunch.
We only get half an hour 
What you doing?
pleasing myself.
Giving him a different style 
 
Oh yeah   that would be funny.
Better than believing in a god.
Mm.
It depends what you've been brought up with though dunnit?
Yeah but if you think about it, people laugh when you say oh like I believe in fate, bit more easier to believe than believing in somebody up there like  looking at us innit?
I  
 
I couldn't believe in that.
Everyone's entitled to their own opinion.
You haven't got any opinions though cos you're a 
Shut up.
wouldn't like that would you?
Ugh funny  
You ugly cunt.
He's always doing that, he's reading or drawing or something and he's laughing to himself.
that's hilarious that is.
No  yeah
It's your favourite now.
No
What?
Am I right?
No  you're not 
It is  am
not
I am 
And
Yeah
spending three ninety nine in  
Is that all it costs for a C D  then, three ninety nine?
 

No er in between school and not working?
I'm going to college, and university, and law school.
Well how do you think you're gonna pay for all that?
Government grant  and my parents are paying for it anyway.
Government, do you know how much grant you'll actually get?
Not much but my mum and dad said they'll pay the rest.
I get all of my grant.
As long as I get good erm GCSE's.
I got two grants
The  shut up
The government pays all of my grant, or will be.
Does it?
It will do when I go to  university.
It won't pay all my brother's cos they're cheapskating bummers.
Yeah that's because your family works still isn't it?
Mm.
You don't ha not if you, not if you chop your legs off they don't.
Well me dad's eighty two, I mean he's hardly gonna go out to work is he?
 
He can go on the game.
He does.
He does already.
Goes after poultry does he?
Yeah.
Give it here.
I'm reading it.
Give it here.
in a minute.
Look at that.
I don't want   stop trying to get me in a  
Sorry
I was going to tell you about Margaret
Oh yeah, Margaret and Snowy, yeah
they went to this Howstead Abbey
Yeah
because they've got a season ticket and they got to feed the ducks and
He's
so they er  to get the stuff, shove it in the boot, lock it up,
yeah
somebody had robbed them, didn't they?
Must of seen them putting it in, they had fifty quid away, she had fifty quid on her
Yeah
in the handbag
And she left it in the boot?
Yeah
Did she?
Well, is that better than carrying a bag, you never know do you?
No
I mean if you carry a bag somebody will mug you and pinch it off you like
Yeah
Anyway they had the  her handbag away and so they got all her trust cards and all this business you know
Yeah  er did they get the police?
Did they get the police?
Yeah
Oh
they got the police, but, I mean the police say er  yeah we're, we'll probably know who's done it, which they do don't they?
Yeah 
But er whether we can prove it
Mm 
Apparently the, he said they've had one of them up in court twenty seven times and they haven't been able to prove it yet
 

which they can't, they've got to get somebody who sees them take them haven't they?
Mm 
He's got a handle bar
What that bloke sitting behind?
Yeah
Looks like Mr  oh having a ride in
He just sat there though
Mm
Oh I wonder what, I wonder what er, what party he's for?
Sshh
Oh no
Sshh
sshh
sshh
it's Neil 
I hope it's not them two walking along the
again
I hope it's not them two walking on the, on the sea front when the, when he falls over.
No it was
Sshh, sshh
Nice brown top 
Why don't they show us all Britain?
Sshh  that is Britain, it's just in the winter
Sshh
Oh no
Sshh
cor this is a bit ugh  ah let's all clap for Neil, er, er what's he gonna do go off and have a boxing match?
Sshh
Sshh
why don't you shut up for a moment
Oh sorry
cos she's recording and she wants to hear somebody speaking on it 
just sounds a bit silly if you can only hear the telly 
They came in today to give us this talk about kind of er, kind of erm, money we're gonna get, whatever today, you know, like they said about the Poll Tax 
You want one on , you want one on
Eh?
said here about the Poll Tax
What it say?
Well it was with every community charge benefits and everything
Yeah
said, said that at the moment we're paying  twenty per cent, twenty per cent er Poll Tax  erm  we're on about thirty five pound a week, the full grant, that's how much we get you know if you level it out you know
get the full grant
Yeah, well, like you know, the full the grant is two thousand whatever
Yeah
two thousand whatever, not you're saying that parents subsidize that, you know
Yeah
whatever you, whatever your grant is whether it's eight hundred pounds, parents subsidize that up to the two thousand whatever
Yeah
erm, up to the grant status, and then everybody should be on two, er thirty er thirty six pound a week out of that's got to come everything you've got, everything you've got to pay for to drink, whatever
Mm 
and erm  like I said up to about, up to about two years ago you could claim housing benefit with which you could pay your rent, and that was a great help to students you know, but now that's been stopped, but you don't get anything like that, so you've got thirty five pound a week to pay for food, rent, community charge, everything
Yeah
right, you should of seen the look on everybody's face
Yeah
like you just, they just went, oh and but I think it's finally, I mean I was in the
about how much it's, you know what a struggle it is, yeah 
Well you knew, cos we told you 
I knew what it was 
what you get 
but everybody thinks that it's gonna be easy
Yeah because they think they're going to get more, don't they?
Or they thought they were  and the only people they're going to get any more from is the parents, nowhere else, nobody else is going to give them anything  I've got no illusions about it, I don't expect you to get anything from anywhere else, and I know that you, you wouldn't get anything from anywhere else  because they, they've cut it, they've cut it to the bone and the only people that can afford to go now and to live in  anything like
A decent
Yeah, is people who have got rich parents.
It's like Jane her, her mum and dad, her, her dad's rich, they're er is rich is oh er
Lives at Bromsground?
Yeah
Yeah
he's oh, oh
and Claire said to me oh well Labour if Labour get in we'll get, we'll get a, you know, we'll be much better off, we'll get a much better grant, er Jane goes but oh we'll get, we'll get every erm, my mum and dad will get loads of other things er dad, I won't be able to pay for it, I goes well no because you probably get, you get the housing benefit back
You won't get better grants, you won't though, cos it won't have time to work through
No it might, it might 
But you will do 
be the year after
Yeah
Yeah, well for the last year 
but I think 
I think, I think actually, I think they will try to do something actually because if they, if they do away with the loans thing
Yeah
they'll have to try do something won't they?
I know the way, I know, but 
To be honest
you don't, it's not going to be you
just because you vote for Labour 
oh no, no it's not no
No I mean of course not 
and then they can't say alright, oh students give them hundred pound a week, he give them none, give them none 
no, they can't do that because of the state of the economy 
and then if 
I know that, but 
You've got to be realistic like ain't you?
but surely, but surely  I mean surely they'll be able to restore the housing benefit
Well hopefully they'll be able to do something
Well it says in that, in that thing I've got they're gonna restore a fair system of grants
Yeah
of grants, that's, that's the thing I looked at, it didn't say a fair grant
No
it said grants
Yeah
so  I mean even if they don't bring in, oh the housing benefit
But I mean
they'll bring in something a housing grant 
you know, I mean, on 
to, to my, to my mind, when 
on April the tenth they're not going to be able to go
No when they hear it all day 
oh, you know, that's, that's it because for thirteen years they have dismantled the social system, that's what they've done in thirteen years, so they can't say overnight, we'll put it all back because there isn't, there, there isn't the finance there because they've spent it all to have done what they've done
Yeah
because they've sold everything off like gas and electricity and everything and all the resources they've got for it they've spent, to supplement everything else, so the money won't be there, and, and the income from the electricity and that isn't going to the Government it's going to private enterprise
Yeah
so, so it's not gonna be there, and unfortunately it's going to take a while, because we're in such a deep recession and recession is bad, and it's not getting any better
Yeah it won't
any more
What
It, it'll take a long time before it starts to buck up.
Why, why do they say, that for the election it will take them three or four years to put, whatever they promise into operation?
Yeah, to put it right, to start to put it right 
Well they're they're education promises are, we'll do this within two years, we'll do this within 
Yeah 
three years
yeah well I mean they'll want to and they've got 
within three years you're leaving 
Yeah, but they've got
They've got to help people like me but I don't know 
they've got to try and show 
what, you shouldn't think 
that they are doing something 
You should just you this is what I'm trying to tell 
you shouldn't think what's it going to do to me 
this is what I'm trying to tell everybody at school, you shouldn't be thinking oh, how's it gonna effect me, what I'll do if 
No 
No because you should help, think of a society as whole 
because, that, this is, the , I said to this kid the other day, he goes oh, like Ian was arguing with them when I went in
Yeah
and he was going oh all what the Tories haven't done for you, and he goes and what are Labour gonna do for us?
I goes well they'll improve the grant to start off with, he goes well it won't be in time to benefit us, I goes well you shouldn't just be thinking about yourself
No 
No that's the trouble with people
Yeah
They're just, they're just bothered about, about themselves 
Everyone, everyone thinks of themselves, it's like on their, all them people who are under that certain amount, they're all gonna be going oh well in here
Yeah
we'll vote for them, then
Yeah
and people do that don't they?
Well it's like , it's like Richard  today, he goes well what, well what are Labour gonna do for us?
So I goes well, they'll probably, they'll probably erm  er give better grants and restore erm, er housing benefit of sorts, whatever happens 
Well is he going to university?
Yeah
What doing?
Dunno 
or something, and, he goes
But the only, I think the only course he'll pass is mucking about course, let's see who can muck about for the next three years the most.
I can't understand it, they've got to have a decent grade to go to university, but they seem to think that they can get in on D's and E's, if he gets D's and E's, he's not going anywhere, except to work 
No, I, I wouldn't I wouldn't expect it, I reckon 
because I mean, because
come on
He ain't, because to me you, you not got, you're wasting your time 
Stupid innit?
If you haven't got, if you haven't got enough discipline to get a good grade in your O levels
in school then you're not 
then you no way gonna have enough discipline to get any sort of grade at university 
because you live in 
That's for the testing innit?
Yeah, because, I mean you're living at home when your doing A levels, you, you haven't even got 
And you got 
the discipline of your parents to say get up there and do something have you?
No
But some people don't, Adeleine got that, his parents don't tell him to get on with it, half, half the people at school they got that 
Well if I didn't, I mean I don't think, you do enough either of you do enough, but in, you know I mean 
Do you know what I was talking to Nicola
I don't care what other people do I'm saying I don't think you 
So, so what kind 
do enough either of you 
so what kind of time have I got at the moment?
No, you ain't got
Well I know you're doing that, but you still got 
Yeah, but 
to find time to do your work because your exams are still going to be on the same day aren't they?
I know , I'm doing my work at school, I've, but
I know you ain't got a lot of time now, it's, I mean they, when, it's important to, that's just important to do what you're doing now actually, because there's, yeah 
Well yes I know it is, but the exams are still on the same day 
breaks
so you've got to find time to do the 
How?
certain amount 
Well look at it this way it'll all be over by Saturday anyway 
There all be 
education is like today
Well no I know it is im , I know it's just, it's important to involve yourself and
Yeah
but David has decided to involve himself now, in the last year of it, the last time of his year 
yeah, but can  
he could of done that in his fourth year and his third year 
No he, no he can't cos
No, I won't, I want to do it 
I, I 
yeah 
I didn't get involve with it, I mean I got involved in it and I did it
 
 
I wasn't actually 
If there's one, if there's one next year I will, depending on what it is of course 
I did I 
 
Mm 
but I wouldn't, I wouldn't mind next year, but it's just too much hassle just at the moment, and if you look hardly anyone out of our year's in it are they?
No.
But David's decided to get involved in this in his sixth year coming up to his A levels 
Look it's four days 
and he's had his hair cut ah, ah
Yeah, he had to borrow the money off me to do that
It'll only, it'll be over on, over on Saturday, I'll have, once I've seen Pauline, I'm gonna, I'm gonna get, get in touch with her on Saturday  then I'll get my geography project done, I can't do anything until I've got this, bloody project out the way, can I?
That's what Crawley said to me wasn't it dad?
What?
Get the geography project out the way first
Yeah
wasn't it?
Yeah
Yeah 
have you done it?
He's got this thing to do with his computer when he can get hold of it to get the computer 
But I've done , I've done a lot though haven't I?
Yes you have been doing, you have been working on it yes, yes
Up to 
up to this last week when you've been doing 
Yeah 
them, yeah
But  what can I do, I can't be two places at once 
Oh no, no
If
says you've got to do that, you've got to do that 
 
nothing, Miss
No it's right, now, now what
 
Miss  doesn't do actually mate, eh?
Miss  asked, asked me and Claire and Lisa all at the same time
Yeah
to do it, and
yes
What about Jane, is it Jane?
Yeah
who lives out at Tidybig?
No Lisa, Lisa lives out at Tidybig
What's that girl who comes in the Datsun?
Lisa
Lisa, what about her parents, are they well off?
Well
The man from down er
he was in the club tonight 
he was in the club, yeah 
Who?
The trouble maker 
The computer man's husband 
er son
 

No the computer, in the corner
, er 
Yeah, he was in the club tonight
Mr or young
They're doing well 
is it, ah, they used to be su , according to everyone he was such a so and so, he er, he's, he used to be barmy, he was like the clo , close barmy man and he used to like chase people around with bricks and stuff  and everyone used to hate him and like Julian and Andy used to beat him up all the time 
How old is he?
Dunno, seventeen, eighteen
Mm 
I erm
he was in there with this other lad
Jane, no not Jane, Lisa
What the
but they've got erm, I erm, a massive mortgage on it
Mm
like a really big mortgage, but
I wonder if they, is she going to university, or hoping to?
Yeah
Is that, is that the  larger one?
That's Nicola
That's Nicola isn't it?
Somebody wants threaten the staff in the Abbey National
It was you
It was your dad with the wig on
I recognise you mate
a wig without glasses, yeah
How bloody useless
They threaten them to
I bet they asked them to fill in a form for it
Excuse me 
Sorry 
can you just fill in a form?
dad, dad we're not giving up just at the moment 
I'm sorry but we can't do it 
What do you mean?
You
this is a French private building society
We're not giving out mortgages at the moment 
I'm sorry we're not giving money away today
Yeah, but if you would just like to fill in a form, we will be with you as soon as possible
In the next three years  
Oh this is  Rilate 
Is this, is this us?
Yeah
I'll switch it off a second then
Didn't see anything
and when you use
yeah, when you speak it flickers
Oh right, so it's like the erm
Is it recording now?
Yeah 
So anyone can get
well if everyone goes
Sshh 
yeah
You go  there  God he only looks about five  Mark , don't he look like Mark  though?
No
He does
No he doesn't
I reckon it was Mark 
  

Well you would if you thought it was peculiar wouldn't you?
I think  Oh that was the erm, yeah 
Yeah about the train spotting and all that they said didn't they?
Yeah 
We knew it was
didn't we mum?
Mm 
Cor look at all this lot they've got
Oh, I've pinched it all
you nicked that  how do you possibly get that out of somebody's house?
Well it's like those lads that time who tried to nick a snooker table, they got it, they got it about a hundred yards
so they just left it in the middle of the road 
See those paintings at the back, I reckon we should of had one of them
Why don't you phone in and pretend it's yours?
No, we'll, we'll take that one in off the wall, right
A nice little table, you'd think somebody would recognise that wouldn't you?
Yeah
Or that chair at the back
Look, I'll tell you what, we'll, we'll hide that one and we'll pretend that, that's
Jane was
yesterday
Jane, what, er at
yeah, she, erm they got into the kitchen, but
mm
 

see, you'd think someone would recognise that wouldn't you?
Mm 
Ah 
when they were painted weren't it?
Oh 
Oh I thought it was nice
yeah 
that's nice isn't it?
Mm 
 

Mm  I don't like that 
Look at all those paintings out, have one of them
They're easy to steal though aren't they paintings?
Yeah
What
Remember that fellow at work who walked into that gallery and just put it under his coat?
Yeah
Yeah and walked out with it 
He tried to flog it on the bus 
Is that
yes please
Please
Yes please 
oh it's got hearts on
three
Two  Right, let's go round photographing all the chairs 
You haven't got anything of real sentimental value anyway have you?
Why do you mean?
Well nothing that you
What about me?
no, no
you know, that you're absolutely
Well no, but I wouldn't want to be able to replace these at the prices that these cost us, unless 
I'm gonna sell it all when you die, get loads of money and then buy some stools to sit on, what
 

Ooh dear, oh blimey  you don't, you don't realise all this, the time's going on
of these organise crimes, you never hear about them 
No you never hear about any of them, do you?
What?
You know all the murders that go on, and everything
No you don't hear about any murders do you?
Someone's trying to get into the toilet with dad  
Mummy, mum
What?
Go on then
Who's come in?
 

Good lord 
I bet that's, this is when they started to get, get in 
Oh yeah
Ta, thank you
Oh ace  mum
Mum
your glasses
they've steamed up
 

oh dear oh dear, I'd hate to have a broken jaw  Now what you gonna do?
I'll be running the other way  you'd think there'd be loads of people going to pubs and stuff wouldn't you?
I don't know how all these people notice these things, I never notice anything like that
You don't keep your eyes open do you?
Do you?
Mm
Do you notice things like that?, oh 
actually if it was down to the
What did you say?
Oh don't it's only been on for about er, the last half an hour  it's not it's a cross a crucifix is got bigger on it.
I wondered when you'd say that Helena, with your little bit of wisdom
Well it's not my fault is it he's illiterate
What
a know all
I'm not a know all
Sshh
What
Yes you are, you're a know all
Helena is a know all
Shut up
it's the only way anyway
Tim the airman, Tim the airman, er, er, er, er
You on the tape
Yeah, oh funny with that
I think you'd better tape erm, put that on and tape it
No 
a police officer, what's he been doing for the last
Well he might not he might not 
two months 
work for them any more
You recognise them don't you?
Mm, I suppose
He might work for somebody else, or not working weekends
Just send it to the prison and they say yeah, you know send their photographs and everything and people
Yeah
look at that and they'll say that's, that's that
 
So and so and all that, yeah
You know  six months, can you remember it, that
yeah
It's just that, that's overcome as
won't it, just might, might 
Yes just that slight thing, yeah, yeah 
and that fills in with five other things
Yeah
it makes it up like 
Right, I'm off to bed
'Night
Goodnight
Oh he's so childish
sleepy tight
Don't let the beddy buggies bity
Don't let the beddy buggies bite you 
Personally I think you're flipping barmy
Perhaps we are 
Oh does my voice sound funny on there though, oh
er 
What?
Just
Ah I bet they do though if it's the same people that's operating, they're going round murdering people 
Serial killers in Lincoln
Well   my only sunshine  
 

Oh I
Ruby Wax pain in the backside 
I can't 
Ruby Wax
Oh I like her 
I'm off to bed
What's my jealousy?
Jealous you greedy pig 
I am 
I've just become somebody dumb
No you haven't
What are you holding it for?
because
against me
Why don't you put it in your pocket?
Cos it won't make any noise then
Pick it up, stick it on your pocket
No
like so, see
Oh how special does that look?
On your tie
No, I'm not sticking it on my tie
Can't we have a big conversation, please, juice and, oh
and there's third years there, no, I'm not, no, I refuse 
You refuse, oh I want it
I've got to go down to graphics
Let's go
you did promise
I did promise yeah
Anyway I've got a question, I'm asking about the, the availability of a green spray can
Hiya Ally
ah you take the piss so bad
Mm, nice bum
What
I think I'm going to elope
How's that for excitement, I can see, I can tell
don't be silly
squeeze his brief line 
Ah
Hi 
I'll hold it for you.
Sure I'll be able to come down, I'm not gonna get told off or anything like 
Course you're not , I'll just say
Oh who
with Claire? nobody 
Nobody 
see
so, I do, you're not going to get killed, I just say Mr  you threatening Mike and he'll go no Helen because I'm incredible scared of you and I'll go I know you are
I bet he doesn't, is Edward doing Adidas?
No only me
she's designing er swimming costumes
Oh is she?
Let me see yours
er what, what, what
Have you still not done anything?
Well I've done my introduction
That's it that's all she's done 
and analysis and that's it
Well done Helena there's loads there isn't there just so much 
Where's that that bit you did on erm
That one little, oh, how special
they're not even
They're not supposed to be
Oh good
they're suppose to be like that, that's my best bit that  I'm doing well
Helena
Yeah
do you think we're gonna do some work today?
I suppose, I better do
not at all 
Oh sorry I slipped 
Oh, oh
What was Christian, was Christian a great help was he?
He was
I liked the bit when you were going I don't know what to do
I haven't got a clue what to do
do what we do, just walk away
Go whoopsy-daisy, bye then
right I'm going down to graphics
well so I like school work  course we're not gonna get done, got Mr  under my thumb
Where we doing it?
Pardon, graphics room, what other room?
lock the door to let themselves in, so obviously we don't want anybody in here.
OK
Alright?
Oh what a shame I won't be able to do my homework, watch me weep  what it's
glue and stuff, that's all
It's all the grease and metal and, ooh grime
Oh no what a shame I won't be able to do any work, oh boo hoo  I am so upset about that
Now what you gonna do then, what you gonna do, have you got one more lesson?
I've got one more lesson this afternoon
Yeah, but you ain't gonna do loads in one lesson are you?
Yeah, I'll be able to finish my one design
Ooh one design
that, that one with the lines on, I've got to spray that green
Why?
I thought you were supposed to be designing a
I am, that's the design to go on it  I'm gonna have to go and put it back now
Is it locked, no they go out to the pub on a Friday
Oh do they?
Yeah
Well dear me what a shame
I don't know
teachers eh, who'd have them?
I can't answer that
so er, what's this design then?
That's what I'm doing, except that it's not gonna look like that any more 
I like the arms on the t-shirts
Well of course it's filling, just a quick sketch isn't it?
Yes 
I mean you know I can't draw
Wonderful, what does that say?
What's it supposed to say?
Wimbledon 
Oh that's brill, I must admit that's really good, OK
No it isn't it's rubbish
Don't let me mock you, it's really good
It's pathetic and you know it
No, no, no I didn't say
can I just have a quick look at your worse
Where'd you stick this?
Stick it in my, your losing my bits of paper, all my importantly file bits of
Oh wow!
What a hairstyle 
I know it's cool isn't it?
I've got to go and do some work
Have you, why?
Why?
only a folder
A folder, oh
Yeah
no it isn't, he, he said that's rubbish  oh did you hear about oh yes you were there when we put hair
In her shoes 
and she put them on?
Yeah
And she, she had a right go at me yesterday, right, er, this afternoon she goes, oh I took it out before I put me shoe, me foot in it, killjoy
She probably didn't
What's a matter with that, I think it's good
I know
except for the knees
What?
The knees are a bit erm
I'm sorry, I'm sorry I'm not a bubbling Picasso
It's erm, yes, actually the skirt's not, oh well it's your drawing, I like the, you've got the shoulders and the head right, I can never do that, I could never get the portions right
give me just a little more time 
that's only what I've written in my analysis and that
You haven't done nothing yet, so how can you analyze it?
Oh
Is it analy analyzing it?
Mm, where do I stick this now Helena?
Put it back in my folder.
Did you have a nice game of football?
Did you have a nice game of football did you?
Can we join you, can we?
We're real demons with the goal we are
Excuse me, I am
no cos I'm not into volleys are we, we'll tackle them
breaking their legs and kicking them in their bollo I mean balls, in the, in the, in the
Testicle area
Let's go and sit down in the thing
Are we?
Ah, I don't think I could, you know
where you going?
no, come on
oh no, it's nice and quiet, oh hello  sorry but we're not taping this conversation or anything.
It's come off actually Helena
Who's is it?
Is it?
Oh it's mine, it's mine
It's not hers really, let's have a look 
Ah
Isn't it wonderful
you should hide it a bit more than that
Well you can't really, but no one notices, but I'm not doing it on purpose, it's for a survey, I get twenty five pounds for, mm, watch me weep
Mm, and what do you do on the survey?
Just record my conversations to everyone
Why?
I'm doing a survey
Who?
This er dictionary company
I don't believe you
A dictionary company?
You don't buy a dictionary company
Where do you think it's coming from 
Are they gonna, are they gonna hear this now?
No they're not
They are
I thought it was 
they are honestly aren't they?
Oh erm, where did you 
I am doing this honestly
where did you see this then in a magazine or something?
No, my, they came round to my house 
honestly I swear it on my mother's grave
it's not it's my Walkman, they gave me a Walkman, they gave me twenty tapes, I'm not joking
Let me have a look at this Walkman
I don't believe you had
Smell of garlic?
Might be my
on me sandwiches
No it's not
I've just had a Polo  all they're looking at is like what kind of accents you talk in
Oh god they've got a great big problem with Helena then
and what kind of 
Oh no 
and what kind of words like different people use
At the end of the tape you only get, I think you really needed 
Did she send for you?
No she said
see you, bye 
Bye 
It's not on again is it?
Yeah  smell of garlic it might be my cheese and onion sandwiches
No it's not cheese and garlic
I've just had a Polo, do you want one?
No thanks
Stop putting it on Helena
no I'm not
I told you, you never get into drama school
We are now in the changing rooms, it's really boring 
there's lots of smelly stuff like
Iona's bag
a pair of knickers 
They're not knickers it's a flipping
Cami 
camisole, Iona's knickers, oh yeah she's gonna leave her knickers on the floor isn't she?
Shall I put some wet in that?
about
about this bra top thing she's got and how it's got a hole in it and she was trying to think back how it got this hole in it and she remembered that Mark  put his fingers through it 
Andy 
No it was Mark , I can remember it happening when she 
 
what
she can't force him 
I went out with him 
he does, he looks just like him.
Emma went out with him for about two months
Did she?
no
Did I see him when we went to the fair, I see at the
and with those boys 
Blonde one
I don't know to tell you the truth 
Was Mark there?
Was Mark there?
I think so, I think he was there yes he was, yeah he was 
 

he was the tall blonde one
no they haven't, I'm just gonna, I don't care, any more
what?
Who's it from?
Erm
I'm sweating like anything
especially if it's tighter
Oh
She better not pull it anyway, I, I, I was
I asked three teachers where she was and they said she wasn't in
and they didn't know where she was
went to staff room and nobody knew he was
She went to the staff room, they said she wasn't in the staff room, but then she left
Mrs  anywhere she went, who's Mrs 
Yeah
I've got two English teachers today
you're not fat
I am
You're not
Oh I know it's huge
I am, it's grotesque isn't it?
Mm
I'm obese
Do you want to know why I'm wearing two pairs of knickers because
she wets herself
She won't tell us the truth, but I know it, she wets herself, she doesn't want it to show on the chairs in school
incontinent
I think that's so
Oh no, our dog needs one of them
my dog's incontinent
I can't think straight, I really can't
Oh yeah, huge
you know, is it
you walk in and there's a few
you know the pub
yeah, you, right by Next, the bottom entrance to Next, there's a sports shop there
Oh I know it
I searched for Christmas and I wanted it
you got it?
Anybody else?
hello
What's that, is that a microphone?
Yeah
Why?
Taping everybody's conversation
eh, oh, they've just all fallen to pieces, here you can have the rest
Compilation what?
Ah gee 
Compilation 
I've got about two here
I'm taping it now
Shit
I am
Why are you?
A survey thing
Are you being serious?
Yeah
no she's not
you can't show this because I didn't put a bra on
she's got a microphone on her blazer
She has
I have, yes it is
Testing, testing three, four, five 
 
I can't count
rewind it, let's have a listen
I ain't got the headphones
I don't believe you
It is
let's have a look
OK this conversation was between Alison  Nina, Helena, Caroline and somebody who is unknown, OK
What you gonna do?
Ask her for it   I am, she's alright, she's
In very small doses
Yeah, she's always been alright with me, you know, so I can't say about anybody else, I mean she's already, she's always been really nice to me, but  like them people she goes around, well she used to go around with Lisa  and Vicky and all that lot and when she used to go around with them she used to be bitching them off behind their back and going oh you're my best friend, to their faces.
It's like me and you really, huh,
I know I bitch by you
I'm saying how much I hate you, just all the time.
I suppose it's a bit like me and Joanne really I mean I'm bit er nasty to her behind her back really, only to her 
Yeah 
not anybody else about her
she's alright actually, sometimes she just aggravates me though
mind you I don't know her though
No
I mean she's a, she's a nice enough person but she just gets in a strop so easily, you, you know
Maybe she needs to grow up a bit more
Yeah probably  I think she'll always be like it though, cos her mum's just the same, she's just like her mum, you know  her mum got in a strop every day because she couldn't go round, down the
club and have a fag, her mum's given up smoking, so Joanne's really worried now  oh 
silly old Jo
mm
I know someone who had that done and then later on they had their voice box taken out, cos he had cancer of the throat, ooh,
oh they cut them out
why?
Because they can't speak
Yeah, he couldn't speak after that
no I
if I were you, that is just
use them as leggings, leggings with a hole in, that's a good idea
oh no way, that is
Are all the girls outside?
Aha
Yeah they've all gone to
yeah see you
don't
tight, you'll rip them.
Honestly I went like that on a pair
are so thick that it
Oh god, having problems putting a pair of tights on
Are they a nice colour?
What colour are those?
Nearly black 
Erm nearly black 
Who'd wear
God knows, my mum  
no they're not
Oh that's nice 
they look alright on me 
you wouldn't have to worry about, you wouldn't have to worry about trousers or skirts or legs 
You'll probably wear 
or something stupid like that
they look nice
heck, oh my knees face each other, it's sick 
So do mine
no it isn't, we
to it anyway
Spread out
just look at that, got bow legs, isn't it awful?
You've been playing too much football
I have not
you're born with rickets 
mine are too thin at the ankle, looks sick
oh yeah, yes you have
don't bow
Yeah but they're fat, they're horrible, they are, they're all purple at the ankle, not like she's got thin mm
and a tidy pull oh I'll have just a quick go of it
did he, you don't pull them if you've got a, a hole in already because that's death
cos you see like
that
not like, like with that one
there you see I've just cured that one look, that one with
Mm, can't, I dunno
What?
we'd better go
Mind me shoe
Don't be so nasty
I'm sorry
Am I gonna get any backup here?
What else do you want?
Do you want a fishburger or do you want an egg?
Er  oh decisions, a fishburger please.
A fishburger, righty
Oh Jo 
can have a bit of a party, bit of a rave   died and he got to heaven  
Yeah 
Erin, Erin and Brian stuck up again today
Oh did they?
it was really funny
Mine's not very strong
he called her childish
Mm
so she had a bit of a benny   it was 
Where does 
dead funny
where does Brian hail from?
Brian?
Yeah
Dunno  round here I think
Does he?
not Greenlands, maybe Woodrow South  so he probably wouldn't get on too well with someone from
Oh I'm sure that not everybody's 
Well she comes out with such a load of claptrap, she don't know what she's talking about most of the time  ah, are you and dad gonna buy a box each?
Are you gonna buy a box and I'll get rid of the other two to Joanne and Emma?
No I'll buy a box 
Cos I might be able to cart them off to Joanne and Emma to give them to their mum's on Mother's Day
Mm, well you can buy me a box for Mother's Day, that's a good idea innit?
We never buy you anything on Mother's Day, you get a card and be happy with it
Er, well I've decided I want something this year
Oh, I want two presents a year for birthday, christmas and children's day
There isn't one
I've just invented one
Now, well you can't have one, you can't have a children's day cos you don't do anything
Yes we do, we give you all the love and support you need.
Ha.
I was talking about you today in English
Oh goodness
Well they were talking about the eleven plus you see
Oh
and they said whose parents took it?
So I went  and he er, and she goes er, and did they both pass?
She was expecting me to say yes, I goes no my mum failed
and er, and, yeah she said but your father liked it did he?
And I goes no he hated it, he used to get detention every day for not wearing his cap   he hated it and he didn't do any work.
Cos she was expecting me to trot out something like, yes both my parents went to grammar school like everybody else whose parents went, you know, they were all saying, yes my parents went to grammar school and they got these and these have got these qualifications and everything, I couldn't believe it though, there's a load of people in our class and like  you know, all the parents are all these things and they're not exactly brilliant, the children
Mm
you know, like Olivia, er, both her parents are teachers and all this business
Mm
er, you know  she's not 
they don't have any time
she's not much to shout about , you know, intelligence-wise 
Who was that with Miss ?
mum had failed, but she said why?
I goes well all the, all the questions were matters science and she weren't any good at that
Would, would, would erm, grandma and granddad let you go anyway?
Would they of let you go if you'd passed?
Oh yeah  course they would of done
Well some p , parents didn't like it did they?
Didn't want their children to go to it
No, well it was a fixed system anyway
Yeah
if you were well to do, you, you went  I mean the  the grammar schools, in the grammar school like your dad went to I mean it was, it was a really, you know it was a grammar school, it wasn't anything like it is now.
Well, there was two grammar schools in Lincoln though weren't there?
Well there was the City school and the Lincoln school 
The Lincoln school 
The Lincoln school was, is by the hospital
weren't, weren't there a girls?
There was the, the, the Chri , Christ Hospital which was the girls high school
Weren't there, weren't there another boys and girls one or whatever, or were there just the boys 
No there was just 
and the girls?
no there was one girls school which was Christ Hospital
Yeah
which was up Lindon Hill
Mm
and there was the City school which was on Monk's Road, and there was the Lincoln school which was on Brambury Road which is 
Where was 
now Christ Hospital
Yeah, where was Christ Hospital then?
Christ Hospital was on Lindon Hill 
Where?
Christ Hospital was
Where the old, where the college is now that art college?
Yeah, you know, half way up Lindon Hill there's three stone steps
Yeah
and you went up there and there's them building sort of on the top isn't there 
Yeah 
that piece, and so you start go up this building across, and it's like it's, it's the school there
Right
and that's Christ Hospital, or was 
Or was 
and that was the girls grammar school and then there was the City school where your dad went and there was the Lincoln school
Was that co-ed?
that come out at Bram , Brambury Road, what?
Was it boys and girls?
No, no, there was the girls school and there was the two boys school
That's a bit unfair 
There wasn't another grammar, there wasn't another girls grammar school, oh what was Spring Hill?
Oh great, I don't know, Spring Hill was something
Girls?
Yeah, it was a, yeah Spring Hill was a grammar school, it was a girls grammar school
Oh 
Yeah because erm, poor thingy, the girl I went to school with she went on to Spring Hill when she was fifteen, see you could go on to grammar school when you were fifteen then as well as going at eleven
Yeah
if you passed, if you failed the eleven plus and if you were clever enough, you could take an exam, like an entry exam to go, it's sort of if you improve from eleven to fifteen you could take an entry exam to go into grammar school then, so that you could take your G C E's 
Like erm, but, like Miss  says some of the stuff on it was so rubbish, I mean like, there was somebody she knew, who their son failed the eleven plus twice and now they've got their P H D
Yeah, mm
they failed, but they failed their eleven plus twice
Mm
but now they've got their P H D
Mm, mm
you know, it's so stupid innit?
It's too young an age which to, erm
Assess like that 
judge , judge people and, and, and, split them like that
Mm
Too young.
I mean it might be alright for the more intelligent people or whatever, cos they get the best teachers then don't they?
But I mean for the other people it's just, it's just rejection innit, you're not good enough 
Well I'm not stupid , I mean I wasn't stu , when I was at the junior schools in the country I wasn't stupid
No
but I went from there straight to there taking me eleven plus
Yeah
I never had any practice at anything or, and I should imagine they did, I don't know, I don't know how it worked 
Yeah 
but I never had anything, I just went from one to the another, and I had to take it in the hall one day  and I wasn't, I was never very good at maths anyway, not that kind of maths.
Not algebra  oh we had this, we
I could never remember how to do them, I mean if somebody, if someone sat with me and explained it to me and then I, and then I could do it, I would do 
Yeah 
it then for that lesson, but after that I couldn't remember again how to do it 
That's, that's just like me that is, if I get into a rhythm and someone gives er, I can do it then, but if I just sit on a page, I think oh how do you do that?
Mm, I can never remember the formulas, like your dad said formula for such and such a thing is so and so and that, but I could never remember them  so I was no good then, because I couldn't remember it 
Mm, them nice
and then there was St Joseph's which was private
Mm  mm there was only one in Redditch
What grammar school?
Where was that?
Ulster grammar
Where?
Ulster 
Ulster , Ulster
Ulster
no, that's in Ireland Ulster
Ulster
Ulster's in Ireland
Ulster  erm
That's nowhere near Greenwich
No, but it's where all the
went  but you ain't good enough
No, I'm afraid I'm er was a bit thick
If you weren't, you went to Dudley High
I was good at English  history, sport
You ought to try taking some of them, honestly they're so easy the exams are, like history, ah, talk about easy, spartan erm, you could G C S E, P E mum
I don't think I could now  I could of done then probably
You remind me of bit, eh, you're like a bit what Joanne's like, except Joanne's better at maths but she's not very good at English, like when they were doing Animal Farm, I had to explain that it was a parody of the Russian revolution and everything and she just sat there with her mouth open.
What did she go to see the other day that she reckon was a load of rubbish?
Duke of  Duke of thingy, it was er on at the Palace it was erm Duke of, there was an advert for it in the paper the other day
Mm
she didn't know it was an opera you see
Oh it was an opera was it?
Yeah
and I didn't like to say anything
What did she go from school?
Yeah    oh 
I should imagine Joanne not
erm, but, you see, they would of been the most aggravating little gits there, because as soon as they found out, they all started messing about then, for three hours it was on, could you imagine sitting in there with them lot for three hours?
What about the teachers?
I would of chucked them out  and Mrs 
yes, but mum, you're not a teacher at the Leeds High
Mm
If you were it probably be a bit different than it actually is  dad said to me once that if he, that if he'd  like been in charge of it we'd of gone to the Leeds and not St Augustine's
Yeah he would of been  cos he was, he was, he was on about that, erm the
said to him about it when we first came and er, he said about when, when we were on about sending and I don't, they're going to a Catholic school and he says oh the Catholic schools around here aren't very good and the, the Leeds and that are the best
Yeah well he's all in with that isn't he?
What a load of rubbish
He's, he's the flipping governor isn't he?
He's one of the governors
Where?
Up there
What at the Leeds, not at the Leeds he's at Dingleside
Well he's at the Dingleside but he's involved with the P T A there
Oh well
and he's bound to bull up his own place isn't he?
I mean no one 's gonna say oh yes my school's the best
I don't think so, I don't, they're too, they're too big
What?
that's what I don't like about it
It's not, it's no bigger than our school
Isn't it?
No
It's not got the same discipline 
It's about the sa , well it's might, just a little bit bigger than our school, about another hundred or something, but that's, that's a drop in the ocean when you've got seven hundred there  that's like one in each class or something you know, extra
Still there's no discipline 
No discipline ah, no discipline
 

and er, we were like, we was on about, you know like we were talking about the education system and everything in English and you know I told you they were on about people changing at eleven and everyone else in the class wanted the thirteen system except me, it's only cos what they're used to
Oh yes what they're used to, what they always, yeah, I know
but I mean, but like I said, I said, I mean, I went, I went to the  like I changed then, I mean to be quite honest I didn't like it, I didn't like it
What the same people in school?
no I didn't , I never liked it, whether that was because I knew we weren't gonna be there, or, you know, I just, I was only there six months
Mm  you would of done eventually, you would of got in alright, once you were settled and that
I, you know, I just  I would of been alright if it was a bit more organised I don't 
I think 
know it never seemed quite very organised
they sent it back, I think, I thought the twelve was, was quite good actually, I thought the twelve when they went up at twelve, but then when they changed it back to the junior and infants it was the elev , the eleven and it was a bit, I think it, you know eleven might be perhaps too young, I think twelve is a reasonable
Mm
age.
But you see I was thrown from one teacher all the time Miss  all the time
Yeah to that 
to, to German , French, Latin
Yeah
er, you know proper algebra and all that kind of stuff and it, and it was, I think I would of been better if I had of gone to Our Ladies cos I don't 
Well I don't know I mean it would of still been the same if you'd of gone to Our Ladies, it would of still been one, one
One teacher
Yeah
was there?
Yeah I think so
I know, but
yeah because they were the only one who would
didn't we?
I know, but that, at St. Hughes you're stuck in a little rut aren't you?
I mean
Well, the trouble is you got to be the eldest and you were the eldest for such a long time
You mean we were the eldest for five years there 
Yeah because you go to be the eldest and then just at the time you should of gone on and become the youngest, it changed so you were the eldest all the time
Yeah
and that made the difference I think, that probably made the difference 
That particularly didn't bother me it was the regime, the sudden change in the regime
Yeah
you know  I think I would of got used to it
Oh I
but you know.
I feel surprised that I put, how thick was she?
What?
No, well you're not thick are you?
 

So this is where you two get all this
what?
supposedly cleverness
Supposedly, when I, when I told Nicola the other day that you reckon that I don't do enough work, she says cor blimey  she was shocked she was, shocked  oh do it, do it as near to the microphone as you can mum
What she doesn't want does she
 

I don't think er, I don't think you do do work, enough work, either of you really  I mean if I sat an eleven plus today, by what, if they ever brought it back, it'll be a lot different than what it was then
I
it'd be easy wouldn't it?
It wouldn't of been easier
Well it would, it would of, it'd be easier, I think it would
Not to everybody it wouldn't
Well I think, I think, I think to be honest they've all got easier 
I'd say they'd got harder, you should see some of the things we do in maths mum, it's not easy
 
No I know that , that's it's not easier now, you know, but I think er that would be easier wouldn't it?
You know, I mean  you, the problem with you and dad is, cos you never got particularly involved with it you don't, you don't know exactly what's happening at school, you don't know what we do.
Well I've never got particularly involved with this school, I got involved with the other schools
I know, but, mum that, that was, that was five years ago, I mean I've moved on a great deal since then
Oh yeah, I know it's not, no I know it's not easy, I don't try to make out it's easy
I mean some, some of them are what, what I would deem as fairly easy, I mean I find history easy, but not everyone does
Oh no, I know that, I know that I mean some people find some things easy, some people find some things hard, don't they?
But I mean that's er, a fact of life 
You know, but I mean, there's no way easy, especially the science and maths  equals I times R, voltage and resistance in electricity and magnesium
what?
but er, that fibbing git Tim right he's got a locker next to me, and he's got velcro on his coat and if I'm standing at my locker and he takes his coat out of, out of his locker, it always flipping pull my tights with the velcro
Mm
that's the third time he's done it, I had such a go at him
You'll have to charge him 
I'll have to  I had a bit of major benny actually ha  it was rather shocking wasn't it?
Mm
Not that I ever have major bennies or anything 
No, no 
I hadn't had a benny for a few days actually
Oh
I'm doing well   thought I died and gone to heaven   I don't like plain chocolate it's horrible
Shit 
take a
pardon?
Nothing, sarky remark,on my own just 
Ha, there was this girl in the club last night and somebody shouted at her and she went  what?
Oh dear I said to your dad Jesus
Ladylike
as common as muck  what she goes 
I thought I could give dad some of these and then eat them all myself
Mm
for his birthday
Well why not, I don't think that'll go down very well
Don't you?
No
Well I'm really shocked mum, I was really going to do it honest
Mm, I don't think so Helena Rosanne
Eh  what you do to me all my 
chuck me in there, chuck me in the closet  hit me with your rhythm stick, hit me hard and hit me quick 
Hit me, hit me  what's the time six o'clock isn't it?
What?
Six o'clock
What's six o'clock?
The time
it's half six
Oh half six that was it yeah
That's what it said on his little card
Yes we thought he was going to somewhere else at six o'clock
Nicola didn't believe me when I told her she thought I was playing a joke
What?
When I told her about this
Didn't she?
I goes er, oh I'm recording it for this thing, she goes oh yeah my beard, ha, I was going I am, ha, but she didn't believe me, can I have some sauce please?
There was definitely no chance of a walk that day, bit of Jayne Eyre there for you
Mm
Oops, that's what I call an honourary delight this is
Mhm indeed
What?
Indeed
Indeed  what exciting lessons did you have to do?
Nothing too exciting 
Well I had  er, oh, what did I have?
Something P E, maths, English and graphics, science, science, maths, English and graphic
How comes you're so, you're so interested in the eleven plus and everything?
We're having a discussion about erm, whether it should be brought back
Oh 
I said definitely not, cos it makes rejects of people in society, therefore a  what 
which they all do in my class, cos they're all thick  I couldn't believe it right
Well they're all supposedly got intelligent parents by the sou , by the sound of things
Oh not all of them, I was sat, I, I was sat there
All thick like me
and I went who's applying to go on to university or education after eighteen, so I put up my hand, turned round and flipping Stuart and Danny had put their hands up and I just went oh god, they're gonna do really well  and Terry, and Terry, we're talking Terry, Terry who hasn't got a brain cell to rub together
What, er, mm, he's in your class ain't he?
so  ah that boy, this is the one who said I think we should be allowed to hit girls
he supposedly, he, two short planks does not describe this boy, even Miss hates him  that was it, she, we were having this discussion right in education, she goes, are you cynical about education Terry, he goes, no, he goes, oh she goes why?
He goes I don't know what cynical means
I said, ah no and everyone in the class just cracked up  sometimes you wonder, you wonder whether he does it on purpose  he must do it on purpose, no one can be that thick
How many was thinking of going on?
Ninety five per cent 
Yeah, oh 
but erm like Vicky who's got, in her English folder, this is Vicky  Vicky, she's got in her literature she's got nine A's and one B and in her other I don't know what she's got, ten A's probably, mm she's not going to, she wants to be a nurse
Oh does she?
and er, like she said aren't you Vicky and she goes no miss, mm, you can't be a nurse till your eighteen
No, no you can't go into student, student
so like, you know, she's gonna stay on, do A levels and then go into it
Mm
because she might as well have some A levels just in case or whatever, but erm  you know I, you know she's, you know, I can understand that actually, she's being quiet sensible about it she said there's nothing else I want to do and I might as well do something that I enjoy, you know, you've only got one life haven't you when it comes down to it?
Well if that's what she wants to do, that's what she wants to do, innit?
Mm, like, her dad says to her why don't you be a doctor  and she, but she don't want to, you know, she wants to be in a hospital and that, she don't want to end up in general practice
Well she doesn't necessarily end up in general practice does she?
No, but 
But I mean for the first year she won't be in, if she goes into student, she'll be in college
I know, but it won't take as long for her to get there as it would if she becomes a doctor
Oh no, three years ain't it a student?
Mm
But then you get on hand experience right  hands on I should say, not on hand 
but erm
learning how to clean pot pa , er bed pans and make beds and things like that
Clear up sick, that's a favourite job isn't it?
Mm 
Yeah, I thought of being that once but  I wouldn't mind it in the wards, but I wouldn't want to be in the operating theatre, I don't know why, the blood don't put me off or anything, but
You do have to go into the theatre for so long I think
Mm
but then you can, you can specialize you see, I mean some nurses go into the theatre all the time once they've qualified
Yeah
I think they do have to go in, you have to go into each area
But like, I mean I don't mind the blood or whatever, and if they were doing little things, I could handle it, but like, like on that op , operation that woman was having the other day and they cut her open and they just pulled
Well they do
and that, that, that's the thing that makes me retch, not the cutting, it's when they just pull it apart
Well I know 
when it rips ooh, they could of cut it
Well they do cut it
No they cut the skin and then they just pulled it apart 
Yes because it's not the like that underneath, if they didn't pull it apart they, they cut down, if they cut down with a knife they could cut into something couldn't they?
Oh, er
It could be dangerous so you, you open up the top and then the other parts  the lining
Ah
Yeah but what they ripped was all fat, all her fat, ooh
Yeah, but you see, you've got the, you got all the other things in, down, down, underneath, well I mean if you started going in with a knife and you started cutting them I mean you could cut an artery or anything couldn't you?
Which could be a bit nasty, you know   and then she'd say buy a little bag for me, a chick, a chick, a chick, a chickita 
who's turn is it tonight?
Oh mine  oh, I wish it was David, probably never get
 

We've seen it on T V
  

flower 
but, I was listening to myself on that
Mm
Oh is my laugh vile or what  and my voice
it sounds so idiotic 
That's cos you be a country yoke 