

And I'll see you next, let me just make a note of this, on this form, a green form.
Another one that's dribbling now
erm it's at forty eight 
What about this , what about this?
Yeah put it in the bucket, in the bucket 
can have that, no I don't want that at er three P M or thereabouts
Kieran
I'm just trying to remember everybody in the same afternoon, to collect them all because of about six of them are being done around here
Right
and so, that'll be great, thanks very much indeed for doing that and I'll give you the gift vouchers next week 
 
right, okay then
right then we can go and have a purge at Marks and Sparks,
no you don't need these
no
no right 
right 
I mean if you have a lot of people that come round you're gonna tell them that you're doing it, they might, I don't
 

Put that one in there and this Donald goes in there and where's this men?
What do you want?
Do you want a drink?
Did anybody find his cup?
Oh here, here's your cup
I can't figure out what's up with you young man today
Me want a biscuit
What?
I think you got up too early
wait a minute, did you have a good day at work?
somebody at work, what's a matter love you've been like this since you've got up haven't you?
You want your do do?
Catch it, catch, catch, put your bucket out, hold your bucket out
If you want your do do, go and get it.
Ah, there you go 
say thank you , he's a right little misery when he wakes up ain't you boy?
Yeah
Get me a biscuit
Oh, Anthony
Get me one too
anything else while I'm here?
How about a please
  

Yeah take them in the front room then, take them out to erm
that's it, we're happy for two minutes
You got the biscuits?
Charlotte's bringing them in, oh he sat there playing I notice his button I presume it must be off his cardigan
Yes
Yeah, I thought what's that white thing down there, oh yeah a button
Here's your pen, thanks
mm, he went up about oh, I suppose he went up to bed about half twelve, quarter to one and he got up about quarter to three
Yeah
Yeah, he's up there sound-o, and he was up this way, he went up at one and got up about ten minutes after this one, so
Look what we've got, little boxes
Mm, very smart
oh I see going to the cupboards are you?
oh
My favourite one
Yummy, yummy, yum
 

So what did you do did you sort out, did they say anything about er, erm 
 
tea towels?
Paper towels?
Did anything happen, she said
I go there at
oh well that's fair enough innit?
Oh I won't do it on principle
There you go
somebody else can be 
Where's my drink I had for breakfast?
Pass me his drink please, he's too plain lazy to get it 
Where's my drink I had for breakfast?
I don't know Charlotte
You give to, down the sink
Oh what you left this morning?
Yeah I'm not, don't tell them, I'm not gonna leave them in the sink all day while you decide if you're going to eat it or not
No not my breakfast
There you go just a booklet there to fill out
I know, and I'm the one hundredth and seventh person to do it
so this is tape one, side A 
Not my breakfast, my drink I had this morning
put you down as a stranger shall I?
and when I woke er, and when I woke up 
Sorry 
and I had my breakfast
what would you like to go down as a scrubber?
mummy my drink, mummy my drink 
 
I never thought of that actually I was thinking of scrubbing the kitchens and that  or maybe we would, or maybe we would put that down
No, I don't think so, you'll probably get, get had up for having a erm brothel  
Oh look at that I've lost me pen now, bloody thing's, okay
occupation?
What's your occupational hazard?
I am
I'm not putting down there just do the washer upper
What's the matter in the Oxford Dictionary
Alex a washer upper  
 
Can I have a drink?
You
oh I know her , erm  secretary
I didn't
how do you spell that?
S E C
secret, A R Y
Oh yeah, I've never looked at it like that before, yeah, ah, ah
 

Ah
 

You two, what is going on?
Why do we have this fighting this in the front room
 

Show mummy
Ah it depends what his toys are at home
he's got enough of them
Well like you say he's probably got 
Hey
Mum
Yes
mum
yes 
 
yes
This is my milk I get out of the fridge
Oh you was going to the fridge for that was you?
Yes drink milk, no, no
And me
You want one more do you?
there you are then, you don't want one?
Me, thank you mum
Er der
You want to choose one there, they been very busy, have they been very busy up there the old canteen then?
Erm, it's not bad I'm probably doing 
Mum I want a drink of milk 
a hundred and fifty odd meals a day
Alright, a hundred and fifteen?
Fifty
Oh that's a lot
Yeah it is quite a lot, erm
you know like some days you can have a really  like you never
everything on the menu is like really messy
Yeah
and say like say it takes absolutely ages to clean the dishes and pots you know, but like you say it was erm chili con carne, erm tuna and celery pie, what else was there on?
Erm seafood vol au vent 
Oh no problem
something for everybody, see I go really easy dishes, I mean you've got your veggies and salad by all that
Yeah
I mean nothing like burns into the pot you know what I mean?
Yeah
so it wasn't too bad
ah, it's got here
Yum
oh, regional accents
yeah I can put that down can't I?
Mm, cos they're not, not
no, that's what I thought
No


I say it wouldn't relate to any accent in England anyway
No


Oh we've emptied it too much
 

Tell you what


don't play with these
shall we go and buy you some juice okay, cos we've really ran out of juice this morning didn't he?
Oh yeah I got all your bits then , he hasn't had hardly had anything to drink again today  he doesn't seem to drink, he eats all his food, oh he ate that pudding no problem
Oh did he?
Yeah he loved it
and then they tell you just cover it, the taste of the food some time
Yeah
has you eaten your




Larna
Yeah
have you seen this how he loves me?
I tell you what you wait until he gets teeth and, and he does bite you.
The other day he, he grabbed my nose, he had my nose charming in his mouth, he bite
and mummy nearly went through the roof 
Mummy I want another one 
Oh better take that biscuit tin away before they eat the lot, got that lid, get that and put, have one more and get it in the kitchen Charlotte
you
yeah one more and that's enough
Yeah
ooh, ah, what she doing?
What is she doing?
and you want the bib and the spoon
Never mind the, never mind the
Get off the table
another one like me
mum I don't want one more
Right would you take them to the kitchen for me please because I'm putting these bits away
can I give you a hand there Larna still
no you're alright, no you're alright, it's to the truth there's nothing, who put that bag in there, can't put it in there, put it right, I'll put it in, in a minute
Ah 
Do you think you're gonna be up to me next week or not?
Erm I find out this afternoon when I phone in my hours
Oh yeah, well you know, just let me know anyway
Yeah, I'll call you after definitely
Yeah
I just have to let you know
right I think all, no bottles out the fridge and that's it
What he hasn't had a single bottle today?
No, not even, that's all the
are you a tired baby, did you want to go to sleep?
You go home and go to sleep
He's only been up since quarter to three
You go home and kip
so I thought you'll probably give him a bottle when you got here anyway, so I was going to give him one, it all depends when he got up and I thought you'll probably give him one so I didn't
Yeah, but
I mean he was so happy playing
yeah, he'll probably forget  I doubt it though
would you know where they think it is Larna?
Your what?


yeah
Because
yeah it could be that


you only had these two bags didn't we?
Erm wouldn't have the
I mean
it could be that, yeah  you've got a drink in there
It's been in this week
Oh you want your coat
when did they do it?
it must of been about Tuesday, it must of been first day
Oh you've got stuck
yeah oh it might be there but then they, they do erm, they do say as they get older they get er fed up with milk and they eat and you know the, they do sometimes 
Do sometimes 
so
It's funny they've never been a great juice freak really
He didn't drink a lot of it
Erm, what's, oh, and yet he hates water
Does he?
Yeah, he can't stand the water
Now that's yours, now I've lost me
ah it's probably in me bag, yeah don't worry about it, it's probably in a bag, let mummy
oh yes there it is, come to mummy
Do you want it on him
Want mummy's hat
Mum if you, he can have a bit of me milk if you like when you, that bit yeah
No, my own milk
Go and get some juice for the boy, go and get some juice for the boy
I'll go and wash this and put it onto his coat
you didn't want to eat that love
No
What his name erm 
no 
Alex name, there he is 
you know that, that juice, that's it
Alex erm, Alex I'm talking to you
And Vicky got a new bed
What's the matter?
Vicky got a new bed 
Vicky got a new bed 
I know I saw it this morning it's really smart isn't it?
How could you, you live far, far  away
What do you say?
Excuse me
Or pardon
You didn't see it this morning, well, I mean when you come over 
Yeah, well when I got it out the car but, just wash that down
Erm what was I going, I was going to tell you something
Yeah you was weren't you till they interrupting  
Oh that juice, you know when erm they're six weeks old and you get the bounty packs?
Yeah
Still had that, I ran out of his usual juice this morning, I went oh I can't believe it 
 
and I keep these little packets in obscure little places because then I remember about them one day


in case I run out
You won't because I used to be 
they're quite handy 
I'll smack you 
by hand is all gooey now
It is?
baby, baby 
 

call you B B then won't we?


Yeah, watch him, leave things there, he hasn't had a dirty nappy today so
you can't climb there, Alex has got your
mum, ah pick me up there 
er see one of these bibs this morning 
No I'm not picking you up I'm cleaning Kieran's face 


carefully Anthony, careful cos Alex's got to live in there


Erm, if it is the one this morning, I can understand why he hasn't done one today
Oh, it was enormous
and we all, we always get our drink of milk
Do you, that's good for you isn't it?
Yeah
I know, but he don't climb on that
do you, do you buy milk?
Yes I do, Jordan drinks milk
Mum
Yeah
good boy, where's do do?
He has full fat milk, full cream milk, full fat milk
full cream milk
full cream milk
It's only half
calorie stuff innit?
The one that ain't got full
This is only pasteurized, erm
Oh what I drink
We don't have any
oh I don't have milk anyway 
we have the one that's the thickest and 
Kieran don't do that darling
oh okay now, it's okay
Oh, he, he always starts to whinge when I lay him down to do his coat up, he don't like
the latest thing is putting his wrist on, anything he's gotta get his arms through  oh let's go
right I'll speak to you again next week 
It's Friday again tomorrow
Ah
it goes really quick though doesn't it?
what's wrong
take care
He might have a bottle when he get him home
Yeah
say the way he was looking at her milk just then, you can have a bottle when you get home are you?
get excited
yeah, at home, you erm put that button in your pocket?
Erm I did, let me just check it 
Right 
could of fallen out


Look at the state of my glasses
Oh dear they need cleaning don't they?
there's er
oh Kieran
Yeah got that
I've had up to five floating around the house before and then we can't find one, no and then two days
that's where they all are, I've got them
Bye, see you all tomorrow
Alex, Alex
Eh  got it
Alex, Alex I've got it
No I think it's a shame about, it doesn't really matter, mm I'm not quite sure Alex
I don't know
what
I bet you have forgotten your keys
No they're in my pocket
Mummy
Mummy, mummy, mummy, mummy
oh thank you, take care, yeah I can't imagine surprising what you can get over the weekend
yeah, we should have to put you on the book
put stranger down
okay then, see you tomorrow
Yeah, alright then, same time, bye Kieran
see you later, bye
Mummy
Charlotte come on, come and watch cartoons 
do it mum
Charlotte I'm shutting the door it's cold  come on
right, we want
Channel eight
No T V S
well after this now, right
Can I take my jumper off?
I wouldn't, it's not very warm
I do 
 

You put, you gonna put some of these toys away now please?
 

Ah, ah, no, no
Oh we put
on
ma, mum, ma
Mummy, mummy I like that
get me some milk
What about your manners, please and thank you?
Please and thank you
Yes I will, hold on
I didn't have to say please and thank you for my milk cos I pour straight on my dinner, didn't I?
Didn't I?
Hold on 
No, yes
Are you gonna
away?
Yeah, just leave that now, you want a drop of milk now do you Anthony?
Er
Hold on 
mummy, mummy, mummy 
  

here are
alright, listen, come on, right let's have all these toys tidied up, before the cartoons start  come on, alright, you're alright, that's not what we do with toy boxes is it?
That's how accidents happen


No, this is what we're going to do, we're going to tidy them all up now  quietly


Don't throw them at the windows.
Careful, that's it, right jump straight in the car then, cos it's open and it'll be warm
I get the 
Hang on let me open the doors 
last one open doors
right you get in there
Charlotte can you get in here and put your seat belt on?
Please
Maybe, maybe 
No you got to sit up here in the car seat love, Charlotte get in or you'll be late
oh, one, two, three in, oh that's a good boy 
in the morning 
You got hiccoughs?
E I E I we 
Right are we in Charlotte?
No  can you put your belt on?
No
Do you want me to do it?
Mm
Yeah, okay
do it
There we go, that's you done, and you young man, cor all strapped in?
Oh you know
Yeah well I'll put my seat belt on in a minute  right
Off we go
off we go, can you hold that letter?
Why?
Well I just wanna stop to post it
I wanna go to play group
We are going to play group, but we've gotta drive right past the letter box


Why, cos it's on the way
Mummy me
my pussy cat on shoulder
Oh you brought your pussy cat did you, didn't you bring your Mickey Mouses?
No brought a
out
Alright
No
he's half, half of er, all his tail has gone
Half his tail's gone?
No all of his tails has gone, he's broken his tail
Oh dear, did someone pull it out then?
Yeah, maybe
Oh never mind
pull it out
And
take it out
How can someone pull it mummy?
Yeah , oh it was probably an accident
How can it be pulled out it was up there for ages
Never mind, don't worry about it  
right what do you think you're gonna do at play school today then, does anybody know?
Not me
Me
What do you normally do on a Friday?
Oh I don't know
Playdoh
Playdoh
Bricks
do you, that should be fun
Well you're gonna have plenty to do then aren't you?
Yes 
Okay, I'll just jump out and post this letter
Sticklebricks and erm some engine bricks, and also some
 

oh that's handy, thank you  
Why didn't you post it in the letter box?
Well because the postman had come to empty the letter box, right, so there was no point in mummy putting her letter in cos he'd of just taken it out again 
Where you put it?
Why does the dustman have to take it away?
No not the dustman, the postman
Why does the postman have to take all the letters away?
Why?
Well he takes them to the post office
Yeah
then the post office sorts them out
Yeah
and gives them to different postmen to take to different houses
Yeah  yeah
and that's how we all get our letters.
You know mummy gets letters in the morning, mummy and daddy
Yeah 
Yeah , no I do it up
well it, now the postman takes it to where it's got to be sorted and they will post it to whoever it has to go to.
Yeah, but what about your money they might send it back to you
I didn't send any money, you never send money through the post Charlotte
Why?
Cos somebody might take it  wasn't money I sent anyway, just an order form
Why?
There's Pauline and Aaron, shall we go and see them?
Yeah, stop right where they are
No I can't just stop right in the middle of the road, I have to park darling, there we go, ooh right next to this car, there's Ian over there right  right one, two out you come
Aaron
Charlotte don't just run off and get on the path
Aaron I'm here
Morning
Yeah alright?
Yeah, you
yeah she always is, it's this one that's not  you must be joking  Charlotte out the way, don't be so impatient, oh god, thanks very much  right, hang your coat up, hang your coat up, I'll hang your coat up  give us your coat
right come on
She took him in
Oh right, I wondered where he was 
Hiya Paul alright?
Thanks  alright, yeah you, yeah  what?
Come on, ah?
Anthony smile, oh it's a good job we unzipped it then
Have you got a kiss for me then
Bye
I see you later okay, good girl
He mustn't have it today
He mustn't have it, oh Anthony she said you can't have your smile today
You know why?
No
Because it suppose to be a present
It's a present
don't tell him
ooh, it's a surprise present 
Why what you doing?
Ah, eh, I'm going into town, you going into town or
Erm, no, but I come in for
if you want
You know what your daughter started yesterday you know?
What?
All these pots, weren't it?
Oh some of the kids come up and said 
Oh that's not my one 
hang on a minute that's not mine either, and all then that's not my pots  I tell you what when they do something they do not forget the colour
Aren't they funny when they look, we didn't look at the yoghurt pots did we?
No
Went no, no, it's not, it's not peach melba, right down to the last detail 
Oh no you know what we forget my play school bag
Your play school bag?
Yes
Pity you didn't lose your voice at home today Charlotte is there 
 
I don't know what she's on about, you tell me Kim
Oh
I haven't even gone yet
I'm jumping like a jelly baby
Yeah you jump
right I'll give him a kiss and you
I might get a smile out of him
Listen you told me you ain't gonna cry this morning, put it this way you won't be going to the sweet shop will we?


Come on, come on, I'll see you later
Oh
see you later, I'll see you later, oh you want a kiss?
See you later
Now you stop crying   oh
Mum, mum, I wanna go
I'll be back in a little while
 

I miss you, I miss you
Ah
I don't know
Who've you got today just Kieran?
Oh no I've got thingy at erm eleven 
Eleven 
well half ten, quarter to eleven
yeah er what 
I don't know about next week yet, she'll let me know
Yeah I've only got to go to the bank and got to pay something for Gary, I've got to pay in a cheque for Gary again cos he's ever so low again this year, this week, this month
Yeah, I'll just move that chair from out the front
Yeah
I'm not putting it in where you put it before though cos I had a hell of a job 
Did you?
I just erm 
Put it on top
yeah, yeah, it makes it easier that way.
Sian was saying there's a coffee morning on today
Yeah, but I couldn't of gone anyway, cos I had too many kids 
What time's that on till?
Erm I don't know I haven't been to them for ages now 
Yeah 
because er  I can't really do much with my two anyway 
Yeah 
so did you get your wardrobes done?
Measured up got any quotes?
Last one today twelve, I've got the last one coming today
Have you?
I've got erm, we've had one through from erm  erm came round on Wednesday morning because we had Wednesday morning, one should be coming via the post today, we phoned up yesterday
Oh yeah, yeah
and he's sending it first post, it should be through today, if not tomorrow morning, erm
Oh dear
the other one gave us a quote for three hundred and eighty eight
Oh that's not bad then
which was good, but Gary's suspicious at that price
Three hundred and eighty eight?
Yeah
What's that to do?
comparing it , comparing it with erm one thousand, two hundred, he's, he says it's rather suspicious
What is that for the actual three hund 
Just, just the actual erm sliding mirror wardrobes
Just the doors no fitting or anything?
Yeah it's for the fittings and everything, erm and I've had prices like one thousand two hundred, eighteen hundred, and this bloke you know, says three hundred and eighty eight
Oh 
and Gary's rather suspicious at that price, we, we had a builder that came round he, he wanted four hundred and twenty
Yes
and that was with the doors from Texas and he thought oh no you know
Yeah
we'd rather get it done properly, erm, but erm, this  that came yesterday morning, he reckons it, that he can do the whole of the bedroom, look there's been an accident, I've got to tell you 
Oh good
they've gone right over that bank, right over that bank, right over there, it's bounced over 
It's speeding I expect
Yeah
to get that far
erm and they can do the wardrobes and the fitment erm and wardrobes either side erm for eighteen hundred
Oh
which is the price we were looking at, it's not too cheap and it's not too expensive
Yeah
cos Gary sort of said we should set prices that are too low
Maybe they just, he just done it so cheap because of the recession I mean
Yeah
you can get almost anything done at the moment
Yeah
can't you?
so we'll wait and see 
Well was it all private people then 
we'll see what price they give 
or companies?
No it's all companies
What even this three hundred and eighty eight?
Yeah, that's 
Well you can always check it out
Yeah
make sure it is a genuine it, the, the, he's come from the company and he's not doing it privately or something
You see the thing is, I said, Gary said to me he said did you ask them about the over bed erm units and that and I said yeah, I said he wanted to, he, he said he could do the over bed unit for eighteen hundred plus the wardrobes for three eighty eight
Yeah
well this  people I mean with, with, that I mean that really is more or less the same amount as the other companies have said for er more or less the whole lot, so why the wardrobes are so cheap and yet the, the bed surrounding is so expensive, we don't know
Mm
whereas  people they reckon that they can do it, they can do the whole lot for eighteen hundred 
Yeah , oh strange isn't it?
Yeah , it's er, it's er cheap for the wardrobes, but expensive for the over bed unit, I mean Gary said well at that price he said the over bed unit we might as well get out of a catalogue.
Well, yeah, talking of catalogues actually you might know, my two want a beanbag right?
Yeah
They've got one in Argos but the colours are disgusting and it's twenty pound, you see I went and brought one for Boo Boo, that one from Argos 
Yeah , yeah
and they absconded it, and the dog hasn't a hope in hell and also the ones you get for the kids, when you sit in them they sit up like little chairs don't they?
Yeah 
whereas the dog's one 
Yeah 
lie down on 
lie down on 
and I haven't got them in my club book, any ideas?
Erm, Argos, Index, or 
Argos has only got the one which is disgusting 
Is this for the dog?
No this is for the kids, I've got the dog, I've got the dog's, but the dog ain't got it 
Market, Saturday market
Yeah
they do, they do er a carpet stall and they also do erm on the same stall with a carpet, they do erm, duvets
Mm
pillows, and they do beanbags as well 
Do they not do it on a Thursday?
No, I've never seen them there on a Thursday
No
Saturday is the only time I've seen them there
I just wondered cos Argos wanted twenty pound and nineteen ninety nine 
Yeah, yeah I think they want twelve, twelve ninety nine or something off the market
Yeah
It's been ages since well, since I looked, but I'm sure it's something like that.
Yeah, but I also got a leaflet for refills as well 
Oh that's what I need some more of those for his beanbag
Yeah that's what it's for the dog's bean bag
Yeah
so
Yeah
I've got the address at home if you want it
Right 
now, put a bit of lipstick on  
 

Do you wanna grab my catalogue do you when we get back to my place?
Why is there anything in there?
Well you said you wanted to have a look at the er quilt covers?
Oh no, I'm gonna leave that for a bit
Are you?
Yeah, due to lack of funds 
Twenty P an hour innit?
Oh, where's my bag then?
I've got it here
Oh god I thought I'd lost it for a minute 
I though while I was there I might as well grab it
erm
Is it twenty P for an hour or thirty P?
What's the time?
Half past nine, half past ten
Twenty five past nine
I normally, let, well, if I put an hour and a half in cos if we're a bit late
Yeah
five or ten minutes late, it's cheaper for me to put ten P in than to pay twelve pound ticket
Yeah
actually it's twenty pound
Yeah
right, I'll just nip over and get it, cos I haven't locked up yet  maybe I won't I haven't got ten P, I've only got two pennies, just have to make sure back 
You want ten P?
Well just in case we're not
As you came down town for my sake really  
Alright then, I'll accept, I won't be a minute
Yeah  
She's going to look after them for a little while
Oh yeah
so
well that's right, yeah, in fact I said to her I was expecting a phone call the other morning to say that
Yeah
her, her mum was having him, but she had a, her mum had a few things to do, so
Yeah
Oh, you ain't heard no more about applying for the hospital for a job yet then?
No, they still haven't advertised it yet
Oh ain't they?
I thought they might of got on and done that
Well that's what I thought because erm Ann's leaving in erm the end of this month
Mm
it's only next week  still gonna apply though, ha
Oh yeah, doesn't hurt does it, you've got nothing to lose 
Yeah but I shall go for it but if any other jobs come up at the hospital I'll apply for them 
Yeah, do you wanna go in here?
Ah, let's get some money first
Oh yeah, let's go in there while it's empty 
Yeah 
No, I've been waiting for them to get them cards in I ordered a couple of those cards with the lights at the top for Kieran to take home
Oh yeah, it's been
Since I've bleeding asked for them they haven't been in, that was two weeks ago
Yeah, I know we went in there last week, cos they had these cards, they got those things with six bugs on them, they're really ugly looking things, Aaron wanted them, he hasn't half been playing some tricks on Gary  take them down in front of Gary and that Gary's aagh


pretends he's got, you know he's frightened 
Yeah, yeah 
and he thinks it's hilarious


I do this all the time, I can't be bothered to take my gloves off
It takes you half an hour to get your card out
 

put these on while your hands are warm
Yeah
you hold that, oh come on, he normally puts them on straight away 
Er Aaron can put his other gloves on, but with those ones they seemed to take twice as long to put on
These are supposed to grow with your hands, I'll tell you what they didn't grow much with Anthony's no
No they didn't with Aaron's, they haven't done with them, they're still wearing them, but 
Hold your hand out, er you used to use er Pampers nappies didn't you?
Yeah
I bet you didn't know, like I didn't know they were tested on animals
No I didn't
the gels they put in them
Yeah
to stop the wetness seeping through and that the gel, what they do is they shave rabbits, and rub it into their skin, the rashes and that and a couple of rabbits have died from it when they first started testing the stuff
Bloody hell
Yeah and I was watching it on This Morning and what it is it's because most things you've got in your kitchen like myself are all tested on animals and they don't label it
Ha
I couldn't believe it, I was horrified
Yeah
I thought my god I use Pampers all the time
the first one is why label make now
Yeah
cos, cos you know for a fact it's not
It's not animal tested
Yeah
Neither is that other book that I run that  whatever 
Yeah 
pronounceable, I've never got the name right


but I couldn't believe it though and they, this woman went under cover into this place and the state of these animals
Yeah
these rabbits were
by the head and all this stuff was put on their eyes to test it
God
you know?
Yeah
It was really horrible 
Right I've got to go into Superdrug, I've got to get some more hairspray
Okey dokey, oh they've got those in again, mind you I haven't filled up what I've got yet, so
Yeah
Do you want to have a look up round here?
See if they yeah, they haven't got any video cases, they had some video cases the other day and I forgot to get some
Now they ain't got none 
No I'm gonna put all of Aerial's tapes, get her normal tapes
Yeah
erm, in, into cases 
mm, might get one of them another day
Mm
My one's falling to pieces, always come in handy 
 

it's brilliant, right what else do I want polish
Ah I
tablecloth please 
No I won't go round there I can't be bothered   that's all pretty empty that lot innit?
Yeah
I know it's boring Trev but what do you want me to do, done some work actually, you ain't gonna do some work
  

er they're with the what?
He knows
Yeah
 

Oh they're different to the ones he's got, he's got those ones, I'll get him those ones  that's nice
Mm, yeah, ideal for putting in a picture for Christmas  well I think nothing for me today
One pound please 
What's that?
Oh yeah
They just
yeah
wipe them clean
I've got some gardening gloves at home, I haven't had the chance to use them yet, the weather's been so bad
Yeah, I went out yesterday morning and cleared up the dogs mess 
I can't do mine with little one, I got like I'll 
Yeah 
probably do mine tomorrow morning  hello Janet
Hiya
alright?
Yes so I'll probably do it
Yeah
like, I might not do it, I see how I feel
Oh how was, how was your leggings you got from here?
Really nice, ever so comfortable, yeah I was really pleased I got them
Yeah
so I got them, me mum got me some black ones, but they're like, they come right down to the ankles
Yeah
so they're nice, I've kept them, so I've got a black and I've got a khaki pair
Yeah
erm and I've sent off for some loose fitting ones
Yeah
that were eight ninety nine a pair and five ninety nine for a matching top
Yeah
erm, that's about it really  in here?
Oh yeah
They haven't got many cards in here lately you know
No
I wanted one for er saying granddad one from the kids and I couldn't get a decent one
Yeah
when I came in the other day, I might have a look now actually  get some Chewitts for the kids  go on looking something for myself


actually I can't see what I want
Why don't you get a
No


no, I won't, no I just get these for the kids, I might just be tempted to go in there and have a look though, did you eat all your others?
No, we haven't eaten them all yet, still got half a box open hiding away from Gary
I got them out and me and Tony, well Tony didn't eat many, I sat there and pigged the lot
Yeah 
I doubt if they have any better cards in now, cos all they had was that
Yeah
for granddad, well I can't get that from the kids and that's it, that was to my dad so I got him that one in the end
Yeah
I went over to the market, cos I came in yesterday erm, didn't like that one, I'm not into dogs, and I went into the market they didn't have nothing either
No
I mean, I want something
No
that's
Yeah
I'll have to go elsewhere and get it
Mother's Day soon isn't it?
It is oh my god
Mm, when's Shrove Sunday that's soon an all innit?
Pancake day
Er, oh is it?
I shall do some pancakes this year, cos the kids are old enough now
Yeah
to decide whether they like them or not
Oh Aaron loves them 
Oh I got
Yorkshire puddings
Oh yeah
cos erm, they er, I thought well I'd get them then Tony cos he said to me Sunday he said where's the Yorkshire pud then?
I said well it's not worth making all that mixture just for you
Oh you buy a mix?
Yes that I did I bought a mix
Yeah, yeah
but for us lot it made four nice medium size ones 
yeah that's right
and then I never ate all mine, and the kids never ate all theirs, so I thought well I get the frozen ones and just get one out each time for Tony stick it in the oven half hour before.
Oh that's what I was going to look at the brushes
What?
Hair brushes, I want, I want one of these
something that's not too hard 
I've got a, er  comb, I've got one of those that I use for Anthony at the moment and  why brush?
Why not a comb?
Cos his hair's not thick enough for a comb
Yeah true
See what I want 
Anthony's hair is quite thick
cos really, something like that, but only a half one
You want a small one don't you?
Yeah  that's one thing I've got, I've got my  denman I've got that one
What about that grey one up the end there or is that too big?
Yeah, you see I've got, again it's erm, complete handle on that one  one of them one's, I want a half one like this with just this
With soft bristles on
Yeah
yeah  too big ain't they?
Yeah
Or they're the right size but they've got the hard bristles
Yes that's right  but I like, I ask the
brushes
I tell you what have you 
 
where was it I saw it now?
Woolworth's they've got some fantastic Easter eggs, no not Woolworth's Robert Cray, they've got a massive great big Kinder egg Easter egg in there
Yeah
really pretty it is, I mean it's four ninety five
Yeah
my two both dart for them when we went in there
Yeah
I thought oh, see I was gonna get a present for Easter, but they've got so much there's 
Yeah 
nothing they really need
that's right
They've probably got a few over here 
Erm I'll probably get erm another video 
Thanks  lovely thank you  me hands are alright now, they've warmed up
Yeah  I'll go over this way, let's have a look in  chemist for that comb
Yeah they have a lot more choice don't they?
Yeah , brush I should say, can pop up, oh Midland we can do on the way back, we can go
first though
Yeah okey dokey, I keep looking at that clock there but it's wrong innit?
I know  ha  oh Dixon's I've got to pop into Dixon's, they've got a P C advertised
Yeah
in the computers, on the erm telly
Mm
Gary wants me to find out a bit more about it cos he wants a new one, another, well he wants a new one, cos we done a deal, get my bed, if we get the bedroom done
Mm
he'll buy a P C, I said okay fair enough  I don't care, I'll get my bedroom done 
What computer he's got?
He's got an Amstrad, but it's not a coloured one
Oh right
Why, is Tony after one?
Well no, we wanted to get one for Charlotte, but erm, I don't think they'll use them 
Oh no this one's, you know it's a proper, proper video 
Oh yeah yeah that's 
yeah 
what they use up the school a proper computers, the screens and printouts and mouses and
Yeah
I went up the school and had a look at them
Yeah
I was talking to a lady about them
Yeah
but I've got to discuss it with Tony first
erm
you see that's what you want, but they're too hard  mm, even they're quite prickly
Yeah 
They're not too bad
Yeah
Trouble is though as you say he's not got a lot of hair really has he?
No
It's straight forward onto his scalp  I know what you look, I know what sort you're looking for though
Yeah
and it's what I'm looking for
Let's have a look 
and it's three ninety nine
Bloody hell 
and it's likely to last
Is it as soft as what you think though for him?
Yeah, erm how do you work it?
That's pretty
It is isn't it?
Mind you it might be a bit uncomfortable on the head
Yeah
or you can use it as a tie round  mhm, what about having, that's a bit harder
Yes, same as the  denman 
Oh, get it out
It's not too bad is it?
No  probably about the softest
Mm 
no I think that's harder than that
Yes
no that's  there you are, now you can't get softer than that


it's nifty innit?
Look at this  it might be three ninety nine, but I'll get it
Oh
we, cos me and Gary we've got a brush each and he wants one, see I like that, but I think that, that is a bit big
And it's dearer
Yeah
No Kieran, don't pull any of them off  you'd think it'd be cheaper if it was smaller wouldn't you?
Yeah 
Yeah hold on just looking at something  right, three little ducks
 

A load of different hair things in here ain't there?
Mm 
Very expensive in there though isn't it?
Yeah
A lot of things 
I'll go into Boots and find something cheap 
Well now cos places like Superdrug and, and Boots and that aren't er, I mean that's just basically a chemist that innit?
That's right yeah
So it should have everything, I still think that it's a bit expensive though
Yeah  
What about that Ferguson factory closing down then?
Yeah when they gave out 
I thought that was really sad 
with all those redundancies a couple of months ago, I thought that'll be it, I mean I've been there
Fifty percent off marked red tickets
That's right
I'm reading all these money things off
Yeah
Well I know, but it was sad because in Gosport that was what keep most of them going, I mean like they said none of them have never been on the dole before, they've all been there since they've left school, there was a couple there
Yeah
and they'd both been there thirty years since they've left school
Yeah
and now they just don't know what to do, there's no jobs, there's no nothing 
No 
and they said that some of them were thinking of moving, but
and they also reckon that the Gosport and Portsmouth are the worst off than anywhere else in this country
Yeah  it's very sad, but, what can you do?
That's why Alex has had to go back to London
Yeah, I know she was telling me, there she is a highly qualified
Secretary
and she's, and she's 
and 
used to bloody
did you know she's a qualified magician as well?
No
No, she only told me that the other day  yeah she is
Yeah
so that's two jobs she's qualified for and she can't get jobs in either
Ridiculous, erm twenty Bensons please
One ninety four then please 
I think I'm gonna get a Cadbury's Twirl while I'm here


I will, I'll get all this change out of my pocket  let's get rid of this  two, four, five, right, there's twenty five there for one of those, thanks  Yeah she's a qualified magician as well 
Yeah
you know, she was saying there's a girl at work and she's a top qualified chef
Mm
and she's, all she can do is what Alex's doing
Yeah
just general cooking and cleaning
Maybe she'll apply at the hospital then if she's a qualified cook, they're in and out of there like, like nobody's business the cooks, they can't, well they don't stay long
Why's that?
They don't get paid that much
Ah, that's it innit?
Yeah
The trouble on, the trouble is with a recession on it's an advantage of, oh they've closed down
Yeah
that didn't last long did it?
they couldn't afford the mortgage, erm the erm the lease 
The lease 
Yeah, erm you know my mate Lorraine, her sister used to work in there part time and it was on a Friday 
You got your 
book, I've got mine
it was on a Friday, it was her day off, she got called in at about three o'clock and they told her then, it was two weeks ago now
I didn't notice yesterday, mind you I didn't walk past, yes I did, I must of walked past it
Yeah, cos er Lorraine told me last, what Lorraine works every two weeks, what she's on this weekend, so erm, so it's two weeks ago she told
Bloody hell 
I tell you as I walked past there on Friday, she said yeah she said we were still open then, they closed it that night, ridiculous
It's terrible innit?
Yeah
I mean years ago I can remember coming into town and seeing that furniture shop filled with people walking around, every time I go past it now it is empty
Yeah 
which is why I think a lot of things, places should be able to accommodate for shop owners and reduce their leases while this recession's on
Yeah
It's so unfair
I won't half be surprised if they get in this time, I really will
The trouble is, us council owners will be worse off under the Labour council
Well I
so you can't win
That's right I know, but what can you do?
I mean the way, it, it's happened, I don't think John Major stands much hope basically
Yeah
I hate all this politic business any road, but
I know 
let's face it, whoever gets in, someone's gonna lose out
Yeah  I was quite shocked at that er thing about the fox hunting I was pleased 
What about it?
for my sister's sake
Oh what they didn't ban it?
Mm, yeah
I'll go in these doors, I wasn't surprised, I didn't think they would, but as this guy said afterwards he said whether you do it now or later he said, within the next five years it's gonna be banned  so I think it still will be banned in the end
Yeah 
I do at the moment, sympathize, that's a nice colour
It is, innit?
I didn't but now I sympathize
It's not bad material either 
No , that's nice innit?
That's good
Just right for around indoors, yes that one's nice to
Mm
I mean if they'd of banned it, there'd of been a lot more people out of work, which is 
Yeah 
probably part of the reason why they didn't for the time being 
That's right
I like those jumpers too
Yeah
Oh they've got rid of those white ones 
Sweat shirt 
Oh no they're not they've shoved them down there 
are they?
Yeah 
Nine to ten years, oh a bit big for Charlotte  oh there Paul, they've got some white ones
Oh yeah, oh I don't like that material, I'd rather get them them, this material
Oh you're a fussy faggot
I know 
what do you expect for two ninety nine 
but they , they sort of itch, whereas this stuff doesn't
Oh
See it's really soft feel that 
er actually I quite like the lace up ones anyway
Yeah
they're three ninety nine though aren't they?
Yeah
Yeah  well  nothing's much changed really
Mm  oh have you seen those knickerbockers over there?
Eh?
Knickerbockers, for babies
Oh yeah
They're sweet aren't they?
Mhm 


Oh they, they, oh yeah so they are
Look at these ones?
There's a, as I'm speeding them round here, oh one nine, nine, seven, that's Charlie's size as well 
Yeah Aaron's a seven
Are they supposed to be like that then, different at the front?
It's just the way the pattern is
Yeah, ah, I like the new pink ones, and that's for boys
Yeah
That'll be just right for on holiday won't they?
Yeah, get two different colours
Yeah, but the thing is right they're sevens and they're gonna be too small for them by the time holiday gets round say September
Mm
that's the trouble
well Aaron's a six and they're seven so I'm safe to getting Aaron a seven
I'm safe to getting mine sevens yeah
Yeah  there's erm I think that's seven is it?
No it's an eight 
Mind you when the warmer weather gets here they can wear them anyway
Oh yeah
I don't know which ones I prefer the purple or the pink
One of each, then she's always got another pair, cos I don't, is that blue?
Mm
Yeah I'm not keen on the blue
No 
have one of each 
Yeah, they've got these 
No I don't like that
Yeah, it clashes
Yeah
Oh I like those ones
Mm 
thirty seven, ha, don't get red
No I don't like red, I'd get him black
Black and blue?
Yeah, yeah so they won't, not, well they won't get so dirty, again with these you can just stick them in the wash
What, if they ain't got the size you can't 
Seven 
I think we've gone through all the sevens in the blacks ain't you?
It's only a five  nine, they're nines there, have you got a watch on?
Yeah
Oh good  ah hang on er, three pairs there, seven, six and an eight, right there's two blacks in sevens here, well I'll just have a pair of each, I've only got a fiver in me purse  just wondering whether to get black or blue though?
Mm
The mauve's quite nice aren't they?
What do you reckon?
I don't know, they look a bit rough on the front to me they do
Mm
don't they?
I'll just find a seven in the blue print
Haven't we got any then?
Hang on they're alright on the front, want another seven don't you for Aaron?
Yeah cos the black's likely to go grey, whereas the blues don't look so bad 
No 
when they go  oh they've got socks there to go with them
Mm, yeah I'm not too worried about her socks though but I say I'm gonna have plenty of Marks and Sparks' vouchers
Yeah
Seven?
I've got a seven here
Oh


and the white are nice, but they just get dirty too quick
Yeah  I don't know whether to get Aaron one or not, he's got enough at home, he's got enough from last year
What have my two got?
I believe I can always pop in town tomorrow 
I was wondering actually I think I might wait until that dress comes through, I'll try 
we can always ask to put them away for a week  yeah that's what I might do
Why?
Well then, if, we can put them away for a week 
Actually, actually wanted new trainers and they've got them there
Yeah they have ain't they?
He has been nagging me actually since I threw his others, he threw his others away that when some more came in, but these are alright for girls ain't they?
Six, they're nice, boy's nine 
Yeah 
No
I'm gonna leave it cos I can't make me mind up


I think I'll just walk away and leave it   Where else did you wanna go?
Erm I've got to go into erm
What's the time then?
Ten
Right, we'll scan there and I want to have a look at the computers in there as well
Yeah 
Okay, is there, I don't mind getting them shoes, but the thing is with, not knowing what the weather's doing
Yeah
you know and it, they don't need them, say they're both in their ordinary shoes at the moment
Yeah
I've also got to be careful because they've got size eights upstairs as well that Robert got them
Yeah
and it, oh Dixon's
Yeah Dixon's
it's over there innit?
Going that way and er  so you've already booked your holiday time up the hospital then or not?
Not done it yet
Not done it yet
No  I'm not bothered about going on holiday, I suppose I'm all worked up about getting bedroom sorted, ha
Mm, I said to Tony if we can't afford to go I said don't worry about it, we might just go back down to where we went last year for a week because, it's like I was saying to Joanne this morning, that this year they won't, they're not gonna worry whether they don't go on holiday but next year when Charlotte's at school and got all her school mates saying oh where did you go and
Yeah
you know what it's like.
That's right 
Ah, now that's the sort, they use the old B B C ones up the school and one's manufactured by Acorn 
Do you need any help there at all?
Erm yeah you got on, on the advert on the television you've got a P C, which one is it?
You haven't seen it obviously 
I've seen the advert it's embarrassing


it's probably either the five, oh dear, I don't know actually, we actually do several P Cs in the 
Yes I know 
because we're only a small branch, we only carry like one or two maybe 
Mm 
at the most, erm  is it I B M or
No it's an Amstrad
An Amstrad, is it five O or five two eight six?
I can't remember, that's what I've come in to find out
It could be the five two eight there's a five two eighty sixty two which is, about two hundred pounds, which is like a better machine
Yeah
erm which we do, which we haven't got in stock at the moment, but we can always get hold of
Right, well I think the best thing to do is to leave it until I see the advert again
It's  so just enquiring on the catalogue interest, we've only got that one
Leaflets, brochure?
Yeah, yeah, is it the games pack one?
No it wouldn't be the games pack, it'd be after that one
Yeah, so erm Microsoft Works game pack  erm  see do that, so many in the range now these are like our, our highlighted deal ones you see
Mm  I think I'm better off leaving it I think
erm see there's five five eight six which is this one, it's forty
hard drive
the Basingstoke's a larger branch aren't they?
Yeah they, they, they have a business centre as well you see, erm
Right
we can always get hold of the stuff here, save you lugging it around because they come in big boxes and that 
Yeah, yeah 
it's not a problem so if you just want to have a look round up there and sort of come here 
Yeah we've got relations in Basingstoke, so 
Yeah 
we can have a look down there tomorrow
Yeah, we can always get hold of them it's just that we don't carry them, we're a small branch you see
Right
we've not got a big room
No
so
okay then
unfortunately, but, I, I would give you one of these, but I can't even give you one of these 
But you haven't got one  
No, they only send us about three from the
I believe they should be out in the like the National Press and things like that
Yeah
I'd imagine because they usually put it in
Yeah
things like the magazines the colour supplements and things like that
Right
but yeah the Basingstoke branch is the business centre and their business centre is like the size of this shop so it's
Right
And they've got a lot more and they would have them up and running as well 
Yeah
so you could compare different ones and things like that 
Right I shall have to leave Gary in there for half an hour then 
Just drop him off and go to a canteen
Yeah 
but
Yeah
sorry, we can always get hold of it, it's just we don't carry them here
Right
but as far as the search thing and stuff like that it's the same engineers we buy it from Bensons 
Yeah 
they can buy it from
they just ring a telephone number 
 
okay then alright
Alright?
Thanks
Thanks a lot, sorry about that
That's okay  never mind, I knew it was gonna be a waste of time 
You just thought you'd ask
still perhaps we will get to Basingstoke this week didn't last 
Didn't you go last week?
No
why?
Well I got home, I got everything all sorted out, Gary even left a message on the answerphone saying that he'd be home round about half past two and that
Mm
and erm, ha, got home, didn't wanna go out, there was me I got changed, I put on those new leggings I was all in black I thought I looked rather nice, you know, and Gary said what you all dressed up for?
I said oh we're going out aren't we?
Oh I don't wanna go now
So you had a row
No we didn't have a row he just went a sleep me Aar , me and Aaron had enough, we went for a walk down the lake


we only went out for forty minutes, we were surprised how long we'd been gone
Ha
erm, I had, he only had his wellies on and his leggings


puddles were that deep, you know, puddles were that deep


I said to him you're not going in the puddle, he said yeah I am, no you're not, yeah I am, he did
He did 
so
oh well
once he'd gone in there I, I let him get on with it
Yeah
and erm I just stuck him in the bath when we got home
It's annoying that though innit?
Especially if you got ready to go out
Yeah
you see, like, I mean I started staying at home on Saturdays and, I don't do nothing, if Tony comes home and says he wants to go out I get it ready then otherwise I just plan on staying home
Yeah
oh I'm not gonna go all to hassle getting organized and he comes home and says he don't want to go out
That's right
so I don't do it now till 
yeah 
he comes home, then it's up to him.
Yeah  Children's coming about eleven again
Yeah, well she comes down about twenty to now and has a natter
Yeah
erm, have a talk and a laugh and she just stops for a coffee after
Yeah
or a talk, well she doesn't have to rush home cos there's no one there like
Yes, that's right
you know  I'm gonna take the kids to see Snow White at the weekend
Yeah
up Basingstoke cinema with me mum
What tomorrow?
No probably Sunday
Yeah could 
erm 
I might give you a ring later and say can you have Aaron
Mm
Gary's gonna find out, he's got 
yeah 
chance of overtime so I said well if you can get it, get it and I'll 
Yeah 
drop Aaron off in the morning
Yeah, no it wouldn't be tomorrow because I think my mum's working so
Yeah  It doesn't say open that, and I pull the others
No I know  anything else you need to do?
What's the time?
Ten, ten past time
You wanna browse round Peacock's
Yeah
or anywhere else while were here?
erm
Woolworth's, let's go and have a look in Woolworth's
Yeah
let's have a look in Woolworth's, I haven't been in there for ages, see what Easter eggs they've got
Yeah
erm, oh cut through over there I suppose  I was thinking the other day when I worked out that money for Saturday is it, it came to something like two pound eighty when you had Jordan
Yeah
and like six pound something when I, and six pound forty when I had Eran, so I thought if we call it six pounds for a Saturday, when you have Jordan I'll give you three pound
Right
is that alright?
Yep
Cos I thought if we round it off both ways
Yeah
you know that, a little bit cheaper on your end and a bit more I give you  oh what's this stand outside the shop and talk day, carry on over there, so are you happy with that?
Yeah
I don't want you not to be happy with it 
Yeah 
you know, say
Well it's all money innit?
Well, yeah, but I don't want you to sort of like 
As long as you get paid in the end
Oh yeah, I just didn't want you sort of be short 
Yeah 
at the weekend or something
No
you know, erm
er no cos I pay my cheque in
yeah, alright then cos it's just three pound for last week then
Yeah
and six pound fifty then week cos I won't, you won't have them on Monday but if she keeps working it'll be most Mondays anyway
Yeah
so all the time I've got him
Yeah
now, I don't know if they've got them ones in here, what they got in here  I wonder if my husband will remember to get me one this year?


That'd be a first I can tell you, oh that's a good one innit?
Mm, paying for the wrapping though
Oh it's only ninety nine P that one though innit?
Oh is it?
Yeah
Oh yeah
ninety nine P, no, it's a chocolate Easter egg that's all you get
Yeah
Easter egg  then just, like you say mainly the packing I suppose, oh they've got some more over here, ah these are my kind, oh they're not bad are they?
Little ones
No
eighty nine P
I like the cup ones, only what I, what they don't do which I think is silly
Mm
as most Easter eggs go to kids, they put them in a breakable cup, while they don't put them in a plastic one or a melamine one
What's that for?
Yeah came out, last night
yeah
garage as well and the car didn't he
Look granddad 
Yeah well they said it was rules and regulations 
Yeah, but 
but they told mum not to worry
shut up
Look granddad
Tut, oh
Hello Dave 
 

I want my dinner
Come on then what we having for dinner?
Well I got Anthony a piece and butter
Right do you want some lunch in it Ant?
That
What?
Just butter?
See you later folks
Yeah see you later Dave
Bye, bye
Why did you come over then?
Cos I wanted to see your dad
Here you go 
you don't mind do you?
What was Snow White like
oh
and the seven wolves?
Well, too bad
Was, was it good?
Me undo it
Go on then
yes
I'm four years old
I know you are
and I go to school
and if you keep on you won't see five
I be to the I get five?
Mummy 


ma, ma
bye bye my little girl


bye bye happy
See you later
bye bye Larna
See you
See I kissed your mum


No


See you later Dave
Ta ta
Right, what else do you want to eat darlings?
I want some cheese
You want a piece of cheese?
Yeah
Oh I think you'd better let mummy do that er
I want some cheese
well the thing is if I don't do it, there's not gonna be enough there for both of you, if you hack it up darling, anyway I need to use a sharp knife
Mum
Ah, don't put it on the
on there
mum can I get some luncheon meat?
Yeah
Mummy I want a big bit 
I'm gonna 
Yeah, you both got a big bit there and that gets rid of that then, right who want's erm some tomato sauce?
Eh we got 
do you want a bit tomato sauce Ant?
Erm, yeah mum
Charlotte do you want a bit of tomato sauce?
Yeah, on my, on my bread, so I wanna spread it, mum I only want one piece of lunch meat
Get it off
yeah I don't mind as long as you eat what you've got that's all
I need the board, where's my knife?
Oh what you want your little knife?
Yes I want to spread my sauce over
And me knife
And yours
Yeah and now I've got my gear and my
I never got my
I don't, I don't need my fork or any no I, I have my fork too
Mummy put it on, mummy me bear on?
No it's Sunday today love not on Sunday 
Not on 
nothing, they're watching a film in there darling, so we're gonna sit out here okay?
Have some dinner
Yeah, mummy's going to do the bingo in a minute
in the dinner dinner 
The 
you've got the copy of how to do that number one
Well I wanna do this bingo first cos granddad's 
Mama 
got a lot of cards and it takes me a long time to do it 
 

cut my bread up
You want it cut in half?
What cut in half so you can make a sandwich?
Yeah  there you go, that's good innit?
Mum look I've put tomato sauce over
Well done
Mum there I am 
one luncheon meat sandwich, oh that's gonna be nice
no 
no  yeah  there that's gonna stick, it, there that's gonna just about do it, there, well that's going to stick it like that, so that'll stay sticky 
Mum I don't want a bear on, mummy bear on tomorrow
No it's not on now till next week
Oh bear on next week, he on a big, big
big  and he's a nice
row, row, row a boat gently down the stream, merrily, merrily, just uh, uh, uh when my night got him 
Are you singing mate?
 

Mum, I'm making such a big sandwich
Can you cut it up?
It's alright as long as you eat it
Bye, bye  I can't do it, done it now, and a little bit and there 
Ah are you gonna eat that?
Yes he will in a minute when he's finished making it, won't you Anthony?
Have you finished making it yet have you?
Right, would you two like a drink?
Me on Coke
You sure you'd like Coke or do you want some orange?
We have Coke
Okay, are you sure, cos you've already had some Coke
Mummy me are gonna go in there
No no put them back in there darling, they're what we got at the pictures 
A little bit
to see Snow White, didn't we?
no, no
Next you wanna go and see Peter Pan?
And, and er Cinderella 
What about Cinderella?
We want to go and see Cinderella
Cinderella, oh I don't know when that one's coming down  if it comes down to the pictures we'll go and watch it, I'll promise you that, right, who's nicked my cup?
Er mum
Yeah, hold on let me just go in the other room and see if my cup's in there 
I made in it 
here it is 
mum
Yes love
I didn't want a drink
Oh well it's there if you want it
Ta mum, thanks that's what I needed
Just what you needed 
Mummy get it a big, big
 

Oh right, you've all got drinks and you've all got something to eat, well while you're doing that then I must do these bingo
Yes mum, I don't mind
Let's put this away, I've got to find a space first
Those are mummy
No what?
No please don't find a space
Oh I've got to find a space to get to a newspaper, to do the bingo numbers
Why you is it, why you eating a piece of luncheon meat?
Well, just something to nibble on that's savoury and not sweet
Like popcorn
Yeah, but that's sweet  rather that one was sweet yeah, cos you can get popcorn
sweet too
Yeah, but you can also get it with salt
mm
Can't eat popcorn then
You put erm
anyway salt's bad for you
Salt's bad?
Mm
Yeah, but you, you try the popcorn
Yeah darling but that one wasn't with erm
Pepper
No that wasn't with salt, that was just with erm 
Row, row, row the boat, gently down the stream, merrily merrily life  
What?
Oh, hang on a minute darling, I've got to do this 
hello, hello
 

mum ma  erm, dinner, dinner our, dinner, I've got a
 

mum
Yeah
I want a bit of sauce
Okay, yeah, but don't go too mad  right, let's get all these bingo cards done, see if we've won this time, I doubt it very much, never won anything in our lives, I can't see us starting now
Bye, bye, me see you later  hello, hello
  

Are you trying to sing Anthony Mark?
That's enough mum, I
Mum ma
That's enough darling, you don't want to put too much on it, it's just a waste
There you go mum
Well put it over there 
I've finished
Good girl, at least you've eaten it all up
Mummy
Yeah
mum ma
Mm  alright?
Chew it next time
I know, gonna see if other nan's in tonight aren't we?
Who nanny ?
Yeah, if we've got time, right, see if mummy can, oh I know what I want before I do that
it's alright, I just wanna get my head band, mummy's hair's getting long at the front, I must get Sara to cut it
Not mine
No yours is okay  ain't got no playschool next week, have we?
Ah?
Half term
Er mummy don't want that I've had enough
what's today's date?
Let's see, it can't be then, that's dad's birthday, so it must be the twenty third today, look in my little book
Mum ma are you doing in your little book  er pardon me
Right twenty
second, twenty two, who's what darling?
Who did blowed off?
He meant burped
Who did burped?
You did you little piggy so you say pardon
I say pardon
Oh that's alright then
Me go up to bed
What now?
Yeah
Alright if you say, before I start me bingo
But mummy 
Careful, careful 
Merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily, life is but a dream  
Bring your chair over then and we'll wash your hands, hang on let mummy do it, don't drag it, good boy, let's run the tap then you can get back to sleep
Me up
get the soap then
Me, me
Don't take too long then cos that water's pretty cold  quick then  have you eaten that all up Charlotte?
I don't want any more bread or my luncheon meat
What you putting more sauce on for then?
Oh but this isn't my bit of cheese in
Oh, well, alright
Yeah a bit cold
Yeah a bit cold, are you gonna dry your hands and I'll put your chair back
right, bingo, well done Charlotte, what game we on?
Four, one, two
 

mum ma
Yeah
er are daddy come in and daddy come out
Mm daddy won't be out for a while though he's watching Terminator
He's got a lot of nasty in there?
It's got a lot of nasties in it that's why I'm sitting out here looking after you
Having some dinner
Yeah, having some dinner, well we didn't have any did we, cos mummy took you to the pictures with nanny 
Row, row, row the boat gently down the stream, merrily, merrily life  merrily, merrily life is but  mummy
Yeah
Mm
Don't knock the table
mummy
Mm, Charlotte stop rocking the table darling
Mummy
Mm
me undone meat, meat
Well you'll have to get it out the fridge, alright let Charlotte get it cos she's easier to get it than you Ant
The meat
Yeah, get the plate of meat Charlotte  good girl, well done
Mummy
erm, I want a bit that's not got too much fat on it don't you?
That's a nice bit
Mm
Yeah, do you want that bit?
I've got that on it
Yeah, give me the knife and I'll cut it off
No, I want, me a bit tired
Yeah I know, but don't start going off to sleep now, not if you want to see your other nanny
Nanny
You want to go and see nanny  don't you?
Mum look
Oh actually come to think of it
mum look, mum look
Good girl, there you go
We made it a nice one, yeah?
I'm not gonna talk to you 
Why?
mum look
When did that happen?
I bite, I was biting it
Oh well that's your silly fault then
I want a new one
You can't have a new one
Why?
Cos we're not at the pictures
That's right
Quickly go to the pictures
Oh they'll be shut now won't they?
Why?
Well cos some, everybody has to go home, it's too late for you to be going out now anyway to pictures
What you doing?
Taking the fatty bits off darling, mummy don't like the fatty bits either
stay at granddad's for a little while, while daddy watches that film and then go and see other nanny for a little while, cos you've got no playschool tomorrow so you haven't got to get up early have you?
Mum could you teach me how to play that?
Not now, no, we're having dinner and I'm doing this bingo for a minute  look bring your
Where is it?
get your pencil
I don't know where they are, they maybe in the front room
Run in and ask granddad where they are, but don't look at the telly, then come out and I'll show you how to do it 
I am
Yeah, it's quite easy 
mum ma
Mm
daddy wants a bit of Coke
Well come out and get it then, got the pencils haven't you?
Yeah
Mm
Mum ma, I want a bit of that one there
Take that then  don't spill it
Don't you want to drink it?
Me undone my, get, get my beat in, meat in
Ah
Vinegar
Me like vinegar
Mm
mm
Right push the door up, push the door up if you've got pencils, good girl
I er, I bring
Right bring the tin round here and I'll find you a pencil  right, now bring your Snow White thing round, that's the best one to use, right 
What about Anthony?
No Anthony's still eating darling, right, now that word there says Doc, D O C which is the name of one of the dwarfs, okay, so in all them letters there is the name Doc, so you've got to look for those three letters D O C alright, so you go along, no let me show you how to do it then.
You go along  each line and you find a D there but there's no Os next to it is there?
So you go along to the next D and there's no Os there, so you come down, D, no Os, so you keep going along the lines and every time you get to a D you stop
D O C
That's it, D O C and then all you do is you draw a line around it  oh dear, no we want another pencil, this one ain't gonna work on here is it?
My, see if we can find a pen or something, that one might work, lean on the table cos it'll be easier 
Not too bad
Yeah, right, then you'll scrub that one out like that, cos you've done that one, alright, then you pick another word and you look for it, right look for Grumpy G R U M P Y and you start by going across the top, alright?
You get a nice space to sit down at the table
move my plate and I'll sit here
Yeah, well what about saying please
Please  what did you say?
Now do it quietly 
That big red one?
Well, no, er Grumpy
Where's Grumpy?
I don't know what's in it
That one G R U M P Y, right?
Grumpy
Right, you do that and I'll do this
That one down the bottom
Mummy I do, I do done me
Hang on, let me just do this game on card 
No 
let me just finish this game 
No 
You haven't finished eating yet
No, me didn't eating now
What about your cheese?
Eaten it
Yeah finish your cheese while mummy's finishing this card  and then erm 
Is that, does that a C, a proper C
Ah well you do it Charlotte you've got to match the letters up, not much good if I've got to stop to keep helping you is it?
The idea is so you can do that while mummy does this 
 

No, no, hungry 
Thirty five , twenty one, fifty four, sixty nine, twenty, oh, there, five is not there
Ah, look I've got it  I saw this, one of those right, mum I finded erm one of those, but I just can't see any Cs or that number
Well Charlotte it's not easy, it's gonna take you a long time, but then so
Mum, mummy
 
I can find C
mm, mm
that number with the and so that number
We're running out of room on this table
that number, that number
Mummy move back
Where am I gonna move it to?
Push, push it back there, then you can carry on eating if you want to, then you can sit there
that number
 

I'm only showing you once darling and then you'll have to do it or else I'll never get me bingo done, alright, you choose a word to look for like Doc
Mm
Right that's D O C and then you look on here and you look for a D O C, when you found it you put a ring around it alright?
Like that
Mum I find it, C, that number, that number, that number 
Yeah, but they don't join up Charlotte and then you cross and then you cross it out
Yeah but this can't find them 
Right, so you cross this out and now you've got to look for another word
Erm
it's very hard, if you can't do it go to the Snow White picture and colour the picture
and me gonna do it
What?
No, we'll, we'll do it together later when mummy's got time to sit and help you alright?
Yeah
When I've done me bingo
Yeah me gonna colour in on
There you go if I put the pencil there, don't knock it off though
Why?
Cos you'll drop all your pencils that's why
They're not there
No
Number one I think, no
Mummy not it on there
No, no
Well get another one then
No
Me got another one er one
me doing, I find a two that match up together mum, look
Yeah, but you've got to have a complete word that matches Charlotte
Look it matches
Look why don't you do the colouring for now and then I'll help you do that in a little while when I've done this bingo?
Alright
Alright, good girl
Where is this picture then?
Here it is Snow White and the Seven Woofs
Dwarfs, not Woofs
No  ah it's going in the butter
No it's not
Ah
not if you don't move it, it won't go in the butter
Just leave it down
I don't want and move it over
Right
mum ma here
Look, why did anybody move it?
Put it down where I left it, put it down, let go Anthony
I wanna put it in the butter
It's not in the butter, look, let go and you'll see it's not in the butter, it is over the butter which is alright, now don't fight 
Who had the brown hat?
But that and those had the brown set  that, that and that, right so it's on
That one I'll do, he my are 
Where's my 
I do want it Anth
Grumpy, Grumpy
Yeah


Grumpy over there?
Mummy me go in it 
There's Grumpy  Grumpy, pink colour on
there's brown work in Grumpy
There's thirty there
this do, this won't work on Grumpy, Grumpy do
Well
Mum, look what I've done Grumpy on done him, I've done him in the right hat you see
Well done
all the right hat that one
Mum, mum, mum, mum
doing the right 
oh me doing
Right
up anot , he doing a that up, dearie me
You supposed to be doing that hat, that hat and that hat
Me doing it that hat
Oh Anthony sit down before you fall off the chair
Are you doing that one?
You're doing that hat right, you're doing the wrong hat aren't you?
You're doing the wrong hat to Grumpy to Anth, you're doing the wrong hat for Grumpy


Bless you


Bless you
Mm
How many more times are you gonna sneeze?
He might of been taking after Sneezy aren't you?
Oh mum me do it, me are gonna do that and that in a minute
Right  that one  here he is
Anthony sit still you're knocking mummy's arm 
and like that, which way, which way
I don't, ma, ma
What is his name?
What is that one called?
That's Grumpy isn't it?
No that's Grumpy
Ha, I don't really know darling cos they all look so much alike don't they?
Oh well shall I just colour in the same hats then?
Yeah, I think that's probably the best idea
I think I  there
Mummy doing
now I've got all of the hats on 
mum doing 
now I'm gonna do 
Five three, eight
a blue one 
Colour it in 
a blue one
What?
Where's the blue?
Mum
No I think I'll do a purple hat 
erm, it, it go in here
where is, here we are 
Where's this gonna go?
I know where that one is  oh I need a colouring bit of that thing, colouring harder  there
I don't know why
Doc has green hat, where's the, where's the green?
Grumpy, Sneeze, Grumpy
Grumpy
Sneezy
Grumpy 
I wonder if Aunty Mandy will come down next week?
Grumpy, Grumpy, Grumpy, Grumpy
Here that one
Have to give her a ring won't we Charlie?
I'm doing it Charlie
Yeah
Yeah 
short one
Mum
was that one  what was that man, what does the green man do mum?
What green man?
That one, what, what does he 
I don't know looking at it upside down darling, hang on, oh keep yours, let me look at Anthy's  the green one?
Yeah the green one with the green hat, that one, that one that you're touching with your hand
Any, hang on Anth  oh the green one is  for what I can see on the picture, I think the green one is Sleepy
No read it what's on there, does it say Sleepy?
No it doesn't, I think that's just what it was Sleepy darling
Sleepy, now where's Sleepy, oh here he is, here's Sleepy
Not that
 
here's Sleepy now he's gonna have a green hat
Here he is
the green hat
I did that on there
right and now erm  a 
Mummy
Yes love
me doing all green
You doing it all green are you?
Erm do you want a little bit more table
Er 
do you wanna little bit more table, that's gonna be alright because you've erm, if I move them  if you put on that, if I  hold them on my lap and then they won't get, you won't want to ask me, do you want another one?
Erm, no, me want, me wanna do his, erm me wanna do it all green.
And when you want one tell me
Yeah 
I know what
er 
we've got erm, if we  you put mine over there and then the sauce there like that
and er
and put and that up, any one if you turn yours round
Yeah
and I move this plate
That mine
Yeah, but you don't want to eat it 
Where you going with that plate?
Me wanna eat it in a minute
Just leave it there in front of him so that he can eat it if he wants it Charlotte
Put it on here, there 
I leave it right there and I 
When I've finished these Bingo cards anyway I'll, I'll give the table a good tidy up so we'll have more room
and if I move that, that on to there, then I  on there like that we can even put the red sauce there can't we, and see what
Just don't knock Ant's plate on the floor
No  see Anth look, if I put the butter up there
Put that
Charlotte why you moving everything?
It was all fine the way it was
I know, but where could we put the pencils on the table?
The pencils were alright 
Yeah but I did still did see  I do  I wanna do a blue
I hope granddad don't collect no more of these bingo cards  I'll never get through doing them all each week for him, I don't know why we do them eh Charlie he never wins?
He hasn't got lots , got a big one
Er, erm
a big on there
I want that one
Is that what it
ah
Put this, that across
mum, mum, mum, we
I want red
What Ant?
What mate?
Me want no
got, me got a, me got a man
You've got the wrong hat haven't you?
Look green hat, purple hat, purple hat, green hat that's brown hat 
 
Bless you
brown hat, brown hat, brown hat


Bless you 
blue hat 
Mm, I wanna do
See you're doing them all green like you shouldn't be, you should be doing some brown
It doesn't matter Charlotte, so long as he colours it in
I'm colouring mine in nice and there's little nose
Me I going on the pot
Oh they have the same noses, orange noses, mum have we got orange in here?
I don't know it's your tin of pencils, have a look
No we haven't  they'll have to have yellow noses then
Oh dear, you have got the sneezes haven't you?
Yeah like man
Like Sneezy, yeah 
Yeah, like Sneezy  I can't see any
thirty five there 
I think we're gonna have grey noses 
So did you enjoy that film at the pictures then?
Mum I only 
What doing 
never dinner up
Well you've finished your dinner haven't you?
No
Why, what have you got left to eat?
I got a little bit of dinner, dinner there now
Right I'll put some more on in a moment, hold on let me do this little bit 
Not, it's  big, big nose now
Erm
 

both look tired
What?
I said you both look tired, that's sat in front of that cinema screen all that time 
We look tired?
Yeah, does make you a bit tired when you're watching a big screen like that, it makes your eyes ache after a while, cos you're not used to it, but  still you can have a nice lay in tomorrow can't you, cos you've got no playschool tomorrow 
Mum, ma
so we're all gonna have a nice lay in aren't we?
mum, mum, ma
Mm
What else noses have I got to do this?
Mummy me getting worn out doing it
Pardon?
Me getting worn out
You getting worn out are you?
er doing it
Well it's a big
I'm getting worn out doing this, it's hurting my eyes after going to the pictures and then doing all these bingo cards for granddad
It still, it, it hurting 
I done that 
my eyes too mum
Mum I wanna go
Oh when daddy's finished we can go  you went to see your film now you've got to let daddy watch his.
Ha, I'm tired
Mm
That's alright though because it doesn't, I'm not worried tonight because you can lay in tomorrow cos as I say there's no playschool or gymnastics is there?
What
 

go, mum, ma, I can't do any more
Well don't do it then darling, you don't have to do it
Mum, ma
just sit down and finish eating your lunch, your dinner
And you've done them a bit all green haven't you, why don't you do some of erm
Cos he's tired ain't you love?
some, the other colours, look what I've done, I've done mine pretty
Not at a pretty, I like it all green
He likes it all green don't you Ant?
Mm
Yeah, but I like mine pretty so 
Mummy me nearly did it now 
Jolly good, I think mummy's nearly finished her bingo too
Mummy, I wanna dinner on, dinner
I'm finishing
 
I don't know why I bother though cos you never flipping win anything 
Oh yeah  oh yeah and me
you've got too many green ones haven't you?
If your mother wins anything it'll be a bloody miracle 
What about it like this, see, I've done all those hats, I've done the, I've gone a great hat I have
Mum, ma I want a great hat mum 
I've done them all the right hats
We needed eighty five on the last one didn't we?
Hang on a minute , one, two, three, one, two, three
Forty five 
Mummy
cor, yeah mate
I want you to help me do that now 
when do, do it 
Oh yeah I've finished my bingo now
Oh I've forgot someone's hat
Yeah
Who's hat did you forget?
Come here then let's see if we can do the word search
This 
Mum I wanna do that one
Do what darling?
I wanna do the word search 
I do that one 
I do 
I wanna do that 
Right, I read what it says on here then, okay, you listening?
Still the fairest one of all, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs is back and coming to theatres everywhere, Snow White is a beautiful, captivating and timeless of the day everyone fell in love with her, in the world first full length animated feature.
Filled with the magic and beauty that will continue to thrill audiences for years to come, Snow White tells the story of a beautiful young princess and her jealous step mother the queen.
When the queen plotted to have her killed, Snow White is forced to hide in the forest that surrounds the castle, but not before being noticed by the handsome prince, helped by her animal friends and offered shelter by the lovable seven dwarfs
Mum
she remained hidden from her cruel stepmother, knowing that one day her prince will come, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs is a mor as memorable as the songs that fill the movie
hello
that fill the movie with music and everyone's heart of joy, with the contagious hit tunes Whistle While you Work, Hi Ho and Some Day My Prince Will Come, you'll be tapping your toes and singing along in no time, let the story telling magic of Walt Disney capture your heart 
Mum that works, some, some 
in this timeless classic Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs 
I know, but I've also got to do the tea as well for granddad and daddy and Phillip.
And Karen
Yeah, no Karen's not here
and bubber and big bubber, bubber not er bubber, here are 
Mum look this one 
Hold on , what?
this, I've just done that so remember we've done it
Okay
this done that, see
yeah I'll be with you in a minute, hold on
Mum can you this
Yes in a minute 
What are you doing carried away that
there we go, I've done that now, right
Mum
Mum ma
I've just done that to know with, we've done that okay?
Mm
Yeah, that's right, I'll just pop the kettle on and then we'll start to find another, oh well done Anthy, well done.
You going to get a different colour pencil and do a different colour little birdies?
No, erm
I wonder if any birds have eaten any of that erm food yet that's outside in garden at home?
Maybe not
No, we'll have to have a look tomorrow  they'd better hurry up and eat though hadn't they?
Well now what we're, we're we looking for here?
For erm  G, A he only started to write Grumpy, mum look what I've started to write, Grumpy
Mum ma
ah buy these 
 
there's some Buttons here do you want some?
Ah I want
No, I'll put them back in here then
Yeah
Do you want them or not?
Mummy he had mine, I want mine, I want to read my own, I wanna, I wanna have mine
Right who's having which one then?
Me having
I'm having
here
that one, I'm having that one 
Right, that's a good choice, okay
Mum, ma
Do you want me to read them?
Yeah
Alright then 
I can read my own
Alright here we go then, here's Anthony's  see saw marjory door, Johnny shall have a new master, he shall have but a penny a day, because he can't work any faster  and Charlotte is, let's have a look then  hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle  
I, I know that one  hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle the cow jumped over the moon, the little dog laughed to see such fun and the dish ran away with the spoon 
Well done darling mm ah 
I know that one
you really are getting clever aren't you?
I, I've always knowed that
Ah, well yes I know you've always known it
Mum ma
Hold on, let me put some of this away  have you two finished with your plates?
Yeah
Yeah, do you think you've had enough now?
So if we move some of these off the table
Yeah
we'll have more room to do our pictures 
I can do oh no 
get one 
We don't want to go in the other room and watch the nasties do we?
No I get down
So you've finished Anthony have you?
Mum look, I done my own buttons
Good girl 
do you want me to do, I can do it
Charlotte have you finished with your dinner?
do you want me to do it?
No
If he says no, he says no
Don't fight me
Don't fight nanny won't take your pictures any more, do you want me to open Anthony?
Yes
If I do this to opening up 
See saw, see saw, the marjory in a door 
Mum ma me wanna do a bit of green 
Okay then, well you do a bit of green then, I'll tidy up and then we'll carry on
What are them?
Ant what about erm Snow White's dress?
I'm doing in it
Yeah, let him do it how he wants to Charlotte 
You can't do a green all that
Mummy 
know why?
Cos it'll look stupid
We'll do erm another


perhaps another of drawing and that and then we've got to erm get pyjamas on
Why?
Well, because then we've got to sort out all our stuff to take home  well 
What about 
like I say there's no rush cos we haven't got to go, you haven't got school tomorrow 
Hiya
Ah dad
Do you want me to make you a coffee in a minute?
Mm yeah
Eh?
please 
Marjory door went off her car, eating her 
Give us a kiss then 
Put more water in then 
along came a spider
I miss you
and sat down beside her 
You miss me have you?
Liar
and frightened Miss Muffet away
And frightened the spider away 
 

From this map, this map work's on here
Mm, yeah well I will be with you in a minute darling, it's just that I've got a
hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over the moon, the little dog laughed to see such fun and the dish ran away with the spoon, hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over the moon, the little dog laughed to see such fun and the dish ran away with the spoon
Oh what am I doing?
the dish ran away with the spoon
hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over the moon, the little dog laughed to see such fun and the plate ran away 
Dish ran away with the spoon
and the plate ran away with the spoon
No, the dish ran away with the spoon, the spoon goes with the dish darling
But look, look, it's a shape of a plate
I know, but it's a dish that goes away with the spoon love
hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over the moon, the little dog laughed to see such fun and the dish ran away with the spoon  another packet of Buttons
Me eat them?
No 
Show me Charlotte 
There look
Wait a minute  me only
 

hey diddle diddle, the cat 
I'll be with you in a minute, let me just finish making the tea 
and the fiddle
Mum, ma
Yeah, oh don't tip them all over the table sweetheart
Oh 
Right, I want a coffee
Mum ma
Yes
wait a minute, he and not got a ticket on
Well that's alright 
Hang on a minute  this one hasn't got the ticket on
Yeah well don't get muddled up whose is who
Why?
I don't want you two fighting over them that's why, you know what you two are like
write your name on them
You can't write your name on them darling
You can 
you just keep hold of yours and Anthony keep hold of his 
 

L, O P, P, E, E, H, H, R, L
Not 
 
E, R, H, H, L 
Mummy
O, T, T, E  marjory door, the little bit more, in the
and down came the spider and sat down behind her and frightened Miss Muffet away,there's a spider
On about a spider
We're going 
See little Miss Muffet?
Yeah Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet
Yeah me a spider 
Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet eating her curds and wheys, along came a spider, along came a, no I not say along came a spider and sat down beside her, along came a spider and sat down beside her and frightened Miss Muffet away 
Right I've got one more drink to make my dears and then I'll be with you
What about our drinks?
You've got Coke, that's your treat each week, cos you don't have it at home, you only have it on a Sunday
I've not got in there
Yeah they're probably for little Robert darling, but he's not here is he?
Mm
He didn't come up  Anthy out here
On the sun, with the
There aren't any nasty in there
No but there will be in a minute
Er, erm, me up
well they're all trying to watch the film  sit down
Mum he was here but we were too late 
I know 
to see him 
Right come on then, you've got to finish your
right, come on Ant
right, alright, let's go and see if we can find these words
Anthy, Anthy, Anthy
Along came a spider and set down behind her 
Oh don't scrape your chair across the floor 
Look the mat's working
What, why you've been crossing them off?
Where's me pen?
I didn't cross them off
Right
I didn't cross them off
Okay you didn't cross them off
Look at this just
okay then, you've got to try and find Bashful
Where's Bashful?
Well find the letter B and you Anthy
Where's Bashful?
Is it down the bottom?
 
Aren't you doing it?
No, not there, doing that bit
Oh alright then
What, what is the
You've got to find the letter B
Is that it?
That's a capital B
Bashful, I can't find the letter B
Mm
there's B
Is there an A next to it?
Erm
A capital A
No, that's not it, is it?
What about down there?
No
Mm, I know what the problem is
What?
Well there's young children
Yeah
hold on
Yeah
you're first taught to write in small letters, these crosswords or as they print most crosswords in erm capital letters, and of course you don't recognize them do you?
I don't remember
You don't recognize the two different types of As and Bs
Mum
Is that it Bashful?
Yeah, but you won't find it in there because you don't recognize the letters darling
Well there's B and it's not
Not on there
there, now what are we?
Which?
Where is it?
Which one is it?
Mum ma mum ma I'm not 
 
where is it?
Is it up the top B, that one 
Yes, very well done Anthony
Where's
Mm
where's the first letter?
Mummy
where's the first letter?
B A S H F U L it's down there, but it's all in capital letters you see, now you've got to find the diamond, which is what they, where did they, where were they looking for diamonds?
There
do you want the other half?
No
I've been sat there all evening nobody's eaten it so I thought I might as well get on and eat it
I've never tried it actually
It's cheesecake dear
No it's not like the cheesecake I had
Oh it's not a thick creamy one, it's a home made one innit?
mm?
Let me sit on your lap
Let me sit on the table
Half term next week innit mate?
Mm
Yeah, right, now we're going to look for diamonds, where were they looking for diamonds?
I've pointed that one off 
 
That's it, no they went to look for diamonds in the cave when they went to work didn't they?
Is it that one?
That one
diamonds
Yeah
so now 
you've got to find the letter D
Mum ma
There
Yeah, then you've got to find the letter I, I think it's there D I A M O N D that's it there look
Mum ma
Let me cross it off
Go on then
I wanna help me do it 
Where?
There?
Okay love, yeah down there  around the D at the bottom and then back up to the D at the top 
Why are you eating some, some cheesecake?
I think they saved it for me darling
There you go, I've crossed it off, look
Okay
I've comed it
cross it off down here
Oh look
cross it off down there
Here?
Yeah, let me eat this last piece of cheesecake then I can help you
I'm gonna buy you, er
 
Now what one are we gonna look for?
mm?
Now what one are we looking for?
Now 
Dopey 
Sleepy?
Dopey
Dopey my love
Dopey there, Dopey there
Do it in pen cos the pencil don't show up, yeah Dopey, D O P E Y we've got to find
Let me do the pen, so it's that one
Yep
Right, where I do
Oh I can see it
There?
No
Erm where?
There D O P E Y
There, start from there
No Charlotte, did I just say there?
I didn't, I didn't, I wasn't
D O P E Y 
Er what about, got 
me
Yeah
Start from there?
Yeah D O P E Y 
 
right now cross Dopey off your list
Where?
Yeah, that's it
right that's enough, now we're gonna find Grumpy, I can see Grumpy up there look, G R U M P Y
That one?
Yes, G R U M P Y, so you've got to draw a circle round Grumpy
Round them
That's it all the way along to the letter Y 
Mum ma mum ma
there
That's it come round the Y, now go back to the G, start, where you going?
Mum ma , mum ma
I can't see a blinking thing you're doing
mum ma when me
in the morning
Mm
when me
in the morning
Cross it off down there, yeah
Look
Yeah 
Here?
Grumpy there 
Mummy when me
in the morning
Now I wanna look for that one 
when me
in the morning, me wanna go on that
You wanna do yours tomorrow do you?
Yeah, that
Right, now 
I wanna 
we're gonna look for castle
I wanna do that one
We've just done Grumpy, we're gonna do the castle now, don't point the pen up to your face that's how you get pen on your face
That one
Yeah castle
Right
Right, erm
now this one is gonna be a little bit harder for me
Yeah
Here it is C
Yeah there's the, no that's 
Mum, me a 
there is is C A S T L E 
 
C
C A S T L E, there's all wobbly bits in the table isn't there?
Cross castle off
There?
Yeah, right, so we've done those and we've done Doc so now we've got to find 
A bit of 
no, no, they're all right, got to find dwarfs now
What's ah
there is is look D W A R F S
Right 
Cross it
Mum, mum
Yes love
Me wash up?
No I've done it all
Oh
Right cross dwarfs off, that one
That one?
Yeah
Mummy me wanna do it next 
That's it 
time
now we're gonna find Happy
Happy
it
Happy
Mum ma
Yes Anthy
do it
 

Where's Happy, there it is, is that Happy 
There it is H A P P Y, you've got the pen ready?
Mm, I wanna do it, there?
Yeah
So round there
No, see, you don't watch do you?
Round  right now cross Happy off
There
No that doesn't say Happy does it?
That say Happy?
Mm
Does that say Happy?
Yes darling
Mum ma 
Right, now we're gonna find poison apple and I know where that one is
Where?
Where?
Poison apple
along the bottom, the whole bottom line except for the letter T okay?
Yeah
Mum ma
Go on then, what darling?
That one
Yeah, start from round there
now go all the way along and around and all the way back and stop.
Cross poison apple off
There?
Yeah
All of it?
Yeah
Poison apple off
Right stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop when you're told
now we want 
Right prince 
Prince, now that easy to find, I, hang on a minute I'll be able to find that
Alright then, I won't help
Prince
Mum, ma
Yeah
here
What darling?
Here's prince I finded it prince
Where?
Well that's that number, but it's not altogether is it?
No that's right, you've only found the letter P, you've got to find P R
Mum ma
I can see it
There?
No
I get the pen
I wasn't gonna draw it
Mum, ma
Just look, I'm not gonna do the circle I'm just gonna demonstrate where it is, P R I N C E, down to the E, hang on I've knocked the pen out
Mummy
Down to there?
start from there?
Start from the P not the N
The P there?
No, where's my finger, there, look  you don't watch do you, you, you're so worried about other things, right cross Prince off
Mum ma
Prince
Mind you don't fall love
Mm, me what a get
right, queen you've got to find now, that's enough, cor dear, you don't have to cross it off so you can't see it Q U E E N get up on that chair you're giving me headache keeping having to look round
Mum, mum
What are you doing sat up in the high chair?
That over there with two R 
No we're doing queen with two Es
Mum ma
Want your Buttons over there?
Yeah
And your drink?
And your cat?
There's two
and a do it on my button now
I wouldn't darling because that might be a bit grubby
Mum I want it 
Mum I finded two that's not together
Right which is, they're Anty's aren't they?
Mum
well it won't make any difference, I'll give you a dish
Oh I want
I get you a dish for them
tip out there
No you don't want to tip it out on there cos you get germs darling
Mm
Do you want a dish?
No
I'll give you a dish, yeah I know, I know you're not to open them but I'm just making sure that you know that they're yours, now do you want a dish or not?
No
Right
I want
here
I finded two but there's not
 
It's fine if you want to eat them Anthony but don't moan when Charlotte has hers tomorrow, there you go
Er
and be careful because 
Mum, I can't 
it's a bit bent, your drink it'll fall 
find two 
You can't find it?
No, I finded two there but it's not together
Queen, right, well first of all
What?
Ah that one
ah there it is, Q U E E N, right start from there
There?
Right draw a line along, go round the end
There?
Yeah, but you're not pointing the pen down, hold the pen up so that it makes the line
Right then
Oh it's hopeless trying to help you innit, you're so independent you won't have no one help you and the pen's not coming out, see you're not doing it right  I don't mind helping you, but you've got to let me show you, now go all the way along, round the Q, come round here, come round here, round here, back along, stop.
Right cross queen off
That one?
Yeah
That one?
No, the queen, the top one, you know we're doing the top one, now we're doing Sleepy underneath it
There?
Yes, S L E E P Y Sleepy this one, not there, that one, okay?
That one?
Yes
So there's O
No wonder you give me headache sometimes having to repeat every thing tut, right  S L E E P Y, right so draw 
That one?
a line from that S all the way down  to the Y, right round the Y and back up 
Mum
Oh well put them in the dish, round and join if up, right now cross off Sleepy
There?
Yep, right now we're gonna do Sneezy S N E E Z Y, there it is, S N E E Z Y, so start from the S again, come down to the Y, go round the Y and back up to the S, not that wide and go back up, up side, the word Charlotte, alright now cross it off down there
There?
Now why you crossing Snow White off?
Oh, that's not Snow White
Yes it is, we've just done Sneezy
Is that it?
Yes, you're not me , oh I hate doing things with you this time of night you've got no concentration have you?
Now it's Snow White 
Yeah, even though you've crossed it off, oh that's handy sitting right next to the bin innit?
S N O W H  W W H I T E 
No ain't it in 
Right start from that S  and bring your line all the way down to this E, that's it keep coming straight down,m ,m , make the pen mark 
Mum ma 
the paper
let me make, get me down 
Now you can cross Snow White off and all we've got left to find is witch, oh, there it is, right go from the W, W, W, from the W, right now come down, oh I'd better help with this one because it's diagonal, I T C
Mum let me down
Right now cross witch off 
Mm, mm mum I don't wanna  that
You have to get them on, pyjamas on, with the dressing gowns on, you little
I'll go and get that big bucket
Everybody knows it's mine in moon, postman went 


I tell you what your dad's taken us to playschool to show them at play school won't you?
Why?
Well show them that you've been to the pictures 
Er, who, who why do they want to eat him?
Ah, well sometimes when they make popcorn
Yeah
right, popcorn starts off as little, like little brown seedy things and when it gets heated up it all pops up into fluffy white stuff, those little brown bits that nobody ate were the hard little bead things that didn't pop up, sometimes they don't pop up you see
Oh that's why you erm, tipped them out
Yes because they're not very nice to eat they just get in your teeth  I'll rinse these up
oh I'm gonna play a drum on this I can even play it like a drum
Ah, no, don't do that  Charlotte
Playing drum 
finish that picture I want to put your pyjamas on in a minute
Mm, mm, mm
You'll be able to show them what you had at pictures, won't you?
When you go back after half term you'll be able to show Karen and Carol and Mrs  
 
yeah
Erm at
that's right you'll have to show all your friends that you went to the pictures
No, mum ma, mummy move it in there
Er careful, you gonna save them other Buttons for at home tomorrow?
Yeah and in the morning and
yeah it's half term tomorrow so there's cartoons on tomorrow
Me eat, me want to eat them
and my, and my
tomorrow
Alright then, mummy will, mummy will put them on the table?
No put them in that bag in there 
You want me to put them in the bag?
Yeah and then 
 
mum look what I've done, I did her penned eyes
Oh yeah
it look's beautiful don't it?
I'm put
in there, in that big
do what, are we gonna sort your pyjamas out now?
No
Well I think we should
Mum ma, mum ma
Yes love
we want to stay up here
Well get down and get your  jarmies on and then you can get back up there otherwise, if we don't get them on, and when daddy's ready to go you're not going to have time to go and see your other nanny
Cos we won't be 
 
mummy me sit down and, and
watch me mum
I am watching my love
watch me now
You can do it all by yourself can you?
Yeah
Well done, watch you don't spill that drink
down there and me do it
Well done Anthony very good 
Me a big boy now
Well I think you most certainly are
Who's that?
Oh either yours or Charlotte's
I want to eat them
What now?
Yeah 
 
let's have a seen them on
No they're Anthony's Charlotte cos you ate yours, your went, your bag went empty cos you had Minstrels in it right are you gonna get up here then?
Yeah, and me 
And you can eat them while I'm getting your pyjamas on
Yeah, that an idea
Yeah, come on then that an idea then?
how good 
Yeah you'll have to make sure you give your teeth a thorough clean, get up here
Mum look
That's pretty love
me and that
yeah, come on then
look at your nice posh shirt it's all dirty now, what?
Me wanna do it
You won't be able to do it, it's all buttons, alright
Me know how to do it
No don't just pull it you'll pull the buttons off, not poppers you no, fatty look at you  take it off then, no you don't take your shirt off like that, you take your shirt off like this, that's it, you're a big boy ain't you?
No, me er leave my vest on
Ooh this is gonna be
Yeah you must leave your vest on
Yeah
Okay, plonk your bottom down there and we'll undo your shoes
No bum
Oh it's bum is it?
Sorry
Mum look
Oh we got your slipper now
me and put it on
Oh Anthony why can't you wait until I've got the other shoe off?
Oh I've got a Pluto on  jarma on me
Yeah
No Pluto
now you've got to get back up again
Me, me have got on now and 
 
as you're warm
Yeah
I'll leave your top up, I just get your  jarmy bottoms on, I'll leave your top off alright?
I'm warm
Yeah, that's alright you can leave your top off but you must put your bottoms on 
aagh 
little 
 
on
Ah nan bought ah in
That's the Coke that nan bought you, but we bought you some more didn't we, so we'll save them for tomorrow
We, you didn't bought us any more Coke 
Yeah we bought you the cartons in the picture, Anthy let me do your pyjamas, you know they're there, you know that, what nanny got you?
Oh yeah
Get up here, don't lay them down they might leak all over my books and I will be in trouble
Yeah, I want
there stop worrying about everything, do you want any 
Mummy me want to eat them in the high chair
You taking these off?
Erm yeah
Right
Mummy me want to eat them in that high chair, you staying out here?
Of course I'm staying out here until we go home in a minute, that film's nearly finished dad's watching and then we're gonna
Mummy, mummy
Mm
we wanna go in there
mum nearly finished
That's a good idea, that's why I've sat out here tonight darling, not watched the telly, cos there's a lot of nasties in those sort of films and they're not for little children
I want a big
only little children go and see things like Snow White, Peter Pan, Cinderella
Yeah, mummy
Mm
when you get bigger you can watch the nasties, yeah, when you get a lot bigger
So will me, can I?
One day when you're all grown up, yeah
Yeah you bigger and daddy bigger and er and
one day when you've got the worries of the world to think about
Much bigger
Yeah
Everybody's bigger mum
If we've got a world to live in as they say
 
Better get my pyjamas on before they get, before daddy gets
Yeah, cos we've got to do your inhaler as well and we'd better wipe that all that muck off your face, all that tomato sauce
Me washed my face in the bath
Yeah I know, but, I'll have to wipe it in a minute
Why a Babywipe?
No I get some tissue
I'll do it
It's alright I'll do it 
Mummy me I 
mummy
Do your shoes darling please
and me a little baby
What?
and me a little baby me
did you?
Yeah
Oh
Take me socks off?
me a big boy now 
No leave your socks on, just take your trousers off, either leave your knickers on or take knickers off it's up to you 


You've got that song on the brain now haven't you, you leaving these on?
I think about it
I'd leave them on, might as well, seeing as you like wearing them
erm
Mummy
What's Anthony done to his?
Well he takes his off, but he always takes his off
mummy 
You always leave yours on
mummy, mummy, throw that in the bin?
These trousers fit you don't they?
Yep
If it's empty Anthony you can throw that in the bin
No, me wanna cut it out tomorrow
Yeah you can put it in your playschool bag for cutting out
Yeah that's an idea
Alright that's an idea then
Mummy put it in 
Mummy you screwed mine up 
No I didn't, I brought it home, right put your bottoms on
mummy save it
Hang on
I wanna take my my knickers off 
yours is there , there look
I wanna take my knickers off
Well do it then, I'll put it in there
And mine
Mum I'll leave them on.
Just make your mind up, cos daddy be out in a minute, that film's nearly finished
Is that right mum?
Mm
Is that right?
Is the ticket at the back?
Oh no it's at the front
Well then it's not right is it?
That way
Mummy
Mm
and that goes on that 
so I'm putting these other packet of Buttons with Anthony's, in there for tomorrow
I don't mind if you put them in there
Good, don't want to eat any more do we, you'll be sick
No
You've had a good day out today
Mum ma
one, two, three, four, five 
mummy that'll go in there 
Don't you want it?
Me go and put it in a drink
Yeah
me do it
No I'll do it, I'll erm clean your face in a minute then we'll all be ready when daddy's ready, how you going, wow a bit of a problem?
Mummy I want a big bowl have a big bowl
Eh?
I want a big bowl
Okay, there's your
you'll have to put your top on in a minute, okay, oh it's filthy
Me, me wash it
Why?
Because it'll be time to go in a little while
Mummy me wash it
No you can't wash it here
Me wash it in the bath
That's not ours to wash darling
The bowl
Yeah it don't belong to us, okay puff on your inhaler, one, two, three, four, five, six 
Mum ma me 
me got it in
oh, puff, one, two, three, four, five, six, right, can you put those slippers on, I'll take your hair bands out, get your top on and that, get your face washed
Can I, mummy I want 
it'll be time to go in a minute, no I'll do it there's two in there
Oh 
can't take the top one out without taking the bottom one out first
Ow!
Sorry, sorry
Stop that
No sorry it's mummy's fault, she pulled the wrong one, that's it, good girl, I'll er brush your hair in a minute, get all your knots out, right, sit down for a minute, well turn round, there 
No 
you don't want to go to bed with knots in your hair
Mum
Due for Sarah to come round soon to have it trimmed again ain't you?
No 
Not mine
Yes and yours
No I'm not I, mum
You always have your hair cut every six weeks young man keep all the knots away 
mummy my 
mine either 
pussy cat needs a cut he head too
There we go, ah
my pussy cat got a knot in it
No your pussy cat's alright cos you washed his hair
No, he 
Yeah and bathed him
yeah and got a knot in him
Well we're not bathing him again it takes three days to dry him
Ah
it takes a long time
No 
Right
out
Mum ma
Yeah, I wonder what cartoons they'll have on tomorrow for the kid's holiday ah?
Might be Mickey Mouse, is he got on?
No
Might be Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse and
on the day
I think it was on this morning yeah but it's erm
on tomorrow
No that's only on at the weekends darling
Erm, mummy we go er on morrow
Right 
Monday
Monday's tomorrow darling
Mummy I, I never know
Well I don't know till we have a look at the telly pages at home
Mummy and me I like in the morning
Eh?
and me I like in the morning
Yeah
me and
got a dog, on a do that, that dog
Do you?
that, yeah
No that's a word that not a dot to dot
Me wanna do er a
in the morning mummy
He said dot to dot, he wants to do the word
No, what,
me want to do a da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da
So have I got a new song
ah, da, da, da, da
cat and the fiddle the little dog, how does the 
I can 
the cat and fiddle go?
Hey diddle diddle the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over the moon, the little dog laughed to see such fun and the dish ran away with the spoon
Ooh we ain't done your faces yet have we?
No Mary, Mary no, no, no  da, da, da, da, da, da, a, da, da, in the morning
Anthony
Me doing that, mummy me doing that
Look at what?
me doing that
Hold on I'll give you something to look at


I de, da, da, do, the dog do, do  I'll give him this one to read
no I'll give him this one cos I wanna look at that one
No I give him this one, there you go
Mm, mm
Hang on to that one a minute Anth 
Let us
now, now
now, me done Superman  me done Superman, done Superman, there are their
Don't
da, da, da, da, do, do, there, their did you are, da de da are with the da, da, de, da, de da with the de da, mm, de, da, de, do with de, da, de, da, oh we're glowing in the glowing in the da, de, de, do, mm, mm, mm, all the
off today, dab be de do, dab be de do, put on their clothes all the mauve colour their clothes in the mauve colour their clothes  
I want 
their clothes they wear, their clothes, their clothes, colour their clothes in the, in the merrily most  
Me got a make a 
and my that 
Yeah 
me not got 
are all the same in  
in there,
Mummy I got me 
and me got in and
green, green, da, da, do, do, da
merrily, merrily life is but a dream
Superman
merrily, merrily quite contrary
we done, we da, da, da, de, de, do, da, de, da, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, da, de, do, da, de, da, erm da, erm da, de, do, de, de, de, da, de, de, do, da, do, give us the bag
Aagh 
give me 
Hope you're not fighting 
now wait a minute, wait a minute, let Jordan have some toys, he's only a baby, hello darling, hello  no, don't leave that there Jordan's playing with that darling, look show me this car you want, show me this car that you want
I want the at here
Right, well let's have a look then
I want a car as well mum 
A car 
No, you're a girl
No I need to have a look at the picture Anthy, oh look Goofy's on again in a minute
Gooey in a minute
Yeah 
Mummy 


 

can mummy have a look then?
 

Mummy ah, you've got them everywhere
That's alright you don't need to do them up 
It's not cold, anywhere
Not found it yet?
Okay let me have a look
Mummy
Yeah, but don't rip the book, don't rip the book or we can't show daddy
No, no
Look what's on telly?
Goofy 
Goofy 
I wanna get Goofy, Goofy, Goofy, Goofy, Goofy,Goo 
I can't see, I can't see 
Ah, let me own
 

Mummy, mum that, er that, mum ma, mum ma
Yes dar yeah 
hello darling, what you got?
oh no he
bit a
 

Mummy  mum I want to put it over, I want to put it down 
Hello darling what's the matter?
No, you, go down  mum down  mum
what's the matter darling?
My to do games do it 
Oh darling what's the matter?
do it  mummy, mummy
Oh I think I'm going to go and make you a bottle, make you a bottle shall I?
Yeah you 
mum, mum do me and, and I only two
yeah let's put the kettle on first I don't want to 
mummy, mummy 
Oh Jordan what's the matter darling?
I want to put it back up , put it back up
Jordan what's the matter?
What's the matter eh?
mummy's gone to get the work, don't cry
put it in
Everybody's
up above the sky, everyone Monday morning upon the sky 
Mum ma, don't want any more, don't want any more, don't want any more 
can 
everybody knows his 
mum ma
rainbow climbing high, everyone can see it climbing over the sky, rainbow, here's a rainbow  yeah  today poor
he's lost his, he's lost the 
 
mummy I want a car 
Mm
and didn't know where to find  
I want a car 
alright then
ah, a car
he, little Bo Peep had lost her sheep and didn't know where to find her, leave her alone, little Bo Peep had lost her sheep and didn't know where to find her, leave them alone and they'll come home searching for them everywhere 
 
they, are, didn't 
Right if you had that new bed then
Er
will you sleep in it like a good boy?
yeah
Well daddy has got to say first ain't he
ah me got a
if daddy says no though you can't have it alright?
when he gets, when daddy comes home you'd better give him a big cuddle and ask him
Mummy and that
What is that you eating?
It's a hard sweet
I want one
No they're horrible 
One to go 
 

here we go all the toys, alright now, alright
  

I borrow it now
 

I'm busy
    

You okay?
Ow
oh sing a song, sing a song
round and round, round and round 
 

mm a
mum and he was crying
Oh was he?
I was just getting his bottle
Mummy get him another toy 
Hello darling , oh
I'm tired
you didn't eat all your breakfast did you?
Mum ma
broke down
Broke down, you rescuing it are you?
Yeah, er lorry, er look
Clever boy then?
Yeah, mummy car, mummy car
Didn't know where to find him, leave him alone and they will come home wagging their tails behind them 
Mummy er
Little Bo Peep has found her sheep, didn't know where to find them, they were sad on a
leaving their tails behind
little Bo Peep has found her sheep, didn't know where to take them, thank goodness your back on all is back, wagging their tails behind them 
come on darling it's alright
That
I've got it
Didn't know where to find them, leave them alone 
 

And didn't know where to find them, leave them alone and they will come home wagging their tails behind them 
aagh 
Little Bo Peep has lost her sheep and doesn't know where to find them, leave them alone 
Sheep, doesn't, where to find them  
and they'll come home dragging their tails behind them 
I can't
down there
down there, nee naw, nee naw, nee naw 
Little Bo Peep has lost her sheep when they are mine 
Oh Jordan come on, you was thirsty weren't you?
Come here love, alright, sshh, sshh, it's alright
Mummy I got the all the children watching the pictures
sshh, sshh
mum ma
oh darling come on, come on
mum
What oh you're tired 
this is all the children watching the pictures
Yeah, Jordan's sleeping a little while in his cot, he's tired
I want something for lunch
So I
Little Bo Peep has lost her sheep, didn't know 
 
where to find them, leave them alone and they'll come home, wagging their tails behind them,
Mum ma, here
Oh go and put it in the bin then
  

oh, who's drunk all his bot-bot?
Oh Jordan it's all gone, you can always have another one if you're still hungry, got some windy there?
Good boy  tired, yeah
Mum ma it going
there's a good boy
was that nice, yeah?
Anthy what you doing sat under the table
Got a boat in
Oh
it me get in it
Charlotte don't put pens in your mouth, I've told you about that before
Mm, can we play that game?
Not while Jordan's awake, we'll play it a little bit later he'll be 
When will 
going, he'll be going up into his cot in a minute, he's very tired, so
Mum ma
I wanna have the lunch
It's not lunch time yet  I've got to sort out all these paperwork in a minute 
ah, me done it
It's a wonder you didn't wake the baby up with the noise you're flipping making.
Done it
Get off of that
done it, done it
Right, let's sort out here what we don't want then
Stop, get off of it
Er you
Right we've got to keep that, I'll give you what I don't want and you can put it in the bin 
Want that?
Right we want that one  don't take 
Me want that
don't want that one
me want that one
Erm you said I could have it
You can have that one as well, there's one on the floor you can have
Yeah
you can have that, you can have that, move that Anthy, right there's one for you and one of those for you
Ah I wanna see what, what every one then
Here are then, here you can have all them then on the floor
Mum ma
Yeah you can have it
I'm gonna have these, open, you can have this one
That goes with that
Oh mum can we open this and see if we've won?
Yeah you can have them and then put them in the bin cos I don't want them
Me and
me
mum there's some in there
and that are
I can't open and see the big one
Mm
I can't open it to see the big one
that, that, that, that, that, that
I can't open it to see what's it doing
oh
Anthy what you doing?
shall put it in there in there
Oh Anthy you collecting them?
Yeah
Oh
for my party, for my part 
Erm want one of these?
One of these?
 

Right I'd better keep them then cos they're different 
Mum 
mum 
What?
I don't want a plastic thing there
Right, well you'd better put them all
Where's it gone?
Oh don't worry about it now, all the plastic things then put  put on that blue leaflet for now and then when you've taken them all off you can put them in the bin.
What we won mum?
Number seven that says, win number seven.
What does, but, what, what, what do we win on the  muppet What do we win on the  muppet 
It's not on that one it's this one, you don't need to send this one off anyway cos mummy already gets stuff from there 
What do we win on
Hang on, hang on
erm this one?
We win, what do we win on this one
No, er
A little birdie look, number seven that, that's a magic swallow
Mummy I win that
win number four
Win number four
a proud sematic, chromatic cockerel
On the blue mat  we win number eight, we win number eight mum
Clever girl, that's an owl
Oh, see what else we win
Er, mum mummy
Oh that one says void, don't win on that one
 
no we don't win on that one 
We win eleven
No that one says void ten, you don't win that one then  right that one's void Anthony, we don't win with that one either
Erm, this one, it won
we need one of, one of
No void, don't win with that one
 

Oh win number three that a pelican 
Oh we win nothing
Win nothing, no
no, one of mine  I didn't win Ant, what you win, show us what you win 
Erm win number five, a rose bag, right, now you can keep the tickets if you want, but get all them little plastic things and put them in the bin
Hooray
I want er, did we, what did we win?
We win  win that
Right
win that
have a look the square
win that, win that, win, win that
what's the date?
Monday
win that
this, is it Rosie and Jim on today?
Oh wow look at that   oh the baby's in bed get your bum down here , you know you don't go upstairs when he's in his cot Charlotte
Yeah but erm 
Me 
shut the door, shut the door, before you wake him up
I've done it
erm a, erm a, me erm, me a boy, me a boy
What's he, what's being a boy got to do with it?
I don't know, I want to
Charlotte give him some more
No
He has to try and get one
No, you share it out
See if you can get one
Oh yeah that's nice, I like that, do you think that looks alright Charlotte?
Yeah
Charlotte
Come in here then
That, and a matching bed bedspread to go with the erm duvet 
A new one, one with, this, it's coming out the 
what?
Matching bed duvet and
 
Yeah that looks nice, don't it?
Now we're gonna go inside like that right, inside
I'd prefer the darker colours
They're nice, we like blue ones don't we?
Yeah, they're
You wanna go up and have a sleepy, you can
Right shall we, now we're gonna give, shall we give him a yellow scarf?
Yeah yellow scarf
Come in then if you want me stop throwing tantrums
we have a yellow scarf, yeah, you don't want a yellow scarf
Yeah I do
You do want a yellow scarf, you pick another colour what we gonna have for his hat, you pick what we're gonna have for his hat
Hang on
er on, er on, er on
that one, brought out a red one, have we got any red?
Yeah we have on the nose, but we
Are you tired again?
we need a
that's not going to be a very good hat is it?
what you doing?
What you doing?
Oh that boy
Mm
What are you throwing a tantrum for?
Oh dear
mm, yeah I'm looking at it
At least he's got someone Pauline like you
Mm, you do it babe  Jordan hiya, hiya
 

Right put that back in my pencil case
What Anthony been in
oh yeah Anthony
this one's better isn't it?
Yeah
Sharpen them 
mummy this one's better now
Mm 
Yeah 
Oh Aaron leave him alone, talk to him
Talk to him Aaron instead of punching him
Come and fetch them, that's it
da, da, da, da, de, da, da, da, da, da, oh, everyone who's his flying over the sky, rainbow this is rainbow, da, da, da, da, de, da 
Jordan, boo 
everyone who sees him 
Boo 
over the sky 
Oh dear what's the matter?
Oh what's the matter, do you want some more drinky?
Now you've been changed.
She said Alex said he wouldn't eat any breakfast this morning, he threw a tantrum
Yeah
so I thought right, she said to me he'd want a bottle, so come like ten past eleven, he's like whinging, he's drunk all his milk, then went up and come down and eat all his dinner and his pudding
Mm, mm
Had a tantrum this morning didn't you?
Oh no I haven't I don't want one.
I've got Kieran back for next week two weeks and then it's half way through March and first week in April I haven't got him, I've got three weeks 
Mummy I don't want one 
well put it on the table then
Gary's going to Norway the end of March
Oh is he?
Yeah the end of March, mm
for a week
I've still colouring this Ant, without you
me do it now
You can't, me erm, a little bit, I want it nice, don't scribble over it
I want
I shall go down to the coffee morning at playschool when they break up for Easter next week 
Will you promise you won't scribble if you do it like that 
and then they do some songs
and all the other ones
and they do some singing and everything and also they give out the bibles to those that are going up to school
Mm
so it's quite nice
I've just done it pretty see 
The only bit about it is you have to sit around when the vicar comes in and 
you colour that bit 
and give the talk to the kids on Easter and the religious side of it too you know and 
erm, let's have a look, give me that and the pen 
No I wanna do that bit 
Mm
I don't know if I want it
which I think 
yeah we'll have it 
I know kids have got to learn about it but surely they can 
You did it 
make their own minds up later on if they want to be 
You are, were gonna have ten 
why just come to the Church of England if they want to now, it doesn't go in
No
it means nothing to them, what they did last year was sat there and got irritated and they kept like running about 
 
and couldn't keep still 
oh yeah don't want a 
cos they were listening to some 
Yeah 
bloke going on about nothing to them, you know they thoroughly enjoyed doing the songs and everything, but when it came to listening 
 
Yeah
to why Easter egg being related to Easter egg, they don't give a damn, they just want to eat them
That's right
Ready
yeah
Can Aaron go upstairs?
Yes
Don't make a mess though, yes you can go upstairs, but don't don't make a mess, Aunty Pauline should of said that


go in Anthy's bedroom he's got all his cars in there with his garage
Yeah
don't go in Charlotte's bedroom, alright, alright, they might have to come down in a minute if you want to go up, ah?
But I, mummy
Hold on, just go up the doors are open, I'll put the light on in a minute, we will won't we, yes we will, he's had a whole bottle of milk and a whole bottle of juice today, you are doing well aren't we?
I shut Ben in the conservatory now when I go out through the week, we just put him in the garage when we go out the weekend
Yeah
in case we're out a bit longer, I said, Tony said we could leave him out there, but like he said if he starts weeing on the carpet
Yeah
that won't be nice in the summer if the kids have got to go out there
Mm
so  are you gonna finish that last bit off?
Yes, no, you don't have to  no
He's nearly drunk all his juice up
He's had a lot to drink today haven't you?
Yes you have, yeah
He still got a lot in the bottle there
There is some in there honestly, don't you want it?
Give you er  oh, ah, hold on, er you don't want any hairs on it do we?
Wonder what that doggy's barking at eh?
I wonder what doggy's barking at?
Yeah, what do you think of your toys to play with
Mum look at that poor man he's got lipstick on
Oh yeah
I like him with lipstick on, it looks like a lady it does, doesn't it?
With red arms, on, erm 
A dress I, I sent off for two sizes, I'm glad I did now because I thought you know that the small one would be okay for them, but it's not, there's the hat
Oh yeah
and that's the dress 
Is that the little , is that the little dress?
I thought for fifteen pounds, seven pounds and forty nine P 
Yeah , yeah
that's not bad and I went round to see Helen to see if she wanted this one for baby Anna but she said this one  there is another one in there, erm
Mum which
How big do they think kids heads are because that just fits me
I know, which is a tiny one look
Mm, don't know, do I know any little girls?
Oh piggy
Oh that's a good one, see how small that one is compared to that one
Mm
see that's just right for Charlotte
Mm
Well I was gonna ask you if you knew any girls, I mean for seven pound fifty you can't go wrong, you can't even get that in town with a hat 
No 
and I thought before I go and send it back, because I don't know of anybody
Mummy
Yeah
well go on then  I don't know of anyone though, I bought those kind of shoes there
Mm
the bright, the pink ones will be alright won't they?
Yeah the pink or the lilac
Yeah, so I thought I might nip into town sometime this week
One thing they could of done  was put the same colour belt on the erm, oh ribbon on the hat
Yeah
or this, that the same pattern as the dress on the erm, on the belt
got the right one for the right belt anyway yeah
Mummy I'm a bit wet
Why you a bit wet?
Cos er Aaron go a toilet, me need to go
Well wait for Aaron to come out and you, well you go in the downstairs one now, cos you've got the stool in there then
No
then you and Aaron can play again
no I want to go up there
Well, I mean it's there if you know of anybody, I don't know of anybody you see
Well you'll have to wait till Aaron comes out then
Decide what age is that for, forty one 
What you'll have to do 
I don't know 
Get, that
I just ordered a forty one and a forty six
Mind out Anth
Yeah I thought I might have to put another stitch in that to keep that on
No, don't
just thread it through
don't
Yeah alright, alright, you nearly knocked it off again now look
That'll be a three year old wouldn't it?
Sort of about three, two or three
Two or three yeah 
Turn it up 
Don't do that, that's Charlotte's hair
Mm 
Do you suppose that's supposed to be dead straight that or twisted?
I think it's meant to be twisted
Mm
Mummy
Mm
want Aaron down now, red
There that's it
Mm
So I didn't know anybody and I thought of well, you know
Well there's Sian, they probably want one the same for Nicola, Jill
Er I can still order them, I mean if you want to take it around, you can take it and
Mm
it's only seven, well it's seven pounds, forty nine P exactly
Mm
and it was fourteen ninety nine in town so I thought well,
sales out the old book
Yeah, I can't even think of any nurses at the hospital, Louise her little one's three but she's more like a five year old
Yeah, Charlotte you're not putting that on the walls
No
Well then
Erm
there's a little bit on there
Well don't
Wendy but her one's four
see
no she's five now 
Mm, just got to go and sort them out, hang on I'm coming up, I don't know why you didn't go in the downstairs toilet, it would of been easier for me then wouldn't it?
What, make sure no one gets that plate, I'll do Anthony one, shall we?
Eh?
He can play in your room, don't go and pull all your stuff out
No
Leave him Aaron, Aaron I'd 
They were, they were down from six 
leave him he's got the strops
sixteen nineteen nine down from
go and shut up, go and shut that, my bedroom door please, I'd leave him, ah?
sixteen nineteen nine they were
What's that?
Oh it was sixteen nineteen nine were they?
Mm
I wonder why they reduced them then, if they put them in the new catalogue, oh there's a slight difference ain't there, there's no bow
Mm, I don't like the bow
No I don't, it's the wrong colour innit?
Mm, mm
Oh sixteen ninety nine to seven fifty, it's cheap isn't it?
Yeah, yeah
You don't know how old I am do you?
Course I do
How then?
Having a strop out there is he?
you're four and a half
No I four
You're four and a half
I be four  I'm not four and a half am I mum?
I don't know I'm not bothered
You're four and four months
Nearly four and a half
no I four I said not four and a month  I'm four
Four and four months
four and four 
It's going really quick innit, when I keep thinking about it when they go back after half term 
Not four mum 
they've got six weeks exactly until Easter 
nearly four mum 
and then when they break up for Easter and it's only sort of like whatever it is from now until September 
no, no, no, no 
Mm
Aaron, Aaron
er and after the holiday she'll be going to school, it's frightening
Yeah, that, what, just a quick look through here, they've got loads of dressy things for girls, not for boys though 
Put the crayon back in, do you want to watch Chip and Dale?
Er
There isn't nowhere really though is there?
Apart, I mean whatever you get for boys it's the same, which is in different colours, bow ties and shirts that fit innit?
Can we watch Chip and Dale mum?
Yeah if you want to
Yeah put the, hang on a minute our exercises tape was in there 
Yeah I watch the Chippendales 
we were playing, we were doing our exercises, doing our exercises 
if you've got the Chippendales' tape 
Yeah
Mum does this, should, I don't know if this needs to be rewound
Let's have a look see if it's been rewound, yeah, mm actually you might not have to on that, that might just be there, oh dear he's throwing a strop up there
Mm
for some unknown reason 
No
is it worth rewinding it Charlotte?
Oh no just leave out the bit where it was 
Because if I don't you won't know what's happened will you?
It, it a
in a minute, yeah, there
Nearly there
Aaron where's the prince, get into this pencil go and get it
Please
Please  put that back in can you for me Aaron
I've got to remember actually to get some birthday cards this week some time
mm
Give me dad's to his yet 
Coming over Sunday at last 
when's, when's his birthday?
Sunday
Oh it is Sunday
Can you pass me a brown one?
Well while you're there you can give them to him can't you?
Yeah
Pass me, pass me a brown one 
I didn't go this, this weekend cos I won't see him Wednesday
 
pass me a brown one 
birthday and erm he said well 
yeah, that's what I want that one you picking up one 
let's ask him if he wants to come over for dinner cos we don't have dinner until half four anyway 
yes give it to me 
Yes
so erm, yesterday he had dinner round Joyce's, he said he'll come round a bit early and
but we eat, we do it anyway so
I don't like them
a little bit can't you?
I mean if you left your dinner another half hour say till five
Yeah
he might come anyway
Yeah
Oh yes, do the blue sky then  I do purple, what I thought you wanted to do a blue sky?
Oh look he's magic, he
 

They've got some quite good stuff in there
Mm
and they're not badly priced, I like the furniture, I like that little cabin bed in there as well
Yeah
I thought that might look quite nice for madam, see my two only ever had cheap beds to start with anyway, I knew that I'd get them better ones later on
Yeah
you know, erm 
You go like this, see
and like Helen, well Helen said why don't you wait until you move, and I said well that might not be all that, you know
you can do this sky
the way things are going that could be years
Yeah
erm no not that bit, do the sky blue, now we're gonna have erm
Er, erm
now we have a
have a blue, blue one
I give this, this isn't purple one  that's a brown one 
Which is the cover for these?
What on the same page?
Oh I don't know, I think it's on the same page as
 
use the brown somewhere 
Yeah
do a brown hat
yeah, yeah similar to Aaron's maybe
which colour now?
Yeah it's got three chest of drawers at the end bit
and I'll do this, look and finish the snow 
and sliding cupboard underneath the bed 
Yeah
and a couple of wardrobe as well, red and white
Yeah, it's not a bad price
Yes I quite like  yeah you see she can have something like that look 
it's your mummy, mum how do you think of that 
Mm
we've finished this snowman, mum look, mum look we've finished this snowman 
and they're not a bad price for all that, you see and I'd get rid of her wardrobes that she's got 
mum look we've finished this snowman 
Oh yeah , and I quite like that, but if I had that, I'd like to I wouldn't be tempted to decorate his room 
we did, we finished off all the snowman haven't we?
in wallpaper I'd do, I could make
That's what we're doing in their room just one colour and put a border around it 
a very, very, very, very long, long, long, long 
I mean that is really nice that, they want thirty five quid for the headboard
Mm
I'd want the wall paper and everything
I, I, I do
you know the lamp, the rug, it's really nice, but where's that, did you see that black 
 
furniture, oh I think that was at the front I quite like that for the boys bedroom as well with the bed set in 
you know, don't know whatever colour you have, and you colour nice 
Mummy, mum, mum 
Yeah
you know
mum
you know you buy all that and
what's the matter?
Mum, mum
What?
But I still think
Mm
I still think they've got a lot of choice in there compared to the big one, I always think they've 
I think my, to do it a little bit harder 
for one of those pillow cases I won't pay that
Mm, no
I did notice in that they sell, sell erm cushion covers with the sofas
Cushion covers with the sofas
Mm
did you see them?
I think I did, I thought about that but I can't afford to do it at the moment there look see you can get the, the L ones the double seat ones and the little ones look 
now I done the blue sky we've got to do 
Yeah 
if you 
that's what we need
you order the colour
I'd, I'd have the plain it's better in the plain 
but do, do the 
I know what you do is you order the colour and it, where is it K, you order the colour and they surprise 
Yeah 
you with the design
Yeah
you see but I'd want floral anyway
to go with one of them
Yeah, well I've got floral, I'd rather have the plain
Yeah but I don't think it
mm
no those, those, those are 
no 
I mean all those are
you see I, what I'll then do is get cushion covers for the cushion and get like the net ones 
these ones I wanna do 
Mm 
and go over
yeah
oh yeah you can colour that bit if you like 
I quite like plain but they're the wrong colour
cos that's what
 
it looks like it's a snowball to me
 
It looks alright but then they're half way up
But you can colour it if you like
Mm
and I'd rather make it, it went all the way up to there 
Yeah mine normally that 
well yeah mine only, mine only 
you do that there 
like that aren't they?
Yeah
Yeah alright
Yeah the rest of
oh what's the matter?
What's the matter?
Ah, ah, what's a matter little fellow?
Can you hear that other one up there moaning
Alright then Aaron he's not coming down yet, he won't 
I mean there's quite good, there's some good stuff in there when you think that should be in the big catalogue really shouldn't 
Yeah 
it?
yes, I mean they do do some of this in the big catalogue I had a look
I ain't noticed, maybe I ain't looked 
yes pencil and some bananas  what's the matter?
I didn't it, I'm mummy's
Er let, let Jordan play with it babe cos he's getting upset now
look, I think we'd better put a dry bib on you as well, I think we've got one in here, oh we've got one in yeah
in the kitchen ain't we?
No I thought there was another bib in here, I'll have to go and get you one out of the kitchen mate  oh yes we have, yes we have
Baby having that that bib on
Yes that one says Thursday and this one says Friday, but it's Monday isn't it?
Oh dear I
 

he's making a lot of noise for a little boy isn't he?
I think half his trouble is
weekend 
yeah 
Oh nanny
I weren't gonna see my mum Saturday, but she broke down Saturday night
Yeah
coming to Andover to go up through 
Mummy 
Chigworth to see the
 
mummy 
Yeah
mum
cos if they got
 
mum 
so they were stuck here to half eleven, so
What ?
got these
Right, well go away then
Does he keep pestering you?
Mm
Mm, don't keep pestering your mother 
Of course we went to bed late last night as well
Yeah 
Right
He's alright, I didn't get no hassles about like, that, no matter how many hours she's awake she never grumbles of being tired
Oh
Oh no this one is a
 

Mummy I've got a police one
Mm you have haven't you?
What's he got?
A police car
A police car, I thought he said bleed 
Right, have you got anything in that felt tip Charlotte?
I haven't, it, get any on my trousers, I was licking
You better not get it on the furniture as well, keep it away from the furniture, now put it on the paper or else don't use it
right done, done it mum, I done it
Right
didn't put it on the sofa 
oh dear me   oh he's still making a noise up there
Mm 
I don't know, even know what he's throwing a tantrum over
He said 
No 
Charlotte watch that pen and get it out your mouth   now either use it or put the lid on it and put it away.
I'm using it, it's just
 

Don't you want to watch this video Aaron?
Yeah
Well watch it then
Oh I didn't is want Chip and Dale on
noise, you didn't want Chip and Dale tape on
I did
You did, oh
Yes, you want to choose another film?
Yeah


He wants to choose another film
Oh does he?
No
 
his problem is he goes to bed 
 
at eight and he still get up at seven
Mm
Let him a do mummy, let him
What is it?
Dennis
Dennis the Menace, I want Dennis the Menace on mum
There's Dennis the Menace upstairs
Do you know how to work it?
I do it
Come here 
Dennis the Menace, Dennis
jelly boy  put the tape in then Aaron and I'll press, there I'll fast forward it, no you've got it, you've got it, no you haven't got it round the right way
Look at it, you know which way to put it in there, that's it.
I think I cannot use this felt tip
That's it come away from it Aaron don't touch any buttons 
I'd better not use this felt tip
No
Yeah come away, that's it
I'd better not use this felt tip
Aagh, oh dear me
What you doing?
I'm tired and hungry your mum  hasn't had dinner yet , put him up and dress and I thought I'm not gonna hang around doing something for dinner
Should of got something down town, that's what I usually do
Yeah should of done
if I was in there
I've got something for tea for tonight, I never thought of about getting
 
what you gonna do?
anything like I usually do 
I'm just gonna sort that little boy out
What's the magic word when you want something?
Ta, mummy
Do you?
Yeah
Mm
What does he say when he wants something?
Yes I need a drink please, ta
Oh
There you watch this
yeah  get me the box for this one then 
I don't know then 
Mum will you get me a drink?
No
Yeah 
Why not?
Your mum's, your mum's getting one in a minute
You want a drink?
Yes, is that
you get Aaron's drink and my mum will get my drink
I, I, in that here
What, do you want apple the same as me?
Yeah
Let see what's in there, oh apple
Watch it, put the top on the felt tip Charlotte when you're not using it  otherwise you'll get it all over you, you get it over er everything else  Aaron 
Mummy that's
a doggy 
mum, mum 
He said he's too, too, too, too, too big doesn't he?
I'm not getting any eat
Put a bit in 
er Anthony out , what
you on about
Oh what a lot of noise over nothing, weren't it?
I shouldn't use pens should I?
What you done now?
Oh little bit over here 
Show me
No
Show me
No
You're not gonna be able to brush it off, I'm gonna see it anyway
I won't wear them, it's gone now
Not I think
It's gone
She couldn't of got any on then
Only a little bit
Oh, I remember when I was a kid getting in trouble 
Where I can't see any, it's gone , where gone, where is it gone you show me?
Oh, oh mummy's tired , how many times have I told you not to have the pen near the furniture though young lady.
Yeah I just told her to put the top on the pen when she was having a drink, because she had the pen in her hand
Mm
and she was having her drink at the same time
which is why I'm not so worried about replacing cushion covers with the 
 
it doesn't matter to be honest 
I did put it on, when I had a drink and then I took it off again
Yeah
I mean you get to this stage where a certain age you can say no you're not having it because they've got to start to grow up at some point and she likes using the felt tips and she's usually not too bad with them
Yeah
but she tends like you say forget what she's doing and
Mm
she'll sit down with perhaps a pen in her hand and then go up and
mm
you can't stop them from using everything in time
Yeah
Humpty Dumpty sat on the wall, Humpty Dumpty had a great fall all the king's horses and all the king's men couldn't put Humpty together again 
That's right
I know it
Oh crikey, oh dear  did you get to Basingstoke Saturday?
Humpty Dumpty sat on  
Well we went over my mum and dad's er
You didn't get round Pam's?
No
Did you go up in the car the other week when you was gonna go?
No
You didn't get up there 
I wanna see Pat see if she'll look after Aaron on Friday night, but Gary says he doesn't want Tim and Lorraine having him cos they smoke like a chimney
Yeah
I mean we go round on a Saturday night and we come out stinking of smoke, cos they smoke one after another
Yeah
and Gary says he doesn't want them going round there so I said well I'll ask your mum if she will then I can
What if you've chosen Lorraine though?
I, I tell them that erm Pat offered, I'll just tell them straight to their face
Mm
that, that Pat's having him, so erm, what I'll erm what, what we'll do then we can leave Duke over there and then I catch the, the train straight from work
Mm
and we can go in
when Gary's finished at two it'll be the
set at half past two
Yeah
so  and not only that if Gary meets me up the train station we can go straight into town on our own, leave him with Pat.
That's it yeah, it's not very easy walking around looking at things when you've got the kids tagging along with you
And man all 
I don't mind I mean they always wanna run off with, one you've got to hold his hand or carry them 
I 
ask mummy said you can have it
or something, you know
mum, mum me and Aaron want some apple
Apple?
Yeah apple drink
Oh you want some apple do you?
Can I have some hot apple?
No not with all the children around darling, in case it gets spilt 
Coke then 
We're running out of apple aren't we?
I've got to get some more, do you want a drink?
So you've got all your quotes in now for your furniture then?
Yeah
Oh put that back on Aaron 
Put that back on Aaron 
cos I might need that to send it back 
He's always taking labels off 
I need that back on there 
Put it back on 
You gonna stick it back on for me?
Thank you, that's it
There
yeah that'll do, so long as it's on there  good boy, so what one have you decided to go with then?
Well it's all down to Gary now, is, I mean he still hasn't said yes or no or anything, it, but it, if we go for any of them it'll be 
Mm
the one that came out first thing Wednesday morning.
They want, from the whole of the bedroom, from the alcove where we want the sliding wardrobes with erm single wardrobe, over the head surrounds
Mm
with two, three drawer chests and then another wardrobe right up to the window erm sixteen ninety four
Yeah that's not bad then 
No that's not bad
No, is it?
Yeah so we'll go for that I think 
He's just like Tony, he'll say alright then get it done, get it sorted out and Tony will say well we can't really afford it now or no I've change me mind now I don't think, you know 
It's a bit they, I mean these  people they even do interest free credit
Yeah
over a year which I worked it out it'll be a hundred and forty one quid a month
Yeah
so erm, I mean it's all down to Gary, I mean if he wants his new computer, I said to him I said you're better off getting you know extra three or four grand on the mortgage
Yeah
and then he can get the computer he wants without moaning and then can get everything done in the bedroom without worrying about it
That's it
and it, it'll only be, you know, that extra twenty quid on the mortgage a month 
Yeah 
so erm, oh I let him sort it all out
That's it, the trouble is he's not enthusiasm cos you sort of like, if you like me you get all your hopes up you want 
Oh yeah 
that's, that's gonna happen and the fellows go along with it like when Tony first decided to move and that I thought oh great he's found a place back in Basingstoke you know, we went and looked at them and everything and he turns round and changes his mind or he's in the, you know he's worried or nervous 
Well what I said to Gary I said when was the last time I ever wanted anything
er
and I never want for anything and I said when, I said with you if you want something you get it
That's it
that's how he's been brought up, if he wants something he gets it
Oh same with Tony yeah 
Yeah 
Yeah
which is why I said to him that yeah he can have a new computer, he can get what he, you know what he wants as long as I get my bedroom done
That's it yeah 
I've never wanted for anything
The thing is though they, they look at it, they always look at it that erm, they earn the money so they can go out and get it, you know, women aren't entitled to anything, they're just at home to look after the children
Mm
What's the matter shall I do your other bottle for you?
I mean if I knew for the fact that I was gonna get this job at the hospital I'd pay for it
Yeah  still you haven't even applied for that yet have you?
No cos they haven't put it out yet
Oh, yeah let me go and make some drinks then, oh dear little man
Yeah if I knew some facts that I had a job to go to, I'd pay for it myself 
Yeah, jump down a minute Anthy
No
Yes because I've got to get drinks and I've got to put Jordan in his cot for a little while
No
He'll have an hour
No
Look Anthony
No
That's the sort of price that Gary was looking for to start with
Yeah
No
about fifteen hundred
don't want to
I mean it'll save on the wallpaper as well 
That's it yeah 
we'll , we'll only have two walls to do 
Oh big bib
Mm
you come up with me 
won't have so much carpet to get
That's right, yeah, come on you tired man let's get the others a drink
Mm, mm, I want a drink
Stop whingeing or he won't go to sleep and then I can't look after you


Whinge bag 
Mum an egg
Mm
I'm tired, mummy tired, mummy
Mm
mummy 
Funny noise, look I'll pick all these up and he won't go to sleep 
Yeah, what is it quarter to three?
Yeah, but by the time
mum I can't hear
Sshh 
just leave him with his alarm on
No, you leave it, if he doesn't go to sleep he can come back down 
So I've done nothing today, I haven't even done one load of washing 
I can't hear the telly 
I've got a whole basketful today, I just left it
Left it
Yeah
I can't hear
Oh shut up er Charlotte it's on ruddy video, you can watch it any time, anyway you're colouring 
   

Do you know what Gary yesterday at about nine o'clock he fancied a pizza, he said that he fancied a pizza, er Aaron come on in, pizza and erm garlic bread to go with it, well I thought I'm going in town so he's got that for tonight now
I'll get you a drink in a minute Aaron hang on 
Mummy 
Is that
Argos, nine ninety nine, and it's got removable cov cover
That's what I want for Aaron for his room
That's the cheapest
Yeah
In my catalogue they're fourteen ninety nine
but, do you, what an ordinary bean bag bean bag?
Yeah
And erm I wanna get one of these
er yeah, that's a proper dog one and they said that'll take up to a size of a labrador that's why I got it, erm but the cover's removable and
Have you ever seen any of them or not?
No I'd like to 


Well why not men go to the bleeding, er well it's like I've never been to a proper hen night, Gary's been to a, a stag night, with female strippers, I'd like to go to a stag, er a hen night
Mm  oh dear  oh dear me
I'm gonna pretend I'm the little baby and you pretend your
Hello
Out, what did I tell you 
Mummy
I don't care what you're gonna say go out 
I wanna 
don't let him in again, out  If you wouldn't of let him that wouldn't of happened


then don't let him in and don't be such a wimp


you're alright go and get
no
Well get in here and stay in here then


then get out


go and tell him off then
No
Well shut up and let me shut the door
No 
Anthony
It out erm
Yeah and then when Alex knocks who will come through barking?
Now get out the way
No
Right you get in there


play me up


No


That's Alex
Right, Alex is here now, you going out?


Go on then, right


she can hear and say how naughty you are, horrible


There she is you'd better be quiet, don't let Boo in, come on in then Aaron don't let Boo in
Alright
Go out there, go on
you coming in or you staying out?


Dog knocked him over didn't he, then you hit your head on your bike
Oh dear
Have you had a good day?
Not really
Oh dear why's that?
Washing dishes not much fun
hopefully something better will come along
they've got to be, not a growing dead


come here and shut up
no 
Well get off then
no, no, stop
yeah
Mummy
Shut up Anthony
What?
can I have a video on?
No not now
You don't watch them Aaron, you put them on and disappear
Yeah
I want this one
No, go on, go out and play
He had a bottle after you'd went
Oh did he?
yeah one whole bottle, erm I wouldn't go near him Aaron he's not in a very good mood
Mum
go and play with Charlotte outside
Mm
Right then he went down, then he got up and had his lunch about one


Oh he's humpy
just now
No I just took him up 
Oh mum I want to come back in
Oh alright, Boo go and lay down, Boo, out, lay down then
I didn't see baby Jordan
He's asleep
He's sleeping
Yeah he ate all his lunch and his yoghurt and his
yeah
Changed a dirty nappy
I try
getting a bit half two, I took him up at twenty to by the time I came down it was quarter to three, he was really rubbing his eyes 
Look what mummy let me have, look what I've 
but he did go to sleep about then 
Very good
so he had two dirty bibs which are in there 
Come let's go up there and make some, come on 
erm Charlotte, Charlotte, Alex is talking 
I was tidying up
a whole bowl of clean water over his nappy so if you wonder why I got through an extra nappy cos it wasn't
to wear after was it?
Mum I told you to get me a drink 
There was it, there was two in there wasn't there?
There was I think two in there yeah so I got one out 
Did you have enough?
Yeah, I had enough I changed him 
I told you to get me a drink
Well I'll get it in a minute I'm talking now
Who's is that drink?
That's Aaron's I'm sure he won't mind if you have a little bit
No
Alright then
I want my own
Yeah I had enough, but it was just a waste of a nappy
mummy I'm too hot
Take your jumper off then, do you want your jumper off?
I know the other
I know this morning it's, I changed his nappy and I like always have a bottle of you know those
you know just to wipe him down and everything in the morning, he just grabbed that and I could see this thing tipping and I went oh god no, please, because that could of been the duvet, the duvet covers 
Yeah 
the sheets, the mattress
Yeah
everything would be absolutely soaking, and I'd try and get it off of him but he holds on to it so tight


Yeah
he just won't let go
Yeah I know he does hold on to things really tight
Mm
it was in here it was sort of like, he'd been niggly all day, he was tired, he sort of like knocked it over with his foot, and of course it went straight over the dry nappy that was laid out on the floor ready to put under him, I said oh that nappy 
You do the okey cokey and you turn around that's what it's all about 
Oh do you have to sing and give us all a headache 
Where's 
you do the okey cokey and you turn around that's what it's all about, you put your whole self in, in out, in out shake it 
Boo under 
all about you do the okey cokey 
go and lay down 
and you turn around
under
that's what it's all about 
Charlotte we're all trying to talk, get up there and sing if you want to sing.
You wanna go outside?
Mm, mm
Go and let him out
Go Boo outside


Go on Boo out, do something dog, go and lay down and have a bark 
 
come on then  is he gone?
Oh Charlotte's trying to lean against him and push him out, no he's settled for under the table now, now leave him Charlotte he can lay under the table, he's out the way over there 

Oh shut up you're a whinge bag Anthy
Aaron's like that in the morning
Yeah, boys are terrible
threaten to take him home, once take 
Leave him 
him home we, we, I was ready, I wanted to get to 
 
town by ten o'clock, ten to twelve we left, he wouldn't get dressed 
Found him 
so I said what, Aaron's playing with the dog
Aaron no, no leave him 
got myself ready I got my coat on and I said I'll see you later
Boo, Boo, Boo 
you're not going without me I said you'd better hurry up and get bloody dressed then hadn't you?
Shut the door Aaron
And ten to twelve we got out the door, oh I was just glad to get out, you know walking a bit of peace and quiet just, I could of strangled him, little git
Do you walk with him or do you put him in a baby walker?
I, when, when we go down to playschool I walk but because it takes what fifteen minutes to walk into town I put him in the pushchair
Yeah
it's less hassle
Yeah
otherwise it'll take about, over half an hour


You get down
side then by the time you've walked round
yeah
And they're absolutely shattered and it's windy and
Mm
You what 
you like to go in the pushchair don't you?
No, I don't
You was in a bad mood yesterday afternoon 
In a minute 
Gary brought him up the hospital to meet me he wouldn't speak to any of the nurses
Anthy?
like this, he wouldn't like up 
I tell you what make the most of it while he's a baby cos when they get like this 
Oh yeah 
cor


I haven't got the patience
I haven't got the patience
I tell you I, I don't know how you do it
Well it must be the age difference
Yeah
Yeah in having said that you're the same age as me
I know
so
Mm
I'm just used to it 
I told you to get me a drink you 
Ah ah 
by the time I hope to four years  
no, no you don't speak to me like that
Please and thank you
Yes and I said I would in a minute darling alright?
Get your bum up
Aaron, Aaron you drive me round the bend?


You make me cross?
No
Do you?
No


Yes you do Aaron
Oh god 
No I don't 
You'll be alright, once he, once he starts doing it anyway you'll get to know how to
Right, to, I, I haven't honestly I've got no patience whatsoever, terrible
I'm going to get my own drink now
Sometimes I quiver to 
Get a drop of milk 
Yeah
or cos I only speak
Don't you look at me like that, I'm gonna have some apple 
Fighting talk
You obvious to be naughty


yeah she'll be in trouble won't she, she often gets her own drinks anyway, she sort of like, she's at that age she can, it's only when they get out there together
Mm
and she'll go and get the milk out and say I've just got myself a glass of milk mum, oh right, okay  not even aware that she's gone out to the fridge you know, fair enough we say ah, you don't do you?
No he was good yesterday though at the pictures, we took them out and they were like really good, we brought all the cartons home didn't we?
Cos they've got like you know Bugs Bunny on all the cartons up there
Oh have they?
and the Warner Brothers Bugs Bunny and the popcorn, you go and get your popcorn dish out of thing, show Alex how much popcorn we bought, I mean you go up there and it's not like it used to be years ago a little bale of popcorn they sell them in huge great big cartons up there
Yeah
you know it's either salted popcorn or the sweet popcorn, I couldn't eat that amount of salt, it is chock-a-block full up with popcorn
Oh look at that
Yes, the whole thing was like a, a thing full of with popcorn, show Alex then
Mm I can't eat
That was medium 
popcorn 
there's small and large
God
there was, the big one is like this and I'm not kidding you.
Groups go up there and they pay the money for it and they put it in the middle while you're waiting for the film, it's all carpeted and you can watch all the monitors and they just sit down this huge tub of popcorn  they had an op 
How much are they?
Well that was on offer this week actually, that plus a great big bag of Minstrels I think was two, two fifty five
That's not bad is it?
erm, erm normally they start at one thirty and they can go up to about three or four pound a great big tub.
We went in and we paid seven pounds for me and my mum to get in, we didn't pay for the kids cos if they know they're gonna sit on your lap, they get in there for nothing, but once we get in there we give them their own chair anyway, providing you go in like it's not in the first week, the following week when the show is quieter and not so many people going
Mm
erm, but it cost seven pounds for me and mum 
No in there 
to get in, three fifty each and then we paid another six pound, ten P and for that we had popcorn, Minstrels, one large Coke, a lot bigger than that and two small ones, and of course everything's got like all this on
Mm
so the kids like to bring it home, stick in the playschool bag, show them at playschool, actually they didn't show them, he puts it on his head as a hat


I haven't got the slightest idea what the kids are doing up there
They're sweet aren't they?
Yeah, which is why I only take them once every so often which is why I only have the two because it means I can take them, you know if you've got a family of four kids or something
It's a bit expensive
it gets a bit yeah, which is why I'm gonna stick with two, I mean now they want to go and see Peter Pan next, when that comes down which will be what probably a month, about once every couple of months they'll go or once a month
Mm
but we do if we look out when we see it coming down I save a couple of quid up each week that, then I've got the money again
Mm
Yeah
yeah let's have a look at that one, that's the large Coke
Mm 
Mm 
Me and my mum bought one of those and we had that between us and we bought one of those each for the kids, even though she swindled sweets in her bag, we started taking sweets in the bag and bottles of drink, but that wasn't the same they wanted a cartoon cup, so we
 
 
when we got up there, and next time we 
It's good to go there isn't it?
Yeah, the thing is though, the daft thing is there is nothing small up there
No
it's all big boxes of wine gums, fruit gums, big box, packet of Minstrels there are no small sweets for children at all 
Mummy that's Bugs Bunny 
Yes I know 
You go into the pick and mix and seventy five P a quarter, so you get next to nothing in the bottom of the bag
Bye, bye bunny
you know, but it's all these jelly sweets, you know choosing different jelly, jelly snakes and things, my two aren't into them 
Aaron 
Well it is Anthony's can you give it back please
Yeah I wouldn't run off with that mate
Got bunny on it
Yes I know it's Bugs Bunny on it and you've got a Bugs Bunny tape haven't you?
I've got Bug Bunny tape
Yeah, they got, they've got a massive Bugs Bunny sitting up over the sweet counter as you go in
Yeah
absolutely massive it is, yeah
Mummy
is it, they're gonna take this to playschool so you'll probably see it down there, they don't decide to keep them anyway, there's the other one there
Who in there
it's a good outing out though 
 
mum I've, I
Sshh, come in here, come in here and shut the door and 
I 
who, who left the door open out there?
Go and shut it for me
Erm Lewis
Aaron, erm


sorry what, what was in here?
Mm
Just things like erm black penny sweets you get
Oh right
like little jellies, what else did you have in here?
Oh little jelly shaped bears didn't you?
Yeah, and a
Erm
and a snake and
jelly snake you got didn't you?
Yeah
There's all this jelly stuff and they get fed up with that
Mm
We got some
but where if they sold little packets of sweets
Mm
Mummy 
Opal Fruits and things like that I could of got them that but of course a great big bag of Minstrels, you couldn't just let them rummage through that, so what I done I took a couple of handfuls out and put them in here 
Yeah 
with their jellies look
Yeah
but I mean it's seventy five P a quarter
A
It's awfully dear
One, two what?
er a friend of ours was up there
a
and she had her
What comes after two?
quite two happy in the bottom of the bag and it came to one fifty
like you get caught out 
What come's after two?
once you've put it in your bag you can't put it back
Three
Three you know it 
You know it 
It's, you can put it in but you can't put it back with your fingers you don't realize it when you go up and get it and you ain't got enough 
One, two, three, four 
money you're stuck aren't you?
Yeah
What comes after three Aaron?
But apart from that pick and mix they don't do nothing else in small things
 
What come's after three Aaron?
No
They hadn't salt me popcorn so I complained
One, two, you count, one, two, three, four, don't it 
Funny I've got a sweet tooth when it comes to like chocolates and things like them 
Mm 
but popcorn
so what, what I do like and I haven't bought any for a, for weeks I must admit you know them pink erm what they called er 
 
one, two, four 
Me got
Shrimps
shrimps in Woolies 
me er put it in there ah mum
And I like to eat erm the banana ones
Yeah 
I like the old flying saucers with the sherbet
I had popcorn there
eaten them down there
Yeah I like, I like them shrimp they melt in your mouth mm 
Yeah you show Alex how you wear that as a hat then 


 
Alex, Alex 
Put your drink up before it spills somewhere 
And also had interest last week about two minutes I sat down I was just sitting comfortable 
Anthony I got 
she says
bye
Alex he wants to show you something
what then is to that?
We have
No don't crush it, don't crush it
I mean how, I was just getting comfortable and I thought oh god
Are you ready then?
Mm
and he said yeah your
I must admit that I chew a lot of gum
Mm
you know like sugar free gum I've 
Yeah 
always got chewing gum on me
Yeah
so that I can chew
chewing gum always makes me hungry
Right here's your, here's your stick
Erm, er it, it depends which one it is
they say cos it makes your stomach think it's gonna get food 
Oh no he 
yeah and it's erm saliva and everything too
Yeah so I daren't eat chewing gum if I'm on a diet 
Oh you don't need to
no but I oh I do sometimes, but today I'm not eating much but I'm not fat 
Oh I dropped you 
will you be quiet for goodness sake I can't hear myself think
Da, da, de, da
Sometimes I do be, I can put on weight really fast I can
in the morning
Charlotte
and I pig out at work
 
Right now put these up 
and I don't have
yum, yum 
yeah 
Mum, mum don't put up there
I tell you what, what we bought up there you know we could of bought at least six bottles of Coke
Aagh
two litre bottles of Coke what we paid to go in
er I mean what we paid forty seven, seven pound, ten P
Oh be careful Aaron
but still like mum says it's an afternoon out so
Well I'm a bit of
actually I tend to waste money cos I thought I'd sit here and moan about taking them out the cost of it, but then I considered spending a hundred pound on a bed that he probably doesn't even need, it's daft really innit?
Yeah, it is yeah
Aagh, aagh
Put your nose into it there
Don't aggravate your brother
That'll be nice and smart won't it?
It's getting your priorities right isn't it?
Yeah 
Yeah, but then I think well yeah you can moan about taking them out but that six
 
Oh no you have broken down 
but nothing to show for it


Fetch the hat quickly
You don't have to shout in my earhole


did you want, did you have, do you want another Aaron?
He's got one up there
Oh he's got one, do you want one Charlotte?
Erm yeah
Dad'll come home tonight and say who's eaten all the custard creams then, he loves custard creams
Yeah
And me ate them all
Don't talk with your mouth full, last two there  so do you think you'll get anything happen Thursday then or don't you honestly know, just ask them 
I honestly don't know , when I spoke to her this morning she said she hasn't erm for a, for a few weeks now she hasn't placed anybody
Er a my bic, bic 
 

me put the bag on
It really does
 
You shan't 
Mum, mum put a bag on, I wanna put a bag on 
 
Are you only up here till Wednesday then?
I put bag on 
no
Yes
No
Sshh
Aaron
oh big mouth 
I wanna put I wanna put bag on 
The 
M four she went and
I wanna put bag on
Yeah it's gotta rewind, it's only going on quietly though
Yeah
Erm
Boo go and lay down 
Mummy eat my cream
You can wear your hat for bag 
it's an awful day but I mean it's still money at the end of the road
That's right
isn't it?
Yes, Charlotte be careful
I thought you was gonna say have your veins done is a normal job
I
me ate my cream 
you gonna have yours done Pauline?
me ate my me ate my cream 
Oh shut up I've got bad veins
Yeah
Oh, oh dear 
just in my 
go on in a biting it a are 
my, my right leg, but 
Mm
they, they play me up every now and then
Yeah
Yeah
I've got one behind this knee here
Mm
and I got that doing my eight 
how 
position
Oh yeah
Yeah and that was out standing fifteen hours a day
Mm
Yeah
and it's never got really bad, the only time it got bad was
yeah
then it really stuck out
Yeah
but it's not bad enough to have it
 
No mine's, mine's not bad enough 
it's only just very small
Yeah
it's only that big
Yeah and mine's all day, from sort of there and there or there, there
Oh no
you can see, it's not as, it's not that bad
Watch your fingers Aaron in or out, shut the door 
but I, I have pain down the leg every now and then 
erm Aaron come in shut the door cos your fingers 
I keep getting 
same leg, so erm, see Gary moans at me that I, he says that I eat too much erm salt, now if I was to eat that much salt I wouldn't get cramp
Mm
but I still get cramp, and that, and the doctor said to me he said all that I can do is when you get the pain just rest it, how can you rest with a three year old?
He got a 
oh dear
This is only going on very quietly
No loud
No it's not going on loud Charlotte, I do not want to be deafened by Michael Jackson thank you, I think that's quite loud enough
 

I think you're in the wrong place there
Mm
I think you're in the wrong place
Yeah, Michael Jackson band
eat your biscuits
Do you, do either of you know of any really good, good car boot sales?
Never go to them, no I put these up for Anthony give them here, give it
Erm I know
that they hold one every Sunday in the football 
Do as you're told  
er
Come away from that Aaron, what?
Well get out the way then I can't get it if you're there 
 
try to get rid of all my baby stuff and, so what I'm going to do is advertise in the paper and then
yeah
What does he want?
And erm I just want to get rid of it, get it out the way
Yeah I've got all my stuff up 
I think you'll find 
in the loft
Yeah and erm, the, everyone advertising got the basic, I mean
yeah
Don't 
I think you'll find, I don't know whether it is but mum, my mum went to a car boot sale once and they weren't selling nothing over ten pounds, so the car boot sales
Don't Charlotte
only go up to certain, yeah, though people can't afford to go to them 
I was gonna say how about putting it in a shop window?
Yeah, well I was gonna, thing is though
Don't play with the sewing box 
same for me is
Yeah
 
don't play in the sewing box 
car boot sale, there's other bits and bobs I want to get rid of
Yeah
yeah
No, no Aaron don't get on the table 
I've got, I've got to sort out all of Aaron's stuff get rid of that and that can go towards my new bedroom and don't stand on his feet.
I'm thinking of getting my bedroom done, getting a fitted bedroom, we just thought well we can't afford to move
Mm
and Aaron get up, we've, we've only got a very small bedroom so we might as well make the most of it, we've had quotes and all that and erm, look not the cheapest but not the exp the most expensive erm 
Expensive yeah 
but something that's got five year guarantee on it erm, what did we work out?
Three sixteen, sixteen hundred and ninety four
Mm
which isn't too bad
No
er and that's getting a third two walls and erm an alcove with erm two glass sliding doors and then erm single wardrobe and you've got the  
Show mum 
around with the erm top boxes and two, three drawer units 
Put it back 
and another erm single wardrobe
Yeah
and that goes right up to the window yeah, and the time that, we had seven firms 
Stand up 
not on me not on me 
and they wanted sort of three thousand quid
I want a cuddle
You can have a cuddle but just 
and there's no way we can afford that
Yeah
It's bad enough you know sort of being fifteen hundred, but, you know that, that
that's what we were looking at to start with
Yeah
so erm


No we're not putting any more films on Aaron cartoons are on in a minute 
 
and that
yeah, Aaron you pig


No that's naughty
You've got small feet ain't you, you look like a size four
A two
You're a two?
You know somebody's got smaller feet than you Pauline
I've only got a five
Yeah, well I'm five
Well five's average
Yeah
And I'm only four
These are a three, two, my actual shoe 
Aaron 
foot size is a two, they usually end up in a three erm in flat shoes like this for the width I've got very big feet
Aaron
and if it's high heels, generally
Go and lay down 
Yeah
it doesn't make any
Aaron
so my shoes are too big for me
lay down 
Yeah I know, these are a five but I've got my, I've got my, my but erm, taught colour boots and they're a six
but the biggest I buy is a, is a five
They're a three and erm that's for the width
Mm
mum, ma
Yeah, amazing


What I don't get nothing for
I get a, I get a six for my width, see I have great big bones that used to stick out there, see the scar?
Yeah
Mummy
Went into hospital and had
didn't I?
Yeah
Yeah I had the bones broke 
 
reset and that's how I met up with bleeding Tony he came to visit me meeting a friend, it's only me he said oh go round and see this girl I know and she was related to my best mate, it's a complicated story and we sort of went from there really
Go, go
many years ago 
Mm, mm
I kept thinking to myself I don't bloody want this bloody operation I might have
picture half way round the world
Aaron, Aaron
Oh dear mustn't complain, no  children 
Aaron give that back to Anthony now, now 
I was playing
no I saw Anthony with it just now 
Mm, mm
Here give it to me
Aaron give it to Alex
Come
Come on, we've got to all get home, mummy hasn't done all the washing yet,
yeah come here, let's
smile
You can leave them if you want
come on we've got to do dinner, got to get our shopping home
Mummy me, me
go and put it in the bin, one, two, oh Aaron
Do it though
I've got so much to do now, I've left it all
sharpening, where they sharpening down there?
There's a pencil
Ha
do
What?
So what do you want to do take that little dress or not?
Erm 
If you don't want to just leave it and I just 
no I just leave it and I'll have a think of who's got, you know a two year old, a two, three year old, can't think of anyone
No


Er come on please


come on A J
Not Aaron
Oh look, I'm going home now
Mum
Oh where's me sat here you want
mm
er come here, come here Aaron you know them sweets that we've got in our be , in my pocket?
Yeah
You can have one in a minute if you hurry up and get up, right I'll leave you here cos I'm going home, I'm not
I want a mint
Did I kick you?
I haven't got any mints, we haven't had any of those for ages
Me got them buttons 
here are, otherwise you'll stay here, come on I'm not gonna muck about, come on
Here's going to do
come on up


I'm not taking you home in a stroppy mood Aaron we left home in a a stroppy mood 
No 
Aaron why you going home in a stroppy mood?
Not
Oh
 

Mum
Yeah, Boo, Boo
you
I'm Charlotte, you know my name don't you?
Oh who's that, is that you?
No, er, Boo, Boo
Do you wanna walk home or go in the pushchair?
I walk home
You're gonna walk home, fair enough, come here and get your hat on, come here
these two bibs are very wet up here where he's been dribbling and
 
Aaron 
there's some food in there darling?
mum
Yeah I fed him, I didn't starve him
Aaron
no we'll clear up in a minute
Who's on telly when we get home?
We'll put these back in here cos we know they're
Who's on telly today, Timmy Mallet
Timmy Mallet, Timmy Mallet, Timmy Mallet
Hiya darling, hiya  no I was really surprised cos he hasn't been drinking his juice, and that went down
Timmy Mallet, Timmy Mallet
I say that was naughty I normally wash them up and I put it back in there


Don't worry I just that
all the washing anyway
here are
Quick tidy up, upstairs in the bathroom wash me hair, done that this morning I thought oh dear
Here look
Oh bye
I done me exercises instead
I'll only getting my
to stop whingeing, don't push the pushchair, it'll topple back one 
Happy little fellow then , who's a happy little fellow?
Aaron if it topples back and, that's it I'm smacking you, come in here 
He's usually quite good when he wakes up isn't he?
I haven't touched him, I don't think I've had him any trouble
Ah Aaron
let's see if we can turn your head, oh dear it's a little bit big
no, he
They've actually been taken apart, and probe about saying school leaving age and that one
Yeah
the kids spilt milk on this and I didn't realize and it all dried, stuck all the controls  you know what Tony's like, you know, can't you keep the kids away from the computer
Aaron
typically 
That's like Gary caught Aaron on Saturday changing the tapes over, said I didn't know he did that 
Liar , er I don't mind them doing the video tapes over, but
Er remember when I was here that day and he was shoving them in and out
washing to do
You want a lift back?
No that's alright
Are you sure?
Yeah, yeah, honestly
Walking keeps her fit she quite enjoys walking this one, I hate it
I don't mind walking but it's I get the shopping 
Charlotte no don't get Pauline's shopping out, she's got all her pushchair organized
I haven't had any 
I always thought you bring this over for breakfast 
I don't like walking full stop 
Yeah, I, I find I like walking
first of all it's gotta be warm, if it's cold
mummy, mum 
I mean I walked to work every Saturday and Sunday no matter what the weather
Yeah, oh my god
No, I, no I, I suppose what with Aaron going to playschool I go out every day walking apart from Thursday 
Shall I open the door?
Yeah
Well you shouldn't of done it, it's very
Right as Aaron's got the door out, open, he's got
I'll let you out first
Right I shall see you later
Bye
Bye
I'll just shut this door
Hello, hello
Right my two get in you haven't got coats on  Charlotte in now and shut the door
oh
Shut the door now, bye Charlotte 
Right come on Mr man
Come on you can put your I T V on in a minute
I'm in got in now
actually oh sorry 
Oh sorry , go and knock you out there
What?
I got, oh that must be on, I think you can watch Josie Smith can't you?
Leave it turned down and you'll be able to see when it starts, yes, okay, you're a really good boy aren't you?
You're a really good boy, yeah, take him upstairs and I thought oh, he could be mine this little one


I don't think mummy would like that you know


but he, he's at that age now where I could have another kid and look after it quite easily if I had one, but I don't wanna go through, not the pregnancy, but I don't want to go through all the babies and getting up in the night and, one that'll come out six months old 
Be happy
I'll be quite happy yeah, yeah because they say
to play with, when they're babies you can't do nothing with them.
But they sleep peace and quiet, ya
Well yeah, they can be boring as well can't they?
Yeah
You know when you spend the night
you know one popping in and looking after, I find that easier than just putting them down to sleep
Yeah
I find them a constant worry when they're sleeping cos you're making sure whether they're still breathing 
Never really bothered too much about that, and I've always been very like erm ooh, la, ha, ha, you think that's funny, er happy go lucky I don't think, I think if I was neurotic 
 
should be neurotic
yeah
Do you know what I mean?
And erm
he's got really red rosy cheeks
I know 
at the front 
it was the same yesterday, I don't know if it's his teeth again
Oh go on, what you doing?
I noticed last night when I was bathing him and covered in his ears this one 
Mum ma 
Yeah
mum ma, look what I've done
He sat on it
No leave your
I noticed it, I thought it looked like a rash
and I felt the side of it and it's just warm and I thought oh he, he must getting
whatever you know, cos at first I thought he was hot in his cot and
you know, but just
he hasn't got none through yet though has he?
There all there
But he's not
I tell you if one comes, they'll all come at once 
Yeah
I reckon
they just want to start it, cos once they start getting through that's when they start getting wanting decent, wanting to eat more and  I mean I make them clean theirs thoroughly, they're really good at doing them actually as well 
Yeah
Mum I can't hear the telly
No you don't need to get into that 
 
in the fridge Anthony open your eyes
and I'll put everything in the car
Yeah, you gonna come and put your coat on?
Oh
He's chewing on mummy's scarf, so it'll definitely only be till Wednesday
Till Wednesday
Right, say right, right, right, shame I can't have you any more
I shall miss you
Yeah
Yeah
say that's not fair , say I shall miss you then won't I?
Say I really appreciate your time 
That's alright, don't worry 
Right  you've made a nice mess out there haven't you?
Mum ma I want them  I want one of them
 

Right then Charlie what you gonna sing for us?
Happy birthday to granddad
Go on then 
And me 
Right you both gonna sing happy birthday to your granddad are you?
Alright then, stand there then, right, go on then, off you go, I'm listening
What about the song have?
Just sing it
Happy birthday to you, happy birthday to you, happy birthday dear granddad, happy birthday to you  
Happy birthday to you, happy birthday to you, happy birthday dear granddad, happy birthday to you  
Well done, what you gonna sing for me next then?
Erm Twinkle Twinkle
Twinkle Twinkle
You wanna sing that one do you?
Twinkle, twinkle little star how I wonder what you are, up above the world so high like a diamond in the sky, twinkle, twinkle little star how I wonder what you are  
Twinkle, twinkle little star how I wonder what you are, up above the world so high like a diamond in the sky, twinkle, twinkle little star how I wonder what you are  
Very good, what about singing the ones you sing at playschool?
Jingle, Jingle Bells
No what about the one, my mummy lives in this house?
No  jingle bells, jingle bells, jingle all the way, oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh  
Jingle bells, jingle bells, jingle all the way, oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh  
I need to go to the toilet, you see 
Go on then hurry up
Wait for me
mummy I'm gonna sing
What you gonna sing?
Erm, erm, erm, I be your in your house
Go on then
You're my sister, you're my mum, mm, my daddy, you're my 
try singing without sweets in your mouth and try singing a bit louder, I might be able to hear you over here.
How many live in our house, you're my sister, you're my mum, you're my daddy, you're my brother 
No , not bad, not bad
How many are living in our house?
Well, but 
Sing it with Charlotte as well then
How many people live in your house, how many people live in your house, one my father, two my mother, three my sister, four my brother, there's one more now let me see oh yes of course it must be me, how many people live in your house  
How many people live in your house, how many people live in your house, one my father, two my mother, three my sister, four my brother, there's one more now let me see oh yes of course it must be me, how many people live in your house  
Well done
The bear went over the mountain, the mountain, the mountain, the bear went over the mountain to see what he could see, it all that he could see is the other side of the mountain all that he could see is the other side of the mountain, the bear went over the mountain 
The other side of the mountain, the bear went over the mountain  
the mountain, the mountain, the bear went over the mountain, that's all that he could see 
Erm, what about, what's that other one you learnt, the chicken one?
Yeah
Go on then.
I don't know where it starts
Erm, five little chickens, five little chicks
Yeah, five and five, no, hide them round your back
Go on then
Five and five make ten, sitting on top of the mother hen
With the mother hen
with the mother hen 
Start again, start again  five and five makes ten, sitting on top with the mother hen  
five and five makes ten, sitting on top with the mother hen crackle, crackle, crackle what do I see ten little yellow chicks as fluffy as can be 
That's it, what's the matter?
What's the matter darling?
Shall we sing, er mum what else shall we sing?
Erm, I don't know, what else, what other things do you learn at playschool then?
Erm
How many people in your house
erm,
ah?
some sausages, how many sausages?
Sausages?
Erm, yeah the
oh
I don't know how the end starts off and we haven't singed it properly, one, two, three, four, five, six, we have six,six
Sshh
six sausages in a pan, one went pop and the other went bang  
went bang  
Oh that's it, go on then, sing it, off you go, start again
one went pop and the other 
No, no, in it, don't it start off  three little sausages sizzling in the pan 
Yeah
Go on then
Three little sausages sizzling in the pan one went pop and the other went bang 
Bang
Yeah, then what happens, two little sausages
Yeah, I don't
Two little sausages in the pan, one went pop and the other went bang  
Went bang 
One little sausages sitting in the pan, one went pop and the other went bang  
Went bang 
Five little sausages sitting in the pan, one went pop and the other went bang  
Went bang 
Oh really
What else shall we learnt Ant?
Oh  how many, how 
Hickory Hickory Dock
Go on then
Hickory, hickory dock, the mouse ran up the clock, the clock struck one, down the mouse run, hickory, tickery dock, tick tock 
Tick tock
Insy Winsy Spider
Go on then
Insy winsy spider climb up the 
Insy winsy spider climb up the  
spout and down 
no, Insy winsy spider climbs the spider's web, I think that's how it goes
The spider went up the spout is me, down come the rain and out come the sun, all the sun came out in the rain, Insy Winsy spider climbed up again 
Well that weren't too bad, but not very good
What, what else shall we do?
Mm
there must be loads that you learn at playschool, what are they?
Oh, I want
I'm just tidying up a bit while you're singing darling
No
We don't want baby getting them
Mm
you can get them all out again in a minute
The bear went over the mountain  what else erm
What other songs do you learn?
I know what other songs I learn 
What?
Er Hickory, Hickory Dock
Yeah, what about doing Jack in the Box?
Er, not me down
Yeah, Jack in the Box
Go on then
Yeah we wanna get down in our little box first 
Go on then 
Erm  Jack in the box, rest his  no I can't sing it
What is it?
Jack in the box, resting so still, will you come out yes I will  
Yes I will 
Yes I will 


What other one?
Go on then sit down and I'll sing it, and you have to do the jump up and do the yes I will, quick curl up, quick, quick, right,Jack in the box, resting so still, will you come out ?
Yes I will  
Yes I will  
yes I will , ah a Jack in the box
What else do we know?
Oh careful, I don't know, what other songs do you learn at school?
Hello darling
No playschool
What, playschool, yeah, what other things do we learn at playschool?
Erm 
Erm , I know, the one you go  like that
I don't know that one, sing Hi Ho
Hi, ho, hi, ho it's off to work we go, we've a huff, huff, huff and a whin, whin, whin, hi, ho, hi, ho 
hi, ho, hi, ho it's off to work we go, we've a huff, huff, huff and a whin, whin, whin, hi, ho, hi, ho 
it's home from work we go we've a huff, huff, huff and a whin, whin, whin hi, ho, hi, ho it's off to work we go, we've a chuff, chuff, chuff and a whin, whin, whin, hi, ho, hi, ho, it's home from work we go 
What they doing?
with a, with a chuff, chuff, chuff and a whin, whin, whin, hi, ho, hi, ho  
Yes alright I think we've had enough of that one now, I think we know you know that one, don't we Jordan, erm what other ones do you learn?
I don't know
Well you're the ones that go to playschool I don't 
the one that goes  
I don't know one that you whistle in
Oh, I know
What?
if you really want to show yourself
Oh go on then
Where, what bit does it start off?
I don't know, I'm not at playschool, I don't learn it
I don't know, erm, Jingle Bel 
If you're happy and you know it
Yeah,if you're happy and you know it and you really want to show it 
Right start from the beginning, if you're happy and you know it and you really want to show it clap your hands, if you're happy and you know it and really want to show stamp your feet or how ever it goes, go on then you do it.
How you really want to know it stamp your feet if you really want to  
No, Anthony will you stop banging on the radiator , no it's  are you happy and, if you're happy and you know it clap your hands, if you're happy and you know it clap your hands
We want to sing it
if you're happy and you know it 
I know I want to sing it 
and you really want to show it   
mum, mum I want to sing it 
Go on then
If you're happy and you know it clap your hands, if you're happy and you know it clap your hands, if you happy and you know it and you really want to show it, if you're happy and you know it clap your hands  if you happy and you know it stamp your feet, stamp your feet  ah get off, get off,if you're happy and you know it stamp your feet, stamp your feet, if you're happy and you know it and you really want to show it happy, if you're happy and you know it stamp your feet, stamp the feet 
Good
Now, now, we've still got a lot to do
Oh, go on then, mustn't stop you from working must we darling?
No, mustn't stop them from working 
If you if you happy and you know it tip your head, but not your head, if you  if you're happy and you know it do a four 
Get off the radiator 
do a four  very quietly 
If you sing it quietly you won't  sing something properly if you're gonna sing 
I do
again
Head and shoulders
Go on then do head and shoulders
Head and shoulders, knees and toes, knees and toes, head and shoulders, knees and toes, knees and toes, and eyes and ears and mouth and nose, head and shoulders, knees and toes, me and he, I have to do it a little bit faster 
A little bit faster then
Head and shoulders, knees and toes, knees and toes, head and shoulders, knees and toes, knees and toes, and eyes and ears and mouth and nose, head and shoulders, knees and toes, knees and toes  
And eyes and ears and mouth and nose, head and shoulders, knees and toes, knees and toes 


Now it's really faster where Karen beats us
Go on then really faster
Head and shoulders knees and 




this what I did
Start again then 
Head and shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes and eyes and ears and mouth and nose head and shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes  I beat you.
Now do it really quick, quick, ready go  head and shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes, head and shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes and eyes and ears and mouth and nose, head and shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes   oh dear all worn out now.
Me wanna sing hi ho again
You wanna what?
Sing hi ho again
Oh, er watch where you're going there cos little one's there 
Can I take this 
It's not that warm darling
mummy
undo your bottoms ones, that's right it's got poppers then
mummy
er, hello lovey, got poppers there
mummy
don't get them muddled up there, cos they look the same, aagh, put that bleeding pussy cat down  ooh ah, ah, pull your trousers up, you're gonna sing hi, ho again are you?
I put mine over here like that
Good girl
Hi, ho, hi, ho, hi, ho
No, erm, start all again  hi, ho, hi, ho it's off to work we go we've a huff, huff, huff and a whin, whin, whin hi, ho, hi, ho, it's home from work we go with a chuff, chuff, chuff and a whin, whin, whin hi, ho, hi, ho, it's off to work we go with a chuff, chuff, chuff and a whin, whin, whin hi, ho, hi, ho
I think they're mad 
it's off to work we go we've a da, da, da, and a whin, whin, whin hi, ho, hi, ho, it's off to work we go
Oh 
we've a da, da, da 
they're mad
My, my, this round my hand
children
hi, ho, hi, ho it's off to work we go with a chuff, chuff, chuff, whin, whin, whin, hi, ho, hi, ho it's home from work we go with a chuff, chuff, chuff, whin, whin, whin, hi, ho, hi, ho, it's off to work we go 
Oh now then what's the matter, what's the matter?
Me wanna sing the lorry
Well you sing it again then
Me wanna sing the lorry
You what?
Alright then you sing
Me wanna sing the lorry
You wanna sing what?
The lorry
The lorry one
Yeah, me get my lorry
Oh hello beautiful oh you listening to their noise 
How many lorries can you count, how many lorries can you count?
I know how many lorries you can count, shall I sing it to you?
How many lorries can you count, how many lorries can you count 
They're making a lot of noise aren't they?
How many
lorries can you count  
lorries can you count , one, one, one, that's all we can count, all we one by big and stout, I clapped my hands, and I jump up jump up and turn around and I jump 
Did Jordan leave his dummy on the floor?
Oh no it's there
No you haven't
Me wanna sing lorry again  lorry and lorry, lorry 
How many lorries can you count  mummy listen to us
I'm listening, I'm listening
How many lorries can you count, one, one, one, that's all we can count, why don't you jump instead of turning round 
Are you sure you're not just making that one up?
No, we are not
Are you sure about that?
Of course mum, mum I know, I know another
Charlotte you've knocked his dummy out
and now I know another song about Donald Duck  Donald Duck went up the hill stuck in the miney mo, down in the rain and was for, Donald Duck
for  erm, I know,Insy Winsy spider climb up the water spout, down came the rain and washed poor Winsy out, out came the sun and dried all the rain, and Insy Winsy climb up 
 
the spout again 
I sing a song about Donald Duck  Donald Duck wears a hat like this, a hat like this, like this, Donald Duck wears a hat like this, has he got a drink of Coke?
Er Donald Duck had a drink of Coke, mm, mm, Donald Duck had a drink of Coke  
 
I think you're just making that song up dear
No it's not it's my new guest on and then  Jack and the Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water, down fell Jack and broke his crown and Jill came tumbling 
Turn it off, you'll waste the battery 
after , mum did you hear me?
Yeah, Anthony turn that off  don't waste the batteries on it darling 
Did you hear me mum?
Yeah I did
Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water, Jack fell down and broke  
Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water, Jack fell down and broke his crown and Jill came tumbling after .
Do you know Humpty Dumpty?
Yeah  Humpty dumpty sat on the wall, humpty dumpty had a great fall, all the king's horses and all the king's men couldn't put humpty together again 
I tell you what, you know more songs at your age than what I ever knew when I was little, I couldn't remember all them
Er
No
Apples, two little apples hiding in the tree
Go on then, I haven't heard that one
Two little apples high in the apple, two little apples smiled down at me, I shook the tree as hard as I could, yummy, yummy, they were very good 


That's what you have to say yummy, yummy they were very good.
I suppose you're supposed to of eaten them was you?
No, no, no
Sing it again, nice and clearly and slowly
Two little apples high in the tree, two little apples smiled down at me, I shook the tree as hard as I could, yummy, yummy, they were very good 
That's a good little song innit?
Yeah.
Yeah I know what
What?
Five little monkeys jumping on the bed
Go on then
Me
Five little monkeys jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the doctor said no more monkeys jumping on the bed  
No more monkeys jumping on the bed  
Four little monkeys jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the  doctor said, no more monkey's jumping on the bed  
Four little monkeys jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the doctor said, no more monkeys jumping on the bed  
Three little monkeys jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the doctor said, no more monkeys jumping on the bed  I know  two little monkeys jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the doctor said, no more monkeys jumping on the bed, one little monkey jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the doctor said no more monkey jumping on the bed  
One little monkey jumping on the bed, one fell off and bumped his head, mummy phoned the doctor and the doctor said no more monkey jumping on the bed  
That's a noisy one, cor, want it mate?
Me and er sing pussy cat
Sing pussy cat?
Yeah
Go on then
Pussy cat, pussy cat where are you?
Pussy cat, pussy cat where are you?
Hang on a minute it's supposed to be  pussy cat, pussy cat who did there 
Is it not supposed to be  pussy cat, pussy cat where have you been, I've been to London to see the queen ?
No  pussy cat, pussy cat where on  
No sing pussy cat, pussy cat on my own
Pussy cat on his own
Yeah
Pussy cat, pussy cat on your own , yeah, then what?
I think you're making that one up aren't you?
Mum it's pussy cat, pussy cat have some pie for, where mummy don't give them some pie and pussy cat, pussy cat up in London, there's two about pussy cats
Oh well as we don't know any of them, we'd better not sing them had we?
Yeah but we know pussy cat, pussy cat where have you been
What about humpty dumpty?
We've singed that
Have you?
Not me sing it
Alright then, what other nursery rhymes you know, erm
Erm, I know  three blind mice, three blind mice, three blind mice, see how they run, see how they run, they all run after the farmer's wife, he cut off their tails with a carving knife, have you ever seen such a thing in your life, three blind mice 
Me and three little, three little, three little
pardon?
Three little sweets in the
what was that Charlotte he saying?
Three little sweets in the tree?
No 
Right erm 
Yes 
hang on Anthony, speak clearly I can't understand you yet darling.
You sing it with us  three little sweets, three little sweets  is that right?
No
What about, what about
Baa Baa Black Sheep?
No, I was going to say what about the one about five sticky buns in the baker's shop, do you know that one?
Yeah
Go on then, sit down and
 
Five sticky buns in the baker's shop   is that right?
Yeah, what's the next bit?
I don't know
Oh no it wasn't, it was five currant buns wasn't it?
Yeah
Go on then sing it
Five currant buns in the baker's shop, one went 
No I can't remember what comes after that, five currant buns in the baker's shop
Five currant bake
Sshh, five currant buns in the baker's shop
One went pop and the other went bang
No, no, five currant buns in the baker's shop
No I know what
Oh I don't know that, I can't think of that one
Three little kittens
unless it was, yeah, three currant buns in a baker's shop, I paid a penny and, no, oh I don't know I can't think of it 
I laid a penny, no  I spended a baker shop and one took away, five currant buns in a baker's shop, one went 
No, five currant buns in a baker's shop 
Shop , along came a keeper and fi 
fat and delicious with sugar on the top
along came the people and buyed it too
No, five currant buns in a baker's shop, round and sticky with the sugar on the top, Peter paid a penny and took one away, two currant buns left on the tray  sing that one then  three currant buns in the baker's shop 
Three currant buns in the baker's shop  
fat and sticky with sugar on the top, Peter paid a penny and took one away, then there were two currant buns left on the tray, two currant buns in the baker's shop fat and sticky with sugar on the top, Peter paid a penny and took one away 
two currant buns in the baker's shop fat and sticky with sugar on the top, Peter paid a penny and took one away  
there was one currant bun left on the tray
mum cos I
one currant bun in the baker's shop, round and fat with sugar on the top, Peter paid a penny and took one away  
mum cos we, mum, mum, mum,mum, mum  
Yes Charlie?
can we sing that last one by our self?
If you must
One currant bun in the baker shop, sticky and round with sugar on the top, Peter pay a penny but took it away, now there was none left on the tray 
That's right, no currant buns, oh
Well you my prouded thing
Me an eating 
I wanna sing , I wanna sing pussy cat, pussy cat where have you been
Go on then
Pussy cat, pussy cat where have you been, I've been to London to visit the king, pussy cat, pussy cat what were you there, I frightened a little mouse under the chair 
That's a good one
What, what
three little kittens
I don't know that one
Three little kittens, three little kittens, see how they run, see how they came, along came the father and make it hat, when he put his hat on and said 
I know, three little ducks swimming  three little ducks, swimming, three little ducks, swimming, go to the pond and round and back , no I, hold a, hold on to my hands, hold on to my hands  Ant hold on to my hands, you sing row, row the, row the boat gently down the stream by our self.
Hold hands Ant, we're gonna sing row, row, row the boat gently down the stream.
Are you tired?
Are you tired?
We're gonna sing row, row, row the boat gently down the stream 
Are you tired?
Alright then I use it with my feet
Mm
No don't aggravate Charlotte
What, what about row, row  row, row, row, the boat gently down the stream, merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily life is but a dream  Ant do you wanna sing row, row, row, row the boat gently down the stream?
Mm
Row, row, row the boat
What's the matter?
Ah Charlotte no, he's got his shoes on that'll hurt if he catches you.
Get up and away from him now.
life is but a dream 
Now stop aggravating him, he doesn't want to play or sing.
Why Any why don't you, why don't, why don't you want to sing?
Er leave er no
Do you wanna sing row, row, row the boat gently down the stream?
No, we got er do
oh darling what's the matter?
No, me got to sing
I know you've got to sing wheels on the bus
Oh you want picking up do you?
No, I'm singing the one the lorry
Little and the lorry, he wants to sing little and the lorry
Go on then
Little and the lorry, little and the lorry, do you see  
Listen can you sing quietly?
alright, alright, I'm gonna sort you out, come on then, sshh, do some more singing then
Erm I don't know what to sing, I think of something
You two think quietly a minute
Mm, we've got to think of something
Er, ma, make me horrible
 
Is that one yours?
Oh no, me not altered mine yet
Where are they?
Oh, er me eaten them 
Anth want one?
What do you want, you want the same colour as your car?
Yellow, yellow or orange, which do you want?
Me want black
Well there's no black ones in these
Er me have blue
I ain't got any blue in here
Ah we got this one
We got yellow in there and red
Erm
yellow, yeah shall we have yellow?
Aagh
yellow, yeah we have yellow then 
erm that , me want that
No I want red, you have yellow, you have this
No I don't want, me have, me have a green one, me have the green one
Well is there any green on your car?
Erm
No there isn't is there?
Yeah a little bit
Where?
Little bit of green where?
In the door
Where, no I can't see any, yeah but you can have green, there you go I give you green
No it isn't
That's green Ant, what do you think this maybe be, green?
Green there 
I did them , here for you see
Oh no 
another one in there, you can have two then can't you?
Stop doing that, oh it won't shut will it, just press that button, oh  stop that, I want it to shut
Well it won't shut
There now we've got two, two each haven't we?
And I just gave you two, two aren't I?
This recorded that and recorded this when I open it, so, get two out, that's one of yours, ah, that's two of yours, erm, now it's my turn, mine
No I play with that orange one
Yeah
and that one there and that one
Oh 
warm them up now Ant
No I 
Right mine is warmed up
You put them on there
I need some oven gloves, has anybody got oven gloves?
Oh yes teddy, here's my oven glove, where's your jumper Ant?
Is that over there?
Yes yours is folded up, my wasn't was it?
No, did it
how did you 
er , I want it in there, I got idea, me have a
 

Oh I can eat them
Alright?
We haven't thinked of any songs
Oh
We can't think of any more songs
that's alright it don't hurt to have a bit of peace and quiet
I know  I know a song
Oh do you?
Yeah, three little kittens and mother gave them
Three little kittens 
Ah don't you eat all, eat them all
Three little kittens they walked round the door 
Oh not on the window sill 
their mother said he isn't well, we brushed the kittens  those naughty little kittens in the, show
Ah, ah, aagh
What's the matter?
the three little 
 
well ask me to sort it out, don't sit there and whinge Anthony 
and they found the
I got it now 
three little kittens they found their mother  three little kittens they found their mittens
 
I got it 
and mother did, we found our mittens, when you got your mittens now you can have your
meow, meow, meow, meow   er, a, have you got your other one out?
Shall I put mine in there?
Where did you put it through there?
How?
Like that?
In there 
And you couldn't even get it out 
er that
take it  and that's how you've got it out, and I want
 

Do you know if I ate a strawberry one yet?
Yeah
How did you know that, do you look at the paper or anything?
Did you?
Oh no it's broken, that is it  oh this is better, that's better to fix it 
   

That's what I haven't, have a sweetie
 

Oh it's a bit hard to do innit?
Good boy  keep working darling  but the only problem with it, that the wheels don't go round do they?
Where's your drill?
What you doing fixing your car are you?
Yeah,
he hasn't got
got something though, stand up, I know a song now, I've got a song   Hickory hickory dock, the mouse did run up the clock, the clock struck one, what do you think of that, hickory, hickory dock, tick tock  there are, I know that one, er, get a drink 
Do you have to tip them all out Anthony Mark?
Yeah
Well I hope you're gonna put them all away later
Yeah
had a bit of my drink
Oh my drink Anthony
Are you sure?
I think there was some, there's still a little bit in there Ant
Mum, mum
Stop the pigeon, stop the pigeon  
mummy a little bit in there
You want a drink dear?
Have your sweets for what?
have your sweets for what?
That's my last one
Me want a green one
No, not any more
and me want a, er, not and that I got two
  

they're broken  My last one
 

No more for what? telephone ringing 
hello
Can I do that?
No you can't, me have a go
Oh right, okay  Charlotte be quiet, ah?
Oh that's alright  yeah I'm just feeding my baby
what's he coming round for then?
No 
Must be
 

Well what's it gonna cost at the moment then?
Well it might put the price up a bit the, yeah, who's that with them?
Oh, you definitely gonna have 
Where's the spanner thing?
Me got it
Oh I need it
I want it
or are you still having a
 
me doing that 
Is, have you got three white ones?
No, well I'm, I need that one, that's not a white one, you need to go through the wheel there, see 
Oh 
then?
Well don't have it done then  well if you have them done you'll have them with the frame 
Oh 
won't they?
why won't this rod go through?
Oh you're not having those aluminium ones then  mm
Won't go through
Oh whatever, at least they won't rot
that's right 
No and not 
Yeah 
I got a
 

Yeah we could do with decorating, but it's not really worth it
you need a white one
No, I can't, I can't
Yeah
I know you did and nobody can work on here, and won't work on that bit
Well we're gonna do the kitchen anyway under the er insurance where that water leaked 
see, it keeps falling off the stupid thing 
I suppose you can
to decorate it as well, we're gonna have that dark grey, and that way it won't cost us anything, we just wait, you know just get it out on our insurance policy, so we'll send it off, no not at the moment, so
I've still got to clean my kitchen out thoroughly
Mum ma, mum ma