

This bloke and his daughter who like lived as tramps
Mm, like, that little girl
yeah and conning people and this 
 
yeah, he was alright 
is it, was it a bit like
no, was it a bit like Paper Moon?
I've never seen Paper Moon
oh ain't ya?
Tatum O'Neal she used to erm swindle and cheat people
probably is then, sounds like
mm  you've got a cheese slice
Ah cheese.
Are you going out tonight?
I don't think so, unless I go up to Richard's 
mm  Geoffrey's going to watch
do karate, in town, now 
well he likes marshal art don't he?we won't tell daddy that you knocked a full on the table of black currant all over the carpet will we?
Were not telling you
we've not told daddy that you've done that
did you see it?, did you see it?
no I don't think see it, no
by accident 
are you up to two days at the Co-Op now?
yeah, I don't know what I'm doing actually, cos I've, I can't work Tuesday cos I've got an exam till five
oh, can't you swop it for another day?
I'm gonna try and do
mm, if you see him 
up to him 
well I've told Claire any way, she'll sort something out
why she acting managing then?
below Neil
oh, third, is she getting married?
no
oh I heard er talking to one of the
do you like drinking
yes
soup?
oh yeah
do you like, you pick it up, like to pick it up really
mm, I heard her talking to one of the lads, I think the dark hair, short, what's his name?
Matt the donkey
oh Matt, right, and he was saying something about getting married and he said about bridesmaids, er have you choose the bridesmaids dresses?, how old is she then?
I don't know
I want these bits
there are
she acts about ten years older than she is, I know that 
sit down then 
I'm not sure though what actually
I don't think the monkeys will be on for much longer then, a few moments
no I know there not
aren't they?,
I wonder if they'll be able to say
doubtful
no 
a bit 
monkey
pardon?
he's got
monkey
Victoria
in the Victoria
Victoria's got a monkey hasn't 
what my Victoria?
yeah 
no Victoria at aunty Ann's is it?
no, no Martin's monkey
my Victoria not my monkey, my Victoria's not got a monkey
she's not?
I hear her she's got a monkey
mm
I heard her
you heard her, playing with a monkey, when?
my monkey
Darts was on again last night, I was watching it
mm
Tony Greaves says that's the crippler yet again


oh that could be the crippler now
is that his favourite word then?
yeah
he's dead funny right, cos he was on and he's, and some, some match was on he's, in his er, he said there's my son in the crowd and this kid had his finger up his nose, picking his nose
there's my son showing me up as usual 
What all the time is is?
yeah
Dad, don't want my cheese slice
you eat it 
I's got I woke, my alarm went off at nine thirty this morning, I thought shall I get up I thought no, better not
I didn't wake you up cos I thought you'd want a lie in 
So that's, that mine?
I know how much you like your bed, was it nice and on, was it nice and warm when you got in bed last night?
well it weren't on fire
no, it weren't, shouldn't of been on fire, but it should of been warmish
luke, tepid
mm, lovely them
dad
what inside?
so did I
dad, dad
 
dad 
goes on the outside
mm 
dad , dad
what, what, what
dad
have stew
stew we had last night 
was it nice?
, I'm gonna make stew again this week, I love stew, it was lovely wasn't it?
yeah
did you like the stew?
s'alright, but are you gonna do the lasagne like you said you are?
 
yeah I will do that's why I bought the mince meat, I'm going to do lasagne
are you, are you going to make me lasagne in a minute?
some what?
one of these
no, why have a bit of daddies if you want some then
come then
no
here
in a minute
have a taste daddy let you have some there
I have to make sure I don't electrocute myself with my cup of tea
ah  so it just picks up your voice?
I don't know, I couldn't tell you
yes.
Have you sorted out all your washing Martin?
no
have you got an exam on Monday?
two
what exams?
German, reading and French oral, French oral's a doddle
is it?
yeah so is German reading
is it?
the only one I don't like is the e economics ones
really?,
I thought you didn't like your German, are you a bit picked up on that then?
no, but the exams are easy
are they?
the ones were doing are, absolute walk in the pan
I wouldn't say that in case you don't do very well 
should be quite easy though I think
well I hope so 
eh Rob show mum how you do your horse falling over, we saw a horse falling over 
let's see a horse falling over


oh yes
ah, eh, get me, get me
no you have to get yourself up with your four legs, you've got four legs so you can get up, that's it, just, that's how horses get up on the front legs first, then the back, that's right
listen , neigh, neigh Neddy
ah, ah, ah, I fall over
that programme on and that last night was good that emergency
I saw the end of it
it was, it was the police, the fire and the ambulance and it was a clip from each, it was good
yeah, it was, the bit I saw was that policeman when he goes   although those two were up to no good 


cos I saw them skating round that car 
what made me laugh was this police woman saying, it annoys me, if you have a drink you shouldn't drive, and I thought to myself and I bet 
the only reason 
she's never had a drink in her life and got into a car, has she?
the only reason that police get away with drink driving is cos half the buggers are Masons and they give them the old funny hand shake and its oh on your way sir 
that's right, I think she was quite hypocritical, I mean she said, any body that has a drink and gets into a car is a potential murderer
yeah
well that, I mean  a lot of policeman have drink 
put in there dad 
as part of their duty to get to know people
yeah
they have drinks in pubs 
what's in there?
and then go home and drive so there, there 
what's there then?
potential murderers 
tuning knobs for the television, don't touch those, mind that
no
touch them and the telly goes wrong
but I didn't like the accent you very, very
oche I
oche I all the time 
bloody thick in it?
your very oche I
very thick the Birmingham accent
the Birmingham accent sounds really thick unfortunately, it doesn't matter how educated you are, but if you come from Brom you sound dopey
as Hitler, yes 
don't you?no, no
Grandma was really slagging her off weren't she Maureen Lipman, oh god, yeah, oh I don't like her, she has too many programmes, I've only seen about one
she only has, yeah too many programmes, she means too many adverts
I've seen her in about one programme in the last five years
what was that Agony?
I hated that 
About Face 
oh I saw her in Agony  that Agony was er 
dee, daw, can I play with them ones?
problem pages wasn't it?
no not fire in the
Just a fire engine noise?
I know a fire in
are you as hard as Matthew Dr er Richard 
his mummies
she let's him does she?
she's in , he's insured on it
is he?, oh  he seems to be out driving a lot now 
well 
the roads were bad this morning  you haven't driven in frost have ya?
yes
icy roads?
yes
oh well you've got to be very careful 
 
oh no, what's he got 
excuse me Robert 
did you, did you ever get a predicted grade for German?
no, I no, well yes, but I don't know what is it
oh
I think its some C D E or something like that 
didn't they tell you?who's doing German with you?
Katie  that's it, two 
just the two of ya?
yeah  in town last night right you get so many drunks untrue, right, this bloke like staggering across the road I thought 
drunk?, what time?
erm, about ten o'clock he was seriously 
that's early 
yeah I know
what erm, what times the last bus now?
I don't know, I think we caught it, I don't really
its round about ten to eleven, in't it love, last bus usually?
so it gets back in town by about half past?
mm  no sort out of town, from town
yeah
and you can't get another bus after that
oh can't you go back to town on the bus?
no, once they take you to your places that's it they don't take passengers back to town, they finish there
there gonna loose loads of money doing that
who wants to go back in town at half past eleven at night?
you never know
mm, not usually
well no, but not on, to town, but there might be somewhere they want to go on the way
no the bus goes out and that's it
they take you home and that's it, they don't pick up passengers to go back, they've gotta go back to the depot then
he depart
have their money
yeah that's right, I meant to ask you, do the tills ever not balance at the Co-Op?
I don't know
you never get to here then?
yes well it did the other week
what?
didn't balance seriously
was it?
Neil was absolutely worried as hell because it was
can't remember how much it was, it was like two thousand pound out
good gracious
no 
yeah remember that girl when she did ours, ours wrong?
kept what
one thousand, nine hundred pounds for about twenty quids worth
yeah what did she do wrong that girl?
want this light on 
she mul multiplied
she multiplied it, yeah 
I want this light on 
no
why?
its broke look at the birdie up there look in the tree
yeah but 
can you move your ladder please Robert?
ooh yes
yes
are all your friends out from their universities yet?
some, some
cos they haven't all
no
do they usually take a long while
I don't know
put that handle down a bit more, its not locked yet
would you like a Cadbury's cream egg?
oh no
would you?
no I haven't got any
right I'll have my egg then
I'll have one of them
 

might have a cherry bakewell
do you want some of that?, here
Robert very cold 
shut the door up quick 
with that door open, I would like you to shut it please
shut the door 
quick 
draft up my trouser leg
cos I'll have to put a bat up my pyjamas
did any body ring while I was out?
no 
Taggart's on tonight
is it?, no Morse
no Morse is on tonight 
Robert will you move your ladder please?
no, fire water
there's not
no there's not, move it
put it out then
mm, mm
that's it, good
its gone
lovely, you've put it out 
er now you can move it can't ya?
out
up, up quick, quick lets put your fingers back  is that better?
I can't get it 
you've not eat your cheese slices sandwich
that
oh my finger then, give us my finger 
saw Susan and her boyfriend in Alder weeks ago
it were er, next door
yeah
he's right no quality in he?
well, what's he do?, is he a plumber?
Geoffrey said he's a policeman
yeah Geoff talks out of his ears 
I don't think you'd have hair that long and be a policeman  Geoffrey gets the wrong end of the stick unfortunately doesn't he?, eat this cheese slice if there's any
mm, not bad  are you gonna get erm  a pair of trousers then from Mark's?
possible yeah I think so 
what sort d'ya want?
dunno
do you need some more jeans?
yeah I could do couldn't I?
don't you like black jeans?
I might get some black gear 
mum 
yeah
I might get some black, yes
I like the black ones 
daddy said don't want one jeans?
no thanks 
do you want one of gee?
no
what's that on that, what's that sticker there Robert?
its a monster
don't pick it off then, you'll spoil it, grandma bought him that booty bag
did she?
we all had sweets there again
oh that's what he had
this is what he's got left
cos your not impressed are you?
don't you like it Rob?
don't you like, your socks are wet, where's he been?
probably in that
oh you've been in the wa in the Ribena
in your Ribena you've dropped poor
swinger 
 
on there
 
look what you , go and put your slippers on 
 
some bread
there's that piece of bread you left look
oh
these are lovely Dave
he don't want it now do he?
mm, no 
I want is that it
think National win today then?
mm they're away at Plymouth, they might do, they might, they might not  they're winning runs got to come to an end some where
yeah, but they're on a real roll at the moment aren't they?
two cup wins
mm
two first division wins
they did well to beat Notts County didn't they?
yeah, she says, she says spitting all over the place
huh, didn't mean to 
mummy he had the last cherry bakewell
have you had the last cherry bakewell?, he has the last cherry bakewell
oh I don't like them 
deprived his father of the last cherry bakewell
well I'm depriving him of his chair
you had the cherry, oh well he did share it with you didn't he?never mind
now you get some little stickers on it 
did you want a jumper from that shop?
no
no, why?
I don't
don't you want another one?
no
those lilac one was nice
I need trousers not jumpers
I know, but you could have a, yes but you could have a jumper to go with the trousers, lilac's nice
us, I don't know, I want
how much money have you got?
er, erm
two pound fifty, no that isn't enough Martin
that's true, its true
well do you want to go down and have a look?
no
I'll take you
no I ain't really got time this afternoon
what time you gotta be at work?
two thirty
its only twenty tw 
I know I don't want to though
why?
I don't want to
 
 
yeah but your not gonna have time next week
yeah but I don't need a tra ,ba another jumper though
yes but its, there's a sale on
I know, but where, no point in buying things for the pr just for the sake of it
no it isn't that
yes, but your going to need 'em jumpers aren't you?, when your at college, gotta think ahead 
let me get it 
well how many have I got?,
I've got one 
not that many 
two, three, four, five, six
in there mum
yeah I know
precisely
a lot of yours are sweat shirts
yeah that's what I don't want
yes, but there's a lovely lilac one
I'll go next week when I've got some money
yeah, there won't be no jumpers left next week
yeah
I'll take you this afternoon
no, no I shall do it myself, thank you  
Robert, I don't like your cold foot in my face  poo see if your feet smell, oh that's clev , see Martin smell his feet
cor rashes of roses
no
when did you last have a bath, four or five weeks ago?
nineteen sixty six, nineteen sixty six weren't it?
you didn't have a bath
I did
I didn't
I did
I did 
let's have a look at your nose
I did
I'm clean I have one every other night  I have done this week 
is that better now?, can you breath better?, that's got a great lump out your nose 
I've got a lump
you've got a lump?, you just got one, aagh where'd you get that from?
out my nose 
we had to take the monkey shopping, didn't we take the monkey shopping?
what to see all its friends?
no we went to Aldy and we went and we went 
Co-Op 
and where else?, nowhere else
Co-Op
Co-Op and then we went, we didn't take the monkey in the Co-Op did we?, why?
cos somebody will nick him
no they'll think that you've nicked one from the Co-Op won't they?
yeah, and we've nicked and when I
when your a fly?
yeah
oh
I nicked another one, I want another monkey 
know who's working at the Co-Op?
Kate  
Mr , O'Neil
oh good, that's him off the way
the bloke with the blonde hair and the long hair and the glasses
yes
erm, now what women were on? erm
you leave it alone you rat bag, who's digging my stuff out aren't you?
that's yours
rat bag
bong, bong, bong, bong
don't hit yourself on the head, it'll hurt, shall I make you say Robert 
I want it 
there seems to be more men than women  eat your bakewell tart then
probably
 
you never heard any thing about that golf tournament that you won, have you?
no, I probably have to wait till the season starts
I would of thought it was the end of the season
I don't know what's happening, but I'm gonna get something off him any way, definitely
how'd ya know?
cos I'm going to, when the next time I see him, I ain't been up to Humbersome for about three month though
yeah, but you don't play in the winter much any way do you?
I know but I'm not the ideal member am I?, go to Scraptof more than thing 
yeah , well you've never had any thing from Scraptof have ya?
yeah
what?
no
yeah, no
yes I have and they said no 
well aren't you on a waiting list?
yeah
how long's the waiting list then?
I've put some things down your 
as long as a piece of string, but I might be okay cos Matthew's junior captain this year
yeah
so he might be able to
nominate you 
yeap  oh this is it 
does Richard play golf there as well?
yes  both as good as each, well yes I suppose they are both as good as each other 
are they?the siamese twins
yeah hip joined 
joined at the hip
I wanna come out with play no socks on 
you can't go out with no socks on can you?, what's that?, ee where you getting all this from?, hang on let's get a tissue, I'm glad its coming out though because its been up your nose for a week  you've been breathing
that's it just like that
that's right you just, you get them out, that's the boy 
just like that, aargh  
come here let's have a no , a nose blow, look at the face
clean
blow, hard, trouble is you blow and nothing comes out the area  oh that's good, do that again like that  that's it 
Robert 
Martin's speaking to you
Robert would you be so kind as to shut the door for me?
I wanna go out with these socks on
well get yourself some socks 
well shut the door first and then you can do it
get some socks there in the second drawer, second there 
middle drawer
in this drawer?
yeah that's the one, that's your shocks drawer 
you got some?
yeah 
right we'll put them on you then  he wants to come out with you dad
yes I know he does
wait for me 
wait for the bloke, you can put your wellie boots on
wellies
wellies cos its muddy out and we don't want the dirt all every where 
not my , not my stumping
no not your stumping shoes
not my stumping shoes
not your stumping shoes, there are then, where's your hat and all, all that
I don't want one
yes you did
the thinking man's cam cowboy's sandwich ham, jam and spam wrapped round a wagon wheel 
do you like wagon wheels?
no
no 
I think they're awful
I don't like the marsh mallow in that
I don't like the biscuit
oh I like the biscuit I don't like the marsh mallow
I think that's awful
the marsh mallow is revolting I don't like that 
I don't like that either, I don't like the chocolate either
oh look here he comes with his woggy boots
wogginton boots 
wellington boots  and how is our
ooh look at these, good job you've got these for the dirt
I wish you would be a neat clag as my granddad would say
do you remember the, what's, what's a clag?
Yorkshire saying for trouble
oh right


remember 
Yorks 
do you remember you little wellies?
no
that you used to where when you were a little boy?, can you remember what colour they were?
they must of been red
they were red
cos you always bought things totally the wrong colour for my sex 
no that's the only colour you could buy, they were red from, from er  Mothercare
has he got any thing in there worth nicking?
fudge, milky bar and a crunchie
is that the milky bar I gave him?
what?, where is it?
right  I dunno what you've done with your hat, have you seen his hat any where?
I have nee
what?
 

where's your hat though dear
can't find it 
see if you can find his hat any where Martin
a hat, a hat
a little beige one with all the colours
oh god I haven't seen that for ages
that one's yours actually
I'm not surprised, oh here it is, its over , its on the settee
can you pass it please?
yes I suppose I can 
my Martin's being horrible
no he's not
and then
he says he's Martin's being horrible
no I'm not being horrible 
he's not , he's not being horrible
I fetched your hat with an A
say thank you Martin
thank you Martin
say love you Martin
love you Martin
creeping gets you every where
what's he say?
creeping gets you every where
creeping gets you every where  there you go
creeping gets you every where
bye, bye
bye, bye, bye  bye spotty dog
oh he loves little spotty dog isn't it?wouldn't you like to be a nursery school teacher Martin?
yeah
your good with children
yeah its dead easy  you don't need to be exactly er a one intelligence do you?
you only need to be a nursery nurse 
oh though, its a woman's job though, in it though?
tis really, you don't see any male teachers
and that's not trying to be sexist, but that's how 
teaching 
it is
nursery children, you don't know do ya?
no 
cos they're still a bit clingy and they need
mummy
toilet training and, well not toilet training but reminding to go to the toilet, look at his hat  did you read in the paper that George Best has had to spend half of his testimonial money on debts
test, testi what?
his testimonial money 
oh yeah his testimonial
money on debts, that's terrible in't it?
he's a prat
he's really ruined his life
ruined it years ago
through drink  he could of been a really brilliant football player he could of made a lot of money and  
well he was, he was 
well he was and he could of had a secure future
well he did that for a while
yeah till he sconded it all on gambolling  I don't know what people see in gambolling do you?its like Willie Thorne
Willie Thorne the gambler
well I mean he's lost every thing hasn't he?
yeah 
even his wife's left him
your getting like grandma now


don't like him, his wife, he left 
no I'm just saying 
don't like him his wife left him
didn't say
don't like her she left her husband with nine children
didn't say I didn't like him, just said that his wife had left him
oh god you don't like him do ya?, yes, why?, ooh well why shouldn't I? oh he left his wife with a hundred and fifteen little children under the age of four
mm, Ray Reardon's the one she doesn't like
she used to love Ray Reardon to pieces 
cos he was Welsh
cos he was Welsh
then he left his wife
and then he went to London, she said oh he moved into a flat with a girl he hardly knew, A she was forty when he met her


and she was, and he was about foot fifty, something like ten years different which is very little
yeah
and second of all he'd known her since they were at school, well he was like ten years older, but something like that any way  oh brilliant this is back on Jack The Ripper that 
is it a repeat?
its him look that one, Lewis Collins and Michael Caine
he's good Michael Jack
able line
erm Caine
yes so is Michael Jackson 
who was Jack The Ripper?, he weren't was he?
no
was he the policeman?
yeah, he was the detective
mm 
Dave Stevis
he's not doing so well now is he?, he used to, he's not won a high ranking tournament since nineteen eighty nine
no that's true, since he married
oh blame it on that
no its true though  its true since he's got married he hasn't won
well why do you think that is then?
cos he's been devoting his life to his wife more
and that's not right?
I'm not saying that's not, but that's the reason   bloody vegetarian's again  all people who do something that they don't have to always shout about it and try and turn every one else like it
like vegetarians
er, yes 
eh, its a free country and you should be able to choose what you want to do yourself  er, if something is damaging to your health then I would agree, yes, smoking I don't agree with smoking  but if people want to smoke that's entirely up to them, they know the risks, I wouldn't smoke, I know the risks  but vegetarianism is purely a matter of choice and there's no peop people that harp on about you shouldn't eat meat, get on my nerves 
exactly  but every body who did something like being vegetarian or what's the other thing?, goes to church, church people are the bloody worse
They're hypocrites any way
there
they liked to be seen to go to church
they go to church because they've done something wrong half of them
no they just like, think that it looks good because they are being seen to go to church
precisely, I mean Prince, the Duchess of York goes to church and she lived in sin for ye years with that bloody racing driver so she's, she's nothing
that's right, that's right
and when you
she is the biggest
hypocrite
and the biggest erm, what's the word I'm looking for?
embarrassment to the royal family going
rough, she's a bit of rough she is, she is, she is not high class is she?
I don't think so
she really isn't  she, she doesn't tow the line, does she?she doesn't tow the line to be er accepted in the royal family 
and she's not doing any thing nice to endear herself to the public apart from erm, what gran grandma says that princess Diana spends too much time with aids patients


that 
there's nothing wrong with that though
I think, I think she goes 
I think that's good 
over board though
yeah, she maybe does, but I think she's trying to, to try and promote the fact that aids patients are harmless, because a lot of aids patients are very isolated, people don't want to know them, they think you can catch it through shaking hands, drinking out the same cup and all that, and I think she's trying to prove that look I'm alright, so should you be, but she does go a bit over the top
every time I look, turn round, she's been visiting some aids patient 
said, definitely got 
I mean the you've probably got more chance of having an audience with her if you've got aids than if you haven't  catch aids, meet the princess
yeah  but its better than going off skiing all the while and taking your spotty chicken pox children with you 
I and infecting the country that you go to 
I think that's disgusting going abroad taking chi , a child that's got chicken pox abroad and the other one she could be incubating the disease any way  I bet you any mo money she comes down with it as well 
two pianos?
yeah, one's Geoff's
oh I see
I bet she comes down with chicken pox hog Eugene
oh pathetic names or what
Eugene
its not how they came into the world of real names to stick with prat names like Beatrice and, I mean I know its old royal and that and I mean fancy going to school in that bloody Henry and William, I mean William's not too bad
William's alright that's the best out of them 
king Billy's the best I think something like that
but Henry is the, why call him Henry then call him Harry?
I know
what's the point in that?
I don't know, Henry, Harry comes from Harold I would of thought
yeah, so why do they call him Harry all the time, Harry for a boy, that's awful  I mean a lot of the old names, we talked about the other day, a lot of the old names have come back for children, but I mean I don't think Harry should be
Harry ain't coming back
Gladys won't ever come back for a little girl will it?
I think Ena's gonna be back with it, before you know it
mm, well, I visit ladies in the nineties and they're called Emma and Alice and Amy and all these names that are being used for children now, but I don't think you'll ever get Fred, Sidney
oh Sidney's gone forever
Sid
that's in the annals of history I think, an thank god as well
Sidney and erm Horace, I think Horace won't, can you imagine a little boy being called Horace 
oh in it sad eh?, reading in the paper the other day about that  thing the, the list of top ten names, I mean half of the ones on there are pathetic
I know 
I mean Lewis is something like nu number seven in the country, I don't know any Lewis's
well I do, its er at Robert's school there's, there are all the names, that's what children are being called now, your age group you won't know them, but then 
I know at my age group they're all Darren and Gary and Steven and 
all they want that, that was the vogue then
and Dean and Scott 
Dean and Scott all that's right, I can remember when I had you that's all the names that were in fashion, but now it is Joshua
I like that actually
Joshua's alright, a lot of biblical names
the thing is when you've got a last name  your stuck because it, every thing, you can't have any thing too new otherwise it sounds stupid
it adds devalue don't it?, well why don't you do what you said you were gonna do and have a, a doubled barrel name
I might do 
well you wanna do it sooner rather than later you don't want to leave it, you wanna do it sort of, now, so that if you go to college or any thing you can start off with that name
could do
and be known as
Martin James Thomas 
mm, I think that'll be nice  Thomas  goes alright doesn't it?
yeah
I think that's nice  Geoffrey couldn't do that
no Geoffrey Thomas, Thomas 


Geoffrey Thomas  Thomas 
well he could just say Geoffrey Thomas  and, and adopt it, that is his name any way
yeah
he could just me merely stick a hyphen in between it
could do
that is his name on paper, Geoffrey Thomas , he could call himself Geoffrey Thomas  and write it as that couldn't he now?, if he wanted to  what's Mark's middle name?
David 
David 
Mark David
that's awful that, well it ain't awful I don't like that
Mark David   well it could of been Mark Andrew and then it'd been Mat  at least your name, your initials don't spell any thing rude
no
do you remember when I told you about that baby on the maternity ward 
what's her name something like Patricia
no Pauline
Pauline  go on
Iris
Pauline, Iris something
Susan,
that's it, Susan, Pauline, Iris, Susan 
fancy calling somebody that, I mean the names in themselves are old fashion names aren't they 
Pauline that won't come back 
Pauline was awful, well they were all family names
oh ain't they terrible
grandma's and, and that, so, they were all names like that and she hadn't realized that Paula, er Pauline, Irene, Susan  spelt, spelt P I S S
I know 
and I said to her is that what your going to call your baby and she said yes, so I said well you realize what the initials spell and she went Pauline, oh my goodness I didn't know that 
so she changed the erm
she changed them round Paula, Pauline, Susan, Iris 
so she changed the Susan to, to Theresa and made it pits instead


P I T S 
household name, cooker
hoover
yeah
Dave hoover


and also a household name Dave Moulinex


Steve bath 
Steve table and chairs, huh
Richard dining table
oh look at his smile it sad
huh, he's an Essex boy I can't see his white socks though 
what's all this joking about Essex boys?, every where you read in the paper its Essex gir Ess why does an Essex girl 
they're dead naff, right, cos Steve Wright in the afternoon as a thing, he says, he says, what do you want Essex girl and he's said something funny she'll, she'll go, you crack me right up you do, you make me crack right up, right and they're suppose and they are, well I don't know, but they're supposed to be really naff 
are they?
naff, over the top, the per the car that an Essex boy would drive would be a Ford Capri
mm
either where white socks with loafers, you, you know naff
mm, mm
and look generally pathetic and the, all the woman have peroxide blonde curly hair, shoulder length
mm  why suddenly Essex though?
its just a naff place
Grantham supposed to be the most boring place in Britain isn't it?
yeah but this is, this is different though, just
cos hasn't Grantham got the reputation of being the most boring town in Britain?
s'I think so, yeah
I remember when I started my training I work with this girl and I said where'd you come from and she said I come from the most boring town in Britain, I says where Grantham?, she says yeah, I says is it boring, she says yeah huh, it is
Leicester's dull though in it?, you've gotta say Leicester is dull
what's dull about it?
the night life is absolutely pit pitiful
every body always says that about the night life, I don't know why
its really pitiful though 
was but, what you expecting that, obviously isn't called for a lot of night life, otherwise it would be there, there's been discotheque, they've been all sorts of things, but they've closed down because they haven't made enough money
well
so there obviously isn't the need and the demand that people think 
Nottingham's got better night life, that's the, probably the nearest good place
mm
but Manchester that's probably the hive 
but is it 
at the minute, because they've got there the Hussy End which is like the number one, that's better than the Stringfellow's apparently, Hussy End are in Manchester  thirty quid to get in
cor, but its so expensive these night life places, I mean  they charge the earth for drinks and that don't they?
yeah yours  
is Crystals any good?
yeah ain't bad
its good?
s'not bad, its a bit of a meat market, there's loads of like
well that's how these places are any way, all you do, disco's and that are always the same, you got women dancing round their handbags, Tracy and Stacy and all those
Tracy  Sam and Cheryl
do they still dance round their handbags?
no no 
no what do they do with their handbags?
they leave them in the cloakroom
oh right, and you get all the blokes standing round the bar with a pint in their hand, eyeing up the woman, looking for which one they're gonna move in on  don't ya?
I don't personally
huh
because I look for the men, now I'm just joking 
 


oh, oh dear, I hope not 
not it, it is like that, but
I mean its always been like that but 
some places are worse than others
mm, doesn't Steven Henry look young?
he's got worse, well I don't know he's complexion's are about as bad as mine
and how old is he?
twenty two
mm
fifty three
mm  I wonder if Steve Davis, is this the quarter final?, or is it the final?
the final 
the final oh, I wonder how he'll do 
a lot of rubbish that one 
I bet his wife said come on, get the money in mate
come on Steve, come on Steve 
get the cash in
get the wonga  up to their
 

oh you missed Only Fools and Horses the other night, its the funniest one ever, its the one where Del was in this wine bar pretend to be a yuppy
mm
and er  he saw the, he was with Trigger he says, he says keep calm, drinking calm, were in here my son, right, and er its the bit where he's leaning on the bar and the bloke lifts up the bar and he just folds like a tonne of bricks sideways
oh that's funny that one, I've seen that before
the best 
there's a story here in the paper, I don't know whether you've read it about a little boy, ten weeks old and he's been born with all his organs on the wrong side of his body
oh yeah
he's got his heart on the right instead of his left, the liver on the left instead of the right, the appendix on the left instead of the right and other internal organs possibly 
well he's alright though in he?
res reversed, where every thing is the wrong way round, so its alright really in it?
well if it was just some things 
I wouldn't of thought so 
so when somebody says to him what sides your heart on and he says right they say no, he says yes it is
says here he should be expected to lead a perfectly normal life 
its when they find out when he's three years old, his face is on upside down or something, oh god Marathon Man I'll be on tonight, I hate that film, that's that terrible bit with the dentist and the teeth
ooh, oh that is the worse, that is so bad, that's horrible isn't it?, you really feel that  when's that on then?
tonight
oh I must watch it
I don't know if I'm going to, lets see what else is on, Jagged Edge is on I might watch that instead, oh god its still time, I could, yes I think I could just about give that a wide enough berth 
It picks it up well  right .
What did you do yesterday afternoon, nothing?
No, nothing 
You know that Morse that was on last night?
yeah
was that the one where  hang on let me think what it was, there's some, there's a  it was, at Oxford College weren't it and one of them was trying to be a like high up in the church or something
yeah women
and one of them got bunked off
yeah
was that the one with Zoe Wanamaker in it?
yes
Zoe Wanamaker
it was good, I like Morse anyway
shame it was a repeat, there not doing any more with him
I know, I like all the police ones
I like all the ones there not doing  unfortunately
it's Poirot tonight
I don't like him so much
well that was er what you saw on
 
yeah I know , but I don't like David Suchet, I prefer Peter Ustinov
yeah, true
cos it loses its erm
you'll just have to pretend it, it's not him
mm, could do
close your eyes every time he comes on
yeah, er, probably be about right 
do you like swede?
no not particularly
mm
not keen on swede
do you like bakewell tart?
not really
no I don't mean the iced one that you buy 
no, no, no 
the one I make, I made it once and you liked it with the almonds on top
what's all this craving for making new puddings, you know 
oh, I just thought I'd have some thing different
let's have a look at the puddings in there and I'll shall choose, I shall show you what I'd like
no
oh wicked
its not what you'd like, it's what I've got the ingredients for
I see  you didn't say that did ya?, you never said that did ya? eh, eh, eh, no
well you like it with custard don't ya? it's not got icing on
so what is it then?
pastry, jam, sponge
yeah I suppose I've had that before 
with nuts on the top, I made it once
right, yeah, I've got it
can you crack some nuts for me?
yes I will oh er 
look these they're almonds
er I don't like them
you know there those hard
 
eh you know those walnut ones?
yeah
granddad's got this thing which you open them with
oh
it's a key
a key?
well its like a tri a triangular piece of metal, right
yeah
triangular piece of metal, you dig it into like the crack and twist it and it just opens
walnuts never if you crack them along the seam they never come out whole, you always break into the nut
well you don't with this
it's a shame
you don't with this  it's quite good it's not bad at all 
alright you can crack these almonds then, use up the Christmas nuts, now then they're ever so hard almonds are
I just move some of this stuff out the way, I know, I've had a good idea, a smart idea
 

you got a bin or something I can knock the, the remains into?
oh, just put them in a, a dish
okay 
you know what the almonds are don't ya? those
I do know 
just checking
after seventeen years in the business I think I know what an almond looks like
pop's gone  today
again
he's fish
fish, fish, fish
now I've got to find the recipe for bakewell tart 
so what you do you see with these al with these walnuts
mm
you stick the key in there
ah
and twist
ah
and just breaks it 
cracks it mm
its ever so clever, dead ingenious  good god there's enough almonds in this bag
here you are that's it look
ah
looks nice doesn't it?
yes, how
you have to say nice cos you've got a knife in your back
yeah
right  move that out there  it's, it's Sheeba and Ted
yes not Ted and Sheeba but Sheeba and Ted 
Sheeba and Ted 
Sheeba and Ted's house


do you want all these almonds really
yeah cos I want to put them on top
don't you got some hazelnuts?
no that serves you right, shame in it?
look at all them, that's only out of one bag
I know  right I've gotta make some pastry
well it was real value buy buying nine bags of nuts over Christmas wasn't it?
nobody's ate them, whose fault's that?
yours
where did you go last night then?
South Crostain dead sort there 
the White Hart 
no Golden Fleece
oh that's what I meant the Golden Fleece
nice int it they do meals there
yeah
supposed to be nice, I think I've had a meal there years ago
mine 
does Richard drink much?
yeah, but not when he drives
who was driving last night?
Richard
what was he having then?
coke
good, very sensible
tres sensible 
please to hear it I'm sure his dad would be fuming if he did drink and drive
I don't think Richard would ever drive again if he did drink and drive
oh with his dad's own breathalysing kit at home
yeah
checks him when he gets in the door
although his dad's er, you know his dad's a police surgeon?
yeah
sometimes I mean he's been out when he's had a drink, on call, sort of thing
mm 
I'd hate that being on call or  cos he gets called out right in the middle of the night sometimes couldn't do that
well does he do like the, the blood test the breathalysers and all that?
well he does the blood tests, cos the police couldn't do it
that's what I mean just the blood tests?
yeah
he would get called at 
but as far as she did erm thing  do da's
mm  still it's all good money int it?, must be on better money now than he was as a
G P
an ordinary G P, otherwise I don't think he would of given it up
I don't think he would have moved to a two hundred and thirty five thousand pound house either
no
from a small well from a
where did they live before then?
Long Way Crescent which was just a semi
oh that's real naff up there
I know, that's where all the  live 
the what?
oh
a nice little term I've nicked from my driving instructor 
so you  before then?
oh yeah
how surprising
oh it's massive it was, the house he's got now is massive
I know it is, it's lovely isn't it?
tres beau, cos there's the living room, its like he's got two living rooms and Richard and his sister and there's a vid there a telly and a video in each of them, buggers
mm, who was telling me that somebody's four year old son has got a video and television in his bedroom his own video 
I don't know 
I forget now
it's ridiculous 
they were saying how spoilt children are today and how, erm I think it was Anne who was telling me and I said it, that is just ridiculous isn't it? for a four year old to have their own video
should give it me  this gonna take me three weeks cracking these almonds 
I know there ever so hard the shells you know  Robert says he's going to have some dinner today
I've heard that story before an all
yes I've heard it before as well  he said he wants some pork and potatoes
you got pork?
yeah, that's what we got
Gonna say tough luck out I've got beef  oh it just smashes into pieces
it doesn't matter
it does when you don't know where half of it's gone
oh right
actually, yes I've found it, what do you want me to do with it then?
what?
give us another bowl
where is it? oh yeah
give us another bowl and I can dig out the little manky pieces
I wonder if flaked almond is toasted or something
no, well probably
have er, oh well I'll just have to put them in the oven they'll go brown under the oven won't they?
yes you'll have the  every now and again you'll be biting into a piece of shell which will be nice
oh Geoffrey watched Marathon Man last night
oh, glad he had nightmares
no he didn't, but I could hear him saying oh no absolutely wicked, oh absolutely, murderous, oh god, eh man, drilling his teeth, ow no that's horrible though that film 
cowabunga do 
isn't it?
yeah
is it safe?, yes its safe, its very safe, is it safe?, no its not safe, every thing he said it still carried on asking him the questions didn't they?, terrible
oh that's better   two down, three hundred and ninety six million to go
jolly good, oh that's it
I've got a cold coming, I've decided 
oh no I hope you're not getting the Chinese flu
what?
oh that's what's on the way from America isn't it?
is it?
it's, well its reached England it's not epidemic proportions yet
no it's gotta be a is it 
it's gotta be a hundred in, hundred in a hundred thousand to be an epidemic, at the moment it's twenty two


before Christmas it was nine, so it's trebled, trebled
doubled
oh yeah, it said trebled on the news  
trebled, it would be twe it would be twenty seven 
a good programme on last night it was about B B C 
oh 
in the fifties when it first started and how 
does that look right to you?
eh?yeah they are shrivelled up little nuts, there was this programme last night about the B B C when it first started in the nineteen fifties
that was I T V, I T V started in the fifties, B B C was in the thirties
oh well whatever, no it wasn't, they were on about the B B C
it was on I T V the programme
yeah okay well it was all about B B C cos it was saying how stuffy the B B C was and how  erm
get off ah 
the Beverley sisters were on and they said they used to wear very daring clothes and the B B C banned them from showing their navels, cos you're not supposed to show your navel on television and you couldn't say the word, oh yeah Lonnie Donegan was on and he said that he was banned from singing this song  er  in eighty forty was such a little drip  and in it he says we beat the bloody British and they wouldn't let him sing that because he swore so he had to sing we beat the ruddy British
right
and they were say and then he and at the end they all sang, there was Joe Brown, Lonnie Donegan, Bert Weedon, all the old nineteen fifties stars, Hank Marvin and all that and they were all singing and he sang that song with bloody in it
huh, was Cliff Richard there?
no  so it was saying how times have changed, but they used to be very, very stuck up and it showed some of the early programmes and how people used to talk, oh so frightfully posh and so frightfully gorgeous and the words, and, it's rather pleasant isn't it, really rather nice
knickers
think we used to talk like that, what happened?
dunno
I mean whenever you see old films
er all greasy 
this and every things in and the Americans always portray the British as being oh jolly, stiff upper lip, don't they?
yeah
god only knows why
cos they've watched the fifties films that's why
said in the paper today that Michael Barrymore mother is very concerned about him because he's lost a lot of weight
oh I his got nervous exhaustion ain't he?
and it says there's been tales in the paper about him, I ain't read any
I have
that's what there reckoning he's got AIDS, is that what there saying?
no their saying, I don't know he's got nervous exj exhaustion
he looks terrible actually  I said to Dave the other week I said ain't he lost weight, look at his face, he's so thin
I haven't seen a ph picture of him
he was on last night, now that's quite a good programme
what his programme?
it's not Strike It Lucky, I can't stand that
it's called Barrymore
yeah, that's good, he gets people out the audience and he goes out and about and sort of meets people with talent and gets them to do singing and that
with people with bad throats
no, he's good  it was funny  there was some can can dancers on at the end and there were sort of ladies in their sixties and he joined them 
oh god 
he's got such long rubber legs hasn't he, he looked ridiculous, but he aint 'arf gone thin, he's really gone thin  so, now do I have to bake this blind first
what's that mean?
well
do it with your eyes shut
yeah, no you put it in the, yes bake blind in the oven at two hundred degrees, two hundred, mark six
 
you better teach me how to make gravy if I'm going to polytechnic, because I don't know how to do it
well the best thing to do for Martin is get a, a
oven
a packet of Bisto gravy granules
is get a woman in
and you just, yeah that's right just get a woman in, er Bisto gravy granules and you just have, oops hot water and then that's it simple 
I'm gonna do that then
it's alright, it's quite easy
oh beggar 
right bake that blind for ten minutes
what's that mean break, bake blind?
well if you got pastry right, and you have to put a sponge on top like this is, it would go soggy, it wouldn't go hard would it?, so if you bake it blind you're baking pastry on its without anything on 
eh, whole nut smashing
this one's actually plum jam, but I will use a substitution
jam, raspberry
er right, I've got to make the sponge now, done that  
eh, oh its another one, beauty 
almond flavouring, have I got any? just mind your head a minute while I open the cupboard, don't know
scrap the bowl off those 
that's a point I could always grind some nuts up, with any luck, chocolate, colouring  red food colouring  
gosh you've had that a long time
yeah
twenty P
yeah, peppermint flavouring, artificial cochineal, green food colouring
cochineal, er that comes from beetles
I know, cockroach's insect, I don't use those cos they say colours make children go hyperactive, used to stop using them when we had Geoffrey, cos he always used to go berserk
yes
so I'll have to grind some, almond flavouring right, self raising flour
it's taking ages, oh can I have another cup of coffee?
I'll bung the kettle on
begger  begger me 
that's what Phyllis says
what?
oh you begger nurse Lynn,and I go in, oh we do get in some pickles nurse Lynn, oh you begger
I don't even think I've done half of these yet 
you're doing well, four ounces of flour
oh, beauty, photograph that one
yes 
play it right, went to the Rose and Crown after South  Crostade and played darts
pub crawl eh, Rose and Crown oh yeah, what's down there?
yeah, I played darts against this bloke, scratch golfer
oh yeah
plays off none
mm
and I think, and he plays at Leicestershire
what's his name?
I don't know 
was he good at darts as well?
yes he, bit 
 
right, we played three men, you know you supposed to do it, it supposed to be five hundred and one
yes
well because there was three of us we went, it was seven hundred and one, like, their go, first bloke got a hundred and eighty, next one got a hundred and forty, this one got a hundred and twenty and me and Matt got about forty each and Rick and we were stuffed  just bit, have you been watching any of the darts? dead interesting
I was watching snooker last night
oh that's darts innit?, oh right Davis won 
dunno what the score, did he?
yes
did he?
I didn't think he would
it's er nine eight I think it was
oh close then  er it's Davis said absolutely stupid thing he really did
Davis did?
yeah, I couldn't believe it I mean you go back five years he'd never done things like that, he erm, missed the most easiest reds and left it right over the pocket and then Stephen Hendry went on and cleared up the whole frame, got a break of over a hundred
oh I saw that one
mm, that was typical mind you I think he needed this win to boost his confidence cos he's not been doing at all well has he lately?
no
I want to use this, I can't believe its not butter butter
that's been in the fridge nine weeks
it doesn't matter, butter keeps in the fridge 
apart from when grandma gives it ya
she has to taste it first
oh god got a bad stiff neck
you still got a stiff neck?
yeah 
I think you ought to go to the doctor's about that
I dunno
well  have a stiff neck 
it weren't bad yesterday
oh I never understand it
and it weren't bad Friday but it's come on again now 
coming on well
yeah 
look at that cat can't you tell it's Sunday
yeah cat hovering
it's always in the kitchen when it's Sunday, see if she can get in the oven quick, if she had a pair of oven gloves, she'd get the meat out herself 
this is well er annoying this is
why?
doing this
I know I give it to you, so time consuming
I had a beauty I had a run there I had about four in a row which came out whole, but now I'm getting crushed nuts
oh
very painful
it doesn't matter because I can put them in the sponge
you'll have to do something with them   
what have I got to put which is very urgh, butter, no, sugar, one egg separated plus one egg yoke, how ridiculous what have I got to do there? er, whisk the butter and sugar until  followed by
now this could be better, oh yes, slightly better  that shot off nicely somewhere
where have I put me eggs?
er, I'm over hitting these
you're not playing golf
no, I'm thrashing them too hard
now what's that, one egg plus an egg yoke  right 
you beauty
Stephanie likes cooking
I don't, I like eating it
don't you like cooking at all?
not since my disaster with the soup in the second year
oh that was terrible, mm
tell you what it seems ages since I was in the first year, but not very long since I was in the second year
oh it does
don't to me
why you don't want to be put off, gosh the number of things I've done that have not turned out
like Yorkshire pudding every Saturday, every Sunday
well it never cooks properly does it?
yes, well I've heard this before 
I know I've noticed
is that the cat meowing then?tough luck if you want to go out, right so I've got this, butter, sugar, flour  eggs, salt, lemon juice, I haven't got any
I'm not getting much revision done here mother
no, well you can do some later, I thought I had a bottle of lemon juice in the fridge, not the fridge  Robert loves Cadbury's cream eggs
I noticed
last night, yesterday he had one and he said can I have another cream egg, so I said alright, cos there was a box of six, which means he's had two out the six, he said to me this morning, got any more cream eggs so I said not for you, you've got one for Martin, so I said yes, I'll have his then
cheek
he did, I'll have his then, I said no you won't, but I like them, I know, but you can't have Martin's, as Martin will cry, I buy him another one  he's absolutely mad on cream eggs, you never liked them when you were at his age, you don't really like them much now do ya?
bit sickly, but I'll eat one
when you look at the waste, a big bowl of waste and a couple of nuts, never mind.
I think we can all learn a thing or too from that  oh er that sounded nice that that sounds even better, oh I've cracked it right down the bloody middle
don't swear, ooh you're doing well, if I get some of these bits, if I get the whole ones and the big pieces they can go on the top and that
there are mum there's another big piece coming for ya
the little bits I shall crush
there's another big piece here, well, no little  well greasy these are
greasy? well nuts are there oily aren't they? right I've got to crush these in with this stuff 
what you doing with these here?
leave them there I'm gonna use them for the top
huh, ain't gonna have many on the top at this rate are we?oh lovely got another one for the top, cracker
no I don't want a Christmas cracker I think
that's a full one that is
now then
now how did I do it?not like that obviously  oh that's it, I'm getting a fifty percent success rate of whole ones to small ones here 
oh that'll be good
and this is another
you not got a driving lesson this week then?
no I've two the week after 
did he teach you what did he teach you? mirrors last week
yeah, we go out, are you, if you, oh you bugger, I had four in the row now, beauties.
go out what?
if we go driving, I'll, I'll show you all the manoeuvres I can do, which is all of them
so what's left?
pol polish up on the mirrors and get ready for a mock test 
oh right  do you think Richard's a good driver?
I don't know, yeah, but, I don't think he's bad
but, don't forget even when you've passed your test, your test you're still learning, you still make mistakes and still do things wrong I mean I do even now  it's not what you do wrong it's how you get out of it, isn't it?
mm
as long as you can get out of it.
you'll be quite pleased with this cos I'm getting some really good big bits out now
right I'll, last week I was in the surgery one day to help Sue and she had 
ow 
to do an E C G on this man, well I hadn't done one for quite a while and I'd forgot really, not forgot what to do but I'm not very familiar with the E C G machines because it's a new electronic machine and its
what's one of them an E C G?
an electro cardiograph, it's a tracing of the electrical il impulses from the heart given off by the heart and this chap came in he'd never had one before and he was nervous anyway, so I'm trying to put him at his ease and I, I put, you have to put like a rubber band round their arms and legs and attach erm electrodes to them, you don't feel anything, you're only measuring the electrical impulses given off by the heart
I'm, get this 
so I've got him all wound, all er geared up for this E C G
and failed it
I hadn't switched the machine on
you wally
and I was er, I try and switch the machine on it wouldn't come on, I thought what's going on here, so I said to Sue, can't switch the machine on Sue what's going on here?, anyway, apparently the power supply to the machine was a bit dicky, the
er, er
what?
do you call that frizzle?
no, that's a bad one, the er power supply to the machine, the lead it was, there was a break in the circuit and it kept going on and off, so actually I was switching it on right, it just wasn't coming on, so she says oh use it by the battery cos its battery as well as electric
where's my cup of coffee?
alright just shut up a minute, I'm talking to ya, so she said afterwards oh I says that was good weren't it couldn't even switch the machine on and she said it doesn't matter does it, she said it's not what happens its the way you deal with it, and I made a joke of it and I said to him oh this is good in't it? relax you're in safe hands I can't even switch the machine on, but anyway I did it in the end and he was alright, and he said thank you very much, that was, you were very good, you were very kind, cos it is frightening and one thing I said to him don't hold your breath, because people think when their having an E C G they've gotta hold their breath for some reason, just lie there take a deep breath and don't breathe again  but you've never had one so you wouldn't no, I'm just going to mix this up 
they're coming out better now
oh good 
oh that's got two in it
see them
and I got them both out whole an all
used to, sometimes get double yoke eggs
why you mean used to?
I've not seen a double yoke egg for a long, long time, I don't know why, but sometimes you used to get a box of six and nearly all of them would be double yoke for some reason, don't ask me why, I don't know, where's your cup?, did you bring it in?
no, I shall go and fetch it  yes I  I must have brought it in
which one did you have?
erm
what's it there?
yes, the red one, the red one which 
I've put it I think I've put it in the dishwasher
well it makes it look, well it looks like the er paints fading off it
I know it was like that when we had it, well all these mugs that you get from the petrol station are all seconds any way
are they?
yeah  they're all the, they must sell them, the perfect ones and the second ones they sort of er petrol station cos they've all got slight faults on them.
cor that's a big 'un, looks grand
getting warm in here isn't it?
I know
oh they're good
leave them I shall sort them out in a moment
is that all the w all the erm almonds out of both packs?
yeah
oh excellent, oh that's fine
bloody well hope so too oh another manky one 
I like that advertisement on the television this woman in America
ah with the walnuts and she does that 
that cracks the walnuts in her hand I'd like to see somebody do that
she does it on er, the, the inside of her elbow joint 
that's it and over to you, crunch, I don't know how she does it, got muscles like Samson
she doesn't say she's Miss United States body builder nineteen ninety one
no  erm blackcurrant or apricot?
blackcurrant
blackcurrant  I love these jars with the fruity lids don't you?, good aren't they?
mm, mm my favourites
god, right  blackcurrant jam, what's the time, it's five to one
ten to
that clock's a bit fast then  plenty of jam, don't like to skimp, haven't seen grandma, haven't heard from grandma today
no, it's er minor catastrophe isn't it?oh damn
I think that should have been Plymouth, I thought Plymouth were high on the league, they're not, they're near bottom
yeah I know, but they haven't lost a home match for seven months for 
oh didn't know that
seven, seven or eight weeks
oh they're on a winning er 
they've won the last six home matches
Plymouth have?
yeah
oh at least they've broke that run haven't they?
haven't, Leicester never do well when they're at, if they go away, if they play away, if they go right down South or if they go right up North they'll get beaten every time 
why's that then?
I don't know
think because of the travelling
I don't know, they always get beaten seriously by Newcastle, Middlesbrough, Sunderland
what matches have they got left?, are they in with a chance of promotion?
yes, I should think so
have they got hard matches left or 
I don't know, there's still got a long way to go though
well, I was disappointed when it showed the league table they weren't even in the top six, but they're seventh, huh  but there's two, two teams above them have played one more game than them, but then
there's probably two above them that have played one less
that's right 
so they would go up to fifth
mm  but there's only sort of five points that divides all the top seven
yeah I know
and like the first division there's 
well 
even bigger leaders ain't there?
well yeah just the match before, the Saturday before New Year, there's one point covering the top six
mm.
and if Leicester had beaten I forgot who it was, whoever they drew against, they would have been third.
What makes it, what makes them  improve so, the team makes it  the same doesn't it?
confidence
mm and when you start winning you, it boosts your  
that's what I mean confidence
right  let's have a look at this banana chocolate thing  don't know what's that gonna be like, I've never made that before.
Could be roast potatoes
this is sounding great this is, I'm, every time I crack a nut I hurt, hurt me hand, these last three won't crack
well you've done very well I, I could never crack any of them, so, huh
I'll get out all the whole ones
it don't matter I'm gonna chop 'em up anyway
no well I'm gonna do it any way 
want to slice 
want 
have you read the paper today? no you haven't didn't  
no I didn't get up till twelve
of course you haven't, what was I going to say, the er, that Marquis of Blandford is it?
Marquis of Blandford, speeding and all the other
yeah, his wife posed in a sexy picture in her underwear
yeah it's Rebecca 
stockings and suspender belt and the Marquis of Blandford's father has called her a, a slutty little something or other
oh
which is quite rich coming from him, considering his son's been in prison I don't think
yeah  here are, I shall go and just get the paper.
right, thank you, very well done 
Oh not Catherine bleeding Zeta Jones again I don't even think she's nice
Some clothes on her makes her look like a right podgy country maiden don't it?
you thought of the classics you do, podgy country maiden
well she does, she's got a fat face
nice  I don't, well I definitely don't think she's that nice  oh I see what you mean Leicester are seventh
mm 
oh they came from two nil down as well 
I know, I know they did, one was an own goal
and the other one was er
but then if you read the report of the match it said they could have won by more than that, they did all playing they were just unlucky, but he's pleased with the result 
yeah it's not bad
now, then got to chop these nuts up now 
best thing to do when you see the football results is to look at who their playing next week, and then you can get a fair idea of who's gonna do what
yeah, who they playing next week then?
Swindon at home and Swindon are right er below them by one
by one
no the place below them
but er they're playing at home
yeah
so that's an advantage int it?
Blackburn are away to Portsmouth who are both above Leicester, Southend, Southend, Southend should beat Bristol City  Camb Cambridge  Middlesbrough have got Millwall at ho away, well yeah don't know  oh Sunderland did well
mm
beat Millwall six two
huh
it was only one one at half time
good lord
five in the second half, bloody hell three goals in three minutes, fifty five, fifty seven, fifty eight  Don Goodman this bloke got a hat-trick, he got it within fifteen minutes
oh dear
Ian St. John holds the wor holds the Scottish record for the fastest hat-trick
why what did he do?
he got three goals in two minutes
good lord
for Motherwell  this paper is only interested in two sports and that is football, cricket 
see that pigeon
mm from Ann isn't it probably?
mm, she does, no she's got doves, keeps doves and animals and birds like that doesn't she?
yeah a bit strange I suppose
got loads of doves
yeah I know, dunno why she wants to keep all them I'm sure
mm  Rory still going out with his girl friend?
I don't think, I don't know, I think he might be, I couldn't tell you though 
no 
not so easy as you think getting jobs
mm 
this is where the schools I think are partly to blame, okay, yes they encourage you to do exams which is good  but they don't tell you that you're gonna have difficulty getting a job even if you get A levels and all that, they sort of say oh yeah you, you stand a better chance of getting a job, but, its still, its still difficult.
Sue and I go to this cafe, I told you at Newtown  didn't I?
Sue and who?
Sue and I
oh
yeah, and there's just a little tea room and they sell, lunches at dinner time and teas in the afternoon, right opposite Bradgate's Park
oh that one
yeah and the girls that serve in there, there's three girls that serve in there, one works in the kitchen actually helping with the food, but the other two serve at the tables, they've all got A levels but they can't get jobs
mm, oh dear 
look at this it looks pretty good doesn't it?
yeah it does, not too bad, I don't think they'll be enough nuts to tell you the truth 
now I've got to make this top for this banana and chocolate cake 
what's the topping?
chocolate something or other
you want to cut a piece off and let me see what it's like 
oh when I've finished doing this I might  Has Matthew decided what he's going to do? has he applied for university?
yeah he's got an appl an offer
what university or college?
er Bristol Poly
oh right, what's he want to do?
marketing, he's been offered two D's
mm, yes, that's alright isn't it, he should do that shouldn't he? is he quite bright?
should do it  and if he doesn't I'd be, I'd be surprised 
marketing what's he want to do then?
I don't know, I couldn't tell you  I really don't know
well what do you want to do?
me?
mm
I'm not sure, I don't know
mm any ideas have you got about a job you'd like to do?
television something like that
oh yes but that's gonna be very difficult Martin
no research in of that 
job like that 
mm with difficulty I suppose
mm I know 
very difficult but if that's what you want to do
I know, but you've got to sort of set your sights realistically haven't you? and there's a lot 
yeah I know 
of people unemployed and what are you going to do when you eventually leave college if you get there?
what?
you're not gonna step straight into television
no I know, I don't know though  could go into a bank or something like that
mm
there's lots of things though 
right then, let's see now what we're doing, where's that recipe book for that chocolate and banana cake? chocolate and banana cake which book was it?
it was in the folder
oh right  oh some of these chocolate cakes are absolutely mm, mm
I'm not so keen on chocolate cakes 
mm right what's 
me 
the topping? what's that icing sugar?
I can take it or leave it 
cocoa powder and vanilla essence oh luckily I've got all those, I think, yes
oh that cream, creme de la creme looks nice
I don't like cream caramel it taste burnt
oh that don't look like, is that cream caramel?
oh that looks like
egg custard I don't like that at all 
oh I like the ones you buy, but I, my mother used to make one every Sunday and it tasted horrible, tasted eggy
you never guess what Andy Spence's mum did when I went up there for dinner once?, it's vile
what 
eggs in custard
eggs in custard what's that?
poached eggs in custard
custard?
yeah
poached eggs in custard?
yes
I've never heard of it
it was awful
sounds terrible
I didn't eat it
savoury or sweet?
sweet
oh
cut me a, hacker off 
did he like it?
yeah I think so, well he eat it, whether that was because he had to I don't know, but he did
he's doing cooking isn't he?
yeah 
Ah  get out  I'm not keen on these ones with the
personally 


huh not more
can't do, oh that's good 
why might got to employ the cat don't you?
what is it?
must've been already off though
Er the cat in Go Cat
yucky, yucky 
oh death trap
no he ain't gonna open the door, no he can't open the door


well that's clever innit leaving the door open 
how funny, clever how it's done isn't it?
that
oh lovely boy
go on 
got him
 

 



wouldn't you kill that fellow for doing that, that's what you call bare-faced cheek 
oh no, she walked off without it
it's a he 
it's a bloke 
he's also got hairy legs, as well as the lump in his pants  
her knickers off, oh you devil
 

 
that's, that's Richard's  that is, does has done that, I've seen him done loads
what sit down with his flies undone?
pass
yeah 
oh yeah funny, tell you about when he went to court
court?
he went to court and he says oh about Jane 
 
what happened to her?
her strap has fell down
oh you bugger  she's caught
I know  
wouldn't you die?one of the bits of her wedding dress
that's gonna pop 
oh that's a nice new bike in it?
that's gonna pop in it?
it's not




ripped his trousers
 

oh no
I know
now that was silly, that bloke's gonna go in in a minute I'm sure, or one of the kids is gonna do a really weedy jump 
 
 


cor yeah look they'll go back
oh nightmare 
eh that looks like Foxton
no it's not that hilly, not that woody 
oh goodness no 
oh lovely
he's black 
hey that's disgusting 
he's
oh look at the black  oh dear 
that's seriously gross 
that's never gonna work 
it's gonna snap , it's gonna snap
 
I like that
that is absolutely ridiculous that is
 
sensible that is sensible 
yes, clever ride there, there  oh God look at the state of him before he falls in
yeah, looks like he's fell in half a dozen times
probably been practising for the camera
oh that's clever yes ha, ha 
oh dear
er


these are, these good this week actually
yeah
oh watch him done, over there look 
he's gonna come someone's 
he's gonna 


oh I've seen these before, that water looks mucky an all
look, look, look, oh well
someone's letting the rope down


ah, er that's a lovely one 
 
oh this is amazing
I'd hang my feet, I'd hang my feet over the top


he's still hanging on
got his head ducked in, oh that was funny that one
oh
well tried  oh dear 


yes, how did you do that?


oh no
is it easy to do that?
no, you have to really do a snub underneath
he's got a blade on the end of it
must have a, a point on the end of it the cloth
it's Jack The Ripper shot that is 
oh dear , they're, they're better than caught in the act aren't they? they're quite 
yeah 
I never saw them 
they weren't laughable were they?
slightly funny some of them
yeah, but they weren't funny as this lot.
Yeah, where they hang out then
oh
pass the
yeah
oh, don't have much luck with that van does he?
well when you do twenty thousand miles of
mm  if he had it serviced regularly would it stop it do you think?, still have to have the work done?
 

kid's gotta be blind
that's a big job as well 
oh referee
oh have me glasses 
good lord
er
fancy doing that
gotta be mad
changing yourself from
from English to a Jap
an English to oriental 
that's disgusting that 
slitty eye
Prince, Prince Philip's son if he stayed here  
slitty eyed git 
if he stayed here long enough he'll tu he'll be slitty eyed
nothing these days goes down well with them
mm?
nothing these days goes down well with them
yeah but that's
 

is that what er Prince Andrew said 
what they said about Maxwell, he was like a dodgy seaman
no he never said that
no that's the, that's Freddie Mercury and Robert Maxwell that is
oh yeah
dodgy seaman
oh I've not heard that
do you want to hear it?
no I don't think so
so what you doing on it's had to see granddad, Pat's coming to pick you up?
are you going Mart?
I don't know 
please 
I don't know shut up 
you have to  
how do you know?
I'm gonna have special chicken or something
what's special chicken?
chicken with
mixed up with breadcrumbs and walnuts, in it?
I dunno I might do I might 
Martin's not smiling he doesn't like the idea
I dunno, I might go, I might not, millions of things, millions of options are opening
your hectic social diary
exactly, precisely what can I say 
you have, you have what you're having 
er are let's look
you'll have all your money won't you from that thingy doing  oh yeah
he's gone, he's gone
that's what you call out of order in it?
oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah


oh he's going oh that's a good way to mow the lawn
gone without him
calm down Mr 
oh dear
let's see
don't do that with your toenails, I'm glad he's not interviewing people it's better ain't it?
yeah
he's got a totally short hand you know well, yeah
oh no
I love these, cos
men at work
oh you devil 
oh no 
the wall collapsed
that weren't concreted then was it?
the debris falling
oh  oh 
it's gonna fall, it's gonna fall
oh no
oh no 
oh yes oh 
what the hell's that that's just fell on his head?
you were funny with that wheelbarrow out the front, out the back here this afternoon
who?
you
why then?
 

he's gonna
oh you devil 
oh you devil what happened there?
cleaned the drains out
yeah
oh you devil
 
 
bugger me  someone's gonna come in 
come in   
got, don't you just love those, oh dear, right there
it's, it's better if you get an interview, but 
my daughter
I did when I found out I got two hundred and fifty poonds for it 
yeah  pounds for it
no poonds
 

he has got a short hand, look at all his fingers they look like they've all been trimmed off
he's had a finger cut
oh the wedding
it look's like a wedding to me
oops she's lost her hat
he's gonna, summat
oh  oh my good God
wouldn't you cry if that happened?
oh no 
oh he's got some cheek
 
oh  
 
 
 
just die
her skirt falling down in church
 

 
 
oh God  
 
 
these are good
shut up Geoff
 
 
oh dear, oh dear lord
look at it, that's totally had it ain't it?
oh fancy losing your skirt like that
he jerked
shut up, with the skirt on, let that be a lesson to you always wear an underskirt
yeah, of course I should wear an underskirt with a pair of trousers
don't forget to go out with ya 
this is this is a security camera in a shop
oh no  he'll fall in
he's not gonna fall in the fridge is he?oh God  
I bet he'll come out with ice cream, aha no  
 
that
oh dear
he's look


oh no, nightmare 
oh super 
freezing 
really thought
it must be deep 
oh
a couple of minutes
yeah his lips not
absolutely awful  oh that's nice
yeah I give it to him
I bet they're thanking them for getting two hundred and fifty nicker
yeah that shop's highly delighted  I love those wedding ones coming out that church
oh, oh Hawaii Five O
da, da, da, da, da, da  oh, oh  
like that one
why they just carry that on 
oh he's lost the end of his trombone   oh what's on fire  on fire
crucial music
crucial  he's jum how comes his jumper's on fire?, wagging it or something?
show man respect
some will ask them out 
he's going off the side
oh you devil, what a long drop
he must've fell about six feet
that's dead funny those
he's going off that chair 
Muffin the mule oh
ah


I like that
gosh
what you laughing for?,
I wouldn't laugh
oh
silly mummy  oh dear table's wobbling
oh dear
that's what you call vigorous isn't it really?
oh dear 
the other one's gonna go rolling down the stairs 


 

oh that looks like er Jesus we love you festival doesn't it?
I still like those wedding ones, with them coming out the church flying 
 

oh no
 

can't hear her
 

oh God
 

terrible  
oh you cow 
 
that's what you call don't F in it?, don't er
oh isn't that awful?


I love you 
yes Dame Kiri's turning in her grave  oh this was funny
ah
I don't think this was that good, that cat opening the door
it's not funny, it's clever though int it?
probably
nor was this funny
they always have the silly one at the interview don't they, the interview
I think that bloke coming off the ladder with the buckets of paint would've been funnier than them
it was, cos they interviewed him
oh  four
er, yeah, I like the one when that car run over that woman's hat 
oh yes
it's gotta be the kid on the sports day, your joking me 
he's not won anything
he ain't gonna get a quid is he?
no  why's he gonna get it?
yeah he's
perhaps Eileen will give him some
she ought to 
yeah, a free ice cream
for ever 
can I have a free ice cream
as long as you get it yourself
yeah, yeah
cor what's that shot
 

just for you, just sincerely 
he's burning the ice cream, you know it, you know it  
a rude awakening
oh
 
 

oh there's still
 
fat bugger 


there's, they're silly them
no they're good they are, so you don't
oh look ain't that, that same bird
no 
yeah 
 
I thought she was a
she usually put the, oh no
I can't believe how safe 
oh you bugger
he's still asleep  no
yoghurt, bar of chocolate
no, have you seen how many calories in a
have you had your creme egg yet Martin?
no I haven't indeed
get Martin's otherwise Bobby I'll eat it
I'm highly unfortunate young man
if you don't have your creme egg Bobby I'll pinch it
why?, well what the hell am I gonna do with it?
no I don't want it thank you
Geoff's greased up to the nines after putting on a eig eight tonne of Oil of Ulay
you'll slide into bed tonight
he'll slip between the duvet 
is that sting or what mum?
we've got the lovely array of mugs, I've got to say
yeah, half of then are mine
Postman Pat, Garfield  Turtles, Paddington Bear
or erm 
 

have you put our electric water on?
is it very foggy out?, have a look at the fog Martin, see if it's
 
no 
 fogerific , you can't tell
 fogerific 
 fogtabulous 
absolutely  fogtabulous absolutely  fogadab 
what other word do they use to say?
 fogadabadogulous 
 fogadabadogulous and you used to say  oh yes they're having 
cherry 
another birthday you
oh fantastic 
that was really good that 
put your teeth on  aha   yes it is, don't lie  
don't you just love those creme eggs?
I do not
you make it sound like
when I was a child they were much bigger than that
yeah I know, I know they 
now you can stick a whole one in your mouth and eat it in one go, can't you Martin?, yes Martin it is it that you did 
yeah yeah
rammed it in all in one
is the tape recorder
show me then, I think I'm gonna have to throw those chocolate cakes away
this plays on
let go then, let go
I just found it on three
no you ain't
eh?, why?, don't know what sort they're like, those
 
they just didn't, they just didn't rise, they
the middle is not  hoptastic 
oh there's jelly in the fridge
go and get it
I forgot about the jelly
it's too hard now
what you mean too hard?
it's been inside for two hours and can't get out 
so I'll leave it out and it'll melt, Bobby and I 
stick it in the microwave, pass us my cup of tea
that's out of order jelly like that
oh it's terrible
it's not on like that
what is it, yeah
jelly
jelly is supposed to be like ah, you see it in cartoons like
jelly is when it goes 
wobbly 
out the dish
how's it go mother?
can you eat it like that mother?, his mother said you just tip it out, like a liquid, like a bottle of milk  you're always on
 
absolutely  grotoskew , you've got a worm, you feed him
you're always hungry, have you got a tapeworm?let's have a look at your belly, it'll pop, what a pop belly you've got
more, more meat on a jockey's whip
Bobby thinks he's fat, he's obsessed with being fat he keeps saying I'm too fat, I'm too fat
he is fat though inne?
he has got a bit of a belly on him actually
their mum
don't know how, he don't eat a thing
he ate nearly all those chips tonight, didn't he?
 
I want chips he said , I said do ya? and then he said yes 
mind he had a Milky Way bar and then afterward he had a mini Milk
 
mum what can I have to eat?
go and have a look in the fridge
he had a Milky Bar and erm
yes
erm
he ate most of those chips
yeah
I'm hungry an all
well you've had half a dozen oranges, I shouldn't have any more, you'll go to the toilet all the night
yes
have a sore end, huh
as Patrick used to say you'd be able to poo through the eye of a needle
, who's Patrick?
er goggle eyes at the Co-op, I saw him the other week
which one was, oh goggle eyes Patrick, yeah where, where's he now?
and he's funny , Ackman Avenue
oh Ackman Avenue oh yeah, that's right
no Glen Glenfield he made, he makes me laugh though
what Globals goods store?
mum there's some good news and some bad news
oh God
I didn't find anything to eat, bad news is the topping's got, jelly's gone like the cat's, top of the jelly's gone like the cat's tongue
what's the cat's tongue like?
all white 
no that's, when you make
it's called scum
scurf
you scum
the cat's tongue, you feel the cat's tongue, what you've got there
 

Robert likes, Robert likes that
he says he, I'll have a cheese sandwich
stop it now, stop it, ooh what's that?
dunno, it's living in the bin
it's dead
what's this
it's only on for two minutes
it's not one of those
 

London's Burning's on, I like that
a bit of arson on a Sunday night never went down badly
 

see if Geoffrey's Oil of Ulay face
yeah
would er
his face is gullible


 

 

Geoff don't do that dear, don't wanna do that
you don't wanna do that, you'll get a clip round the ear'ole 
I think
was on Thursday night and I flipping missed it
yeah I know
did you see it?, did you see it mum?
no, well I saw some of it, but it was a repeat wasn't it?
was it funny mum?
it was about as funny as toothache
funny as route canal work, I like it, I think it's not bad
what time was it?, twenty five to ten 
that's a well-known American actor 
well this looks a load of rubbish, what's on the other side?
it's erm
where's that?, they can't call that pony that whatever it's called?
where's there always be a pony that's what I want to know
there must be a pony
oh that's it
there must be a pony and trap 
yeah no its twenty five to ten though, still got Poirot on the other side
check Poirot out see who did it, don't know who did what, but see who did it anyway
does he always end up with a summing in, summing up?
yes I like them ones
I like that
go on then, put it on
put the summing up of Poirot on
don't you want to see Women in Wales?
what Women in Wales?
with the welly boots?
no
no we don't want that rubbish
what's interesting about that?
ooh
oh
it's on till midnight
yes it is
no
is this the Superbowl?
no, it's the ar , it's the finals, semi-finals if you like 
this is a weir-r-rd game this is 
didn't it used to be really popular, I mean everything you bought was
I think it's great 
come on
what, what?
German, huh
yeah, got a sword in his cupboard haven't you?
you
yeah  I can't stand that hairstyle when they shave it off 
this is exciting this is
I want Poirot
maybe 
here we go look, here we go
 

oh
Lady Hornblower
 

ah
oh dear
eh, shock, terror
what's his name?
dang, dang Cafe Hag
oh Cafe Hag yes of course it is, Cafe Hag
all the annoying Germany always pops up at the wrong, the wrong most inopportune time.
no mum
don't mention the word 
 

big garage
was it?
yeah, original
oh I didn't know
like the ones you get now they're all
oh
that you buy
yeah 
the engine on and if you've got a car
yeah
and if you got to change the wheel or anything you got a, there's some clips, you undo the clips down the driver and the back hand comes off with the wheel
oh  mm 
oh that's it, you don't know what
these garages do you, look at our garage got an old Adler in there
mm
old
Joe's got two old bangers in his garage
mm, yeah
I know who they are
I tell you what erm
his mum and his wife
I'm still underwhelmed at Joe's choice of name for his latest son, Slobodan
Slobodan, isn't that terrible
if the worse thing is, you can't shorten it to anything decent, you can't call him slob
slob
call him Dan I suppose, but
oh I yeah
he won't be called Dan
I think it's terrible giving him a name like that
I think Vich is probably what it'll
Slobodan
it's not got Vich on the end of it, it's Sloberdan Vich
Slobo, that's what he should say
 

she says when you ask her, her name's Miranda, but it's not spelt like that, it's spelt like Mijarna, it's got a J in it, but she says it's Miranda , you know
how old is she?
she's about, how old is she, twenty six, twenty seven
no
twenty three
twenty six then
no six, seven, no
well there you are then, yeah she goes to school doesn't she, well I think it's sad I mean giving a child a name like that
yeah but
in this country, he's, he's he's not, he's English, he was born in this country
yeah, but
anyone would think he's
or where ever
Yugoslavia I keep telling you
he's not Yugoslavia is he?
yeah
right
he's at war with himself you see, that's why he's
get ready to
he probably doesn't know what one is
yeah
but he talks as if he, he was born in that country, I mean I could be really patriotic to Wales
I am
well I am, I mean I always worry 
keep a well 
to work
what did you say?, what's it, what's he say dead patriotic then to Yugoslavia?
oh he's always going on about it, he's very religious as well, he goes to church and erm well he serves the, serves their Christmas which is January the seventh the Ukrainian Christmas  better ring it up, his children in the language don't they?
oh you're joking 
no he does, they talk yeah, he says well, Polish I think
Polish, he's Yugoslavian if anything
not Polish still got foreign
he looks foreign 
they're probably Jewish because they always reckon that there's people after them and that's what she's like
 
saw them standing outside the gate, he's coming to get me
you've been, been hard balling my wife
yeah I want my ball back 
crummy  Max Lennon 
she's so foreign looking though in't she?
is she?
yeah that's that girl 
usually 
you find he's got 
his sister's name 
you usually find that people like that are more 
more 
very patriotic to their country of well it's not up there, but
homeland
and they're, and religious
they usually marry somebody else, usually that
 

I think flipping
I thought he was Polish
Yugoslavian,Sloboda 
her dad's Polish
no
yeah Slobodavian 
Slobo Slobodan 
Slobodan huh 
well how come Joe erm, Ken said he Polish then?
Ken doesn't know what he's talking about 
oh right, you know Paul  who plays for Leicester?
yeah
right, now, if you had about twenty thousand pounds to spend on a car Dave, what would you buy?, no seriously, I mean if you were just like, start, no, actually no that's the wrong thing to say, what looks really smart?
yeah, I mean for twenty thousand what could you have?, you could have a Calibre couldn't ya for twenty thousand
yeah, but I'm saying what you could have, not what you bloody want, you
yeah, he's had, yeah, he's had an R S two thousand and I mean I think that's absolutely pathetic, total Essex boy thing to do that is
you know what I would've got?
drive round in his white socks and black loafers and drive his white R white, his white R S two thousand
I would've got
why 
white 
has he passed his test then?
yeah
I would've got a black two eighty sleeper myself
oh
is it first time he's had one?
yeah, yeah
with your driving instructor he'd taught him to do
but I mean I'd rather have a Calibre than that definitely
I'd have a, I'd have a two
yes and you would pay lots of insurance to have one 
so what?
so what?
yeah but the thing is he's got money
yes
that's what I'm on about
don't throw it about though do you?
yeah, well he obviously has on an R S two thousand  twenty, twenty one
well the thing is I mean he plays for England under twenty ones
they were on about, talking about it last night weren't they?, they, back in the fifties they were on eight pound a week
no the clubs can't afford
I think football's gone through the roof, it's absolutely stupid how much there worth
yeah, they get paid far too much
it's not, nobody's worth millions like that 
it's just stupid, absolutely stupid 
we've missed that programme of the fifties
good
he weren't
it showed the Woodentops
Bill and Ben
Bill and Ben
Andy Pandy
Andy Pandy and Muffin the Mule
I never liked any of them
Muffin the Mule
Muffin the Mule
didn't like it
and Sooty
I liked Sooty
I liked Sooty
I still like Sooty
Sooty is still on and, and Sooty still appeals to children it's, does Robert like Sooty?
you
Sooty and Muffin the Mule
Sooty, Sweep and Soo 
you, you wouldn't think that just er glove puppet
Sooty, Sweep and Soo 
would appeal to children, I mean knowing how sophisticated things are today, it's just a simple glove puppet and yet kids are just as interested in them
 
oh you've had one of these haven't you?
what?
these frozen meals Geoff
that's what they says
Domino
that looks nice, I might make that tomorrow
what I had?
no that's what you had
oh no it wouldn't've been er with spin with spinach and ricotta cheese, what's it like Geoff was it nice?
do you want me to make lasagne tomorrow?
yes 
yes you've been promising for weeks
well I've got the mince out so you're alright I'll do it then
oh I don't like the Darling Buds of May at all 
no
is
I like er back, he's coming back  that's coming back an all, oh yes 
they were all police things more or less 
oh God
no they're good
P D James
I like him  P D James is a woman though isn't it?
yeah
mum?
quite, don't keep on  what's on the news?, see who's died
died, given birth and
oh this stupid bloke gets on my wick, lovely boy Neil strikes again
 

all this fuss about there's a
it's only a horse
good job he's not in another country he'd be eaten for
he'll go to stud and start producing won't he?not with your
they got on my nerves them
his wife is the biggest gasbag
where?
just lately
where?
oh no another wet, loads of people like him at our school
mm, he's got absolutely no chance 
yeah, it's wide open, but he ain't gonna get it
what do you mean there's much chance, he comes down every Christmas
I know, if he comes through the back door and
you told me it's the chimney
I know, but the fire's in the way
but we left it open
are you sure it wasn't the birds?
don't talk about the birds 
how low quality can you get hiding guns and ammunition in a church 
did I tell you Margaret daughter had, she, she's bought her a  
yeah she had burglars 
eh, she's had burglars?
New Parks, well that asks for it really doesn't it?
what it doesn't mean it's right does it?
no, but if you don't want it you don't move to New Parks the roughest Council estate in Britain in, in Leicester, Britain
no the thing is you go where you can afford the house prices and they are reasonable there
no, it's not surprising is it?
well
you don't have any stuff left
where my mum and dad live it's not that bad an area yet they were burgled four times and that they get 
well that was somebody had it in for them
somebody up the road was burgled before Christmas
 
well New Parks is more likely than any where else
it doesn't matter where you live
don't give me that
if they want something they will break in 
Yes got one thanks
You got one
Oh right
for you what Dave 
I don't like this monkey right by me having
 

I didn't put it there
eat your chips then come on, good boy
trying to nick your tea
is he?
mm
come on eat your tea 
monkey
did he?
what did he say?
mm?
what did he say?
he said eat your tea
oh
here mummy
no
 
oh I've a 
I said eat your tea
oh God this family make me sick 
he dropped it he, he said I'm not gonna move it
yes I liked a hamburger please
yes, run away .
Perhaps he's
 

have what sandwiches?
beef
oh  I thought Harold was vegetarian
he is
oh
doesn't make them .
She always looks like a sack of spuds she does
she looks like Miss Piggy
she's awful looking 
oh he's, he seems to be grown up all of a sudden 
oh that tie doesn't even go with that suit, look at that, brown tie with a blue suit  get this into ya, ha, ha
and now, I haven't got a, I haven't got a space for it 
maybe he likes her  what?
for these chips
you haven't got a space for it?
I have
he hasn't got a space for his chips 
I haven't 
shall I have 'em?
no you
This onion's very nice mum 
Martin's gonna eat
thank you
make one tomorrow as well?
the best one I've ever done I think
oh
that was mine 
I made it in the meat dish
oh
square meat dish
I haven't got a space  space, space for it but I
oh that's out of order
no spaces for it  no spaces 
Robert excuse me
eat some of the chips Robert please 
Robert excuse me please, thank you
excuse me
come and sit down
 

Last time the kid ran away he come back with a
oh yeah they usually manage to come back in the end
that old bat
oh yeah 
was it nice?
I didn't like mine
you didn't have any, you've had chips 
well I don't want mine any more
well you're naughty chicken
do, do, do 
was it nice?, did you like it?
yeah weren't bad
weren't bad
Robert stop moving them away please, thank you  Rob
I didn't know he got two James Bond 
no 
cars, did you?
no
I don't know where they come from
we've had one of them
this one come out the box
yes
and this one come off downstairs
oh  do you want a piece of fruit cake for afters?
no thanks 
do you Dave?freshly made this afternoon, you want some?
pardon
Robert move out the way
I'm here, let he get out the way cos I'm here 
can't believe that Sky was one of the most popular names last year in this country for a new baby girl 
wasn't 
was
it was
no it wasn't one of the most popular it was one of the most unusual, it wasn't in the top ten list they made
oh  but still flipping stupid
why, it's only cos people watch this soap isn't it?
yeah
mm, there's
 

got to put
away 
do what?
me can of
furniture polish, and I was saying to Martin how, I don't know how our
come up with the names for their stuff, I mean
where, where does that come from?oh when you think about it Pledge, why do they call polish Pledge?
cos they pledge to you that they get it cleaner than anything else
so they stowed it with you that you're
they have people stowed it so they keep it
no  why do you like Thunderbirds Rob?
I did not, change my mind
You don't like it any more do ya?
I do 
Cor you look like a  drinking then eh?
Martin's teasing me Martin's teasing me
he's what?
no he's not at all 
he's teasing me
no he wasn't Rob
he said, you can't have Thunderbirds and, and he said no you couldn't he said
no I said after Thun after, mm, after Home and Away we can have it on
yeah
no, it's, it's not after
after stowed it all
you can watch it after stowed it 
Home and Away 
I was chatting to a bloke today about you
what?
he said  looking for a little boy who can do building work
oh
and I said I've got a little boy who can do building work, he mixes cement in the cement mixer
I, I weren't heard of him
he erm
I won't forget
brings daddy some brakes
and gets his wheelbarrow out 
mm, only made it Christmas 
and takes the wood down the garden 
might like  
er me
yeah
and not you
not me, you that was weren't it?
yeah you be digging all of it 
and he said, he said that's just the man I want for a little job 
for me?
yeah, he said if he comes and give me a hand he says I'll give him five P a hour
oh that's really good
wages
I should say
why he's, what erm, building, getting cement
and he said on top of that he said you can bring your digger along and you can play in the sand as well 
good in it five P an hour?
no
in the big digger?
say I want a pound an hour
oh
the big digger what I will sit something in it
it's one way, what was called this way
remember that digger daddy had when I helped build the run?
mm
when you sat in it, that
mm
good weren't it?
what will I get?
you get
was the cake nice?, don't you want a bit Martin?
I know the big digger, what's it called?
no thank you
you full up then?
yeah
you said you didn't have much
well no not full up, I just don't want anything else.
look
look at that dog it's got glasses on
let's see how it is 
show mummy how the digger works come on show mummy how the digger turns
oh I can't the diggers over there and that's the dipper 
yeah and it's got a bucket which goes like this don't it?
no, not that, I don't mean that one, the one that been
without it, if, I been a why bigger lorry what 
what like the one what brings the bricks?
yeah
oh right
a toy one
oh a toy one
that's very nice
want that one
so Sam can bring me that in after Christmas aunt, no-one, aunty Amy will bring it?
will she?
yeah
yeah
this one
yeah
this one, but
and, and after it I've got  erm a digger  and I've got daddy tools, what tools do you want?,
I've got daddy tools
have you got parents' evening this term Geoff?
dunno
daddy's torch
satsuma
were you looking for that?
goodness me
were you looking for it?
you've not stopped eating 
were you looking for that?
yeah, where was it?
it was in there
where?
it was in my
look, look, look
well put it in your truck now then hadn't I?
mm, why, why have you left that crusty bit?
I don't like it, it's too hard for me
oh, give me that I'll have a bit of it  thank you 
it's only that
what you gonna do when were finished?
got a pipe on it, got a pipe
has it?what even if she's only met him twice?two or three times 
this is stupid this is, it really is daft
why?
as if he'd even have a chance of it anyway
I know


and the evidence shows that his wife, mind that cup of tea, is there anything in it?
no
no
the evidence shows that his wife can't have children so that's obviously why he wants to adopt her, well, claim here 
open your legs open your leg 
 

 
 
what about a Bakewell tart I made yesterday
I want my chips
I'll have some later
chips, chips 
do you want some Bakewell tart?
no thanks
I've made all these cakes to fill you up 
I've a, I've had a bit of a migraine this morning
why?
after, after breakfast had er it suddenly went a headache
oh, you should've took those Migrolifs
I was on all day and I, it didn't come off until about four o'clock
well you should've taken those Migrolifs because there supposed to be for migraines
mind mummy's tea
you take the pink one or something
yeah
yeah
you take the pink one as soon as you get there then then you take another one, I don't know whether it's yellow or blue, there's different coloured ones any way  two different types  so that's what you want to do
doing what?
putting a fence up in the
mm
you know it's only stacks around with the wire round it and er 
what for ?
he's fencing off his land
mind you don't fall over that
digger
digger, huh
he's fencing off his land
mm
that's what he's on about doing, his buying an acre of land on the field
 
a lorry 
mm, who does it belong to then the acre of land?
oh he's got er seven, eight acres
oh
Bill, stop Robert take the box off your head
mm
I couldn't
so where's he fenced it to?
you know where his wood ends?
yeah
he's got er, it's like a bank that goes up in the fields
mm
he's fenced all around there  and then he's had this bloke to make amendments and then rows of
oh yeah
he's been paying this bloke thirty quid, then he said twenty quid, today he said sixteen quid
oh it's going down
mm
wow
mm
he said whatever you do he said don't stop
he said otherwise you'll
 

oh dear
how old is he?
well I would've said he was, in his fifties, looking at him, oh don't look like he washes much
oh God
but there you go
Oh good lord
Er Richard's
I know that
Richard's bought the forty three I think
has he?
something like that, yeah forty two, forty three this year
yeah, gosh  oh dear
careful
careful Robert
yes, so
mm  oh
Richard looks old though don't he?
he looks younger with his without his beard and all that on it 
without his tache he does
he looks real scruffy and he says oh he said this cocking up my dole money working here
 



no
ah, he's, he has a bit of a
 
still with his mother 
he's got a bit of a brain tumour
oh dear
he came out with it, were chatting and er  he said oh he said I'm gonna get
Rose's dad made him redundant
yeah, oh they shut the place down
have they?
yeah
have they?
yeah and he's sold up of course 
have they?,
I didn't know 
yeah
and er, well he was in financial difficulties so he had to close down
mind you I
that's why Richard phoned up before Christmas said do I want to go round to his place
her dad must be
slip over Madge
nearly seventy
yeah
that ain't Madge
I know that
how do know
Claire 
Claire 
oh she's gonna start laughing now
oh dear the chips
oh there's a  a minuscule portion of fat in the bottom of that thing.
Her dad must be getting on for seventy she looks as though 
I want those in the bag 
no we're having Home and Away first 
after this you can have it look at this Jack the Ripper
oh when's this tonight?, oh great Jack the Ripper tonight
Thunderbirds on tonight 
super 
who?, what?
now Thunderbirds 
no that's on tomorrow night
no, that's on on Fridays
on now
Fridays are you hot?
I want Thunderbirds on
do you want your jumper off?
I want Thunderbirds
You can't have 'em
I want Thunderbirds on
like Rose's dad's 
dad 
closing up
dad, want Thunderbirds
alright after 
no after Home and Away 
after Home and Away
after Home and Away
and then you can have it on, you can have an episode on and 
I don't want that 
then after you've watched that, then you can go to bed after Thunderbirds
yeah
I don't want that 
if you watch after Home and Away come here tell you something
yeah
mm, how long ago did he finish then?
just before Christmas
mm
last three or four weeks 
he's got this little bloody moped
can I take that out there?
no, you mind that bat, so he's just like moped thing, he said oh when I get my redundancy 
six months 
I'm gonna get a new motor bike
caught I've got peanuts in the cup
oh that cup's got nuts in yeah
yeah you were playing with it weren't you?
I was playing with it now, put me back up
no you can't play on the side there cos I put, I put a pan of fat 
go and get it and bring it in here 
I love this
so erm, there you are
 

it's, it's up her nose
go on  oh dear 
I've got a peanut, a peanut
yeah
Marty mind my drink
yeah so you see I'm going to get a brand new motor bike when I get my redundancy
can I er
and I said oh
cup
he said the money which I'm getting he said 
I can't find a pea 
will just about cover the cost of er the motor bike
mm 
so I said what bike are you getting and he said
what's that?, he said it's a Jawa
this is mine in there 
I said amongst that one it's a Skoda
I didn't know Skoda made motor bikes 
motor bikes 
never had one
I've never sort of seen one alright
alright
and er of course the picture and all that, he's got a price on it, sixteen hundred and eighty five pounds
sixteen?
yeah
it's cheap
that's a motor bike, it's a motor bike and a sidecar
goodness
is it a moped?
what new?
brand new 
that's cheap
what a Skoda car is only just over three thousand 
yeah 
pound
gosh that is cheap isn't it?
yeah and er
a motor bike's a motor bike in it?
mm 
he said he said what he's gonna do is erm  is he's got his name down for buying a trailer for it as well 
mm
actually buy a trailer
for a motor bike?
for a motor bike, yeah, erm
I've seen one of them 
Honda make trailers for their motor bikes
I've never seen a motor bike with a trailer
I have 
ain't ya?
I have 
I haven't 
you know the bigger Hondas they've got a big trailer which matches the bike
mm, haven't seen that
yeah
I thought it was a bit unsafe on two wheels
no it's not, it's been designed especially for it  so erm he's gonna get erm, I said what are you doing all this for I said, it'll be easier to go and buy yourself a three wheeler
mm
I said you'll be under cover and dry and then I said
in the back
mm
he said I know I can't get a rubber boat and an oar at the back of this bloody three wheeler, that's why he's having a moped
mm 
yeah
home and away with you each day 
touch that erm at the fat
who did?
pies
pipe?
pies
pies?
yeah
what you on about pies
that piece
what?
that piece
that piece, what you on about?, what you on about?
what's in the can?
fat
fat
the fat I cooked your chips in
yeah
that you didn't eat
that I'm gonna eat in a minute
I'm gonna eat it 
they look nice they look like
I'm having one
Geoffrey can have 'em
if you eat one I'm having more, oh
Yeah oh Richard says he works for, he said he works all day long for a
 

don't wipe your hands on your clothes 
that's good innit, go to a coffee bar and don't pay any thing, just what you want
doesn't she wear stupid clothes that Marilyn? tight things 
 

why does she wear thick tights?
drink this coffee
oh
drink this
oh thanks, that looks nice, gorgeous, mm, mm nice
have you drunk it?, have you drunk it?
yes, I've drunk it now thank you 
Richard said how are we situated
oh you're joking
we're not
he said, I said Lynn said can't because of the kids 
who wants a cup of tea?
exactly
it's bad enough having three kids, he said oh the dogs I'll be used to looking after kids
yeah well does he want to check with
in America then 
someone's let him down
oh yeah
mm, that's gonna be his problem, he'll have to put 'em in kennels, no I wouldn't mind one, but not both 
they have , they coffee, I make you in this
yeah we'll have one of them mum
I wouldn't mind one 
bloody won't 
Dave, I wouldn't mind one, but not both
mm, yeah, where you gonna put them
that's it they sleep outside don't they?
ring this dad ring this
in the garden
ring this, ring this, ring this coffee
well you can have the dog, but I won't be here for the week if you're having a dog
why?
what for you?
I, I don't like dogs 
like dogs 
I can't stand them 
I've been drinking 
they're absolutely soft as shit those two 
I don't care I don't like 'em 
they're not gonna hurt ya, I'm not having 'em anyway
they stink for a start
what, so do you, but we can't do anything about that 
so do you but we can't do anything about that either, but dogs stink 
can you drink it?
yeah they do smell don't they those dogs
they always do 
they they always smell 
do you want a drink?
doggy smell
I don't want to drink from that I'll choke 
awful 
me
I don't like smelly dogs
I'd rather have a rat in the house than a dog
that's the last thing we're keeping when I
at least a rat's small
oh no 
you be careful with it
show your aunty your drink
drink it on this bit
well that
I want that dog
we're not having it, I don't want a dog
you said you
they have a lot of exercise
I'll do it of course 
yeah, they need walking about three times a day don't they?
you open the door up and have a look and see it's pouring down with rain and you don't like going out today
oh yeah but when I go out at night 
I don't want it 
I can just take it in
I don't want it
you just started it
I didn't, I said I wouldn't mind having one but I 
yeah 
yeah but he wants somebody to have both 
and then he was on about oh he said, how are you situated coming over here and feed me dogs for me
mm  he's gonna have a prob , I wonder why his neighbours won't
don't like them, good this one, yes
are they definitely going to
 
cups in it 
I dunno, I think they are
have they booked it or anything?
not got a clue what he's done 
mm  but if he goes, he's going for the month?
he hasn't got any, the whole lot is two hundred and ninety nine pounds, that's for a month, air fare, insurances, an hotel and a car as well 
good lord that's cheap, two hundred and eighty nine pound?
two ninety nine
two ninety nine, the
no that's separate his
I can do this really coffee 
but that's hotels 
mm, motor hotels is it?
yeah, you supply your
the insurances were eighty quid
good lord, that is cheap in't it?
yeah, cos he had to take out an insurance this will be er
what's the weather like in America now?
er, its upper sixties, where they're going.
you won't
mm, not a bad thing 
ooh
ooh
ooh
stop it you two
that was worth it 
I bet he can't swim
I can
can you?, can you?, how do you swim then?, show me
I can't do in a minute
why?
honey give me the midday paper please dear
mm?
give me the midday paper 
Get a divorce they, they've never been happy at all since they've been married have they?
That character Carly is always arguing
mm, it's Ben
 
it's Ben though innit?
yeah, but she's always arguing with everybody  oh right, thank you 
give Martin a knock
oh thanks  will you open it for me Rob?, oh, oh, oh
no I can't
yes you can, anyone can
after Christmas
well crack
oh yeah crack
there 
oh I'm glad Jack the Ripper's on tonight I like that 
this is good em to erm pick up one's
it is isn't it?
mm
yeah
two big things
what did he do to here 
two big things 
that's to pick up salad 
thing and respect
what are you doing?
no
you got
 

mm
how could anybody want to go in the army in nineteen ninety two 
wow
some people like the outdoor life
and some people have got
listen some people like the outdoor life and it 
what getting up at six every morning?
yes and listen they might 
being shouted at running nine miles with three tonne of stuff you'll never use on your back
yeah they might that 
pretending to use a gun
yes they might
 
 
and sleeping rough in the rain and the snow some people
 
Ian's got Ian's mum's trying to sell a gun to Christian
gun, where's he got a gun from?
Gat gun
a what gun?
a Gat gun
oh
like an air rifle, smart one
oh you're clever at these things aren't ya?
you know erm  mum, like one of them
oh right 
that isn't cheap, it's not cheap at all 
no I sai I said that last night
what is it?, it's a quarter pounder int it?
no chicken burger or fish, what was it fish or chicken?
or you can get chicken nuggets though 
I can get to a chicken burger, oh you're lovely with this 
Have you sent my letter off yet mum?
no
why?
I will
if you give me, write me a cheque and I'll take it when I go out again, cos I won't have
got to get a cheque book
oh you have a cheque book anyhow
well I'm at the end of it
I've never seen a chewing gum advert for them before
I haven't 
no I've not , I've not
Orbitor extra
no
the only one I've ever seen for is Wrigley's
yeah Wrigley's spearmint gum, yeah, strange int it?
these bricks did you see those
don't know they're stupid
I'm not surprised
don't know they're stupid
how much a brick?, twenty pound
I think it's a good idea to buy a brick, it's too dear
they put their name on it
yeah
I know, but it's too dear, I looked at that and thought it would be nice to have your name on a brick, but to me twenty pound, if they made it cheaper more people would buy it wouldn't they?, what building is it?
perhaps reduce it, if you put a fiver a brick loads of people will probably take 'em up on it, business might, but twenty pounds for a brick
he does doesn't he?
your legs go
no my legs go like that, your legs go
yeah, but you've got littler snub legs
snub legs oh yeah what inside leg are you?
thirty six
I am twenty nine aren't I
oh that's long 
I went to this man today and he's a real doddery old soul and he's the same age as gran 
old what?
doddery old soul
oh
and he's the same age as granddad, I couldn't believe it and he was saying about well I'm seventy one this year actually younger than my dad and he looks really old and we were 
no 
talking about heights and he said
bushy hair
and he said about being tall
that's not
and I said
you pick it up again
no me, do, do, do, do 
he was on about how different people 
mm
can be the same inside leg measurement, but different heights, so I said yes that's true, it's all according how long or short you are in the body and I said my son's short in the waist
here are
but he's got a long inside leg measurement, he says yes I've got a very long inside measur leg measurement, I'm thirty one inside leg and I thought
did you say I was thirty six?
I said well my, thirty five, I said my son's thirty five inside leg and he said is he really, then he went on to say his cousin is a wo is a woman cousin, is six foot
there was no people though got
go really big
yeah, everybody knows a
eight foot six
mm  but thirty one, he thought that was big  thirty one stone, really, twins
yeah
that's quite amazing
yes they can't get through the front door
well if they're Siamese twins you'd never get
six s 
you know, this woman that I, goes down the school that talks, who I talked to, she knew from Peterborough and I think she's German, she's got an accent, I'm sure for certain she's German, anyway she's got twins in Robert's class and she was talking to me today and she was telling me her husband moved out to move from Peterborough with his job so I said what does he do? and she said he's a scientist, so I said oh is he?,
I said does he work at the university?
Lei Leicester's the place to be if you're a scientist in it?, bloody hell
one of my teachers is
so I said does he work at the university?, she said yes, and he, he lectures and stuff
don't
so anyway
I won't let you
I was talking to her and I said do you work? and she said no I don't and she said my children are I V F children  In vitro fertilization, so I said how come?, how fascinating, she said it wasn't very fascinating I can assure you, she said it took five years to have them, well she put plainly they pioneered it down there didn't they?
of course she stuck it straight through her finger
so er, was it that doctor, Doctor Patrick Steptoe?, well anyway, yeah, she was one of the first to be on the programme and
it's Brown or something
yeah Julie Brown 
yeah it was Louise Brown same age as Geoff
Julie yeah
I know her 
but she er 
oh you cow 
she was one of the first anyway, so er, but it took a long time before she had them, five years' wait, and she said, that, at the last attempt she said to her husband that's it now, if it doesn't work this time, that's it, I'm not having any more attempts, that's it definitely, and they had that successfully and that's how they had the twins, so they're her children, they are their children, it's just they were fertilized outside the womb, in a glass dish  it's fascinating in't it?she said it's really fascinating I can assure you  I said oh I can see 
This is sugar too many sugar 
 
laughing about cos just one dive with that lot, ha, ha 
What do you think with those toms he's really er, he's quite, not articulate
artistic
no it's not, its not articulate
autistic 
ambidextrous 
no, no, what's the 
ambidextrous 
word you want when somebody's good with their hands?
ambidextrous 
articulate 
articulate?,
I thought that was with speech
no
what's with speech then?
ambidextrous
it's articulate as well 
dexterity, dexterous, very dexterous  articulate 
what did she do?
stuck that needle straight through her finger
yeah, how can you joined to the machine how come she pulled it off so quickly?
that's clever innit?
don't make me laugh, there's no way she
what with the house?
yes
one pound?
one pound
yes
right
yeah
and also British Rail are gonna give the cash flow fifteen thousand pound for a
it's a bit  

what?
well they're just gonna dump it then?
well exactly
and re-build it somewhere else?
yes 
oh no, she, she
no especially wearing glasses like that  they can't knock it down, but they've got to move it, well how they gonna do that then?
to swim you can't dive in, so he jumps in
that'll be a point, taking it down without breaking a brick .
It don't look very nice there does it?, look at the sky, it's grey, not sunny is it?she's got a cracking bust hasn't she?
er every time you see her you do
I know, but she's still got a cracking bust that's why  How did you get on with your table tennis this afternoon?
Alright 
the salad servers
do,do, do, do, do
have you switched it off now?
no 
oh the tape recorder's on is it?
no you daft devil .
Robert
go away
Robert would you like er a Charlie Farley rusk?
So, huh marks out of ten for
erm, rates about an eight
 

check my record collection  and that's that then
oh yes sir, have a bit of that, yes Barry Manilow 
oh he's a stickler if you don't smash it down to the ground, I'll be really shocked.
Yes well, Larry, have less of that 
 

oh no
 

She said if I were you I'd have breakfast, she said if you had something like porridge, you'd feel more full and you could perhaps do away with your mid morning four rounds of cheese on toast, she said, perhaps, what d'ya want?
in a minute
what you having Rob?
she said if you started off with cereal porridge or something you could have perhaps two rounds of cheese on toast for your break 
 
and er, at lunch time just stick 
what this?
to your sandwiches and perhaps an apple or an orange instead 
mine, my white thingy 
of the twix and the crisps and
 
nearly broken it now 
oh ain't I silly?
one cal erm coke diet coke and all that, I says and definitely  
watch, watch, watch two, three 
two, three of that makes a horrible noise don't it?
huh, I couldn't believe it, I mean he's been that thick and she says how old are you and he says thirty five, when she's gone, when he's gone she said blimey I thought he was forty five didn't ya?, she said yeah, I said he ain't wearing very well is he?, then this woman come in and she was, she'd had an operation and one of her stitches hadn't dissolved and she said I have a shower instead of a bath, perhaps that's why and Sue says yes that's why because you need water to dissolve a stitch, so any way she said to her how old are you, she says thirty seven and Sue says
 
oh, oh careful, careful, careful 
watch, watch
what, what, what I got to watch you do it, careful,
watch
so I said, she's the same age as me, she said god, she looked much older than you I said yeah I know, I says it cheers you up doing surgery don't it  seeing all these people  that look terrible for their age, so she says well I though she looked older than me, I says yes she does look older, I don't have, I don't know how old Sue is, I think she's forty, I think she's forty, but this woman she's got long hair
its all just grey, loads of grey in it  and it didn't look streaked, it did look natural.
Oh Jenny  is terrible, Sue and I decided were go to see her today because we had a message that she was in hospital, so we bought her a plant and we were on our way to see today
 
no 
what's that bit?
that's, that's a clip
what's that bit?
microphone, do you want to talk?, no, don't, just stay up there, talk, no, go on talk
a
not too loud
 
I'm key runner 
pardon?
I'm key runner
what you doing at school today?
er  playing, playing and, and standing up
playing and standing up, what you been, what you been doing then?
er
stay there
gimme, gimme
you don't have to hold it close to you
I, I holding it
hold it far away from you then
I 
Geoff said he's going to Gartree
Well I made enquiries
mm
I've got, I've got an appointment at the school on Thursday
what Gartree?
yeah
oh
mm
you'll have to get up earlier
huh, have to got to bed earlier as well, what was I gonna say erm  what exams you got on Wednesday?
none tomorrow
Thursday?
two
what are they?
French and Ger er Economics and German
what morning and afternoon?
yes, you can't two in the morning can you?
what time does your morning one finish?
twelve
what time you gotta be back?
one thirty 
I'm gonna have a bit of a job getting Rob to school and over, over to 
you doing 
Dinner time, I saw him, I went as soon as he came back basically
oh  trouble is I don't know any way round the problem of his, his lot at his school
go to
did he tell you what happened yesterday?, hang on I'll get it for you
It starts of Stuart says to Geoff what team do you support, support and he says Nottingham Forest, ooh Nottingham Forest urgh and he takes the mickey out of him which okay, then he called him
and all that, then he took no notice of that,now don't tip them silly, what the bloody hell you doing that for?, don't be so daft, so any way, then Stuart goes off into the showers and turns the showers on
yeah
comes back and says when the teacher come, the teacher was there this time, urgh the showers are on, Geoffrey switched the showers on and then they all start chanting  Geoffrey switched the showers on, Geoffrey switched the showers on  and er, loads of them, not just him, a load of them did it, and he, he started to cry, and then that was it then weren't it, ooh tiny tears, tiny tears, ooh poofter, poofter, crying and all that I mean he had a right day with it, so he goes to school this morning in Geography and the every body in the class, the girls and every body were going tiny tears, tiny tears, and he said I just ignored it today  he says I just took no notice he says, but they're all going, how's your tears Geoffrey, are we going to cry again today, he says and they were trying to get me to cry today he says, but I just took no notice and Stuart kept going like this Geoff and he says I just went  so he, he did the same back and then he went Geoff  and Geoffrey just went, I mean what you do?,
I mean I've said to him answer him back like you would but he, he, the thing is he just thumps them, he just thumps and kicks and hits
oh if he does he gets er done, dunne
yeah but he don't get done, he doesn't get done, that is the problem, the kids don't, I've written a letter to Mr  yesterday, why they were waiting for the games teacher he was hitting Geoffrey and he gave him a dead leg, kneeing him in the leg, he said before drama, he's got drama tomorrow he says he hates drama because the teacher takes no notice, he said one week Stuart was hitting me with a stick and the teacher just said calm down you boys, and he was being hit with a stick  oh no  and this I find totally disgusting and I feel like complaining about this, one of the teachers and I don't know whether its drama  yeah I think it was drama and
get that
in a minute
they were, they were doing a play or something and it, it mentioned about er, erm, what did it mention?, it was a bit rude any way this play  and it oh it was on about an erection or something and Geoffrey said his  trousers  his new trousers were sticking out a bit peculiar
oh god
and the teacher said Geoffrey stop playing with yourself, now I think that's disgusting
yeah
I feel like complaining about that
yeah
that is just not on
no
he wasn't playing peculiar and the teacher say said something about, he was reading it out and the kids said oh what's his name then and she said he's names Geoff and they were all going ooh Geoff and she said, he says I think she does it on purpose
mm 
but he's proper pissed off, what can he do?, because its not just him, its not just Stuart because  she, cos Geoffrey says oh half the kids in the class are all bloody weird he said, they're supposed to be me friends he says there's only one kid in the class that doesn't join in and its Indipau
mm
all the rest join in with Stuart, and Indipau says oh take no notice Geoff, don't let them get you down, but its only Indipau that's not, all the girls they all join in, bloody Colin who, he borrowed his computer that time, remember?
mm
he erm, he's given Stuart our phone number  and Stuart's been shouting this, this is Geoff's phone number  I mean he's, he's been telling every body our phone number, I says yeah you just let somebody ring us up and I'll bloody well be round their house like a shot if they phone, they  
if they phone ca call the police, they'll put a tracer on it 
well
no you call you can call the police 
I know but if they just start
 
pretend you don't know who it is
well that's right, I'm not having that 
and then get 'em nailed
but Geoffrey says it, cos I says you gotta hit back you gotta do it, he says yes its all very well but its not just Stuart, its been Blankley,Da ,Ja , erm Daniel  its a load of them and they all get together  its this Daniel bloke, bash his head in, I would really, I wish somebody I'll bloody threaten him, I really do  you know your big mates, bloody, he's got no older brothers, I mean all your bloody six formers, I'm sure they could frighten the little twat
you want
you just need to get him on his own away from the crowd 
so write to Mr  
have written to Mr  three times
, don't bother 
well what good's that gonna do, he must of told 
you never know I'd do it any way 
 
well what can I do?
write to  and just say erm Geoffrey's leaving the school as and then say why
well he, I, I think he will leave
why I'd
Geoffrey's only qualm is Indipau, he says if Indipau I'll come with me I'll go, I says well don't worry about Indipau, Indipau can look after himself, he says yeah but I like Indipau, I says yeah, but lets face of all the other kids in your class who you gonna be sorry to leave, he said none of them, I said well there you are then.
Did you have many form rows when you were at school?
A few but not as many as he's got, not as many as he's got
Its a big mistake when they let  in, into that school, where did they used to go?
Crown Hill
Crown Hill  its really gone down hill I think since they've let ra , I tell you what he ain't going there
no
not sending him there, rather send him to Judge 
I'd send him to Gartree mother
I'm not sending him there  I'll have to get Geoff to tell you about the story of, you know erm  drama he says is pretty bad because, I mean in drama you sort of mess about any way don't ya?
yeah 
and he, he just goes around thumping, kicking and, and going berserk during drama and the teacher just looks on and says calm down and I mean in view of the fact I've written to the school and complained about, but you'd think they would be keeping an eye and he hates drama so much and it, he's got drama tomorrow, if he has any trouble tomorrow morning I'm not sending him tomorrow afternoon I'm gonna start keeping him home and if they ask why I'm gonna say because you can't control your classes and you won't want to now
if its that drama teacher any way
oh I'll have to ask Geoff if it was, I'm absolutely disgusted about that, I really am disgusted about that
write to Mr  about that
I think I will
definitely
I think I will cos I'm pissed off, I tell you what, I mean I think, you've been alright throughout your school more or less haven't ya?
mm
but I'm most disgruntled the way Geoffrey's getting on, he's not had a single parents evening this year, you know normally you go back to school, you have one September, October which is always too soon
yeah
he's not had one
yeah
he's not had one 
write to Mr  
I'm gonna write, if that, if it was the drama teacher that said that I'm gonna write to her, I'm gonna put copy to Mr 
yeah
write to him as well disgusting, as if you don't, you don't need that sort of aggravation from a teacher stirring up trouble like that making the kids making him a laughing stock, he does not need that, its just not on is it?, and as he says I'm sure she does it on purpose.
She'll deny it though
I don't care
if she denies it, that's even worse
don't care, its not a good school any way, tell her to stuff it 
I'd let him leave it as soon as possible
well I want him to, I've had enough, I think its
I mean he's crying all the time, he burst into tears last night
he hates school, I mean, what can I do with him?
mm
he won't let me go round the kids house, he won't let me do 
you can't really go round their house 
well I can do, but he won't let me do any of the things I want to 
well you shouldn't go 
the school are doing nothing, okay what did they do, they stopped the money, yeah, they stopped him from having money, they made him pay money back which I'm pleased about that he got 
oh wow that's really bad 
but it, he paid back five quid well Geoffrey said in reality it must of been about twenty quid that kid had taken  but er  he said they made him pay back five pounds, so at least they
could I have a sweet Rob?, where is it?, out there?
yeah
he
when you, if you get horrid boys at school you tell 'em off, yeah
can I have a sweetie Rob?
don't you put up with any thing 
I just, I will just, if they will push me I will push 'em back
you know that Steven is he a nuisance
no
how does he's mummy talk to him Rob?
today
no let, no, no, no, let him say, how's he say Steven?
Steven 
oh she was shouting at him at dinner time  Steven  oh god dinner time she was shouting him 
how'd she go Rob?
Steven 


Steven 
Steven  
and what did she say after that?, what she say after that?
a big smack
she's
mummy smacked him didn't she?
Steven  she go like that?
mm, Steven very sorry 
Steven stop running about , sounds like it, you do that again I will, she says, you do that again and I'm gonna smack you, right, come here, and she gets him and she whacks him in front of every body, didn't she Robert?
did she hit him hard?, did she hit him really hard?, did she hit him as hard as this?
she was like this she was
oh missed, took a real swing at it
she makes me laugh, she stands there talking and she's saying, one minute she's saying oh Steven really loves school, he really enjoys it, he's really calmed down since he's gone to school  Steven stop running down that corridor  .
You're ever such good boys at school aren't you?
do you do it 
 
properly Rob?
he was trying to do the splits, show Martin how you do the look, look, look, yeah, he come up to me and said hold my hand, right, now do try to do the splits 
is that as far as he goes?
nearly split your trousers then
careful, are you coming with me?,
Thunderbird one
Thunderbirds are go
but that teachers looking for a kicking
any dream will do , yes I'm starving too
hurry up girl
oh dear, stop eating rubbish you won't, won't eat any dinner, oh that is disgusting ramming a whole slice of bread in whole
mm
without butter
mm, mm
What else did she say?
Oh mostly that really, supposedly going to America in February the sixth  and the doctor, she said to the doctor what's the matter and he said you're really, really run down  then he said to her what I suggest you do is to go and buy some cartons of fresh orange juice, a jar of honey and some natural live yoghurt and she's ate it all, now she's got diarrhoea  can't win can ya?
oh its terrible in it?
she's only been to work once since Christmas, she went erm last Friday
mm
and then all the week she's been bad since, I don't know what she did when she didn't go to market
she just didn't go to market, pretty dead though round there any way
well yeah  especially this time of year really, quite he's not even asleep up there
not  pigs 
you gonna watch erm Jack The Ripper?
yeah 
So what times your exam tomorrow?
No, I ain't going in tomorrow I've told you
oh right, you got a day off?
yeah
what you gonna do then?
dunno
has Matthew got a day off?
no
Richard?
no
oh  who've you been on the phone to tonight?
Mat and Rich, but, but Mat last
are you seeing Katie this week?
dunno, not sure
well haven't you rang her or any thing?
I saw her today
But he's loud, he's one of these  oh hello darling, have you had a good day?, have you missed daddy?,
I thought oh god shut up, you know, you've got children, oh he's really horrible  and he stands there and he's looking at all the women every one that comes and he smiles and then hello, hello
Nijinsky
he's a real old woman, urgh, I can't be doing with him 
I wouldn't like that so much you know
what?
one week in Spain, I'd rather have that two week's in Australia wouldn't you?
so would I
better than Barcelona?
yeah
that's the, actually, actually I'd rather have that best, that's the third prize two week's in
You're joking in America
two week's in New York, shopping, spending money thrown in
the first prize is Spain?
for the Ba for the Olympics
poo I wouldn't want that, I'd rather go America
I'd rather go to New York, yeah definitely
mm 
I thought when they done this, it was, they had to put their sport, what kind they would of gone for
that's what they should do I'd of thought
yeah
that's what they used to do
did you hang that other towel on the radiator?
Yeah
or have you just thrown it up the stairs on the floor?
left it on the radiator
 
turn it over Geoff 
eh?, yeah
turn it over Geoffy 
Will you put the kettle on Martin?
No it don't fit 
have you had a nice shower?
yes
that were good 
hello, that shower was well hot 
Your hair's grown long again ain't it?
I need to get it cut
don't touch please Geoff
yeah I
 

its good that is that up there 
 
That's next Wednesday
Top Gun
yeah
have we seen that?
yeah, you know I was gonna go to judo on Wednesday don't I?
is it on Wednesday?
yeah
what time?
I dunno 
eight o'clock 
yes 
have you put your blanket on?
bl no  oh you
move please
oh
I was sitting there  don't put your feet up please, thank you 
Jaffa cakes  all together now Jaffa cakes, does it say
he's that bloke, that kid out of Grange Hill
is it?, oh that's disgusting all that blood
well you did cut the top bit of the
urgh
I know
sick, didn't wear gloves
no they didn't wear gloves in those days
oh, is, is a real connection  alright I'll have mine then 
does it say how many calories are on, in these on that box?
nine point six million per biscuit
How many calories in a Jack The Ripper?
no in a Jaffa, have you got the box?, can you pass it?
fat, one point nought then, energy one hundred and ninety kilo joules
carbohydrate eight point nine
I've been good all week
I know, last night you went and had, had a snack before going to bed
what, a bit of lettuce?
and a
 
 
let's have a look please 
to tide you over till the morning
yeah, me stomach were rumbling all night
yeah, there you are don't eat a bit, its not good kidding yourself
I'm not kidding myself  forty seven calories per cake, oh I think I can have one of those
have three
no, here you are 
move it away
move it  shut up David Swift
pardon?
that bloke is David Swift 
yeah 
you don't even know what he's been in
who's David Swift?
he's in Drop The Dead Donkey
oh  I don't think that is him out of London's Burning I'm 
who?
not convinced
who's it supposed to be?
that new kid
Colin 
he's 
no way 
it is 
I don't think it is
I bet you three million quid that ain't
it is
well what was Colin's name?
Steven North
was it?
yeah
right
and that is not, he was in Metal Mickey that kid, he played erm the annoying little punk
oh right, well we'll have to look in the credits at the end and see
ah, but, his face ain't round enough for Colin 
but I didn't think he looks 
but he's , he's younger there
its not, right, there's no way he ain't got the moles on his
is right
alright then and if not you've gotta give me a quid
no
he ain't got no money, will you 
well that 
settle for a fifty
you owe me four quid, oh did you send that thing off then?
no cos you owe me seven pound fifty
have you rite the cheque out?
no
not until we get some money back
I don't owe you money
yes you do
no I don't, you never wrote the cheque out
well until we get the money you ain't getting the cheque rite out do ya?
no money
I'll wait for your pocket money
its upstairs mum
what is?
money, you'll never do it
silver
yeah  
well go and get the cheque book out the
er I'll go and get it in the week
cos the cheque book's in your drawer
no its not 
I haven't got a cheque book
I haven't been in your bag since the end of the week when you asked for them.
well I ain't gotta cheque book
you have
did you put it in then?
yes, I took the old one out and put it in 
oh I didn't know I've got a cheque book in there
well its been in there a week
oh it just shows I haven't written a cheque out then dunnit?
does it?
I've been paying for me petrol with me money  me family allowance.
What you doing tomorrow morning then?
Dunno
staying in bed I expect
perhaps
you've not got school tomorrow?
no, yes 
Dave's home tomorrow with Roberto
eh?
Dave's home tomorrow with Roberto  
oh 
ah, how do you reckon  what's er name can do Ken's job that cheap?
perhaps
stuff in his garage
because that book show's you the price
yeah
there's no way you can work for that sort of price
what Ken say I've always wanted a pedestal
yeah
well what's he got then?
oh your joking, I, at 
yeah
oh my giddy aunt, his house is really unmodern in't it?
it is


he's got a gas heater in his hall way
then his kitchen
the kitchen's awful, I hate that kitchen  its awful with that kitchen with the back door in the middle of it, why have they got a back door in the middle of their kitchen?its right in the middle of it
its nice
it seems different now, they've got the cooker right by the door
yeah I know, its just how its laid out
 
its badly designed and planned int it?
yeah
its awful
he was saying to me, they're gonna get a new back door or something
need a new kitchen, dunno about need a new back door, our kitchen looks totally different to them, oh I know what it is, they've got their door to the living room in the kitchen, that's what makes a lot of difference don't it?but it could be designed better than that
yeah 
when you look at their kitchen and ours, its the same, they've got their pantry knocked in the same ain't they?, its horrible though I hate it.
His back door I suppose
is his door rotten?
yeah, terrible
is ours rotten?
no, its just
horrible back door that int it?
so what does he want, oh  he wants a new back door
yeah
and a new bathroom
a new bathroom but er sort of 
what's I gonna say?, and he needs, his, his roof of his porch doing
yeah
and you say that Arthur's roof's leaking
yeah
he only did it last year
yeah
he's not 
I said get some
why's it, why they leaking if, even if they are flat roof, why are they leaking?
its not a flat roof, he's got it sloping, no not, he's got the top
he's just put the, he's got like this see through frost banks foregated 
yes I know, mm 
and its just against the back wall
oh didn't you
 
well how stupid why's he just done it like that?
well he's got to fix a proper roof on I suppose
what is that room that he's got at the back?
like er
a conservatory
no sort of a laundry room a washing machine 
what they got in it?
a fridge
mm  she's a bit weird, cos your down the alley way and you, you walk into it don't ya?
yeah, and all the
so I said to him why don't you get some glass I showed him
why don't you get some glass or something, just put it down, just pick up drain and er you'll seal all the alley way up, keep it dry, stops the water getting in.
Mm, its not many that's got alley ways sealed like ours, mostly all open aren't they?
well
mm 
yeah, but, see how he'll get on, then have it from the building, that was the building
the other side of that wall where all those garages slope away
you want to apply to that , does it say in writing again?, that's the trouble, you know when they say apply in writing, how much detail have you gotta give, for a job?,
I never know what they want to know.
Stick the C V in and you can't go wrong
well yeah, yeah
Well this, I was chatting to a bloke and erm
yeah
what they do a lot of these places now, they, put adverts in the paper, they didn't want people, they just put adverts in the paper, they didn't pay for it, see what people are out there and what qualifications they have to have and when things start picking up there, they, they take a pick any people they like
that's a waste of time
it is a waste of time he, he said its a big con, so that's how they work it now


he said
they want the one with the most
qualifications 
skills , qualifications
yeah well that's right 
for that job
yeah
Look berk brain I haven't erm got the original advert so i don't know where the, where it is what the address is 
What's happen to this button ere?
I don't know, why?
I don't know there's something in here  oh he's Steven Darell, he's the
Ministry of Health
health means you 
union Ministry of Health 
and where's the thing for?
dunno 
how much money a year d'you reckon John Majors on?
Erm
try, erm, you know
about fifty thousand
seventy six and what d'you think a cabinet minister's on?
a cabinet minister?, about thirty five thousand
er sixty three, and how much d'you think a normal M P's on?
not that much
go on
twenty thousand
thirty one
oh
its a good job in it?
mm
six hundred pound a week
Keith  has got his own job as well ain't he?
well he's a solicitor, he says he doesn't do any soliciting jobs on the 
I bet he does 
side, I, I asked him that and he said he didn't, well I, I think he was lying
lying through his teeth
you lying git
You lying git
I'm not a lying git, you're a lying git you know that
I think he's a lying git don't you?
I think he's a right lying git, I couldn't, he's been a right lying git, he's been saying all the things that he's supposed to say instead of the truth
oh of course, he's got to impress hasn't he?
do more than, oh look, wonder if he's Jewish look in that back with that star of David flag in that back ground
where, don't do that
I like this, its been proved that waiting list have gone down in the last six months
mm
people have been treated quicker, so that per cent no its not  how can they say no its not?, they wouldn't lie because if they lie they'd get really done wouldn't they?
they're saying that their fixing figures by not putting people on the waiting list so the waiting lists are shorter, because they're putting, not, they're saying that to people we can't treat you for about two years so I'm not going to put you on the list at the moment, so they're, cooking the books, that's what they reckon
well, I mean there's some things 
every body 
that people don't need doing desperately
yeah like I mean a pollack 
and I mean exactly
that's not an emergency, life threatening
and they say I've been waiting seventeen years for this pollack, or having your tooth out or having your tonsils extracted
mm, they're non in , non urgent cases 
I think if you want your tonsils out you should go private to have it done personally, cos you don't need it do ya?,
I mean you don't get tonsil cancer do ya?
you get tonsillitis don't ya?
oh well that's really serious that is, its like having the flu every year.
Until you got it, you don't realize
Yeah its not very nice 
 
Yeah I know I've had it
yeah I know and
the thing is, its not serious is it?, its not life threatening
things that I think shouldn't be done on the health service are breast implants
oh no, that's gotta be well out of it
er, even before the scare came like the silicone 
like Claire  one, I don't think she should of had that done 
no, no that's different, that is different, she's got a deformity, that is different, people that have 'em done just to enlarge their breasts, I don't think that should be done on the National Health, if they want to do that, then 
So 
they should pay for it
don't do, do cos tic , cosmetic surgery on the N H S do they?
well yes, breast implants is cosmetic surgery isn't it 
yeah I mean face, face lifts
no, no
that's what I mean
no, but breast implants is cosmetic, people are doing it to make themselves larger and I don't think, its not necessary is it?, its not necessary, it don't improve their
vanity in it?
well it is vanity, their health's not gonna improve by er, with their breasts enlarged so I don't see why the National Health should pay for that, if they want that doing they should pay themselves, different in Claire's case because she's got one breast extremely small and one large one so she's got a deformity, that's different, correcting a deformity's different, but if you just wanna go from a size thirty two to a thirty six B, then you should pay for it  don't you think?
Yes
I think so.
What makes me laugh that the Labour party always say oh interest rates in, sorry the tax rates in this 
the other way of doing it is getting woman with bigger boobs
er what is it?, what are they complaining about?
Tax reductions, of that's nice, interest rates or something  and those said oh they're two high over here, in America they're four per cent , now what they don't see is the interest rates are linked with the amount of peop the amount of people earn, the amount of people actually save
what were the interest rates when Labour were locked in power
yeah, listen to this though, they're saying oh its terrible America have got four per cent and we've got fifteen, America have got four per cent because out of the interest rates comes money for erm, that can't be right, something tax
mm
they say oh tax is too high, I mean Labour want to put it up any way, but by the by, this answered them any way, what they say is oh its too high, erm even the American tax is four per cent , who gives a dam, because the thing is in America what you're loosing, what you gain in your tax you have to pay out through the nose for health care
that's exactly it
you can't afford to be ill in America, I tell you what
you'll have to mortgage your house if you had a serious illness
if you had what I had we'd of been totally 
oh 
bankrupt
well wiped out, won't we, we'd have to sell your house to pay for your medication alone
exactly
I mean it, they complain and moan about the N H S, but basically its a good system
well said 
you can always complain about any thing, look at America they've got private health care, look at the number of doctor's being sued
yeah
because people are dissatisfied with the treatment and they're paying for that treatment and they're dissatisfied, so you always get complaints whether you pay or not 
I stood there
did you?
mm  that box is absolutely amazing
what box?
that box there that Paisley, I really hate him, I saw him
Joe Croftman, is it?
yeah, that was the, he's so frightening him, see him and you wet yourself
huh
we go with Matt right and it was the Sun it was the Wednesday after Spitting Image was showing one as him as Hannibal Lector, and he says I'm going to eat your liver with a nice bottle of campion


Nigel Croftman, er Joe Croftman, aargh, huh


right and he said in it oh Roy, er Roy, strap him in Roy, cos he's got this like thing and face mask to stop him talking, we saw Roy Hattersley right behind us, it was most embarrassing moment 
did you get hair, hair wettings with the tool  
shut up Roy shut up, just shut up, he ain't too bad
was there many talking when you went?
yeah, we saw Michael Meacher, Social Security bloke, he gets on my wick he does, were from the Labour party and were gonna have such an improved Social Security, and its going to be so good
mm
I've stood where he is an all
I remember when Labour were last in power
people have too short memories
I've not, when Labour was last in power and were going back now to nineteen seventies, they left the country in a mess, there was three day week, there was strike's, electricity strike, the coal board were on strike, every body was striking and down tools.
You used to go to work, I worked in the bank then, and the
used to publish what areas were going to have power cuts, d'ya remember?, you were in Bristol at the time, er Stuart was the same, they used to publish what area would be cut off and for what time and for how long and you knew you would get cut off, sort of ten o'clock in the morning till three in the afternoon,usu , four or five hours at a time wasn't it?
Well I was on shift work and used to go in, six to two shift was alright, they didn't break up
no
but two to ten shift they'd have power cut 
yeah 
all afternoon, and all we'd done, we'd just have the lights on, to give us minimum lights, you couldn't use no machinery
no
just a few lights and what we were doing was cleaning
well we had in the bank, we had calor gas lamps and when the power cut came we had to have the calor gas lamps on, and er, at night you'd get home and you knew what area was going off at what time and you used to have to rush round, I remember once, it was going off about six and it went off early, it went off about five instead, and I'd started cooking the tea, luckily got a gas cooker and this was at Abbott Road, it started 
Devon 
cooking the tea, I remember it was fish fingers and chips I was doing and er the dam lights all went out, you were only little and erm  Lynsey er, she came round from next door because she started cooking her chips
yeah
and she said, she'd got an electric cooker, can I finish cooking me tea on your cooker, huh, said it went off earlier than we thought  I mean it wasn't 
you don't get that with the Conservative party cos they don't let 'em get away with it for a start
well, no, they put up laws to stop
yeah, that's what I mean they don't let 'em get away with it
it was disgusting how the held the country to ransom didn't they?
there was lots of
oh,
oh yeah
what happen was they kept striking for any reason
yeah
they was told not to have a cup of tea in the afternoon, and they had a
strike 
yeah stupid 
British Leyland were the same
oh yeah
British Leyland were well knackered by then
they used to, well, it, it was night shift and they had took a camera into the er factory were they were doing the cars and he had blokes
fast asleep
fast asleep in sleeping bags
yeah
in corners
yeah 
they were, getting paid 
yeah 
for that
yeah, on night shift 
that's a good job that is in it?
they took sleeping bags to work with 'em
what they were doing was taking turns, one bloke was doing three man's jobs while the other two was a kip


and the next night he'll be kipping and the other one I'll be working and that's how they used to go on and it eventually, that's why it was ten English worker's to one Japanese because of that reason
yeah, because half of them was sleeping
and, what happened was it was a hell of a stink in dock, because there was all different workers for different jobs, it was one for fitting car seats, you had one for fitting glass, you had one for doing engine, one for fitting the gear box, one fitting wheels on, so you had ten blokes just doing one job on a car
yeah
and what happened was the Japanese production bloke he was doing it all himself the lot
yeah 
mm 
the whole rigmarole
and that was why they were moaning about it
mm
and eventually that's what streamlined the English company's
yeah
its the Japanese that started them all of
yeah
er the Japanese now they went to Nissan, they only do one thing at, one thing each
that's right
do they?
mm
mm
er it, it proved it like in America they can build a car from end of the production line to the other end, finished, running forty nine seconds
good gracious
that's what they, they clocked it at
god
forty nine seconds and they can build a car
good gracious  well I worry what'll happen to the health service if Labour get in
yeah, well what, what the, the problem is with unemployment is, is technology which, which caused it
yeah, its done away with labour
that's right where we used to perhaps 
done away with people 
where we used to perhaps have five or six blokes building cars, you've got one robot doing it now
yeah
so its been lost by the blokes jobs
its the same in all jobs, look at the banks how they've had to cut down on staff, computers have just totally took over, I mean every, every area of work more or less its been done away with by computers
that's right
apart from nursing
eventually it'll get more and more computer wise, its the same in the motor trade or any trade it all, if the machine goes wrong all they'll have is a pack, just pull the pack out, put a new pack in and put it back 
yeah, don't bother me don't bother maintain don't bother, no 
they don't say that because micro chip is that cheap to make now
yeah
they just pull one out and
I know
you know my, you know vouchers for shops mum, do they give you change?
no  no
usually its gotta be a little bit more 
yeah 
than what the vouchers 
yeah 
worth
either dead on
or a bit more
or more, if you spend less you don't get any
or though you could just like, if you got something for say ten ninety nine and it was fifteen pounds and you got something else as well 
yeah
just to make it up
oh yeah
say you want to make it dead on then or just 
or just over, yeah
can I tell you another thing, any job with Government funding don't go into it 
not even with Labour around 
no
not even go into it, because what happens is they're allowed so much funding in a year and if the budget runs out half way through, that's every body out of work.
mm
I was on er one of those jobs
that's why
for an insulation company and we were on a Government funding and money ran out and it took us up to Christmas really and after Christmas we were out of work for four months
that's why
that was awful
nursing there 
save 
trying to, yeah you're safe, but they're trying to, our community unit are trying to be a trust like the hospitals are opting out aren't they?
mm
and they are excepting a lump sum from the Government and they're going to manage themselves and make a going concern of it as a business  and any profits they get will go back to that hospital, well the community unit are opting out as well, they're hoping to opt out, but if Labour get in, they're gonna do away with all that and they want to undo all the one's that have opted out, I mean I dunno how the hell they're gonna do it
I tell you what though
because I, the doctors I work for they have opted out, they are what they call it fund holding, they've got their own budget, they've got a, they've got a practice manager and its run as a business and they look at every thing  and any profits that they get are ploughed back into the G P's surgery and er, and they improve the surgery facilities for the patience, and it will be a better service, but I mean how can Labour come in and then say right you're not doing that, how can they undo it
they can't
they can't undo it 
its like the franchise businesses, but they'll nationalise them again
oh
and what'll they do buy the shares back off people which'll 
I know 
cost them bloody loads and then they'll turn it into an absolute cack heap like it was before.
I mean British Gas, fair enough it was quite efficient, but its not as efficient as it is now, same with Telecom, Electricity, Water and Sewage
mm  I mean every Government does some good and some bad, but on the whole I think the Conservative have done good, because they've made more people home owners than ever before
mm
enabled them to buy their Council houses, at er cheaper rate because they've lived in them a long time and its, its given a lot of people more independence, unemployment would of happened who ever was in power
you the thing is 
it doesn't matter , they've not caused it
what Labour is saying is that the reason why there's low employ high employment is because er where, they're trying to cut inflation which is, one of the side ways of cutting inflation is that interest rates go up and, but the thing is that which then leads to unem unemployment, but the thing is you can't have a decent the, full growing economies, its full capacity if you've got high inflation all the time knackering you up
no
before you do any thing you've gotta kill that before you start
mm
its alright saying twelve years, but twelve years on a scale of hundred is nothing really
no  I hate it when each party calls each other blind, oh yes its, its better if you have us and were gonna do this and were gonna do that it gets on my nerves  its really irritating 
the thing that annoys me most is that, the amount of bad memories people have, I mean not bad memories as in bad thoughts, but bad
yeah
forgetfulness
yeah, or
I mean how can you flipping forget?
and the three days working week 
the sewage not being er rubbish not being collected, graves not being dug
that's right, that's right, the the bin men strike 
have you ever had that?
I mean Maggie Thatcher came in and told them whether they 
all the 
they, told them they can like it or lump it and they said the miner's strike, but she still won the election after the miner's strike which 
yeah 
was only about seven months after
she didn't give in to 'em did she?
if you don't give in to 'em, you'll nail 'em
she didn't give in, they didn't accomplish any thing, I remember the bin man strike, how many week's was that, that the rubbish was all
its twenty seven weeks
was it? all 
well , well in diff in different, different parts of the country
it was rotting 
in Liverpool it was twenty seven weeks
rotting away they wouldn't take the rubbish would they?
Liverpool was the worse, they didn't dig, dig graves for about twelve months 
dig graves 
twelve weeks are they?
that's stupid isn't it?, ruddy ridiculous, that's the trouble because Labour are all for the unions aren't they?
I like the, there was, there was a, er big bill board in town, I dunno if you saw it and it says, I think it had Labour right, in really big letters, and they said who's really behind me, it was a Conservative one, they said who's really behind them and in it every one there's like a T U C leader one of the union leaders
yeah
which is true
its run by the blinking erm unions Labour
yeah, I mean in Ireland they, fair enough, they call it the unionist party
mm, well that's what it is in it?, that's what it is
but what makes me laugh is doctor  he's, I think he's absolutely cracked
cracked?
cracked
is he Labour?
oh is he Labour, he's, he's straight left he is
is he?
I mean that's ridiculous, the money he's on they'll cripple him, they'd absolutely nail him wouldn't they for money?
yeah, yeah 
and granddad Pat was saying that there's, Steven Fry on the telly he was, he was saying he made,ha I think he said he made half a million pounds out of something and he was, he says I'd like to join go into parliament as a Labour thing, granddad says oh that'll be really sensible, he said you'll loose half of that money if you do that
yeah 
but Pete  if he, I mean I don't see why he doesn't if he went private for two years he'd make enough to retire, in two years, no sweat, he won't have to work again, I mean I bet his house is paid for
yeah  he's one of the few doctor's that's not seemingly not all for what he can get, he seems to be a genuine caring chap  I mean a lot of doctor's they burn the candles at both ends 
I mean the thing is though
private clinics and first thing in the morning 
in this private in this country doesn't mean that you've got to pay for it, it does mean that you've got to pay for yourself, but its not like obligatory, so you might as well get the money you can, if you that, at that, at that standard aren't, hadn't you really?, if you can get that money, you'd be thick not to go for it 
yes, but then what's bad about that is, the doctor's taking the supplies from the Health Service to their private clinics
mm
that's what goes on and that's what's draining the Health Service as well.
When I worked at the General, doctor's who shall be name less used to 
oh look 
yeah, oh yeah, doctor's who shall be name less, used to fill up black plastic bags full of supplies 
I know him  the bloke on the left, sorry, this is where I've been, that bloke 
yeah I know 
called Joe, that bloke on the left, he's
about his personal secretary 
Joe
that's still not it as much as er Robert Maxwell lost and seem,ca , see the Labour party nailing him for that, no you don't because he was a head of a Labour party paper
yeah, that's true 
Thrindon Five Mill that's a, that's er  that's two thirds of Maxwell's pension fund  Keith's gonna become a cabinet minster I reckon at, the way he's going, bad luck
how can he?, he's not, they're not in power
no shadow cabinet
I think he will, actually I think he's quite good  don't you?
look at that
yeah
how many wogs?yes wogs 
why do they call  
or whatever it is, oh  B C C one employees spokesman 
don't it make you think though that Keith  I mean would he really become pain in the side if it was just an ordinary battle 
I mean there's seven people there and six of what, six of black
I'll bet you'll find that the majority of shops at
the thing is, the thing that makes me 
yes 
sick about this is, B C C one, if they wanna put in a bunk what's wrong with the big four, I mean you don't prat around with B C C one
who the heck are they any way? about
they just prat around abroad mainly
mm
yeah, there's a lot  
I mean Abu Dabi there based I mean Abu bleeding Dabi
mm
that's lining their pockets who've they've got more money than they know what to do with
mm
oh er are   yeah , Maxwell, you see his sons are clamming up, they're not saying a flipping word
well they probably don't, well
they, oh don't tell me they don't know, they run the company  see 
mm, the thing is though, that wasn't a Court hearing yesterday and  whatever they say is gonna incriminate them so if they want to ask them questions they've gotta take them to Court haven't they?
mm, yeah
they got to take them to Court and ask the off the questions officially under oath, there's no good getting 'em together like that
oh Mrs 
with a drop of clanger
Mrs  can't stand Neil Kinnock you know
oh can't
she thinks he's a Welsh wind bag, she said, she said that the other week
Welsh wind bag?oh he's lost his hair a lot ain't he?
mm
can't be doing with Algeria
I really cannot be doing with Algeria 
Geoff dear where is the advert for these games, because I don't know the address and I don't know who I've got to make the cheque payable too
You haven't thrown it away have ya?
I haven't thrown any thing away, you had it last
where is it then?
erm, erm, oh no
Sweden
what you doing with these?
you were the one , you were the one writing down the number and the name of the game 
parking wings on three screens four for 
er, I'm sure its gonna be on there in it?
well I don't put it any where 
Robert's had breakfast in that chair, the last four days 
well where did you have it?, when did you have it?
Saturday, when he was writing his letter
if you done it on the night mum, we wouldn't have this
 
well is it on the wall unit some where?, is it down by the papers?, not that wall unit, there, over there 
over there, he had it, he was writing a letter out 
I dunno what get, I don't know, it gets on my wick out there, there always like, every country linked with religion for some bloody stupid reason, I mean its so primitive, no body else is in the modern world are they?
no
I mean not even Russia and they're well behind the times 
not like us
yeah I know, but they, they don't say well if you're not orthodox you can't come here, do they?
oh no
eh?
Spurs are out Gary 
who beat em?
Aston Villa, but they're t , first division though, empty net, there's a bloke standing on the line, how can it be empty, let's have a look  oh Woking lost, Leicester didn't play tonight, no
they can't,Farnbor Farnborough's last look 
cor West Ham struggled against Farnborough , struggled, Bristol City yes, you beaut, that means we Leices, Bristol City's instead of Wimbledon 
oh were playing Bristol City and not Wimbledon 
Wimbledon are sods you know
are they?
you don't want them  that's good erm, that's a good win away from home.
Breken, its Bracken
Breken
I say its Bracken
oh five nil, five nil
er they always have high scores don't they?
er, they always score more goals in Scotland
why do Scotland always score more goals?
I think the goals must be bigger or something, but they always get loads they always 
they do 
and the goals 
always high scorers 
are far more fu , fun to watch because they always fly in from miles out
and if you look at the Scottish results 
the thing is in Scotland though, there's five good teams and the rest are rubbish
yeah
there's like 
when you look at the Scottish results you don't get many draws in the Scottish league
oh you do, you do don't you Dave you get loads of draws in Scotland?
yeah, cos
the last few are fifty six, fifty eight are usually famous for draws
mm
good night C B E, but
is he C B E?
yeah, he got charged for the commander 
can you find another magazine with the advert in?
no
fine
eh?
fine
oh
its gotta be over there somewhere Geoff
I'll have to find it over 
its not over here, he had it Saturday, when he was writing his letter 
over there, I told you
I have seen it when I was tidying up
mm
a piece of paper 
oh I like this advert, watch, watch this
you like it cos its all food
no its rugby Bill Maclaren, I like him, shilly, shally 
 

oh    my mother always used to buy H P baked beans when I was a kid
what are they like?
and the advert was  H P baked beans they're the beans for me, H P baked beans they're the beans for me  they're a bit more spicy 
 

oh
my mother always used to buy Pan Yan pickle
yeah Pan Yan
not, not Branston, Pan Yan
well I can't say I eat either, so it wouldn't really affect me would it?
I like Pan Yan actually, next time we have pickle I think I'm going to buy Pan Yan
don't do it any more I don't think
why the hell are you going to buy that for?
they do do Pan Yan pickle
still do it
of course they do Pan Yan, what a funny name, Pan Yan, I bet its a Chinese bloke that er invented it  Geoffrey what you doing dear?
still at work mother
trying to get something in something that won't go  is it not underneath that tissues and all that
no its
pile of
its not there
its not?
was it one of those badges he's got on the back on the front
I didn't see it no 
no er he had a Peugeot three O five
who did?
you talking about Glen?
yeah
yeah he had a Peugeot three O five
three O five in it?
quite biggish one big Peugeot 
oh would there be 
Peugeot nine?
yeah that's the one biggish car 
there be 
hatchback
yeah 
is that what is was?
yeah it, it looked a bit like that, but its Peugeot definitely
was it red?
no 
no it was grey, greyie black
no it weren't it was metallic green, dark metallic green
no way it weren't
it was
weren't
was
couldn't, when?
there only cheap to buy a car int they?
the other day when you went over to see what's it mother
it wasn't green
ninety nine pound down in it?
it wasn't green, it was grey
oh well I thought it was green but never mind 
no way was it green
well I mean it was still a Peugeot three O nine, its definitely Peugeot
Ken, Rita said it was a, its a Porshe
oh, well, yeah
and when 
well she might have thought it was a Porshe, but Peugeot Porshe
Ri Rita said Ken said it was a Porshe, but when I asked Ken he said he didn't say it was a Porshe, he says I wouldn't know a Porshe if I've seen one and I says yeah, that's what Dave said, ha, ha, ha, cos you said oh Ken don't know one car from another and, and that's what he said 
I had a very interesting talk in my French oral about
they have erm  
Prince car industry 
oh
yeah
he has marked it all out when it'll take him
is he there then?
no 
got it?, is that it?
no
well look in your other magazines
there's not gonna be in there 
why?
get the other magazines 
how you gonna know without seeing the thing that's stuck?
we've got more than 
we know what the 
there's loads of company's int there?
you've got the
I know what company it was
you've got the numbers written down here
you've got to correspond with the numbers ain't ya?
I mean if its any thing like a golf magazine, every week, every month 
the same 
the same company's I'll advertise 
advertise of course they do 
I mean in every golf magazine you get Eagle Golf, you get American Golf and you get Navada Bobs and that's it
Navada Bobs, what's Navada Bobs?
oh its a cute, little, little cowboy with a big hat on called Et Navada Bob
oh
an American company surprisingly
its flog tonight
look at this, please could you send me the following disc the Amiga five hundred, number, any num he writes number every time, one, two, three, four, five 
well at least he spoke of that
five
you'd think he would of listed 'em in a list wouldn't ya?
yeah, listen to this, this sounds a bit confusing, number two, five, four, Monopoly, Cluedo and others


others what?
yeah, but that's the name of the game, Monopoly, Cluedo and others 
oh right, oh go on, send disks to Mr, send disks to Mr Geoff , I'm getting worried, I've not heard from any of my polytechnic's
no, and you didn't write to your pen friend either
I've, this is more important mother, this is serious 
has every body heard by now?
full gallon, full tank
has every body heard though?
London and Newcastle and Portsmouth, well no, Portsmouth and Newcastle have
they'll do, they will do
don't want you to go to London particular
well I don't want to go to London particularly
well I
oh where's the blinking ad, advert
in the fog aren't they?
look at that
my god 
now if you're not telling me he went, he, you telling, telling me he didn't go too fast  thirty cars and six lorries 
give
give, it was zero weren't it?
no
I'll find it, no probs 
erm I did have another one, but I don't know where it is
but I had that ages ago in one of my
well I don't know
 

I'm sure I saw it over there because I was tidying up 
over where?
in that lot over there, underneath all that rubbish 
well look again Geoff  get every thing out and place it, that's it 
well if any thing its more likely to be at the top of the pile, not the bottom
sock, I've got a Batman sock here
oh great, any body want a bobby Batman sock?, phew dear his feet smell  I remember seeing it, I don't remember if it was yesterday, cos I remember seeing the games and all that, I didn't throw it away
do you know where you send in the thing to?
no
why don't you address the envelope?
er, cos there's no envelope
I thought you said you was gonna get one out the box and you couldn't bother to or something
well no cos mum was doing the ironing and how do I get it out if she's with the ironing?
ah well this is it love, there's load up here
yeah, but
legend, this looks like it to me
Martin they're not, they're games, they're games they're not  are there?
is there any sweets in there?
eh?
eh, this kid, this little baby look, savage by a ferret, listen 
hadn't eaten 
see his little face
poor thing, tell you what I wouldn't 
oh god, I'd of shot it, I can't stand ferret's I can't
I'd of seriously given that thing a good kicking 
do you want to sit over here mum?
well ferret's a wild animal 
what the hell 
int it?
wouldn't be over there Geoff
do you want to sit over here mum?
no
I might of put it up there and you put all these magazines on it
well have a look then, I don't know where it is  there's nothing down here
oh no
I think its legend
its not a legend I know that
no, its not a legend 
but its a different, its not like them is it?
G something in it?
yeah, its
 

you sure its not in the things at the side?, what at
he's got it all out
yes, but I've seen it
yes, but its not there if I've had it all out in it?, you took up to bed with him that's why you can't 
of course I ain't 
when , when did he take it to bed with him?
Saturday
oh god 
I've seen it since Saturday, I've seen it round here since Saturday 
turning me
Geoff
oh its quite there
its good
Elf looks quite okay 
see you look at the wrong type of thing, that's the type of thing you look at
it was half a page one weren't it?
like that?
that's not half a page, about that  see that one you did, you used to have one on your thing, on your er doodah
yeah
on your armpit 
look at that
What's that supposed to be?
what?
rubbish
no that's supposed to be the best
 

what?
 

well somebody must of thrown it out then, that's all I've got to say
well I haven't
well I haven't  coffee?
no
I dunno I might of thrown it out actually, when did I, was it on the table last night?
yeah, I've seen it in the last day or two
probably out there in it?
where?
in the bin
which bin?
I dunno, it, probably thrown in that bin
its not in there now
cos that went this morning
look, where's you read the magazine?
I don't know it, I've not had 
well is it down there?
I've not had that right in years, so
well in that case you don't, you're not gonna need that any way cos its not gonna be in it, is it?, you should of left it in the magazine Geoff.
I can't get it then can I?
oh dear, dear 
 

why you looking there?
looking for his magazine
oh  I don't know where this is  who's this El Vira woman he keeps seeing?
El Vera 
El Vera 
who's she?
tut
can't you read?
 El Vera 
 El Vera is with an E, that's I, El Vi
but you still say El Vera don't ya?
I say El Virus but, you don't say oh I've got a  Verus 
where's the magazine I cut out I know I didn't throw that away
oh is it in that corner?that's where I put all the stuff, Jack The Ripper
Jack The knickers, er Jack The Ripper
whipper
oh I see, you've got this haven't you Geoff final blow
mm, don't know how you do it though.
paper boy two
tut, but I'm of the old breed I suppose aren't I?
oh
er, blinking dog, cobwebs, urgh
aargh
this look's better
what?
that toffee's nice, give me another one of them 
got all teams in it mine's different cos I've got intimate football 
gold, gold , quite nice, mind ya fillings
next week
yeah, gotta go dentist next week  dentist next week men
yes, look, that's never, that's not him is it?
no its not 
look at his hair, his hair ain't that thin
 

no  no I'm sorry I don't think so .
Do you want waking up tomorrow morning or not?
I don't know 
no I wanna stay in bed all day 
yes, er yes you can do about eight, coffee pot on
seven 
no I said eight 
I won't be up at seven
I will  alright
he said eight
so
oh when ever it don't bother me
start banging around out there about ten past, you'll be up then 
perhaps he's telling you off
he's telling you to do your collar up, stupid boy, eh?
what a red barrel?
roll out the barrel   it, doesn't something happens to her?
yes she gets absolutely
chopped up 
killed to pickle  see its not is it mum?
no  oh dear
strapping it on him 
what she crying for?, what she going on the street for if she don't like it?, silly idiot
she's never done it before
well why she doing it?
she don't know she's not gonna like it 
huh, oh he's still married to Shakeara Bash in't he?
Shakeara Caine
yeah, but she was called Shakeara Bash, she was a Miss World finalist weren't she?, was she Miss World Shakeara Bash?, she was
somewhere, some hot country  that's good in it?
who him?he's teeth are terribly yellow
yeah they are aren't they?
he's are white 
are we to say that we didn't want it to be Prince
 
yes I think so , oh well class rugby 
get him at 
dunno why they've got Gary Schofield down there because I don't think with rugby league would it?
yeah this is rugby league rugby world cups 
oh its her that gets killed actually
she gets killed, I know it is, do you know why cos its
yes it is
what's that?
get's it as well 
Lysette Anthony 
what she been in Lysette Anthony?
I dunno 
Some Budweiser, nice one, get down this, comes back with two bottles says go and get another one, go get another, go on, once my dad starts going it's fucking wonderful, he don't stop buying it's great stuff.
That's my dad, not my step dad who's got like a wank of everything  .
What date's your mum and dad going away?
Don't know
You know Scott?
They ain't booked anything yet 
My, my cousin
she's a girl, she smokes cigars , that's a bit sad that is
yeah, very
my other cousin though she's got the biggest bats I've ever seen, massive titlets 
fucking enormous
is she nice?
 

she's also engaged to a
oh this is a hefty fucking Cleo Rocos on this, Cleo Laine or whatever her name is .
Are you shitting about that fr about that economics exam tomorrow Rich?
No not really
I wouldn't worry it's not that hard  well it's hard, but it ain't too hard.
That's a nice patch of fog weren't it?
. Look, I tell you what Rich, make it your New Year's Resolution to ask out Julie on Saturday, no worries
She's going out
so what 
she might not be
exactly
so it's not the point is it?
in which case Richard the laughing B H S man comes in handy
Sarah's going out with someone nice, Sarah
who's she going out with?
someone in the R A F
not Mike?
no, this guy called Bob,Sar Sarah and me and my usually self wanted to get back, make it serious but he wasn't interested
he's alright actually
why?
oh I just felt like it 
fucking hell, this is well bad.
because normally you get it out in the country before you get it
in the country, in the, the city, yeah
 

What you doing at the weekend Rich?
Dunno, working Saturday and on Sunday gonna play Ryan, that's about it.
Gonna caddy for him Scott?
Yeah 
When I caddy for Matt he made loads of putts, it's was well cool.
yeah  it's good if he caddies for me cos if he's playing by shot he goes, ee crap, bastard, so I think fuck you and er stiff my necks on to it
do 
and he'll still call you a crap bastard
yeah
did you find it stiff sticking to a millimetre, going you crap bastard why didn't you hold it.
hold it and go
 

Did you beat Ryan?
He's a fucker, I can't stick him  he's the most snobbish little cunt I've ever known  I'd like to see what stuff he had if he had to pay for it himself
hard luck, no I'd like to see what he'd do with his stuff if he had to pay with it, pay for it himself.
Cos he's well out of order, when you, were you there when he was
were you there when he was like slamming his nine iron into one of those brick posts, that's sad
he does rate his clubs though, cos he gets a new one
he's a twat 
oh you prick  I don't believe this
cunt
twenty mile an hour on the A forty seven  this is where you get a big, some big lorry come along and go and land up my fucking arse
the wave if the future
come on now, put your fucking boot down you old bastard
go past him and give him a fucking shot on the hooter  twat
well even the cars going the other way are going faster so what the fuck 
oh this guy's, got the foot down now, he's doing thirty five 
 

go on horn, you know you wanna
over twats like that, though, yes and I have got right of way
don't that put you off when drivers come the other way and you've got right of way and they always go, and they go past
no thank you
exactly
they presume it's their right and just go through, generally find it's someone with either a high powered car or a flash, you know, sort of, Granada or summat like that.
They think they fucking own the roads
 

I don't bother I
goes through 
 

Cor you're a long time coming back from the Rose and Crown, don't forget that's where we were
she'll know we haven't been there
d'ya reckon
 

Go at one of them, if they've got like
They've got no brothers and sisters
yeah I know, but the thing is if, they don't have to have brother and sisters at 
Er, everyone knows he's you like brothers even if they're black or white
the parents are just as bad anyway 
parent be
worse than the dog


yeah and nearly every one of them were football  
I mean that our dad was gonna come up, he says do you want me to come up, but there's nowt you can do though
I do know that
not against a gang like that though, no 
absolutely ridiculous
the thing is I reckon Geoff could take them all on one by one
oh I think he could
but I mean
oh I think he could
but three, but more than two it's that 
yeah got about ten, I mean wh what chance has he got?
precisely , still would be, get me the salt
the thing is it
tomatoes?
he can't hold his head up now can he? since he cried  
no cos you can't act hard when you're crying 
well exactly  and that headmaster said about the bully at their school, it, he thought that was really bad the fact he
well the thing is
thumped this girl back, he says and I told him he will not be able to stay at school for dinner
well I mean that's good because at least er, I mean city haven't done that have been 
what?
Gartree they think that a boy hitting a girl in the back is serious bullying, a boy hitting a girl in the back.
Do you have sugar?
Yeah, one please 
make me laugh they do
Are you supposed to be going with him on holiday?
Er I dunno what's happening yet it says in this book 
you better get a load of food 
it says in this book the other day
that's for
where's that, you said there was a book that come this morning that'll be alright for them
oh
it's called the cheapest guide to
it's called firm time holiday
Butlins
no
cheap, cheap Leicestershire holiday, huh
Club Cantabrica, city centre, Spain, France
 
three weeks in up, up old John
is it camping?
no it's camping, caravanning and mobile 
do you remember we went there
it rained
well they said Blanes 
if you go well you've gotta choice you can either have 
that's where we went and we saw those lads who'd be about our age, so funny, right one night 
gotta choice 
those lads next door
if you go by coach from Leicester
seventeen nights, seventeen days
I mean you'd be alright on the coach, er we went you were only
eight
eight, but you'll be alright on the coach
we went right and these lads were about our age and the next  get drunk every night, you know, talk normal sort of thing, and erm
they got in, came in our tent last year 
they came in our tent cos they all look the same
I lay there and I heard this zip go z-z-zip up, god someone's coming in tent, tried to get in bed with us.
Er, oh get lost
and I said  who's that?and he went oh god, shit we're in the wrong tent and they went out and you can hear 'em I mean being a tent they're laughing their head off for about half an hour
the others
he goes we really put the wind up that woman didn't we, ooh, ooh, ooh and they  
ee should have got a knife and went out the tent
it was, it was funny that and it rained terrible didn't it?
like when we went to , when we went to Newcastle
oh,
old  said I don't want any of the lads going in with the girls


so next morning Mr  
so he collapsed 
goes into Tina's tent
and Matt's in the middle, yeah
he goes morning girls, Matt goes morning


Tell you what once we went collapsed didn't it?, oh that was a killer weren't it?
I can't believe there's a pi , you know on that little display eating there's all pictures of erm
us running away from the tents when there about to collapse 
Mr  collapsed the tent right, and I'm just standing right behind it
pulling them fly sheets was good cos Maureen was yanking 'em right off really hard, how many pegs got broke? loads weren't there?
oh bags full
which one's was
any way
oh yeah she went down, she'd a
fell straight across her throat you know, and she got up coughing
is she the one
or what?
no
no
Ruth  much more arsier than er
dying to get the money, is she, did she used to work in the paper shop?
still does
oh, well I went in there reading the magazine before I bought it, so what, I'm only looking at them, she goes 
you got that wretched tape on again?, you got it on?
yes
say something mum
Ten C C
yes, so I mean the coach would be alright
it's a killer journey though
yeah, but you'll be alright
yeah, there ain't much difference if you er take the train is there?
it's a lot cheaper, what do ya mean no room?
no room to walk around on a train 
you've got a think of 
they keep they keep stopping
you've gotta think of the cost 
cost exactly, and it's so much cheaper than
by the time you've put the food on it, your booze or whatever else you want have your 
he says to me, he said tell your mum we're gonna have three weeks in France, we're gonna be drinking, going out and huh, picking up prostitutes, see what she says to that and if she says okay to that, we'll go anywhere
who said that?
Richard
here we are, when do you want to go?
anytime
I thought you, oh
anytime between June and July the ninth then
December the twenty fifth go then, then don't have to buy you presents 
we can go 
these not, there not
time though are they now?
no, but you wanna go early July if anything wouldn't ya?
are these your important exams or what?
yeah cos once you go out of July then you've got to pay a rate
well here you are
we'll go on holiday
if you go to Blanes hundred and seventy four pound for seventeen days , oh wait a minute, oh crikey it's based on three people sharing,for two see page forty eight 
yeah but if you go
then you'll put
By what
tenth of July 
You sure you want to go?
bloody hope so, finish in middle of June  German is the last one and he says they end erm middle of June
two people book a small mobile home on any high season depart from Saturday the tenth of July  oh that's after you, oh wait a minute,until twenty third of August and only pay the low season charge, save, save over thirty pound per 
it's a lot cheaper int it?
It is a lot cheaper especially in the
oh
was alright
I know, but there's so much
well that one the South of France has
wrong it's further
isn't further than  oh of course it is, it's
oh some of, France is alright, where's that then?
Saint Tropez
go down further
I prefer fra France to Spain
yeah
speak the linger
precisely 
it's much dearer than Spain, France 
what's that dear?
dearer than Spain
oh no 
looking at hotel
you don't by any chance want to borrow that four pound you just lent me do ya?, wow 
what did you want to do go in a central caravan or what?
dunno
whatever's the cheapest there
whatever's the cheapest, tents are cheapest
tents are cheapest, but are they totally rainproof
huh
you don't get much rain down there any way 
yeah I know 
won't rain 
we didn't, we didn't get very wet when we were
 

not when you've got
 

the only thing in a tent is  that, you've got somewhere to lock your money up, in it?, your passport and that, although when we went we just left our passports and money in the tent, but I wouldn't do that now
ten years ago we went
I know I wouldn't do it now 
it is, it's exactly ten years  although I reckon like, well, the thing is, these like late bookers like Richard was saying the other day, the flight ones, you dunno where your going
no, not necessarily, you do know er
it gives you the flight price in there, if you have
you do
if you go for one week it's sixty eight pounds 
when you do the late bookings, you know where you're going don't ya?
yeah, yeah 
but till you 
it's just that my mum and dad have been on ones where they don't know where they're going, Greece 
cos they book it all at the same time 
Greece they do this island hopping thing, and you don't know where you could be, it could be any of the Greek islands, but mostly, mostly you know where you're going  oh God
I'll get it, if it's Joan you're not coming for 
no, if it's Joan I'm, I'm not in
hello, hi Matt, alright  I did an absolute steamer, excellent, did it really well, it only took me an hour and ten minutes  it took me an hour and ten minutes  I haven't  no I knew, I knew vaguely, knew vaguely enough  I mean I have, perfect question came up  just describe er the youths portrayed in the er book and there was only two, there was the main character who I got most of the stuff from, from what Katie told me and the rest was the other bloke was called Carston Corsalius and basically all we knew about him was he fancied this other one, the main character, and erm was a journalist, that was it  ah put it in nine times, no, I, I don't know what it means  eh, er Matt didn't come in, er a bit of a shame   couldn't no  yeah,what did you really want? or was that it?yeah  yeah, fixed, flexible and managed  yes  fixed, flex, fixed, flexible and managed  oh right  yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, don't they and er advantages and disadvantages of indirect tax was, untax and direct was the other one, you know it indirect taxes  yes  yeah  I can't remember, I really can't remember, like a colour  yeah, you wanna know both of those, I'd, I, I couldn't remember all of demand pull, I put down the wage, price, wage spiral or the waged price spiral, that's a stinker that is, that's a beauty, I put that down, its' a beaut, that's my best diagram and I did three diagram' in four essays  I hate doing diagram'  yeah he's here now, we're about to go for a quick drink like, he says he's been revising all day so erm, and I shall, I shall brief him, just as you would expect, I shall tell him all he needs  I don't,I don't want to leave him in the lurch  okay see you in French  yeah, bye, bye, bye 
can't see any thing that says do, two of the same sex people can't go
well I'll have a sex change
no can't, just can't
well we know that cos those three lads went
er various they say 
I can't see 
well are you ready Richard?
yeah 
I'll bring it back with my or what, sometime soonish  alright?
that's good that is
yeah, it isn't bad is it that one?
where you going?
I don't know
what time you coming home?
oh coat , I don't know, I've got my key so don't worry about that
have I got to put the lamps on or not?
erm, mm, yeah, do it latish
how late you gonna be?
I dunno
well I need to know
need to know, need to know, I don't know mum, I couldn't tell you  just erm  stick it on before you go to bed  just give it a bit of time to take the chill of it, alright, bye  You can if you wish discard everything that's just been said  I mean my mother's trying to book my holiday which doesn't surprise me,, but then again she usually tries to anyway, where you going?, what you doing?, who you going with?right, I shall tell you now the exam questions  shall I?, what do you want to know?
yes, all sorts of 'em
exchange rate, like the systems, do you know the fixed, flexible and managed, the disadvantage and advantages?,
Rich
no
well that's a question
I understand money supplies
yes, that's the money supply and measures, the measures of money supply  I'm sure you'll be okay  you should beat what I got anyway, cos I saw it sort of cold  I could see you were put into shits of boredom, they go totally over the top most of the time my parents
I can't pass judgment at the moment cos I dunno what it's like
no I know
might do me good  I mean I don't care I just wanna go away
so do I, my
I've got me darts in me back pocket any way
have ya?
fucking steamer darts they really are  have you a professional set of these?
er, no
no, they're quite good aren't they?so what you been, what have you revised then?
erm
have you done inflation 
er, er period of er 
er that's a fucker, there's nothing on that
shit, could've sworn there must be
well there's not
what's the thing, anything on competition or
 
no, no nothing  inflation, have you done inflation?
erm  monetarism
oh yes, yes, yes  all you really need to know what the question is in inflation is how the  why it's regarded as the biggest economic  problem  and secondly
what is? inflation 
inflation is the biggest economic problem and what problem it causes  and it says discuss the fact that erm with inflation now being around four to five per cent it is now a, it is now being cured, discuss that sort of thing, you say yes it has, but at the moment we're still suffering the effects because we are in, we've got high interest rates, we, and in order for us to have really beaten it, we could have low interest rates and low employment and low inflation, but we're still in the middle of it
what, we mainly find the recession and we do not have 
yes, now don't say don't, yeah that's right just don't forget that we are, actually still going up and it means that we're, erm, but we're out of it, but we're coming out slowly, we're technically out, if you put technically you'll get a pass
here you are Scott  my mother just killed his ear, ear lobes about going on holiday, mother works
come on then we've been waiting for you to come, come on
 

 

oh lovely  I should  one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, no you're wrong 
why?
Des bolt
not bad, not bad, not bad
about fifteen it is let's have a look then 
 
we're go somewhere with a darts board
why not?
very decent ones
these are really tacky, ah
These are tungstens 
ah tungstens, bye, bye, drill 
you can trust me with 'em, not them, I'll have them, they won't
we'll have these naff efforts
come and get 'em then
oh I can't I've got me trainers on
take 'em off then
no you bring 'em down here please
whose, whose car do you want us to take?
ow that'll great 
what else is there, the best of?
ooh, ooh no
oh
oh we was in a competition
I was fucking shocked, I can't remember what they are
I'm going, I'll have to
oh bye, oh
erm what else was there that was on there?, there's a couple you'd like actually
I know
the lesson
showing their form
there's people like that
oh well they're in Corfu you see, that's the, that's the
the, but, I reckon  can I remember what 
Sarah the darts player
Have they got the ice cold, nice cold on her, as he was saying?
Well mine's got Who Dares Wins on 'em
Didn't you get those
those ones dad bought
that, that bloke with the stupid name and I E D too goody master father 
No I paid nearly twenty quid for them
did you 
why?
used to play darts?
yeah
really
you used to play darts?
used to play at youth club and
 
so why come when we went to town that time you could hardly hit the board
well having said that
you
 
I think Rachael gave me something towards them, but
bloody hell Rac I tell you what I saw Rachael today and she was looking right fat and all, it, it's just
and it's just what you'd expect
I can't believe you've got darts
we had, we had one of them Bristol dart boards, but fucking twat at home threw 
flight 
it out
I like the flight Who Dares Wins
are they?
these are black and silver you see
are you going up the road to town then?
Er I don't know
well you can't go drive
in my car
why?
why?, cos there's not enough petrol
okay, we'll go up to the Rose and
well it's not worth going down the road to come back up to that pub
raisin very good raison
yes ma ma 
he just slap me round the face
I can see the hand print
He's a very dangerous young man
oh you're so horrible you know, you know you love him really, my  oh you're so horrible you, you really are  the tickle maestro strikes again with his 
I don't believe this she's got a dog
it's good in it?
fucking the jockey Sarah
cocky jockey hawks hockey
so where we going then?
comfy
not like Sarah is it?
well you usually do, so I'm wondering if you're going for the, you know, your, the usual performance 
 
were, were you impressed by Rich, were you impressed with Sarah's, sorry with Lorraine's immaculate humour?, but I'm sure you're more impressed with her immaculate assets
immaculately, immaculately sized
her perfectly proportioned upper parts  she says oh no, I says what, she says broken nail 


you know what I've just got, erm, if I go this way, cos I bet you Sarah's up at erm fucking window looking for the car going by
how will she know it?, will she see it?
she, she knows this car when it goes by
your joking me
okay
 

I'll have a cigarette for later if you don't, if your handing them out at this point 
yeah, just like erm, say a Friday or Saturday night when I take the car to go home, Sarah's worked it out that by the time she walks upstairs and into her bedroom, she normally sees me going down Upping Road, but she doesn't see me, next days it's oh where did you go? or what happened?,
I didn't see you, er all I'm doing is like stopping at the end of the drive to light a fag up or something, she's 
so where we going then?
That's so ridiculous
South Croxton's got one ain't it?
yeah about a
oh yeah, yeah
Crowston more like it
sorry Crowston  may I have a cigarette to put, place behind my left earhole then?, thank you 
no
 

consider the behaviour is on it
that's sort of the same thing innit?
that's more to do with utilities
yeah.
I feel a lot better though about my exams since I've started revising
do ya?,
I feel better after I've done the exam
yeah, I've done, all I've got left now is a couple of French 
You know when I used to have a tutor Fred 
yeah
he gave me this erm sheet in four years for the essay questions
yeah
and on section A every year they've had one on competition, so I thought I'd prepare for that, every year had one on erm money supply and every year had one on
 
I suppose there is one although I suppose there is one, but it's linked with privatization the competition one
yeah
cos it says  erm  says that, privatizing, the Government's nat policy of privatization, now what does it says, shit I can't remember what, it's something to do with resource allocation and efficiency
yeah, I did that today  what that is is you know
erm, certain, certain industries with erm, with a high or is it a low, a low income of elasticity of demand
yeah
they erm, when the know income's gonna increase they change its resource to allocation
I tell ya I got an offer today from London City Poly?
you actually got an offer?
yeah C D D
oh that's alright in it?
not bad
get a C in Economics
C Economics, C French, D German I'll do me
what's your worst German?
yeah definitely, although that essay I did today I think is really good, it's probably the best one I've ever written  the grammar's good, I don't know whether, I don't think the content's particularly thrilling, but the grammar's good
yeah
which is the reason, which is the thing I, usually nails me  nice car 
you're always having a fag when I pull into a petrol station
oh, well
especially when the blimming tank is there
the what?
especially when there's a petrol tanker there, that's really fucking helpful 
I'm nearly
everybody else I know who's applied to London City's had rejections, so I can't, can't be doing something badly
yeah
especially if I were to actually get, if I get that I'd consider going if I could get a place in the halls, the residence
is that polytech then?
yeah, you get a subsidized grant for going to London, yeah, so you get like more than normal
you should get a big grant shouldn't you, cos erm
I dunno, my step, my dad's earning quite a lot though 
he was at a party your dad?
yes
yeah, but I should still get
you don't see any of those look, it's not relative on this
well I don't know how they work it, but I shouldn't get a bad one, it should be okay, I mean my dad's gonna give me money anyway, so, I mean if I, London City so Phil  was saying one of the best in the country he says that, so hopefully if they, they give me an offer, the others should as well 
is that your first like reply?
yeah
you've had nothing else
no
how many did you apply to?
four
four universities
no poly
all poly?
yeah 
why's that, you need the lower grades
yeah, basically, I mean you could go to poly with what you could get, yeah 
better had 
 

if I were to get C C D or C C E or C D D I'd be fucking over the moon, fourteen points I'd be well happy with
yeah
 

is that four, four, six, yeah 
yes, that's right, yes  or six, six, two, I don't really care, as long as I get fourteen it doesn't really bother me
six, six, two
yeah
B B D 
that , no C C D
no you haven't got it 
Will she know you're coming, see you coming back?
No, she won't be looking 
what, what she gonna do work?
She's done, she was gonna be working with , but she's done most of it now  it's better than some
 

that  is out at the minute
yeah, with his girlfriend
who's he going out with?
that girl he got off with
is he?
the one who I had a good old snog with
I had a Christmas kiss off er an all
what a snog?
I  she was throwing it around Christmas Eve though weren't she?
old slapper
How did you get on in the multi choice the other day?
I answered every thing and I seem, I think I got quite a few right, I mean I do , I, if I got fifty percent on that I'd be very pleased.
 

I definitely, I don't really think I got more than I did in the end of year, last year one, I think I got forty percent in that
yeah
and I think I beat that
yeah, that's alright then
 

shit  bollocks, bollocks
 

bollocks 
Is that what's it's house there?
yeah  there in America at the moment
are they?
America
what with Catherine? sorry, with Melissa?
no she's in Egypt
she's come back apparently Matt was saying
yeah
she rang him
slag
why?
what's the point of ringing him?
dunno, he's seeing her though
he's what?
he's, I think he's seeing her though
is he?
I think so, tomorrow night
 

I think something's coming out the back of that 
I dunno 
fucking twat  what a fucking dickhead, I mean can't they see what's right ahead?
no 
 

pissed off with him 
oh here we go another twat 
he's going is he?
a car behind me, the car behind that just pulled out on to the wrong side of the road, sat there looking and decided not to and pulled back
pull in the lay-by and let them go by that's what they're supposed to do 
 

shit  oh no, oh yeah fucking start  now, why don't you, you cunt 
cunt  quick  get in, thank you 
yes baby, yes baby 
Maddock came, Maddock weren't here for this morning's fucking Economics lesson, exam.
Not at all?
No, came this afternoon though
what did he say?
said he was ill, he looked ill though
did he?
yeah he looked a bit bad  but if you're off for one you might as well be off for two ain't ya?
 

s'pose you're right 
what was up with him anyway?
eh?
what was up with him?
I dunno he just said he felt terrible.
He always looks like shit doesn't he?
He does, cos he never shaves 
yeah  he's alright, he's harmless 
 

why after seeing those papers?,
I hardly got a look at it
although having said that I'll know that if I do well its mine, its in my own, own work, which I think is probably better because when it comes to it you don't get any help on the day do ya?
cheat and that, I mean can't 
exactly like Maddock
well he's dead brainy any way in't he?
no, he was last year cos he'd done the year before but this year he's finding it much harder.