

Don't mind five grand coming your way.
I think  old man  that's got a  .
.
conversation.
Tape a matter of conversation, anything that's .
Are they gonna allow you to walk around with this as well.
I'm not gonna worry about setting it up, it's recording now.
.
Well you're on candid tape.
You recording now?
Yes.
Oh no  are you getting money doing this?
Twenty five quid.
By the hour or week or .
.
I wanna record a bit of conversation people have between er their, their doing .
Watch what you're saying chaps because were being .
Er it's an invasion of our personal privacy.
Fucking right it is.
But.
You know it's not, no it's erm  for the Longman's Dictionary or something.
Dictionary combined .
Say thirty, to find out how people talk, but a lot 
Quack, quack, quack, quack.
.
One of my  fucking answer .
They didn't ask for it up on .
.
They sit and .
How good is it picking up .
.
I mean how good's it gonna be picking up, is it gonna get all these background noises in?
Yeah,.
Where's the old microphone then?
There.
You cunt.
  

Yeah, but the thing is, what it's, what it's doing is that, they want you to have a normal conversation on .
So you gonna say suck my cock..
Hey, Chelsea.
.
find the .
Chelsea, Chelsea.
What's .
.
I'd wipe all that lot if I was you.
No, it'll be alright .
coming up .
Oh yeah.
Who's gonna  obviously.
Who?.
Rumbold's is a shit hole.
.
.
Coming down the old .
say what, you sound fucking awful when you record yourself I  .
Yeah, you know what they say about,used by  .
fucking ever work?..
All that time 
Just speak normally, speak every day like you do.
Fuck off round .
When you stuff the old boy then?.
Sounds as if it's been  managed.
You're not doing a very good job .
Huh, come, come   cos it's fucking early in the morning.
But normally when
What till you get our  it .
.
, people start doing  show off ..
Look, stop it, but don't tell them next time.
Just .
Shouldn't of done, but .
Are you allowed?
without telling .
Oh, but you are, but you must tell them afterwards .
Afterwards , yeah.
In which case if they're not too happy with it you can turn it off,rewi er wipe it off.
I'm not  turn it off and re-wind the fucking thing.
You don't have to shout or anything.
What's the fucking .
recorder .
What's .
let me  .
He know's, he know's, just  it's twenty five  .
Who's  .
Wouldn't mind doing it, just  quite interesting
  

.
No, I got twenty tapes.
Yeah I've just read the literature, I glanced at it.
You what.
Twenty fucking tapes.
Shut up.
Why, why do people get like this, tape recorder or film recorder or
They're standing there going .
I've  normal so far, shut up you lot.
fucking .
It's an impossibility Stu don't give us that.
Maybe  is  you know .
We're gonna make you  a star R R R 
er write down the .
You  stuff like that
you go down the  .
Ah .
So  .
conversation .
Do you have to write down all those like, place,, date.
Yeah I've gotta, I've gotta write name, erm just your first name nothing, nothing else.
Mm.
So you're still fucking ..
Quite  really.
How did ya get into it?
Out of order.
Ah?
How did, how did you see that.
She come round to me, there's  twenty five to thirty  cross section  use, and we made a  down the road .
so we said yeah.
I mean they're all, they're all this  walkman , not , but,.
It's worth you doing it.
Yeah, I trust, yeah.
Lucky.
really.
one.
I didn't know you could get stuff recorded like that, is it like specially adaptable, or is that normal walkman?
That's a normal walkman it's got erm .
I didn't even know you could record something.
yes, that's, that's the only thing that's different about it, it's got record button on there, ever had a walkman?
walkman ah?
No, sure don't, wish I did.
They long play tapes or something?
They're full
ninety minutes tape's.
Seem like.
Geht es dir?
Wohin kommen sie?
.
What was you .
.
.
Good  morgen, guten tag, dankeshon 
Got ten pence Stewy?
Er, no I pay for it, no go on give me that and I'll pay the ten P  yeah you pay for me,.
Oh, you're a show off.
Yeah.
.
Have we stopped?
No, no it's on .
You would of thought a microphone and a camera would .
It's amazing  


microphone up here.
Number nineteen .
Everyone's  about two inches from it in .
.
They do some of the finest dictionary's and it's real read English.
Yeah, oh.
What's wrong with it now, go and .
Well they wanted to know who this old boy is.
Are you gonna have to write down all, all everybody in this section sort of thing?
Yeah the thing is I've gotta write them down in the order in which they appear.
Ah?
So you have to listen to this?
Yeah.
Oh my good God.
Probably.
Ah, are you serious about this?
Oh ah,.
Just the first names, it's not .
.
Oh it is, it is, they just take your, your first name.
.
make sure ..
beep, beep, hooray.
Dildo.
.
.
 

What they
Oh dear oh dear oh dear.
what they want is a regional dialect as well.
you .
.
Yeah were gonna, were gonna mess them up ain't we, old boy and wimp and stuff.
Yeah, you let that .
.
That's what I said  she said she want's all  everything you say, all conversations .
.
Is she nice?
I  but, not, ah .
Oh I ain't doing nothing.
Ah,, you ain't saying nothing then.
Oh, oh,.
Erm, who's for a cup of tea?
.
 

I'll go and put the kettle on.
Ta.
When you've done that first one you'll have to let us have a listen, I've never heard myself on the tape before.
You don't want too.
Sounds .
.
.
Yeah.
Oh what about, what happens if we start banging hammers and stuff?
I was gonna have .
Alright  this morning.
, the point is  
I mean the thing is were  some good conversation.
What the fucking hell does  
Oh I  I .
short sticky tape you never know, the old ..
Not on a Friday, oh it's really not fair.
God sake.
It's  
.
.
Hello Mick how's it going mate?
Lovely, wouldn't mind fucking going with her for a night I tell ya.
Yeah.
.
She's wearing sort of an old fashion corset thought in it?
Well, who give's a fuck what she's wearing, long's get it off at the end of the day.
Oh, what you say?
, shag, shagging.
.
.
He send's me a paper the  old boy
.
Shag, tramp.
he's lucky, definitely come to bed  with that .
Why can't you read  involve in the English language I do not know.


Ok, steady on,
Be a good one on that they will
Fucking right, it shit.
start, start, annoying Cheryl, fuck off and leave me alone Trev .
Who's fucking down there then?
Who parked the old car?
Yeah, I get you fucking whipped.
I know I would, get in there  
I want .
You would?
.
might be embarrassed just put sports in the intellectual paper now, sports in intellectual paper now.
word over five letters long the other day
Who?
, you know.
Oh yeah.
Yeah, wanker.
Taken up your language .
I've no  down London every time I've been down there, and haven't seen any trouble.
I've never seen any trouble down London, not first hand like, no, never.
Well, I, I go down there like eight, nine times a year.
I get about as pissed as a bloke can .
you could go to an area for the rest of your life and still not see any fighting.
Yeah, that's right, I mean, it is in it?
Oh I go to Soho and China Town and that and I've never seen any trouble, the only time I actually saw a  .
I used to go  because hopefully one of the hardest town in
Yeah.
Derby, but I mean one of the  any aggro, the stall  any hassle is in Covent Garden, which is a tourist place that was between two .
.
In a pub cos couldn't handle the old English beer and all that, and they start an argument between themselves.
Tell you wha whe where is a rough place just recently is er Farnborough.
Is it?
Farnborough.
It's always been rough place
Did it?.
Been there for a start so it must be a rough place .
The amount of times people have been thrown from the top of your window at night sort of thing.
been wrapped round people's head at tumble down  and stuff.
a rough place as well..
That's why were  .
Like the, the place that's really , really
It's the video they get in it, it's the American influence in it?.
No it ain't.
It is, it's within our self in it?
I don't believe that shit about you watch a video then all of a sudden you're a Rambo.
Yeah, but your mind's on  yeah, and what do they do, yeah and then they re-enact it outside.
No, it's a load of shit, they can't, I can't believe you've got to have the mentality of a five year old and you fucking  if you, if you believe it  
Well that's right  .
Yeah but not everybody
But  wants you out Trev, he might burst a .
I .
Yeah, it's true, you take bits of The Sweeney, yeah, they done an episode of where there's bank raid and what they don't want they use mask, masking tape right  like that and end up .
Got to try and come up with the rest of them  that's how they done it , a couple of days after somebody re-enact that  again.
Yeah, but the thing is right, they, that's because they're criminally insane any way, it may have given them an idea but it doesn't mean that that women or whoever it might not of died any way.
I don't see why, why the, the many should suffer because of the few idiots.
Trouble is they lie  .
you lie  .
Yeah, but even so, the  well it, you're  I wouldn't see a film .
Do you think , you see you've got to get another bloke  and bloody great, he'll do the same thing.
Well, we can't the only way  stop it all together and that ain't gonna .
Do  .
When we .
Yeah.
Well I mean I've known this bloke, if somebody's gonna do something like that whether they see it on a film or not, I  still go out and do it, they make it  .
look, look  .
I've  .
Once upon a time there .
Oh yeah, but some people, you can't, you can't not  for everybody do it .
No, no, no, oh no, not .
you've got all this  America's, the  America's,, not a lot .
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah, I agree with that, I, were are afterwards, were are  body .
Yeah  way of life .
I mean I think to a, I think to a degree we always have been  fifty sort of thing when the rock 'n' roll started to come over  then again you see for we, we look  little one .
Little one 
.
You know, the only way, the only way you can stop them is to  .
All I know is that any, any sight , any sight person who watches television doesn't forcibly go out and re-enact it.
I, I .
Well, I don't think so.
I was gonna say, if, if, if he, if he's not reasonably sane then he might be, he's gonna do, go out and do something like that any way
Yeah.
he makes a plan a diff a different way sort of thing .
The, the idea have been planted there any way.
Yeah  all the film bloke's have  way of doing it, which he, he probably would of found out any way.
It's not hard to kill or damage any one    it'll be a long old day today I reckon , dragging already .
I'm might say, what I'm, I'm not saying that film  but in some, in some cases he don't, you know, there has always been  he don't in this  a lot of people.
Yeah .
Yeah I'll go along with that.
Yeah I would.
Yeah I'll go along with that.
.
Hear, hear.
I don't know what were going along with so I ain't gotta say.
Hear, hear.
What are we going along with?
Dunno.
Sometimes a small minority of people can be influenced by what they see via the films or something.
Yeah, I'll go along with that.
I'll go along with that old boy.
Yeah, just .
.
I still don't think  do about it.
Shut up we played the , you think about all them mother's .
Oh  or something.
Big  of them there.
.
Yeah, who was, who was there , who was there there though.
.
Who was there there though.
They reached thirteen nine, cos they'd two and a half times amount of play.
Who was there .
Either that or there, all had there boots .
Charlie loves the  didn't he?
Oh god, I think  fucking Charlie .
I rang about half six .
.
Making a funny .
Fucking weren't,..
They might be .
It goes .
.
Wasting my time .
after .
No, it's not.
.
.
what other game  I'll be the one laughing .
Morning Chris.
What you doing, gonna do, go one and one after work are ya?
, I'm only winding him up.
Look boy, you've never played in an eleven side match before,.
Yeah, look's like .
They've got to stop every five minutes for a .
Thank you very much, they're well stitched.
It's not a stitch up.
Trying to find  .
What I mean to say it's not very,it could be appreciated if they  about it, but we just er left  to do it and then tell him afterwards the bits.
Really?
if you draw that much  to it, you'll be entitled to wipe your bit off, not got to worry about it.
You don't have to tell his why doing it, but he has to tell you afterwards.
If somebody, he tapes somebody and they draw exception to it, say right, tell them I don't want to be taped.
If, you wanna be taped or what.
No, it's entirely anonymous all they're trying to do is find out how people speak.
What about  fuck off , that's it  want, every day a modern day plan .
That's what they want , as they're doing a dictionary.
No  find it keeps .
.
.
Oh, we just  we just had a fairly intelligent conversation I thought.
Er, thank you very much.
None of us is blooming Einstein.
Tell you what Mark, that must be a hell of a job trying to collate all this information you know, must be a hell of a job trying to collate all this information they're gonna have to get, I mean how many people are they gonna get to do this?
.
It's gotta be a lot of people to get a rough guide in it?
Well what they're doing is that .
Check this out old boy.
Right guys, I'm gonna need a hand on this one anybody?
Need a hand.
.
Barry might .
What's this, what's this.
Might need a hand,.
.
Might need a hand.
Oh .
.
What erm, what seems to be erm
Just to do that.
Oh this is the erm 
Are we erm, happy with us?
Yes.
Jolly good, pretty good all round.
Oh, that's  too much.
Were all .
All that as well.
There's a  well there you go, ban from the sink kitchen.
.
Yeah, there's no answer to that .
.
He needs .
Sounds like a good name for a pop group don't it?
.
Quiet on this section at the moment in it?
You keep  
must be the quietest time of day for us.
Yeah.
That and dinner.
I'll turn it off dinner time, don't want to hear the sound of Chris's snoring.
What time is it?
Quarter too.
.
Oh right, we can go out.
Oh fucking hell,.
 

I know some guy still takes snuff every now and again.
What's it made off this snuff?
Clears the nose don't it?
That's right, makes you sneeze don't it?
What .
Goes  get's a little shop in , it's an old form of .
What?
be able to make some 
.
yet?
I've always got a .
watching.
I hate that stuff.
.
Like from sex shops and stuff like that, that is.
Bit that old bag in it?
That ain't like the bag  oh thought that she meant the  come out of.
Oh .
Does dunnit .
Bob and Tony  go to the club this afternoon put her  down, if I'm any where near that I'd fucking stop  and all sorts.
Yeah, a bit late 
What?
Do you have to listen to every single one of those tapes?
No, I'm not suppose to, really.
I think I will,list of all the names and that.
Yeah.
Well actually I  .
True .
But I, I obviously try to.
Yeah, same here.
But 
Yeah, you don't try and find a .
you tape don't show that .
Yeah, give me a .
Yeah.
Yeah and me.
Yeah and me.
Can you  tapes out for you.
Handy having one of them round your when you go in the office .
Yeah.
What's that?
Need a  then would ya?
Yeah.
Yeah and I hear the .
.
Who do you know .
Ooh ah,.
Ooh are, ooh are, ooh are, ooh are Rolling Stones first album.
What?
.
Oh  before my time old boy.
Works at Rumbold's as well didn't he?
.
What do you think of that?
What do you think of them then?not it ain't.
Better,shipping.
down to me.
Do you know I fucking do .
I only put .
My god, there's tins out there stew.
Yeah, so.
Why the fuck are you using them?
Barry wanted me to use it up alright nosey.
Fair enough.
.
Don't see what the aggravation is over here.
It's all your fault Barry use this up.
.
oh my life.
We told  to do that for ya.
Yeah, see, better not do .
.
And .
Ah, well he's gone off sick.
Just cos I'm fit you see.
You see, she's got no .
No, he's just gone on.
I don't know whether he's gone on  or something because it's .
They've already done that already.
What?
A  by the side of it, are .
.
I had it, had it recording last night  .
whole lot about six hundred quid ..
And er the cats started playing with the microphone  pushing it about,, you can actually hear the cat playing.
.
bath .
Never  called greatest cat, really is, I mean , come towards ya, grab you and bite you and then if I throw him away about five minutes later he'll come up and bite you again you know, really fucking, don't just  like, just keeps on doing it.
My sister's got two Alsatian's, all they do on the .
my cat.
Gravy.
Yeah.
This little ginger one of ours, he's, he's a terrier, me uncle looked after a Staff a Staff Bull Terrier and er his name's Winston  and he immediately walked through there as if he owns it, you know, the way they do.
And he scoffed all ginger's grub
Mm.
to the bathroom, you know, expecting a big welcome and there's ginger lying there, he's only about ooh of five inches long and he's only about, weighs less than a , immediately he's backs arched and he's hissing away there, his tail came up like  you know
Yeah.
and er he stood there and old Winston's trying to sniff him,giving it all the hissing, eventually  has gone ?like this and .
Dog sort of stood there and  looked at  you know, he didn't know where to put himself, let him, eventually he, he's sort of, you can see it on his face  did that, fucking thing keep away from me .
Stopped on .
.
Say don't let it me near,I don't want anything to do with it.
Oh he's an engineer and he don't fucking know nothing.
Who else .
I'm a ..
Doesn't really matter does it?
.
Oh, oh fuck off Mark..
What he drink .
Who?
Him,.
Oh, oh  
You're getting far too cheeky .
Getting .
Oh fucking stand for that.
What, what for?
.
.
You're lucky that if that'll be any harder I would fucking  his fucking neck off for him.
Try it sometime.
Yes, let's go now, lunch time yeah.
Yeah.
Alright then.
Let's go fucking now.
Alright .
It's alright, still legible.
You done a boogie.
What happen was we was standing this jeweller's, well really we'd been there, she  half the stuff for me and er other people and that, but erm, were standing there for ages, and she come, I'm, I'm sort of standing there like this up against the counter waiting to be served, suppose to be coming back right, stood right on the  foot, it hurt, but I thought ok it's a busy shop he won't  so I'd turned around, sort of he was there, so I sort of went to him like that  and he was  looked at me and fucking looked back, so I said are you gonna apologise then, getting right fucking pissed off cos I  about three o'clock that day, hang over and being dragged up and down the town all fucking day ain't my idea of fun you know,ri right in a bad mood anyway, and he said no in a real fucking why don't you try and make me  sort of attitude, so I'm just about to fucking say something to me, like, how  out the shop and everything, and she said what's the fuck, what's the matter with you then?
I said well that cunt stood on my foot, she said so,move out  I said what about good manners then.
.
Would of been right, you know would have been a nightmare,expected to  all over the place.
But if somebody said to me  shop, alright you don't flare up  face you flare up with them for not fucking apologising.
Yeah, I suppose.
Me sort of, I said you gonna apologise then?
He sort of said, sort of went  no, so I went don't fucking apologise me you shit and all this sort of stuff right .
So I  I  fucking get it right, say something, I was right pissed off by this time, next, I, I, I stood out and step forward fucking get closer sort of thing and say something and that was it,.
.
Makes me look a right cunt dragging me out of the shop let alone.
, oh I hate shopping, I had a massive hang over, right piss up the night before,Sunday.
Ah?
Sunday, I, I was up  ladder cutting the trees down 
Yeah.
Oh, right, we  row, we lucky we've got a row of trees all the way  along the back fence like, and in the summer when all the foliage  makes quite a nice barrier for the noise and sound and stuff, but what were trying to do is to stop them from, were trying to make them spread out
Yeah.
the right way to do that is crop them, don't ya?
Yeah.
So there's me and a mate up a ladder with chain saws and that nearly all day yesterday, good fun actually.
Give me a fucking chain saw in me hand I'm well away , love it.
They're not, they're not big trees or nothing so I mean there was, it was only a, like one of these small  power chain saws,one hand sort of thing, grab hold of it like that, there was nothing, no really big branches, were only cutting the tops off.
We, we did trim them a bit around the sides, they were quite big, you know,.
What are they  trees or something?.
Erm, I don't know really, Oak, Sycamore a mixture.
trees.
.got a couple of Oak tree's, there in the corner you've got, cos our fence you've got that, my house is there right,road down like that and you've got a fencing, it goes like that and with got trees all around it.
Yeah.
And they're and they're, we've got Oak, big Oak trees that have started to get quite big now as they will and the rest is all a mixture of Horse, Horse Chestnut and Sycamore and couple of other like things in there.
A couple of times we had  big branch and stuff .
You know good fun, love, love having a hand and chain saw.
We, we hired one of these little ones, we did get a bigger for the , only cost us fifteen quid to hire three chain saws for the day.
Where was that?
That was the, erm, the tool hire shop in, in North Camp.
Yeah.
it's alright.
You pay for your own petrol and stuff.
Oh yeah, yeah .
Yes, it's wicked, wicked man.
Might go .
Yeah, yeah.
Not got a hang over or nothing.
No.
Still .
I've been as fucking sober as a Judge since Friday night.
Put me off I think.
Yeah, I only go out drinking now once a week so I think I make the most of it, can't remember anything I did Friday night again.
typical night out.
No I don't know whether it's true or not I don't know whether they're fucking  trouble is it sounds like the sort of thing I do, is we parked in the multi storey car park in Guildon .
.
Parked in the multi storey car park in Guildon and were walking along and like there's all this, you go down to the ground floor and then you've got the first and second  and er  you can get to the first floor where it's like the first floor  the first floor is just above sort of street level
Yeah.
but, with, with this walk down into this, this dip so I had to get underneath and I said where'd you park? and he said the second floor taking the piss, so apparently three of his other mates who were well dressed up as well, and he, he said race ya, so I started off fucking, so he, he started off running through the thing right, cos  said race yeah, he went, apparently I just climbed up the outside of the building   climbed up two fucking flights of floors, you know, I can't remember anything about it though.
You see I can't remember if they're if they're pulling my plonker or not, but that is the sort of thing I do, but I can't remember anything about it.
The only trouble is I did have quite, well it's easy though that's the thing  it's just like a, it's just a multi storey car park, so it's quite easy, and you, you know you can get strong when you're pissed don't you, like
What  fucking  .
Well either you have to think it's wrong.
yeah but I mean, I  it, I  when I'm fucking pissed, I can't  sober, that's why I probably think they're, they're not pulling a plonker cos I've done that sort of thing in the past  had me fucking climbing on bikes, swinging off the side of the building .
Oh I.
See I never know whether they're pulling, pulling a plonker or not you know, that's the real , like I said I can't remember doing it, but, I wouldn't put it pass myself and I fucking get stupid, I don't get aggressive or anything I just get stupid, you know, I do shit like that.
I've nicked bus stop signs, fucking road signs and stuff, I just get stupid, that's if I get that pissed, I mean I probably talking of, talking of fucking all most not knowing you're right name sort of pissed.
.
That's the thing,apparent apparently I couldn't even walk straight, and yet there's me fucking climbing up the outside of a building, which to me sounds about right.
God knows how I didn't kill myself and the sheer of the whole thing was, it wasn't even on the second floor, it was on the ground floor, they were just pulling a .
Cos I count.
I, I use to go up the .
But norm nine times out of ten you went the inside of it.
Oh yeah, just sat there in the outside, down a .
Well I, see, if, my memory
Fucking people use to come out and fucking say to me, fucking wanker up there, I wonder if he's gonna jump,the old bill .
Well, my, my memory right, you go down into, into like a, the ground floor and the top of the, like the bottom of the next floor is about that sort of height, but there is a wall up there sort of thing, which erm, I, I must, which you could probably get on.
So what they says is that I, I got on at this wall, jumped across onto this other wall, shinned up the outside of this other wall, stood on top of this the first floor wall and jumped up and caught hold of the top of the second floor wall and he reckon in the la about fucking twenty odd seconds, I was up and over and in, they, they, they  fucking kill yourself, get down, I can't remember none of it.
The on the only thing I can remember is running after the car.
Why they all just piled in did they?
Well I don't know.
to fuck off?
Yeah, probably, me and this other mate he'd a, did a, I can, I can remember him saying something about I'll race yeah, it, like I remember just remember him, me and him run running down ramps and stuff trying to get back down to the ground floor, so   .
Actually sometimes I'm pretty glad I don't remember things like that.
You can see why I was in such a bad mood Saturday cos if I'd drunk that much Friday night you can imagine what sort of a hang over I had.
I mean we got up about nine o'clock as well.
but er I'd meet up in town and  our house like twenty past nine, half past , get, get, get the bit of shopping done before the fucking  crowds I might off wasted me time, we got in there about ten o'clock,right old day.
Yeah.
By fucking half past ten it's, it's well busy, it's so packed.
Barry's not there.
I bet you hate it when the glue goes hard .
Yeah.
That's the only thing with bonding .
When you're fucking pissed out does compare to lot of them  taking sister up to er Black  you know.
Yeah, I could do with some .
The thing is the  said to me  she said, oh  were going out in style and have a drink, had a really nice sandwich there like, it was french loaf about that bit, get nice home cooked  lot's of cheese and onion right, really nice .
Fucking dangling .
Yeah, I just go and get this and I'll go and pop down to .
eat sort of thing.
We eventually got in there about coming up to half past two
Yeah.
so I mean I'd been dying for this pint all, all day sort of thing, I felt much better after that.
Yes that right, yeah, and that was the start of this erm 
I said I was  myself but , but what get's me is people stand there chat, I mean your walking behind them and then all of a sudden there just stop dead, and you must be carry on walking  oh god there's about twenty of them there blocking the fucking isle
Yeah
and you've got to try and get round them, oh god, there's about six thousand  trying to do the same thing.
I'll tell you what my idea of hell is  going Christmas shopping with them.
and then you've got women all round the worse one's are the women with the kiddies in the pushchair,and you've got to go round and you .
Tell you what women with pram's and stuff, there  fucking tread on the babies head or something.
Notice that  supermarket's 
.
Yeah, fucking little kid like 
it's bad enough standing there trying to be calm and nonchalant like most bloke's do in the fucking underwear department.
Don't .
Oh, I wasn't and erm, the next thing I know I've nearly fucking been bowled over, sort of the bags in  fucking look behind me , so those two  fucking bought the bags back down fucking legs  and I've just caught this like  running round another, another thing, I thought oh fucking little kid, the next thing I know there's another one  gone pass me like, taken the bags,the handles out of the plastic bags, fucking  and it was a girl that was going first this time, so I  and sure enough there was a little fucking brat boy coming again, so I just went  flying he sort of looked up at me and rubbed his eye like that and  carried on running after the .
I said you come round here sonny you'll .
I was just about to wind up, right, you know.
brown bread.
Fucking what, I, I'm, I think it was he's mum or not, some old biddy gave me a right old .
put the handbags of the  and as he came round I sort of went .
And you know the only reason you've got a hang over and you know there isn't really any body else to blame but yourself, but that makes you want to look for a scape-goat, but the kid .
There's nothing worse than being in a foul temper and knowing that it's only you, you've got to blame for it.
It's really nice and sweet all day and it's fucking making me even angrier.
I hate going shopping with them, she wants to go next Saturday, I said fuck that.
Go on your own.
Yeah, oh what, I didn't actually say fuck that,I know I've got to go and get your present  you know.
Friends family and stuff,day sort of thing, that'll be quite a good idea.
right.
She'll, she'll think that's right 
.
I know it's good in it?but erm,bought her, I've bought her a Ghost video.
A what?
A Ghost video.
Oh yeah.
Bought her, erm,, bought her a little 
I was gonna split that .
I've only got eight more things to get her, I've already spent about, I don't know, sixty quid on her.
Don't tell me your mates just gone to the sun and the sand as well.
Yeah, oh he's well in love.
Is he?
Mm, definite marriage case.
I don't know how, I don't know how they can stand to be apart .
Ah?
.
What.
All of a sudden you, you done quite well and pick up a.
Tin, tin, tin, tin   all his  in the store , eaten all the fishes in the poor old master's    
.
.
I want that 
in my can not see,with me 
Hello Harry, how's it going in  city?
.
.
.
there was Chris, Chris trying to take the piss in the  there was Chris, Chris gonna take the piss in the , my eyes looked in my can of , I have no  with my, I have no  not a , trying to make ya  
We'll take it's up the  
What can you do .
Always look on the bright side of life  
Here, did you hear that Barry .
We must be the latest .
your  number one fucking  
Oh, I must get  
You've lost that loving feeling, ooh, that  feeling, he's got that  feeling which is, is gone, gone, gone, cos he can't go on no, wow, wow, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom  .
can't go on no, wow, wow, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom .
What?
he get's down on his    
Microphone when we start singing.
Go on break the .
We don't need nothing 
Oh, what we need is Richard over here to give us some of his crazy comments, yeah.
never came over today did he?.
Do you wanna tell me what number it is?
.
I could be what number it is .
It is two, five, one, one, O it.
C, seven, eight, three
Hold up, hold up  what, seven, eight, three, seven
Seven, four, nine  
Got that on Monday morning  I thought that was the worst time of the week.
No it's alright, you fucking annoy me.
That's what makes Monday worth warming his smile.
Fucking twenty five to three  clamped up fucking arsehole,about to stick one on tramp.
Yeah, don't let him get that close to me.
No, alright then.
Fuck off, the lot of ya.
We all gonna have a little sing a song .
I have been.
Have yeah.
.
Yeah, where have you been?
It's been ..
I've been having .
Ah, right.
Is that all you've done?
No, I've done .
it's a forty hour week man.
We've been in at five past eight, we've been in  past eight.
No, yeah, but  only works .
Then again Barry we don't creep in at fifteen minutes past eight either.
I didn't creep in I just boldly .
.
.
He says that really well there actually.
Same dozy kind of voice.
 

If the van was big enough we could put 


 

oh this won't notice .
Is he?
.
Yeah he said look that's what I gave you he said.
Here's the other half.
Paranoid
I threw that actually and I didn't .
I just saw you standing there with a smile on your face.
Can't help it I  I'm such a give away when things like that are happening.
A grand total of eleven pounds 
They haven't covered it yet, are they going to?
Er  dunno.
Suppose they wanted us off.
making up  cash.
See that  fucking brilliant.
petty cash.
don't drop that.
won't be able to choose it .
I can't imagine who suggested it.
a bit tasty.
Bit tasty.
Nicer than 
Let's have a look.
Give him  a little plastic clock.
Yeah.


clock .
Yours is in a right fucking state.
He would be impressed.
I told you he'd see it.
What?
See what?
 

He would you know.
playing around with  
I'm playing diseases .
You're the only bloke we haven't got yet Barry.
Towing him up the road.


They're all hanging waving .
Oh you broke it Barry .
An origami lesson.
Have you got nothing better to do than .
No.
No.
We're making a, making a  we're making a collection for Mr 
I've got mine here waiting to go in.
Got mine.
Got mine.
Oh sod 
I'll tell you what I'm gonna put in  I'm gonna put in fifty P you.
I sh I should have brought that Irish woman in.
She was a bit thick.
What that Irish woman?
You really should.
I ain't used to her voice
Who's got  money?
. You can see it now can't you?
Farewell day  he's gonna give his farewell speech, thank you for your generous donation.
I really needed these two nuts and bolts for  for a chair I'm making at home.
Sounded like 
No,.
Who's he?
Director of B S G.
Oh is he, I dunno anything about B S G.
What about  oh no.
No actually  's not the top dog is he?
Isn't he?
The shareholders can  vote him off the board themselves.
Could they sack the shareholder?i i if there's a shareholder  do they sack him?
No.
Could have.
Shit should have bought shares shouldn't I.
Actually I'm not sure  
Oh they can sack you on the works.
Yes but they can't get rid of you as a shareholder.
They could buy your house.
Yeah but they can't sack you.
But if you are a shareholder they can sack you .
Eh?
Got any money ready.
Yeah.
I've got mine here.
Oh do sit down .
That's where all the tape's going Stuart.
I've only done this a little while.
it's getting all out of hand now .
Right come on  knuckle down you guys or I shall have to get  
I've been knuckling down all the time.
You what?
Yeah, doing it on the wrong sides.
One mistake I've made since I've been here that is.
What?
I said  I'm getting more enjoyment out of.
They don't put their backs in it.
And putting it on there themselves.
Yeah nice one Eric.
That fucking  
They don't work.
Permanently on there.
Come on then, let's .
Well they won't fit.
armpits old boy.
Oh I know.
They still smell fresher than you .
 

That is nice, that is.
On the ball, as usual 
You know that boy you kept talking about?
He's gonna be kicked in a minute.
Who's been tooling all the parts?
Ah!
You!
I noticed that .
What have you got to do then ?
Well  you come over here for?
Put them in the fucking  
Stuart , can you come and ?
What?
Oh no!
The   Oh 
Cheers .
How do you know that?
pack up .
Or  still to pack up already.
Certainly not you  that's for sure.
Cos it's too hot.
I can't.
I know what I'm gonna put in  I'm gonna put in  
?
Yeah.
Who's fucking been  cut the bottom off my ?
No idea.
Somebody's been chucking
Who's fucking scalpel from ?
This fucking clock card?
Why, what's he done?
Cut the bottom off it.
Oh 
What the fuck do you think you're done ?
Cutting the bottom off yours like you cut the bottom off mine.


Do you wanna fuck off?
Well who the fucking hell says I did that?
I didn't do that.
I don't care who told you I did but I didn't do that.
He's taking it off the wrong  hasn't he?
No.
I apologize old boy.


You dozy git.
Thanks very much .


Oh I don't believe this.
An innocent onlooker and I get fucking
Card vandals.
No that's not 
 

Yeah you know you make me wanna shout .
I turn my back for one minute     
Oh shit.
Oh shit.
That ain't gonna .
 

I don't know!
Where's the bits for this ?
That's the one.
Where's the bits for this one?
One man  .
One man and his dog Spot   went to mow a meadow .
paranoid.
you got to do it again .
See you've got to do it again.
 

La la la la la America .
 

go no slower now.
I've got to make the job last.
Mind your business Graham.
I shouldn't have to put the fucking .
Eh?
I shouldn't have to put the fucking 
cut his card up a bit more.
Just cut his, go on   just a little smidgen.
That's not his card.
No I know he's  taped it up hasn't he?
That's alright.
Cut it off right, cut more of the bottom off and leave the tape there.
He's a nasty little  boy isn't he, really?
Eh?
Boring now innit?
Yeah a bit.
Everybody's checking themselves so often that
Eh?
Everybody's checking themselves so often  bit boring.
Can't even get  loads on anybody now.
Can't even what?
You can't even get loads on anybody now.
People are keep checking themselves so often.
They'd better not get any on me after I've done this, put it that way.
After what?
After I've done this.
Well cos I can't check myself when I've got this on.
It's gotta be you that puts them on you.
  

.
Telephone.
They make me want a lot of things that I never had .
What, what a singing voice?
Whoo hoo.
that is, bitch.
And I'd be rich.
Stinking rich  gleaming rich.
Yeah.
pop over and see him 
No.
You're fooling around with me now .
He's not seriously going over there to get a  pound out of Richard is he?
Yeah.
even did it.
Wa hey you lead me on and then you look away  wa hey well that's alright  I'll get you alone tonight  and baby you'll find you're messing with dynamite so what do you wanna make those eyes  
this guy getting drugs is  
Lying git aren't you?
Load of old bollocks .
I don't even like nicotine.
I don't even like nicotine.
Who's she?
Do you have the occasional drink at all mate?
Oh yes I do indulge  occasionally.
Er Jo.
Believe it when I see her.
They can't give   can they?
They can't .
Yeah I have heard we're getting
The full works.
yeah, the full works or something, yeah.
somebody said a little cake.
Ha!
That's a bit going overboard that is.
Yeah well he probably meant a little cake you know, like the one  
Cherry bakewell.
That's right .
Can I have six thousand cherry bakewells please.
Yeah.
Actually I like cherry bakewell  or a mince pie each.
I get so, I just bung so much stuff in my lunchbox  I don't eat .
If you wanna get rid of that cherry bakewell 
Have you got cherry bakewell?
Have you really?
Me and Barry .
You can have the cherry   and I'll have the rest of it .
I am very partial to cherry bakewell.
I give you one yesterday.
I gave you one yesterday.
That would go down very nice with the cup of coffee I'm gonna have in a minute.
Actually it's about time I had a cup of tea.
I haven't had one yet.
Thank bloody god it's Friday.
Eh?
No.
Not I.
Who ripped the er  rubber bands off this?
Dunno.
Oh it's me again.
Yeah I'll take the blame .
There is, specially round your area.
Right, I'm going to get a cup of rosie.
Better not get messy though cos  
It's alright    all over me desk.
You wanker!
can have a stagger round the town pissed out of.
Oh, didn't I?
Sorry about that.
Still going is it ?
Come in?
How many fucking tapes have you gone through?
Er  four I think.
What, at work?
sit there and play the whole lot.
Are you gonna play the whole lot back?
Well what I'll do is
He tells me you was getting the beers in.
No I'm not.
I bought them last week.
this week.
We ain't going.
You just won the pools you tosser.
Got erm syndicate .
You can have them tomorrow morning .
Yeah, can do.
You've been wasting more .
Stop sticking it on me back.
Yeah, stop sticking it on my fucking back.
Still  still doing that.
I'm not.
No, shut up you.
Is that tape still going?
Yeah.
Mm.
Actually, what you should have done is got Jo to carry it around with her cos she could have got some very interesting conversations.
Yeah  could have done.
What?
Carry what around?
Oh right,yeah .
carry that tape recorder round with her 
She hasn't come round here yet though has she?
No.
No she  
I'm not gonna put anything in or , but I want a chance to refuse.
Yeah, same here
Yeah, that's right.
Okay lads, money.
She'll say no thank you.
Shit.
Got any timesheets Mark?
Here you are Stuart  .
It's alright it's alright I've got a couple thanks.
Oh  your money out of you 
snack size it'll turn into a  size.
Sorry?
Go on then.
let's have a look in there.
Hold on, I'll give her  so he can have some change.
He slipped up.
Yeah I've only got  change.
Eh?
I've only got a note  I'm sorry.
You're gonna do what?
Think I might put in a note actually.
I missed out on my  didn't I?
Paid out two rounds.
Nearly nicked that.
I got it yesterday so 
I said I'll  I'll I'll pay me contributions when I go .
they've got a clear out on  clearance sale on.


Ten pe 
Yeah 
Ten pence a cup.
people are not putting anything in.
When's this rave then ?
Eh?
Well normally at a  sport centre and that.
Big hall 
Old Freddie Mercury .
Cheers Barry.
Tell you what  if I  the next one .
That's nice.
Sick.
Oh what!
Right, that's it.
Yeah I did.
He was doing his po doing his .
Yeah.
Did you do that?
Me?
No, wouldn't do a thing like that would I?
Oh  god here it comes.
Oh look they're gonna miss out on it.
Oh that's fucking choice  
Last day.
second  oh I paid him back with Mark's fifty pence.
It's two pence.
Well whatever 
Yeah, righto.
a token in 
be rich.
Oh!
You're not gonna  if you're not wanted.
Monday I'm going.
I can see you're really pained by that .
Oh my life, here's Richard.
Hello Rich.
Eh?
How do Richie?
No, cherub's only er going over there and ask  for his quid that he didn't put in.
Yeah.
That's fair enough innit.
Bollocks.
Yeah, that's fair enough.
Come on Rich.
Your as tight a bloke as cherub is.
Put up or shut up.
Yeah, we would have won anyhow.
I might as well just save my pound and give it to whoever fucking wins that thing cos I've never won it.
That's right 
Graham reckons Sid's won it so I might be the only bloke who hasn't won it yet.
Well has Sid won it yet?
Out of the original, there's only you and Jonesy.
Yeah but  Jonesy ain't here  you cunt so it's only me.
Yeah you probably put the other fiver in.
Do you hear that?
Thirteen pound fifty two they've got out of nine hundred people.
and all.
pound fifty two.
I know.
Apparently Sid  or somebody put a fiver in.
We heard you give gen generously.
Did really, he pissed in it.
That's probably what they're gonna think anyway.


Nine hundred people  she brings back thirteen fifty two.
They're gonna say hold on where's the rest of it
.
I need a job Barry.
Yeah you're not the only one.
 

I do need a job old boy.
Well you gotta fill your timesheet out.
Oh who did that!
Forty minutes.
Sorry?
Said 
That's your er  well, what's that doing there?
I dunno.
One pound seventy eight pence.
suss it out.
Oh who's  oh your dirty !
Was that you?
Well nobody's buying the rounds.
Oh, I ain't got any money on me.
So when  when do you lot, when do this lot goes?
Not next week, it's the week after innit?
Yeah.
was gonna come up but he ain't got any money.
I'm in France next Sunday.
Stay there.
En francais.
Stay there.
Thank you.
No problem.
I would if I fucking could.
Nicer climate.
I wouldn't live in France if you paid me.
Why?
France is quite a nice country it's just polluted by frenchmen that's the only trouble.
That's why I couldn't live there cos I'd be fucking, I'd be  every night .
You what?
Good sport.
Let's have your 
Oh yes.
Oy.
Is this definitely on for next Friday?
Come on lads, make up your minds 
I dunno, I might have an appointment.
I haven't.
Don't be stupid.
I see him throw it.
Fuck off!
Stuart!


Oh no, that's cruel.
What's this?
Picking on Stuart day?
I haven't done anything with them.
Well least of all fuck with them.
He's had his card chopped, he's had his timesheet chopped.
All for nothing, I haven't even done anything today.
Exactly.
What do you get when you do something?
Well the times I do fuck with people's stuff and I don't get caught  and the  time when I haven't I'm getting hammered left right and centre.
Where's my erm  ?
Cheers  skanky 
Cheers what cunt?
Skanky.
They call her flapper, flapper .
I don't fucking believe this.
A bit of a slapper  she's not very dapper  she takes it up her crapper   neighbours  everybody needs good neighbours   with a little understanding .
Thirteen pounds fifty two.
Pounds fifty two pence.
Yeah.
We've heard, out of nine hundred people 
Quite impressive innit?
Very
It's a lot actually for 
very depressive.
Come on then, give us some of the  fancy German  stuff.
Eins zwei drei vier funf.
 Wo hier kommen sie.
 Ich kommen aus 
Where do you learn that then Graham?
Er  nightschool.
You actually took German then?
Yeah.
You didn't pick it up in Germany when ?
No, I was doing  doing German nightschool.
I beg your pardon?
Sounds nasty.
Ja ja.
Haben sie kinder?
Nein.
 Wascher  wascher nummer kinder 
That must be kids innit?
Yeah.
Yes  
How many children.
None.
I only got that cos kindergarten.
Zero innit?
That's my father's name?car.
No, what colour's your car.
Oh.
Silver.
Silver, silver ah .
 Mein  mein motor ist er rot 
Red?
Yeah  mine's red.
 Habens sie rot motor 
You're on drugs.
Nein.
Mick got that one right.
Anyway  
I'm not I'm I'm sort of like beginners course .
Ugh 
Oh yeah well.
and I was gonna  French.
Eh?
I'll go and do a French C S E and er they basically  if you get sort of like a B or a C that's enough to get you by  
Parlez-vous francais eh?
Eh?
Parlez-vous francais?
Ah oui.
Er 
Un petit.
Un petit pois.
Erm  oh shit.
Merde.
That's who this is for actually it's Longman's.
They're the  the people who do the the tapes and stuff for French and German and stuff like that .
But it's it's also going to the Oxford English Dictionary, cos what they want
do you know it's gone.
I can't spea cos I've been learning German I can't remember it.
It's all for the Oxford English Dictionary.
What they want is everyday talk.
Really?
Straight up.
So they're gonna listen to Rumbold speak and think oh my god.
What's this for anyway?
Oxford English Dictionary.
So, so I said they're, they're
They're trying to make a  dictionary up for everyday language, that everybody uses.
So rather than 
You're getting paid for this are you?
Twenty five quid.
Yeah?
Gift voucher.
They're, they're, they're put well, they're supposed to be putting swear words in it, stuff like that you know so  They they just want ordinary common or garden speech cos basically  to help sort of like English students actually coming to this country you know?
They hear sort of rhyming slang and things like this and they think my god what's he on about.
And I suppose  their slang version to  gonna help out other people.
What do they do?
Er  don't know actually 
I mean he's told me all about this stuff .
It's a lightweight.
Bog off you.
I'm gonna hit you 
What I wanna know  what was all this fucking hassle in aid of?
What hassle?
Just minding me own business and I get fucking  things thrown at me, timesheet ripped  timecard  cut .
Shame about that  .
Fuck off.
Timecard cut, I dunno.
 

It's just not good enough.
No, they could have cut it a bit more couldn't they?
I mean really.
try and get out on time  me old boy.
Eh?
No, I was talking about him.
He was first out last time near enough.
like anything weren't we old boy?
Yeah.
Yeah!
I'm really  stitching me  timesheet.
. I'm having me fucking stuff vandalized.
Did you see that ?
My person was attacked.
Not to mention me timesheet.
Just what the fucking do you think you're doing?
Is that any of your business?
Think it is as you're using my tools.
Don't even know if I'm gonna be able to clock out this aft this evening.
Oh that's gonna, that's gonna kill the cherub.
Cos he wants a lift off you I mean what's he gonna do?
Yeah old boy!
Cherub, you should have thought of this mate.
What's, what happens if he can't clock out tonight?
You're gonna be fucked for a lift ain't you?
Have to fucking walk home won't he?
Have to fucking walk, don't bother me.
Just walk anyway.
over the bridge innit?
Fuck off.
Give me a mint for that.
Give me a mint cos I haven't.
Oh no, I don't believe I did that.
I'm having a nightmare.
What've you done now?
Threw away my bag of rubbish and stuff and  I had a packet of mints in it .
Oh 
Get it out, that'll still be 
Ain't fucking fishing through that lot.
Twenty one p's worth of mints.
Got more pride than that.
then.
Yeah well we know what sort of bloke you are though.
Fucking skint.
That had better go in that's all I can say.
On top of old smokey  Arseholes are cheap today  arseholes are cheap today.
yesterday 
I never used to  I never used to realize what people were talking about at school and stuff when they said .
That's hilarious innit?
What?
I never used to get that  though .
say it at school and somebody'd say that and go oh!
What's the difference between a prick and a cunt.
I bet he still sat there and laughed though.
Oh yeah, like you do   .
No, you go home, you think about it and
Yeah.
you know?
You daren't ask anyone.
He didn't realize what he was saying .
I I will always remember the poor guy who was  coming out of the showers with a hard on  
.
He was queer.
thirteen or fourteen.
Oh this guy wasn't.
I've seen him since with some really nice women and he had  girls at school as well.
No that helped him actually,trying to find out whether he was or not.
Yeah he  come out the shower with an amazing 


you imagine .
Is that  Stuart?
Yeah.
Get all the young kiddies  fifth year.
fifth year .
in the towels and that.
go in the shower with them on.
fifth years  thinking they're like  grown up and everything.
fourteen sort of an an average sort of time for puberty 
Yeah.
round his navel.
It's exactly the same as, we had one  
And he was he was a big, not, I don't mean big down but he was a big sort of stocky bloke as well.
And he was well well mature for his age.
I mean he looked like an eighteen year old.
There was one at our yeah.
Exactly the same as ours.
When we was about fourteen in the fourth year at school, there was this quite chubby bloke  he'd have a towel just there while you shower.
Yeah that's right, that's what 
He'd sort of hang out, he'd  shower with his 


you know he'd go like that, yeah look at me I'm, I'm mature sort of thing.
That's so funny.
It wasn't at the time because you had a real complex about it but 
Right old bombardment I got then didn't I?
anyone?
Next page old boy, next page.
Oh, next page even.
Bloody hell!
Perhaps there ain't none in there today.
Could have sworn I saw some tits in there today.
I did see some tits in there, yeah.
Do you wanna go home?
Jam special again old boy.
Yeah quite nice.
Quite nice.
but I can't handle that pub.
Thank the fuck for that.
Hi ho hi ho it's off to work we go.
With a bucket and spade and a hand grenade hi ho hi ho hi ho hi ho hi ho  it's off to Rumbold's we go  with a bucket and spade  hi ho hi ho .
Hi ho  hi ho so it's off to work we go 
Figaro  figaro figaro figaro 
Scrape the scalpel out.
That's right I do apologize.
all the bollocks.
What for?
You haven't done anything.
Right.
Who the fucking hell you gonna blame now Frank ain't here then?
Eh?
You've got nobody left to blame have you?
You gonna clean my board?
No,off.
Oh, you nancy.
Look, I don't wanna go home with dirty hands, alright?
I don't eat food with dirty hands either.
I like fucking clean hands.
Yeah.
That's why I don't ever do any work.
Even when you're working.
Cos you don't do any work.
Cos you got clean hands.
That's why you  I think you're well out of order.
What time is it?
Four twenty.
And we're Leeds United  Leeds United F C .
Yes my son?
And so begins another weary day  so begins another weary day.
La la la la in the morning I awake  my arms my legs my belly aches   And so begins another weary day.
Oh in the morning I awake, my arms my legs my  Oh my   is full of shit  my  is full of shit  it's full of shit, shit and  .
Oi fuck off,punch your fucking lights out.
cunt.
Trev, maybe you didn't hear me.
I said fuck off or I'll punch your fucking lights out.
Oh, sorry old boy..
Alright  ?
Fucking well be.
Well,you see.
But he's not saying that to anyone else.
Just have to wait and see.
Not yet anyway.
are you pulling my plonker or what?
Like we'd love to  
just ask Barry what  just er Mick  
He reckons we'll be going soon.
.
I I'll go after Christmas.
Sort me out  well it wouldn't, would if I get a job.
I mean in a way I think it's probably the best thing that's happened to me for a while cos I could see myself  see the thing is I can  I wasn't ever planning to be here for even six months.
And all of a sudden I was here for six months and then it was, then it's a fucking year.
I mean how long was I gonna be here for for Christ's sake?
It cou I mean it you could easily do three or four years here and just fucking get lost couldn't you?
two year .
Two years.
Well that's nothing so bad because this is what you're trained for but 
Well they're car fitters look.
All the time I spend here is fucking getting me further away 
talk about sheet metal work.
Well they don't know you weren't being aren't doing sheet metal work here.
Thing is this is taking me further away from my trade.
The longer I do here 
knows fuck all about sheet metal work.
I dread going back to an aircraft company.
I'm gonna do the pump and  go back with the chaps.
Quarter to eleven, pick up the chaps and go for a smoke.
he wants to see him.
Yes he does.
I told you that about two weeks ago.
Why does he want to see me?
Dunno.
Just been told to  carry on round.
is this lot going Barry or what?
This lot getting  are they getting, yeah.
Still getting  still getting 
Eh?
They're still getting a go at college aren't they?
Mm.
Yeah if we do get the boot it'll be the next few months.
What about our college course?
Have they said anything?
It's all paid for innit?
Keep going.
You'd have to pay for exams and all that, but it's all paid for at the end of the day innit?
Is that it?
Eh?
seven I make it.
See you later guys.
Everybody else is going.
Old  didn't believe me when I said  this afternoon.
Will he be thinking of us when he spends his gold  mancho that's what he'll get.
Yep.
Will he still be thinking about us poor  working , no I don't think so.
What do you think the public  are  still
I know its mild, but I feel its particularly 
how you feel then, if I put you on .
A paint party,, we can all sit around and sniff paint.
Yeah, that's it, you've got it in one.
Only, we didn't have any gloss 
What's a paint party mate?
and a brush and they supply the  and that's it, you pay and get pissed at the same time .
Oh,
No, its not being in concert, that Jason, that something  being taken  for years, it must of been, Jason  or whatever he's name is.
Jack , he must of been painted  for years, he's been on  ship.
Have you ever seen the real Jackson 
Only on the T V in it?
I've put er a Royal Academy
I don't go places like that
 

Last time I went to the  was the school one 
Went to the Royal Academy when I was doing my 'O' Levels,it was a Jackson follow up it was about, ambulance was about twelve foot by twelve foot, it was literally splodges of paint all over the fucking place, it was horrible,you can actually buy them at the Royal Academy, you can't buy them at , but he was asking a hundred thousand pounds for it, I couldn't believe it, a trained monkey could of fucking painted that   
Well that, it probably is.
Jackson  is a monkey at London Zoo.
All you have to do is get one mug buy it, too buy it, he's made ain't he, ah?
I mean  see why they call people like Constable, Rembrandt a great artist 
I never see how they can call anybody like 
About Picasso a great artist
Na, I don't know 
Its just  crap
Its all 
Oh who's that geezer who's just started who used to paint , can' think of the pop artist, Andy 
Oh yeah.
I think that's a load of shit, half of his stuff, I mean they're, they're good reproductions, tin of Heinz Bake Beans but any monkey can fucking do that  charge fifty grand for it or whatever they charged for it  The ones I've always liked is erm, I dunno if you've ever seen any,Ed , Edward  Lanzear used to paint a lot of er Queen Victoria used to do er animal paintings.
Really fucking  and her some of the Dutch masters Franz Hells and er
Not really an arty person.
but, sort of like er, erm its like  so, some of those paintings of the wraps and  beautiful boat, they look as if they've just been photographed, they looked as if they're a photograph not a  oil, oil painting .
There's  
The only artist I know that brings to mind that I think is absolutely brilliant is David Sheppard,You got a print on his works and its only one of a hundred prints, and even his prints are worth about a thousand pounds.
No, but
What you doing?
bearing up, er, under the strain.
case.
Mm, yeah
Times hard, thought of all days, thought the old lady still wouldn't let me of the old erm
She would
she wouldn't,good this week  I've managed, I've managed to get the bottle today thought.
See what I mean,
No, no, that is, that is true probably, yeah, this is true 
finished playing that tape yet?
Yeah I have switched off.
You've been  up for weeks now, haven't you?
No, I have, I've got it, its out in the car 
That's the  keep  er the actual, the actual master tape for that one I, I lent to somebody and I haven't got it back, I can't remember where it is  
No I  I pop out 
Do, do, do, do you  the place?
I've got to go up the town, like  
Right pair of art critics ain't we?
That is cheap
What?
These 
Which girl 
She worked in er
What an inspection?
Yeah
Yeah
I dunno, I dunno who she's going out with, but I've seen her, I've seen her in the car in the morning when I, like this morning I was walking in, she was in the car just getting the old , but I don't know if he works here or not, she's got to be going out with somebody.
I dunno  
 
I don't stare at people then 
You fucking lying git  don't you believe that he's  
To 
About right 
I think Alex, I gotta 
 

or so 
 

where's  
  

I don't know I really didn't have that much to do with it
What?
He is right, he 
Say oh Bob, how's it going?
Who?
Bob, how's it going?
Isn't he deaf in one ear or something
Yeah
It sounds terrible saying that.
My mum went to see that with my aunty, she said they both come out of there and they were wetting themselves, well
Is this the one where, see a topless girl wobble them in the streets
Is it Airplane II?
Yeah.
I think they showed that one Christmas or something and were watching something else and we turned over and the instant we turned over, this girl wobbled across the screen, and my mum straight away switched it back on the other side  me and me brothers right in the other room watching there.
Huh 
there,
That's what I will be when I 
I mean we, we keep telling the old man to book the weekend holiday so we can have outrageous parties and things like that.
My old man would say good bye, yeah, send the mother away 
I think the old man's a bit afraid to go into hospital, I know that he's afraid obviously cos of the, the, this open heart surgery sort of thing but er, he's also afraid that, he thinks were gonna have er such outrageous parties down the close and were gonna be open all night and things like that.
Did, even with the few times my parents have gone away, I've never held parties, I may of had a couple of mates round just to let them kip over or something, come back  I've never, ever held a party, I wouldn't, I respect them, well I mean I wouldn't  respect them  make, every er penny they earned in the last fifteen years gone into that house , they've had one holiday in that time  and erm,gorgeous house,no its a lovely house, full of nice stuff as well, I, I, I wouldn't dare have a party
Well even if you do you'd clear out the stuff 
Oh, I, well I never  like so , even now I'm paranoid about it, its like a couple of times I don't know how I slept a wink, and these people are the people I trust because you don't want  I know they won't do it on purpose, but I know, have seen what I'm  
Oh yeah
my parents are far more worried about how  at the party than the actual  kids are.
Yeah, its probably cos they've done it all before so, they know, they know what goes on there.
I mean I'm too frightened the things what happened what  you know, the stereo nicked and 
hooligans 
,
every time I ask him too, he says no you ain't allowed a disco out there.
.
Oh well he probably doesn't trust you whipper snatchers  first time I actually carried my licence with me.
Oh red one, you got one then.
Yeah, that come through quicker, come through in about eight days that.
Is that your licence back?
Yeah.
Wow.
All nice and sh , all nice and shiny.
The colour is red and green
Yeah, it .
Yeah well they've had, they've erm , yeah the pink, the pink ones came in just after I passed mine.
Yeah it come from , I, I wasn't expecting it to come back , it come through eight days,.
That, that letter I'd written must of done the trick.
I would appreciate, I put in, I appreciate, I would appreciate your co-operation .
If you, if you put down the letter for people like this,sort of, I would of done one of two things, I'd would get really nark about that and the way  they give you what you want
They either drag their feet or 
so far its , so far I've been really lucky in everything I've done that too I sort of got through really quickly.
Oh yeah I never sort of like give it here or else and all this power, I would state my case firmly, but then I.
Yeah but its, you gotta try and give them  instead of putting the law first, not   
Well you're the one 
man said you got any experience, I said no, I said well you know  experience, I felt like saying fucking well how the bloody hell am I supposed to get experience when no one will take me, but I'm, I wasn't really interested in the sales work  not quite  
You're outrageous you are, you've got to have the gift of the gab in the first place,that's just  to walk into a shop or office and   , my girlfriend's   think that's what  chain
fucking great 
Its not a meagre expensive place, forty, fifty quid  expensive enough though  
That could explain a lot actually     See old London's Burning last night?
no I missed it, it was the second part, see last weeks, but
Yeah they got Bayleaf out, they 
the 
yeah 
One geezer died didn't he, Rocky?
No, no, he's, he's, he's ok, wobbling around on crutches, it was the er, the bloke who got buried alive at  they wanted him to go to er former therapy,go,slowly cracking up.
You think about fucking buried alive by the wall.
Yeah,
Oh er,
  

Why not 
 
 
Not going to do you anything to help    
What, what are they doing with it?
There's only, they let  .
There was somebody working here called er Julian, he was fucking   coming, coming out the pub about half past twelve, coming back in about six o'clock and then working on three  
don't tend to take much notice of them do they?
No, really, mind you, its  then there was quite a few people working  .
It is a bit shitty that in it?
Its them that's threatened to stopping them do the overtime with .
Nothing you can do about it 
is well out of order 
Yeah, to go and work.
Here was that Jaws Three or Four they showed, showed on Saturday night?
They haven't showed the third one have they?
Yeah, I T V had it.
Which one was that?
That's one with the er underwater complex   
Oh yeah, I haven't seen the three.
but there's five ain't there?
made a fifth.
Did they make a three d one?
Yeah oh that was good weren't it?
No 
They  in the end didn't they?
Does Roy Schneider appear in any more of them after two?
Just two,paint after this one.
I never saw them, but I saw the, the clips for it.
What's he going for the world record on, for appearing in most films, or
 

Most of the releases have got 
Its 
Zulu was the first bloke weren't it?
Yeah, he's an 
See that last night, he was on telly before that in erm 
He played  in Jack The Ripper
Jekyll and Hyde?
I can't remember the telly programme he was in  something like Budgie it wasn't Budgie though.
Have you seen that er  Paul Hogan film 
I haven't watched many video's recently.
I, I can remember bits of it now, but I couldn't on fucking Thursday, I mean, there's this bloke in er, they're they're doing a banking job, while  doing a bank job and he still doesn't believe he's the main 
He is  though in he?
I ain't saying nothing.
Yeah he is, yeah.
Fucking, fire's this gun at him point blank and he goes  and he stands there  like this, and he, he stood there and he goes running round the corner sort of thing and then he goes he can't of missed from that fucking distance you know, and its that distance and er, in the, in the car, the mate goes, the mate sort of till he passed out, and he goes  bring it to me, he goes, and its still alive,he goes , but matey in the front goes oh my  he goes, I knew you'd fuck up he goes and so they're all blanks you 
to be Michael  or something
Yeah
That's what makes it think to the name don't he?
Oh he goes er  
 

this little girl runs to the  he sees god and he can't believe that god looks like Charlton Heston, and you think 
Yeah, yeah I don't know what it is when he  
He comes up to him and he goes, you're only a trainee, and he goes this is the first time we've ever sent the scum bag back, oh, the scum bag, that's a big strong even if you are god and he, he 
Yeah  see the  or somebody like that or I    yeah  
No good  fucking me    you are a 
Yes, its funny cos   its not often we get that one, but I
Its not a particularly believable film but its well funny 
Seen er, Weekend of 
Yeah, its quite an old film
I've only ever seen part of it I mean where they get it rigged up and the hit man keeps coming back and he, he keeps seeing him and he's, he's walking round the place and
Yeah, well funny
he sits, he's sitting there like a fly squad,
yeah
he flies 


well funny, that must of taken quite a lot for that actor to play  cos he gets chucked around and sort of things don't he?
Yeah, I, I tell you what as well, er I don't know whether you saw him last night, it was on channel four  there's erm,its called
No
now that is brilliant, really good, its sort of 
yeah, I've, I've seen it, its got the same dog as in the story teller
Is it?
yeah it is the story teller 
Yeah but its Michael  
Michael  instead of, instead of 
John Hurt
John Hurt 
The directly after that on I T V there's Dinosaur, its brilliant
Oh no.
its brilliant, its really good
what?
Dinosaur's.
Fuck off Trev 
Yeah its brilliant  the puppets are fantastic in that.
fantastic  it stirs up a hornets nest.
Just like the Flintstones  they bill it though as I T V's answers to the fucking Simpsons,
that's what the billed it as early in the, early Sunday's, they says in it by er, half past five we have erm I T V's answer to the Simpsons, the Dinosaur's
Oh really good, I've never seen it, so I couldn't say.
did look quite good though.
one year old.
So you thought, you don't watch it then
No.
six months 
What the fucking hell's that?
, you are now being taped for posterity and also its for the English Oxford Dictionary
Ah?you're taping this?
Yeah.
Why?
All these conversations are what they do
Who?
Oh yeah, you weren't here Friday was you?
Its the, its for the Oxford English Dictionary, its erm, what they're doing is they're making up a Dictionary for just using everyday collocation and they 
Is it yours or there's?
No, its there's, they're 
They come to work and asked or something?
No, no, they came to my house  yeah, bring Oxford Dictionary out, no its gonna be five quid
Twenty five quid.
a day
A day?, fuck off.
Wish it was, I could do with
Yeah I could do with  How many tapes have you got?
Twenty.
Twenty oh,
This is the fifth one, B side
They providing the batteries as well are they?
Yep, batteries, tape the whole lot .
Why who've you taped?, have you got to fill up the whole twenty?
No, you don't have too, just do as many as you can.
Do five and keep the rest of the tapes.
Yeah 
Yeah, you have to give back what you don't use   .
Amazing how people's attitude change towards it when they learn you got 
getting a recorded, getting a recorded so can get a recorded contract
Ah?
Who?
Terence hoping to be discovered  or something, they say, they say er,
Batteries going.
Ah?
Batteries going.
No it ain't, picking up everything.
. And they left it with you, I can't believe that.
Yeah, you've got to sign for it.
Yeah.
What do you mean they've left it with me you cheeky little sod
 

Have him Mark, have him.
Oh, oh, have you heard about that?, for a, oh have you heard about that, people are refusing erm the 
Why  yeah.
Yeah, they are  what they want is the regional fucking words, like phrases which are particular to your area, like bull shit and the  
 
No, no, you, things like alright, how you doing?
I mean, in other parts of the country its hi yeah, how are you, alright and hello and stuff like that.
Alright you
But I mean they get a lot about 
Down here they get a few of that.
Yeah I know that's only cos its been deported down here 
deported by Jonesy
Its amazing how you, you  came down here, but I mean duck never managed it did he?
Right oh duck, what 
duck.
One of me mum's favourite sayings was lover, alright lover, I used to hate that.
 

One which used to be around was alright uncle how you doing.
Uncle
Uncle
Uncle Billy 
What time is it, any ideas?
Have we got the time fellows?
Eleven twenty one 
That was another one of his songs weren't it, Yes I'm The Great Pretender?,
Yeah.
do the cover version of it oh Freddie Mercury
Yeah
that seems to be  this situation don't it?
Ah?, dunno, don't even know the words 
Well yes I'm The Great Pretender seems to be pretty  cos he, he, said he hadn't had, didn't have Aids.
Oh I, never said he didn't have Aids, but he's never, he's never said either has he?, he's never said he has or he hasn't
People who knew him, knew he had Aids.
Did they?
All his closest friends and that 
Aids have claimed quite a few victims now
I's, listen, erm, watching that Aids update Friday night  and er, there have been five thousand reported cases of Aids out in this country, no three thousand reported Aids out in this, in this country, and in New York alone, New York City alone, there's been fifteen thousand, they reckon there's about thirty four thousand actually carrying H I V  just in New York City 
New York   
I mean, I mean New York is what  has, has got a 
London  was the highest populated place in the world.
Yeah.
Yeah it is London 
William Golding,
there, there were deaths weren't they?
Get this bat thing, get a  smash his head open
Yeah
Yeah,for er English literature, I think everybody has though ain't they?
No I didn't.
What?
William Golding 
No.
Did you watch Of Mice And Men 
Yeah
George and Lenny
Yeah
Adrian Mole 
Brian   I see it 
Is this for English Literature?
Oh, oh Christ  
I like  
Okey cokey  E I O   
fucking body building then ain't ya?
got a bit of oil in that?
Yeah 
David's 
Na, it's not David's.
That'll do for that lot won't it that little bit?
On the one hand he was 


Would you rather have a job?
Nose to the grindstone time again I suppose, in a minute.
When do they all come here   for nothing  if you get a spare trade as well with that  except .
Take part in a   keep going for it.
There's a metal tray  put that in .
  
All they do is a put a little bit on the    just keeps the stuff from sticking.
Doesn't really stick.
it's alright though    just like the old fashioned pick them up  pick them up   


Oh get out!
Right, see you later,.
See you later.
I'm going to get   can't get no blinds  but they put up with that though  make a drink  coffee.
oi  Touch my     sort out the   Like to think that we can afford something like this.


Right carry on you chaps   er  we all  George, er
Yeah 
Afternoon tramp old boy!
Good afternoon old boy!
Well what do you reckon  seen that ?
Supposed to do it.
Ah can't do that!
You're supposed to act natural when the tape's recording, I mean but  there again with 
I didn't know that.
with  that is a bit of an impossibility innit!
 

Being as he's totally unnatural.
Apart from 
Do you want this?
Afternoon.
Yeah.
I wanna go to the toilet  under your bench.
You'll have it now.
They seem to  hands down.
Don't go under the bench Brian!
Why?
What?
Why?
I ain't go , give me the money then?
Your real mate, Stuart back or what?
You calling!
Don't fucking have it!
Yep  Yes.
Alright !
Which one?
Little one.


Aha!


Urgh!
Urgh!
Done any more on yet?
Eh?
Da da da da da  da da da da da da .
Who wants that?
Dunno.






 

Like where they've done that  yep  that it?
Yeah.


Ah!


time !


I reckon those people'll be giving us most of their business.
That's it.
You what?
I reckon those people'll be going up the wrong way.
You what?
Those people who are gonna go.
Even by the time I'm  rich,doing   What is  
Well the old twen twenty usually   that's what I'll do
My daughter threatened to buy her something.
Oh.
No.
When you haven't got any cash or nothing small   banging in something.
Here Nigel  I've got some fifty pees.
Brilliant!
I'll let you have some.
I think you better 
We, I generally ask 
Maybe, that's always the way.
I could get a couple.
Eh?
Yeah  gangland Mark.
 Watcha 
Whether you should put down  in front of the wing mirror
Yeah I know, I know.
Brian said  I could come  
Those fifteen's 
Right, are you gonna go down?
Yeah.
Are you alright there?
Yeah    Aha!
Caught actually bou bouncing about on the  that little  we didn't
Yeah?
bought the wagon round, yeah  I made them clear the site cos    well actually it's twelve being as, they are a bit stained  
Oh yeah.
People had  the money or the shops  they were on show on the   that most expensive dress shop.
Not bad  but that shop  they have er, the cheapest.
Well I've never seen one  shop.
, it's down Hampton Court  twenty four  twenty pound for twelves  they range from two pound for fifty odd quid.
Yeah  
If I was gonna get one,
Right.
Ah  oh shit!
You wouldn't have to worry about them  that'd solve the struggle, trouble  er  you got them off the 
Even have to have the same  as one another!
Just think it  can't have .
man  I think sooner or later it's gonna become law in this country that we 
But you think how  how  
cyclists must wear them.
you think how many people many people didn't wanna wear  helmets   See a lot of   Oh God!
And loads of people thought it was stupid  sensible.
Lot of them have  since
That'll do.
Since 
That's right yeah
we've had it  since last January   
Go on  how many wear a helmet?
It's law to wear a helmet  when you're on the motorway  came out last January.
Oh yeah what these  can't be bothered   
No!
Tell you something.
In case you  smack your head.
Yeah  Innit?
Who said 
Come over to my side of the room and have a 
Yeah but I might want a bit of help with it.
 
About one in two wants to  with a helmet on.
No, sorry you're way out of line Chris!
Yes.
Way out of line, I don't know where you work that one out!
Oh I dunno.
Yeah, I'm bringing it in 
We've go got one.
Yeah.
It isn't  
I mean  cycling magazine 
But bikes maybe and all th 
But I 
all the parts.
Yeah but in the middle of road .
It will be made law, soon.
   

Mate, I  
Yeah.
my bike.
Yeah bu , why don't you go up close?
We've already thought of that cos my bike 
it's not gonna help.
cos my  my bike 
Eh?
ends up on the pavement.
Oh.
I can't .
Had a hairline fracture of the skull.
Why is .
Yeah.
So
I do  won't explain your broken nose though Stu, will it?
Might go and get help  aha!
Looks like most of mine face the other way  more than one.
See look  they can't do it.
Goes like that.
Two foot  even in the .
Fuck off!
Some of them facing square  although, what happens?
Well ain't you allowed out?
Oh yeah I'm 
 
I'm not saying that they shouldn't make a mess or like that 
But also I mean  you can't do without a .
I'm going out and all  and you can't come in without , signing .
Anytime, anytime.
See that'd slide down and break until  and then you're trouble!
I think you should  to do it  no problem 
Wipe out  well go without peak time I mean.
And then it's your time to do it, that's all.
It's about time 
Better get your old .
Fuck off, you silly sod !
I ain't getting a  yet.
Don't lie .
It's a bad year for  
They don't listen   so I went outside
Down here.
.
So why did you  hit him?
Well I've had this before, I was starting printing  work or something   and then I like .
My brother's one.
You practice shots.
Yeah but I don't like   might end up a !
Ha ha!
what I mean.
Yeah.
Sod.
It's up to the  blooming restaurant.
going.
It means that a after policeman, it's like we're on grade three.
You you being a motorcyclist as well as 
 
all of these things  the helmets and  causes  tha that
they would think like that  probably the motorcycle  and erm   for in compulsory helmet wear.
I say .
Why not the same for bicycles?
Dunno.
Kill yourself at five miles an hour in a car  I know sounds stupid!
I probably wouldn't wear them.
Probably kill them,on the head   well would be my problem to do it   see myself coming off 
Nobody really does.
.
Well yeah but tha that doesn't mean the police do it .
If I drive   I'd kill myself  ride on the day .
Police won't  cos you are  
I'm not really stupid  that's why I'm driving home.
What pillion?
 
If you like.
But   I wouldn't like, like  car driver.
Oh!
Yeah I remember that, fucking thing!
Do you?
Yeah.
And after that we kept shouting 
Rock on!
camp,.
And there was Pete's   urgh!
I'm really frightened 
 
to do it though, at the moment  go over the 
The old   see old beautiful legs 
really frightened of that .
I was   where
He was .
there was these two  
Yeah but what they're doing   do thirty or forty  then do number six and only that far away from the handle bar.
Well it's a lot different from what he told me.
Chance  cos they went out 
What was he 
I don't know whether you told him but he  himself
Particularly on a right of way  It's as much your right to drive ar round the way you go  I used to 
 
give myself two, at least three foot away from the kerb.
That .
he, don't like he don't like  right, I mean I still ain't paid him .
He will do though  right let's ride the motorway down.
Alright, but I'm coming down there.
Let's hope you find it, this time.
I mean I won't come and do the record.
On the way home
Gently.
we'll ride home that way 
Well you're  taking the right steps .
Gotta do seventy odd,
See him ride them.
Hey!what was the last time your old lady ?
I mean if someone wan wants me to do it.
We could walk and go and ma put  down.
Why?
Well I hope he  
they're always go they're always about that far away  the less  gotta swerve out to avoid .
He said something else  riding.
Ride.
While he's about.
Just like one of them   that's why I pop out about that far away, so
That's why I .
You sell  don't you?
That's right, yeah.
Cos then i I mean a couple of times I've , like  I wouldn't
But they've cut them  well they done it again about a month ago  no one could survive   They'll only do it to  get the get the key  
They'll still be  is just walk straight in, it's only about eight foot deep   so if I'm going forty odd  there int a car bonnet.
No.
So if a bloke goes in the back of us     er  er  by the bonnet, caught up with the  before we start out  what  what  .
Ideally  over it  on my bicycle.
Well  what I'm saying is 
You ought to be .
and I   you're not 
Won't be.
no you're not   
 
parked cars.
I don't know what to think   parked cars  the  of a big   if I can see a parked car there  a long way in front of me  I go I am  park that car  so it
so it looks as though you haven't got in.
got a long way  
Yeah.
you know  if there's nothing immediately behind me,then he knows that I  I ain't gonna touch his precious parked car!
Yeah.
All all this sort of  riding off at a  
Le , what they say?
Well I don't know but, you know  
Well I would ask, I got .
As soon as soon as you see a parked car  you should be looking to see what's behind its  and there's about six policeman behind
Well there are.
If the  before I come to go past it  he would cut back in and  and climb across  even if if the next car  then back in again  you're just going, you start out of line  
Well I did
and the thread bit on    I don't do it all the time   look you've got half a sense mind  half a strong common sense   
Oh I get it.
I got  pull over inside then the motorbike's 
Yeah but you don't  
but you must have seen the metal nut in the front!
Then he left out  
Yeah exactly!
The way I look at it, is there anything you can do?
No  Stuart you come and tell   come to tell me  police squad I don't think 
how to  
But we said so
Well  yeah alright but I gotta 
Yeah I was just saying, let them know  no  where we going then?
Oh I 
See I I 
Yeah but it could happen though.
I don't care!
Well what are you saying  to prevent it?
What's the point of taking driving lessons, or motorbike lessons then?
It's a bit difficult.
What is?
And you, all day, you got some of the bits 
Whe when you have a cycling proficiency test 
Yeah.
No matter what car you 
Better than my  
The rules are the same  you don't say  oh I can't go for a ride  and I'm gonna go through  announce my 
That is though Stuart 
Why?
If you may  sort of done it   
Yeah.
Well it's it's kind of certain   
What like that ?
He did it.
I don't know  , I would 
That's right that , I still don't see where  
Yeah  I mean    you want your car 
I wouldn't 
Alright, don't!
Cos I  ain't got time to do it 
do it  so
David's choice, it's definitely 
I will pass this  he he should pass.
But he can't see it can he,
Oh God!
It's 
Better take them back to 
No what I'm saying is, like,
And 
or anything like that  
What're you saying!
because I'm not.
Don't bother to explain 
Wind this  to er
Ah no!
Look I mean in actual fact, it's probably  well it shouldn't be 
Alright.
If anybody's gotta stay there.
We have 
Say 
bikes to ride home  or cars and Stuart.
Somebody needs to 
Why does nobody  why's there been so many  accidents involving
Alright 
Alright 
I  there is a fucking  getting killed on  motorbike.
Yeah,ni nine times out of ten, particularly when there's cars around 
 
it is the car driver  that is  at fault.
I told you twenty times about that!
The actual cycles   
Yep.
you know.
At the end of the day.
tough luck!
But I ca I can't  unless you cover   all summer  and yet can't see the  the ri bike riding down the road, driving a 
Would you see the 
I would  I could.
Yeah cos you're not out in the morning   must of heard from here.
yeah 
Can't see that it matters how good a driver you are , it's not always how good you are to  
Alright yeah, I just want   and even fucking arguing !
Yeah   to see .
Alright.
 

Can't do my work   it's the same as before, I'm just fed up with it.
Oh  there!
Er  I mean er  by jumping down  come down 
Oh does that mean  doesn't count?
Yeah  yep 
Get plenty of newspaper 
What?
newspaper  
There's that woman  that's the one out of 
Yeah  and a and a  and a roundabout 
Yeah that'll be probably be better  won't it?
He burnt out 
No   them 
It's either that or , how about that?
Yeah alright   Oh!
Steven's gonna get wet.
Want his fucking coat back!
No we'll 
clear as anything.
all ought to have a look, didn't we?
No the old bill probably .
Yeah but I'm talking about going up to the gym.
Yeah but it's gonna be quite boring  
Who you going up there with?
I'm doing a favour for the old my old gran.
Yeah  mate    That'll be 
 
forty  six.
No  alright Si?
Don't forget it!
Top row  behind the .
Is that where ?
Is that right?
Oh!
I ain't got no paper!
Not , you know.
Yeah it's not, right, I went down there cos my   
Yeah, that's it , yeah  it's about three .
Going to the mens?
Yeah  yeah get a bit closer .
That means, we all do it, we always leave it outside the 
Yeah.
school.
Yeah I'll 
He said to me oh that poor old !.
I'll have to  carefully     borrowed off him, he never looked   
Yeah.
,
check before we left   brand new motor.
they don't care!
gotta hand in that bag, It's gone  I can't.
How do I know, I'll  I don't know  if    Who's gonna be  the other side of the ?
Who?
Chr Chr Chris.
Why did he cry?
He said  on the one hand he was agreeing with you, right  that i it doesn't matter how good a cyclist you are  it's the fucking car drivers, nine times out of ten, that cause the accidents on   and then, on the other hand he was saying  but I don't see I I can't se ever see myself coming off  you know, he's fucking stupid!
I bet i , I mean I bet he's the sort of cyclist and  car driver that gives the rest of us a fucking bad name!
I if you drive along and a  along  with the attitude  I'm alright, everybody else, fuck them!
That's a sure fire way of an accident.
I you've gotta fucking drive .
And they
You got
and they drive 
you've gotta drive  ah like every other cunt on the road's out to get you.
I almost caused an accident coming back from Bedford yesterday, there's somebody  in an X R three i  right up my arse so I just coming onto the motorway, the M four  to Bracknell  and erm    comes right up my arse  and I had to come out cos there was this car coming on  you know, from further up the  the lane  and it was coming on  and I was already on, so I  overtook it  let it  did  to let it come out  you know?
And he flashed his lights and was right up my arse!
So I  I sat by the side of this other car  for about five minutes  you know?
Doing about sixty, seventy, normal speed,in hurry to get somewhere  and er I I just sat there  and erm  all of a sudden I I thought I was miles past this other car  and I started going in, just to let him go past, obviously  and he's  I I didn't realise this other car was keeping up with me   and I've gone towards it and I thought sh I'd looked in my mirror  shit it's still there!
So I just give a little bit of pedal and  carried on  but he was complete and utter bastard, really was!
Tell you what, I notice I'm doing, I never us always used to do it  I give fucking !
 
Still don't.
Right now I will   
If somebody does that to me  they're right up my arse and something  came like that, or even just on a single carriage road, or anything  I'd just touch my brake slightly
I always do.
Right?
Yeah, yeah I always have done.
Right?
And then  I tell you what, and even if they don't do it, I let them fucking stay there!
I won't  the amount of times I've  I've been in a car or something, where  fucking jump on the brakes!
Yeah.
That's fucking stupid!
Alright, it may be there fault, but what happens if he fucking  get out of control or   then I can  I always try and do it now, if somebody wants to act like a cunt, let them!
Don't try and retaliate  cos then if  if you retaliate 
 
the chances are he's gonna be even more of a nutter retaliating harder  so that gets me.
Yeah.
I  nine times 
 
Half a mile, and he was right up my arse  and I was going at a far pace 
 

forty miles an hour in a forty zone  and he just got, right up my arse, he was obviously somewhere in a hurry  somewhere in a hurry, you know?
I thought, this off he is!
Nine times out of ten .
So I thought, sod you!
I am not gonna  move over and I am going at my own pace, so I slowed down to about twenty miles an hour  and it's a road about four miles long  and er  he just couldn't get past, you know?
Oh thes er there was oncoming traffic, just couldn't get past  and I thought, fuck it!
You're gonna stop behind me mate  and I'm gonna do my own speed  and that annoyed him more  than anything else  that was annoying him.
But why did you try and annoy him?
Alright he was not 
Because he was annoying me, he was right up my arse!
yeah but it isn't a battle!
No it isn't a battle, but  it's not everybody retaliate 
Who who who gets the best who  no but you shouldn't do that's why there's so many accidents with people retaliating.
So!
Course they do!
But don't  don't get me wrong  I mean I'm not saying I'm a fucking  saint, cos I've done and I'll probably do it again  but
But doesn't it annoy when somebody's 
Nine ti 
sitting right up your arse?
About two foot
Yeah.
away from you?
I slow right fucking down!
That's what I do.
Yeah.
Like I said  twenty miles an hour  that 
That's a  ain't it so?
That's annoying you  but for how long without changing your speed,I yo you don't 
Yeah well they  speed up  !
you don't annoy me  it annoys them  they are the ones who are behind me.
Yeah but he's your doing it because it's annoying you though.
Oh no I I, I find it highly amusing that they're getting fucking flustered behind me.
You just said you did it because  them up your arse, it irritates you.
Oh yeah, that irritates me but, I mean it's gonna it's gonna make them think again innit?
Well they they don't have to sit right up your arse, on your tail.
Course it would.
Yeah course it fucking would!
Like I said, nine out of ten if I touch my brakes they'll drop back and if they don't then there ain't nothing I'm gonna do that's gonna make them  drop back.
Well there's plenty of things you can do to make them drop back.
Yeah, stupid things!
Like slam on your brakes or going slow!
If you're doing twenty in a forty and a copper comes along and pulls both of you, it's gonna be you that gets fucking done, not him!
There's no law saying he can't be be an inch up your arse, as long as he don't hit you  If you're doing if you're doing 
Why why why is he 
speed  if you're doing it in a 
Why is  
if you're doing  
I'm doing under twenty miles an hour.
But, have you ever heard of an ob obstructive speed?
If you're, if you're 
No.
if you're obstructing the flow of traffic by doing twenty in a forty  or fifteen in a thirty  then they can, by law, do you.
But like I said  if it  if you, if you do that then it's  for them and for yourself  but them being up your arse is irritating  if you just fucking carry on as if nothing had happened, but you're aware of the th them doing that  then I think it's a fucking  I've  that's a psychological edge over them anyway  it's just the personalities obviously, but er
How can it be a psychological  though?
Cos they they  they've obviously not made sense to realise that, a dog might run out in front of you  but you're doing sixty in a  in a sixty zone and forty in a forty zone  you're gonna have to slam on your  anyway  so it's them  gonna be stupid, it's not you being 
Yeah.
stupid.
That's what I'm saying  so there's no psychological  over  
Cos if if you show them that we're not, they're not getting at you.
Yeah, that's right, they ain't getting at me, I'm getting at them  I'm annoying them 
No they're  can't you see by retaliating, they are getting at you  but if they hadn't of got to you, you wouldn't of retaliated  Like if I,i i it's like if I 
Yeah but  seen that, yeah 
come up and insult you  if it doesn't bother you, you won't say a thing, but if it does bother you'll come back and re say something back.
Yeah.
Exactly!
So if you don't react at all 
I ca I can't get out of that car  and say, you're a fucking wanker  I co the only way I could do, the only way 
No  
yeah, but 
well 
the only way that I can retaliate, towards him, to show him my   cracking up there.
Don't you see by ha don't you see by not retaliating, you're already showing us something  it's just a personal opinion I have I've  it's like, I dunno if  you have the se erm  i if people are taking the mickey out of you, ignore them.
Yeah, that's right.
The same thing, if somebody's annoying you like that, ignore them  like I said, I don't mean  I won't just let them sit there  I'll touch my brakes a couple of times perhaps  do the old bit with the mirror  and like I said, normally if they're  if they're responsible drivers that have just happened, they got a bit close  then maybe they'll drop back  as I've done 
No see  nine times out of ten 
but 
they're fucking wankers!
But they are wank that 
But you know 
but if they are wankers  nothing you do, and including, I mean I've done it in the past, slowed right down and nine times out of ten  it jus it just incenses them to drive even closer.
Yeah, exactly  and tha that's when you slam 
 
your anchors on and they're in the fucking wall!
But you've caused an accident!
Yeah as simple as that, yeah, I mean you've caused an accident
So you soo 
but 
been   driver 
No, cos I haven't caused an accident because they, are in the wrong  anybody that gets, anybody else up the arse no matter what you fucking did to them, it's them wrong.
I know that, I know that Mark.
But you would rather go through all the hassle  and the dam of having the damage repaired to your car 
Yeah.
and all this, just for the sake over a bit of retaliation?
No I wouldn't go as far as that anyway  but I'm saying  they're in the wrong  it's not you in the wrong, they're in 
There is 
the .
there is no law saying that they can't drive that close to you  you're advised against it.
Yeah, exactly  and then it's their their  
But then again yo you're you're advised against going over the speed limit that most people do, I do  I I tell yo like I said I'm not a saint cos like  a couple of times when I was first driving, especially in my fucking sprint  cos it was a quick car  I used to drive up people's arses and wait until I could overtake them  and if they did slow down  that used to incense me and I'd fucking, I'd go right up there arse and then probably try and cut them up when I went, overtook them  and I s fucking learnt, I got a  I had a couple of close calls like, people are slamming brakes on and stuff
Yeah.
and, I didn't so much  I just thought  that it happened to me 
I think you should get 
a couple of times, you know, people were up my arse a couple of times and I retaliated a couple of times 
I think that it's that's very very rude!
Bad driving!
Oh yeah but can 
That somebody should be right up your arse, so if you 
Oh it's not good 
that 
driving, no I'm not 
that, that 
saying that.
that's the way I look at it and 
But you can't you see that 
you  you just show them something to back off, as you say  and my way of doing that is slow down  and then nine times out of ten once they've got the hint, well I'll sp speed it up again.
Like I said, I've slowed down in the past for people like that and they haven't  you know I don't think that 
Well if they don't , then you slow right down again  simple as that.
So that's affecting your journey!
No it isn't!
Not really  my i idea of a journey is  to get there in your own time, you don't have to fucking speed everywhere!
I don't speed everywhere!
it's better than fucking  better be being late  than not being there at all.
Can't you that by retaliating  yo 
No I can't 
you're interrupting your own journey as well.
No I can't  sorry  you're on the lost cause here.
Obviously!
I mean don't get me wrong 
If so if somebody is a bad enough driver to sit right up your arse, three foot away from you then  they deserve all they fucking get!
Simple as that.
But I, I do agree with you  slowing down probably does annoy them more than anything else you could do
Yep.
but then again I'd rather just let them get on with it  I'm not trying to convert you to the better way of doing things, cos obviously I don't know a whether there's 
There no fucking better way of doing things, is there?
But I do if you listen 
Just that it's different  way of dealing with it.
If you listened Mark  without interrupting, I was just about to say  I'm not trying to convert into a better way of doing things because obviously I don't know whether that's a different, a better way of doing it, what I said  It's a just a 
It's a stu 
different way of doing things.
Alright, yeah.
Yeah but you interrupted!
Yeah, exactly  cos there's not a better way of doing  as far as I'm concerned.
No if you listened I wasn't gonna say that!
This is why you and Chris are so alike, you won't let anybody fucking finish what they're gonna say!
You just jump in half-cocked, and get the wrong idea of the argument then  I was just about to say to you  that isn't the better way of doing things, cos obviously neither of us knows that way  it's just a different way and it was just a  a matter of opinion  so I mean 
 
at the end of the day it doesn't really make no odds, as long as I'm not the bloke you're doing it to!
But then again  I wouldn't be up tha far up your arse  I mean, like you sa , you must have found yourself a couple of times getting close to somebody  and without realising it and then they 
Yeah.
maybe touch the brakes, and you back off, yeah.
No no I I don't do that i I  I I get to within about ten feet, on the motorway, or twenty feet on the motorway and that's about as close as I get.
That's still too close.
Oh yeah, it's too close
But don't 
Ah 
you, don't you mean sometimes they touch they're brakes 
I mean as I as I get a 
and you realise, ooh shit, I'm a bit too close here, back off!
No as as I'm going towards them I start touching my brakes anyway,
Yeah.
and I don't give any of this shit with lights  If they're doing seventy miles an hour, and I'm going faster  and they're, all the overtaking lanes are taken, then I'll slow down  to their speed, I won't 
Yeah.
attempt to go past 
No I'm not I'm not saying that,hav haven't you found yourself a couple of times, not really so much on the motorway at all you just
No  not really 
you just find yourself up someone's arse  without realising it.
Not unless I'm doing it deliberately.
No I know.
About fifteen, twenty foot  all the time.
That's too close.
No it's not  they reckon you should leave a two second gap  if yo , if you're travelling at thirty, forty miles an hour.
Here, have you got your erm  highway code here?
What are the braking distances you know?
Three 
seventy five  a hundred  
thirty five .
Seventy five innit?
What thirty?
Say thirty.
Thirty is seventy five.
Yeah, four foot.
 

So it's thirty  by seventy five alright   by  is thirty five .
In which case fifteen or twenty foot is far too close.
Okay, it's too close  but how many, how many cars travel  any further than that apart?
I certainly do.
Oh right.
And tha that is one thing I'm, I mean I'm not  I'm not the best driver in the world, but that is one thing I do try not to do  cos as you say no matter what the circumstances are, if I go up the back of somebody it is my fault.
Yeah, exactly!the back of too many fucking cars!
And you still s dri driving fifteen or twenty foot away.
Eh  well that was just a fucking  example!
Well I mean I, yeah alright.
I d I don't know how 
Yeah.
far I drive away from them  it could it could be twe 
But you would, you think it's enough though?
it could be twenty foot, it could be thirty foot, it could be forty foot  how, how ca how far can you tell?
All I know  is that I think it's a safe distance for me to drive behind that car  at any given time.
Yeah.
And the only way you can do that  is when you judge  when you know tha your car.


Mm.
What's that?
I said what really bugs me is when I'm driving and you come from behind somebody and then somebody overtakes you and .
Yep.
Yeah they come right up 
Yeah but mind you
then cut past .
All I know  bibbing 
I'd 
your horn  and cut him up a bit.
Yeah.
Then when he stops, get out the car and grab him by the neck then throw   then I .
.
Fucking been talking!
There you go  
Alright  excuse me going on the road 
Didn't realise you'd got the shafts again now.
Eh?
Didn't realise we got the shafts again now.
We haven't have we?
I think.
Oh right.
I'd just had enough of them so I was gonna do them when we got the shafts, like  then I see what you do.
Yeah.
and I really thought you'd  got the shafts in.
Oh that's dodgy that is!
I'd rather do them again   dislike them.
It's just at an inch this innit Mark?
Eh?
About an inch deep.
Yeah,.
Another Terence special!
Don't forget to put the old  inserts in as well.
Yeah.
After Christmas we won't have any work, but we'll have plenty of  spare benches in, we'll be laughing!
Spread ourselves around a bit.
Why who else is going?
Got Stuart  
and Alec.
Actually that'll be quite good cos you won't be on anybody's bench wherever  vi 
Me thinks me hath  sharpened up my blade too much!


Well if I can, it's the wrong bloody head!
That's alright.
Ha  I'm just glad I don't juggle with chain sa , chain saws!
Chain saws.
They reckon there's somebody in the States that does, isn't there?
Yeah.
There is yeah.
There is.
He was on erm  oh what's that ventriloquist, Ron  show
Yeah.
That's right yeah 
one weekend.
my son's seen it, yeah.
Yeah, bloody three of them going!
 

One slip and you're in the cacky aren't you?
Your mate  would be dead if he did that!
I just can't imagine how you could rhythm if it's like that  I suppose you gotta s start with them all running but still 
Yeah.
No way!
They're quite large as well, weren't they?
They're about  foot and a half blades on them.
No way!
I can't even juggle three 
Might even be 
Ever tried  juggling, beyond three?
You can't do it, I tell you.
erm what's his name, the er  
Yeah, yeah.
He used to be able to do it didn't he, old tap tap?
Yeah that's right.
Er  what was his name?
Mick.
Mick 
Metal Mickey.
Metal Mickey.
Ah does he have  
Can't  
now,?
No it was.
It got  did he?
Yeah he got moved out.
Mick  Mick.
Worked in the part   the pioneer cord, little Yorkshire fellow.
Vince.
worked out .
What did he do?
Japanese one .
Oi!
I I've spent a fiver on .
I said bou bought a Proton motor car and took
Yeah and about ten  
Bought a Jap.
walk back to the car lot!
He jacked it in for something different  did  
got    about two hundred  
, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah it's  cabriolet  .
I see,
 

And that and that.
Not Mick  was it?
No.
isn't it?
No Mick  was one of the  the brothers weren't he?
Pete   Mick .
What's his name?can't remember  fucking name!
Who?


Victor?
That's all everybody only  called him anyway wannit?
It's for that thing.
Wanna know the regional accents as well 
Oh
and all that sort of shit.
well I only lived in London for about six months.
I mean  I've lived in here for the last fourtee thirteen years and I've lived in Northern Ireland and Bradford and all sorts.
So I   
You're a right mixed up fucker.
Yeah, well I was an  army kid wasn't I?
So  we went all over the place.
Yeah.
How long have you been down then?
Down here?
Yeah.
Lived in Farnborough for thirteen  thirteen fourteen years now.
I would have thought so.
It's probably where I've picked most of it up.
My accent's certainly changed since I've been down here.
Yeah.
Apparently I used to talk a bit like a  thick northernish
Sandhurst 
Sandhurst.
A Berks  Berks boy.
Born in Reading, lived 
Berkshire boy.
You lived in boy's town?
College town.
Oh college town.
So that probably explains a few things.
No  no 
Self circumcision.
You'd probably charge me for it as well wouldn't you?
Only if I can  kneecap first.
That would probably solve a lot of problems actually.
Yeah?
Got water on the knee?
Thanks very much.
Oh my life.
It is isn't it?
gotta go the other way 
Yeah I know.
get the hump then.
I told you, don't take any notice of him.
The only ones he's ever done was bodge it and scarper himself so
What?
Your idea of  bodge it .
Bodging.
Where's that screw gone now?
Alright old boy?
Wotcha.
Fancy a bit of the old er pop groups you know?
Video ?
Hello  
No I'm busy you.
Don't try and drag us away  down with your slipshod ways.
We're already there.
. Don't need dragging down, we're already there.
I said don't try and drag us down with your slipshod ways.
You two'd stick together even if you didn't agree wouldn't you?
I do know I'm  you inform me every five minutes.
If I had a little money  in a rich man's world  .
Pretty woman  walking down the street .
Pardon me.
To Las Vegas or Monaco da da da    money money money  funny in a rich man's world .
Don't know why I'm singing that I don't even like .
Don't like Abba?
Erm 
What the fuck is up with you?
I dunno I'd  I'd probably listen to it but I'd I've never gone out and bought any of them.
No I haven't.
Not .
They're back in the charts .
Are they?
Have you seen that piss take group?
The Aussie piss take group born again?
Bjorn Again .
The Aussie piss take group  out of Abba.
They're like erm  they they've got they've all got funny, it's, do you know like the  Asterix names and that?
Yeah.
They've all got  it's like that but it's Swedish.
Like the they're names are Swedish sounding but  if you put them together like an  Asterix book they they sound like something else.
And they sing all, they sing all the songs and that.
It's just a piss take group.
They dress like them and they look like them, they sing like them.
Cor, if they look like erm  Agnetha cor!
Yeah.
Blond one.
Blond one.
She does actually.
Well she doesn't 
Fucking gorgeous.
I mean not brilliantly but she's a well tasty bitch whoever does it.
She used to be absolutely gorgeous.
And the darker, the er redhead woman as well.
Mm.
Many a schoolboy fantasy.
Yeah they used to wear like really fucking short dresses and  jumpsuits and stuff open to their navel didn't they?
Yeah.
I remember it well .
That's another perv.
No you're talking to the original perv here.
The Pans People era.
You must remember Pans  Pans People?
Only in lust filled dreams mate.
No I li I sort of, yeah sort of remember them.
I  I can't  I mi , who was the last dancers they had on Top of the Pops?
I can't even really remember them very well.
That was a whi , long time ago wasn't it?
Yeah.
Oh gawd.
Legs was it or something?
Yeah something like that.
Legs and Co.
Legs and Co.
They were the last ones.
That was er must be about  eight nine years ago.
Oh it was more than that I should think.
Yeah?
Probably is.
Yeah I'm much  must have been only a very young teenager.
Thirteen  fourteen.
Well, ten years ago I would have been twelve but
What now old boy?
Hey ya .
Ten years ago you were leaving school weren't you?
No.
I never left school till I was fifteen.
Oh  right.
Sixteen actually.
Right, nine years ago.
all over the fucking place .
Might as well get rid of that.
As much good as a fucking chocolate ashtray.
Do the walk of love .
Er has anyone got a pencil sharpener?
No it's alright, here you are .
 

Do you know  when they won the Eurovision Song Contest?
Yeah.
Were they singing for Sweden?
Yeah.
They were.
Waterloo  I was defeated you won the war .
Oh shit    Mark remembers.
I remember watching that as well.
I can only just remember Bucks Fizz.
That was a long time ago as well.
Cor yeah.
You know what won them that?
It was when they fucking 
They was taking those skirts .
Yeah.
Yeah.
And they whipped the the skirts off.
Because they were both nice women weren't they?
Yeah.
Cheryl  Cheryl Baker and 
Oh god
the other one left didn't she?
Yeah.
Quite, quite a bit of disgrace actually cos she was having an affair with er the tour manager wasn't she?
Something like that.
And they were both, weren't he married or something?
Yeah.
I thought she was the tasty one as well.
Cor yeah.
Shorter but prettier.
Shelley Preston?
Yeah.
That rings a bell.
Shelley something.
Shelley certainly rings a bell.
Excuse me.
Yeah they went into an upbeat  time didn't they?
They  ripped loads of people off.
Yeah.
Actually they  they were  quite good.
They weren't bad anyway.
Oh I I would certainly reckon that was the best song on there for two or three years.
And, and after as well.
Oh I don't know, there was some fucking  that that German one which won it, erm  what was her name?
Nina.
Erm 
Oh the one that sung in English and German and Spanish and French and Italian?
Yeah, right at the end.
That was fucking brilliant.
I didn't like the song but I must admit I thought it was quite clever.
It was brilliant.
That's the first time I've ever seen that done.
Or ever saw it done on the Eurovision.
Yeah as I say I didn't like the song but I, that was well clever.
Oh I dunno, it got to number one.
Europe wide didn't it?
Yeah.
I know I still didn't like it.
It got to number one here.
Yeah  I thought it was pretty good.
No, it wasn't really my cup of tea .
But yeah it was well  she, what did she, she sung in English and German  Spanish and French
She went right round.
She did the
Yeah.
the whole European countries.
I think she I think she did about eight or nine European countries didn't she?
Yeah.
I think the only one she missed was Turkish .
Cos that  the year they won that was the first year that  what was it erm
Turkey hadn't finished last or something weren't it?
No, who was it?
Finland got zero points.
Oh that's right.
Finland yeah.
Poor old Finland they never seemed to get many points did they?
The the the the trouble is  he got more recognition for that  for getting no points at all than he did probably if he'd have bloody won that thing.
The the trouble is though their  their erm language just doesn't lend itself very well to pop music does it?
Well no they're  the thing is with the European  Song Contest  each different country has its own tendency, has its own leanings towards different types of material.
I mean no  no  erm
Yeah and you're you're own judge can't vote for yourself can you?
Yeah.
That's it.
I mean 
That's why matey never got any points.
Cos nobody else liked Finland or something.
But didn't they get that, get that 
I mean they  y you 
for two or three years though?
You you think about, yeah.
Two or three times Finland got 
Three times on the trot.
Finland got no points.
And it was the same bloke each time.
Was it?
Yeah.
Was he the  was he the only singer- songwriter in the country or something then?
Something like that.
That must have been the only man ever to get no points three times in a row.
They have had some crap win it though.
Been a couple of good ones though.
Yeah.
Well there has been like 
Puppet on a Chain.
erm 
 
But who was that  Johnny Logan.
He was good.
Yeah.
That was a nice song.
We've won it a couple of times haven't we?
Won it about six times.
Have we?
Yeah.
Didn't realize we'd won it that many.
Erm  Bucks Fizz er 
The only ones, it was Petula Clark and Bucks Fizz the ones I know.
Eh?
Petula Clark and Bucks Fizz are the ones I remember?
Petula Clark, Lulu.
Erm 
Really?
Er
What did she sing?
Oh god 
Er  Mary Hopkins 
Is that what she sung?
Erm no no.
Er Puppet on a String was er
No it was Petula Clark weren't it?
No.
Mary Hopkins.
Erm 
Who sung what did Petula Clark sing?
I can only remember those two.
Er   save all your kisses for  Brotherhood of Man.
Brotherhood of Man yeah, that's true.
Erm 
That was a number one for years wasn't it?
What you done now Trev?
Nothing.
He's just trying to take the grease out of his fingers.
Erm erm erm erm erm erm erm  Cliff Richards won it once.
No, he was a professional though.
He wou , which wouldn't be allowed to enter.
Yes.
It was.
Thought only non-professionals were allowed to enter?
No, there's loads of them.
Really, as I said, really  
Say hey girl take a walk on the wild side .
Yeah but I thought in the case of like Petula Clark and Lulu it was  because they won it that got them into the  scene sort of thing.
Certainly did for Bucks Fizz didn't it?
They 
Yeah.
released an album on the strength of that song.
Oh!
Fuck me, he is in.
Course.
Ooh.
Bloody hell.
Hallo Damian.
How the devil are you?
Hallo mate.
Not too bad.
How much is  did you have to pay extra on this?
Yeah.
I didn't get mine with Tech I didn't buy  Technics .
No?
They were eighty quid.
Eighty quid are they?
Yeah.
Cos they're virtually the third best going anyway .
I I've heard quite good things .
Sony.
I could have got but they were seventy quid.
I didn't mind paying that sort of money but after spending so much on the Technics I couldn't afford another eighty quid  
You going home?
Yeah I  I might go and treat myself to some today.
Cos they've got  see I don't know whether  I don't know whether it  makes it   Hemmings hey've got nought percent disc er interest and all that sort of stuff on every single thing
Yeah.
so I'm gonna see if they've got 
Cos you can pay it off in ten monthly instalments you see so  eight quid a month sort of thing.
No I might just go an see what sort of deal I can get.
Yeah.
Cos I've been meaning to get myself some.
does it round about fifty quid.
But if you've got a decent Technics he said you want the best integrated
Yeah I might, I mean I might I might go in   the best ones I can get.
Say I've got a .
I'm not  I'm not overly fussed about this five C D carousel.
But it's good, don't get me wrong, it is well  well  but I  really don't think you need it.
Cos I, I mean I tend to change my mind about  I'll be listening half way through a song and then get pissed  get pissed off with the album and go and 
Yeah I know .
change it.
And nine times out of, alright say I've got another four choices but nine times out of ten I'll go and  I will have put those four on, in the mood that I'm sort of feeling  then I'll fucking, I want to listen to something completely different.
listen to The Jam I might want to go and listen to fucking  bit of heavy rock or something or  bit of pop or something you know?
Yeah.
So  I don't think I've ever  I've had it for about eight months now and I don't think I've yet  listened to all five in a row  without changing it.
Mine's just the one C D.
Yeah.
The only trouble is with that, if you're changing it for different albums all the time it can wear out the gears and that .
That's the only trouble, cos I'm always changing the damn thing.
Well maybe it is a good thing, yeah.
Cos all I have to do is .
Cos you 
 
I I quite like the idea of these double ones you see  don't they?
What?
The the double tray ones.
No.
My auntie's got one 
Don't think Tech I think Pioneer do them don't they?
Yeah, and Sharp.
My auntie's got one  which takes six discs in a little box like that.
It flips out  with six discs in it .
Yeah.
Which that is a good idea cos erm  if you get bored with one song or one album you just click it and it goes to that .
But I have to keep changing it.
carousel as well 
Yeah.
but like I said  nine times out of ten if I've got pissed off with an album I change all of them.
Just have a  and I I don't listen to that lot then.
It's well flash though, it really is.
It's like I said you you can lift up the cover  and change four while one's playing.
It's only the one that's got like the bit over the top of it.
What's this?
A Technics carousel for the C D.
It's like five C D's in 
Two of me uncles have got  one  stacking system without the  put in a cassette or a cartridge type  allowed six.
Yeah.
And it just ch shoots one in.
Yeah.
I must admit I quite like these little mini systems, they're well powerful.
I can't stand them.
Really?
I don't like them at all.
Oh I think they're  quite good.
Cos I've got I've got 
There's no turntable though.
Yeah I know, well  I haven't got a turntable with mine but  
Do you remember Andy ?
Tubby, worked out there.
He had about three thousand pounds worth of C D in his car.
Yeah.
What, one of those ten  the one you put in the boot?
Fucking amazing it was.
He'd say he'd give you 
Gotta fill it up with ten C D's and you just got 
he give 
like a little   pad in your car.
Yeah he give  give me a booklet  and they get a little booklet with it.
And he'd say just take a look through  he said  just any one you want he said and I'll programme it that'll  come straight through and he sort of s six speakers  fucking ridiculous.
What car did he have?
Only an A M .
Citroen A, top of the range Citroen A M .
Cos I went to this kit car show and they had erm
Absolutely fucking beautiful motor though.
anyway not unless  music coming out.
No.
I was gonna say cos if he's got that, that much it's probably more, more than the car's worth.
They had this, they had this  A T Cobra 
Yeah it's about, no it's about fourteen fifteen grand 
kit car right?and they had, it was a V twelve jag  engine in it right?
Under the bonnet, and it was fucking, it was it was the best kit there.
It won, it won the best kit car and this was at the national show so you imagine how good this thing was.
Mm.
And in the boot it had one of these things.
And all it's got, just on the little armrest was like a little pack like that.
And it could programme everything on it, just in that pack, the radio and everything.
Yeah?
Fucking well .
And I saw  come just over the top of the doors as well.
All nicely trimmed, oh it was immaculate, all chrome roll bars, chrome  bits at the front.
. Fucking good car.
And he started it up  V twelve jag engine .
I nearly fucking  I was that excited with this car.
It was fucking great.
But I mean if I had enough money to do it, like that's the kit I'd do.
Yeah.
Cos I've I've thought about a kit before but  for the money I've got I couldn't do what I really wanted.
But if I had the money this is the car I'd do.
And I've  
Well you've only got five pence so it don't allow you to fucking do  
That's right.
Doesn't even spend on the Airfix paint.
And I I thought the only ones I've ever seen and they've got like things like three eight and  Chevvy  or  maybe a V er  .
And they're all nice engines  but there is nothing that will ever get anywhere near the V twelve .
They're just pure fucking power and it's it's  He'd sit there and vroom 
Bit like me really.
Just pure pure power.
Been dreaming again boy.
No this was fucking .
Actually you remind me of my fucking Triumph 
Sleek looks.
at the moment Mark.
Firing on two cylinders.
Ha ha ha ha ha.
That nose of yours is really  
 
No, my car's are alright at the moment actually.
I've put it in the paper this week again.
Have you?
How much have you got it in for?
Five fifty.
Oh.
How much are you hoping to get?
Four fifty.
I I I'd take a drop of a hundred, yeah.
Thing is I, I actually think it's worth fi about five hundred.
Cos they're not gonna get a brilliant car but they're certainly gonna get an alright one.
Yeah, but your fucking biased aren't you?
No I mean, the thing is I, all I wanna do is get rid of this fucking thing now.
It's been sitting outside my house for over a month.
And  it's got an immaculate interior  it's got an immaculate interior right?
It's got average mileage for the, well below average mileage for the year.
It's got an M O T, tax  two new wheels on the back erm  it's got an alright engine.
There's nothing wrong with it.
Er the bodywork's not brilliant  but for a B reg car it's alright.
Who do you reckon this cheap ?
It's gotta go on age really.
It's   They're all as bad as each other.
How many miles has it done?
How many what?
Miles  has my car done?
Ninety seven thousand.
Original engine?
Er no.
Had er  had erm  er 
Rekcon.
Rekcon at about twenty thousand ago.
So it's only done twenty thousand miles  
No it's not full, it was just bits and bobs.
It's a proper  V L arts and stuff.
It's not one of these Goldseal or anything.
So it's not the original engine?
Yeah.
It is the original engine in the original car.
It's just had bits and bobs added.
Like  well  it it's had  it's had enough added to it  a recon, but not enough added so it's a new engine.
It's had well I think it's had a short engine rather than the whole lot.
It's a it's a good engine.
I've never had any problems with it.
The only problems I've ever had with it was the fucking n erm  that thingie I had weren't it?
The er what was it when you called out the A A?
That was the  starter weren't it?
The er accelerator .
.
Put it, put it over there mate.
Give it to me, I'm in charge.
Well
Should have those   this week right?
I've given the two  to Jim as well together so
Right.
Mark is doing them.
Going over for inspection 
Then hopefully they're going on to 
Yeah.
Well we had a few problems didn't we?
No, no problem.
We're going straight 
Well you've had your hands on all of them now so it's probably highly likely.


Fucking hell!
I'd shut up if I was him.
Yeah I was I was gonna say  
 
He helped me.
He helped me fuck them up.
No.
Where were you born?
Just fucking tell me now.
He's got, he wants to know that dialect thing doesn't he?
He wants to know regional dialects and stuff for this thing he's taping.
London?
Not Battersea Park.
Battersea dog's home!
Saint Thomas's?
No.
Saint Mary's I think.
Something like that.
Who?
Saint Mary's.
Saint Mary's.
Something like that I think.
Yeah.
That rings a bell somewhere.
Somewhere, somewhere  .
Somewhere in London .
There's a  there's a few of them around in London.
I mean.
Not Saint Mary's.
There's a few fucking saints in London yeah?
Well there was for six months.
dialect   sorry?
There was for six months when I was there.
Regional accents.
I was only born there and I lived there for about six months and then got taken out.
Couldn't handle that any more.
Yeah we know about you.
I was such a party animal at the 
So fuck  
age of six months that they couldn't handle me any more.
No it's 
they wanna know regional dial dialects.
 
We got moved on to Crete.
The Oxford English Dictionary old man.
They're doing a
Doing a conversational  dictionary.
Everyday common or garden speech.
So there's swear words in there, farts burps.
We love you Chelsea we do 
Especially  
that sort of thing in there.
Guess who that's from?
We've got a few er right conversations with Barry as well, slagging off the management so er  we're gonna use that for
blackmail.
Blackmail.
But that's an ugly ugly word.
We like to think of it as extortion don't we?
Yeah.
It's a much nicer word.
It's longer, it makes me feel educated as well dunnit?
Shut up .
Oh dear.
He's been going on all day old boy.
Well fucking hell!
There's him that  says that and you can't get a fucking wor word in edgeways when he starts yattering.
You can speak now.


Have you had a  you've had a  done ain't you?
Yeah.
I was gonna say I was gonna have the er top one off cos I was jealous.
I was only like that.
No, I was too late now.
They've already had them.
I'll give it a go matey, it'll come off.
Halfway down
Yeah.
Fucking take it all off if you like.
Don't worry me.
the fucking thing  in a week.
Now now Mark.
There you are Mark, are you gonna do that?
What?
I'm gonna tell you what  come the twelfth right  anything I don't want damaged I'm taking home and locking up.
Why?
I'm taking me chair home.
Because with Mark and that the amount of practical jokes we  we've been playing anyway I can see fucking  saw, our legs being sawn off chairs and stuff.
So I'm
I'm taking anything I don't want damaged home I think the night before and then bringing it back next Monday.
I'll have to stand up all day Friday 
Oh no, that's too much hassle.
Well I'll just get a jig  sit on it.
Cos I can see a lot of fucking shit happening.
last Friday 
 
What Friday?
Friday the thirteenth everyone's sort of leaving.
Eh?
Can see a lot of practical jokes being played.
Like saws and erm legs being 
Eh?
Well I'll get mine out.
It's going in my kitchen.
afford to chuck away good stuff.
Just give it a bit of a paint and it'll be  well away.
Eh you?
Oi  oi
Oh god  hurry up with the beer .
Have you got their new album.
That's good as well.
It's a good album.
See the video to that?
It's a good album actually.
I wanna get hold of Chris Rea's album.
couple of his songs but  his albums.
Auberge is supposed to be a quite good one.
Like, that's his most recent one innit?
Yeah he's got Auberge  Road to Hell Road to Hell one and two.
Yeah that's supposed to be quite good.
I said I've liked  I've liked most songs he's put out I've just never had an al bought an album or anything.
But that er 
Anybody watch The Word the other night?
No.
That fucking  Christian ate, he's a right wanker isn't he?
He can't interview anybody to save his life.
He's quite a cool trendy dude and all that but
Yes.
he can't interview anybody.
No.
What's this new  woman like?
Oh her  blond bird.
She's hot mate.
Yes yes yes yes.
Is she really.
I ain't seen this series I just sort of remember from the last series.
I didn't act I didn't actually mean from erm  the sexual point of view.
I wondered what she was like on the programme, you know?
She's alright.
Is  De Cadenet till on it?
Who?
Amanda De Cadenet or has she left now?
Think she's left.
There's only those two.
Yeah  it's great ain't they?
Great.
And he had this
Did did you see it a couple of weeks ago where
No, I've never seen it.
where where they  stuck things on their head and he goes I know if I if I  if I stick a  a pot 
Yeah he goes I'm  I'm  pot on his head 
on my head you can call me Normal Lamont.
And he sticks a pot on his head and everybody goes  where's Norman?
And sticks a pot on his head.
Ah there he is!
Was it  you probably won't believe this but I've never seen a programme of Spitting Image.
Never?
Never.
Better start fucking watching .
The only  is that  bloke who's on the ten o'clock news 
I've seen the odd snip of it like on telly, but I've never actually seen a programme.
Couple of weeks ago they were going on about erm  Essex.
Singing a song on Essex is crap, and all this lark.
And that nigger bloke comes in who does the ten o'clock news he goes to all these people who live in Essex, we're very sorry that you have to take up this very abusive language and this sort of shit.
And  comes on  you have to admit though, you are fucking crap, ooh .
Taking the piss out of old Arnie.
Oh  yeah.
And his little willie.
Yes, yeah.
Who's got a little willie?
Not me.
Massive.
Fucking hell!
I didn't realize I had to  I just filled up 
watch London's Burning?
No, I can't stand that.
I say I saw the very first film of it
London's Burning.
I I've only ever seen the first film of it.
make a regular appointment to watch
I don't stay in to watch it  and end up taping it.
I watch I'll probably watch about half an hour tonight, an hour tomorrow night.
There's nothing really though  that I would   I want to see other than American football.
I tape that 
Yeah Minder yeah yeah yeah.
Yeah I know I  watch the first one  video fucked up.
.
Taped every one of that.
just on a Sunday afternoon now.
Merlin or something.
Was it on last night?
Saturday weren't it?
It's a repeat of the very very very old 
Gonna say, yeah
Which one was it about  er?
Christmas one I wanna see, they get killed off.
Yeah.
They get killed off.
They get killed?
some sort of drug or something 
Yeah.
and get killed off.
Do they?
Yeah.
Get killed off?
Yeah.
That was another programme which I, I've always thought was alright.
I've never bothered 
I've never really taken  that much of an interest  Only Fools and Horses
Specially where  specially where they had the baby
Yeah.
Damien.
Damien, and that fucking music 


The way he was looking at it right at the end when he's  looking back at him and he 
It cracks me up but it's not something I'd 
That and Minder are definitely 
I never saw any of the new Minder.
I thought that new geezer was alright really.
Yeah.
Well if B B C one get it
Yeah 
Yeah they'll bring Terry back.
Will they?
Yeah.
If they get it.
Cos I T V .
Yeah.
Yeah I know that, but why will they bring Terry ?
I thought that one got good ratings.
Cos they haven't 
What, Minder?
actually tried to replace him have they.
Yeah.
Oh I think.
Oh it used to crack me up.
Cos the character was so obnoxious.
You hardly see Kirstie Alley in it, she's only  forty five minutes and that's it.
It's all you ever see of her though.
Yeah.
She gets paid a fortune for that as well.
Yeah.
 
 
fucking made me cringe, that story.
Because of the mother in it.
with erm  you ever seen that?
Yeah.
Language Timothy.
Who's the little gi erm Ronnie Corbett.
 
Yeah.
Ronnie Corbett.
He had that really overpowering mother.
Marvellous.
He was about forty three years old and living at home and his mother was like  well wrap up warm now  
Yeah I know what you mean.
I tell you what, that was so  ooh  you wanted to kill her.
Wound me up that mother.
The only thing that er  the only two characters that really wind me up  Mrs Mangle from Neighbours 
That's 
Dorothy Cotton.
She fucking gets on my tits.
Old Mangle doesn't wind me up as much as this  this other one  one with glasses.
Dorothy.
Yeah  this one winds me up more than Mangle .
I mean how could she have a son like Joe?
I mean that, that is  absolutely  totally unbelievable innit?
I mean Joe, Joe's  Joe's so 
 
Joe's so easy going isn't he?
He's unbelievable.
And he's got an old dragon of a mother.
Joe Mangle.
Has he has he left the series for good?
Yeah.
No, cos he gets married to Melanie.
Melanie?
Yeah.
Who does?
I thought she'd left?
Joe Mangle.
I thought she left?
It is, it was in a magazine.
You sure?
Yeah.
It ain't to do with Melanie, I'm sure it ain't.
with her donkey laugh.
I thought she'd left.
How old's she supposed to be?
Eighteen  
 
Stay on there you bastard.
They've all walked out on poor Paul.
Eh?
Who have?
The girls.
Have they?
They were well tasty.
I  and that Jane when she was in it.
Just cos you've messed up your practical your your personal life  it don't mean you have to take it out on the rest of us.
So wha who and he started getting all those  carry on like that  all one at a time they walk out.
Ha ha.
Jim's son.
Paul 
Robinson.
Robinson.
They're on about Neighbours.
And here's to you Paul Robinson .
Home and Away mate.
Yeah, I watch that and all.
I used to.
How's old   ha has she erm
She's changed.
Different character.
Yeah, she's changed.
No  has she
She changed ages ago.
Yeah I know.
yet?
I dunno, I've missed .
I've missed .
Cos I've seen that bird in something else as well.
Who's that?
Rachel.
Let's face it, they've all been in something else.
If you watch Prisoner  ninety, ninety percent of er of the actors have  been seen in Prisoner.
Been in Neighbours.
There was some, who was Paul's father?
He used to be in erm
Jim.
Young Doctors didn't he?
Eh?
Yeah.
He was in Young Doctors.
Yeah, Jim Robinson.
Curly hair.
Yeah.
Yeah?
Paul Robinson was in er Prisoner  Cell Block H.
Was he?
Shane in Neighbours was in the Flying Doctor .
Yeah.
So was , so's Harold.
Yeah.
Henry's in er Home and Away, instead of Neighbours.
Was.
Still in it.
The thing is  you've gotta feel sorry for these Aussie's haven't you?
Cos that's their idea of culture.
Don't seem to do too bad out of it.
I mean we've got real upmarket programmes like Coronation Street.
Coronation Street.
Eastenders.
And Brookside.
Crossroads  a few years ago.
Oh my life!
Don't blaspheme.
Emmerdale Farm.
Emmerdale Farm is not bad.
Rather like Emmerdale Farm.
The Bill.
The Bill's good.
Is there one of the  one of the women in Emmerdale Farm getting raped or something soon?
That was ages ago.
That was Cathy.
Oh was it?
That was ages ago.
Yeah.
She's married  she married the bloke who raped her as well.
She did what?
No it's a fairly normal sort of thing in everyday life really isn't it?




She married the bloke who raped her?
No, it is  it is up in Yorkshire Barry.
Happens all the time!
Haven't you ever heard about it?
It's not unusual  
 
old boy, it's only a fucking T V programme 
Yeah but they 
No they don't!
Oh yes they do.
At the end of the day old boy, at the end of the day 
The only reason that I'm enjoying Neighbours again at the moment is that I haven't seen it for month and I'm trying to work out  which characters have changed, which characters are getting married to which other ones.
Who's just divorced who.
Do you ever watch the very first series?
No?
Yeah.
I did.
I got right into it the first couple of series.
Oh I did.
The first time I ever watched it  Daphne.
Yeah, when she came a stripper.
When I  when I, no.
Yeah.
First series when she moved in the street.
Yeah, she was a stripper originally wasn't she?
Yeah.
Did you see ?
Yeah I saw  
I remember old plain Jane when her transformation  
Yeah.
I saw it when she had somebody prowling round her house and that .
She was outside in the garage 
The amount of crappy car accidents happening in that fucking Neighbours.
It must be the most  emotionally unstable province in the world, that.
Yeah,.
Terri there's always divorces going on.
Break ups in marriages, break up in boyfriends and girlfriends.
That don't happen in real life.
And that's 


I mean Jason and Kylie getting married at the age of  seventeen or something and then like two months later getting  and one of them moving to Tasmania.
Well that was Joe er Henry or something weren't it?
And every time they get brought back it's a different character  or a different actor playing the character.
What's that little girl's name?
Er 
Lucy.
Yeah, she come back as a bloody  well, thirteen year old  was a five year old and she come back 
Cor yeah!
She came back rather  cor!
as a thirteen year old.
Yeah I was gonna say, she went away as a little kid
Yeah.
and come back as a bloody teenager with big tits and everything.
With, with threepennies.
She didn't have threepennies, she had pounds, I tell you.
I remember old Clive when he was first there 
Yeah.
that was fucking brilliant.
Oh jeez.
And Melanie's laugh!
Oh!
Clive Gibbons.
Actually he made a return a couple of months back didn't he?
Yeah, he made a return not so long ago.
What was his name?
Who?
Bertha.
Bertha.
Tell you what though , for someone who doesn't watch it you don't half know a lot about it.
I did use to watch it.
When I was on nights I used to watch it all the time.
Yeah.
watch it when you have your dinner.
you soon figure out what's going on.
I haven't seen it now, any  any at all for about a month  and within two episodes I've picked up everything.
Yeah.
The most interesting thing about going, coming back to it is trying to work out who's got married to who and  who's divorcing who and what baby belongs to which person.
Shit hot  Neighbours.
Yeah but what you, it's not like a sort of a good story where you miss something.
Because when you come back  when you come back to it 
 
you don't feel as if you've missed anything.
same as the last episode isn't it?
I heard somebody  they're behind over there in Australia 
We are.
We're behind  two years behind.
got a new Madge and new everything over there 
yeah, got a new Madge.
Harold died   Probably Neighbours have been burned down by now.
Where's my quid there Richard?
Oh yeah.
Where's my fifty p  Tin Tin ?
Oi!
What?
Eh?
Well where's my fucking ?
You owe me a quid, you cheeky 
What about my fifty p?
Fucking hell, where's my tenner?
can of Coke.
Fifty p?
Fuck off.
A can of Coke it was.
I give you a quid, you give me fifty p back.
I didn't.
What, you think you're bollocks have dropped, cunt?
Scouts leader, all that sort of stuff.


 Akela in the Cubs.
Brown Owl the Brownies.
Never ever joined the Cubs or the Scouts  
Bit of a black sheep really.
I joined the A T C once  for a couple of months.
I used to go on St John's Ambulance .
I was in that for about three years.
Load of fucking crap.
Eh?
Diabolical 
have to go through some tests.
Yeah, it's daft really .
They used to give us loads of tests, this bird  
I tell you a good programme which used to be on was erm  oh fucking Auf Wiedersehn Pet.
Did you ever watch it?
Fucking brilliant.
Even the second programme was good weren't it?
Valerie and fucking er  Moxie, you aright Moxie?
Spain weren't they, the second one?
Eh?
In Marbella in the second one weren't they?
Yeah.
They  they had to  they had to cut the scenes cos that Gary  died half way through didn't he?
Yeah.
Fucking hell!
Fucking hell!
Hundred and one pounds to get a fucking tooth 
Fucking hell!
Where's he going?
He must go to the most expensive dentist on the face of the earth.
What's he doing, having platinum fillings or what?
six months.
I haven't been for three years.
 
No I I need a  done he said.
I've got to have er a wisdom tooth out.
All I normally ever end up doing is having them fucking cleaned  
 
Yeah I've got to have mine cleaned as well.
Yeah.
teeth out.
I just fucking lost them all playing rugby and boxing.


Goes through a new set every now and then like.
Yeah.
I tell you what.
It's most embarrassing cos my  do does your old may wear y wear his teeth false teeth all the time?
Yeah.
Except for when he goes to bed
Mine 
he takes them out and puts them on the sideboard.
It's fucking disgusting.
Yeah.
Ugh!
And a piece of tissue or something like that.
And when he fucking walks out somewhere he  he'll always put his teeth in his fucking pocket .
Ah no!
He'll be sitting down  
He what?
Joking!
Thing is, my old man's had them for so long that  he just, he he puts them in a  in a cup of this like sterile solution every night.
And erm that's it then.
Have you ever seen that done?
Somebody put their fucking false teeth in their beer?
When they go to the pisser.
Ah!
Ah.
It's fucking disgusting.
Stop deters people 
Why don't they just take their 
from nicking their beer though.
Yeah I bet it does but why


why do they need to take the 
Fucking seen it.
Oh god!
I tell you.
straight in the beer, wallop on the side.
Fucking walked off.
Come back and  fucking hell.
Ugh!
What's so bad about it mate?
They're only fucking  they're only  plastic and  shit innit?
Yeah 
You don't fucking expect to see them on the side of a bar though do you?
I mean fucking anything 
Yeah in a fucking pint of beer.
pickled in beer.
Wouldn't worry me.
Must admit probably cos my old man's had them ever since I've  been alive.
Yeah, the same as my old man, but
Yeah.
It's like one guy down in Wales when I went down there last time.
He's fucking stood there, he's got the sneezes and he's whaaa whaaa whaaa in his fucking beer.
He's going  oh that'll deter people from fucking nicking it.
Every two minutes.
Ugh!
Oh yeah well that's that's a bit worse.
Sneezing in his fucking beer.
Ugh.
Who?
Some Welsh geezer down in Wales.
Welsh geezer.
His name's Lally.
Or that's his nicks name.
They're barbarians anyway down there aren't they?
His nickname's Lally.
Cos when he when he goes 
Do fucking lally innit?
Yeah.
When he gets in a er a punch up he goes a bit fucking  do lally.
.
Sounds like a right nutter.
Fucking  I tell you you've never seen a pair of hands on this  like them.
Fucking  about my height  about my build, but he's got fucking hands which are about three inches bigger than mine all round.
It's totally 
Fucking strange.
unbelievable.
Fucking   plates.
 
Do we need any  compound?
I haven't .
I've got some mates with weird nicknames.
Really fucking weird nicknames.
Chicky  One Hand Too  Digger 
Digger.
Digger.
He's Aussie is he?
No.
Miner?
No.
that's his second name.
Digger .
all three of them.
There's three, three brothers  one's Big Digger, Little Digger and Dumper.
And then Little Digger got his nickname Chicky.
Cos he fucking  he's a bit punky.
You know and he used to have one of these fucking mohicans, he  looked like fucking a fucking chicken.
So he became Chicky.
Sounds like a right bunch.
bunch of weirdos.
No, you'd get on alright with them Stuart.
Thanks.
I think.
I think about the only nicknames that  my mates have got  
Bunch of wankers?
No one 's called either Tony or Malcolm the Mountie cos he looks like Tony Slattery.
Oh yeah?
He really does.
Oh!
That's where he first came to fame wasn't it?
The mountie 
Malcolm the mountie, yeah.
Yeah  
He looks like the spitting image of him I tell you.
He really does.
So it, he either gets called Tony or Malcolm Mountie.
We've got this erm  I actually don't know why he's got this nickname  but there's this guy who lives out in  er  and he's got the nickname  Seamus O'Reilly.
You have to do that, it's Seamus O Seamus, how are you doing Seamus?
And  I don't think I could tell you how he got his nickname.
Cos I don't think he's got anything to do with Ireland or anything.
There's a couple of mates of mine  Obey.
Robert  his nick 
Yeah.
name was and he's called Obey or Bod.
Everybody called him Bod.
Yeah.
Like the oth 
Martin 
There's this other two  and erm  they're brothers and they're both  they're both quite big.
Sort of not fat 
 
but quite well built and all that.
And they've both got slicked back hair.
Yeah.
And they look like the fucking The Management.
Oh .
So we don't call them what we, we call them Ronnie and Reggie.
Yeah?
After the Krays.
We started calling them Ronnie but it got a bit confusing.
And out of those four  out, well out of the the bunch I know  that's the only four that have got nicknames, that we actually use all the time.
Winkle.
Ravi  used to be.
Winkle was the classic.
went to call someone a wanker 
Wanker it come out winker .
That's it.
Yeah you tell me these things.
Fucking winker.
I've  I've had quite a few nicknames.
Think you should fuck off.
Cos I think you should fuck off.
Do you like your face the way it is or not?
Not particularly, but you ain't gonna do nothing about it.
We don't like it the way it is.
Can you arrange something?
facial attribute 
squeezing a fucking zit.
Why don't you fucking squeeze that spot on the top of your shoulders?
Ha ha ha.
You got overtime ?
Course not.
Don't be silly.
We haven't had overtime for the last couple of weeks.
Saturday 
You sure you can't get that finger any further up there?
Look at that, right up to the elbow he's got that finger up his nose.
Flipping hell.
Ask me what?
Ah, you're as bad as Tim.
. Tim ought to be able to do it .
listen to yourself.
Don't worry about it.
talking to two blokes here.
I worry about you 
I'm not talking to Sue, I'm talking to you.
I've not said a word against 
Well how come you're getting shoved after five years experience?
first  first few days you got involved with too many foremen.
No.
You have, cos you've been lippy.
Erm  first few days
You don't get on with your work.
First two days .
First two days he came up here 
I know you had that  unfortunate incident
Yeah.
about two or three days after being here.
Well somebody  in the office.
The thing is, you haven't had a brilliant  neither of you two have had a brilliant reputation for a long time, right?
Now he's, he's done nothing
he's done nothing, put it right for the last year.
As probably so have you.
But it takes a lot longer than a year to get rid of a bad reputation.
Elvis.
Is anybody  .
Eh?
Don't worry about me I'm singing mate.
yeah, he knows the score.
Trying to get the time to go a bit faster.
 
Eh?
I thought you were moaning.
No, I was singing.
Half four.
Half four.
And some of us keep to our contracts.
Do they?
Yeah.
Says who?
Me.
Fucking company don't does it?
Well go home at half five then.
No, I'll go home when I'm ready.
Three hours.
They're not giving us four hours are they?
They ain't keeping to their part of the contract.
Yeah, you can fucking sue them.
I know.
Cos they keep telling  cos I owe them so many hours  they keep coming up to me and telling me  that I owe them so many hours, you signed the contract saying you've got  whatever happens .
Now they're not giving us the time to make .
They're breaking their part of the contract now.
we've gotta  thirty nine hour week.
You've gotta do a thirty nine hour week?
Well I do three hours overtime.
Yeah.
So  we do three so we only get paid for thirty nine hours a week instead of forty.
All I know  even when I first  even when I first got here and I was working  
And if I have  two weeks time  then we get paid er  thirty six hour .
Go to erm  the C A B 
No, I only found out this morning didn't I?
Oh yeah 
She'll probably go to a  Citizen's Advice Bureau.
Yeah.
See what's going on, see what she can do about it.
One of her mates over the road's  he's gonna try and get a grant  and then pay for the college by that and then tell  where to go with his overtime.
Yeah.
And that's the best way of dealing with it really isn't it?
Yeah.
Still a bit cuntish.
Yeah.
I don't see why we should have to
.
Ryan, Ryan was doing four hours on the Saturday morning to make up his time, right?
You get  you officially get should get paid time and a half on Saturday morning.
Half, yeah on Saturday yeah.
So you are doing six hours to make up the four.
Yeah.
Well I never did it on a Saturday.
I did it during the week and came in on a Saturday for myself.
Oh see what she does.
She'll sort something out for me.
Yeah.
Cos I've already sussed Jim out anyway cos  he said it was on my contract saying I had to do the four hours.
Well I've got my contract out and it's totally different to his and any other apprentices.
I've just got another bit of paper  a note saying  please note  while you are at college you are asked to do four hours overtime and that's not a contract, it's just a letter.
So if I wanted to I could tell them where to go with that and all.
Yeah.
But get it sorted out.
Go, get your mum or somebody to  get all your paperwork together and go to the C A B.
Because it sounds as if they're having you one over the barrel.
Yeah.
It was on a programme the other night saying the advice bureau are on the er   companies cos some bloke, they were employing him to do something  and he sued them and got two grand out of them.
They fined him for doing something stupid 
I think the ideal thing is she can't  you can't do that.
But any  any one of us in here now who were  who were actually training  and have finished our time, no no apprentices were  to become part of the union.
Even if you're in a non-union company, they will fight for you if they think you've got a case.
If you've got a good case, then they'll put their lawyers on to it.
But that's only if you are actually part of the union.
Er paying subs.
So  probably be a good idea, even if you're  not in a union company to to actually join a union .
Whether it's rightly deserved or not ain't the point.
a bad reputation.
So if they made me redundant  or whatever I know all the ins and outs.
John  's fucked off in the afternoon to a car auction.
Old Bob came over 
it doesn't matter whether the er reputation's deserved or not 
You ask Barry.
I mean he  he knows you've changed.
He knows 
What time is it chaps?
Please
It's four o'clock.
erm when you lot  out there first of all   wasn't there?moved on.
I came in, and I was still in here 
Yeah but you  you weren't, you weren't really put on 
No he goes  he goes to me  he goes  
 
Oh no you weren't were you?
It was me and Jamesy and Graham weren't it?
He goes er  
 
I think  I think a lot of people agree  but I think a lot of people would probably say that  .
Yeah.
No, but I tell you what  that, as soon as you two were separated
When, when you went out there with us.
You both started knuckling down.
Yeah you did.
We weren't knuckling down but we started working more because we weren't fucking bossed about.
You  you and
Yeah that was  though.
and then you  you got separated and both fucking started working
It's a lot harder  it's a lot harder to get rid of a bad reputation .
I know that cos I had to work at it when I first come here
fucking know it all attitude.
Bit like me now.
Yeah!
Because I done extra metal work  for three years right?
And  metal work  two years before that.
And I thought there ain't nothing these blokes can teach me about files and stuff.
Right?
And a lot of the time they couldn't teach me anything.
I'd been doing it for five years.
But obviously I'd got on to something a bit more skilled and I still had this know all attitude.
And I I got right  few bollockings.
I had fucking verbal warnings and all sorts.
And I tell you what, it took me probably another couple of years to get out of that.
Verbal, written.
I've had none of that since 
I had a fucking verbal already.
Yeah, I got verbals.
Cos he get, he said  old man
Who's that, Mark?
Mark, yeah.
And
.
Cos I hadn't done nothing.
I said what the  does your old man .
I dunno whether he actually tells him he's fucking off  or what, but I think he knows he
That's what pissed me off, when you lot got moved down there  fucking  ridiculous.
and they were added on after.
Yeah I know, that's why.
When we first went out there there was no trainees and then all of a sudden we got  no, who did we get?
because it was the same time.
Cos we got Brian didn't we?
Yeah.
out there  come back in here.
Can't remember.
I think he's just a fucking arsehole  to get sent  get himself out there.
Cos that that's what Tim and  especially Richard was fucking well upset about.
He only went out there to help  some 
Good luck to the bloke.
 
I haven't seen it.
Still got .
way to get on innit?
Basically  you've gotta be a yes man.
I'm not a yes man.
At the end of the day you'll flatly refuse to do a job if you don't like it.
I'll just say I don't like it, I'll go and do it.
.
Fuck it, I'm ill.
Well this is the thing I can't understand, especially Mark and that.
Why you lot can't .
It looks better on your record than being made redundant 
No, you'll still get sacked.
You can get sacked for fucking  
 
I know, I'm not, that's what I'm saying.
Specially Mark and  oh really taking the piss.
just fucking  for three hours.
Well he's gonna struggle to get  get a job anyway.
He he's gonna struggle to get a job anyway let alone 
I asked Derek if he'll give me a reference  said yeah.
really but 
Well Derek'll give you the right one won't he?
Will it help Barry if if I can use the same  to actually ask him if ?
C V and photo photocopy it or something.
Or would it just  will it just be the same as writing down your name and .
That's it, if Derek said I could use his name for a reference  
Er 


I dunno  I I mean I have never actually had a written reference from anybody when I've left 
Yeah I mean you used to do that  I mean 
Yeah, the old days.
I got a written reference from m m m 
In the old days  no no I mean you 
my headmaster and stuff to get  
That's right.
What do you mean?
I went out Monday to get er a replacement for 
I'll get the yellow pages and I'll  phone up so many companies 
.
Is that the time, what time is it?
Quarter past four .
Quarter past fucking four?
Oh Jesus.


Pack it up.
Fucking hell.
No
That fucking 
Better turn this tape off.
Eh?
Better turn this tape off.
You fucking  put it back, it's still recording you little cunt.
cunt, wonder what that would be if they put it in a dictionary.
A little turd with a microphone.
Some pratt  messing about with microphones.
Bloodshot eyes all the time.
Where's the speakers then?
I want a listen out of it.
Headphones innit?
headphones.
Oh right.
You can get little
It's a fucking Walkman you goon.
you can get little speakers to put on the side but they use loads of power they do.
Yeah I know I've got a pair.
They're the 
that poster up there.
fucking  .
Yeah  put it up there.
Get a poster up there.
 
What poster?
You're middle middle page 
What poster?
poster.
Oh your middle page.
won't have that will they?
Oh yeah nice 
And the second page.
She's fucking well nice.
Katie 
She's well  
No, not there old boy.
I can't hang it over a drawing.
up there old boy.
Up you get.
Go on, up you get.
Pretty tasty that is actually innit?
 
bit on each corner  old boy.
I don't really agree with this kind of thing 
Is it level?
Erm 
No, I don't either.
Er  yeah.
No, her right one's hanging down a little bit.
yeah  was having a field day when he saw that.
weren't he?


Pull it down a bit.
Pull it down a bit.
creased up.
Yeah  have heart attack Mick.
Old ticker's going.


Pull that  no pull that top down.
Oh will you give it a rest!
Are we happy now people?
That'll do it.
Hold on, her left one's lower than her right one.
I think we ought to put a bit of sellotape over that one.
Yeah.
Cut it out.
No 
Over which one?
We got a bit of  remember.
Yeah we got we got .
What's that?


When you're big enough boy.
It's not quite the same is it really?
I like that.
You like that one do you Cherub?
What's that?
I said a topless male and a topless woman calendar, it's not quite the same is it?
And then he said 
you've got the old fucking tits and all haven't you.


I like that one.
I like  
Thirty six double D.


Hark who's fucking talking.
himself.
I took a polaroid of fucking Karen last night in her underwear.
I'm gonna try  and get it.
She won't let me get it.
You're joking!
Bring it fucking in.
That's what  I'm gonna try.
I've gotta  well it wasn't kinky underwear but it's underwear.
Got a  picture of Karen in her underwear last night with a polaroid.
She's just bought a polaroid camera.
And er 
Thing is she's wearing his y-fronts.
I I I I I I I wanna check, I wanna check her out.
Yeah.
Get a picture and then
I will.
I'm gonna try and get hold of this one.
But it it it's tasteful  but it's not  not too bad.
She's in her underwear  not too revealing.
looking at.
She's got fucking thigh high boots on as well.
Eh?
Has she?
Fucking definitely bring it in.
We'll all have a wank.
Oi .
Put it up on the wall and have a fucking  jerk off.
She's got her fucking thigh high boots on.
Definitely bring it in.
She won't let me have it like.
I tried to get it last night.
Cos I fucking took it and I said  you haven't taken one have you?
And I said well yeah look  thing buzz coming out the end.
So and she said let me look at it and she  what she's doing fucking  she's fucking  got her leg on a stool like that, not a very high one like sort of like that  right?
So I thought yeah I'll have that .
She said, she looked at it and she says you're not having that.
I said I am.
I was just about.
No, you're not having that.
I said no come on, no messing about.
I ended up chasing her around the house  fucking photo.
And the thing is, by the time I  by the time I chased her I was  so I don't know, don't even know where the photo is now.
Chasing round going like that.
It wasn't like that, it was just fucking
It was like that.
Yeah.


Yeah.
Did you see that
I put it to you people 
You don't need to stand that close to it.
Sorry.


Cos it  it fucks it all up.
Does it?
It goes really quiet afterwards.
I mean I was listening to one of the tapes last night.
What's this?
I was listening to one of the tapes last night.
And he he'd got up to it and he gone  good morning Trev about two inches away from it.
And it fucked it up for about  a second or three seconds afterwards.
It really goes really quiet and then comes back up to full volume.
It's probably got one of those self adjusting thingies has it?
Yeah.
Oh well I'm sorry Tramp
There's no need to shout either.


I tell you, it picks up everything.
I tell you what, this even picks up the girl over the tannoy.
Really?
Yeah.
You can actually hear what she's saying.
So it must have one of those self-adjusting microphones.
Self-levelling  
Oh my life!
Yeah.
deck shoes.
Plimsolls!
Deck shoes.
Plimsolls.
Deck shoes.
They're sort of plimsolls aren't they?
Fucking hell 
No .
Deck shoes.
Everyone wears deck shoes but no-one wears plimsolls.
It's a fierce old colour that old boy.


Very old.
I've had them about two years and never really worn them.
My old mum can remember when the old french onion sellers used to come round, door to door.
I think.
Bit all  all mix all  me greened up.
God knows what this survey's gonna make of this all me greened up and  right shitted up or something.
innit?
Is that just him or is that what most people say around here?
What?
Right  messed up or all messed up .
Right seems to be er  the in word at the moment.
Pardon me.
Are you recording?
Yes.
The little light flickered.
Cor I tell you, I could eat another one of those scotch eggs.
of shit from you.
Certainly got that look about her.
What's her name?
Nicky 
Another quick jostle of an evening.
From what I've heard it is quick as well.
Eh?
From what I've heard it is quick.
All evening.
you've got no fucking onion  crap.
None of these ten minute jobs.
Four hours of hard strain.
Oh you're coming down here Derek?
I thought we was gonna get rid of you.
No I might as well do it on that bench there .
Oh my life.
This is my bench.
Picnic time at Rumbolds 
Hey hey we're a-munching .
Oh look he's bringing .
He ain't bringing any tools.


bring your tools as well look.
Fucking  off out at two o'clock anyway.
lunchtime.
Have you found anywhere yet?
So if you take into consideration .
But aren't all their jobs linked and stuff?
No.
the odd one or two 
Been to er Bracknell or Reading?
No I wouldn't wanna work in Reading.
Dodgy old area, Reading.
getting there.
Fucking traffic .
You'd best go and get help.
Best go and get help?
I'll lend you a hammer if you want.
You'll need fucking help.
Be fucking .
borrow a hammer 
You like canvassing don't you?
Battle of the lightweights.
He'll 
Better than being battle of the fucking ten ton Tessies.
He'll end up in the same place as the last bloke and he's still there.
 
Listen to it.
Did you hear that?
What?
fuck off.
Don't you talk to my mate like that.
I only like .
Fucking  here innit?
Yeah.
They give it all the   innit Terry?
They give all the fucking verbal and they'll ride off and they'll all fucking 
Oh my god.
Oh my life!
Fucking  .
They fucking give it all the verbal and  
Oi Tramp!
What's the fucking crap?
Don't fuck  about, he'll fucking deck you.
What sort is it you've got Alex, an Electrolux or  a Vax?
No a Vax has got four wheels innit 
Shall I make the little thingumajig up for you?
No.
Gonna make it up?
Make it up then.
Wanna see what it is.
Fuck off.
Eh?
Cost me eighty five P, that .
You've been ripped off then Rich.
I love the chocolate  
 
you fuck.
gonna get one  someone else.
Fuck off.
Fella's  Trampor is fucking  won't let me make his toy up.
He wants to get home and play with it.
Course I do.
That's half the fun of having Kinder eggs.
Sod it, I'm gonna finish the lot.
I love the chocolate.
It's beautiful.
Really is nice.
Shit!
Hey ho .
Oh no!
Not sure whether this was a good move giving him the job.
I thought he was taking it down there, I didn't realize he was fucking out here with us.
He's clocking off at ten o'clock anyhow.
Ten o'clock?
Applied down the Job Centre .
Never get rid of him now.
this day .
He's even pinching the old boy's .
.
Can't help it .
Yeah?
Yeah..
Paper?
What one do you want?
They played at home look.


fuck.
Got a match as well?
Can I borrow yours Mark?
Bit rude innit for you Mark, this one?
No.
No?
What, the match?
No  his  
Oh.


Ooh that's nice that is.
That's right.
I put it on Farmer Giles.
That's a sad case  .
What?
. When he starts bringing his bench and stuff down here Barry and I'm gonna .
Filled up.
Day are you going?
Brilliant  
Yeah  twentieth.
Off the ro up the road  up the swanney.
Why, have you managed to  get another week out?
I had another week anyhow 
That's erm  that's your fourth one Tramp innit?
Yeah.
How long's that?
You've had four of them?
Mm.
No I've been here more than five years so they'll have to give me  five week's notice.
Saying that I've got me notice on a Monday  
You serious?
You've just had four of them?
so it should have gone though to the .
Oh, so I've got to put up with you a week longer than everyone else?
Yeah, yeah.
That's the worst bit of news I've ever .
You'll miss the Christmas drink up .
Eh?
You'll miss the Christmas drink up.
Who will?
I won't.
Yeah  they are going.
Hey  come and take it away will you .
Not bad.
Not bad.
Oh god .
You're in for a treat today Barry.
Sorry?
You're in for a treat.


Ooh .
What the?but what's fucking going on here cunt?


Excuse me.
What do you think you're doing here?
Oi Tramp.
What's going on here cunt ?
Fucking lovely modulation.
Er  got a pencil old boy?
Me and old  aren't into fucking   pencils are we ?
Reckon the old wooden ones .


See when you're a fucking tradesman you've gotta have the gear ain't you?
Yeah, that's right.
Precision pencil.
None of this  
There's some erm 
stuff that you lot do.
No I do like the old er  pencil in the  
 


Yeah.
Ha.
Fucking hell.


Think of it.
That's the last B and E we'll be doing.
These ones, won't they?
Let's rock and roll.
Barry  
Oh dear.
Oh that looks rather sensual Mick dunnit?
Ah!
Yeah.
When you do it like me  you'll learn this one day.
Do what?
Eh?
when you're good as me.
You'll get there one day.
 

I had him last night .
Eh?
I had him last night.
Oh yeah?
When's  
Who?
Oh they had to fucking swap them so 


Did you?
Started off at twelve eight  nineteen eleven.
They was eight three last night.
Got him on the run .
Be a bit of a bastard if he pulls back .
My girlfriend's cousin's in there this week Mark.
Eh?
My girlfriend's cousin's in there this week.
?
Yeah, it's something to do with Argyle.
Plays for who?
Plymouth.
Does he?
Yeah.
What's his name?
Mark .
Mark who?
.
?
Yeah.
That's a moniker and a half innit?
 

 

Plymouth .
You what?
Got a job yet Alan?
No, not yet.?
No.
You been looking?
Yeah.
Eh?
Yeah.
Don't sound too convincing.
No , it doesn't does it?
I don't think he has.
Now and again.
You telling porky pies?
No.
Have you been looking or not?
Don't think he has has he?
Now and again.
He's been laying in bed on his days off hasn't he?
Even the fucking   day of the cup he is, look.
Who gives a  
Oi oi.
Steady on.
Fucking Derek's up there  
Eh?
Derek's up there.
Where?
There, there.
He is 
Yeah I would  di would you  Rose 
Well I haven't.
Er 
Get here a second .
Oh  hold on a minute.
Hold on.
Hold on..
He's just got a little job to do.
Little job.
A little 
Hurry up.
Oh my life, what's he up to?.
Here Tramp   Hold that while I give it some wellie.
Oh you dozy fuck!
There's always one isn't there?
Steady on, there's a lady present.
Where?
Ah ah ah ah  Mr Grimstone  Ah.
You alright?
Yeah.
Fucking sound.
Fucking fooled me.
Fucking sound.
You fucked my  mean green up Tramp.
Bollocks  
You fucked my fucking mean green up.
I'm non too happy.
It's not fair, it's not goo good enough for me and .
I've got it all over me .
It's gotta be fucking spot on ain't it .
Yeah.
do you reckon?
I'll sort it out Tramp.
Don't worry.
Look  he puts his hand right in my mean green.
though innit?semi skilled 
ain't got a fucking clue.
Ain't got the brains they were born with.
They fucking ain't.
It's not good now.
I've gotta redo the fucking thing.
Ha ha.
 

I dunno, he knows it's fucking .
That's what we're up against though Cherub.
Can't get the staff boys can we?
Well  it's fucking 


cup of tea.
Eh?
Time for a brew?
Yeah.
There is  a house  in New Orleans  they call the rising sun.
Been the downfall of many young men.
I know because I'm one..
 
Did you see that last night?
No I missed it.
I'm a skilled fucking man.
That's why you're needing me cos you er two ain't got the fucking skill between you.
You cheeky cunt.
I'd piss all over you tramp.
Wh co when it comes down to craftsmanship   
You ain't got a fucking hope have you?
I'd piss all over you.
than me if it's er fucking craftsmanship you're on about.
He reckons I ain't got the   couldn't handle that one over there he reckons .
Eh?
Couldn't handle that one.
Fucking hell!
Because er 
Well why don't you ever do it?
I don't want to.
It's too much hassle.
Exactly.
Cos you haven't got the fucking skill.
No no no no, no no no, no no no .
That's when I don't wanna do it, just too much hassle.
That means I want the easy life.
I'm not saying I can't do it.
It's that I don't want it.
Well do it next time.
No, I want the easy life tramp.
Looks bad on him, doesn't it tramp if he won't do it?
I want the easy life.
Bollocks to it.
Old tramp takes about five days to do one of them.
Yeah fucking right.
Huh!
Still  to do this fucking programme er progress chasing bit eh tramp?
Yeah, fucking been coming up  fucking up other people's  mean greens 
Yeah.
That's one of the skills.
What?
You know?
Being able to put your hand to any fucking thing like I am.
I mean that's fucking
Tramp I said I didn't, just, I didn't say I couldn't but I don't want to.
There's a big fucking difference in the 
Yeah.
in the English dictionary.
Nobody wants to.
.
Well there you go.
I want the easy life.
And I'm getting the fucking easy life.
At the end of the day I've got my head screwed on.
Just about par for the course cherub old boy.
Yeah I know .
We're not fucking arguing about this again are we?
Yeah.
About what old boy?
About not wanting to do things  
Yeah yeah we are, yeah.
Are we on that again?
Yeah we're  
one.
Eh?
the one.
It's fucking  horrible round here innit?
Every time tramp picks it up we get on that one.


He comes out with  I'm mister wonderful bollocks.
Well, you're always sprouting to us about how fucking good you are.
Yeah but it's not bollocks though is it?
Ha!
That's the fucking difference.
Ha ha!
Is that right ?
Yeah.
It's about right.
Shut the door.
What the fuck would you know?
You  fucking reject.
 
Yeah I know.
Fucking  hard life though innit?
Yeah.
used to get a little bit jealous at the end of the day.
Well that's it, yeah.
we're young  
Jealous?
we're young, we've got it up here and 
Yeah.
they don't like it.
Jealous?
We're young we .
Of you?
Fuck off!
Still learning and we're still better than them you know what I mean?
Fucking hell.
What's the world coming to ?
Jealous!
Ha!
 
Silly thing is that they actually believe it don't they?
Yeah I know.
This is sad.
This really is.
The thing is you two fucking believe every word you say don't you?
It's true, that's why.
They fucking do!
 
They always say the truth hurts cherub.
Yeah.
It's fucking killing tramp though innit?
It fucking is innit ?
If the truth hurt  fucking wouldn't be here  
Tramp.
. What are you gonna do look.
We are fucking shit hot.
You got the shit bit right.
And the hot bit right as well.
Yeah.
No.
Shit hot.
We got the shit bit better  it it was put, talking about you.
Yeah.
If you're talking about me and 
Huh!
It's a double, double-barrelled name when you talk about me and cherub.
Shit-hot.
 
And it's got a hyphen in the middle as well.
Where are the  potting tabs then chaps?
Toolbox.
Yeah that's why you're getting, losing your job.
Where's th where's the potting tabs tramp?
In there.
Fucking had to be in there didn't they?
Oh fucking hell!
Here hang on  where's Roy?
. Stu, where's Roy?
It's like the fucking stores here innit eh?
Oh right .
It's all we need and we've got a fucking sto oh here we go.
That's nothing.
You never saw Richard's.
I can imagine it.
He had no fucking tools in there, it might have been all  might as well have been fucking  everything else.
Look at it  fucking  oh .
Let's twist again, like we did last summer.
Ooh let's twist again, like we did last year.
Do you remember when  I was humming 
couple of hours  get me going.
let's twist again like we did last year.
Up and back and round and round we go again.
Wouldn't mind a bit of that..
Where's Barry gone?
The old boy.
Eh?


live in ?
I had to  my wife .


I know I came in here once with my mum's keys.
The spare and the ordinary key.
I had the whole lot.
She couldn't go anywhere .
No what it was, she locked her keys in the car 
Yeah?
something like that.
Yeah.
oh go and get the spare keys and get the keys out.
So I've gone out there with the spare keys, got the keys out  tossed them in me pocket, gone back indoors 
Forgot 
Oh I had to get something out the car as well you know?
fucking car keys  fucking spare keys .
When she phoned   oh sorry mum, I didn't realize I had them.
Yeah.
Hope you're not planning to keep that pornographic photograph on that wall.
Eh?
Well  reckon I'd give it one if she asked nicely.
Marks out of two  he'd give it one.
She'd have to ask fucking nicely.
She'd have to ask fucking nicely.
Just popping down to see .
You never know it might be half one lunch.
You've got to be back in here at half two.


You didn't even get a chance to get in here and .
Yeah he sort of almost ripped him out of there.
No, he took  out he goes here you are tramp..
Five minutes for a job like that.
Christ, it's an afternoon job that is.
Never!
Even young  knocked a set of them out  about an hour.
slow him down.
Did you hear that thing about the old geezer who chopped his old man off?
Oh I saw the headline.
What was that then?
Chopped his old man off.
Gauged his eye out  cut his tongue up  out and then chopped his old man off.
Er  where's your  hammer cherub?
Then the old girl turned up and  him to stop him mutilating him  bit more.
You're just a devil woman    you're just a devil woman 
How far back's your  then Barry?
About half inch?
No, take them down a bit 
    

One skinhead two skinhead three skinhead four kick the fucking  while he's on the floor.
Kick him in the bollocks kick him in the head.
Kick the fucking  till he's fucking dead.
Chelsea .
Chelsea hooligan like I always said.
what a lovely song.
Isn't it a lovely song?
He got chucked out for singing that.
Chelsea.
Well he took the old  and he offered him out.
Who?
Matey.
Goes one on one I'll fucking take him out he goes.
Right, I was cracking up, he was right behind me.
I was in hysterics.
Wherever we may be  we'll follow  cos we are the Chelsea and we are supreme.
We'll never be mastered by no northern bastards .
He was  out he was.


I  as the old bill grabs him like.


He was, he was going  he was up there  cracked up .
I'm gonna have to pop up there one week with you.
He's such a fucking pratt.
He was fucking well gone 
They are so subtle these Chelsea songs.


Yeah.
They actually don't mess about do they?
Yeah some cunt wants my coat .
I collapsed though.
He come out with some more classics but I can't remember  myself.
goes up there?
Last time there was  what me,geezer,was there, you know .
My mate used to.
I'd go up on me own.
When you're in there  other people.
You  .
Very good too.
There was another couple of Chelsea fans I was singing about them all the fucking day weren't I?
sing along with the best of them.
We'll keep the blue flag flying  high right up in the sky we'll keep the blue flat flying high.
From Stamford Bridge to Wembley .


And the old  just applauded when he finishes .


 
he starts it up again  goes oi shut the fuck up.
Are you up  are you up there Saturday?
No, away to Sheffield Wednesday.
When is their next ?
Sunday er  Man United.
Yeah?
You going ?
No.
No I'm coming on Saturday.
Come to Chelsea Tottenham it's a good week.
Yeah?
Tottenham support .
Tottenham supporters, two Chelsea and a fucking Gooner.
In the shed.
There's a lot of you go up there .
You ought to come up there .
up there with old cherub.
 
Check it out.
Coming up then ?
Yeah I wouldn't mind.
You gotta handle the tubes though  
I tell you what get going to the Wolverhampton versus Notts County with Jonesy.
Oh my life!
He can't handle the tube.
I can't handle the tube.
Have you  his excuse for not going to Arsenal cos he can't handle the tubes.
No.
Fucking, fucking hate them.
 
After the game after the game's the worst bit.
You claustrophobic then Rosie?
Arsenal tube station.
Yeah?
Do you get claustrophobic then Rosie?
It's not so much claustrophobic it's just  
 
when when you're in  in the fucking station waiting for the old train you're on the front of the fucking platform.
Got every cunt behind you pushing.
Yeah.
Nearly hit the fucking ditch like.
. Fucking hate that.
I'll pop up , not till I'm handcuffed to you.
I'll get fucking lost.
Cherub, cherub I'm lost .
 
Up fucking  it's a laugh.
Fucking brilliant.
It's a good old sing-song.
What was that ?
There was some matey in the crowd, I forget who it was Wolv Wolverhampton  fucking end we were.
And they're all sort of brummie type people you know?
They all speak with a brummie type accent.
Fucking   for them.
And he goes  fucking run will you.
Get out of your fucking wheelchair you and fucking run  And there's this de the rest of the fucking crowd are dead silent and this, there's just this bloke's voice.
Everybody fucking cracked up.
Sounds about par for the course.
Fucking brilliant.
Dead fucking silent.
But I'll tell you what, they outsung Notts County.
Ain't fucking hard though is it?
I say chaps 
Eh?
No.
No.
Can't remember.
They're tens aren't they tramp?
What's that?
Yeah  tens.
Wonder if he lea leaves a slime trail behind him?
You what Skip?
Wondering if  leaves a slime trail behind him.
No you don't have to but they want as many done as possible.
Fair enough I suppose.
Anybody take the  gun?
Anyone got the  gun?
No.
We don't use the horrible thing.
Last one.
Bollocks.
Yeah.
Go down and ask him.
mine then.
No it fucking ain't, mister.
Bet it fucking is.
You got about five of them went round giving them to other people just so you could say that to Chris didn't you?
Yeah, that's it.
I've certainly had enough of the year.
Yeah, I have.
But I could have said that about Mark's one.
 

How many  do you fucking want tramp?
Might as well stock up.
I'm going for the full set.
I've got six, I've got number five, got number four, got number two.
Want three and a one now and I'm away.
Ugh.
The long and the short and the tall da da da da da da da da da da da da da  When Mark was just a little girl, he asked his mummy    Bless your beautiful hide wherever you may be  .
I tell you what, I'll leave one of these here  if anyone's interested 
 

Me thinks not.
Oh it's a fucking  race.
That'd be a laugh actually.
What?
Treasure hunt.
You drive, you do the walking and you give me and  Chris the prize when you've won.
I ain't got time to go gallivanting off 
 
stuff like that.
Yeah.
Fifteenth.
When's that?
Oh Sunday innit?
Fifteenth for er  Chelsea United.
Chelsea Man U?
They're on the telly innit?
Yeah.
Oh, cherub on the box.
You won't see me boy.
Be inconspicuous will you?
I'll be up in the shed.
Wanna get out and chat to your old fellow Chelsea supporter?
Who's that?
Old  's out there.
No, he's a plonker.
I beg your pardon?
He's a plonker.
He must be.
He supports Chelsea for a start .
He's a good fitter.
Is he?
Yeah.
though.
So why'd they make him up to a supervisor then?
Erm 
Don't normally get  
I'll never get made up to supervisor.
Because erm  Derek was looking for a supervisor and he said to me one day in a moment of desperation he said who can I make up?
I said well I'll tell you who you wanna make up I said er yeah I know   I said you wanna make somebody like  up I said cos er  I think  wrote the book.
He says I know we all  over his face.
Sure enough.
Had a punch up?
I mean now they're as thick as thieves you know?
I mean now they wanna, both on the other side of the fence, they're the biggest crawlers going.
And they were two of the biggest  villains, they're in the fucking
Yeah, that's true.
Mick, Mick  when I was, when I was working down there in er the machine shop, him and erm Ian  you know the bloke who  one of the engineers?
They sat in there and they drank a whole bottle of scotch between them  one Christmas.
Micky  now you know, he'd tell you he's whiter than white.
I mean when he er you know when that thing was going on about the old ?
Yeah.
lark.
I was talking to him about that and I got a totally different response from him that I expected  didn't mind.
Oh no he was hundred percent on  side.
Oh it shouldn't be allowed and  director can't walk through the company.
You know
Tosser.
respected because he is a director  
 
And I said, leave it out Micky.
Talk about cheetah changing leopard changing its spots.
I mean he  he really was 
He was total anti-establishment weren't he?
What's that then old boy?
Clove oil.
What's it for?
Toothache.
 
To relieve toothache?
Have you got ?
No I haven't fucking lost the cup.
What's that?
Smelling salts.
straight away.
No it's alright, thanks.
That's pretty innit?
No oh  don't do that.
Stick them on your arse.
will you?
No it'd come in come in handy for a curry though wouldn't it?
Fucking hell yeah.
I tell you what, dip it in the bloody toilet paper, then stick it in the micro.
Ooh.
looking curry as well wouldn't it?


of erm   just just try it.
Just try it, see what you think it tastes like.
It's the stuff you put in apple pies innit?
Just taste a touch.
No  I can't stand the smell of it.
It reminds me too much of fucking .
Thanks very much.
That's a fucking brand new scalpel  you bastard.
It was.
Don't like the dentist at the best of times.
Hundred and one fucking quid?
Mm.
You having it  put in there, platinum or fucking what?
You're a dodgy geezer you are.
Stuart, does that smell bother you?
Just like a, like a load of fucking drugs pusher isn't he?
Have some of this, have some of that.
Somebody  aqua fixing?
You know how to use it?
Yeah.
Oh righto 
To tell you the truth that bothers me more than them .
Yeah.
But then again I've got fucking smoking chimney pot over there.
Mark smoke half a fag and leave it on your bench to pollute the air .
Fuck off.
All I'm waiting for right, is for somebody to set a precedent for  for erm doing people for manslaughter because of secondary lung cancer then you're fucking history sonny.
Bollocks.
Gonna have you up there for ass attempted assault.
No I'll sue your ass boy.
  

Oh don't do that .
Cor, look at the tits on her.
Mm.
Cash and something, something.
Amazing.
Yeah, totally.
But not after  D and E fucking .
gonna do no work is he?
That's true, yeah.
So what's new?
. Have you got your job?.
Yeah.
Handsome.
Start on the sixteenth.
Well hard.
Blows your excuse for going down the job centre.
Or haven't you told them yet.
Say what?
Haven't you told them yet?
I haven't told them when I start.
I've got, I've got stuff to sort out anyway I  they don't know I haven't .
Got to sort out solicitors and
Do they give you any training or anything?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Do we get discount if we shop with you?
Or do you just refrain from sending the boys round?
Fucking hell.
You could send the boys round as well couldn't you?rugby squad.
How much are a pair of sort of alright rugby boots now?
What?
How much are a pair of alright rugby boots?
twenty to thirty pounds.
Yeah.
But you can spend  sixty to eighty quid.
Mm.
Depends what sort you want dunnit?
One of those great British folk songs.
oh my darling Clementine .
Oh look and you'll find tra la la la la la.
La la la la la la  la la la la la la la   
Fucking hells bells.
S O N at the end.
Cor  coming from you that's rich.
Who's is it?
Er 
Classical half hour now.
Oh give me a London girl every time .


I followed on with my old cock linnet.
I dillied I dallied I dallied I dillied lost me way I don't know where to roam.
Oh you can't  trust a special like an old time copper when you can't find your way home.
Sing faster.
Eh?
Sing faster .
My old man said follow the van and don't dilly dally mm mm mm.
Off went a van with me home packed in it  
Eastenders half hour.
I followed behind with me old cock linnet.
I dillied and dallied dallied and dillied lost me way and wouldn't know where to roam.
Can't trust a copper like an old time special when you can't find your way 
My old man's a dustman he wears a dustman's hat he wars cor blimey trousers and he lives in a council flat .


This is definitely cockney half hour innit?
It's not even a Friday afternoon, we're all getting musical.
Hopefully that tape will have run out by now.
Eh?
I said hopefully that tape will have run out by now.
Let's all go down The Strand have a banana  .
I've got a lovely bunch of coconuts  I've got a lovely bunch of coconuts 
They can do with some appalling singing.
Ha!
Yeah I know but that  there is appalling and  there's really appalling.
There's appalling and then there's Cherub.
Cherub, yeah.
Probably listen to it go ah!
What
We're gonna turn it up full blast you bastards.
What sort of what sort of working conditions must those poor souls work in  to get agony like that?
The poor tormented souls.
What is this?
Some sort of a 
Torture chamber.
torture.
Ah!
Be even worse if they played his singing over the tannoy though wouldn't it?
I mean that's  gotta be the ultimate.
Work or we'll give you more Cherub singing.
Ah!
I think you're being a bit out of order there old boy.
It's true though innit?
Yeah.
Could be.
Yeah you're right.
  

Oh we're starting on the show tunes now are we?
Sleep silent lady  go to sleep.
Ba ba ba ba ba 
What?
sometimes all that I need is the air that I breathe just to love you .
That's not a show tune.
I know, I didn't say it was.
You said it was.
Well you were singing Memories.
Memories  all alone in the moonlight  has the moon lost her memory la la la la la la  in the lamplight  I seemed to know what happiness was la la la la .
Something like that anyway.
I can't .
Don't cry for me Argentina  the truth is I never left you.
All through my wild days my mad existence I kept my promise don't keep your distance bom bom bom.
And as for fortune and as for pain  
I tell you what what was that last tape, number eleven?
Yeah.
They're not gonna get past number eleven.
Just in 
 
just in case there's any more of what we was giving them.
Ah ah.
my mad existence.
I kept my promise don't keep your distance.
Bom bom bom bom bom  
I think we should have a a spares section glee club.
and as for fortune and as for pain  I never invited them in though it seems to the world they were all I desired.
It's all illusion  
 
it's not the illusion it promised to be the answer was here all the time.
I love you and hope you love me.
Don't cry for me Argentina .
a little bit.
Eh?
Eh?
Saying to Cherub, you're going for it over there.
Yeah.
Don't cry for me Arthur Negus la la la la la la la la la.
Whatever happened to  all the heroes calling all the heroes shooting up the town boys 
Calling all the heroes shooting up the town boys.
all of the heroes 
 

Oi, I thought it was a musical bit.
Erm  The phantom of the opera's here inside my mind.
The phantom of the opera is here  inside my mind  pull back the curtains
oh oh oh.
one thing's for certain any dream will do  .
   
Fucking  .
You can't sing anything without him bringing up Chelsea.
Fucking hell's bells.
Hell's bells and little fishes you 
What?
Erm
Oh bollocks.
Well bless your beautiful hide wherever you .
No, you can't have that one.
We've sung that one anyway.
Have we?
Erm
Oh the bright golden sun in the morning  oh the bright golden sun in the morning.
And the palm's high as an elephant's eye and everything's growing right up to the sky.
Oh what a beautiful morning oh what a beautiful day I've got a wonderful feeling everthing's going my way.
Everthing's going my way.
Happy talking talking happy talk ba ba ba ba ba talk about things you'd like to do.
You've got to have a dream if you don't have a dream how you gonna have a dream come true? ba ba ba ba 
have a dream if you don't have a dream how you gonna have a dream come true?
Fucking hell.
Talk about a girl 
Rosemary I love you .
When I'm calling you ooh   
you ooh   fucking hell .
I'll be calling you ooh ooh ooh .
Oh my life.
Ugh.
Second part  oh yeah.


la te do  .
well impressed.
reasonable.
Eh?
do ray me far so   
Three pound seventy five for   
It's Nigel.
Again.
Three pound seventy five for what?
Three pound seventy five for what?
For the examination.
Yeah?
Six pound seventy five for an extraction.
Mm.
It's a bit better than a hundred and one pound ninety two pence.
Yeah but are they still gonna do that  you're not having it filled?
No.
Pulled out.
Pulled out.
I'll save you a few bob .
Tell me which one it is.
Yeah I was gonna say, just let me smack her.
Would you touch that tooth, seriously?
No.
No, no I wouldn't.
No ha ha.
Some enchanted evening .
Don't tempt me.
Ha.
I might use a chisel.
Fucking get all of them, oh messed that one up, have another go.
Ooh you know.
 

 

Oh what a beautiful morning
The sunglass drawer that is.
oh what a beautiful 
Mark.
Do you need sunglasses?
Every time he opens that drawer do you need sunglasses?
Yes.


We're all going on a summmer holiday no more working for a week or two.
We're all going on a Summer holiday  for a week or two  me and you  
I'm  the model of a modern major general la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la  




Can't sing that.


Shut up you .
We want, we want a video camera.
We don't want a fucking tape.
Ooh ooh.
They're daft.
The young ones  darling we're the young ones .
Fuck off.
We ain't singing Cliff Richards.
We refuse.
By all that is holy.
once didn't I Cherub?
Played it once  back on.
Just slap him about a bit.
I mean his face needs to be improved really, dunnit?


The Rumbolds glee club proudly presents  a mad half hour in the spares section.
As a special guest, shag.
Shag .
Actually it's kept you really fucking quiet this hasn't it?
Gonna have to put a bit of black thing, stick a black thing
Yeah .
in my box every time he comes round here.
Have you any comments on this Mick?
Fuck off.
There you go.
it's over to you, Longman audiovisual 
 
tapes.
When shag sings.
does that it, I'm surprised little Batman signs don't come up.
Kerpow 
Yeah, kerpow.
zow even, bop  .
Zap.
Every time you fucking go and hit somebody.
You, when you whenever you  fucking hit somebody 
Just shut the fuck up.
you go smack, smack, smack, smack slappity slap.
Biff biff.
When you're old enough you'll be too fucking  ugly.
You hit me you cunt so I'll fucking still owe you one.
Fucking fuck the pair of you 
And you and all Shag if you want some.
And you just stood there  looking at him .
Yeah I know but I mean  what a way to look.
You can see it now can't you?
Listed under fuck  all, all the different types
Eh?
all the different types of variations  fuck has been used for.
Shut the fuck up.
Why don't you fuck right off?
And all these sort of things you know?
There's so man so many different variations of it.
Get the fuck out of it.
Yeah.
Fuck off Graham.
Exactly.
That's gotta be the the  used one though innnit?
Fuck off Graham that's gonna have its own sub-heading just that.
Yeah .
You can see  where's this  eh, eh you can 
Could just see it in a Trivial Pursuit question 
see it now can't you?
I mean Tramp is gonna come up and fucking  in the English dict dictionary and  they're gonna say a meaning unknown.
Sharon  what the fuck does this mean?
You can see in a Trivial Pursuit question in a few years time  what's the most commonly said three words?
I love you?
No, shut the fuck up.
I know that's more than three.
That's four.
I meant to say fuck off Tramp .
But I got confused.
Fuck off Tramp.
It's only cos I'm handsome debonair suave sophisticated and fucking  dead horny and hunky.
And they're all jealous, jealous.
Look whoever's editing this tape you've seen the cunt.
Now fucking draw your own conclusions from it.
They're all jealous.
Bollocks.
We didn't ask what held your ears apart.
I was just about to say that then   if he hadn't have got in there I was.
He is on fine form this afternoon.
Form of Rumbolds mental torture  and cruelty.
Think of it, you can see it now.
All all these Oxford undergraduates  if you don't go home and learn your words we'll let  we'll make you listen to Chris  again.
Ah, no no!
Thought this was supposed to be anonymous?
Anonymous?
Anonymous.
They won't fucking know who Chris  is.
They wouldn't want to know.
They can find out.
You never know, you might become an international celebrity as the person who can 
Oh go on!
You just break it.
   

I'd love to do it  this is Mark  reporting for I T N  Rumbolds.
shut  
Shut the fuck up.
 

In the words of the immor the immortal poet  fuck off.
Eat shit and die you mother.
It's cos you enjoy our company so much innit Chris?
Guess I've just learned to put up with it.
Only a smidge  a tad
I, I just say to him what do you mind doing?
Fucking have a little drink here or fuck a couple of bob every five minutes.
At the end of the day
It's in their interests   have a little drink innit, really?
To have a a little drink.
Oh come all ye faithful  joyful and triumphant .
Oh come ye oh come ye to Elland Road .
Are you asking?
Who?
Elland Road?


Where's that then?
Can't be bothered to go up there though.
If I went  if I went up there 
What's the difference between Leeds and the I R A?
The I R A are fucking 
The I R A have got a team in Europe.
If I went to Leeds I'd never go  coach  falling into the ground.
If I went I'd go  park the car up  wear a Chelsea shirt.


Do they know us up there then?
Yeah  rather.
Just a 
come down there  down Chelsea  get their fucking heads kicked in.
I suppose innit?
Fucking hate each other.
I don't know 
Leeds and Chelsea had the worst record in
Yeah.
Britain at one stage .
Fucking hate each other don't they?
Leeds were the first club to be thrown out of Europe.
They hate each other 
Yeah.
There's fucking big punch ups after a Leeds Chelsea game.
Big fisticuffs.
Oh no  I hate it when than ha when that happens, you fucking pull off the corner  and the top don't come off.
It's a real bitch to try and get into.


Here are Mark  put two five one O O seven one, about five seven or eight.
Yeah  if you could.
Is it an inch and ten inches?
You'd have to look up in .
Yeah, you don't know then?
Two one thousand.
Fuck off!
Two one thousand o seven one I think it is  is it's equivalent.
I dunno  If I the  exactly the same part bits on it?
Yep  the only difference between the two, is the colours   If I could talk to the animals  walk with the animals, sing and dance and squawk with the animals  ah la la la  la !
Is yours the  ?
That's 
No  it's er  that's one film I'd never seen, but I'd like to see.
Erm
Doctor Doolittle.
Doctor Doolittle  and around the world 
!
in eighty days, I've never seen that all the way through, with David Niven.
I wonder who wrote that  Doctor Doolittle?
Who wrote that?
Barry's the man with the words   Barry !
Hello!
Who wrote Doctor Doolittle?
Do you know?
Doctor Doolittle.
Yeah  you mean as played by erm
Rex Harrison.
Rex Harrison 
Rex Harrison  yeah.
Cor!no can't.
Oh I just wondered  Just wondered who it could be.
Not H G Wells?
Probably somebody obscure.
What's that?
Doctor Doolittle  who wrote that?
I dunno.
Well we didn't ask you!
I mean you would of said George Bernard Shaw it would've been .
Who?
Who?
Nev never heard of him!
Who?
Pygmalion.
Who?
Pygmalion  wrote Pygmalion.
Sorry?
Pygmalion.
He wrote Pygmalion and  sang Doctor Doolittle.
Eliza Doolittle  Eliza Doolittle.
Do you want to ?
Come on then sunshine  let's boogie!
Let's fucking boogie!
I ain't dancing with you, you twit!chocolate star fish hunter!
Fuck off!
Got a ?
Waterloo  how can  my Waterloo 
Shitty fucking shit!
De de de deddle deddle de da da da da da da da .
As he said  could of taken the whole fucking 
What you 
lot off!
What do you want me to do to prove that that wasn't me?


Just wait till they bring   and get down and to get on down  
If that what it takes  
and 
I'll swear on anything, I don't care, I'll swear on the bible if you want, if you got one handy.
 
Yeah but it's no good swearing on the bible if you don't fucking believe in it is it?
I do though.
Just ask.
Bollocks!
Stu  .
It was fucking you Stuart!
It wasn't Mark.
Just wait until the last day, when you come, you sit down on the fucking stool and  each leg goes like that!
You watch
Just wait!
You rewind that tape  right, to about ten, eleven, twelve, something like that, I can't remember when you did it.
How are we supposed to know when we fucking taped it!
That's what I said, about ten or eleven or twelve.
Well it's at least one and half hour tape.
Well that's fucking  
innit?
I'd  and the words would be  I was bored  and that's Cherub saying it, and he said that 
I was bored?
as he was 
I never 
walking back  I don't know why I'm explaining that!
You 
We do 
fucking !
cos you're the bloke who did it!
We thought this before.
Yeah I know!
So it's 
And I'm 
fucking you!
It is!
I've admitted to it , when it has been me.
Court adjourned.
I admitted it when it was me, I even fucking repaired the stool 
Bollocks, did you!
when it was me!
You le , you ripped his fucking stool to shreds, and then said it was me!
As I told you all  
But I ripped your stool to shreds
Yeah, and then I 
and said it was you.
then I ripped his stool to shreds and then fucking you  you admitted to me, it was you!
Yeah.
See I  
How's it go  how's it go?
On the   If the  
adjourned.
Ten past four.
Ha.
No this is, this is a fucking pain!
What's going on here then?
It's falsifying evidence.
What?
I'm getting the blame for crime I didn't commit.
Right then Mr , shall we go through it just one more time and make your appeal  
You've heard of the  six and the Birmingham four and the Renault five  this is the fucking 
 
one!
Oh!
Oh!
This is a miscarriage of justice.
fucking  
Okay  order!
Order!
Order!
Order!
No comment.
Stuart .
Yeah where's the  
This is daft innit, eh?
justice and that man thinks 
Eh?
I'm afraid he is guilty though, alright?
He is he is guilty.
I don't believe this !
Eh?
They're being a little 
No I must admit, I don't remember this scene.
Well there's no  cutting little  
Go on boy yeah!
Oh oh what!
Yeah right behind your fucking chair!
Oh that doesn't prove a thing!
He had Gary  
It does.
This is a right fit up!
And   
I have to hand it to you 
circumstantial evidence.
I have to hand it to you.
 
Hang him by his bollocks!
listen to everything, after all he will  
That's true.
Isn't it?
I reckon  thirty.
That's your printout Mick  here are.
You know  
Here , the old !
They 
I think 
can print it.
It's not very nice 
Yeah but I should probably get a bit of  today there, no problem.
Ah  it's me, it's alright.
And there won't be  for sure.
No it won't come off.
Get off!
Get off!
And he sells some
Get off!


He really likes that, he does, he goes 
he does  
Ooh look!
Ooh!
He never 
Get the 


Get the fuck off!
do you hear.
No.
I said, get off!
Why not?
Got off of there and get down them  there!
No that really wasn't what I was trying to say  Get off!
Oh that's been all over the fucking floor!
 
you cheat!
Oh look he Cherub , that's cos he did it.
Man that was all over too .
Fuck!
Fuck that !
It's  this afternoon.
Scrub the ears though.
Yeah sorry I thought it was , I didn't realise these are coming off  
It's the muff diving 
I have to add that  damn well  to make you do it.
What's that old boy?
He's not there is he?
He is.
Oi, leave that alone!
Who Ton?
No, got it out my bag  settle for that crap!
What's that?
I could be here all, fuck this thing!
That won't be a tramp  that one .
Must say something .
What're you up to?
What does it fucking look like, cunt!
Fucking do it on your bench!
Could  but there's no room on my bench, it's not a very flat bench either.
Stuart.
Oh .
Yeah.
Yeah  nice fucking time sheet though innit!
Is it?
Nice and destroyed.
Hey!
Fuck off!
I see it co , I see it coming to blows!
Get this!
Oh what do 
Then  fisticuffs in here Barry.
I don't like being accused of a crime I didn't commit, cos I admit to things I do.
Eh?
Bollocks!
 

I didn't do that Mark !
I'm telling you  I've admitted 
what?
to when I did it.
Did what?
Ripped a bit out of his chair.
Ripped my fucking seat!
I did it in the past, right, and I did blame it on Mark, right and that  last thing 
Blamed it on me, you cunt!
No not you.
 
Well fuck it then!
He blamed it on you and fucking admits it!
No I did it to Marks' then blamed it on Cherubs and Cherub come over  and did it to Marks'  and I admitted to it, or so or 
No, no, no, no!
the other way around or something like that.
 
But I got twe so that Mark blamed it on me  but I'd sussed it, as soon as starts tramping 
Yeah.
on the inside of str 
Er
And this time, it isn't fucking me!
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah  we had Douglas.
It isn't me!
Yeah, I know he's admitted it  already  that doesn't mean we're not gonna get you back for the first time you fucking did it!
I even repaired his seat for him!
Yeah, you never repaired mine did you?
Mark cos I didn't do it to yours!
I did it to his.
Don't think, I can't remember, you're doing my head in tramp,fuck off !
I did it to his.
And he did it to mine and then I did it to his, and you repaired his but you never did mine.
Yeah well, sorry.
You're a cunt!
Yeah, exactly!
Here, here, here!
I thought they knew you cunt!


Fuck off!
He is !
You're a sad case int you really!
Shot away with him.
Who?
Him   junior.
No this old mad man  apparently he can't afford some.
Twist my arm.
I was waiting for that!
you played fuck all  go and  number four they'll be able to help, twelve  and twelve ,number three, make sure you don't cut it   probably got a .
Yeah.
I've co come to stay the night with .
Fucking hell!
Good that, makes the old fucking  it's still ringing, fucking    what'll happen .
Right, you take it in  It's alright, I've only slipped up.
You're a cunt !
could eat that here!
Rule Britannia  Britannia rules the waves     It will be !
Don't think that will.
And then we'll fucking sweet!
It be it better not be and fucking !
Well if you sit on it and four legs go in different fucking directions 
There's the main part   doesn't matter.
and your mummy comes in a .
At the end of the day, it ain't worth it.
What's that?
You don't like .
Your mummy goes ah!
Stuart what the fuck have you done!
Er I probably, she probably won't say that, she'll probably belt you round the ear!
Tha that wasn't me  I said you ain't fucking learnt!
I love it, it's great!
fucking talk to you now!
Couldn't believe he said that !
About,a right poof's game  see he's a cunt  the  football .
Yeah I reckon.
The old chocolate   
Fucking nonsense sport!
I don't know.
Must be  dangerous team in the world.
Right lads, a lot of them coming up for sport today.
What time is it?please.
Dunno.
Eighteen minutes past.
Fucking pack up early didn't you?
Yeah  turn around time.
I'm so vain   
You're gonna get your fucking head kicked in!
You got a  mate?
Just run that  number.
Fuck right off!
I can feel the stare.
 
Fuck off Stuart!
Nice shot!
Fuck off!
Oi, fuck off!
Come on .
Wait till lights out.
You know you won't.
He fucking will!
He'll have a go  but he  he won't succeed Mark.
Come on then Cherub, let's go for him shall we?
Both of you might do him.
Who?
Or should I say you need my help.
Fucking  !
What need the 
Oh look he's standing near  Leggio look.
Yeah,.
 
it always works
 
it always works dunnit?
I don't know.
Look at that .
Come on, you got an iron fist?.
Sixteen storeys back  sixteen blocks back.
Make it a  you got a good shot there.
The old ones.
All the old one's are the best.
Well perhaps I can see you go for them.
Have you got  in there?
Ah!
The old boy.
Old McDonald    They always work  last time I heard.
Get off!
Cunt!
Fuck you  mister!
seven eight  two one one seven eight  one two 
Whoops!
six.
Here we go, here we go, here we go    Oi!
Stuart!
Stuart!
Where you going ?
Do you mind!
What?
If you if you say something like how far would you of got, if I hadn't of called you back 
or 
It's only twenty three minutes past  you're a naughty, naughty boy!
Cos you were going up there before twenty five past weren't you?
Twenty seven minutes past.
Twenty minutes past then.
Stuart!
I'm gonna tell!
Derek!
Derek mate !
I already got past the .
Eh?
Gotta get the old fifty  again this morning, old boy.
 
Well you shouldn't  
It's on ten minutes.
Right?.
Now you got that old watch  you er
That's it, I ca I clocked it in  one up there  and it's like.
The old man couldn't even put  this Christmas.
Where's my fucking bag gone?
Eh?
It's here.
Good boy.
Leeds have got their fourth round one tonight against Everton.
It's there  there's no  you pratt head!
 

But when I bought .
I got it fucking awful again this morning  .
You get a photograph then mush?
Eh?
You get a photograph then?
No, I've taken a couple, look.
Eh?
taken a couple, look  yeah?
Have you.
Don't know what they're gonna come out like  did it with my camera.
Alright Tramp?
It's .
Yeah  I was a bit drunk so I don't know what they're gonna come out like.
What's that , a bit drunk last night?
Not badly, just enough so I couldn't focus properly.
Get the old  
Oh yeah?
Some rude shots   Get the camera and the photos and I would and if  and if there ain't any photos  so I get it back into focus and he  do it again and it  bit out of focus.
Oh well tha that might of had something to do 
Yeah.
with the focus.
Yeah it is, I know about it  .
She actually let you photograph them?
She had her clothes on.
What do you say that was for then?
Eh?
So you can show the lady at work.
No I just told her the truth, I wanted  wanted some of her 
I heard you wanted a couple of photos of her  so you could take them out in your wallet and keep them close to your heart.
I wanted to waste a film!
Aha, fucking hell!
No, cos I I haven't used my camera for over a year and it's been fucking flung out from S A and all sorts.
And now you're taking it back to S A and it'll probably be left out there.
They're taking the
yeah I should of done really, so I but I didn't know I was going back.
So I've er I'm taking a load with different lenses and stuff.
Just checking it out and something to write on.
There's not the point going out there and fucking taking God knows how many pictures
Yeah and not 
and then coming back and it's not fucking working properly!
old boy  You're going .
If I was taking er
Happy ever after   young lover!is he weird !
Yeah I said to her I wa wanna waste a film and I couldn't think of anybody better to waste it on.


Then I realised what I was saying, and it sort of realised that it wasn't really a a complimentary thing to say to her.
No it wasn't.
That was after she hit me!
a couple of them in there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes, yes, yes.
A couple of her cats   friends down last night so she wasted a couple on them.
Played this game called Snog.
The what?
Dog?
Alsatian's .
Snog yeah.
I can't remember how you get there, I can't remember how cards is how many cards it is, but you get loads of cards, with with pictures of different things you have to kiss and it ranges from the hand at one point, navel six points, bottom seven, lips eight points, cheek three points, erm the chest fifteen points and there's a fig leaf one fig leaf bud in there, fifteen points and you can kiss anything you like.
Oh right yeah.
Right and there's also, what it is, is there's also a few cards just with snog on.
And when you that lay down you can look at whoever what the other players have got face up and you either go for a player  or you go for the maximum points.
But you've gotta try and get the most points to win the game.
And you pick you one you want to kiss and you have to kiss them on whatever their card is showing.
And then if if you lay down the joker cards you have to kiss everybody.
Right.
There was erm me, Karen, her flatmate and her flatmate's boyfriend.
Oh yeah.
Playing this game last night till three o'clock in the morning.
Quite a laugh.
I won three games  in a row !
Yeah?
Cos I'd kiss anything!
I'd had a few !
Don't sound like a lot 
.
Wha Eh?
I always get something wrong, I always   I kept, I kept getting to kiss her flatmate's chest.
And I was only doing up here but er, that's good enough, sort of thing I kissed her on the lips a couple 
, was everywhere 
of times  kissed her on the arse 
 
a couple of times, great!
Eh?
She kissed me on the arse a couple of times, kissed me on the navel a couple of times.
Yeah.
But somehow, I me and this other bloke managed to avoid each other.
Aha.
I think he laid a joker card and I had a hand card up, so he had to do a kiss my hand.
And so you get a dice.
Well and it's the normal one to six dice and all that whatever the dice shows you times it by five seconds like.
One one dot of the dice, five seconds, six, thirty seconds, yeah?
And he he got he got my hand for five seconds and then I I got  I got his hand for ten something like that.
The rest of the time we managed to avoid each other it's good.
Sounds like a good game.
It's quite good if you  well  we were quite well away, but nobody was really jealous of each other and that.
Certainly be a good game if you know people, you're not  .
Yeah have you ever played er spin the bottle?
Used to play that at parties.
You gotta have a go at strip poker though  Yeah.
But the thing is we were all really  I mean thing I'd we've all nearly in a state of undress anyway.
Yeah it's about ten of us at this party put the bottle in the middle and spin it and whoever the the open ends comes at is the the previous spinner's gotta kiss that .
didn't play.
Yeah.
Well then I I fucking spun this bottle.
I got the tastiest bird in the place  and all that and er she spun it and spun it back to me and  spun it.
and he's he's a bit younger than me and I've gone come on then give us a kiss, like this, and he's gone like that, I thought, just there like this  and I've leant over and went just there.
And he's he's turned over this and just gonna slap one on me and I've turned my head and gone like that  and he's fucking caught me right on the fucking lips  !
A real cracker!
So funny!
Fucking hilarious!
He wet himself!
Yeah.
He went, oh you dirty bastard!
Yeah if you if there's some broad-minded adults there.
But if you're really pissed, you don't care about them do you, eh?
No that's right.
Everybody wet themselves!
You dirty bastard!
Nice !
Susan  trying to kiss me on the arse right and I fucking farted!
Urgh !
She said you dirty animal  fucking git!
She got me she had to kiss me on the arse  she fucking she had to be there thirty seconds to get the points and I farted at about ten seconds
Yeah.
And we wouldn't let her have the points till she came back and finished the other twenty.
Quite a funny game.
There's this thing called sex maniacs.
Sex maniacs version of Trivial Pursuit.
Oh yeah.
Like erm  can't remember them erm.
Oh fucking hell, I was gonna try and remember some of the questions to bring in but I didn't.
Oh yeah, what's the things like, what is what is the highest phallic symbol in France?
Er, the Eiffel Tower.
The Arc de la Defense the Tour de la  Montpasset or the Tour Eiffel.
What does  verversity mean?
Eh?
What is  verversity  verversity 
I dunno.
Is it and it's a multiple, is it A, a woman's preference for men's clothes  erm  two other answers.
Sometimes there's just the totally outrageous funny answers to, sort of, some of the questions, sometimes they're  similar  and it's like  verversity woman's preference for mens clothes.
Erm there's all stuff like that you know, there's famous things you know.
Who said who said sex is just five minutes of squelching?
Is it A, Sid Vicious, B, Johnny Rotten, or C er Malcolm Maclaren, and apparently it was Johnny Rotten.
Stuff like that, it's quite funny.
What you gotta do is, each card, if you they ar the person in front of you asks the co the question and if you get it right you get that card and each card has got a letter on it and you gotta try and make up sex maniac.
Oh I see, yeah.
But you can't can't throw any away until you've got ten and then you can throw one away.
And also in there there's like, there's there's the odd card saying swap your entire hand with somebody to the left or the right of you, or swap a card with the person on the left or the right of you, and that's quite funny for a laugh as well.
Some of the questions are a are right outrageous!
Can't remember hardly any of them now.
forget whether er, have you ever had any oh  book o , oh it's a game called Quotes.
Quotes?
Yeah, something like that, I'm just trying think who said 
I think I've heard it.
such and such.
Yeah.
One of them was erm who said er it said Mae West
it's a great shot!
Said hey Mae We Mae where are your tits gone?
She said, do me a favour and get off my back!
Hardly !
Something like  
Yeah.
you know?
Quite a good game.
About 
One of the
Scruples is a good game.
Scruples is good.
Yeah.
Quite good, I like that.
One of the questions that does spring to mind is which of these three people have an I Q er four times their chest size, is it A I can't remember the woman, erm with a thirty two inch chest B I can't remember, Jane Mansfield with a forty three inch chest
Yeah.
or C, Albert Einstein with a forty seven inch chest?
And it was B.
Jane Mansfield had an IQ forty, er four times that.
A hundred and forty one.
Hundred and sixty a hundred and seventy two that's quite high isn't it?
I was quite surprised, I said fucking Albie Einstein!
Sunday morning  first thing on the piss with Andy  and stopped round his house.
Mm.
He come in, he's fucking right as rain  me come in  oh I'm feeling right   got in, sat here for about half an hour  quick mad dash, chucked at the fucking shit house  murghhh!the fucking   well  I won't be able to play cos I don't 
 
I don't throw that evening I won't throw at all I won't throw the next morning.
Throw up in the morning.
I sometimes feel like it.
Yeah.
Well I must say 
I sometimes wish I did but I I've never done it in the morning.
Yeah,
You're a cunt!
That means I could have 
What about with a bird?
Yeah 
Not out of 
They don't really think 
Something like that.
Cos you're fucking  can't wait there!
I said I
During the time  
That's why I don't  
  
 
Yeah  Manchester.
Carl!
What all those ?
Thing about up north is they got good woman 
Oh I don't know, we ain't got bad ones down here.
Yeah he's quite keen to do some nice work.
So you're going down the south coast, it's lovely  Guildford's alright, where they, they're fucking stuck up bitches!
Hope we go to fucking Cal er  Boulogne!
Fucking weekend!
So he's still doing it is he?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Are you going?
Oops!
Eh?
Are you going?
No.
Well I  I ain't going.
Eh?
That'll only be where all the places nearly everybody goes.


I know, Boulogne  well it don't matter
Most of them  with 
Yeah?
Yeah  quite a long way.
When I was thinking of doing.
Anybody see erm  Quantum Leap last night?
Who?
Quantum Leap.
No.
Brilliant programme that!
Is there any time sheets in the tray, do you know?
No idea  he's gone from being a Jewish rabbi  last night  and he's he's  sort of gone okay we'll leap now  out of, so he's leapt out of that one  and he's leapt straight into a fucking  little boy's  erm  body  right, and he's a mongoloid  poor little soul  and he's a  downs syndrome kid.
Yeah  Is this all played by  then?
No no, it's like played by the same actor
So how can he then
Well wha what he does is is he looks at himself in the mirror  something like that  and er  he sees  sees the body he's jumped into.
Right.
Fucking  brilliant programme!
I mean you all the way 
Brilliant!
through you see him as  as the actor  but to everybody else he's like
Yeah.
Last night  this  these , as I said, he's playing this rabbi
Yeah.
and  he's having a punch up with his brother  and he keeps letting his brother hit him  he's got this holographic image he, who accompanies him with this fucking computer, and working out what's going on  why they're there sort of thing  cos he goes back in  into to different times to  to help  these people out
Yeah.
and er  he goes, aha  the bloke hitting his  his brother hits him, and the holograph standing behind him and he's going  he's going, it's okay, it's okay, I've got you, I've got, like this and you see him fall backwards, straight through the fucking body and he goes  sorry I don't got you!
I said I  he goes like this, and he clicks his fingers and he goes erm  I keep remembering holographs  ho holograms aren't real, ha ha!
Yeah I, I've  I've sort of heard  that it's quite good, my brother watches it a lot.
I keep meaning to watch it.
It's brilliant!
Really is good  Saw it first time when it was out  last year  I can't think that twenty more days and I'm a fucking away.
When are you actually flying out?
Twenty sixth  about four in the afternoon.
You got on this er   
It's a funny old game!
It's  funny old game!
Da da, da  
Da 
Where's the
There you go.
Where?
There you go, have one of those  
No it's alright.
Ain't got a small one have you  thirty pee.
   
Small 
Sorry?
He kept waiting for me.
Eh?
No.
Ain't you got a smaller one than that?
No  that's a .
Take a six, won't it?
Yeah.
Can I borrow that a minute?
Wouldn't worry about it, that's alright.
Alright.
!
Everybody
No, not at all.
everybody fucking !
Do they?
Yeah.
Naughty lot of people aren't you!
I need that anyway.
Makes you laugh don't it?
Yeah.
I dunno, what about you?
Fucking tapes?
Yep  we are recording for  Oxford English Dictionary.
Oh   I was saying something about that   
 

Nothing they  provided the lot.
What're you recording?
   
Erm  just everyday common or garden conversation.
What and all this fucking behind you?
 
Yeah.
Why?
It's going into a dictionary  it's to help erm  students I suppose but that's all I can
Can you  got a bit of er
Everyday common or garden slang
Yeah?
colloquialism  erm  local accents.
Here !
I bet  innit!
He better ,
Eh?
fucking lights going on and off!
 
Yeah it's recording.
Yeah but it's that light,?
Going on and off  supposed 
Yeah.
to be that ?
Well it's taping it  with the recording.
That shows that you're actually  picking up the sound.
Picks up everything, it's pretty good actually.
Here Tramp,let us have a listen to that.
Me and  .
Well 
Right 
Der, der  you got a tape to tape at home Mark?
Eh?
Have you got a tape to tape at home?
What tape number is it, in there now Mark?
Er  thirteen I think, thirteen.
Fourteen.
Fourteen.
   
I Didn't have time to fucking cut the beef this morning,in the butchers .
the sun go down  
Just  bread and butter and fucking  a big slab of beef.
That's alright.
Go for it mate, fuck it!
What does Sud Milsch mean?
Fresh milk  fresh milk.
Could be.
Ask Graham.
No  not that bothered ha  next time.
It's good, it's got a ca , well impressed!
Done it really nice, done mine at the weekend.
Oh where's that?
Up here on the er 
No  
I did mine down in  
I wanted to go in a car wash  watch it, just sit and fucking st , right that's the  
It's a lot easier.
and I've never used one of these jet wash things so  it's gone  when it end the cycle will go  and it will indicate right, so I'm 
Yeah the the 
I'm expecting  like a lights or something are flashing  so I got the  off the jet wash and I'd just about got to the  where I started again  it's gone bib bib bib bib bib  is that it?
No it can't be   for something   not very loud  and that's all gone, shit, I've fucking  it!
I've thought no, it must be the end of the cycle  and as I've said that  the old fucking foam started to pour out 
Foam started to 
the brush!
Yeah.
Fucking shit, so I've got up  fucking like this all the way round  and I've do , I've gone round 
 
I've gone round the car twice, I thought, that ain't stopped  but I did , you don't realise it's stopped cos I didn't hear the bib bib bib bib bib  there's so much foam anyway you don't realise there's none coming out  the  like fine dribbles coming out of fucking   put the  back, put the jets bit on  he rinsed it all down  just about got it rinsed   and then it gives you like erm  a blob  like a wax blob, so I put that on there I thought 
, yeah.
this old fucking  soaping up again!
Shit!
This is unfair !
Yeah.
So I carried on  
That's a wipe isn't it?
I thought I oh and it must, must be the   one round now  I think I just about managed to get round the front
It 
before it stopped.
I mean I I try it once but   shoot everywhere though!
Well I'm   I went back in and it's come out  gleaming .
Really is good  gets your  going  but I got fucking wet feet!
I don't like using that,.
How much do it cost?
About, three quid  full works, but about
Yeah.
pound fifty or something  for like  a shampoo and rinse  I mean I'd use it if I go in there.
fucking  er  it was like that  but they ain't   just don't go and get very close to the   like that  So I've gone up under arch of the wheel  got my  like that  right state I got in!
if you hold it in one hand.
Quite a lot of pressure innit?
You can't 
Yeah.
let go.
I we .
Cos a mate of mine with a  moustache, didn't have it for long, he  fucking ri lighting up a roly, he's gone  fer like that, his fucking tash has gone boof!
Straight up!
Yeah Tuftie's granddad.
No  granddad hasn't got a tash!
you.
I popped into the 
Go on then!
Yeah  granddad he had er  an operation on his , he had it all fucking  lamp-shade,light bulb, he's gone   
 
Fucking dressing !
it.
His fucking nose!
Do you ever watch London's Burning?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's really good.
No cos I had  I had another  fucking !
Yeah.
Look at that!


See that, we're all fucking erm   lying there, glaring under that fucking  bit of timber or something.
Fucking  
And there's that bit of wood burning between his boots!
Yeah that 
And Pete's going oh oh oh!
And he's goes, does it hurt, does it hurt?
He goes  I'm alight!
I'm alight!
Well there's nothing stopping those two!


Talk about fucking noses, there's one!
Aha!
Big nose, big ears, big , big mouth!
Big .
No way!
Fucking nightmare!
See you later on,.
Where you off to?
Gotta see a man about a job.
.
You stupid pratt!
God he's !
Hurry up, he's coming to get you!
Sort them out.
What the fuck's up with you Stuart?
What you got the old earplugs in?
Cos these two are whistling .
Now do you understand?
Shouldn't have asked really, should I.
No you shouldn't.
Wake up!
Can I borrow that little lamp of yours?
.
What time is it chaps, please?
About half eleven.
Yeah.
Something like that.
Eh?
Seven thirty seven?
It's a happy !
Oh not more naked women
Yeah, I don't know he's put oh he needs another book,.
Volume five, its about one  
Here are Tony here's one for you.
I get that one.
Ah?
Bet not give her one.
Yeah this is
And that a bit of meat there.
Oh my god.
That's not real flab that I'm telling ya.
I know its not, there you go Stew
Goodness
Some of that.
real
It ain't, that's better
Steven, you wouldn't give anyone 
There's Robocop
Yeah I know, get some like a big shit out .
It was broken already  so I glued it up, just had a look at it  see how I could get it , its broken it again.
I would if I had some
He throw it away 
I got some 
I wanna be, I wanna be a star, oh, oh, oh 
It worked .
in it .
 

What's another boy Mark?, is that where there are three  er  thirty-two?
Yeah
No.
that's thirty.
That's thirty.
Thirties late.
Yeah thirty is late.
Forty is three thirty-two
Yeah  thanks Chris
Forty-four is  
three thirty-two anyway .
Quelle heure est-il old boy?
twenty-five past 
Third time  
 

Yeah, but they're nothing but a bunch of wankers  speak 
Don't know.
What man, what  
Sorry?
Oh its alright 
You might have to get it going first.
Hold on, that's have a look 
I said that'll be perfectly alright on there 
Hold on, wait there, I'll get the better stuff than that Tramp
Yeah
Yeah, get some shit hot stuff for that
 

He caught his fingers together
at work.
What's that?
Can't we get it on the 
Yeah, how much did you get then?
Oh, its not the  not like you see those goodies.
Oh yeah
next week.
Or week after.
Its the week after
Ah?
Next week its supposed to be.
Or the week after, just pass the chocolates like you did last 
choccies, erm  its all we've got  the old Quality Street.
Tin of Quality Street erm,tin of Quality Street, Dundee cake, bottle of Whisky and a bottle of  Stones Ginger Wine, all we got last year was a  Quality Street and that.
You get a 
What we getting?
Yeah, apparently were getting er Quality Street er Dundee cake
yeah
er a bottle of Whisky and a bottle of Stones Ginger Wine.
A fucking cake, I'd rather have a bottle of Gin I'd prefer to that.
Its got a bloody tape counter on it
Yeah
Its right in it?
Fuck off.
Yeah, got a bag  super bag,
What's a super bag, super bag 
Crime heads, of yes it has
Super bag  its 
Ah?
The old tape 
Why?
Oh, cos, they want  recording I suppose.
Testing one, two, one, two, yes and the voice 
Yeah
and it picks up here, the erm, tannoy 
It's not unusual oh to be loved by anyone, da, da, da, da, da, da, its not unusual oh to be loved by anyone 
Did you see that?
Ah?
Did you see 
No, no  if I 
Yeah
What was the chicken like mate?
Well it put me off a little bit  
Just like you 
, yeah man 
all over the  a bit.
You know your, he don't love .
Yeah, I'll have it in a minute I'm all glued up at the moment.
 

He had a  
luck ah?,
Two black eyes
two black eyes, a broken nose, dislocated jaw and sore bollocks
Yeah, but he was with the coach and all that 
Take you home
Yeah
Oh  
Oh Mark
Oh, see you ain't 
Na, give it a stir 
 

Cos I'm a generous kind of person
I was gonna have it anyway.
, I was 
I thought 
Is it,
What?
Na,
What time is it?
Chelsea.
Two, twenty eight.
Two, twenty eight.
twenty nine, something like that.
Stew we get erm
what the fuck am I doing this
I've got two twenty nine 
Ah?
What's the story of this not  stuff, are they 
Probably  
You can't beat Liverpool 
Do what?
 

Fuck Liverpool, better than you'll ever  
Come on you Liverpool
Really great  
I've got a self  
Ah got another  
Always look on the bright side of life  .
Give the old  up there  the old .
Its a nice time sheet
It is isn't it?
Yeah pin head.
Is it pin head?
Is that him that keeps doing that or is it fucking Mark ?
its Mark 
Oh
 
since Friday, cut that out 
 

The whole fucking weekend  to do with it.
I just can't fucking swear   
 

Your a bad influence Mark.
out there.
Yeah, its hardly there 
It cuts my  
I thought I'd paid that 
The kids watching  time sheet up like that.
Still I don't 
Some bloke outside
I don't think
I've had one time sheet yet that hasn't been cut up,the last  two or three months.
just give it the  fucking chewed it off completely
No, some bloke outside coming in, don't know who it was.
Mark  probably  I don't know fucking tolerant sort of bloke
Tolerant sort of bloke,
Mm.
I'm glad I'm going home at half four tonight 
I ain't got a 
No, I have ain't I?
I've worked the last five, get out 
So out you gonna make up your 
I'm not.
I've only got to make up three hours
Sorry?
I've got to make up three hours
.
.
Sorry?
I've got to make up three hours instead of four
Yeah  
Get docked for it then
They keep a list of it and when overtime comes back, see I'll have to make it up then, I'd rather do that than re-arrange all my stuff just for that, I usually come in seven o'clock 
I usually have to come in seven o'clock, that's how I did it and now I've been over here sort of  mucks the whole system so   I've got a driving lesson tomorrow night, I can't cancel that
Yeah.
pin head he brought it over to me 


What's the point of having the  then?
Well your a super  go and get one of them and don't cut a whole out of that bit 
I think you boil them, I think you boil them 
Don't forget 
I've got  
He laughs anyway
Yeah I know
Now what happens he'll laugh, all night he'll fucking laugh 
I know what your trying to say  
fucking fell on his head didn't it, and the whole fucking shops in uproar.
Oh my fucking life
Didn't you know he used to be feather weight champion of Scotland 
paper weight.
army did he?
Yeah.
fucking  wrestling.
I was lying.
Go and ask him.
I was lying,
He's actually in the guards, he's fucking signed .
How can you miss a mouth that fucking big?
Well  mouth
Here are
like that
I got     
I think  good copy that I  the end of the week, I'm just gonna have it up there, only gone and cut that with his fucking  as well.
I'm getting right annoyed with this now , why's it only me he does it too
Fucking stressed out, I'm  fucking , fucking serves the cunt right as well, cos we was gonna book eight hours on that fucking job.
Yeah, what about the fucking night that we did two and a bit hours  and the other little bits and pieces that we've been fucking doing it,
I get the impression mate honestly that he hasn't heard of it, I'm not sure about  but Chris  I don't know, fucking typical 
Quite funny isn't it?
Yeah, fucking  
I don't know  its all a load of bollocks , right old  
 

Oh what that one I did?
Yeah 
 

 

You were working something extraordinary 
Ah?
Work something out, its rather extraordinary  happens to people of the same age as me
For what?
all on the same day
What's that?
If I was born on the eleventh of the eleventh of the eleventh right, no if I was born on the eleventh  about nineteen hundred, then on the eleventh of the eleventh of the eleventh of the eleventh, announce, that's when I was born zero, six, six, eleventh, eleventh, sixty-six, I was eleven on the eleventh of the eleventh of seventy-seven, I was, I was twenty-two on the eleventh of the eleventh, eighty-eight, I was thirty-three on the eleventh of the eleventh  noticed how they're all double   all the way through
No, all the way through.
Spot
What?
Get the money 
Oh fuck off 
Will let yeah
Double numbers are, I've, I've got two, one, one.
six is my  number, then numbers five, one, three, three  another double number, I've got erm, in my car at the moment its three, 'C', 'G',
Where we  
'T', six, six, 'W' 
I tell you what, I've, I've got a good fucking 
Look at that?
take my box home
yeah
my box home and everything on Thursday night on a job 
What?
just in case they happen to
Born on the eleventh of the eleventh sixty-six, that's a zero, so I was eleventh of the eleventh seventy-seven 
Will that carry on 
 
that carry on 
No, it won't go into the next century, but it will, it would of done back
it would of done backwards
the eleventh, the eleventh, the eleventh gone all the way from there
Yeah, that's right
so obviously it 
obvious
No, not, not everybody's works like that does it?
It only happens usually once
People born on the eleventh
once every  every say couple of years 
its not
Its not, its not all the way through it,
We  that was an all, thirty odd thousand 
Yeah I suppose so.
Yeah, but its not that, everyone of .
Stupid, but  quite amazing  what time you here till half five?
No just five.
Who's that twit who does the old erm racing for Channel four, bloke with the side burns and funny hat?
Yeah something like that.
He goes everybody hates  nobody wants  and all that 
They fucking brilliant
Don Revie, Don Revie he's er manager, Leeds playing  brilliant 
Yeah, they still hold two records 
Only two straight first division wins.
Seemed a bit daft to me though  you'd think they, mind you they'd, they'd supposed to of had erm  er sub contractors down there, in that, that is disgusting, some of these should of been out of the door the .
I mean I've got, some of my best friends are fucking sub contractors as you know, really good friends, I mean Jonesy brilliant friend, a great friend, a nice geezer, er Bill  beautifully bloke, really nice, but  they should be the first ones out the door, Rumbolds should think more of their permanent staff than they do their fucking contractors staff  that's what makes this company work, that's what makes this company worst than all the rest, ok, you get, you get Union companies which are, must employ sub contractors all the time,
I suppose times are hard
they're the first people who go 
they don't start laying off the permanent staff 
I can't see how they can justify one shop without 
The, the thing is they're, they're the only one with an M O D contract  the only ones amongst the 
How can they have one part of the same company having all this fucking  over time  while still laying off people 
I don't know
Its not like were a separate division or anything
No see British Aerospace there  
still got to lay off  
military division, erm, like  actually run similar businesses, these aren't lower 
like the same thing, its not Military Division P L C
Yeah
Or  Division P L C or whatever
 

they've still got eighteen hours overtime a week
What,.
Saw that Joe verses the Volcano last night and I thought it was absolutely fucking shit   mind you  was , huh
.
What time do you make it Stu?
I haven't got a watch today 
Graham what time do you make it?
About  past 
Is this the one that has all the yellow 
Yeah
from over there.
Better name for him than that but I won't say.
What's that, come on, spill the beans
look at his face
Yeah
  

What's your nickname then Tom?
cabbage
Cabbage, that's appropriate.
Ah, that's my second name.
That's your second name
   

Doesn't make me 
No,so were talking about Boddington's beer man, Boddington's bitter 
about half 
Ah,
Tell you what about three pints of that, you can  real good stuff, so, we, we went up to Blackpool a couple of years back on holiday, and we found this little 
Sit round the  fucking head on it like that, you go what  fucking what, real fucking strong beer    Boddington's from Manchester 
fuck up there 
Right, what've you done?that's not too bad
Yeah, but the .
Pan Am and T W A are doing internal flights only now in the States aren't they?
Did he?
Yeah 
Fucking hell  Jesus Christ  oh dear, you know what that means econom , the America's biggest airlines goes down the toilet
They've not been making money for years though   
United Airlines and American Airlines I've been told aren't really all that good  to fly with, mate of ours went up to the airport to pick his parents up, they just got back from a holiday in  and er they flew  and a, on a seven hour journey, where ever it was they come from, they didn't have any food, no food, nothing , what they done is they, they, they'd taken a container off, but they hadn't put a new one on.
You looked absolutely fucked Stu, what you been up to?
  

Who'd you go out with last night then?
running off so  
Oh, its rarely  
Have you been  I mean will we see you at number one tomorrow?
I was
old boy 
I'll have one in the 
So,in it?
What is?
This, this week's got   
Six o'clock till about eight, eight o'clock in it?
Something like that.
Goes  top forty don't it?
Yeah  just  move your body 
For god's sake cut that  down.
What you want for the 
Yeah   make up  
Want to go and get this one  up?
I thought 
Ah?
No, this is one of er, a bit of a baby teeth come out
Yeah,
 

Yeah, this is rock 'n roll
Oh  
Oh, you bringing it down to me save me coming to ask, oh no.
How many games did you play then?
Just one,play one each.
I won,
chance in their pockets, win them all, up we go with it.
How many points did you clear?
I don't know, there were three top knots right, who were,
So you be up the second division next year?
What you go  go, go to men's  as well.
No, were we on our own like, but 
I think I never do anything without a 
You 
I don't care, I'll just get 
Crap,
Yeah, I know.
You play two leagues, were they, were they two leagues?when I, when I was playing pool we played in the Tuesday  league and the Thursday  league
We play Monday, Thursday 
play Monday and Thursday 
and then
Who'd you play for in the old pool?
 

Went down there?
Do you want to play pool mate?, yeah its 
Red Lion?
Right up the A thirty on the left 
Yeah I think I know that
Do you?
Go in there  turn left, its  with the sheep right opposite the barn, played there for  years, two trophy's
That's, that's before you hit Wentworth in it?
Don't know  is it?
pass the train station, got up the train station on the left 
Its quite er, unusual village pub in it?
You 
one
No 
Another chair my dear.
I'll have to come up there one Monday night and watch him play  moosh 
I don't play down Borehamwood.
No
they   
With a
We, we, we were playing in the er Alton league at one time, you know, we were doing quite well in that as well we got, one year we come second we got promoted to the first division after our first year, there was only three of their, there were four or five leagues going and they put us straight in the second division and er, but you were going all over the bloody place, you were going as far a field as Petersfield bloody old  there was almost, there was one erm, just outside 
yeah, still you, really it is too far in it?,
I mean if they especially if they want you to do in the, the championship's, they, you got the league and then they play er, a knock out competition don't they?
Yeah
Yeah, we er, we won the, the losers trophy twice, we got first round trophy, got knocked out the first round to go to that, me, half, half the decent teams were knocked out in the first round, you know, we were, we were playing sort of, that, that was, nine times out of ten that was the real cup , I mean we, we were up against the league champions once
Where you?
thrashed them out of sight, couldn't fucking believe it, when you've seen a pool table, erm, pool game go on for two hours, that's when you know you 
two hours.
How can you play on a pool table for two hours?
It was 
When the balls go in the pocket in all that time 
Yeah it was tuck  
Oh fuck that 
Oh god 
 
absolutely awful 
don't make you  
yeah.
 

They did well up to 
well fucking pissed as well, cor Jesus  Yeah we played back,obv obviously this, this was sort of , we were
Its nice 
it was about four all
sort of, the, the last pair went, went on and on and on, it got to twelve o'clock and the  the, the landlord said right that's it he said I'm closing down no matter what , he said I'd, I've, he wasn't  eleven o'clock on, he said that's it I can't keep it open any longer , so they closed it down, we called the game off, called it a boring match, they came down  the club, fucking played them there, thrashed them out of sight first four games, no first five games, five nil, straight away , wahey,fucking walloped them, walloped their  that was the, that was the league champion's as well, Post Office in Grantham 
 

These days I was just getting  down drunkenly 
 

Do you ever do the old speed course?
What 
Yeah.
Where you play pool  do they just use these red, yellow balls now?
Yeah
They've changed it again as well, now, now instead of the er, the white ball being placed anywhere in the  anywhere behind the black line at the top.
Pathetic game in it really?
No, its pretty good.
some of them 
Yeah
Oh yeah I  that.
I mean I, I've never, well I  once  bloody put money into the machine and all these red, yellow balls come out 
My  taken a bit of banging this morning in it?, hot plate a bit of a bashing this morning.
You, almost 
Ah?
Working out the profit margin?
No, I'm just seeing erm, what's in stock
 

We've got ten  game  and ask how much profit their making on something 
Yeah
Take an invitation to buy you either set a price or you don't.
That's it.
I hope he don't ask you how much profit your making on your tax 
I wouldn't mind.
Well, that's how you probably  
 
Anybody change fifty P?
Erm, I might be able to  
I can change it
Er
I think 
I  putting the old car in the garage last night, straight up the  this car went slow
yeah  somebody 
What you got?
they, they started Monday morning, they dug up the concrete  they disappeared with the sort of bigger stuff  come back in about,
Ah?
that sandy  stuff they lay on the road
yeah
and erm, then when I got home Monday night, that was how it was just left, you know, so there was about a 
I must admit I, I was beginning to wonder whether I made a mistake whether I taken on  then I popped home
Yeah
and said can I have some money for me tonight, I said well I was gonna get a cheque out the Abbey National, he said oh no he said  work day to day and I thought oh 
we were talking about it at lunch time, you know, its one of those things that you just don't think about, you know,
yeah
I said where did you get the tarmac from?,been up London about, on his way to London by about half past four   he said well there's, there's, three tarmac places, basically he  people like that
yeah
oh course, you know, its , unless you think about it, the stuff has to be kept hot  twenty four hours a day and he said a little bloke like me, I mean all these 
yeah
but I mean they work on a sort of cash basis  and er the lorries just drive up, get loaded up, course you just have to queue, he said if you get behind six or seven lorries  by the time you've got your load  then you've got to get back to where your doing the job, then you've only got about two or three hours daylight left, this is why these, these obviously go round there, say do three or four in one area and you get one load get it out get the job done, you know, and when his paid out cash  that time of the morning they  the don't care  you have to pay 
yeah
rather than walk round with wads in your pocket every day, they liked to be able to work on a day to day pay system
how much more 
well that's right, yeah I mean, I   but er
yeah, well yeah I mean one of the blokes I  he said  just over a pair of 
Just over a what?
just over pair of houses that was built.
yeah.
nice pair of thatched houses.
Bloody right
He can get away from by the time he's  all the money he 
That's what happened to me old man in the cleaning business, I mean with  you could write your own cheque virtually, but they, they had sort of like a three year, three year back log on painting,they just didn't pay anybody.
This is it, I mean big , it was embarrassing when I was in the garage, but
yeah, you do  say yes, then they come back and then go sorry your   you want to get up and  
Yeah, my mate thought I was going to  his, his old man's a builder and er, he's a good worker and he's  trouble getting the money out of him.
Yeah a lot of people don't quite understand why 
But the building game is  anyway 
yeah 
What I made out of I mean a lot of small businesses, small business, its like paying Russian roulette every single day.
I don't know where 
How much  
Yeah 
What he does, when he goes out the, to put a 
Nothing need surprise me somebody went  said this bloke never advertise at all its all word of mouth,
Yeah
wouldn't do a lot of work, but the work he does    yeah, I just want certain amount of money a day  say ten per cent of , yes 
 

Erm  alright , my brother  so I went out to 
Yeah
and I bought this  I mean I  cos I wasn't paying cash wanted .
Cor, they're expensive
They are aren't they?
yep
they charged me thirty six quid for a  plus V A T, plus a fiver till I bring back the other one.
You'd gone in Blondies next door you might got it a bit cheaper and you can take  yourself.
I wanted 
Yeah 
starter motor
start right underneath the exhaust 
starter motor
this is going back  must be a few years , we were laughing and figuring sort of, you know,this bloke  back of the garage  in the end he said    we give him the bill and said yeah you can soon run out 


Your looking at the  head on, its on the right hand side  and the only you can get it   so I don't really bet how much  put on it cos I don't want to get out of my , done it all properly and that .
I'm fucking absolutely got no  till tonight.
Absolutely
for  this week 
He was a day short last week weren't he?
Yeah,
Worked out right, but not in sort of, I've bought some  but including the rest of them I've got about a hundred pounds spending.
What out of South Africa.
No, in this country up until Christmas I've got about a hundred pound include, including getting Christmas presents, from now too  December the twenty-sixth.
Oh dear.
Yep
Somebody's going to get some shitty Christmas presents then
No, somebody's going to fucking go into their three hundred quid overdraft.
Yeah 
I've only bought three or four presents
yeah, count them at the moment.
I've only bought one present 
Ah?
wasn't that er 
Oh right.
Oh its silly, it depends how many ca come, well obviously how common the car was
Yeah
somebody  
right, by when  
quite cheap, cos it was fucking 
Oh yeah ,
 
well you wouldn't go to a breakers would you?
I mean how many Ferrar , Ferrari's end up in breakers?
Oh  
Yeah, nine times out of ten   
Who was that, who was 
nine times out of ten these 
It's just body work
Well the  engine erm between cars
Yeah, the  got to actually change the  starter motor erm  I mean on the A D fifties and the two litre they  I would sort of, its only a hundred and fifty cc, but the next biggest thing they did was stopping er, a sixteen hundred  so  quite a lot of those, but nine times out of ten all they did was  another part, so
I, I, actually heard that the R S two thousand were, were quite reliable out of most of the sports car, but they did, did have to buy a  they were quite expensive, same as  top of the range car and their, their top of the range of car was  parts of them, especially if they, they, they stopped making them in  
Same as a Herald 
eleven year old 
a Herald was 
funnily enough because they made so many fucking Herald's, you can get parts for them really easy, I mean Dolomite fifteen, thirteen's, eighteen fifty you can get no problem, any part you want, no problem, but  cos its a quick car, people have either fucking killed them or
crashed them 
they've crashed them, they didn't make many of them.
Frankly, I couldn't afford the fees
No 
whatever I get from this  there's gonna be 
Fucking garage 
there's gonna be a big park and, and
In who's garage?
at your garage.
Haven't got a  your old man said,
old man's in there.
What 
 
I mean we've got, four, four, four cars in our house, the gran lives in the granny annexe inside, god knows how the fucking hell she got a  parking space, somehow she did, mum's got her's in there, my old mans parked his opposite, we've got a big double drive as well, my old man parks his on the right and I park mine on the fucking left, its like a parking lot out there in the mornings, and if when he says 
When, when your brother 
yeah, he 
he start driving 
hasn't started driving yet, but if for instance, erm, I've left my car out, just left it in, in the way, cos nobody  nobody said they were gonna go out and all of a sudden they wanna go out before I get up or something, fucking this cars reversing here, fucking everywhere, but that, and that 
 
still got a  outside me house
its as bad as our house , I say the secret in our house drove cars is three cars parked out the front,so you've got a bit of grass, three cars parked there, you're not allowed to park on the dri , drive,,sometimes  parking round the front, but 
The other thing is, I mean, whatever I get back  its gonna be a big part of my spending money, so if I don't stay 
see it in there?
in the paper today, it should be, so if I don't get any, put it this way if I don't sell it before Christmas 
Well you've still got that two grand of whatever
yeah, that's what I'll do, I'll just take some out of that and replace, but I, I've said, I, I'm never gonna touch that I'll be well unhappy if I do, cos I been in real dodgy situations with money and still resisted the temptation to take, touch that money.
Yes.
yeah, you know.
You're not sure we'd let you have any if we did 
yeah, what's  ain't it?
before it 


dipped it in the canal
yeah.
last time I went fishing, got 
Yeah we .
I heard about you and your old 
Mm,
just wait till we see him then.
Oh shit that might be, you mean recorded for posterity
Tape annoyance, can I sing a song?
Go on then.
Er, what song do you want?
Not really, we don't want any songs  
 
if you've haven't seen one then for fucks sake


do, er   don't know what to say, I've gone all shy
Its not like you
Ah?
its not like you
no, good job this is 
Manage to speak to me mum and dad,contact with 
Did you?
No, I'm going to go to 
I tell you what, I don't suppose you could persuade her 
 
to get me some contact
Yes I could
can't you get bi-focal contact lenses?
Yeah, yeah, I've know that, that's been on the market for about a year, year and a half now .
I've, I've never seen it , well I've, I've, I've only had contact, I've had these, this last set of contacts for about two years now, that's why I want to get some new ones and erm 
How much are they nowadays?
Tint, tinted ones , there's coloured ones, there's all sorts
You can get coloured can't you?,
I know they've been doing that for ages.
John if I, I, I never got  
that  and er she's got big red  different coloured lenses, she's got white outlines
Yeah
like old Crawley what's his face, the forge, where's he
oh yeah
Star Trek he's got a pair of them.
Can you see through them?
, yeah  no point if you can't
No  
 
well no, I just wondered, I mean  totally  in it?
Yeah, but they're not  are they?
Those, those ones are complete cover over, just got the 
No, this is one to re-cover over
Yeah I would of thought
yeah
you can only get re-cover overs
No, I went for contact lenses, he, he just said look, there are lots of ones on the, the market, but I suggest you have these, bloody shape of them,
Yeah you get, you get, blue ones which make your eyes bluer than 
You can get ones that implant sort of colours
Yeah
actually when I think  my eyes, my eyes go dark green, fucking  they're almost like translucent green  cos the  are all fucking 
 

walk into a shop and the girl, the girl goes oh you look tired, you think, yeah, yeah, you know, still fucking red you know, that's what I  
I don't get red , I've never have done  I, its only sort of over the past sort of half year, and I don't know why, they never started, started to go red 
Did they 
when they 
You're supposed to change you contacts at least once a year
Yeah
er, apparently after that you can start risking infection, and they get hard and everything, that's what I've noticed
My, My  
get mine in now 
my aunty gets, gets them back and she says they come back, she, she actually  them, and she, she cuts them into the, the shape, of the
Iris
yeah, and er, she gets them back and er they've got to go through about twenty different processes before they're allowed out the shop, or out the  storage, cos even then, when they're in store, they're, they're, some of them come back as  cracked, you get ones coming back from er customers sort of thing, been  and they come back and they've got pins in them, they've got bloody great er bits on the outside,of the outside .
I've got the like  I don't know what it is, they've got like the little triangular something on one of the things, its right on the edge of the  like a little white mark on it, that's 
I, I get it sometimes, I, I tell you what
I can't get it off, I've soaked it in , yeah 
if, if you go for a swim right, and you  with your contact lenses in, I always wear my goggles over the top, I mean obviously if you dive
yeah
and you open your eyes, you miss the, the contact  right, but always  and er, it  so you take them straight out, and you've got to clean them virtually straight 
Well I swim with mine in and I haven't noticed anything 
I don't know, maybe its just me 
Well you are a bit drunk  
if you happen to get anything in your eye, right  the, the thing I found was, if you just close your eye and then open it again, your contact lens would come up with your 
No, I've never had a problem like that 
Yeah
You see, I didn't realise I thought there was a soft or hard, but there's actually soft and then there's 
Yeah.
allow  and they reckon that soft ones are better suited too sports because, because of the great  action they're harder to, to knock out, whereas soft ones er, have better other qualities, I've got this little fucking book, book that I picked up in the Boots in Farnborough the other day  yes, its quite interesting.
Hard ones have better greater durability and that er vision  and that's it, all the others is, is fair 
I don't know, I say I found my ones brilliant  they are 
Yeah, but , but I'm just saying they reckon on this, its like, they had a little chart, its either fair, good or excellent and like all the others there was like vision and wear and stuff and the vision of  that erm, durability and vision capabilities were excellent on the, on the erm
Hard ones
hard ones, yes, and just good on the  and soft ones.
but if you think about it, there is the hard ones can have a lot better  can't they, I mean the only thing that'll actually harm them is that if you  get poked in the eye or something and it shatters the lens cos they are actually  
you can now get non shatter proof car lenses, shatter 
Shatter 
shatter proof car lenses
non shatter proof.
non shatter proof, whatever, non shatter I think they say 
What you want?
Got any tens?
No, I've got 
Why's everybody after tens?
Yeah, so I can get a kit kat
Kit kat 
Do you want tens 
I wonder now, I  
The ravenous four 
What did that  come out like?
I don't know 
and I thought my sister did.
Your sister did,
Do you actually do any fucking work?and especially that McEwan whoever he is
Ah?
especially that McEwan geezer, whoever he is
Yeah
I said oh steady on 
Yeah 
I know your sort Michael, you use them to use people, then you throw them away, so they don't matter
Must be doing a lot of 
I do.
Ah?
  

you take the high road and I'll take the long road and I'll be in Scotland   
Ah shit, erm Alex
Yeah
erm  re-spray this  and er 
 

Do you have any  round here?
No,
 

Yes.
What do you think I'm doing here?
Had them all set up at one stage.
Funny old day again.
Yeah, I wish you'd stop fucking saying that.
What are my 
You start fucking  I'm going home.
I've enough 
you get Dave like that  
Yeah exactly
We go 
Erm, two 
Surprised I could fucking walk this morning  Ah?
 

Did your friends 
the bonny, bonny  of the  
Yeah
 

Fucking,
Worse one I had was to go and get some elbow grease.
this guy Jim 
I nearly  like that  he was like a .
I did fucking, I did five years of normal paperwork and plus for the last three years I did double as well cos I got kicked out of french, so I was  in metal work like, four hours of metal work every week the last three  three years and, cos I was like nine times out of ten I was the only bloke there, the er, the er metal work teacher got on really well, he was  showing me all sorts of stuff and I never got to do the actual metal work lesson
well nine times out of ten yes, everybody else was in french lesson.
Oh.
 
yeah,
This is why I had the right attitude when I first got to British Aerospace,anybody any, any  anything anybody could tell me about how to fucking  like that
Yeah
cos I had a right old attitude, I mean, I mean, I know it sounds modest, but, I was doing it well, don't get me wrong, I was doing it, and I, but then it started getting a bit 
Sort of 
a bit too advanced , stuff that I never got and all of a sudden I was still saying I could do it and I couldn't any more so I, took me ages to get rid of that reputation cos why I know about  you see, I forgotten what  fucking hard too get rid of it
Yeah, even  get rid of it 
too bad 
With us,need, need a bit of a mouthy 
Yeah.
Dave
I wasn't saying oh I know it all, you can't tell me  how to  superior attitude
Yeah
fucking wasting my time  six months.
the bastards.
But the fact is I have done it all, up till about the first six months there and then I started getting  well, well out of my league, you start getting the machining and stuff like that, I haven't done much on them at all.
But I still, no I was still saying oh yeah I can do this, getting in a right old state  boys will be boys.
I wanted to be a machining  but I was .
That was probably  the most, the in , the most interesting form  friendship in there,its fucking good, I went for a job in there, but I couldn't I was an apprentice , as I say that, that's what got me going really was the fact that he had to go down and actually  do a design of the  and he had to work on the 
I think that's technically a, a draughtsman though is it, that's more like a  more what we call a design commission.
Something like that, yeah.
But everybody get it,
Yeah
every , but all, all the draughtsman unless they were just called 
We always used to play the  like you never see what is going on and never know the problems involved in being , that, that was what was good about the, the R A interview .
Yeah, but they're, they're much more keyed up  probably their design programme is probably much more advanced than most other places  
The whole idea originally is the R A was to get them  we can design as well 
Yeah
so I mean though, I suppose that they probably had erm things they 
The, the most efficient wing in the world is seven hundred mile an hour, it, it was a flying pig at, at seven hundred and thirty.
Ah, ah, sorry?
Yeah 
Yeah, like I said what's, what's the people's most efficient wing in the world, seven hundred mile that could be a flying pig, but why all of a sudden technology started  in.
See I don't really know much about planes to be honest with you.
There, there is planes, but there is no want  the, the world's most efficient because like I said that the efficiency changes at different, different level 
Yeah 
speeds, altitudes, stuff like that.
See some  different characteristics and a supersonic  and so that then, so the elevator and control services because at supersonic speeds, if you moved at the same distance, at  six hundred mile an hour the elevator went like that, so that sort of 
you're not fucking throwing the plane out of control or the elevator would rip off or something, I mean if you get the same sort of thing probably would only have to do that, break the surface a little bit.
The, we 
Think how much like 
we did two years theory as well, no three years theory  
There's a, there's a lot of dead people not dead cos their dead because they've died of old age, dead because they were trying to find out how things work.
Yeah
We  flying a glider or throw themselves of the bridge, if it doesn't work they die, somebody learns from that, you know, I know it, it really was a fucking 
this, this has been the most extreme  of trial and error ever
Let's face it a war is the, the biggest single event that can increase technology  in the electronics and radars  two men on a fucking single budget, two men on something like a three hundred pound a year budget or something silly.
Like behind us, up behind where I live at Sandhurst  thirty years now.
The prin I mean the principal of radar that's fucking  fascinating, the did a programme on it,
That's, that's where they go on 
and the first sort of thing they ever had was just like a little screen it just went blip and that's it, all they could tell you was there was something in their vicinity, it couldn't tell you what direction it was or what height or anything.
That was developed up at  
Yeah , and then from that they've now got these fucking things that show the direction, the sign, the speed and oh  its incredible   sonar's been going longer than radar, but only just  we were the world leader's now, I mean we  cos we, cos we preserve fuel, we knew exactly, they left it for the last minute to get up there and intercept them.
That's right all of a sudden they're 
They reckon Germany done about ten, fifteen minutes combat time over the, over the 
only once who had any staying power with a high 
But then again they were no match to .
I mean we, we say the .
In nineteen thirty there was something like  there was only about er ninety, hundred spitfires in the Battle of Britain all the rest were fucking Hurricane's and stuff 
Do they still do that?
No, that's been cut out, same as the blue ribbon  crossing the Atlantic  blue ribbon event.
Even though, even though er thingy  trying to do ain't they?
The last, the last, the last liner oh yeah, the last liner to actually do it is erm the Queen Mary's
say the Queen Mary 
I mean the Queen Elizabeth, Q E two never even went into that   like an average steamer, thirty five knots or something
Yeah
that's fucking going some for a ship that size  I would love to have be able to fly with the  or something
yeah
cos that really was flying you know, that was, no, it was none of this fucking press a button and let the, just a computer do it, you're a computer technician, you're a pilot now, but this fucking Eddy, Eddy the , yeah real, there's, there's quite a few reputable
Oh yeah
but there's only one real 
Oh yes the shame like that  
as well 
there's only one Lancaster still flying, and there's no Wellington and
Well there are, if you go
there's no Wellington's
if you go to Hamdon
there aren't any original Wellington's flying because this is why they got 
Oh no, not flying ,
no, oh yeah 
cos they  
its like lots of  as well but  this is why 
Its only 
this is why they were so excited about this one they found in the Lock, in the, in er Loch Ness, because it was in such superb condition and they actually reckon they can get it flying again.
its only one short  as well Look at all the, look at all the Brian .
called defiance, ever heard of that then?
There's only three, yeah three they reckon left in the world and they found one with a Japanese 
are still  quite, quite around a lot, there's not many of them, there are about fifteen, twenty, there's not that many P fifty one Mustang's either  crying shame in it?
twenty-five  bombers.
There's quite a few of them, cos they were 
Yeah 
they the by erm old air America in the early indo China wars.
They're quite, they're quite common actually, I mean there was a couple up at Black Wood
Yeah,
the only ones left in this country
they've erm,erm fifty-eight's up at Black Bridge, they used to be three of them there and, one of them was used in the
plane
one of them was used in the er  film, no er, what's the Richard Burton er Clint Eastwood film?
Where Eagles Dare
Where Eagles Dare, erm their flying the 
See I, I didn't eith I didn't either realise, right 
That was just, that was Blackbush 
that helicopter's were fucking around during the second World War but they, they were 
I think the first, the first helicopter flight was thirty seven weren't they?
No, the first V T O 
Flying  
yeah, the first V T O L, no thirty-five
thirty-five, I think its sort of thirty-six  
that was  V T O L 
What's that?
If you think about it, the whole fucking  been going since the early six , mid sixties
Yeah, and they haven't changed at all.
That's a fucking  there is still no other bird that can take off  
one but its actually the same 
I was gonna say which is, is as good , ah, no its not virtually the same, it looks the same but they've got three engines in it.
Have they?,
What's that?
Its something like the erm, the legions 
The Russians or something like that.
the legions, something or other will do it, the Russian versions a harrier, its got three engines in it.
Certain  
Its got, its got er one the downward thrust, one for an angled thrust and one for level thrust, and its got a, they reckon its got about a twenty minute range if it takes off vertically
Are you
yeah but they've got fucking, just fuck off with the dust 
Didn't go in your coffee, sorry
Yeah, but its all around in it?
I don't need any more with fucking stupid  come along with everywhere .
Yeah, the, its like the old 
Yeah
that, that's not supersonic
ah?
that's not supersonic 
trouble is that, that, that's got  and then they've got the, they've got, its about two or three, they got, they, they never had money to 
trouble is, is 
We can't, we can't afford to build any more Concorde's,it costs too much 
They're only about twenty years old, ain't they, they  sixties
Concorde ain't they?
Sixty nine  
I mean if Britain will, will be 
  

Did you see that helicopter flying backwards?
Yeah
Supposed to be, supposed to be the only one that does that.
No, all helicopters fly backwards
Oh you mean loop the loop
yeah, they also fly backwards there
oh they 
there are two or three that can do it, not many though, that's what I said two or three
yeah that's right
technically, if they get 
Yeah that, that 
Oh yeah, that's the, the  erm
the only one of its kind 
got a little jet outside,
jets at the back 
What about .
no, one I've seen
can do it.
the one I've seen is the one without the tail ropers, its just got a little jet out 
yeah 
stop the centre  stop the erm  lever 
This one had er a have a little can't remember what it was.
Bells was the maker of it, did a project on it 
Gets you, the reason why helicopters haven't been able to do loop the loop unless they've got a lot of height, is because, obviously it pulls you up
yeah
so if you doing that,doing that keep you up in the air, right, keep doing that you'll go that way, when the helicopter's  you want to do that way, so obviously 
like that 
when its like that it tries and pulls you down, and this is why there was an accident with a Wessex or something or a Sea King a while ago, where three or four people died, cos it just didn't get enough height and as, as it got to the top it just pulled it straight down to the ground, it couldn't, it didn't have enough height to clear the circle
Was that a, a Sea King or something, about ten, ten years ago or something, try to do a, a loop a loop  air show and crashed 
I wouldn't 
it was one of these big things, a Sea King or Wessex or something like that  I remember, I remember 
didn't really they should of 
that's what I said it pulls them down, erm the Apache can do it now at any height apparently  erm and the , there are, there are two or three particular copter's now 
They've got no 
pulls you up  do that goes that way, does that goes that way so you're upside down you see, you've not only got weight and gravity pulling you down you've also got the thrust of the engine pulling you down as well, and the only way the helicopters going to be able to do it is by getting enough height so they can sort of drop like that and they start dropping and they can just pull it back
I remember it as, I think, I think  I think  I remember there was like three or four people inside it or something, certainly wasn't a 
still hold the erm air speed  one of them new 
yeah the 
engines
wings are down, yeah
sixteen engines
four  four, four wing mile  on each 
worlds biggest air .
The old galaxy department er, galaxy class as a enterprise erm, the old er galaxy air lift plane with the  as well 
The Russian's build this things but they haven't got the money to finance them
yeah
they haven't got the money to keep them running
commercially
they had the money to commercially run them,
they built, they built a well beaten aircraft and they haven't got half the technical advantages that the West has and their computers has still, practically just got out of the  stage.
A mate of mine he says he won't tell you  for about three or four years.
Eight twenty-seven, eight twenty-nine
Eight twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine
A well beaten aircraft  
I mean I, I heard a stupid story, that instead of like, the, the  twenty-seventh, twenty-eight and ninth come over here, but the  was still, was still using a radio and stuff  taken out the  pre war stuff, that's how far their radio technology and communications  come on.
Yeah 
With the old F sixteen its like a couch, you sit like that, its just the joy stick in your right hand and you've got all your buttons there, whereas the old Russian one's just a p , a normal sit up and  on a joy of a  column, its amazing how they fly,make those flew once they do
ah?
Yeah, but 
 

A mate of mine actually worked in
a mate of mine actually worked out in Russia and he said you know,piece of discussions about when, where the Russian's sort of appear first and this sort of he said  he said erm, this, he said that, that kids running around on the streets of Moscow is actually given a working permit and so he could actual work there and  sort of like er
one of the top  in the, the company  and er he said that there are kids
Mm, I mean you've told me this before Mark, well I, I said to you
kids are fucking running around with just nothing on their feet
right, that's it, you've, you've told me this three times and I've told you several times as well, the, the Russians put everything they've got into military technology, just because, just because their kids are still running around 
They don't  they've still got , they've still got no military technology
they've got one of the biggest armies in the wor , they have 
so 
got the biggest army in the world
so, its all on script 
and they and th , what I am saying is they produce, they produce stuff like the  twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth, don't be fooled because their kids haven't got enough to eat and stuff 
they haven't,
that's, that's the time to worry
they, they still haven't got any, as you say they haven't got anything to eat, I mean what's the point of you putting 
Yeah, but their military has 
everything into military, no they haven't even now 
the military get the best of everything 
that was, that was it , that was it, even now, the economy is ruined, there's nothing there 
but I would still bet you that, I'm not gonna say that, that their eating well, but they'll, they'll be eating, they'll be eating twice the amount of as a civilian
that's what I'm saying Mark, what, no matter what the state of the economy, the Russian military will be at the best it can be which will be 
yeah, but  
three or four times better than the civilian's 
some of the guys out there, you know, the Russian people don't want to start anything you know, but also they, they feel they haven't got the technology we have 
no, I mean its obvious that 
for , for a start their tanks are still man powered, their still  tanks 
no 
you know, he, he said, he said  he said there's still some of the tanks are still 
still some of them
but he said, he said.
but every front line regiment in the Germ , in Germany had, they were the first tank regiment to get completed with er, er, computer optic sights and stuff
Are you sure?
I should know, I was, I mean ask Mark, you know, how many people are the  are, its very naive to think that, that their civilians are in a, in a poor way but their military is as well.
It maybe in a poor way compared to what the West get 
that's what changed 
but they've got so much  there's eight tanks or something to every fucking one of ours
yeah, so what
seven combat planes
you've got to you, you none, none 
fucking fifty men
none of their tanks have been tested really 
Afghanistan 
look what the Afghanistan did too them.
look what the fucking Vietnamese did too the Americans and the Americans went in their heavier numbers and more concentration 
yeah, ok 
the  than they went into Afghanistan
you, you are trying to determine gorilla war, right, but it doesn't how much technology you've got, because Afghanistan and the Vietnam proved that, but   tried, tested and proved
yeah, the cheaper  being phased out
yeah obviously they're being phased out
challenge for us, the  right
yeah
but on the other hand you've got the T eighty eight the T seventy two which is, that's only like the Correan one but its still got one of the, the erm, the longest range, and the most accurate canons on any tank still, I said the, the Russian military's got some of the best  in the world  and that's giving the fact that they haven't  yeah the, the state of their population
yeah exactly
and I think where they 
cos they 
population starts getting that desperate that's the time when we've got to worry
no
the Russians are just, just mad enough to fucking go for it
no because they'll do what they, they've always done there send their military in  and they'll  they'll say you aren't having this, you aren't doing that, I mean obviously Gorbachev's   I mean  this stage, he'd just send the tanks in by now, he plagued Yugoslavia crushed  
so what happened to all this Yeltsin thing right, has  has it been so much build up, speculation of the West, you say thirty years of build up on our part is being wasted, we've really got nothing to fear of the Russians?
No I don't think we have, but I think they'll probably be a Civil War first
well yeah now, but you, you were saying this, we, we had this conversation when I'd first got here, before any of this started to happen 
I, I, I don't think that you
Here you are 
we don't really have anything to
obviously we got to have fears, because there's something to be , they're the largest nation in fucking Europe so everybody's got to fear them, because they co-hearse all the other  into being part of their group   and that sort of stuff gotta be 
lets face it, if, if Russia had wanted to declare war, to, declared war on us, sort of right  ten years after the second World War had finished, and that would of been it, Europe would of been out
we always did  
because they were scared
just because
they were just as scared of us as we are of them 
nuclear weapons
yeah, exactly, but other  its not just that
if we, if there was no nuclear weapons I reckon we would of, probably would of been at war with Russia now
yeah, that's, that is it, that's what I've said er, got  there's one reason, one reason why 
but all these talks, all these talks 
I would never of er voted Labour
yeah, cos its not a union that  
it isn't the biggest deterrent in the world backed by .
But like I said Mark, er  the mil , NATO never used to think that they can hold the Russian's for very long  in, in conventional warfare's
You're telling me that we've got nothing to fear from them?
ah?, see, this, this is one of 
why has there been such a  Star Wars plan?
Why has there been such a, a, thing in the fifties and sixties for buying  and that sort of stuff?
you, you, keep  can't actually tell until it does happen  until something does happen and then you know how well that each side is prepared.
All I know is that there are better people in, that, are more intelligent people that are better informed about  than me or you and they deemed it that we've got something to fear against  and I'm willing to take that.
Fear against?
Fear against them , I still wouldn't put it past them, I'm not saying they will, I'd be very surprised if they did try to get  cos they're cos they're on the sort of er the brink of being excepted by the rest of the world again, you know, but up until a couple of years ago, this thing happened, you know  conventional warfare were  and they only way we can stop them is by nuclear warfare's
and you think part of the fear is er Russian causing  the fear that communism is now spread three fold around the world.
Yeah you're going on as if , you started off on the fact that you don't think we've got any fear of them cos their kids are running round on the street and now all of sudden you say we have because they've got nuclear weapons you say.
No, I, I just said do you think after 
Oh yeah, yeah
by the  which was
because, one  of state
yeah I'm saying it does, yeah 
one minute shall forcibly put upon the world
well yeah
by force
that's why the, the McCarthy witch hunt and stuff, the hippies   
that there is that fear, that is because that is  the second World War  this is why  the erm  the er  late thirties, early forties was never gonna succeed, because they had two completely different archaeologist, plus  now in their purest form their not that  but in the  they were, they were never going to work, I mean that is the fact that their communists, the sole reason they've been against each other for a hundred and fifty years  there is no other reason 
 
if they were capital capitalist you wouldn't have a problem.
that's why, that's ever since bolshevism first started in nineteen, seventeen 
yeah exactly , but I think er
but then again since, up, up until the mid forties we had nothing to fear from the because they, they didn't have much of an army themselves, they had millions and millions of men but no resources or facilities to build it
The Germans feared them
yeah because they had, that, that's why 
shear weight of numbers 
that's why, that's why during the first World War, Germany made a categor categoric statement that Russia should start disarming, she was mobilising 
yeah but shear weight of numbers like I mean America, America and Britain 
Red army 
American and Britain are partly responsible for the way the Russians are now cos we finance most of their industry in the second World War
yeah that's right  but I mean what can you do I mean she was an  Russian was a 
, she wants the bear necessity .
 

All the reason that we have been against each other is because of  economism and we, we 
but 
did, did have   and I'll still say the only reason we haven't been at war with them is because of the  army, arm 
oh yeah 
neutral wise, yeah
I was thinking  venturialise as well, I mean we can't, we can't 
we  hoped to we couldn't never hoped to match them 
during the second World War, one German found three hundred, four hundred Russians took them prisoner 
second World War 
yeah, took them prisoner second single handed, I mean  
After the second World War they didn't have a economy in the second World War, now they have
the Russian have fucking one of the most powerful forces, I mean up until the Stalingrad in Moscow, the, the battle of Stalingrad they didn't know if they  at all.
They were wearing cardboard boots that froze in the winter 
yeah exactly 
Yeah 
but I mean up until Stalingrad that was it, the, the Russian army was nothing, right, but as soon as Stalingrad came in every  day 
I can't see what the point is that was more than forty-five years ago
yeah, what I'm trying to say is that, that the Germans,on one German captured about four hundred blokes
what's that got to do with modern day warfare and stuff?
well, I don't know
its got nothing to do with it
I know but what all going on is the history, that fact is since the mid-fifties we, we have had dealings cos they've been one of the stronger  of the world 
yeah, no, no nobody knows how, how they, how they do things, they've never opened up their army to us  but
I, I don't know how they get there  but they know how our army works, we know how their army works, we cannot hide manoeuvre's and every army in the world knows the manoeuvre's I've been on one big NATO manoeuvre out in Germany right, and you're saying to me they don't know how I, how each army works
no I'm saying that 
why why do military  on our side say that we'll gonna get fucked in conventional war?, we would hold them, we would hold them 
shear weight of numbers 
for a year or two years
shear weight of numbers
yeah
that's all, nothing else
yeah, matter why we've got anything to do 
if it was one on one, we wouldn't have anything to do, but it is the fact that they have got good technology, good materials and they are that much more than us, their troops aren't as well trained as ours
yes, yes that's, that's one of the class of  
their, their supply routes aren't as well defined as ours, but they've got shear weight of numbers, see, I'm af , I'm afraid, I could be a fucking karate black belt or something right, so one on one against you I wouldn't have a problem, but if you went and got fucking thirty of your mates I would have a problem, I maybe able to hold you off for a fucking few minutes or something or if you could either contact, maybe a few months or years or something, but they will win
yeah
and this is why military strategies have always said we were gonna get  we could hold them for a year, two years maybe three, but in the preventional warfare we would start loosing and military strategy have always said along that it would probably be somebody like France or us that would first use the nuclear weapon 
Me you fat fart, well he's a fat fucker 
Fuck off 
This is really 
What'd you mean?
You ain't still recording it are you?
No, its .
Th the doctors over there need a lot to be desired, I mean that  what's, what's his name the eldest son of er Jim and, Jim's next door neighbours, what's their, their names?
Who?
The one who cut his hand
Cody's brother
Adam
yeah, I mean he's supposed to be a surgeon or a doctor ain't he?
No trainee ain't he?
No trainee ain't he?
Cor fucking hell.
specialise yet has he?
Woe betide anybody who becomes ill in Australia that's all I can say  I mean the thing is why is Neighbours put on twice a day cos I don't believe in   
Wasn't Bobby Davro good last night on the Wogan show, that's, that's why they put Neighbours on twice a day because they can't believe 
 

think so.
Twenty million viewers can't be wrong
twenty million  as well 
I never forget Benny Hill once  
 
got talking about Sun readers, there was this girl and she, she was stood on this podium and she, she's talking to The Express and The Guardian and going like that and their taking photographs of her and then you sort of pan round, the camera pans round and you've got The Star and the Sun   going like that  fucking  its really funny,The Sun and The Star in it  
Bit down for somebody's mate who was four hundred and nine, was it four hundred and twenty seven million out the pension or something,
What's that?
the Maxwell group , Maxwell group 
What the old Maxwell group, yeah its good ain't it ah?
what they reckon ah, is it
five hundred million 
five hundred million or something, four hundred and thirty of that or something was out of his pension or weren't it?
Yeah
that's a lot of 
yeah reckon all his  shortly before his death.
Might as well carry on recording,
Ah?
just stop it Paul
what?
How's it go again?
.
But there again its the same as Murdoch in it?
That's what I'm saying how did he knew that  
He's got too many fingers in too many pies  ok one groups making, one groups making a million pound a day, where another groups loosing a million pound a day or loosing two million pound a day, if you've got too many fingers in too many pies
soon adds up
yeah
 

if you think about it, he was, he was the only rival to, to sort of Rupert Murdoch  I mean they've got a
yeah that's it,your talking what, six million pound for a player or  player now, its a , yeah  its like some of the, the teams   what's it, where's  video?,
Oxford
Derby, Watford 
and he was after 
 

Something very dodgy going on at Maxwell group  
They say it takes  
football league 
Yeah,
to, to run a football club say
I wouldn't mind
say about a hundred million pound a year  would you say that?
Ah?
to run a football club about a hundred million a year?
about fifty million a year  its a hell of a lot.
Yes especially the mega bucks they pay these footballers, four or five  
Who's the most expensive player?
John Barnes  
probably Real Madrid or Juventus or something 
Sampdoria
Sampdoria   , why'd you think the  ain't doing so well?
.
Its like me old man was saying well  old fucking Jim Davidson came in and said er  er Bernard Manning is by far the best stand up comedian in this country
Who 
and he always will be, Jim Davidson said, said about Bernard Manning, he painfully said er, er Bernard Manning is, is, the best stand up comic in this country and probably always will be and he turned to Jim Davidson, big headed bastard, and he goes no
cheeky 
yeah he goes I know I am
Jokingly or
no serious, he goes none of you bastards can touch me,fucking hell 
this was with a pair of glasses he took off, he didn't do a very good Michael Caine, he did er Jimmy Greaves and er Dennis Nordon, Gazza really fucking well you know,he did a brilliant Robin Williams 
So how comes Mr Caine 
yeah
Is it?
its number one 
I wanna see that
yeah so do I
Jeff Bridges  
I might just go and see that on Saturday 
I  
Ah?
Robin Williams
He's one of a small 
Ah?
I said he's one of a small  
Yeah I  
 

I think he is fucking brilliant
who ?
Yeah, yeah it all comes down to personal taste
yeah  who do you like then?
Steve Martin, er 
yeah
John 
Don't like 
No.
No
 

What time we knocking off?
What time is it please?
 

Janet  is my favourite, Jasper Carrot 
along-side Chubby Checker
She does
bollocks
as far as I'm concerned yeah 
 
Who?
Jasper Carrot
I quite like him.
yeah I like him as well, but he's not exactly a  or Dan Ackroyd  
Just cos he's not a, he's not a big star in the States 
a bit fussy  and Ben Elton 
not  not any, not any good anywhere else
No I just said I like him as well but 
I know, but he's not
he's not a fucking big, he's only big in this country 
No he's big in Australia, New Zealand
what he's got  big any, any of those I was just saying
I bet you 
, but I was saying any way I like  
 
er, I can't do it any more
he got out this little diary he's got and he was going
he's got another one who does  they hear his screams sort of thing put its in
yeah
puts the letter to his sock, fucking whirls it round and stuff
fucking hilarious
yeah
they way, way he  I mean he's  took a bite out of it or something
he had this tea in his hot water bottle and he 
that's it 
like that
oh that's right 
he's taken a bite and he's fucking spurting water all over the 
that's 
him with his million and fucking 
I, I, the only ones I've seen is why 
yeah, that, that bloke his got his fucking, there's this bloke he's got his sun glasses on and he thinks his er sun bathing, so he got this fucking what's it, his trousers on still and he's trying to get his trunks on and his trousers on still cos this blokes there, he's fucking going from all this and that 
yeah, right 
he manages to get them on and he takes off his trousers, and fucking blind folded him, he gets up and 
trunks through his trousers and that's why I 
Its the  attitude cracks me up, oh, every thing he's ever done makes me laugh 
yeah 
the only one I don't like is that bloody oh erm, what's the other one, deep sea water, something lately for kids, his got his own kiddies programme, Maid Marian, take the piss out of 
Oh that is Tony Robinson
are you sure?
Black the Forgery.
I, know he was in Black Adder
Yeah its Bawdry, its not Rowan Atkinson 
He's done lots of kiddies things, he's had an  and all sorts in there , but I mean  are fucking funny,
I don't think , I don't think Griff Rhys Jones and Mel Smith are that funny
No, Hale & Pace are  
Oh I do , I like Hale & Pace
Hale & Pace are   sometimes they make me piss myself and sometimes I think that was , sometimes they're  
nine times out of ten I fucking love a  I like erm they're better than the other  fucking superb, I think some of 
Its alright for some but
I think yeah I was gonna say its a bit, if your a real Steve Martin fan and he's done, everybody's  but if your not much of a Steve Martin's fan then 
Yeah
but him and Robin Williams 
The Jerk is probably his best, his best film ever,
I thought that 
What?
The Jerk 
and Roxanne 
yeah, yeah and Roxanne
I didn't think The Jerk was deliberately funny but it was, it was 
I thought it was fucking hilarious 
a superb film
just the, just the whole idea, the whole concept of it, I'm just  
but it cracked, cracked me up is these fucking songs that make you take  and he keeps hiding behind the oil can
yeah
he thinks his shooting the oil can, and he keeps diving behind these oil cans and takes cover and that, he said oh no not an oil can and  fucking little bullets, bullet
I was born a poor black boy down in Mississippi, out in Alabama and he's like a  jet white ain't he? and he says I always felt different cos all the other kids they just sit there and they'd be tapping their feet  and then you go onto the oh  and they're getting the old rhythm going, like they do and he'd be going  like I all so different I couldn't quite do this and he used to get in look, and er
and he goes er, he goes 
ma ma 
and he goes off  the big city ma ma, like this and he's got a fucking flying helmet and a flying bucket 
yeah 
and he's sitting outside and he goes, he's mum goes well he's been out there two weeks and he's still stood there in the same spot and he's going like that
yeah and he said oh and well I sure was lucky cos here comes a lift and he gets in, he goes right, he's taken his prize  jogs about fifteen yards and says bye thanks for the lift and he stood about fifteen yards further on from the street, there's bits in it that is fucking funny, he's  made it rich and all this and he's happy bloke, he get's his girl friend 
oh  
in the shit, his fucking gone clang, this blokes got his fucking nuts and the next thing he sees is a big fucking plaster  balls alone  and he's, he's got up his wife, he's having a right old night with here and he's leaving, and he says I don't need you, I didn't need
Way of the World.
its T V remote control though
he said I don't need you, I just need this fucking remote control this desk lamp  he's got his trousers round his ankles you know, he just cracks me up,
black parents.
yeah he goes, I'm gonna offer to him his gonna
find him more work 
get me , find me more work he goes cos next week he's gonna give me a blow job if I'm lucky 
and none , none of the others, they've had this one sort of older black guy and his fucking pissing themselves and all the others going why that sure is nice of that little girlie,
cos she's a real fucking  ain't she
she ended up
she goes to him can you do this like, this
and he goes
well he goes
well I don't know I think she 
well good of her 
good enough 
he ends up as a tramp and he gets to  ah son get in and  you know he  fucking hanging out the back of the window  we had, we had enough money to move to a bigger house right, and they got this little  
ah fucking hell 
yeah that's
I, I said  all they've done is literally scaled it up to like instead of a door being that size its now like that right and the front porch instead of being that low now that high  up double it, its a bigger home
its hilarious
we've moved to a bigger home, fucking scaled it up 
and he, did he fight, does he fight, I mean he here's some
he here's a Pat Boone record or something and all of a sudden he  started dancing to all this and the old black bloke comes in and says oh my life,he couldn't get any of the old blokes .
it is a funny film, you seen Roxanne where he plays a  fucking funny, he has to think of twenty  pornographic, the only women who can satisfy two  by two women at once its got here, nature loving, too much, really love little bee, give a mat to sit on and stuff like that, your gonna fucking break that in a minute, time have you Mark?
Twenty past
Think 
Yeah, yeah, have you seen Filofax?
No
New one out, that's really funny
woman in it 
the woman in these is by the farer one of the horniest bitches for me anyway
that I've, I mean she may not be everybody's cup of tea, she's well slim ain't she
yeah
but the, seen her in Real Men Face Me?
yeah, John Ritter 
What's it called?
Real Men with John Ritter its, its really wacky, like he's this fucking secret agent stuff, I never smoke unless its after six  and he just, he's this John Ritter and his got this really mild  of character but he's been mistaken for an, an agent and he's, he's, he's going  
he's over there so do something so he's, he's going fucking he's gone, why have you got a gun, he said we'll think of something so he's gone  over his hand
all these fucking people have diving they can see he has a real gun  
and as he's done that the mates behind him have shot him with a real gun, his gone, his gone 
and he fucking thinks he's  so he's going around   
and this other mates got it as well and these two mates have shot, he's gone 
Wow,
and all of a sudden he keeps going I'll cover you 
God  eh it really is funny
the best was on that fucking baseball and that 
yeah, yeah its  you'll have to, you'll have to see it, Real Men, James  and John Ritter, its good.
I just sat through the whole  and pissed myself, I like the clown squad
yeah 
oh no its the dreaded clown squad, what C I A agent's dressed up as clowns they're deadly and all you see is this fucking 
he, he, he, he said  hard, right, so he can fucking, he said I'll, I'll take these and the first man that comes up fucking bashes it and then James er John James  gets them all and when he wakes up, just as he's about to wake up John James thinks right and he fucking lays down on the ground and he wakes up and sees all these clowns all over the place
he thinks he's done it 
right, and he, he fucking he gets, he saying to his  what, what happened, you've got all these clown squads?
Well, yeah I guess I did, you got all of them?
Even Bimbo?
Well yeah I guess I did  he gets confidence and he walks up with this  he's getting cockier by the minute and he's well proud and he's got he sees this, his in this bar trying to chat up this woman, he says I need a, I need a  didn't he say I need a smoke or something, so he looks for a woman 
something like that, oh its fucking  
and he sees this really pretty woman, but, like he's got glasses on and he's got big  I don't really know 
all sweet and innocent like 
you know, oh come on we'll have fun, a bit of a I don't really know, like this and he fucking, he gets let in this house and er
fucking 
he says just wait a minute I'll just get everything ready so just come in when your ready so they walks in
Have you got 
yeah
no
he walks in and there's this fucking big like contraption thing there like, you know, and she's standing there
get us a thingy
stiletto heels, fucking whips and stuff, she says right get in, what,and he's fucking on this thing and he's going round and round and round he says I think I maybe in love , you know, he fucking come out and he's looking really awful and meanwhile this James Ritter character he was suppose to, he's stopped the robbery and sent the police and their all going wow what a guy, fucking great stuff, that is a funny film and er
The Real Man
Real Man
who was that Mr Death is alright, its not brilliant  
 
but its alright film as well 
Spread Heap
Spread Heap, yeah unfortunately yeah,
where he drops that fucking cup of coffee 
I love  I think
Wow look at that 
Let's get this straight, the woman's mine ok
Turner and Hooch was funny
Oh the ending was funny  
that's probably the best  film that's ever been, there's been shit
Oh I don't know I really like 
Mr Big er  sorry 
 

Jumping on that big piano on the floor
I thought that was quite funny actually
I thought that was hilarious.
It took me a long while though to realise that was Meg Ryan at the beginning.
Yes, right 
The thing is I knew there was Meg Ryan in the film and I thought I've seen that actor cos I'm, I'm always on about knowing faces and names and stuff
Maybe I should 
but she's, she's going er 
Really dowdy, quite pretty but really dowdy and at the next one you see she's erm this real baddie got  bite my boots and  real trendy sort of bimbo type character ain't she?
Yeah
long, long straight er,
and I thought well now she looks familiar as well, I still haven't twigged that its the same Meg Ryan riding her bike and then Meg Ryan comes up 
 
and its really funny.
Beg forgiveness and say please get off my  
like that  don't you normally go in the garage and do it
yeah,
why can't you change it in the garage?
Some garages say, say no.
Well then I can't believe that any garage would, would refuse to give you a ten piece for their own machine .
I'll ask for, I'll ask for ten pence 
Fucking go somewhere else then  now you know where not to go don't you?
  
 

Nobody has  
Eh?
Saying, quite easy to go into a garage then 
So what's fucking new?
Ah?
You heard
no I didn't, can you repeat that?
so what's fucking new?
cheek 
.
Rocking and rolling 
Fucking 
No, just said , well I don't know she might be, she might turn up and then say  
half past seven
the time  got up 
half past seven   pardon me.
Did you see anything about, did you see that bloody 
No 
What's that about?
about the events up too and leading after the events of Bloody Sunday, nineteen seventy-two 
No, sorry   never had anything to do with  he was trying to er  
He got, got question and that in that events
like so they did in 
said they just fired rubber bullets high into the ground  fucking rules, live ammunition
they were rubber bullets being fired as well but all the ones that died were
no it wasn't rubber bullets, was it, it was that, that 
real live ammunition live ammunition
yeah, they didn't have rubber bullets then did they, they had the old 
Yeah  basically
between the fucking  suppose to be  aren't they?
basically that, the erm the trains that were  right, erm
I thought they'd taken it 
yeah but they take it, they, they got documentary  haven't be able to get anybody died  being shot they got people being brought back wounded and stuff, but erm, basically the  there were I R A gunmen there erm  at least three was spotted, say in a crowd that size how many more went unspotted
yeah
right, its almost definite British  come under fire  but it does seem that the para's did kill erm out of, out of the thirteen, only one had any I R A links, he was a member of the, the I R A  erm, and out of the remaining twelve only three of them might of fired a gun, you know, they  leg  or the hands, by the side, by the gun
yeah
and er, but apparently they did a, they did a test and that was also a package where the  stuff like that, transfer  although those three may of been carrying weapons, they split open the policeman, but this does seem to  basically at , well not no, not indiscriminately they didn't say that but they shot innocent people, I mean like I said well the  I mean that's got to kill  in those streets and stuff the ricochet's can go quite easily go through somebody  but there, there was, there's always been claims er, there's no I R A gunmen there
yeah
apart from one Reverend the most Reverend  Doyle or something  and he saw one gunmen and he saw him fire a couple of shots and they told him to piss off out of sort of thing
yeah
so I mean if, if they caught one, they actually took a photo, managed to take a photo out of all those hundreds of people, look how many more were, were there, and it just seems like basically their not sure who fired first, obviously the Irish say it was the British them and the British say they were fired upon first and erm, on, on the strength of it, who, who would you rather believe I mean, somebody that's been living in Ireland for twenty odd yea twenty years now with all that happening around him being able to be got at by the I R A or a British body who may, may be up on a murder trial, you know, the, at the end of the day its six of one and half a dozen of the other, they've both got stuffed  by a bleeding troop
yeah
so it really does think that all I
murder trial
No they were, that's what they were  weren't it when it all happened, the old Revered somebody or other, they  wilful murder  but erm  yeah basically it doesn't seem like, there was no real evidence as to who erm fired first and there was no conclusion that the  about that, but they were certainly I R A gunmen, para's, its like without a doubt if you know some people, but  like with those high powered weapons they may, alright its unfortunately that somebody may have got shot, but it may not of been the main shot, that may, may of been a ricochet or, or anything like that, both their  they've got a killing range of up to three mile  so  one mate come round, he says he's gonna come round again tomorrow and have a look at it  
 
well if they ring up tomorrow, erm one bloke says he might ring up tomorrow, one said she'll, she'll come round at the weekend and another bloke said  
said it's a Dolomite 
Dolomite, its in the paper, its in the paper for five-fifty, but I told that lady last night is it, what, what is, what's, what's your minimum offer, I said well I want four hundred for it I'm not going to take any less  so I was, I was sort of and
but erm, I think I  down by his legs,all this and erm, you know, its bang, bang its just like, its over in a split second, you don't have time to be  this, I was there and there  nobody really new what was going on and all this sort of stuff, he was probably one of most honest about , well, one of the most honest little bloke more willing to speak about it,and he had this other one it was right you know like, er, well I'm already taking further than I'm willing to go on this course, what you need is, well look, you know, all I know is that we was  first,saying no more than that,not willing to go.
The only thing, the only thing that all of us said categorically is they were fired upon first, but the trouble is they've had fucking twenty years to, to think up their side and so there's that so 
haven't they?
so have the Irish.
How many  they reckon fucking
How many  reckon shot them?
Yeah.
I don't know, well, because I mean that any one of them could of said oh well we were being fired upon first and then they could of er, their colleagues fucking  going on 
Yeah, but the other thing was, it wasn't that, towards the end of the programme, they weren't so much  who fired first, its, erm, there is, there is no evidence either way to support either story, the Irish say there was no Government, there was nobody running for Government  you know, said that they had three 
If you can manage to get one photo of a gunmen in all that crowd, how many more were there they didn't get a photo of you know, erm, so that's bull shit for a start  the  said that they only fired upon identified targets, going on motorbikes, and erm, I mean the thing is, the para's are a highly disciplined, highly trained  apparently at a  you weren't even allowed to go out there without at least five years experience  yeah, they were  soldiers, they need  and I can't believe that they negligibly  you know, cos there was women and children there, and nearly all of them had wives and kids, you know, and there was reports from like the Irish saying oh yeah, they were mixing body er, care and body  people and fucking laughing and joking over dead bodies and my old man said yeah if you just, if you just seen something drop most people will  laugh and joke about it, you know I don't know if you've ever meet this sort of,old man, but the service  sort of a, a unique sense of  they can laugh at anything, you know they can see somebody with its guts put out in front of them and they'll fucking crack out about it, its the only way they can stop themselves cracking up, or fucking crying sort of thing.
And there was this, there was this no conclusive evidence, the only, the only thing that  was that, that these  and make the  said there was only one man definite I R A 
and the other  may or may not of been  like I said just the fact I'm shaking your hand,weapon  he goes and does a frenzy test  but the evidence on those three were, wasn't very, wasn't very conclusive and it 
So it doesn't , still doesn't rule them out 
still doesn't fit and that's the thing  yeah I mean all this morning was saying  you haven't seen  under fire, they don't stop and look around if they get down into cover he said how they suppose to know who's firing or not?, you know.
And he, he said but we only 
You don't fucking  
we had a couple of men fire over the 
 
one of them said, you know, he said how, how the hell  how the hell can they say which directions the fire's coming from?but they, I mean some of them were saying like this mate he run out, he was going across this patch of open space and the soldier obviously saw a soldier and as he did that apparently he got shot through there and out the other side of him.
So the thing is, if he,inconsistent in that story, if he's doing that, that direction how did he get shot from that way, where he's own  telling stories apparently coming from?
Yeah
You know that's all right he may, might, alright there may of been a soldier there, but they've just come from that direction
yeah
and then he's, he's going out and they're coming like that direction and he's looked round and he's seen the soldier,doing it, he's gone and this is how I did it and then he put his, like this and he stuck his  hands up and as his done that he's got shot through the body from the side, what's  
he still alive?
no, he blew his chest out.
You don't get  and fucking live, not many do any way.
How did he know it was an S L R?
Ah?
How did he know it was an S L R?
Well that's it, if, if it was a British soldier it was a S L R
Yeah, yeah, that's what I mean, I mean he could of been fucking I R A
Exactly, the things they could of,stop inside people unless its,so you can never tell.
Any one got any  Harry
But yeah, I mean, there was so  so many inconsistencies on, on the Irish witness  side, you know, like what, what matey said I was, I was running out and all of a sudden I felt a pain from here  on those  fuck it, he's up there, got big forearms, and big sort of muscle that size, that's really wasted this side even after twenty years, it must of about  and apparently one matey got shot in the back running away, oh no five out of the thirteen got shot in the back, which again doesn't fucking mean any thing, you know that's , but I said if there's I R A supporters there and that, you telling me you seen where your comrades have fucking get shot, you're not, you're not gonna try and pick up his weapon and stuff  I mean like, it was just a perfect opportunity to, to get one over on the British Forces and I, I said I don't think yet the para's were entirely blameless, but then again I don't think they ever have been  in any of their fucking  
No
they're not angels, they're a hard regiment, but they're also highly disciplined and highly trained, I've got, I, I, the other thing I couldn't see what good, I mean is it, is it the, I mean its not, its not the anniversaries or any thing so I don't know why they brought the  out, cos I can't see what interviewing people twenty years after the thing happen can do.
Not, probably not.
Well, well interesting programme, I'll give them that though.
Not a 
Yeah, but my old man he's a, he's driving he was driving the  one of the  that's, that erm, Lieutenant Colonel  was in  at the time of the, and he, he was in there  and he said my old man knows for certain that at that time they were under fire, cos they drove in and picked up two bodies and put them in the back of the jeep all under fire
Yeah 
they know for a fact that there were gunmen there, as to who shoot, shot first that's held in tribunal, he, could, he, he'd never know
Who's that, your old man?
yeah  nearly ever soldier that was there got  Lord Rigdely or somebody, you know
yeah and er, the, the programme condemned him a bit, basically he  he didn't, there was, there was, he didn't seemed to take in a lo , a whole lot evidence from either side, you know, he did, he did, he didn't seemed to handle the case very well, it was sort of more like it just get it over with quickly and forget it sort of thing.
Sounds like 
I don't know though I mean he, he's, he's allowed that, he allowed that the fact that they could of been unarmed men and all that but he also condemned three of them on the evidence of this lead which he really shouldn't of done, he should of left an open verdict on those few cos lead could be transferred to .
I mean lead can be picked up at  what put your hand on the exhaust .
Oh well lead so er, apparently if, if you could get in fine detail enough we'd have lead on ourselves, this is why the, this carbon dioxide stuff from the erm 
Fucking have that on the inside of the 
They have this, they have this MP there from the S D L P from nineteen sixty-nine to seventy-two and he's a, a pacifist, he went to the, apparently he went to and spoke to the leader of the provisional I R A
no
I don't know who it
I don't know who it  and apparently he asked him that, are, are any of your men gonna be there and if there are he said, I'm, I'm gonna pull out and use all my influence to stop the march and the I R A police said no there would not be any gunmen there  so I thought yeah, fucking right, oh yeah that's easy to say, and then if like the reporter said and, and you believe him and you have the feeble excuse towards a small community he said, you know what's going on 
fuck off
exactly, I mean this, this is, this is the I R A, they're not part of any fucking small community they are the fucking community unto themselves and that's is that, that was he's answ erm, that was he's answer to the question of do, do you believe him or something, you know, well all in all it was quite interesting 
Oh it might 
How're you getting home?
Naked  you?
Up at half past seven, fucking   
Set the alarm for half past six, gets another half hour in bed and he's moaning about it.
An hour in bed,
 

 

, so 
Fuck off
 

Did you see that, that  last night?
Erm  its not the sort of thing I like to watch.
I, I wasn't watching while  at the time, but erm  basically it seemed like it was six of one and half a dozen of the other.
Don't no nothing about it.
Thirteen, thirteen supposedly are innocent Irish  got killed by para's by militaries included in the crowd, and all the other's, the Irish say that basically there were no I R A gunmen there which is according to there's proof that they have, they were, erm and like that, the para .
It's all a load of bull shit basically, it seems, it seems that the para's were certainly under fire, with  nobody knows and erm, it does, the only thing that is blatantly clear, all these lying  transferred by the para's and they were like dragging them away and stuff and the only, there's only one member that's had any thing to do with the I R A that they can find out about, that's one  so at least nine weren't firing definitely, erm, three may of done or may not of done  so it looks like the only thing that basic the same is looks like at least nine were innocent, you know its all right for
No smoke without fire thought
yeah, makes you  I can't see what's good its doing twenty years afterwards, the people had time to think about it and use their memories for twenty years, nineteen seventy-two it happened and they've just sort of done it .
Yeah but
tell you the truth will never come out about that though.
No, but the, the only good,heard of it is erm  he said and basically any of the para's aren't 
Might know.
They know who they all are.
Yeah they reckon they've got files on it, sort of eighty, ninety per cent of who the provisional I R A and  I R A are.
Yeah.
One of these will do?
Yes please, yes please, soon as, soon as 
Fucking  
they think they're all in the beds,.
Stu done half fucking rabbit on don't he?
On and on and on and
Oh have I upset Phil in some way?
Why?
dunno, seems to have got the hump
Phil?
Yeah, said good morning Phil, totally fucking ignored me.
Are you still sort of staying at the same  or 
Dunno, that wife of  fucking me up.
Ah?
That wife of  me up  I had a  my girl yesterday
Oh.
Oh shit.
What?
Knocked something behind by the looks of it
Ah?
Knocked something behind his bench by the looks of it, dropped fucking  go and wash it  go
But its got    
Fell out the bag  yeah boring night down at the 
Ah?
Boring evening in 
Oh yeah.
probably end up watching video's and  this evening.
Oh, this evening coming 
must be eaten anything dinner time, I've got to go to the bank   
Here Stu
drink
How is he?
Was he really scared?
I hate it when that happens
Eh?
hate it when that happens,did your  buy  or what?
Its three a week, sometimes I don't, depends what date he goes, its up on 
Cos I see him know with this big pallets of that stuff all over the place and 
I must admit I was  fascinated when I was standing  when they
Yeah
looking at other people's  who was that box for?
There's only two
  
trolley load on
Well mum's shopping bill don't come to .
Oh, that's a nice plant, is it a coniferous Colin?
Is it a coniferous one Colin?
Yeah its a little conifer we found in er 
Did you get a good fair offer or what?
Its alright,
Do you want some imported stuff, its  .
I have that  what do they usually look like, they got little, like leaves, tiny leaves under the  a bit like a pine  I suppose, you know, larger  but they're they're sort of like a lit , small little leaf along the outside 
 

easy come, easy go  
Your mum and dad know your smoking?
Haven't they said anything?, obviously not.
At first they
Eh?
At first 
What'd they say?
no
What a surprise 
You did what?
What a surprise .
Have you got those photo's back off her?
Ah?
Have you got those photo's back off her?
No, get them developed, later I suppose.
Fucking 
Why don't you get hold of that one?
Fucking get hold of it
I don't know where it is 
out of her.
I, I respect her privacy 
You lying toad .
I do 
You respect her privacy only when she's in front of you, when she's out the room its a quick glide full through all the drawers 
I once nearly read her diary and I thought no I'd better not 
Actually I would, cos if you end up murdering her 
Yeah
she might have some nasty things to say about it.
Na, course she hasn't


she loves me  Its one of these quite big ones with a little catch on the outside you know, a little,
And you couldn't, you couldn't pry it open, could you?
and it was er open on her bed, she popped out for, for about, I dunno forty odd minutes to get her hair done or something  I was well tempted to have a look, but I thought no if I get a diary and somebody looked, looked through mine I wouldn't be happy about it, so I didn't  its quite a hard temptation but
It is
quite hard not doing it.
I bet she asked when he got back
No
when she got back  you have a look in my diary she said  you go bright red and say no 
What diary?
Yeah
Well I keep a diary now
I didn't know you kept counting 
And I  years  its quite lovely looking back   
Its about all  in it 
What?
have a kip at lunch time, did some work, came home and got smashed  Went down about all  
See you later Mark 
oh see you later mate
see you later, yeah, good luck to you
where, where you off to?
ta la mate
where you off to?
 
Gonna  
Yeah
yeah
Oh, just in time for nineteen ninety-two
Oh yeah
, yeah good luck, good luck, see you later 
see you later Mark, alright 
Be fucked out by the time I 
Get in there 
 

Be a funny old day won't it?
See you later Mark, good luck.
See you 
Reckon that's three out of fifteen.
What you  
quite happy as well ain't he?
Is he, where's, where's he going to?
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Yeah  yeah I mean 
Did he say where?
 

Does he, does he know which firm he's going to,
Airbus
Where?
Airbus  about nine quid an hour
sorry?
Airbus
Airbus, oh  done well Mark
Nine quid an hour.
I've got his telephone number at home, I might phone him up
Yeah, I might
the trouble is if their looking for people to start Sunday, I can't start Sunday.
I know, I can't start Sunday.
Got to give them a week's notice 
Its not worth it for you is it, you might have to hang on till after Christmas and try and 
I might phone them up and just, ask them if there's any jobs going after Christmas sort of thing 
Can use the good  the things, I mean, for a, for us who haven't got permanent jobs yet 
 
not working.
That's right, its a job   Has he got the flight out there and everything, they pay for it?
They do, yeah.
Is he going on Sunday?
Yeah 
I'd love that, I'd love to pick up 
 

Well yeah,
I don't know.
I think.
I should think its quite hard to get into it 
Yeah I never thought of that, yeah I suppose its colder  you don't have to take that many clothes out there do you, cos  get out there 
Its a funny old day  
I think if I was going to go Sunday I think I'd buy myself a few  cos that  
How 
I've got two  boxes at home, but I  I mean  its not brilliant, but they do the job for me   could be worth  cos he  driving out there as well, wouldn't mind  start get the old ferry ticket's tomorrow and piss off over there , straight through France,
Erm
out to Holland  
they offered me two  for a boat, right and they offered me one while I was there, then I got home and they offered me one that late that evening,job, erm  working like that was a Thursday and they wanted me to start on the week Monday, I couldn't do it  as it happens I had to give my weeks notice here  get out there that quick, so I fucking said, I said to myself well they've  first day, they're gonna offer me a few more, so yeah they offered me a couple more but way from  so, a bit unlucky I, I wished I'd fucking taken it 
Well you could of done really, I mean you could of fucking rang in, rang in here on a Friday and 
that's what I, that's what I thought like cos I thought
you know, if they want  the first day, then there gonna have to do another lot so what's the point of sort of yourself out with fucking , I wasn't really sure at the time that I wanted to go to  so, you know, I, I said no I needed this job, but probably a bad   I've been offered a couple of month one's as well, one month and two month's, but I mean the trouble is 
The trouble is there  are they?
I was gonna say if you ain't permanently in employment, you're a bit silly to take that  especially if the er, present climber  and there's one there they offered me said it could be two weeks or it could be two years I don't know, so I  gambler or not, I mean it depends how well you're  you are as well.
Well most of them they saying are six contracts, now they say, say, six month contract or eight month contract or a three month contract, but I just had a couple that were like oh they could be a 
Goal 
couple of months he said he, it could be a couple of years, it depends on how quick it get, work gets done and how long they think they need you.
What time is it?
forty-eight.
Forty-eight 
 

Does they put   
Well maybe thirteenth 
What time is it now?
Quarter too.
What you got to go into town for?
Fucking  alright, I haven't been up to the  today, I've spent most of it sat fucking here.
Fucking I don't know.
Stuart
What?
Barney says he don't like extra strong mints so could you get murray mints next time please  I'll take them home.
Yeah  this is taken this piss isn't it?
you've got to ain't you?
this morning.
I'll tell you what I'll bring you back a crate of fucking French extra strong mints 
yeah we've heard you don't give it to Karen in the French style.
What is the French style?
No fucking idea.
The French what?
Mucking about 
 
the place, sex 
I know you, you, you're not allowed to bath three days before so you can get that fucking French aroma going.
That could be it 
Probably right.
They reckon the average French woman don't change their knickers, they only change it every two days or something   and all sorts  they don't shave.
Yeah I know that.
Get right fucking  any way
Yeah
No I mean  like that
And their 
That, that, that little French, that little French girl I fucking, I told you I met
over in Spain, she fucking had  she had her  right the way round there, sniffing out the fucking size of it ,felt like saying do you want a quick short back and sides girl .
No 
She, she does  she once, she never let me in the pass, she never let me for my birthday.
Eh?
She never let me for my birthday.
What's that, shave her 
shave her 
I'd wanna shave her.
For Christmas she said can I shave you?
Fucking hell, a bit weird man, what's 
All I want for Christmas is a smooth fanny 


No  shave and then you shag a girl
Yeah but they reckon the stubble afterwards plays havoc.
Ah, getting that  yeah
Fucking 
yeah but I ain't gonna have to worry about it I'm not gonna be back for a month am I?
Should of 
For Christmas Eve I'm gonna get the old fucking  out 
run riot , don't try any,fucking run mate.
She'd be up with it as well, cos if I sleep I ain't never going to get it ..
Well think of that, if you cut her, whoops.
tissue all over it 
 

I wouldn't mind another 
Yeah 
Stick the tissue on it 
Would you like to do  you interested?
Definitely different.
Mm.
That's what I want to do the shaving as well 
Yeah, see where its going wouldn't you?
What they don't need, they don't  the old lathery legs 
I ain't got to, I've just realised it was  
The old lather in there, work it about a bit.
Does it, is it, is it the 
The cut throat
A bit of hot water down there fucking 
 
well you've got to snip it first, haven't you , you've got to fucking snip it with the long hairs first, the old cut throat.
Oh he's, I swear he's done it before
He has done it before.
No I haven't
I bet he has
With a bloke
Oh,
.
Its  its just me putting after shave on argh.


Well funny you should say that


but we have shaved the bollocks of a bloke in T A, he was a right  like Tintin, so we, we pinned him and shaved his bollocks  and then put after shave over it.
Oh no.
Oh god I bet he passed out 
 
didn't he?
The thing is we did it right, we did it in the nappy, then we fucking put him spread-eagled on a  bench and me mate ran off to get the shaving kit stuff  and this fucking this people who's erm, looking wom , girls in there and everything, real fucking pissed up


to him, didn't take very long.
What that small bollocks.
But we shaved it from around there,people  we were gonna go on to shave his legs and stuff as well but we got caught.
.
We were gonna wax his fucking legs  argh, he didn't ar , he did, he wasn't screaming cos the thing we said like if you move this, your, your  will be slit sort of that'll keep him dead still right


alright, but then  more ways than one .
Yeah
He had a shaving kit like that, and he had his old, the old after shave lotion and that, and he will, well, picked us, we just fucking said I, I know what will do the trick a bit of fucking  gone


top of the after shave, used about half a bottle of after shave, and he's just gone  started  around, I thought he was throwing a  I thought that must of well stung.
I mean it, you know when you do it, when you put it on after shaving you think ooh you know
Yeah 
half a bottle all over his  I mean that  with a any way, but all over his fucking private parts shave them
Ooh.
I don't think he ever forgave any of us.
Who told you to get him?
The thing is a couple of weeks later
I don't blame him really.
no a couple of weeks later, erm, we, we went on a big route marching stuff and he was in agony the old stubble
Yeah
he, he, he had the old fucking vaseline down there and so , all that all the 
Don't join the T A 
no I fucking ain't, but its  you say that, there's this geezer 
Would you go around with your  
Thank fucking your heads not shaved not you're bleeding 
cos er, there's  there everyone get's something done to them, but nothing, nothing like erm,
Oh, Roger's got bald balls 
they say that some guys  got skin heads,
Arseholes, I wouldn't, I wouldn't do anything like that, I wouldn't do anything that might hurt
There's some, there's some guy .
What's that?
Shaved this Lieutenant Sergeant Major eyebrow off when he was sleeping one night, and he was in front of the, the Colonel Chief and Regional   so what he did, he, cos it, it took, taken ages, took about three months to grow back, so what he did was he shaved the other one off as well 
yeah
and like, just blended it in with like one of these pencil stuff, so funny


apparently he went, he went round telling everybody erm he was doing a live exercise and he got singed or something   but this, this erm, its Browndown on the South Coast and it was, it was a Christ it was a Christmas piss up, regiment Christmas piss up and anything goes, as long as you don't physically hurt somebody, although that has been known to happen and its not criminal anything goes right, but honestly the worse you do to  somebody the worse they do back to you, and people are getting tied bollock naked up the flag poles, dumped in bins, erm, tied in their beds, put out in the middle of the parade ground, fucking all sorts of things you know, like what we can do, the most common thing is nicking, you know the old walking pay slips they've got
yeah
nicking them and capture there pay slips and you get it, you get a little brass plaque on it saying captured by so and so and  the date, cos obviously they get fined for loosing it and all that sort of stuff
do they?
oh yeah its army property, must cost about, they cost about eighty quid or something
What?
the pay slips they use in the  can actually marked up and its got the exact 
You mean you haven't seen them doing it 
oh yeah the people, matey's walking along and he's going like this and he's pulling it as he's doing it, he says  and he's doing it in proper time  like that, but with one arm going he's twiddling it, he's doing it, he says no my feet are exactly  like that, very effective but you can actually get fined for loosing them, you have to pay for them and its like a real, shooting sticks as well,you don't tend to carry erm, these pay sticks you carry them like the old shooting sticks, the old  you know?
Yeah
we captured them,great laugh about that, really is, its just a, its just a weekend of piss up basically.
Every night in the  fucking raunchiest games, it doesn't matter if your a girl, if your girl and don't want to play fine, if your girl and you wanna play well, quite like the bloke sort of thing you know, there was no, nothing er, no  given, the fact that your a female, and they used to go in as hardly anybody half the time, erm, indoor rugby and shit like that
yeah
with a  cushion.
You know, nine times out of ten you don't even get round to take the tables and the chairs out the way, just fucking fall over them


erm  fucking indoor murder ball, the seat, cushion and stuff like that, its fucking well out of order piss up games  oh that's right I think we played in, I think we played, you know that British bull dog thing?, we managed to clear all the fucking the nappy chair this and the chairs out the way, we were playing this British bull dog sort of thing and the only thing, the only, the only difference was when you got caught, got, everybody was fucking giving you a few thumps in the arm, for good measure like, and we played about four of this and every time this cocky little son of a bitch didn't get caught, he was always the last person, so we fucking said, we said, me and this other guy's that are in our troop and that er, we said right we'll get him, so when, when everybody sort of go for it right just after the one person in the middle, said fucking just get this guy and fucking pin him down and do something to him right, we didn't, I think we said we'd just get him, yeah that's a good idea, so he's gone right go and his mate he's fucking took off two steps and there's eight of us fucking dived on top of him, what the fucking, he's struggling, get off you cunt so we pinned him down and at first we was just going to de-bag him in front of the women, we've taken his boots off and his trousers and that and  shave his bollocks, yeah the whole fucking  yeah, it was like an audience, all that they sort of gathered up the chairs and the tables  fuck have his bollocks shaved.


Well out of order, the thing is if that'd been, if that'd been another troop trying to do it to him, there would of been, there would of been shit 
Hell to pay 
but because he knew it was our troop, you know  but erm, that's the thing when you, nine times, about eight times out of ten you did it to another troop, but then again they did it back to you, but this time he was a right cocky son of a bitch, I mean we all liked him, but he was right cocky bastard, so he 
So he 
thought he was it so we decided to bring him down three pegs or two 
So when did the hair grow back on your bollocks then Stu?
Yeah, its thicker now Mark, but they shaved me round here, you know  er, we had , Kevin, Kevin 


yeah he was the fucking B U L G A R, he was a right good laugh actually  he's still there, he's a Lance Corporal now   
Got 
I, I, I was lucky in the three ground  I went too the worst that ever happened to me was I was put head first into a dustbin, but luckily it had been emptied it was still well mucky, but I just fucking went and had a shower, and I come out of the shower and I'd got pounced upon again and I was there, it must of been a funny site, there's me right in just a pair of fucking deck chairs that we used to wear for the, the shower block right, fucking shaving, er like the wash kit bag in my right hand and I was holding me fucking towel round, round me waist with me left, I was streaking across the play ground, going as fast as I could


and about fifteen of the erm eight, eight, five troop  chasing after me, it was like our sister troop  yeah, we were, there was three troops in our squadron, eight, eight, five, eight, eight, six and eighty, eighty, seven and then there was three squadrons and a regiments, there was nine troops there, so like, if it, basically it was your troop and nobody else, but then it was your squadron and, and anybody else and then the few times that I, on  regiment  it was your regiment and nobody else, like, we could touch you cos your our regiment but if you try and touch us,you can get fucking hell , but it nearly always come down to the troops, and the thing is eight, eight, six, only had, the first year that I was there we'd only had about thirty people, fourth year there had I opposed like fifty, sixty and seventy, second year we were there we had about forty- five opposed to like sixty, seventy, eighty, and the third year there we had about fifty opposed like fucking seventy, eighty and ninety in a, in a troop, so we were always well out numbered and we were by far the most outrageous
 

well, huh, one of our fucking sergeant's right, we were taken erm some of the recruits from another, another troop I mean, er nine, nine, one or something it was one of the other squadron's and er, and he's got them inside where's he's like fucking the old erm 
What time is it?
eleven forty six, he's got them inside, I think I told you about this didn't I?, and I was inside helping them out like, he was outside, he didn't have his gas mask, we were doing the  things, like M B C stuff, and I'm inside and he said right  you will each go to a post, where inside this tent, each to go to er, erm, cos there was six people inside and like there was six posts, he said you each got to a post inside the tent and on the  you will pick up the tent, and I new what was coming, done it before sort of thing  and erm, were all in M B C stuff cos there's still lots of  gas, but there wasn't for very long, and he said right on the  you will, er he just said, we picked it up right, were all fucking  all fucking  I said go on then,
Yeah
and then he's, he's fucking started marching us around the parade square and  and we can't see a fucking thing inside there, and he said er  come out a minute, so I've blinking gone out and I've noticed were about fifty yards from the beach


so I've got out, I, I said to him you thinking what I'm thinking, he said yeah shall we do it, most out of order it is a bit cold,middle of, middle of December like


twentieth of December or something like that,he's, he's fucking gone yeah, right troop right turn 
 
so the whole fucking tent shuffle's round, he said, you remember you are part of the British army, if you disobey orders you will be brought up on charges, by the left quick march, and he's fucking walking them to the sea


tent an all
go on 
and like the thing is obviously like the first  realise there on a  and they try to stop it, why are you stopping for, remember you are in the British army, if you disobey orders you'll get a court marshall  really started laying onto them, and like they've started again and like the first bloke obviously got to the fucking water, cos he's stopped again, one man one sides shouting out and  round the other side shouting out and they have they've all gone in, they must of thought fuck it and they've all just fucking marched into the sea, and we marched them in,tent was only about that much above water, and we've  lasted thought, this is the thing that got me, he, he shouted at him, cos we, we, we managed to get them  and that, he said right,right, go in, go in and tell them to come out, what, I said what, can you just pop in and tell them to come out, I said  over here sarge, he said you disobey an order 


I said oh you cunt, said I'm your troop you can't me go in there, he says try me, I said bastard so I fucking  right  sea, fucking over the  right you can come out now, marched back out again gave them a right old  on the way back again,get changed again, alright, I thought you cunt


and er, this is what I, this is what I wanted, to tie  to the flagpole and left him there for about an hour    he had his pasting  as well.
I, I, I remember you telling er 
He was our, he was our squadron but not our troop you see, see if I'd a been his troop he probably wouldn't of made me go into the sea, but it was fucking cold, I mean, I mean full M B C kit right
yeah, trousers, boots
trousers, boots, fucking the leggings, the gloves, the mask anything, he made me fucking walk into the sea.
quite like, yeah , I'll never forgive him for that, he's now our troop's sergeant, he's got a transfer to the other squadron  one of these  troops, to er, to a troop.
I went down there about a month ago  say hello to them all.
Yeah.
, we er, we, we did some, I mean that was  a proper weekend set aside for  but I mean they really  about practical jokes being played and stuff.
Er well the worse thing we ever done in cadets  was erm,the er  the handcuffs right, trouble was .
I used to like, I used to like the P C
Yeah 
yeah, I did like the  used to make  but I used to like the 
But the thing is once you'd fit you could stay there.
You used to work fucking hard though most weekends.
Like a lot of weekends  you'd leave, you'd leave the T A centre about eight and then from eight o'clock Friday night too about, well you'd be working until about three o'clock Sunday afternoon, and you are lucky if you'd got three or four hours sleep  working you don't notice, you get tired but you don't feel that bad and it was only like I used to come home on a Sunday crash out about  sleep about .
My old man said he's erm, he used to go down to er, every, every sort of six months or so, cos they were in  he was in charge of fucking then, he'd used to have to go on manoeuvre's about sort of six monthly or something like that
Yeah
just for re-training sort of thing.
The first time he went down there he set, set a  had to take the waters out, you know,said you've done it before ain't you  said yeah I did it in  in para's and the bloke said yeah, right he said erm well there's not a lot I can teach you senior N C O's he said you might as well piss off down the pub, I'll see you later  
 
Yeah, then the, the old man and about three or four of these N C O's, he was senior N C O, sort of, sort of  corporal and the rest of them were corporal and lance corporal's, but he was the one in charged of the
Yeah
water section  and then maybe, maybe the other month he used to  you get about three thousand rounds of blanks and stuff 
Yeah
like we did eh
did you?
like you do up 
yeah
going for a  that was brilliant I got  and that, and I tried , I had a whole box of er, erm,thing is, when you hold a thousand rounds of ammunition, I got given about two thirds of this box all for myself,so I'm there for about three hours before the exercise  I had and then put the rest in the  then we sat down for another hour filling them up again, superb, we had loads of  bung in the windows  grenades
ain't you?
it, we, we had to do it properly, but the idea of the  machine gun  go in there and go   away 
Me old man right , me uncle, me uncle used to live in a house which used to  digging in the back garden,this piece of fucking dirt and he pulled out this  and its sort of round, my old man's gone, no he, he said er I wouldn't dig there any more


my uncle's gone oh fuck off like this and he started to put his fork in again and we goes, my dad goes well that look distinctly like a three inch mortar shell so I wouldn't put any more in there if, I wouldn't put your fucking fork's in there again if I was you, they had to get the bomb squad out, they diffused it, they found about five fucking mortar bombs 
Really 
in the back of his garden, yeah
.
The thing is  the way the way  
They, they , what they'd been doing was shooting them over and they'd just hadn't been exploded, they said dud shell or something.
Get the bomb squad out any way, but erm, the British army has got a lot of important  that's they way we would fight the Russians, take over a small hamlet, mortify it and that's how the only way we would ever  up the Russian's grass nest, they take it very seriously, so what they did if they tell us how to do it, walks us through, show us what to do, let us do it and then they'd make us do it again, but without any mistakes and that, it was really good and they showed us how to er mortify  up a house, go, going through all the sewers and stuff is quite fun
The thing that gets me though is erm, when they done these exercise you've got to 
yeah
ain't got a 
you don't obviously, but
yeah I know.
It is, it is simulate valve which  basically your out in the open and you see somebody firing the regiment , I know its a bit silly but there is no real way, mind you,
 
its not, you can't, the thing is you can't defend them without how you die, you can't train people how to avo to die, you can only train them how to avoid it, so it doesn't really matter if you get fired or not, but they show you the drills and you have to do them to the best of your ability  the blank rounds are only there to  the conditions, now this is why they've got these laser  got laser sights all over the body, helmet and torso and the actual weapons got a laser on top and you get, if you get near one of these things you go  dead and your out, and you can actually simulate 
but then again  there, but you, you fire off the blank, that's what triggers  the laser  sometimes if there's been a lot of, we did, we did it in  a couple of time see the old laser go, cor, its got very think red beam, its not like you see these big flashing great big bits of light like on Star Wars and stuff, well its not, its not suppose to hurt you  its a very thin piercing beam, its well impressive.
See the old man was saying when he was doing Salisbury Plain they blew up couple of  and a couple of 
Yeah,that is small hard weapons .
Its about, for, for the kit on use of your body and the stuff that your weapons its about a thousand pounds
Yeah, but its suppose to be  in it.
expense, its er state of the art equipment.
As normal the Americans had it first, had it first 
but we had the  computer system first built 
oh not into battleships Mark.
No.
the only battleship I know about is the girl friend   go away for about three months at a time and you'd say of where's Norman, oh he's er working and then we all knew he's working for a  he'd put them in the computer systems right the way throughout the ships
Yeah 
like I said we at least to go on one complex exercise every month which, although they can't physically make you go on it there was, you know, they more or less made you go sort of thing  pay to do and then we were there the other weekend we had one of these weekends where  be more fun, really hard work though  it'll be more fun for 
See you  
Ah?
You get back 
They still 
that's why they have these  on the end of them  weapon with a yellow fork at the end,but even without that you still get lots of little bits of cardboard come out, its a cardboard wad inside  its the same charge as a  but its a cardboard box, cardboard blank inside
Yeah I've seen them.
and it shoots it out.
You can shoot them at close range  I mean there was a
Giant killers aren't they?
yeah there was an actor erm  and he was playing Russian roulette with  and he put it up to his temple, pulled the trigger the blank went off, bloody blew his brains in.
The thing is, if they always give you  and you, your, nine times out of ten what they do is like, is either, they either put a can over there or a beer or something, they put it over the end of the, the  weapon  pull the trigger and that, even with a flash that can  go like that, and then they show you one with the, the erm  flashes right which have more powerful than the  and they've actually got same again same charge as a life grenade in, but it just plain cardboard so, obviously no trap, but if you lay on them ooh er, you get  or something  you don't throw  what they do now is they put one they light one, put the helmet over the top of it and make it lit, it runs like buggery and it'll go a hundred, a hundred and fifty foot up in the air and inside it looks like its been  and where its been in the thing it'll be like er, six seventy foot off the ground, I mean I laid on one once and I,landed about two foot too my left so I've rolled over, rolled, rolled, and rolled, as I've rolled I've rolled over on my back and I've had all loads of  over, like the, I had a  roll there its like the er 
Yeah I know 
stuff keep the  half way up my back its all  padding and stuff and I've rolled over, as I've rolled over there 's been another one it has gone off, it felt like I've been kicked in the back by somebody really having a go at me, it threw me and even with all that I had a  like that  so there not, there not kiddy toys .
How long ago was this?
Er about, how old was I, I was 
Is it, it looks a bit like a, the one laying down.
I don't know, proper weapons I know that, that's, that's  behind me
Yeah
I turned round and  but still got back in   
I don't believe it, paid all that money for a digital   said look at the  about  stuff, at the end of the day they, he is  five a side football  stuff like that, had  I've been thinking about joining again, but I don't really know what I'm gonna do after Christmas now  even Karen said she wouldn't mind joining but I tried, I managed to put her off that idea.
 

See the thing is, what they've said to me, because I've been away now for nearly two years erm I'd have to go back and do all the training again, which is a bit of a pain but its not too bad because I've done it before sort of thing, she said to me oh yeah when you go I, I might come along and see if I like it, and we can do the training together she said, I manage to put her off that idea, manage to talk her out of that.
They still don't like you co-habiting with er 
Court marshall.
Yeah do you know if your on duty and you get caught co-habitating did you say, said er, yeah court marshall, discharged you with a , discharge you  
Karen whatever her name is
   

Yeah, but  married couple there  did have a couple of people there that got married while they were in the T A but they weren't allowed, they never allowed to sort of buddy, buddy together  I tell you why I got put with that woman.
Ah?
Did I tell you why I got  with that girl
Yeah
its really cold, yeah  oh that was good, I enjoyed that  she's still there, she's a Lance Corporal now as well  and I must admit well I, I didn't think she'd ev , she was always crying  but I never thought she'd actually do very well in the T A, didn't seem to have the get up and go about it but she obviously sorted herself out and  got , Spambo Man  they called me.
Shitler
Shitler yeah your right there.
See my nick name in the T A was Vicky, she probably felt save with somebody named Vicky  see people started called me van witty and then it got changed to Wicky then somebody started called me Vicky  and it stuck, she probably thought I'd got a   You know when I look back now I fucking enjoyed  in the T A
My old man in his regiment  they called each other bow.
Bow.
Hello bow how you doing
Everybody was bow was they?
Yeah, it seemed to be a fucking   secrecy I suppose.
Yeah  alright bow.
had a girl from another troop Lynn somebody  can't remember her last name any way her first name was Lynn and as rumour had it, she'd had everybody in the bedroom
Yeah
so we started called her lip, but that happened before I got there so, as I got there it just like, as I joined got in with the regulars it started to peter out a bit, but I got fooled with a couple of times I thought they were taking the piss, alright Lynn how you doing, you know, still .
See the thing was she, she, the best fact the only reason she joined the T A was to get    Right ok love, we will do our best.
Fucking well will  
Yeah good old laugh, I remember my scout motto, I promise that I'll do my best and do my duties  its going back a long, long way brother.
Ah see that girl though, got accused  girl scouts or something, she refused to swear an oath to, to god, because, she wasn't sure there was one, she'd swear it to the queen,
Yeah
but wouldn't take an oath for god so they wouldn't let her in.
You know sort of eleven years old, she said I'm, I'm  god, its not been proved to me, its not been proved
yeah
sort of, so how, how can I swear in all honestly, I thought it was really good.
Girl Guides
I thought how, how can I swear an oath to god in all honestly if I'm not sure there is one, I thought yeah blimming right, I mean, she wouldn't just take, say it  so she obviously said, she obviously said the right theories 
 
and I thought bloody right, they wouldn't let her in.
as long as we get that cleared up.
 

As I say, fun, fun, fun I say, like I say  sometimes you can do a  pissing rain in a fucking hole and have about four hours sleep at the weekend, then we get, we get back get into the bar and we'd have a fucking good laugh about it.
You make some really good friends, friends you fucking trust your life on sort of thing or your girl friend  get a million pounds in, in, in a amazingly short time, cos you've got to work together, its really, really good.
Tell you what, I would love to, like to  for me to be a sergeant again and get someone like that in my troop   fucking break him.
Well there  would he, he wouldn't join up any way
No, I mean instead of 
or where ever it is,.
Er, well there is, there is a  there is in every  but I don't know where they main one is  sort of like  in it, I don't know where  I don't know where the, the military stock aid is  I think they've just got  don't they?
Don't know 
with me wrong hand  I don't told you that didn't I, I was well shagged with someone  fucking swim left hand 
The only reason you join the T A was to get out of fucking work weren't it Stuart?
Don't give us that shit
Eh?, the only reason you joined the T A was to get out of work
Get out of work?
Yeah you get two weeks  don't you, two weeks 
British Aerospace was brilliant, as long as I had, I had a good reason to go away they'd give me, they said they'd pay for , I mean one year I did six weeks away  paid and then anot another year I did two months non pay and I still kept me job, that's when I went up the  for two months  all I was just labour  doing it then.
Did they pay you for it then?
Eh, yeah regular army pay, great  that's really what made me decide to join the army, that was in the T A but I  regulars .
All I do I got out sort of the  sort of about eight thirty  and then I, I'd work to about half three and all I'd wanna do is, we, we'd fucking, we'd set up the cable  then we'd all sit down and do nothing while the old erm, the M O D people had obviously  it, and then they tell us to take it down and move it and we move it and set it up again, its like out of a, out of a seven hour day, we'd only work about three or four, like here.
I've got my own silk lips attached to the fucking 
like swallow it 
stick it up her nose and say.
Peace and normality dates 
Eh see that woman who  right?
Yeah
I was fucking like that and the thing come that way
It would of, it would of got me I tell you.
Only 
direction it'd fucking slice me ear off I reckon.
I thought I don't like all the  he's gonna fucking have me, so I sort of got down like that and as he fucking come round the thing must of gone like that, sort of that sort of bearing.
Stu no  Stewart 
Fucking would of been taken me ear off.
Have to wear fucking er .
I wonder if he'll give me this.
Thirteen O one.
Eh?
Yeah you get  two minutes or something don't you?
What?
You get two minutes don't you?
 
Thirteen O one.
Thirteen O one.
I got that.
No.
I fucking better I think  if he, if I don't get half an hours pay  fucking 
Fifteen minutes  you're allowed.
No, fifteen minutes.
Fifteen minutes and you get docked.
Well I ain't doing sort of I ain't doing nothing  sixteen minutes until it gets back.
You do fuck all anyway Stuart.
Cheeky bastard.
So it's six minutes you'll have to leave him now.
Ah.
Here we go.
I say Barry old chap
.
Yeah they've charged me a fiver's fucking commission on that.
That's outrageous.
Yeah.
Cor.
Shit.
Want fucking shooting.
That's over five percent.
Yeah.
About five an a half, six percent or something.
No no it's not as much as that.
It's about four  
Yeah.
Cos five percent on a  on a hundred pound would be a fiver wouldn't it?
Yeah.
So they charged you er 
About six percent.
five and a half, six percent they charged you.
Fucking  .
I'm sure when I op opened, I'm sure when I got my T S B they  didn't charge me that much.
When I bought  .
Mind you that, that was er travellers cheques and they're usually cheaper anyway aren't they?
They're only a quid for a hundred.
Quid.
Cost me a fiver when I changed that .
Yeah.
T S B.
travellers cheques.
Yeah.
Quid for a hundred wasn't it?
Eh?
Every hundred pound you spend you just put  spend a quid over the top.
Or  every hundred pounds worth of travellers cheques you get.
three hundred pound  
See I'm I'm only allowed to take fifty pounds worth of rand into the country so I've gotta do it all in travellers cheques.
Yeah, it could be right that actually.
Mind you their rate of exchange  if if you'd have bought all pesetas in this country it would have probably been a better rate of exchange for you.
Rather than out there.
No.
That's what she reckons anyway.
She said  she said that 
Well that  I I us I got a better rate of exchange out in S A than I did here.
Yeah but that's probably
When I changed up fifty quid's worth here  erm on the Monday  I got four point three five.
And on the Wednesday when I changed them out there I got four point seven.
Yeah but that's a fluctuation.
That's a lot of fluctu-fucking-ation though.
Yeah, point three five of a rand though.
Or point point three 
But that's still quite a lot.
Point three five of a rand is fucking nothing when you work it out.
Yeah but  yeah to us.
To to English money.
To us.
But they're talking 
Yeah but I mean 
about big business and that.
That's a lot of money.
No
I know it doesn't mean much on a thousand pound or something silly.
But i like it is I mean  it's quite a lot considering the money markets and stuff.
Yeah I know.
I mean that's that's the same as fucking out in Spain last year.
The best rate of exchange I got was  how many pesetas is it to a quid?
I dunno.
Yeah I was, I was getting about hundred and eighty two.
Pesetas to a quid?
Yeah?
Well when we were out there it was ranging from any anything from about a hundred and eighty five to a hundred and ninety six.
So that's eleven pesetas, that's quite a fucking bit.
Used to, used to be over two hundred.
Yeah.
That's right.
Last time I went about three years ago.
When I went out there with Sandra I was told that you normally get a better rate of exchange in the country when you change travellers cheques.
Yeah and she's just ch told me completely the opposite.
Maybe it was the opposite at the time.
She goes oh sorry  all I've got is hundred franc bills.
Okay fair enough.
How many of them can I have?
Well for seventy three forty eight you can have seven hundred.
I didn't think they were gonna fucking hit me for a fiver as well.
That's a bit fucking off isn't it?
What?
Hitting me for a fiver commission as well.
That's a bit fucking off.
You change it back they can stick you again.
If you don't spend it all.
They fucking better not.
You're not allowed, you're not, you're only allowed to change notes as well aren't you?
Notes.
Yeah.
They'll have bricks through the fucking windows at Lloyds.
you don't get  don't get  you don't get the same exchange rate do you?
You get forty percent.
like  twelve francs to get a pound or something.
Yeah.
You get stung when you try to  bring them back.
That'll be a cunt.
I'll walk into a French bank and say can I exchange these back to sterling  and they'll say oh yes and then charge me five hundred fucking francs  again or whatever it is.   no five nines, nine eighteen twenty seven thirty six  forty five francs.
Yes that will be forty five francs commission mons monsieur.


What, is an Italian bank teller working ?
Fuck off.
 

Eh?
What's a franc?
A ninth of a pound.
Yeah.
Ten p.
You have to work these things out before you go to France  your money won't you?
That's why I'm gonna take this with me I think.
Eh?
I'm gonna take this with me.
I'm going for the  
Ah it's ten p a pint.
Surely even you could work that out without .
It's five hundred francs.
You cheeky fucker .
Fifty quid.
No see that's when me sister went, went out.
She only got four hundred and eighty  odd francs.
See that's how much it's, it's going up and down.
It's fluctuating.
She got four hundred and eighty francs for  for 
If you swear at me you cunt.
fifty quid.
Yeah?
Yeah.
Take twenty francs out.
Yeah.
quid.
Yeah but I paid seventy five  or seventy eight.
And now you got seven hundred.
Yeah.
So for that two hundred francs more  I've lost about eight quid.
So now you see why point three five or whatever is  
So?
Two hundred francs more, ten quid more.
quid.
That's  variation  exchange rate innit?
Yeah.
It's the last time I go to fucking France.
Never been there.
Don't know why you're going there in the first place.
Never been there.
Dive.
Yeah I did.
He's got it.
What?
My Sport.
Stuart was reading it.
Eh?
Oh it's on top there.
fill the old pools coupon out.
Suppose I better start in a minute, hadn't I really?
Why break a habit of a lifetime Stu?
I might have to hurt you for that.
Eh?
I said I may have to hurt him for a remark like that.
I ain't gonna start .
I'm fucking kicking you out in a minute.
And I'll sit here and fart away  
 

Oh  god.
get home tonight quite easily.
Why don't you go to bed and go to sleep?
I'm feeling that way inclined as well.
Ah!
Yeah cover your knuckles in this stuff and punch somebody  marks out .


Oh god.
Eh?
I think I'm just gonna go round me girlfriend's and sleep after she's given me my food.
Lord knows what she's cooking.
and see cousin Billy.


He'll soon deal with it.
How is cousin Billy nowadays then?
What?
How is cousin Billy now then?
How much it cost you to get over there Tramp?
Eighteen quid.
Eighty?
Eighteen.
Gonna say.
Yeah that's cos he was using the allen key.
I wasn't using 
Who can explain the thunder and rain there's something in the air .
Oh I  
Yeah I also noticed the way he was using the .
It's amazing how soldiers in skirts have always had a hard reputation innit?
Come on, let's be serious.
No that's fucking  pussies.
Eh?
No they  they've  over the years they've got some very fucking good write ups.
One of the toughest regiments.
Apparently.
Carry on up the Khyber.
The devils in skirts.
Yes.
It's all about er  squaddies in skirts and .
Bung ged id in.
Yeah.
He bunged it in.
Bungdidin.
Bungdidin.
Did anyone see that one er  that Carry On film  second world war with er erm a mixed camp?
Yeah.
With them goats?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It wasn't one of the funniest ones.
No.
It's good 
It's good.
The ar the wooden artillery gun.
Yeah.
Bang!
.
That's got another one, got that
Who who's that matey, Kenneth something innit?
Or  
No it's Patrick Mower.
No the the camp commander.
The little guy with the moustache.
Yeah Kenneth Williams.
Kenneth  no.
Kenneth Connor?
Kenneth Connor yeah, that's it.
He was the only one of the original cast in it.
Yeah.
Windsor Davies has appeared in a few but he's er  not one of the regular ones.
Who?
Windsor Davies.
Oh he was the sergeant major weren't he in that 
Yeah he hasn't appeared in many.
Well  what was it?
Erm
Carry On Camp he was in wasn't he?
Yeah.
I liked the  the Tarzan one.
Carry on up the Jungle or whatever?
Yeah, that's it.
Frankie Howard.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And Terry Scott.
Had Terry Scott as Tarzan weren't it?
Yeah.
I think Carry On up the Khyber Pass was famous though with old erm
Roy Roy Castle.
Roy Castle.
Terry Scott.
Yeah it's fucking brilliant that one.
And erm  the one with Harry H Corbett in it.
Er 
No no no no no no.
The film erm  where he was, the monster one.
Carry on Screaming?
Yeah that's it.
What does he play then?
He plays the inspector.
Sergeant.
Or whatever it is.
Yeah .
And erm, what was her name?
There's been lots of good ones.
Fenella, Fenella Fielding.
Who's the erm the big titted wench that's in all of them nearly?
Barbara Windsor.
Barbara Windsor.
No no no the other one that
Joan Sims
Joan Sims.
She used to play really voluptuous ones in the earlier ones and then she was the old tramp wasn't she?
Yeah.
Barbara Windsor that took over  from showing her tits.
Liz Liz Fraser was another one.
Who
Yeah.
who was the one that was in Carry on up the Khyber cos she was tasty?
The the princess?
Angela er er er er  it was Angela something.
Fenella Fielding  
I used to like that  he'd go here get off, get off.
Yeah.
Jack
Jack Douglas.
Jack Douglas.
He's a freak isn't he?
Yeah.
Kenneth Williams  ooh stop messing about.
What was that one?
Where he was in, and archol and archaeologist or something?
And he had that big titted Russian woman in the same  the same caravan on the caravan park.
With er
Yeah yeah I know.
with erm with that matey and
Carry on Camping.
No, Carry on Camping had Sid James in it.
No, that was Car yeah it might have been.
You realise that you  could cause a strike 
.
I know the one you mean though.
An unskilled man 
Yeah and it had  Windsor Davies in it didn't it?
Yeah.
and  the matey who  who who was the one that
Oh that was
who was the one who played the missionary in Carry on up the Khyber pass and that?
Played the who?
Missionary.
The one 
Oh  god I can't remember.
The one that was caught bonking in the very beginning sort of thing.
Can't remember his name.
Tried to convert that  girl.
I tell you the one I like was Carry on er Beau Geste or something like that, Carry on 
Yeah.
Who was that matey?
Jim Dale.
Jim Dale.
He's fucking brilliant 
He's been in some good ones actually.
he is.
Carry on Doctor and
Cos that was the same matey wasn't it?
As his butler?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Bilko was in it weren't he?
Old Phil Silvers was in it.
Yeah Phil Silvers.
He'd been screwing all day and he'd walk into the camp fucking going 
Yeah.
He he'd wreck himself wouldn't he?
Get another medal for it.
Yeah he was Commandant Le Pew or something wasn't it?
I say this is not cricket what?
I say , are we allowed to do manual labour?
Wanted to borrow a screwdriver.
As our shop  steward representative  I don't think we can allow this sort of thing brothers.
That's what I mean.
People down here being made redundant and he comes in
Haven't you got anything better to do?
No.
Here you are.
Where's this thingybob  then?
Sonny.
What's a Russian 
It's also the Jewish one.
The Jewish 
Yeah.
Jewish trying to teach them English.
And he'd go one  two  three four five sex .
Oh yeah 
And that girl  as well.
She was always like the nice one in there wasn't she?
I used to like Carry on, oh what was it?
Erm the nursing ones as well.
jelly weren't it?
Yeah that's that  the nursing ones were good.
Er the  ones were good as well.
.
Who saw Jasper Carrot last night?
Anybody see him?
that karaoke shit hot.
Eh?
Anybody see Jasper Carrot last night?
Yeah.
No.
Fucking brilliant.
was all 
I just saw the bit where he was on about the erm short sighted hedgehog.


And the dog going  down his leg.
.
Remember you can make a friend for life.
There's a vet like this  he's got a fucking bone in his mouth and the dogs his fucking leg .
I just saw it 
I like the bit with the detectives.
It's called the detectives right?
There's Robert Powell and him
Yeah.
and old Ruby Wax was in it last night.
Yeah.
And she comes up and she goes  good day  lieutenant Kerawski from  New York the N Y P D like this.
And she goes up to the two blokes and she grabs them by the balls and goes mm not bad, nice butt, you know?
And all this sort of shit.
Who?
No.
Who is?
Yeah.
Who's going?
Who's going?
Chicken.
Who's he?
what's his name?
Eh?
Going is he?
Chicken?
Oh yeah I know chicken , yeah.
The one who used to walk round the corner and get round that corner and give it all that.
And fucking Dave  reckoned there was a piece of wire  running across that fucking corner just down the bottom there.
You know where the  ferrangi is?
Yeah.
It's down there.
It's down there
What?
.
Cos every time Jerry'd walk round that corner he'd give it all that.
He's fucking got a terrible twitch, a real nervous twitch hasn't he?
He'd say watch him, watch him  as Jerry was fucking walking along.
And there'd be about  ten or P ten or twelve people fucking watching Jerry walk up  walk round that corner.
Every time he got to that corner it'd be  like that, all fucking  giving it some of that.
Fucking awful really.
It can be the sign of a nervous breakdown.
Somebody s somebody does a  er develops a nervous twitch and stuff.
No, he's had it for a long time.
Yeah.
I'm not  saying he hasn't, but you know  that can be the sign.
You don't say.
You could even give the bosses a Christmas 
Would you still work?
present couldn't you?
Here you go Mr .
I've 
You still work?
bought you this  fifteen up fucking boot.
Yeah, probably.
. Depends how much I won.
Millions.
Yeah, I'd probably fuck off for a year and do my own thing and come back and maybe take  take, maybe start my own business.
I'd love to start my own car re erm refurbishment business you see.
Like  that's how I got that two and a half grand.
By doing up old cars and selling them.
No way in the world, if I won a million pounds  again.
Yeah?
I'd only do something I enjoyed.
Yeah.
Like it's different if you're working for yourself because at the end of the day it all goes in your own pocket.
Any, any profit you make.
I dunno.


See you in a few years time with fucking .
Cos Charles is off the er  drugs .
He was reputed to have personally killed five men because he, they done his head in.


Amongst them a former work colleague  Tramp .
Alias  Mark.
A reformed hippie  with a food complex.
 
Stuart the wanker .
Alias the git.




Who is still at large, unknown  whereabouts unknown.
If apprehended  all care should be taken when a 
That's Chris  's right hand man.
when approaching this suspect 
Barry the  Barry the weasel 
because he smells a bit.
Then he .
Yeah and  Chris  's right hand man and  Barry the knife .
this old boy.


it's the getting caught business innit?
getting caught business .
We'd all be criminals if we couldn't get caught.
Have you seen this man?
Chris he done my head in .
He done my head in so I shot him in it.
I suppose you almost got kicked out, or  did you?
Eh?
Did you almost get kicked out?
No,get out the house at the time.
I don't know what  though.
Keeping the fucking cup now.
Otherwise I'd have put a brick through your window.
Fucking joking aren't you?
Were you out  out of it at the time or what?
No.
Come back from work!
Half hour at work and it .
Bit pissed.
me sister 
 

I've heard of parents shopping their sisters.
Knowing my old man he'd probably fucking turn me in.
No I doubt if he'd do that.
He hates the old bill anyway.
At the end of the day  fuck all wrong with it.
Give me a  sit down and a good fucking stern talking to.
sister ?
Eh?
sister ?
Yeah.
You got any sisters  sisters?
One sister.
Eh?
She does .
What's she like?
Eh?
Married with two kids.
Judging by him she must be fucking ugly.
If she's anything like him.
Married with two kids.
So  do you get on with her?
No.
Don't even speak to her.




Take that as a no then.
Get on with her?
Can't be bothered speaking to her.
She's older than you I take it then?
Don't know where she lives.
She older or younger?
You don't know where your own sister lives?
No.
Close family then.
Well I, I'm a right family man I am.
Can't be bothered to get out the fucking house can you?
I know where she used to live.
Have you got a sister?
Know where she lives?
I've got two.
Are they nice?
Ring me up this piss up.
She  boring though.
Who's that?
My sister.
She fucks doesn't she?
Your sister.
I've just deep-throated that banana.
You've had plenty of practice so I hear.
Karen's been trying to do that.
She can't manage it yet.
She'll get  you have to sort of get over the gagging.
Does she?
Fuck off Stuart.
You haven't got a prick  big enough.
Oh come on!
No  as soon as it gets anywhere past the top, you only have to have about a four inch dick.
So you're alright.
Yeah I suppose so.
 
.
Cos as soon as soon as you get anything down to about there where your swallowing thing is 
Yeah.
you have to try and overcome the gagging don't you?
I mean you can make your  your fingers so you can fucking stick a dick down there.
And every time my, every time she tries a deep-throat she panics.
Starts going 


So I said is that going  is that 
Is that alright?
is that too far?fucking 
 

It's not, it's not good manners speaking with your mouth full.
She likes giving head but she doesn't like swallowing.
She only swallows as a special treat if I've been really good or something.
Or if I'm really  
Merry Christmas!
Yeah.
Slurp.
Ah.
She hates it.
Apparently it's like sucking  I dunno  salty warm yogurt .
That sort of consistency.
 
Well I've never heard it de described like that before.
That's what she says.
She says it   the same sort of consistency as yogurt but it's salty and it's warm and it's not very nice at all she said.
Well you read in them porno mags fucking girls love it.
Yeah I know.
If you ever read a porno mag they're fucking 
My last girlfriend used to though.
No mine
Jean never.
She used to, she used to love swallowing it.
Oh it was great.
I tell you what, I never used to shag her hardly at all.
She used to like giving head so much I used to fucking right drop them  yup slurp  that was it.
It was fucking  gobble you off in the kitchen with me parents upstairs and stuff like that.
You did it without?fucking mad.
Well I got up there  started fucking going for it  .
Wouldn't mind so much but they kept taking the piss out I was wearing my socks.
Yeah Mark  apparently he's got the second biggest cock that this had ever seen.
Are you sure 
Yeah 
she said you've got the second biggest cock or you are the second biggest cock she's ever seen?
Fuck off.
No she said I've  got the second biggest co cock I mean that she'd ever seen.
She goes round looking at cocks does she?
Well yeah, she's fucking must have you know   about a bit.
And they shagged without a condom.
Do you know how babies are made?
Yeah.
I didn't c 
Do you know about AIDS?
Yeah.
I didn't come of her.
You don't have to come of her.
Didn't get a fucking chance.
You get a discharge without fucking  
 
It's true.
semen, really.
No, not semen.
I mean it's the sperm that's 
You you either get a pre  a pre-cum  shit out of it.
And that contains a small amount of sperm.
I mean she used to toss, toss me off on the old  and there's, there's   and she used to sit on there  used, used to sit on there  she used to  to toss me off and I got this fucking  as she's tossing me off she did this love bite.
Oh it was like that.
That's how fucking this AIDS is spreading.
People can't  can't be responsible.
They're just shagging without condoms.
And if she's had a few your a stupid fucker for even being 
Yes.
up there in the first place without anything.
told me  until afterwards.
I still wouldn't do it.
Apparently she's going with some bloke who 
There's no way I would fucking shag a girl 
No it's fucking 
without 
No.
Not with somebody you've just met.
Obviously if  you're having a long-term relationship  and you know she's not shagging anybody else and she's not on the  and she is on the pill.
The day that I first shagged Karen without a condom was about fucking two, two or three months into a relationship.
We'd been shagging for about a month.
So were you shagging  Jenny with a condom as well?
Yeah.
All the time.
She was on the pill  as well but she
Yeah I know.
But I mean
I'm not stupid.


I know enough about fucking AIDS and shit to worry about it.
Really  for women though.
women .
Do they?
I don't, I peo blokes seems to say oh yeah I hate using condoms.
You wouldn't catch me using one of them.
But  I don't feel as if , I mean it's  it's not the most pleasant thing in the world but it's certainly fucking sa it's safer than a lot of their more  easier to put on and take off than and fucking safer and more effective than a lot of their contraception devices.
And er
four johnnies sitting 
and
Eh?
The what?
Four johnnies .
I don't know.
I just I just don't see why 
 
blokes don't use them.
Got  and two  extra sensitive.
I mean it's not as good as  without but  it's still fucking good.
don't really care do you?
If you don't find it good with a condom there's something wrong with you.
Hallo, who's been nicking suits?
When you going to  France, tomorrow Mark?
Er Sunday.
What's this, with The Sun?
No I do well I don't know.
No idea.
Usually the old Sun  every year don't they?
Yeah.
No I think theirs was a couple of weeks ago.
Because that  that Zeebrugge disaster was The Sun as well wasn't it?
Why bother going  why go  on Sunday?
Why go on Sunday,closed?
No.
No.
No.
Not in France.
Never been to France.
It's only in England that it's all closed.
Or Britain that it's all closed.
Been through it.
Isle of Wight.
Yeah .
I can't remember .
I've been to Calais before.
I hope we go to Boulogne next time.
They reckon that Boulogne's better.
Been to the Isle of Wight.
Wow.
See old Sarah's been kidnapped on Emmerdale Farm?
Don't watch it.
Do you watch it Cherub?
No you wouldn't.
You'd be down the pub wouldn't you?
Thinking of missing the Friday night sesh then Cherub?
I'm tempted at the moment I'm telling you.
You footballing tomorrow or not?
No.
Lay in.
Why ain't there no football tomorrow?
Too far to go.
Sheffield Wednesday.
That's just  couple of junctions up from Nottingham.
About another hour er er about another hour?
Hour and a bit.
you could go and see .
Yeah.
not in a .
 

Mister  himself.
No apparently  I'd gone in the bog, I wasn't feeling bad or anything.
He said, said you were just standing there and all of a sudden he said you looked at me  looked back at the wall just went  pee   he said it's all come out, it's all splattered all over the wall  he said, you did your fly up, wiped your mouth, washed your hands and went out again as if nothing had happened.
He said I was left stood there with this other mate on me other side going   what's he had to drink ?
I can't remember fuck all about it.
But this must be the first time I've puked for  about two years.
But I had a lot to drink and that's that time I was telling you about.
Fucking fifteen pints or something.
I was telling Mark 
 
they reckon I climbed up the outs the outside of a fucking  multi-storey car park for two flights.
Oh I do   I sort of I do do things like that.
I can't remember that but 
this  this girl at fucking Wokingham fair.
This girl she was well  and she got on this fucking roundabout  you know, one that swings out?
She got on there and you could see she was gonna throw.
She had  a pile of fucking chips and  
You're not gonna say this old couple fucking put their hand out and  
No, she took  on there she's gone ooer all the fucking way round.
There was puke all the way round.
silly bitch.
I can't remember nothing about this.
I can't remember  apparently like I said  I I didn't say I'm gonna be sick.
I didn't look it I just stood there   apparently  fucking splattered against the wall, dribbled down and I didn't fucking .
I just wiped my mouth and washed my hands.
Yeah there's this multi-storey car park .
Go down  go down a level for the first 
Yeah.
And there's like a brick wall about that high and there's two flights above it.
And what  say where's, where's the old car?on the second floor.
virtually second  and me and this matey said go on, race you.
Right?
So he's fucking  ground floor so I thought fuck this.
And I got up on the wall  right?
Got up on the wall 
He did his donkey climb bit didn't you Stu?
leapt across the like fucking ledge, you know they're not very high erm presumably  
Sixteen foot across it was.
get to this ledge.
Climbed up the outside of this ledge you know like  car park.
Stood on the  of that wall  reached up, pulled myself up that wall.
stood there  
   
Where the fucking hell's the car then?
Where the  hell the car then?
. And all the time he's on the ground floor.
And all because Stuart loves black  black magic  .
And all I could remember and all the  the only thing I can remember about that was  running after the car with .
Do what?
Fucking messing about something  and I can't remember a thing about it.
   
You do that when you're pissed.
I do anyway.
I  do fucking  when I do silly things like I rip bus stop signs 
It's only cos you're a wanker isn't he?
bus stop si bus stop signs off the fucking things.
He's taking the piss out of you.
 
Nick road signs and stuff.
  

That's the last thing you've ever done you cunt.


Fucking nea ooh  groin strain.
Fucking as I did that me whole fucking foot went.
   

I never know whether they're taking the piss or not cos I can't remember it.
I have about eight pints and I blank out.
I can't remember anything about the whole evening.
Just like, like bits and pieces.
Stu.
Should you wish to accept this mission.
This pint of Guinness will self-destruct in five seconds.
Yeah.
got really pissed and can't remember what you've done.
It's bad.
have a pint of erm .
 
Wait wait waiting for them to say something.
Yeah.
I said  one night er this matey's come up to me, and he's like one of me mates and that and he said fucking hell you had a skinful the other night didn't you?
I said who told you that?
He says you stupid cunt  I was out with you most of the evening .
I couldn't even remember he was fucking sat there with me.
me mate  down Torquay.
Yeah.
I thought he was down Devon?
Said no he come back Friday.
He goes  party  Friday Friday night 


That was the first I knew about it.


Well I never do, I haven't even been doing anything.
All I do is fucking drink.
It'd be a right nightmare if I did drugs as well.
Wouldn't know what the fuck was going on.
Bit like here.
about fucking  I'll have a pint of lager please.
I drunk these fifteen pints and I fucking looked as if I was dead.
I wouldn't drink 
All I did, all me and my mate did was sit there all day Sun Saturday  and just fucking veg out in front of the telly.
Feeling rough?
Yeah, feeling fucking rough.
And I  last Friday I had, I had a skinful as well.
That's why I went sh I had a hangover, a raging fucking hangover 
Thing is don't  skinful .
You watch, he'll get in that pub and fi first thing he'll fucking do is I'll have a pint of lager please.
Be on the fucking wagon.
The first one may take a bit of time getting down but after that it
It always does.
Always does  till about nine o'clock.
it'll  oh the first or three always t 
and they always fucking take their time getting down.
Yeah.
Once they go down though you've started
It's totally the opposite with me.
If I've got my drinking head on it'll be the first three pints in about fifteen minutes if that.
Oh no I can't do that.
If I was left to it the first pint would go about 
I did that in fucking 
thirty minutes, forty minutes.
The second pint about thirty minutes.
And then after that I'd be drinking like a pint every twenty minutes or so.
No, I fucking  once upon a time I used to be able to do it.
It's fucking  rock and roll.
like if  say we would, we would get out by about seven.
By about nine o'clock right  my mate would have say five or six pints inside him and I'd have two pints sat there on the fucking table.
And he'd be call oh you lightweight, you gonna drink it?
And I'd be going fuck off, they're mine sort of thing.
By  by half ten
by half ten he'd have a fucking pint sitting there and I'll be going come on then you cunt.
Get the next round in.
What time is it chaps?
Ten past.
What time?
Ten past.
Ten past?
Yeah.
Ten past?
Ten fucking past .
Ten pa 
So what?
Ten past.
I thought it was about half three or something.
That's what.
It's fucking shot by and I ain't done any work.
So what's new?
It doesn't normally shoot by though .