

How are you?
Fine, thank you.
I've got a 
Find your 
headache, but
Surviving?
I feel a lot better.
Oh well.
I went for a walk out this morning but I just couldn't stand it.
No.
it's no good I'm gonna have to go out for a breath of fresh air.
I'm better going  
do you?
But I've got  to be honest with you  you know.
No
So he says I'm going out 
I said oh I feel   I'm going out  for half an hour that's all.
Yeah
I can't see the pleasure  you know.
So you seem a lot better   
Got a lot of washing to do  lie down 
Yeah he'd like that.
Yeah, he'd like that.
I know but I thought 
So I've  bit busy with other things anyway.
I thought what I'd do was I'd have a bath, I thought I'd put all the  back in the fridge 
Yeah.
and I've gotta put that erm  on tonight as well.
Yeah.
So that might be  as well.
Yeah.
See I don't feel as I did last night but it's still there, you know I just take some more tablets like, you know.
Yeah.
But er
Nearly getting rid of it 
but I've really cracked it and it's bloody awful!
It does
No 
oh aye, it does.
Really cold, really, it's horrible!
We didn't do him any good at all.
Telling me he got six points for a driving convic for er speeding conviction 
Halfords I should think
Oh right!
When he got erm 
Oh 
 

 
Smell it.
See if it smells alright 
Got any 
Oh 
We have to that's why 
Aye 
Mm
Too much 
I got your er table things.
They do them in packs of fifty but in 
Oh 
a split pack I got sixty.
That should be enough, shouldn't it?
Oh
Or did I get seventy?
I think I got seventy just to be sure.
I thought sixty 
Oh alright.
That's alright.
was enough so I got seventy 
Oh right.
cos there's only fifty 
Yeah.
So I got seventy.
As I said, they do, they must do them themselves and sell
Oh right.
They've got a well in that shop.
Oh have they?
Yeah.
It's all bricked up.
What else you've been doing?
Oh I've done a bit of drawing.
you wanna get your hair cut while you're there  
Yeah.
Yeah, I ought to go and get changed 
Yeah, well don't stand about  
Yeah, that's alight.
I'll get 
Oh yes.
changed.
I'll just leave them ticking over then?
Yeah.
I won't be long.
Yeah, okay.
Just go and get myself changed.
Yeah, I mean you see works' vans  all over the place regular.
Yeah.
Naughty boys!
I never thought about that.
ha  oh.
Not if they keep his licence.
No.
Speeding.
Dangerous driving.
Dangerous driving cos he made the old woman give over and  overtook somewhere totally stupid and  probably find he had no brake.
He was slowing down anyway!
What are we gonna do?
It's spitting and spotting innit?
Yeah.
Fancy having another cup of tea?
Yeah.
That's if you look at it, like, you only get two chances at speeding now.
Mm.
Which is harder than it used to be.
Must've been four then wasn't it?
Yeah.
Three points 
Like you get four gos.
Yeah, that'd be right.
Get one more go than you used to now you get one left.
Tightened up on that, haven't they?
Mm.
Don't half  your er insurance now, don't it?
You get
Yep.
a speeding doesn't, never did anyway, bother them.
No.
Not unless you had a dangerous driving or something with it.
But er losing your licence always has bothered them, hadn't it?
Mm.
That's always cost you.
is there?
A very old Granada
Mm.
way back
Aye.
  
Ah, yes  it is 
Yeah.
Yeah.
Probably buy 
Hundred quid.
Hundred quid  
Yeah.
Aye.
And he had a dangerous driving or a speeding I think it is
Mm.
horrendous insurance bill  
 
He says I can't afford scrap.
Cost him more.
Cost him about six or seven hundred quid a year.
Cheaper to buy a blimming er  cheaper to insure a car  wouldn't it?
Mm.
Oh
no matter what he gets, it's always over five hundred quid cos he's  he's 
Yeah.
lost his licence in the past and  you know, when he was a kid like
Mm.
and all that
Takes a long while before they forget about that, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Making himself an extra five hundred pound a year for er having been a naughty boy when he was a teenager.
Mm.
That's what it's about now, innit?
Yeah.
It's all the
He is actually quite sane now though.
Yeah, well it's like this fellow that got done for speeding.
When did he get done?
Er Thur no Wednesday.
sat there watching them catch him up  he didn't see them before they got him stopped like.
Saw them catch him up coming along with all their blue lights thinking .
They'd been in er garage at bottom.
Mm.
Aye.
We'd had a little  car before he got there.
He said are you speaking to the  no, no,around town he says, I don't mind doing a bit more, you know, out and about  not much about  they just sat in the traffic, you know.
Mm
but erm  so  had it been a Foxhalls, something about a minute  no, he said only for about a mile, that was it.
I said oh, about forty seconds and he sort of looked.
I says well, at sixty you do a mile in a minute.
So I said if it's only for a mile it's going to be well less than a minute at eighty, presuming you were doing more than   thereabouts and er that was it.
But the car, he'd er he says oh that was funny he says, I blew past him, popped into fourth, I blew past him real easy going up the   .
Come out at Foxhalls at forty, I think he did.
He can come through Foxhall like and he, he'd had to speed up he says and then  he says he didn't carry on, like.
He hadn't been doing  and er  reckon he  and er  think I'm  and that was it  so  right    Been driving since he was  nineteen 
two or three months ago, I think it was.
I remember him saying once before I don't, I don't know what  and er he says it's only a fortnight ago since  you know .
You get done for, pulled up for speeding or parking or something and you can pay your own  fine .
So I went home, anybody gonna pay me fine?


He says I am gonna cop it off me mother  cop it of his mother.
You're always going too fast!
I told you before!
He says me dad al me dad was always speeding he, he used to go mad!
Mm.
slow down.
Yeah  obviously watching wasn't, wasn't watching his mirror very hard.
He hadn't seen copper trying to get him caught up, I wonder how much he was using mirror when he was overtaking people?
Mm, yeah.
Whether he was just watching what was coming from the front.
Mm saw him coming  have to get it  cos Neil's mum was cross about it.
Oh well  he was only just finding out what the rules were.
There was a gang of us chatting with him.
I come up with six points.
That made his day.


He says have I got a fixed penalty?
I says only got a pink form if you've got a fixed penalty.
Know somebody who got one, like.
No, only a bloke  I've never seen one  had one.
Yeah, that'd be Richard.
Mm only he's got to  take his licence and insurance in.
As to what happens now he says I've to go to Magistrate's Court  so  it's just beginning to sink in that it's gonna cost him some brass and it's going to be serious.
One of them there was of the opinion who could quite easily lose his licence for it.
Like  he got done  
What he do?
Run a Chief Constable over?
No!
No, he got done for speeding.
He was over the, over the limit and had a small quantity of drugs with it.
Don't think he'd actually taken them but he had as a 
Mm.
possession.
They did him about eight hundred pounds in motoring offences
Aye.
Phew!
Speeding while slightly over the limit it was.
Him having speed having, having speed .
Oh god!
Mm  Where's  today?
Dunno.
He started to come over, didn't he?
Yeah.
they don't come any worse  get a cup of tea in between, weren't we?
Mm.
I don't think it would've bothered us  when it was spitting and spotting if we'd actually been out there, would it, it's just setting off in it.
Aye, yeah.
Blue sky!
I can see a bit of blue up there.
today?
No 
if you were off to do something and being mucked around for the day, innit?
Mm 
Took my  a long while ago.
Not surprised to see them now.
Only ran out a month ago!
Just as well so late I've been waiting for  to come.
I got some here come in this morning she says, they ran out beginning of September last year.
We hadn't thought about it.
I thought I was late.
Mine have been in, oh, I don't know!
A good month!
Innit?
A slightly bigger  like a fish box


Or what?
Lobster pots making a smell.
  
yeah, don't, I know name when it come up like that.
Anyway we can sort the problem because you'll take them back a  won't you?put them outside your house, creating a smell they were playing up.
Pretty fair stack of them I should think, wasn't there?
Mhm.
Don't know if the son's got out yet.
Been doing time.
Aye.
I don't know 
They didn't catch him   
 
He had an argument with a kid, two or three years ago
Aye.
and er they set off in hot pursuit.
It was in back of a pick-up.
Driving through  with a shotgun shooting the guy 
Still in the back of a pick-up shooting over the roof, like?
Yeah.
Oh!
They didn't get him for that one?
Blimming good job!
No, they just got him for beating somebody.
Bloody good job.
You'd think after that one they'd have thrown the keys away for that.
Mm.
The kid hadn't done much 
Get an extra two years for missing.
the kid hadn't done much, I mean it was nowt  serious .
You know I had a moving traffic accident   
Yeah  
wasn't trucking there, you know  or owt like that.
No sense of humour.
Got brought a pushbike wheel the other day.
Can you get the cogs off that?
Why?
Well they go a lot better on that bike of mine.
I don't think so.
Oh pity.
So what you've done to bend the wheel?
I haven't.
The gaffer knocked somebody off their pushbike, had to buy him a new wheel  and some compensation   
 
Scrounge the wheel!
How do you get them off?
He says you go to a pushbike shop and get special tools.
Ring spanner things with the
Mm.
keys on the outside  pumps and things on it to  I wouldn't bother.
A new set of back cogs for bike's only about seven quid.
A brand new set and they come with the ra with the, erm free wheel and everything all in like, just screw them on.
Go to a pushbike shop they whip them off and whip them on for you  you buy, you know, if you go out and buy one then just take wheel with you they'll stick them straight on.
Mm   that fellow don't go to the police.
Lucky to get away with having to buy him a wheel  compensation 


Unusual innit.
It's very expensive that's why it's unusual.
Sixty nine ninety nine.
is that all right?
It is done isn't It?
why have you got that on your head.
What's it doing take it off.
Oh yeah.
take it off 
Mm.
take it off I don't like it, take it off 
What?
What's wrong with you?
What?
What?
He's bloody mad, he's potty, off his rocker.
Where did you get it?
Get what?
The thing.
Well why  
 
Well why do you need it, why do you need a towel?
Why do you need a towel.
Why er why 
game.
Mum and Dad's got it.
Come on Mum.
Go get in the blooming bath.
Why?
I'll rewi rewind that actually heard what you say, you must be very naughty and nasty  thing to be to your son.
I can't have a sweet then.
Well you're not give me a sweet an all.
Should give me a sweet you know.
You should.
You're gonna turn it off because I wanna tear you off a strip about something.
Me?
Yeah.
Why?
What are we talking about?
Mum what's Hamlet about?
Pardon?
What's Hamlet about?
Hamlet?
Yes.
I don't know much about Shakespeare, the only play I've seen is Romeo and Juliet and A Midsummer Night's Dream.
to er see Rome and Juliet.
Mm.
And I think I need to make it up.
When is 
I dunno.
Well you better find out then.
What do ya mean I alw I'm only saying it cos I got 
Well no if you can go.
You give me the money for it?
If it's within reason as I assume it will be.
Five Pounds.
That's okay.
W would it make much difference for you lending me the money.
Not a lot.
Well there's a quite a bit of difference between five and fifty isn't there  and the one thing is for your educational needs and the other I'm so convinced about.
Well
Yeah.
I thought a computer 
No, but I know that you're dying to have a computer, and if money was no object, then we probably wouldn't hesitate in lending it to you, but really and truly at this moment things are  tight and we can't afford to commit ourselves with things  unless it's absolutely necessary.
Well 
And that's it, I mean I've made it as plain as I can.
 
That is it and I hate it when you keep on and on nagging.
I won't go and see Romeo and Juliet.
Well don't go, it's not my fault if you don't pass your exams.
All right.
Did you watch that animated version that you recorded.
Yeah.
Does it give you the gist of the story?
It,half an hour long.
Well I think it's longer than half an hour.
They probably should
an hour at the most.
Given you er  erm
The film is about hour and five minutes.
You can probably have a video of it as long  of another version.
Well it's does help to see different  versions because  you see that different people interpret the  
Why do you 
Mm?
Well it depends on the people who are producing or directing or whatever, so it's all got  different ways of doing it.
When I was studying  I went to  Open Air Theatre  and  I saw  a version there  on Christopher  er what's his name  that chubby fellow with the glasses  Christopher Biggins that's it.
He was playing Puck  and when I went to see the  Company  doing it well they had a completely different way of doing it, they wo they did it really like er  a dec you know the the mechanical play, I don't know if you know A Midsummer Night's Dream.
They did it in a completely  slapstick farce way  you know th the men who were dressed up  women they  balloons and had rosy red cheeks and wigs and things, it was quite  different.
How they 
Well that's it, when Shakespeare wrote a play and the text has survived and , but the way of  of joshing the people on the way they do it is different every generation and even most of the people in the same generation would  would have a different way of doing it.
Okay.
There's a comedienne  erm  she apparently was born in Wales.
Mhm.
Two Ton Tessie O'Shea that's her.
Two Ton Tessie?
She yeah, that's her her nickname, cos she was quite big and she played the nurse in Romeo and Juliet in the season on Stratford on Avon and she did it using a Welsh accent because she thought Shakespeare, having coming from  quite near the Welsh Border Country might well have had  might well have had a Welsh  nurse.
So it didn't matter that Romeo and Juliet is set in Italy.
Mm.
She did it as she would have  thought Shakespeare would have known people and things, you know, she did it like that.
Mm.
And I remember Amanda seeing a video of Romeo and Juliet  
 
And what struck me was that the costumes were all sort of like you see portraits of Elizabethan dress.
Now I don't what Italy and those  Middle Ages would have been like, that the sort of clothes that were worn.
Mhm.
But  the clothing in that film struck me very much as being like Elizabethan dress.
Yeah, I mean  now plays  of  Shakespeare and  they're wearing modern dress like those worn at Richard the Third or something and they're wearing  well either First or Second World War  uniforms.
Yes.
It was very different then.
Yeah, well it's just different  directors have different  things they want to emphasise in a play and if they want to bring something home or  they think that using a certain  well like say the way the people are dressed and everything will  will have more of an impact, you know will 
One thing I was wondering about you know they  they talk about erm  in  Shakespeare's works is the language the words he uses, the  the sort of poetry of it and the symbolism that's used.
Erm do they talk about that at all in your English Literature 
Yes.
Do they show you how you can learn about this, there's a book you know the book I bought you it's got notes in it.
Does that help with it?
I suppose 
Pardon?
Well you should do.
And what about  I bought some  revision books and things study aids or something for Amanda for her English literature 
 
Well I bought them for Amanda and she was doing  Romeo and Juliet.
So if you look in those you may find there's some help there.
Yeah.