

He might try and come down again
What before 
before then, but you know it depends
Yeah
cos he's, this Friday he's taking a group erm youngsters to Paris
Is he?
That had been booked you see before
Yeah
in fact he was also booked at Easter to go to the erm to Florence
But he couldn't
again, but he's had to cancel that
Yeah, someone else has got to obviously in his place
Either that or I'd imagine 
 
the people that went before have to sort of do it, but as I say he wasn't er, er
we went up at dinner time on the next day and, because he went back after he
the morning again, and we took Daniel up to the er, cos there was a station, Christopher picked him up there and off they went you see so erm haven't heard anything I presume  he got back  alright but as I say 
How's Carris taken all this anyway now?
Mm?
How's Carris taken all this now?
Well seemingly she's erm
A bit resigned to it now?
a bit more resigned, there's another, there's another sort of erm possibility, I mean if they sold their house quickly of course then, you know they'd come down here obviously and they'd try and look for something, but it's not likely that they'd sell their house that quickly
No
but if they did and
They sell it
you know they'd all come down, but if they don't, erm
Christopher would travel
possibility is that Marilyn would stay up there for another year with Carris you know in their house and Timothy of course and erm, then sort of move down here
What after Carris has done her er GCSEs?
I imagine so, is she due to do them next year?
No she's not 
No she's not you see she's 
no 
got another year after that 
after that oh I thought she was 
I would of thought I would of thought is she, if they're gonna move this year is the year she's def gotta do it 
Yeah well Christopher knows that
Yeah
but erm, if everything else being equal obviously that would be the thing to do
Yes, that'd be me
but if they can't well 
they won't want to be separated for
well he 
twelve months 
twelve months or so
He's going to be going up erm each weekend if this happens
Oh yeah I mean that's that's the 
and erm Marilyn will come down of course when she's at, she's worried as well about whether she's going to get a job, cos er, I mean they need to have erm a second income I should think
Well yeah, but I don't think the job's erm, I mean that's not the problem for her because she can always go on the agency you see and she can do general midwifery
Oh on the agency can you?
Oh yeah, I mean, I mean she can like
she used to go to an old person's home of a night time you know
Yeah
or, or days, you can pick actually just when you want to do it
Oh yeah that's what she'll get something 
she'll get paid , she'll get paid travelling and everything for that so that er I don't see that that's erm
No well that's probably erm 
no I don't think that's a problem
no that's not a great consideration 
I I don't see that as a
Well I think it's just 
I mean that could be a short term until she could get herself you know a full time regular post
It's erm, you know, mostly Carris of course 
Yeah
I mean I think if they can 
but she means if they sell their house they'll come down more every year then 
Yes because in the summer I mean you, some time in the, in this next term would be the ideal thing really because that, if she can stay on for the summer term 
Before September that's right 
erm well most of it I mean she'll be take and erm
Yes like in September
Timothy 
Timothy will take his O levels you see during the summer term, well I mean by the end of June he'd of finished those so that 
September would be the ideal time for erm, you know, to be starting down 
Well July, August I mean any
Well yeah
To get settled in
Yeah
Mm
but erm
and
as things are at the moment I think it 
But Chris 
Christopher's very much more happy to have met up with Bob in the office to see what he's you know the thoughts of 
Yeah, he, he'd come away I think rather happy I he, he nev , you know he begun to see here 
He's had some more idea , he had no idea what be expected of him or anything
Yeah
and this Bob erm has sort , he's been quite marvellous, he's set up some fantastic things
He's getting an O B E
in
Is he?
Yeah he's getting an O B E
next
next week isn't it?
next week or something, yeah
Is he?
And he's written books and all the rest of it and in fact he's, he's going to be erm lecturing at Royal College
Mm, mm
you know after he gets out from here on a temporary basis sort of thing, so that erm  Christopher says he's gonna be doing it for a year this lecturing, but it's very nice for him because he'll be able to contact him and Bob will help him if it's necessary
It'd be a difficult situation that will be for Chris then won't it I mean 
Well Chris says he's gotta keep in with him for a little while, he said he
Right
he said I'd, I'd, I'd, I'd rather have, rather have him as a friend than an enemy
And how did he get out of the Chris think he'd get on with him?
Oh very well 
Alright 
Was he on the panel, on the board?
I don't think so no, but you know I mean, for six months if Christopher's living here and having to go back at the weekend, for six months he gets an allowance
A travelling allowance, so
Get it, yeah
that would save them 
yeah but what that doesn't take into account is the tiredness factor is it?
Oh no it doesn't
Because you work, you work the long days
and go, go by train
He'll go back by train
no question of Chris driving 
Go by train 
yeah, but you've, but you've actually got to do this, I mean, that's right
I know it doesn't, but at least it
Yeah, not
fair enough, yes and he gets moving allowance as well 
Yeah, erm
removal expenses
So, I mean it's
Yeah
We don't know anything
Oh, no that's 
more than that, nor does he really
I haven't liked to phone him up because it, you know, I certainly don't want to be, thought that, yeah, yeah, try and be nosy or anything like that, it erm
But that I mean we didn't even know he was coming, father rang up on erm
It was ever so funny really
Yeah because I had said to father during the day on Sunday, I wonder if any of our children are alive?
Because we haven't heard or seen any of them  or anybody
Well I was, I was at
 
No I'm not talking 
Not you 
no it wasn't you was talking
we were thinking
Bridget even hasn't phoned us either 
I was out on the moor from, it's been a hell of a fortnight really
No, no, not, not sort of getting at, anyway I had just said that to father you see
Yeah
I'd phoned up
so father said well I'll erm go and see if erm Christopher's 
Timothy answered the phone you see 
erm there
so Timothy said oh he said well you want to know what time he's coming tomorrow


I said pardon


he said well hasn't he told you?
I said what?
He said oh he says perhaps it was gonna be a surprise 
I've put my foot in it again 
perhaps I shouldn't of told you, so I said well look Timothy I said this is a conversation that hasn't taken place I said when Christopher comes back in I said if you want to say anything you can, but feel free not to and we'll just, if he comes we won't know anything about it
Play it by ear
that, that way, he must of said something because Christopher phoned up and said I'm coming down tomorrow 
He did say something Christopher told me that
Oh he did, did he?
and I are off tomorrow and it's the first day off that we've had together you know, for
Alright then, so are you gonna go out or something?
I might , well no we're not
Go and have some lunch or something
Well I dunno, I don't know what we'll do, it's, there's plenty of work to be done around, but I've been out every night this week and I'm in tonight thank goodness, I need to be in
Mm
erm, what's it?
Twenty five miles over the moor for the weekend 
Oh and then of course, change the subject completely, we've just, we've been out this morning, have we been out this morning?
We've been out together this morning, yes 
We've been out this morning, that's right , we got back in and I was then going to go over to Saint Mary's church club, I wanted to go to the bank at Saint Mary's church, and erm, back door bell goes ding ding ding ding ding and I think it's Chris cos Chris is normally the only one, go out there and who should it be?
It's Bill  and his missus, do you remember Bill  who used to caretake at school?
No you wouldn't know but he was the caretaker at father's school, wonderful man, absolutely, he's got god knows what he hasn't got wrong with him, but he has sort of 
 
which he's made himself
Good lord
He's
he's made two of those up there you see 
Two of those numbers up there are his as well and a painting
That's a cat and a fiddle
Yes, strewth, what was I gonna say?
I tell you, you're talking about names in the past, Fred  do you remember Fred  he was
Yes, yes 
Yes, yes 
er Fred and er, I can't remember what his wife was called now
Joan
Joan that's right, I met them down the town in Torquay
Oh gosh, I haven't seen them for a
Well Fred was working for erm
Now what was their
name?
I can't remember, but Fred he's in the police now
Is he?
police now, yeah
Ooh can I just say, sort of butt in there, I was at the hospital I had to go with my A C
 
Oh yeah and you met er, now who was in there, up there?
Oh you, you've heard did you?


Yeah, but, no 
Oh yes that's, that's, that's erm, erm
Ray  mum 
that's erm the mother
The mother
she's a wonderful erm, she's a nurse that does the A C clinic
Oh is she?
Yeah and I said to her erm, and she said I don't know how it came out about her son in the fire service, oh I know she'd just come back from Orlando, cos she'd been off work having had a hysterectomy and she had three week's leave due to her
And you said your son's going to Orlando 
so she went to erm Orlando 
I am 
so I said oh my son's going there sort of erm this summer and er she said oh don't they live you know locally, so I said well in Newton Abbott and erm he works in the fire service
So does my son
and so
Ray told me about it, he said that erm this bloke 
ah he said that ah she's a lovely lady she really is
so
but then after, not after, before then, I was sitting up waiting to give my bloody when Mrs  said 
Pat's Pat's wife
Yeah
er Pat's, Pat's mother
Mm
she used to live in
 
she said to me, erm 
Oh he's in the fire service?
Yeah
Yeah
Pat, Pat works in
office
Yeah with you?
Is he?
Yeah that's right
Yeah he works in the same office
God
She said erm he's in erm
Fire prevention
Torquay and fire prevention oh I said he must be with Richard, yes she said he is
Yeah, yeah
Ah ain't that funny both on the same day
But Fred was saying, er because, erm the dreadful thing was I couldn't remember his name to start with I think I could try if I knew but I couldn't remember what his christian name 
Fred 
Fred
Angela wasn't it the girl's name?
Erm
Oh Angela
and er actually Joan was quite embarrassed because she heard that you were in a box
Oh goodness gracious
and I said well she wasn't the last time I saw her


She said oh I'm ever so sorry, she said perhaps it's your mother, I said no I said she was alive and kicking as well the last time I saw her  so
Oh she probably heard that I had not been well
Well that's right
that'll be it
that's what I'd guessed, erm, so I said no, I said they're fine, so she said oh I'm ever so sorry I said don't be I said these sort of things get around, I mean it's, she kept go and then I went on to describe how I virtually done not too a dissimilar thing going up the road trying to talk to people about writing in to object, you know with this planning application and erm, I said I sort of knock on someone's door up there and I thought it was the next door that the husband had died and it was that one
Oh dear
Mm, mm
you can't help putting
I'm going to go to the planning committee meeting there
Are you?
on Monday and then happily leave around about ten o'clock
So you can go alright can you?
Oh yeah 
They'll, they'll allow you to go?
Oh yeah you're allowed to go in and watch, you're not allowed to say anything, but I just wanna go in and, and er
See who says what
Yeah
Yeah, that's a good idea, mm
Yes well I mean had we had any idea about this, obviously father would of 
Didn't even go to the committee dear, this one 
Didn't even no I've never even went to the committee, yours was 
That was, that was the trouble with ours 
going to a committee
absolutely I'm sure of that 
Well I mean it's , it's well as soon as, it's, well did you write in and object in within the time?
Oh yeah, yes
I wrote, I wrote a foolscap letter with about nine points on it and somebody who, the architect, Chris's architect next door said with a letter like that going in, it must go to the committee
Mm
so I wasn't bothered, but it didn't go to the committee and now, afterwards when I
Mm
then it was too late
But you can't appeal against it, you can't appeal against it 
No, no 
No that's right 
they,
they can appeal 
they can appeal 
Yeah
but you can't and I think it's very wrong that one man should have, be almighty god really, do 
This present mayor was away on holiday at the time, he said perhaps that I should of seen that erm it would go to committee
I mean I have gone to the trouble, I have been in to see the planning officer that's dealing with it, erm I've written to every single member of the planning committee, I've written to the Environmental Health who have written back to me saying they offer no objections and there because the smell won't be a problem so I've written them back another stinking letter and saying well erm
Come and live next door
I, I completely disagree with your thoughts on the fact that there won't be a smell, so much so that the slightest smell if the, if the er proposal gets the go ahead and I shall be on to your office and asking to speak to you personally, to come and  smell  this erm 
And the rubbish, I mean the, the environmental people 
Oh they, they say it's all controllable so that I've, I've answered, I haven't just let the Environmental Health wash over me I've actually written back to them again, er I'll be interested to see whether I get a letter back from them, but I phoned up the Council this morning and they're rejecting on two grounds, one is to do with the highway and the sort of the traffic situation coming in there, although the, the authority, the Highway Department aren't objecting to it and the other one is erm, on local environmental issues I think you know that is, is unsuitably, unsuitable environmentally to the area  well I can only say that I'm grateful to the planning, to the planning offices for they're going out on a limb if you like because I think they're on thin ice  erm  and so long as the committee will, will back them up I mean I don't know of what else I could of done as a person
No nothing, I don't think you could of done any more, you got it to committee and, and there's nothing more than you can do than that
erm, so that if, if they then go to an appeal er, I was talking to this planning officer and I was saying that I think I'll consult them, he said I don't think you'll need to he said, and of what you've done so far is pretty good and I can get access to all the letters that have been written in, in objecting into the into the homes 
Have a lot of other people written in and objecting?
I think there's I think there's quite a few and I think this is what swayed it, the fact that they have had erm, I know of at least ten  say ten, there's one, two, three on the other side of the road which is good because Bob  which is another one, so that's four, there's  which is the other side of the shop, is five, there's us, six, Jean seven, the  eight, erm the guy the other side of the  which is nine, there is Ginny  over the and the erm old persons' home, that's ten that I know of for certain about, er and then I've heard of other people were gonna be writing in, now whether they actually did or not I don't know
Mm, as you, see you, you really do need 
but I'm sure, if if I've had ten objections, I mean I've done
You've done very well by that, you know
You really have been to houses 
I wish we of had that knowledge when
Had we known about it because this is the sort of thing we could of gone 
We would of done the same sort of thing and could of gone in to see the planning officer but I just, I just assumed you know that, that life was fair but of course there's no justice in this life 
But er, the only, the only, yes, no the only other thing I would of said that you could of perhaps done would be go to to a Local Authority ombudsman
Well I, we went there afterwards
Did you and what did he say?
but it was too late you see and there was no, I mean 
It was passed 
I, I couldn't produce any evidence of malpractice, I mean I could 
No 
think what I'd like, but I couldn't prove anything and erm, so there was nothing that the ombudsman could do at that stage, at, as the stage complete
Yeah
erm and there was nothing that a Member of Parliament could do, this is the trouble I mean it, it with everybody was saying you should of contacted us before it went to 
I'm going to see Patrick  tomorrow, there's a coffee morning up in the village, but erm
Well you went to see him 
and he, he is very keen to try and change the law so that people like you and I who is 
can appeal 
can, can appeal against the decision which goes against us, it's, its not fair that we 
because we we're the third party we're not allowed to appeal against it
It's not fair that the, the other people 
I know 
can appeal but you can't
I know the person whose house, I mean, I've spoken to Jane  at some length and I'll probably ring her tonight erm  but erm, I, I might go around and see old erm  tomorrow at a coffee morning I think up in the village
But I think that he I find he's 
Anything he does 
he's very sympathetic to the likes of 
at least, at least you've got it's going to committee, it's not gonna be just on the on the rest on one man 
 
One person with er yeah 
erm who will undoubtedly he'll have favourable contacts with the person who was applying.
I mean as I'm, I don't think they had any option with this I think because it's a change of usage, considerable change of use then it had to go before the committee, erm  but erm
It's okay, even if they get send down then of course they can still appeal but you can't it's ridiculous 
Well it's not fair
No 
That's right and, so I don't know, we erm  we live in hopes anyway.
And how's Helen?
Alright, I mean she's working long and hard and er 
How does she think she'll do with her A levels?
Well I think
Has she had her mocks yet?
No, not yet she's, she's had an accept, I'm taking her up to Cardiff on Wednesday on a B and two Cs, the thing 
Yeah 
Oh for going to university?
Yeah
What about her er York which she's had 
She hasn't heard from York she's heard from Leicester 
She hasn't heard from them yet
and she's got an acceptance from them on a B and two Cs
Oh has she?
erm
Because it was York that was stopping her listing wasn't it?
What she going to , what she applying to get a degree?
History
History
The trouble is, I mean I can take, I can take her up to Bristol er Cardiff next week, but there's another thing to, to Leicester and I can't get her up to Leicester although she
on a train, because I've got a governor's meeting that day and, and I can't avoid not being at that governor's meeting because I'm a chairman
Yeah
of the building and sites
Yeah
erm  ha, I dunno
When is it for Leicester?
Do you know I can't remember the date, early part of March, early part of March, erm what she says at the moment is that er someone else from the college is going to Leicester next Wednesday when Helen's going to Cardiff and this girl is then going to Cardiff when Helen should be going to Leicester, so Helen says, and she wants to look at the same subjects as what Helen does so Helen says that they're gonna sort of go to the different colleges and compare notes when they come back from it so she might needn't want to go to Leicester
Mm
erm, so I just, I just don't know, erm, so we just
 
Daniel was saying hasn't she heard from any of her
so
I said I don't honestly, I only know that er, erm
which is quite nice to have fir to have an acceptance to anyway 
Yeah very good
so  I don't think she'll get an acceptance to York on a B and two Cs  I think York is one of the better
Try thinking, do you know somebody used 
better I think 
to swear about Southampton for history
I don't know, I can't remember whether she applied for that, I know Harold  his daughter went up to Southampton and he was horrified at the accommodation she was staying in, up there
But I know that erm, for
I think I've just about finished with it
Oh have you?
Have you?
We've not had an appointment to go back have we since you've been home, but I suppose it was been October when we went 
I've had , I've had two hundred pounds worth, I've given her a cheque for two hundred pounds
Have you really?
What on earth have they done
well he had all sorts of
I've had two, two, three crowns
That's only fifteen shillings




I've had a new plate, I've had a hell of a lot with, with a one of the
something to one of the teeth
Yeah
crown dropped off so she had to put that back on, she never put, I had to get erm have another fitting for it, because she said the purpose of pins in her teeth in the tooth to try and get the crown to sit on, on the pins, erm
Darling
Er I know, he's, he's told me
and in fact 
last time I saw him 
I took, I took the cheque around on Monday, I had the, the last appointment on Friday and erm since I've had the abscess, the tooth that's got a crown on top, I think it's been pushed up a little bit and my top teeth, the first two keeps catching was this 
 
well it never has done I mean that, it's always been like that I've never had
erm I can put together
It's naughty of your mother not to let you have them 
Oh, but this, it was catching the tooth that had the abscessing underneath it
Yeah 
god was it painful, and erm, so the crown has got a filling in it now  because she, to, to relieve the pressure on the abscess she had to drill right down through the crown, erm to go right through into the root area
Get me ash 
to get rid of the abscess, oh god it was painful, it really was, in fact I had it once, I had a load of penicillin, didn't finish the penicillin and it came back again and they had to give me a stronger drug then for five days 
Oh I see 
Did you erm, did you 
that's the trouble with them 
have any help?
Yeah, put it all, I mean they I put that in as 
of course you get that
Yes
you get that back?
I have to pay tax on that lot mind, but I mean it's something  you know like it's still costing me fifty pounds
Yeah
erm
but still that's a bit better than two hundred
Yeah
Oh
erm
And Paul is
them thing wasted I mean, I don't know, ha got danger damage in the back of his head I think at times


he's so laid back, he's doing, he's doing erm the C grade for maths now, that's what he's gonna apply to, to go for
Where, what?
For C grade in maths
What is that?
Well it's the intermediate maths
Yeah
Oh I see yeah 
We bought , we bought him a load of revision books erm from Smith's er not for maths but for chemistry, biology, physics,ma , not maths something else, Cherry went and bought four of them and Helen had got one for French anyway, so we told him he's got to erm get down to some serious
Serious work
serious work on him
weekend they're coming
The, the erm the maths, is this erm
He's quite confident about the maths now with intermediate, he says that er, he doesn't see
He hopes to get a one
weekend after
he doesn't see any problems with that at all, no
Was that the one that Helen should of done?
She, they should of put her in for the intermediate 
Yeah 
they put her in, they put in for the higher
Mm, mm
Yeah
Mind you, you see in the long run they proved that she was
Well all, all that 
good enough to do it
all that proved to me is, is that Helen the board, the examination board that Helen did at the college, she said it was a much, a much better exam to do than it was at
Was it?
she felt much happier about doing it
Mm
and it's a different, it was a different exam to the one she was doing at Cuthbert Main, so I don't know, erm I'm not certainly enough qualified to arguing about qualified matters 
No, no 
No
at school
I hear
is sort of going back quite a bit  
Oh he does quite a bit of, he does a bit of erm supplying it
Tony told me
and  but er right I've gotta get back to work
we've had er a man rang to the hall clearing out
thing, that erm they'd left, father's gotta go down there next Tuesday so
Yeah the stag group has definitely wound up, the whole lot has been wound up
the, the erm, there are tents and all sorts of things you said they were comparatively new, erm because remember that big 
Mind you the tents up there didn't look very new actually, I know one
but there was one or two bits of tent then
Oh I don't know what they do, but do you remember that great big jumble sale they had that raised over a thousand pounds?
They had under the erm,
What the Scouts?
multi storey?
Yeah 
yeah
Four or five years ago now 
Well that was sort of mostly to, to be buying erm
Tents
tents, but
Who
yeah just phoned in to find out where the flags were, but it doesn't see the flags
It wasn't Andre that, that comes around here?
No, erm
Ferchase?
No, where's my diary, I've got, I've got his name in my diary
Erm actually Kay got in touch with this man and in fact she had got Andre's name as well sort of 
It's, er you know I yes, I erm
he's a, he's retired, I mean he, he doesn't have anything very 
Ivor somebody 
Ivor somebody, no just a thought 
How old is he?
Oh sixty five, seventy 
Sixty, no it's not him 
Retired haven't they, because if somebody came to you cos you see, he was so upset about it 
I think he's coming I think he's coming up to the high week group, what is he?
He's something he's, he's, he's some, something to do with er with er, with the area and erm, and he's coming up for the high week group some time in the next, little while, and I said to him you were the group's
up there
Yeah, what did he say?
Oh I think he was just surprised, I don't think he knew, you know, I mean
Because I'm on a district executive committee at the moment and I don't, that name doesn't ring a bell
He's erm
Kay  knows him cos he's 
he's about , I suppose he's about my height probably slightly slimmer 
Slimmer 
erm and I would of thought he's sixty eight something like that
Oh gosh no, well I don't know who that is, I've got no idea 
He's got , he's got a big, a very big scout badge on his lapel 
And he had a scout badge on his tie, did you notice that?
No I didn't notice that on the tie, yeah
I wonder who that is?
Kay  knew him, she rang him up
Well I mean if it, if it's, if it's ten
erm, I'm at the process of now looking to spend  certainly four hundred pound on a tent and maybe 
Well I, I , I mean I wouldn't of thought that
Your, your best bet would be to go up and sort of you know look at the tents that are up there so that you would know whether they went about 
I'm meeting him nine o'clock Tuesday morning at the hall
But I suppose you could go and look tomorrow morning
I'm at work erm well 
he's off tomorrow
erm, I, well I can't commit myself to going down to that to, I mean if it's, if I can I'll give you a ring because with Cherry being off as well it's, I mean it's gonna be unfair if I start, cos I've been so much 
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah 
but if, if you are going to be spending a whole lot of money on tents and if these were any good 
Well I mean it's, this it's patrol, it's two patrol tents in particular that I'm looking at, if they've got some decent er scout tents 
I must say I mean I, I mean er there were two rolls
How big are the rolls?
Well I don't think they're big enough for a big tent, I mean one is fairly long, but er I don't 
But do, would it be 
it wouldn't be any thicker than that I don't suppose, but I mean I wouldn't know
No, that
The thing about it is 
It, it I wouldn't of thought 
Perhaps that doesn't sound like a patrol tent
No, it doesn't sound like a patrol tent
This, er I know Margaret, Margaret erm, what's her name


at the time, no, it's, I won't say
Tina's daughter
I know
Jim  's daughter
Yes
Marcus and all them
Yes
kids are called


that's right, erm she had said at the time when they had raised all this money that er mostly gonna be spent on erm
Tents
Camping equipment
tents and camping equipment so that 
I can find out anyway because I can always talk to Andre about it, he'll know er what's being done about it, erm
Er anyway he, this fellow's gonna, we're going to clear all the rubbish
So they, they, they've dropped the erm the group altogether then?
Yes and the 
Who else would that involve?
Well there was an adventure section as well 
Oh was there
erm, the adventure section was quite successful in a lot of respects they had quite a few people er attached to it, the scout group and the cub group, cub packs didn't have very many, but erm the adventure section had quite a few people, er and in fact we've got people doing the tent stalls at the moment that are from a seventh mutant, which is, what it was and of course they've disenfranchised if you like er but we're looking, the district is looking to create a new group with Buckland
Yeah
so instead of being the seventh Saint Joseph's we'd be just erm Newton Abbott
Yeah
so the seventh will stay
Mm, mm
and because the Buckinary is so big and really warrants having a stag group over that neck of the woods
They could well do 
they are gonna try and hang onto this seventh, so it well might be
Resurrected
that all its equipment is gonna be held on to 
Yeah
to try and set up a scout group
But in it, it's wicked, in that, in that cupboard they've got two pairs of really good walking boots, when Kay saw them she said it's not their feet, because you see she had the cubs there right from the beginning 
Mum, we have got the ten saws, last year one of the lads left with us a pair of eighty pound boots and fifty pound gaiters, left them and we don't know who they belong to
Ain't it awful really?
the  scarper boots you know with the  yeti gaiters on
Yeah
and the  yeti gaiters are fifty pounds
Gosh
fifty five pounds
But anyway 
and the and and, and the and the  scarper boots 
he was he was so horrified about it because she had actually run all that right from the beginning
That came in this morning
Yeah, I was gonna give you a ring to say it's been this way, pick them up 
we had a piece for lunch and erm
That was useful wasn't it?
Oh I suppose we can have a little go at this crossword
Well we can have a go at
I haven't even read the paper yet
Oh alright
I mean I'll carry on
Yes
you, you sort 
Encourages prison breaks  
The Co-Op here's got cordless jug kettle for twelve ninety nine
Have they?
Cordless one?
Mm
Oh
one and a half litres, two point two kilowatt fill up
That's not bad
and a cable tidy, that sounds quite good, these are half price things for ten days only  There's a remote control colour television for one thirty nine, ninety nine, save fifty pounds  they've got the dear tapes here look, erm six and a half hours video tapes, recommended price seven ninety nine can get for three ninety nine and there's another one here three pack, twelve hours video tape for six ninety nine  must end Saturday November the twenty ninth, oh perhaps I'll buy you one of those, oh I have bought you a birthday present haven't I?
Mm, mm  Do you suppose it's getting a bit the  the file of phrase is  complete fury over trend 
Erm complete fury over trend 
complete fury over trend , there's three, three and four
Mm, no
I, I, I was gonna tell you what I thought it was and I've forgotten haven't I?
Erm all the rage
Mm, you're very good, yes very good, that's excellent
Yeah
I reckon  gosh look at that you can get a Tefal food processor it was thirty three ninety nine for twenty four forty nine at Comets, there's a telephone answering machine 
This is the long one, this is the five thousand
It says here on the six o'clock Olympics today  including live coverage of Wilf Riley's attempt to win the gold for Britain in the mens thousand short practice speed skating final  it's six o'clock 
Yeah that's the final he's got three, they've got two, I think they've got two of each before that actually  and that's the wide lane that's two lanes so that's the erm, when they do the long one 
Looks as if somebody was sort of passed over to the other
Yeah they do they cross over from outside 
Any lane 
to inside
I thought it were relay
Oh was it?
That's what I thought because he's on the, he's by himself isn't he?
Well if they've separated you see you get one on the inside track, one on the outside track and they can be separated by a hundred metres so that there's one, one side one 
No you can see 
there's usually two racing together in this one, but they're in separate tracks and one starts at the outside track 
This is the end track 
crosses to the inside track and vice versa there the other straight where they change over I think  oh it's finished anyway  mm
Hello how are you?
I'm fine actually
You are
 
I was tired yesterday 
Mm
I was tired yesterday wasn't I?
You were tired yesterday, you were indeed
Falling asleep
Mm
falling asleep wasn't I?
Well you were either tired or dopey 
Look Holly
Nice
 
Am I allowed to read them out to you?
Yes, we'll, we'll do that when we've had our spellings
Here's mine
That's very nicely presented
Mine isn't, I haven't done a front cover
Well that doesn't matter
Oh look Terry I've done an advertisement in the back
You've done a what?
Advertisement
No you don't 
advertisement 
Advertisement, that's better
advertisement
Advertisement, oh right the riverside murder, well that's been nicely set out as well hasn't it?
Right okay well we'll 
I did er an advertisement about understanding animals


Anything you need to know about dogs, cats, farm or wild animals mm, right 
Understanding animals 
Okay, well we'll do the spellings first and then we'll have a look
How many spellings we doing?
Well how many how many do you think?
I hope there's not 
you didn't earn your
forty
you didn't earn the disco
Terry
What?
I, I've got a merit mark today
You've got a merit mark 
What for French?
Yes
For French?
Yes
Oh why did you get a merit mark for French?
Because I was good I did something that was very good
You were good?
I was good
I never get any merit marks for, we never get any merit marks from our French teacher
because I did something you had to 
she's really very tight 
there was about twenty cards and you had to name everything that was on it, order everything, like you usually go, erm that's it or something and erm you have to learn it in the MAs and MEs and things and all that and then she showed you and you had to take everything on that
And you got everything right?
Yes
Very good
well done she said 
How many more got everything right?
About two
Oh about two, right
but I'm wonderful so is my poem 
Er in French?
Oh no that was your poem you wrote in your book, right 
Yeah 
okay so we, because last week you had a thirty and thirty three and, and 
I had a thirty three
and the, and the stipulation is
yeah I got thirty three
if you, what, what was the stipulation, if you get more than
Thirty five
thirty five, if you get thirty five or more 
if the other person gets less you still have to
 
you still have to do it, that's right, you've both got to get more than thirty five
 

So yes, it's one to forty  can't be one to forty five because you haven't had tea  well if you had tea you could say you were fortified
Mm 
We break up tomorrow from school
Yeah
Yes oh I mean 
Yes you do 
I mean I'm really upset
I'm sure you are 
I'm so, so upset 
And I gather you don't go back until Tuesday week
Yeah 
Yeah 
you have the Monday off as well 
Yeah 
Yeah 
It's fun isn't it?
Oh what are we doing?
There's 
There'll be a lot of bread on that table will there?
Pardon?
There'll be a lot of bread on that table
Baker's day
That's right, there'll be a lot of bread
Mm, three
did you remember your money for the erm trip?
No
Oh
Which trip is this?
The ballet
No, but my mum's coming afterwards so I'll give it to her then
Yeah
My mum doesn't like me taking money to school, in quantities
Very sensible too 
that's why whenever I come into you from us I always give it to you afterwards
Mm
because mum says don't take it school because I might lose it
Did we give you our maths money yesterday?
Mm, mm no
No
no you didn't
No I didn't but did we give
but your mother did at the end of the day
Yeah, yeah cos she said that
She's got a good memory
No, cos she said after I came out
Oh yeah 
and then 
said no one 's taken the money in
That's right
and I was meant to be taking it in today, but I forgot and so I just
Right, so are we ready?
That's weird
What is?
because you know there's ten on each side
Yeah 
Mm, mm 
the, yeah, twenty I mean, well that one goes different and they started at the same edge, ah two twenty twos  oh
That's very clever well just 
Just cross one out
just, just miss one you see, that's alright
Miss the bottom one
just don't, don't put a spelling in the line, no don't put a spelling in the line, just put a line there and a line there 
Yeah 
and then put your twenty two there and your twenty three there
Alright, yeah
Alright, so are we ready?
That's nothing great
Number one
Number one
carriage
carriage
carriage, a horse drawn carriage  or the carriage of a train
I guess a plain straightforward carriage
and number two marriage  marriage  as Lucy said that is what she saw on Neighbours yesterday
Yeah
Yeah
it wasn't very good though
Did you watch it?
No I didn't, no
Oh it's funny
I, I only 
My uncle's getting married
I only saw it today, saw
Oh what happened today?
What happened?
Because I, I won't be able to see it


What happened to Des and Melanie?
What happened today well she's on the boat isn't she?
Yeah
Forty minutes out to sea
What they gonna do?
They've got to, she's got to stay on the boat until they're gonna try and find her somewhere else to sleep
I knew they'd
got to get off 
and, and what's his name, the lad that's run away?
Todd 
Todd 
Has got the sack
Ha, ha, I reckon he's gonna come home soon
Well he should do because I don't think
he's stupid
Right, number three
thinks he's gonna go in a home 
Tuesday
Tuesday
Tuesday
Tuesday, Holly's called Wednesday in our play
Is she?
Yeah
Right, so she should know how to spell number four
Wednesday
Yeah that's right
I know how to spell Wednesday anyway
So do I
I'm not sure you know how to pronounce it
Wednesday
Wednesday 
That's right Wednesday
right number five, family
Family
Family
I was thinking
That's a change
how we got our name


er, mm, how we got the days of the week because I said that could name it Monday because that was the day everybody got their money, got paid
Yes that's not a bad idea perhaps that 
I don't know about Tuesday 
When the days of the week were first erm
How did we get names of the week?
occurred probably nobody got paid anyway
Mm
How did we get names of the week?
I, I, I have known some of them and I can't remember all of them, Thursday I think
Thursday
comes from the name of the god of war, Thor and I think Thursday 
Thor 
was Thors day
Sunday it was always sunny, Saturday everybody sat down


Friday they had fried egg
Right number six
Friday crisp and dry day 
people
People, people I like people 
People 
You could look it up in a dictionary probably to find the origin of the word, people
Rhubarb
I'll try and find out for you
Friday crisp and dry day 
Number seven clothes
Clothes
The clothes you wear
Do you know what Terry
Not till you tell me
No you don't, but 
 
my cousin's coming tonight
Wow
my cousin's very nice because he's only three
That's why he's nice because he's only three
Yeah, because I like little children 
when he gets five you won't be so nice
Yeah
Number number eight 
 
several, several 
Friday crisp and dry day  
Several 
I can't stop singing that now, if only you hadn't of said that
Erm
Number nine disgusting
Disgusting
disgusting
gusting
Because we had to discuss didn't we?
So we had to
 
Were you both born in Devon?
Are you both Devon children?
Yes I was born in Newton Abbott 
No I, I was born in Plymouth
Oh
I was, I was born in
 
well that's near enough to Devon isn't it?
Yeah
Devon
got Cornish 
I mean presumably you was born this side of the river?
Yeah
Right, so that's still Devon, right now, number ten
Tights are falling down
special, special
I'm special person, I'm not really
I know you're not
certain isn't it?
 
Right then number eleven  get that, that's very good Holly, number eleven woollen
Woollen
She was wearing a woollen cardigan, woollen
Cos it's chilly outside
Number twelve you go merrily on your way
Dum dum dum dum dum
merrily, merrily, I've done it
And number thirteen
Ah
Ah
heaviest 
Heaviest
Who is heaviest of the three of you?
What is 
Me 
wrong if I said who is heaviest of the two of you?
It's the heavier
Heavier 
Right , it's only two of you say heavier
Heavier 
Have you ever tasted clay?
Right if it's more than two then it's heaviest, I have ever tasted clay?
Yeah, we have we have done 
We have actually Terry because it's in your toothpaste
You have to eat clay 
You won't, you will not get the taste of clay like tasting toothpaste because toothpaste 
No, but 
has been flavoured
we went, we went to a clay mine W D, W D B what's
and we had to eat them, eat clay 
and it just come out, just come out 
yeah, yeah 
you know when it comes out
 
it's revolting 
Well it's a big pile and we just had to go
Yeah and
Me and Rebecca were going ugh ugh ugh
We were I was saying ooh quite nice 
Not the nicest of things , no
Well, no, and everyone was running up the slate
They were what?
Running up the erm, where all the big piles of the dust were to be 
Yeah 
and then all were sliding down it 
You did you went from the top did go from the top 
and then you go I'm gonna get that one at the top and they were running up to the top picked it and they, and ran down again
Mm
Ugh
It was funny 
Right, well let's go on , fourteen abrupt
Pardon?
Abrupt 
Abrupt
Abrupt
He was very abrupt
abrupt
Abrupt, that was wrong abrupt 
he spoke in a very abrupt manner short manner 
I know mine is wrong, I know, I did so I put it right
Mm, do it
It's Friday crisp and dry day 
Number fifteen
Shut up


that makes it easier for you, easier
I've got that word in my
Have you?
Mm
Oh very good 
I might of I don't think I have there
No easier
I might have, oh look
easier
I'll read it
No not now, we'll do it later, right number sixteen, succeed, succeed, I hope you will in succeed in getting them all right, succeed
I don't know how you spell that word suc 
I know, I know, succeed I've done it
It's probably wrong though
Well if you have got it right you will have to have it achieved number seventeen, which is success
Oh success
so it's sixteen it's succeed and seventeen is success 
I've got success
Success
I don't know if that is it, how you spell it
Number eighteen material
Oh I haven't done success yet
Material
success
E R
Did you want, did you want an
yesterday?
Did I watch what?
Yep 
Rodney  
 
Rodney?
Only Fools And Horses
Pardon?
did you watch Only Fools And Horses yesterday?
I didn't actually, no
Rodney 
They're, they're all repeats but 
Mm
have you seen the one where he went, had to go to hospital cos he had the trouble had an irritable bowel irritable bowel 
I don't know whether I have or not, yes I think perhaps I have seen it
and he was fighting he was going
mm
fighting
Right, okay then number nineteen 
 
I haven't done number eighteen yet
Number eighteen is material 
Material 
Oh
material
Yeah
And number nineteen, when something, when a plant dries up, you can say that it will wither
Wither
Wither
Wither 
Wither ah
And number twenty easiest, not easier but easiest  and the third task was the easiest of them all, easiest  now they were all your new words, now we go on to some of the older words now, number twenty one, occupy  occupy
I like that word
and number twenty two accept, will you please accept this gift, accept 
No 
not except but accept  and number twenty three language
Oh I don't like this word
language  this is what we are trying to learn the English language, language
Language
Language
I think I know how to spell it 
Number twenty four receive, receive
Ow my foot's itchy, my foot's always itchy in here
He will receive his reward in due time, receive
I before E except after C 
And number twenty five believe  number twenty four is receive and twenty five is believe
It's so crisp and dry 
Sorry
have you singing that?
there's no attempting for taste is there?
Number twenty six, she is a complete
Nutter
wreck  wreck


Er can we put on the end of this er spelling nutter
Yes, well, erm, number twenty seven entirely, I entirely agree with you, entirely
Entire
Entire
Entirely
Entire 
Number twenty eight grieve grieve 
Not grieve Mumma , Mumma please do not grieve or wept 
It makes me grieve
Oh we're going up to my aunty this weekend
Are you?
I'm not, but my brother's going to Austria this weekend
Yes he is isn't he?
Yes
I'm going to see erm
And I wish I was going with him
Er so do I 
I'm , I'm going to see Cats on my birthday
Are you?
Yeah
Where?
Can I come?
No
In London?
It's a family day out
You said that you
No, on my actual, erm you know
I'm going to Alton Towers on my actual birthday
 
in about in the Easter holidays, I'm going to see Cats, that's like my dad's treat because we can't go on the Friday that's on a school, which I would like to, I think I will go on 
I'm missing school on the Monday to go to Alton Towers so is my friend 
Yeah I'll ask mum if I can miss school on Friday 
When, which Monday?
Monday after my birthday, the Monday on my birthday, because my birthday's on a Monday
This coming Monday?
No, in June
That's what I thought, yes I mean 
then on Saturday, Saturday I'm gonna have the party
Right number twenty nine is it twenty nine?
Mm 
Yeah 
Instantly, instantly
Instant
do you, instantly
In 
=stantly
=stant, and
If you spell it the way it is pronounced you'll 
Instant 
get it right instantly 
=stant , =stant
instantly
It's so crisp and dry 
Now number thirty  the thought occurred to me, occurred, occurred, or the accident occurred  when the lorry failed to stop at the traffic lights
Why did he do that?
Because his brakes aren't working


Well that's a possible answer, yes, number thirty one 
Or he's being just silly 
curious
Yeah
curious 
I don't know how you spell cu 
You haven't done it yet?
Yeah I have done thirty
Yeah curious, number thirty two worthy
Mm?
Worthy
Worthy?
Yes the labourer is worthy of his
worthy, he is worth it, worthy, number thirty three, moisture  early morning moisture on the grass is known as
Dew
Dew
Yes, moisture
I've spelt it right this week
Number thirty four surrender, surrender 
Surrend 
and number thirty five  anxious, anxious, he was anxious to get his spellings right, anxious  I shall think I'll have to give you something for your birthday present and it'll be very useful to you 
Nutty
a rubber, yes you'll must need a new one by then 
an eraser, eraser, number thirty five was anxious, number thirty six is building
Building 
building , building, building
I just can't
building, number thirty seven, naturally, naturally
Naturally
Nature's way naturally
Naturally, can't say that
Naturally
Naturally
Naturally
Naturally
Naturally
Number thirty eight disappeared, disappeared
I know how to spell that word now
the five penny piece disappeared down the drain 
Into thin air 
disappeared  and number thirty nine companion, companion 
Companion and then number forty
And number forty
Ah
is the word that occurs four times at least in a nursery rhyme, there was a something man, who walked a something mile, he found a something sixpence upon a something style 
Crooked 
Crooked, right, crooked, there was a crooked man who walked a crooked mile, he found a crooked sixpence upon a crooked style 
Crooked style 
Right, so
Don't know how to spell crooked
You don't?
No, oh, I've killed myself with my
nearly poked my eye
Look do you like my, my pen Terry?
That's nice isn't it?
Where did you get it from?
Bulgaria
Bulgaria oh
You brought it back did you?
Right, so
Can I borrow you pen please Terry because it's a different colour
Yes
Thank you
Could use a red
I could, but I don't want to thank you
I think I will
Dinky do
Yeah, I think I will
There's another red pen there 
Right number one, Lucy carriage
C A R R I G E
Holly
C A R R A G E
You've both got it wrong, it's C A R R I A G E
Oh
Put a I in there
C A R R I A G E right, number two, Holly, marriage
M A R R I A G E
Yes
Yeah
er, it's silly isn't it?
You've got that right and you've got carriage wrong and yet the only difference is the first letter  right?
Yeah
So you should know how to spell carriage another time, it's exactly the same as marriage
Mm
starting with a C instead of an M, number three Lucy, Tuesday
T U E S D A Y
I hope that's not what you've put 
What did I say?
You said T U E S D A Y, I hope you've put a capital T U E S D A Y 
Yeah I have 
She has 
She has, right, okay, good  erm  Holly Wednesday
Capital W E D N E S D A Y
Yes 
Yes 
right, good
Look what I've done
er number five Lucy family
F A M L I Y
No, Holly
F A M I l Y
Right F A M I L Y
Oh I've must of gone in
family, family, not famliy 
Family , family
Family, that's what you did you pronounced it famliy
Family
It's family
 
Number six 
People
Holly, people
P E O P L E
Yeah
Right, P E O P L E, number seven Lucy clothes
C L O T H E S
Right
Yeah
C L O T H E S, number eighty sevel several, Holly
S E V I R I A L
I don't think so, Lucy
S E V E R A L
Right S E V E R A L several, got it Holly?
Yeah
Number nine Lucy, disgusting
D I S G U S T I N G
Right D I S G U S T I N G
Yeah
and number ten Holly special
S P E C I A L
Right S P E C I A L 
Yeah, yeah 
Good, right number eleven Lucy woollen
W O L L E N
No, Holly
W O O L E N
No it's, it's W O O 
W O O L L E N 
L L E N
Oh I thought it was
W O O L L E N
Woollen
but it's not double U O O L L E N 
Er
so you could say that it's not double U
Double you
double L E N, it's double U, double O, double L, E N 
double you, double you 
Right if you think of that double U, then you've got to double the O and you've got to double the L
double you
Right, so number twelve horrily, Holly, huh
Horrily
Oh that was horrible wasn't it?
Right erm merrily
M E R R I L Y
Right M E R R I L Y, yes
Yeah
Number thirteen Lucy, heaviest
H haitch, do what, how do?
H
H I said that first didn't I?
You did
Well done 
H where am I, H E A V I E S T
Right H E A V 
Yeah 
H 
I E S T, yes
I like to H it
H
I like to
 
I don't , I don't know why
H
pardon?
H is
Holly
Holly
H capital H O double L Y
Holly do you say Holly?
You don't say
You don't say olly 
H 
you don't say olly, no Holly, Holly 
H Holly 
and it's aitch not haitch
H O L L I E is my name
aitch, Holly 
I don't know why you say aitch and your brother says haitch 
I say aitch 
Becky says haitch she says
no it's, but it's, the, it's the name of the letter
 
which is pronounced aitch
Aitch
Says haitch
haitch, O, I felt, you wouldn't be able to pronounce Holly's her, her name with an aitch would you?
Haitch
Has to be an haitch, Holly
Oh no Holly
Ho, ho
Holly, Holly that is how you pronounce the aitch, there is no other way to pronounce the aitch 
You don't say 
Holly
I can't twirl a baton
Right let's go on
doesn't matter 
Number fourteen Holly abrupt
A B R U P D
P?
T 
T 
T A B R U 
You didn't get that right Holly
P T
I have, I put a T but I said D
Oh, that's alright then isn't it?
Yes Lucy it is, right number fifteen Lucy easier
E A S I E R
Right E A S I E R, sixteen Holly succeed
S U C C E D
Lucy
S U C S C E D
No
Mm, mm
it is S U C C E E D
Double E D?
Yes, S U C C E E D
Succeed
Succeed
Succeed
and you say nothing succeeds like success and number seventeen is success and how do you spell success
Erm
I know 
Lucy 
how to spell it, but I don't think you spell it like that, I know how to spell it
How did you spell it?
I spelt it S U C S E E D
No how, how, how did you 
but I know how to 
spell it Holly?
S U C C yes
Well, well it is S U C C
E double S
E double S
Er 
Succeed is S U C C E E D, but success is S U double C E double S 
My hair's all cut off there
Pardon?
My hair's all cut off there
Your hair's all cut off 
That's really interesting 
Yes
It doesn't look cut off to me, it looks as if it's all there
 
Mm 
Right, number eighteen Holly material
M A T E R I A L
Right
Yep
M A T E R I A L number nineteen Lucy wither
W I T H E R
W I T H 
Yeah 
E R right and twenty Holly, easiest
E A S I E S T
Right E A S I E S T
Yeah, yeah
Okay?
Is it me?
No 
No it's not, I was just thinking I've, I must run that, right number twenty one, occupy Lucy
O no it's Holly isn't it?
No it's Lucy
Oh it is me isn't it?
O double, O double C U P Y
Right
Yeah
O double C U P Y er twenty two Holly accept
A double C E P T
Yep
A double C E P T right, number twenty three language Lucy 
Oh it's me L A N U A G E
No
Oh
Holly
L A N G U A N G, no L A N G U A G E
Right L A N G 
Yeah I've got it right 
U A G E
I'm glad I got that one right actually 
L A N G U A G E language er number twenty four Holly receive
R E C E I V E
Right R E C E I V E yes Lucy
No C
R E C E I V E
I miss the second E out
Er number twenty five believe Lucy
B E I L I V E
No Holly
B E L I E V E
Right B E L I E V E believe B E L I E V E  number twenty six wreck Holly
R, no W R E C K
Right W R E C K yes Lucy?
No
W R E C K
I put an A instead of a C
Wreck W R E C K that would be wreak
You silly wreak
Number twenty seven Lucy entirely
E N T I R L E Y
No, Holly
E N T I R E L Y
That's right
Oh that's what I've got, don't why I said it
E N T I R
You missed the E R
You haven't got an E in there anyway
Oh I thought you said
E N T I R 
Oh right 
E L Y right 
I thought you , I didn't hear you say N T
E N T I R E L Y  twenty eight Holly grieve
G R I E V E
Lucy have you got that?
I'm not too sure
G R I E V E 
G R I E V E 
No
G R I E V E  G R I E V E twenty nine instantly Lucy
I N S T A N T L Y
Right
Yeah
I N S T A N T L Y and number thirty Holly occurred
I haven't got that right actually
You haven't?
No
I N S T A N T L Y, what did you have?
E, I N S T E A T L Y
Oh, right I N S T A N T it's instant, =stant S T A N T L Y so Holly got that one wrong
Yeah
Right number thirty Holly occurred
O double C U double R E D
Right, Lucy, yes?
O double
O double C U double R E D, O double C U double R E D
Mm
occurred, right?
Yeah
Right thirty one, Lucy curious
C U R I O U S
Right
Yeah
C U R I O U S
Yeah
Number thirty two worthy Holly
W O R T H Y
Right
Yeah
W O R T H Y, number thirty three Lucy moisture
M O I S T U R E
Yeah
Right M O I S T U R E, thirty four Holly surrender
S U double R E N D E R
S U double R E N D E R
Yeah
Right Lucy
Yeah
Er thirty five lucy anxious
A N X O erm I U S
Say that again
A N X O I U S
No Holly
A N X I O U S
Right A N X I O U S  A N X I O U S  thirty six building Holly
B U I L D I N G
Yeah
Right B U I L D I N G thirty seven Lucy naturally
N A T U R A double L Y
Yeah 
Yes N A T U R A double L Y thirty eight disappeared Holly
D I S A double P E A R E D
Yeah
Right, good, thirty nine Lucy companion
C O M P A N I O N
Good
Yeah
companion and lastly number forty crooked Holly
C R O C K E D
No, that's crocked
Oh
Lucy
That's I, I've got the same
You've got the same?
Yeah
How do you spell a crook?
A shepherd's crook 
C R 
C R 
double O K
Right
Oh
so crooked is C R double K E D 
E D 
crooked
 

Oh god thirty three
Twenty six
Yeah, Lucy's got twenty six and you've got thirty 
Thirty three
thirty three, now I've missed one out, you  the first one you both got wrong was carriage
Yeah
What was the next one you both got wrong?
Ma marriage, no I got marriage right
No carriage I said
Oh carriage
Yeah, now what was the next one you got wrong?
I got family wrong 
Oh I got several
Yeah what's the next one you got wrong?
Woollen
Yeah woollen yeah 
Right, did , did you not get nothing wrong before woollen?
Between carriage and woollen?
I got several 
I got family 
Several wrong
Yeah
I got that right and I got family wrong
And I got several 
Wait a moment, okay so let me get, who got several right?
Me did
You got it right Holly got several wrong and Lucy got family wrong
Yeah
that makes it wrong 
And I got family right
that makes it wrong, so Lucy's twenty six and Holly's thirty three again Holly's thirty three 
I think thirty three's my lucky number 
but Lucy that's four less than the last time  so that, have, have you got them all written down your corrections?
Yeah
Right, well please make sure this time you really go to work on those as well, now we've got thirty three to have haven't we, now just let's have a look at that and make sure that you
Picnic, picnic 
know all the words that they all make sense to you picnic yes
Yeah 
Yeah 
arithmetic, flood, wooden
Yeah 
Yeah 
else, farewell, saucer, aunt, pencil, ocean, colour, clumsy, holy, navy, losing
Yeah
then going down the next list September, chief, successful
Yeah
soldier, Australia, reached, thief, foolish, pearl, zone
Mm
Erm a place like the next zone
The next zone
The next zone 
yes zone , right malaria
A goose
goose, thieves, acre
An acre of land
an acre of land, deny, debt, geese, machine, prayer, New Zealand and doubt 
Doubt yeah
Alright, so learn those but also learn the ones that you got wrong this time, you've got, you had one, two, three, four, five, six there, one after the after, in fact you had seven almost in that list there, and they're the ones you've really got to learn Lucy, right, right, so let's erm
Read a story
let's hear the stories read, I think first of all you can call
Lucy's is shorter than mine
heads or tails?
Tails
Tails so if it's tails you read it first
I don't care who reads first really, but never mind
It's heads
Holly mine isn't 
I, I get to read first or second?
mine isn't shorter than yours 
You read first 
Oh I wanna read second
so you read first right
mine isn't shorter than yours
Is it
No, no, no, right we won't argue 
mine's five pages 
about it
Yeah but that's them, they're like that
Well I don't care
So nice and slowly, don't rush it, read it so that I can understand it nice and clearly, sshh, listen
Yeah sshh
Right 
Oh what am I doing?
What's it called?
The Riverside Murder
The Riverside Murder, right on you go
It was Friday the thirteenth at midnight, the moon was full and shining brightly.
Jane Hall had booked into the Riverside Hotel, she walked over to the reception desk and rang the bell, hello I'm Jane Hall I've booked a weekend stay here, ah yes Miss Hall if you would just like to sign here, here's your key, your room is six floors up, third on the right, have a nice stay.
She took the lift up to the sixth floor and came to the room one O nine, which was her room, as she entered she noticed cobwebs and dampness on the walls, she flung her bed, bags on the bed and went downstairs to supper, after her supper she went to report, she went to the reception desk to report the cobwebs and dampness, she rang the bell a few times but no one answered, she was just about to go back to her room when she heard Mr Sandy the receptionist in the back room talking to her assistant, I put the body in Miss Hall's wardrobe, Jane ran upstairs and sure enough there was a body, Jane rang the police then straight away, please could you come to the Riverside Hotel, there's something I think you should see, there was a knock at the door and Mr Sandy answered it, hello, oh hello we've just had phone call from here, are you sure this is the right hotel?
Yes, well I didn't call, but I did said Jane, well you leave, well I'll leave you to it said Mr Sandy, if you would come upstairs, the policeman and Jane entered her room, please look in the cupboard, I think we've got a case Sarge, do you mind if I make a quick phone call?
Go ahead, hello is Sergeant Briggs there please, if you would just hold for a minute, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, hello this is Sergeant Briggs who's calling?
Sergeant it's P C Garfield, Sergeant Huddersfield and myself are at the Riverside Hotel, we've just found a body in Miss Hall's wardrobe room one O nine, well could you describe him?
He's about six foot two, short black hair, moustache, blue eyes and according to his record card he's twenty seven and his name is John Banks and he lives at 36 Church Hill Road, Upper Tracey, and we think he's been shot, I'll be right over, stay where you are.
About fifteen minutes later Sergeant Briggs entered Jane's room, we'll take him back to the station and tomorrow we'll go around and ask a few questions.
Oh by the way Miss Hall do you know anything, said P C Garfield, well said Jane I wasn't going to tell, but I think Mr Sandy and their assistant knows something about it, because about twelve thirty this morning I was going to report about the cobwebs and dampness on the walls and I heard Mr Sandy and his assistant talking in the back room.
Well just that they had put the body in my wardrobe, that's a start thanks.
The next day the policeman went where Mr Banks lived and they rang the bell, hello, hello are you Mrs Banks?
Yes, yes I am.
Well we've got some bad news about your son John, oh I think you'd better come in.
Well what have you got to tell me about John?
I'm afraid, I'm afraid, no, I am very sorry to tell you this but your son has been murdered said Sergeant Briggs, murdered, but how?
He was shot, John my poor John, what am I going to tell his wife?
He was married?
Yes to a Mrs Stow before, I'm sorry we have to tell you like this, anyway do you know why he came to the hotel?
Yes he had booked there for a week, I think it was for a business meeting with Mr Sandy, that's all I know.
Mr Sandy, are you sure said P C Garfield?
Yes he's the receptionist there isn't he?
Yes he is, you've been a lot of help, thanks.
At midday Sergeant Briggs and P C Garfield went back to the Riverside Hotel to talk to Mr Sandy.
Do you know anything about Mr Bank's death said Sergeant Briggs?
No, yes you do, don't lie, I heard you yesterday morning, twelve thirty, you were talking to your assistant in the, about you put the body in my wardrobe said Jane, okay I know something, in fact I know a lot more than all of you.
I know who did it.
Who said P C Garfield?
Ah but that would be telling, just tell us said Jane, you really want to know don't you?
Look stop playing games and tell us said Sergeant Brigg, okay it was me said Mr Sandy.
I could of guessed said P C Garfield, but why?
Well I was having an affair with his wife and I loved her so much I wanted to marry her, I wanted his land and his money, so I thought if he was out of the way it would be easier to get what I wanted and of course it was.
I hope you know how many years you'll get for this said P C Garfield, of course I do I'm not stupid.
Well if you come with me sir, I think it's gonna be about eighteen years for you mate, said Sergeant Briggs, thanks for all your work Jane, that's alright Sarge, a quiet weekend that's all I wanted, some weekend this has turned out to be said Jane 
Very good, right, good, let's hear yours
I'll just read this bit 
and we'll talk about it later on, yes go on.
If you Liz, Elizabeth pretending to be Jessica or is Elizabeth really Elizabeth.
Chapter one, Elizabeth
was sitting comfortably on a low branch on a tall pine tree in the Wakefield's back garden, she had her knees up round her chin and was leaning against the trunk, this was Elizabeth's thinking seat, the place that she went to be alone, there was a lot to think about, tomorrow Mrs, Mr Davis her form teacher would announce the winner of the class essay contest.
Elizabeth had written about saving the world and she thought her essay had a chance of winning, the prize was a year's subscription to the winner's favourite magazine.
Elizabeth was going to subscribe to the mysteries around the world, she loved reading Amanda Howard mysteries, but she was also looking forward to tomorrow because it was the first of April, April fool day, April fools day.
The day went, her and her sister, her twin sister, Jessica, did their annual April fools day joke, they 
Elizabeth had won the essay competition and was just about to stand up when Jessica got up  and she walked  up to Mr   and she asked  and he asked her what magazine she wanted for the year  and she said Rock Seventeen  Jessica knew what magazine Elizabeth wanted and she just said Rock Seventeen.
Then she had to stay behind and got Jessica's detention  and was late for her next lesson  and got another  detention  for running in the main building.
But the trouble was they were both at the same time after school where she was meant to be decorating the hall for the disco after school that night.
Then, she got Jessica's C for her cooking class instead of the A Jessica got off hers.
But, after school she went to her detention with Mr   and course, the note said  going to the dentist, sudden toothache.
So she went to  her other detention and there was another note saying, had to pick up my child from school.
So, she went to decorate the hall and got sent out with people saying  she was Jessica.
Elizabeth slammed the kitchen door and dropped her  bag.
What's wrong said Jessica?
So Elizabeth told her everything that had happened today  and after half an hour they decided to tell everyone what the they had done at the disco that night.
So that night, at the disco  they told them and at last they believed them  and sorted out the magazine thing and changed the magazine to  Mysteries from Around the World.
And then, they changed the cookery marks.
And Jessica said, I'll race to the cake  and the twins were back to normal .
Mm!
Now  right!
Well I am going to have to look at them both.
And see if I, I like them both.
There's, there's a lot of work gone into those .
Erm  i if I'm honest I think I found  Holly's easier to understand  on a first reading  but that may be because I think perhaps read it.
Perhaps, in a slightly more clearer way than you did.
That doesn't mean that yours isn't as good.
So I, what I want to do now, and I have do eve take time to do it, I can't do it just now when you're here.
But I want to look at them both  and I will go through them as well and mark them for spelling and for  for your punctuation and everything else.
But, really you both put a tremendous amount of work in!
They're great!
Can I just say something?
Yeah.
Cos, didn't gonna say  know when Jessica  got up  cos I've got pretend  erm got up  for the erm 
So what's it?
What is it?
It's April Fool.
Yeah, it's April Fool's 
Yeah.
day.
Er, what they do, every year they switch identities e , Jessica pretends to be Elizabeth, and Elizabeth pretends to be Jessica  but, this year they don't do that cos tha all their friends like know  and, this year cos their teachers and things still think that they're erm  so , they swapped identities they like, give detention and things to the wrong people and  stuff like that.
And, when Jessica gets up to do  get the magazine it's cos Mr  told her but course she thought it was Je , erm Elizabeth but she wa wasn't  so
What's D T?
That's detention.
She went to her detention, I see!
Right.
So we just sort of say  essay, D T to show what I mean.
Yeah.
Well  well yes we used to get  used to get detention, yes, but erm  the thing we used to get more than anything else  was pink paper.
Mm?
Did you have to take it home to your parents?
Pink paper
To show that you've 
was 
been naughty?
Pink paper was a foolscap sheet of paper like  like that
Mm.
but it was pink!
Pink!
And if you had to do  if you had, say, three sheets of pink paper because you've been naughty and done something wrong, you had to fill three sides of pink foolscap paper with writing.
You might have to write an essay or you do copy writing on the pa , do three sheets of pink paper, you had to three sheets of writing!
And it was pink paper  and at the top it had space for your parent's signature so that when you've done the work your parents had to 
Mm.
sign it so they'd know if you'd had pink paper.
What erm 
That was the, that was the worst, that was the pink paper, and then 
what we normally have to do.
you got  yo would have to take and hour or take two hours, or take three hours and if you take up to three hours  or if you got three separate hours  that was detention  and if we were in our in the junior part of the school  in the first three forms  erm, you then had to go into school on Saturday morning.
In the senior school we had to go into school Saturday morning anyway!
And you had Wednesday 
We we 
afternoon off.
No, we didn't!
We we worked  Monday to Saturday 
Our when my 
morning.
When my 
We had games on Wednesday afternoon but we had, in the senior school 
When my
we had school on Saturday morning as well as the rest of the week!
My erm  my dad's mum, they used to go to school Monday, Tuesday  Wednesday morning, have Wednesday afternoon off, all day Thursday, all day Friday and Saturday morning!
But they would have Wednesday afternoon off.
Oh!
Right.
For some reason !
Okay.
So we've got a little time left.
Erm  let's  have a look at your  English  these English progress papers.
Okay.
Because, I want to do a little bit of that  erm  we are going 
Ah!
what page are we on now?
We started something last week.
, I mean I've finished that.
Yes, what paper was that?
The  Locuses.
About the Locusts.
What page was that?
I don't know.
I don't know.


Here it is!
Here's the page.
Page twenty eight.
Page twenty eight.
That's right.
Now, how far did we get with that?
Erm, we finished the bit about the locusts.
Right.
So 
Ten to five.
Okay.
Number eight  we've got to do.
I think.
Look, look!
Look!
Yes.
Number eight.
I think you hold it right at the end.
Do you?
Do this don't you?
Oh you do don't you?
Did we mark it?
No.
The 
Did we not mark it?
They're all ma they're alright though.
Cos we didn't  
Cos we but we didn't the last one?
So right!
Okay.
So we'll go on to page  that page twenty eight, number eight.
If you'd like to do it now and then we'll mark it.
Number eight?
Number eight.
Paper over 
Oh!
there.
Yes!
Underline the correct answer in the brackets.
So write it down, don't underline it.
Just write the, write the sentence down.
How do you write it though?
You gotta choose the correct one.
Mm.
This should be very apt from what you've just been doing.
Mm!
My, am I, am I an author now?
I don't know.
Mm?
That might well be mightn't it?
 
I know I'm, no I'm just coming to sort you out because  as you say you did that with Mrs .
So, you haven't done this yet?
I've done that  Terry.
Right.
Wait for Lucy to do it  and then we'll read it out.
Oh!
Ooh ooh ooh!
Don't think, the spelling's wrong.
Yes I have!
Cos I  I'm usually a good speller!
One of these.
Over to dad and Becky.
Oh, she's terrible!
Mm.
Doesn't know how to spell scene!
Does she not?
No, she 
No.
i , when we have like, something like scene one she puts S double E N!
Mm.
Oh!
She doesn't know how to spell having.
She goes, she puts erm, A, hey, no H, H A V E I N G!
She's useless at spelling!
Right , so what have you got there?
Well now, it should a be a person who writes books is
An.
An.
An!
Oh!
An author.
Mm.
An author.
Why do you put an instead of a?
Because it's got a vowel!
Because author 
A vowel.
comme , starts with an A, right, a vowel.
Right, number nine.
So do number nine.
Mhm!
Oh!
So what have you got?
It's a journalist.
Journalist.
A person who writes articles for a newspaper is a journalist.
For a newspaper is a journalist .
Journalist!
Good!
Right!
Number ten then.
When he breaks   Oh sorry I didn't mean to 
It's when 
 
we break into a house to steal  is called a
It's called  it's called a prisoner!
Mm mm .
Do you know the story  o , first of all I was gonna write about fairground  about a erm  ghost 
Ghost 
train  then I thought, no, I wouldn't write that.
Then I was gonna write about  a hotel  you know, erm Heartbreak Hotel  thought no, wouldn't write about that.
Want something exciting, so I thought a murder !


Yes.
So it's a burglar, right?
B U R G L A R. 
A murder.
E actually yours made me think of a story that I was told many years ago on a coach trip over Dartmoor
Mm.
when a lady who lived on Dartmoor for many, many years  erm  was telling  stories of things that had actually happened
True?
to her.
Well, for instance, that she lived in a in an old vicarage, cos her husband had been a  a, no a tri , priest in the Church of England and er  we her house was haunted  and she was telling us stories and sh she quite often saw the ghost, she was never worried, she never  cos it never frightened her it wasn't vicious or anything like that and she often saw it  quite matter of fact .
As a matter of fact, she often saw this ghost.
But, she was telling the story of a man who was travelling over the moor  and it was many years ago   on horseback  and er he  was completely lost and wan , it was getting dark and he wanted to  stay somewhere for the night  and he sort of travelled and couldn't see anywhere and eventually down a long drive he saw a house wi , blazing with lights  so he went down this house  and er, all the windows were alight, you know  were lit up  and he knocked at the door and knocked at the door, and knocked at the door and couldn't get any answer, no one ever came to the door  so in desperation he thought well this is no good!
So he went back up onto the main road and very little further on, in fact, he in fact found a village  and spent the night at the hostelry  and he said to the man in the hostelry  you know,he that he'd been lost and that a  a little bit back on the road he'd seen this big house all alight and he had erm, you know, gone in the drive and tried to get  get a room there but  couldn't make anybody hear  and the erm  the inn keeper said, no he said er  you wouldn't make anyone hear there, he said and if you go back there tomorrow  the house won't be there!
And he went back  and it wasn't!
Weird!


Why not?
It had gone!
What a ghost made it?
Yeah.
I like, I love 
Told a lot of ghost stories, yes!
I love listening 
in my  
to ghost stories in Dartmoor.
Oh I know this really  story!
Go on then.
Right, it's about this erm  lady, I'll make it that she lived on Dartmoor with her erm grandson  erm  and her  moth and he sa daughter and she is a gran , she was a grandlady  a grandmother.
A grandlady !
And erm, they lived in this little cottage and erm  every night erm  the moth , she would always stay up really late and the mother and erm her son would go to bed  and she would always go out of this erm  go out of the house  every night and she would go, cos she had these three fingers which were blades
Oh!
you know like Freddy Kruger  three fingers that looked like blades  and every night she would go to erm  the fields  and erm  she would go into sheep fields and cow fields and she would kill three sheep and a cow every night  except for a Sunday night!
Every morning farmers would come and they would see this claw mark  on the neck of these  of their sheep and their cows and they were, they were quite worried cos all their sheep and cows were like dying every night!
They were quite worried about it.
And so they went to report to the, to the police  but and th I mean they didn't believe them, they thought it was just like birds.
And erm  and  she kept doing this for ages  and erm  she was, she was sta starting to get worried because people might believe, find out that it was her  and so after she killed a cow, she took out all of i , all it's insides and hid in it and no one ever found her!
Oh dear!
Terrible!
And then, she 
Ooh!
Ooh!
she was
It's horrible isn't it?
And then she hid inside this cow!
Mm!
And she killed it!
?
Right!
I think  we'd 
Ha.
better leave it at that hadn't we?
Will you  before you come to me next time
Mhm.
finish down to  number twenty eight?
And learn those spellings?
Right?
So that's going to be page twenty eight and twenty nine.
Okay, learn your spellings!
Now, I'll have to talk to your mums but it may well be  that  I shan't be here in a fortnight's time so we may 
Oh!
have to put things back a week.
Okay.
But we'll  we'll think about that  nearer the time.
Alright?
Okay.
 Okey-doke And you'll leave your compositions with me and I will look up, and if I can get the marks before then as I probably will  I'll let you have them back.
Okay?
Okay.
Right!
So, one more week to go and then you've got a holiday.
Yes !
Ha hum!
At last!
Yeah, that's right.
Right?
Bye bye girls!
Bye bye!
Ballet now.
Cor you got ballet now have you?
Yes we
Hello Adrian!
Alright?
Yes thanks.
So  all set for a break tomorrow?
Yeah.
Thank you.
Have I got to give your mummy change this time?
Er  yeah.
It looks like it 
Oh yeah.
doesn't it?
I'll go and get some.
I know, right.
That's alright.
That's fine.
Erm  right!
What book are we on?
Four A.
It's alright, this is erm, yours.
Yeah, I know I was looking for the erm  oops!
Now  right!
So how have we got on with that?
Er ah, I did some at home but we haven't done any booklet work this week.
You haven't done any booklet work?
Okay.
Because we've been doing Pythagoras theorem.
Oh have you?
Yeah.
I'll just show you what we've been doing.
Yeah.
Show us what you've been doing.
You understand it?
Yeah  well sort of!
We're erm  that's the booklet I'm on at the moment.
What's this one?
I haven't seen this one.
Oh!
It's  it's er  
?
Yeah.
Did that yu , yesterday.
Not all that.
Is that from here?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Work from that.
And an an the the sheets.
And now  I've just started  this.
I'm gonna finish the end of C six for homework, and I'm on C six A.
And that's what we've been doing, all about it.
Right.
Okay?
Yeah.
So do you wanna finish that now?
Yeah please.
Right, okay.
I I knew that erm  I uns , I sa understand some of it but some of it I find a bit hard to understand  like  this bit, it says  be careful, sometimes the unknown side is  is the longest side and sometimes it is not.
But I thi , I I can't, I know that you have to take it away.
Yes but  the thing is this  in a right angle triangle
Mm.
the longest side is called what?
Cos it 
The hypotenuse.
The hypotenuse, right!
So the longer side is always the hypotenuse.
Yeah.
Right?
Now, what is the formula  for your Pythagoras theorem?
The sum of the erm I do I don't, I know, my dad's taught me a different one to Miss , she  she taught me that erm  i the, oh hang on!
It's back here.
I got a new book today so  but  she taught that is was  ha!
Erm, if I can find it!
The right angle triangle.
The areas and squares on the  two short sides  add together to equal the area on the square of the hypotenuse.
Right!
The square on the hypotenuse
Yeah.
equals the sum of the squares on the other two sides.
Yeah.
The square on the hypotenuse  equals the sum of the squares on the other two sides.
Okay.
Alright?
Yeah.
And the squ hypotenuse is always the longest side.
It's the side opposite the right angle.
Mhm.
So  there's your right angle  that is the hypotenuse and the square on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares, that's the su , the area of that square and the area of that square add together the sum of the squares on the other two sides.
Okay.
Alright?
The square on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides.
So  what they're saying is this  that  the square on that side
Mm.
is thirty six, so what's the length of that side?
Erm  that must be  nine.
No!
Sorry!
Aha.
What then?
The square root of thirty six.
What two numbers amount to  
Six.
That's right.
So the  that side must be six centimetres
Yeah.
The square is six times six which is thirty six.
That is four square centimetres.
Mm.
It's four centimetres and the square is sixteen  so, what must be the area of that square?
Twenty.
Twenty.
Right!
So you've got to find what number multiplied together makes twenty.
Mm.
So it's going to, the length of that side is going to be the 
So you square the root of twenty.
Find the square root of twenty  don't you?
You find the square root of twenty.
That's right.
And how do you find the square root of twenty?
Just  use that.
You'll use that yes!
Mm mm.
Aren't you lucky?
Mm.
Because I  we never had sa we never had erm  calculators.
Wha what did you have to do then?
So you had to find the square root of by  ar either  arithmetic  by 
Mm.
doing in an arithmetic way or you had to use a sca , a log table.
You had to use log tables.
You had to use this sort of thing  like find it   up in a mess hasn't it?
Erm  I had to go to a table like that  which said square roots  and I had to look up  twenty
It's got on the back actually.
Back of this book.
Square roots  twe 
Oh yeah.
square root is twenty  and it's four point four seven two one.
Yeah, square root.
That's right.
But, as you say you can use this


Which one do you push now?
That one.
That's right.
Four point four seven two.
Yeah.
So, you know, that's  well the way you do it.
So th that's how you find that.
So now when you got these  three here
I've done these.
You've done those have you?
Yeah, look.
Here are.
Well let's see that you got them right shall we?
Six five A.
So, this one  you've got twenty five  equals  nine  plus some number.
Right?
Mhm.
So, that is going to be  sixteen isn't it?
Yeah.
No it isn't.
Yes it is!
Yes it is, sixteen.
So, what's that gonna be?
Sixteen to erm, square root of sixteen 
Sixteen 
is four.
Four.
So that's 
 
gonna be four.
So, C five A, have you got four?
Yeah.
Yes you have.
Right.
Now, B  again, that  the square root of that  is going to equal the square root of that  plus the square root of that.
So you've got sixteen
Mm.
Or rather, sixty four  e eighty one  equals  sixty four  plus some number.
So, sixty four from eighty one
Gives you  six which is erm, seventeen so it's 
Gives you 
er seventeen.
Gives you seventeen.
So now, for the answer to that one 
The square root of seventeen.
you want the square root of seventeen  which is four point one two.
Right!
Mm.
So C  again, you've got eleven elevens, what are eleven elevens?
Er  a hundred and twenty one.
A hundred and twenty one  equals thirty six, plus some number.
Mm.
So what is a hundred and twenty one less thirty six?
Erm  er  is it  six erm  erm si 
Eighty five.
eighty five, sorry.
Have you got eighty five?
The square root of eighty five?
Yes, you have!
Er, the square root of eighty five, that sounds reasonable so I would assume that's right.
D  you've got sixty four  equals 
Mhm.
twenty five plus some number, so what's that?
Thirty nine?
Yeah.
The square root of thirty nine which is  obviously reasonable so that's alright.
Right!
So how's 
Mm.
C six?
And you can't do C six?
So that, those are alright?
Yes, you can mar , well yes you can do.
They're wrong, aren't they?
I'll mark them right.
Why don't you tick it neatly?
I do!
As I've said before!
You don't.
Okay then.
No, it's alright!
Leave 
Yeah.
it now but erm
Oh that's alright?
that's , you know, you should erm  Okay!
So you're going to do C six.
I will do them while you do them.
Okay.
Cos I
Is that the hypotenuse?
Yes?
Which is the hypotenuse?
That one?
Which one?
The opposite one to the right angle.
Right.
So it's that one.
Right!
So, so it must be  it is  erm can I write it down on here?
I'll tell you what  write it down on paper and then you can copy it into your book when you know you've got it right.
How about that?
Hang on a sec !
Five point three nine.
Right!
I'll settle for that.
Is that right, the way I've done it?
By the way, I I did that so I did  area of square along the side.
Well I mean you've got the right answer so erm
Shall I just write  shall I copy it in?
Yes, what have you done?
Erm  five  equals twenty five  mm?
Five doesn't equal twenty five.
Five fives are twenty five!
You haven't got five times, you've got five equals twenty five.
Five square equals twenty five!
That's what I've been doing  I meant  I mean that!
 Yahhh But if you write that  look!
Five equals twenty five  is not true!
Five squared equals twenty five  yes!
Okay then.
Right?
Yeah.
Be very precise.
But you shouldn't ever write five equals twenty five cos it doesn't!
Okay then.
You mean five squared, you mean five times five equals twenty five  you're looking for five squared, so that's the right thing to write!
Alright?
Okay.
That is the hypotenuse isn't it?
That there?
Yes.
Mhm.
C  Do you do ninety nine take twenty five?
Which one are we doing?
B.
Erm  I'm gonna do 
What have you got?
Er 
You've got  you've got nine nines are eighty one, nine squared equals eighty, nine squared equals 
Ah so 
what?
Eighty one equals  nine !
Ah  pa cha cha cha cha cha Right.
Five squared equals twenty five  right  now what have you got to do?
Nine into ninety  erm eight in  eighty one take  twenty five.
That's right.
So   erm   that'll be se fifty five  fifty, fifty six.
Right.
So then you square root it?
That's right.
Seven point four eight.
Right.
Is it a hundred take nine?
That's right.
Is the last one eight nine four?
Eight hundred and ninety four?
Mm.
What's the square root of eighty?
Eight point nine four two.
That's better!
Yeah.
Right, eight point nine four.
What did you get the other one?
Nine point eight O.
Right.
That's right.
Alright but  just wondering  why you've got this book.
She gave it to us.
All of you?
Yeah.
It's like, we do a bit of it each night  and it's over two weeks.
The last bit we did was  only the small numbers.
That  or wi with that.
Oh.
An an we're just working through it as a class and that.
Are you?
Yeah.
And we didn't  we didn't do our booklets this week.
Well this, you see  this is the interesting thing because that   hum   What's that in?
I've, I've just been dealing with that  in a booklet.
Mm.
If I could erm  only remember which booklet it was.
Erm  That pa that page  or was it?
No, perhaps it wasn't a booklet.
Perhaps it wasn't a booklet.
I'm just wondering why, cos someone's been dealing with that
Yeah.
just this week.
No!
I can't, I'll have to find it some other time but er  right yellow book two, let's have a look yellow book two.
No!
I'll leave it.
 
Right!
Er, so now what  erm
Do you wanna do some  erm 
Have you done that booklet?
booklet?
This bo , I haven't finished it.
Erm you, have you done any on it?
Yes.
Right, let's mark what you've done.
That goes with that.
You do this in your school book do you?
Yeah.
Right, that's right.
That's right.
Shall I tick it?
Can do if you want.
That's right.
Is this all right?
Well er yes, A five is on  the answer is on the erm  back cover of your book.
Is A four alright?
A four's alright, yeah.
Now loo , look on the, no no, wait a moment!
Look on the back cover of your booklet  inside the back cover.
Right, that's alright.
They're alright.
That's right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Are they all right?
Mhm.
Right.
Shall we co continue with that or do you want
You can do if you want.
Is that  but you're doing that at school are you as well?
Yeah.
Right okay.
So B six.
Er,one to mark here.
Yep.
This one.
Well, I think perhaps  what we'll do cos you've missed quite a few of these out so I think what we'll do  erm is to  leave that  what you're doing there for a moment  we'll go through this  mark this  and the one's you haven't done we'll do  so that you've got this one straight.
Okay?
Okay.
There's only one I didn't do.
That one.
Oh yes!
So there is.
Well, well anyway we'll do do that and see  see what the other's like.
You've been caught!
Right!
This one  posts are erected at a hundred metre intervals on a motorway, how many posts are there in a distance of four thousand seven hundred kilometres?
Twenty seven.
No.
As I say, you have been caught  in a little trap!
Posts are erected
Forty sev six posts.
posts are erected every hundred metres, right?
Mm.
There's a hundred metres  there's two hundred metres  there's three hundred metres  how many posts in three hundred metres?
Four.
Sorry!
Mm.
Yeah.
Right.
Because at no metres there's one post  and at the end of a hundred metres you've got  two posts  so you got one post more
So it must be forty six.
distance.
That's what I say, forty eight.
Forty eight  right!
Got it?
Always 
Okay.
be wary of that.
And the same thing applies  posts are a hundred metres apart.
Mm.
If you are at the fifth post  how far have you gone from the start?
Six hundred metres.
How far have you gone from the start?
Four hundred.
Right!
Fifth post, one, two, three, four, five  the fifth post  you have gone four hundred metres.
Oh.
So  wherever you get that sort of question  just stop and think
Okay.
because it's either one more or it's one less.
The only  time  that that doesn't apply  is if you are thinking in terms of posts in a fence around a square field or round a circular field.
Okay.
Because now  after one hundred metres you've got two posts  after two hundred metres you've got three posts, after three hundred metres you got four posts, after four hundred metres you've got five posts  but after you've five hundred metres you've only got five posts cos that one doubles up.
Yeah.
So you got one, two, three, four, five spaces and you got one, two, three, four, five, posts
Mhm.
but on a straight line  your 
Yeah.
spaces are one less than the number of posts.
Alright?
Okay.
So  just remember that.
That's why I said you have been caught!
That's a ste , one of those little trap questions.
Yeah.
Now this one, four hedges together have a mass of two hundred grams  how many have a mass of two and ha ?
Which page?
Eighty two.
Found that quickly didn't you?
Er  percentages is it?
Yeah.
Right.
E one.
Have you looked at this?
Let's have a look at it.
B's height is sixty percent of A side.
There's B  and it's sixty percent of A  C's height  is a hundred and twenty percent of A's height.
There's a hundred percent  so a hundred and twenty it means it's more  than A's height.
If C's height was a hundred percent of A's height  it means it was exactly the same.
If it's less than a hundred it's smaller  if it's more than a hundred  it's greater.
Now the decimal equivalent of hundred and twenty  is one point two  and there you've got nought and nought  a hundred and one  so ninety percent is point nine, eighty percent is point eight  and a hundred and ten percent is one point one, and a hundred and twenty percent is one point two.
So what you're doing, in fact  is to  if you've got a hundred and twenty  percent  if you divide that by  of a hundred  in other words, you move your decimal point two places  that's a decimal.
So a hundred and twenty percent  as a decimal fraction is one  point two.
All you do  is to  move that decimal point two places.
Alright?
So  to calculate a hundred and twenty percent of amount  to calculate a hundred and twenty percent of an amount you multiply  by  one point two.
If you wanted to calculate  eighty percent of an amount  you would multiply by point eight.
A hundred and twenty percent you are multiplying by the decimal equivalent which is one point two.
So write down  decimal equivalent of a hundred and forty percent.
That's right.
Now calculate a hundred and forty percent  of seven point five  kilogrammes.
Have you got a, you've got a calculator haven't you?
Haven't got it with you?
No.
But you've got your own?
Scientific one?
No?
No.
You could do with one.
Alright?
It's one of those things that you could do with really.
If you've got a birthday or something coming up and if somebody wants to know what to buy you  that's what you want!
You want one of these scientific ones.
So, you want a hundred and forty percent of seven point five.
Let's have a look.
What is it?
A hundred and forty percent, so it's one  point four  times  seven point five.
Try it.
Use that one.
Yes you use your finger .
One  point four times
Oh it's .
Ten point five, that's right.
Okay.
Ten point five killogrammes.
Right!
Put it on the, on the er  on that desk which probably will be better.
So, alright calculate  a hundred and thirty percent of sixty seven pounds.
That's right,a , what is that?
Eighty seven point nine.
Yeah, so it's eighty seven pounds  ten isn't it?
That's right.
Right, B  a hundred and twenty percent off thirty two metres?
Oops!
No .
Start again.
Right, one point two metres  times  thirty two.
Yeah?
What is it?
Thirty eight point four.
That's right!
Now, a hundred and eighty percent of seventy four metres?
One three three eight two.
That's right.
Right!
E three A.
What are the decimal equivalents of  a hundred and sixty percent?
That's right.
A hundred and sixty three percent?
Six six four.
Yeah, point six three.
Good!
You move that decimal point you see, in two places and it's one point three.
A hundred and six percent?
One point nought six.
That's right!
One point nought six.
Again,yo you, the figure staying the same, all you do is to move a decimal point two places.
So D is
One point three nine .
One point three nine.
Alright.
And E?
One point nine .
One point nine   or one point nine, yes.
Right!
A factory plans to increase it's output by fifty percent next year.
So if this stands for this year's output  at a hundred percent  fifty percent of it has to be added on to give next year's .
So there's your hundred percent and you add fifty percent.
So next year's output is  to be a hundred and fifty percent  of this year's .
Because you add fifty percent to the hundred percent  and a hundred plus fifty is  a hundred and fifty.
So the output is going to be a hundred and fifty percent of what is was last year.
The decimal equivalent of a hundred and fifty percent is one point five O  or one point five.
Next year's output is to be one point five times this year's.
So you multiply this year's output  by one point five  and it'll give you next year's output.
Alright?
You add on that fifty percent  or whatever it happens to be  to the hundred percent  which gives you the new figure.
You change that into a decimal  that is what you multiply by.
So, let's have a look.
If something is increased by fifty percent  it is multiplied by one point five.
A new town plans to increase it's population by fifty percent during the next five years.
If the present population is eighty three percent  calculate the planned population in five years time .
So what are you gonna multiply that by?
One point five.
Right!
So it's eighty three thousand  and what do you get?
One two four five O O.
That's right.
One hundred and twenty four thousand five hundred.
Now, calculate the new populations when these populations are increased by fifty percent ?
Now, you can give the answer in this form  you needn't write it out in full.
So, what you're gonna do is to multiply  sixty four point eight by
Haven't got anything.
one point five  and that'll give you an answer which you will write down  followed by the word million.
Alright?
So, sixty four point eight  multiplied by one point five
Ninety seven point two.
Right!
Ninety seven point two.
Good!
Now this one.
That's fifty eight point eight.
A fifty eight point eight million.
And C?
Eighty nine point seven million.
That's right!
Okay.
An airline  is to increase all it's fares by seventeen percent .
Now this erm illustrates the increase.
There's your hundred percent  it's got to go up by  one point seven to a hundred and seventeen percent.
One hundred and seventeen is one point one seven.
So you multiply your hundred by one point one seven and you get one hundred and seventeen.
The new fare is one hundred and seventeen percent of the old fare.
The decimal equivalent of a hundred and seventeen percent is one point one seven.
Move two decimal  yo decimal points down those two places, alright?
So to get the new fare you multiply the old fare by one point one seven.
The old fare multiplied by one point one seven gives you the new fare.
That represents a seventeen percent increase.
So at three,before the seventeen the percent increase the fare from London to  Feraccas was five hundred and fifty pounds  calculate the new fare  after the increase .
Six O three point five.
Right!
So that's six hundred and forty three pounds  fifty pence 
Fifty.
isn't it?
Right!
F four.
If you want to increase something by forty five percent  what do you multiply it by?
Four point five.
One  if you're increasing it by forty five percent  if it was a hundred percent  and you increase it by forty five  hundred percent 
Oh it'll be nought point
No.
A hundred percent plus forty five percent will be what?
A hundred and forty
A hundred and  forty
five.
five percent.
Right?
Now what's that of a decimal equivalent?
One point four five.
Right!
Alright?
So, if you want to increase something by forty five percent what do you multiply it by?
One point  erm 
four five.
Think in terms of putting a one in front of that  and then moving a decimal point two places and it's one point four five.
So okay, F four A is  one point four five.
Alright?
That's the first, that's your answer to that first question.
F four A  was one point four five.
Now  it says  No!
Just one point four five.
Oh yeah.
A hundred and forty five percent is one point four five, alright?
So now it says increase twenty eighty pounds by forty five percent.
So you're gonna multiply the twenty eight by?
One point four five.
Right!
Forty point six.
Forty pounds sixty, right.
Right!
Right!
F five, now all of these  you've got to increase e something by something there so you've got to change each of those percentages  you've got to think of it as added to a hundred  and then the decimal equivalent.
So what are you gonna multiply the sixty seven by?
One point six two.
One point six two.
Right!
Good!
One O eight point five four.
That's right, one O eight point five four  and it is in killogrammes.
That's right.
Right.
Right!
So F six  A.
If you want to increase something by seven percent  what do you multiply it by?
Er nought  point seven.
Sorry?
Say it again.
Nought seven, one point nought seven.
Yeah, one point nought seven, that's right!
So  your ar answer to A is one point nought seven.
Good!
So now you increase sixty five pounds by seven percent.
Sixty nine  point thirty five.
Sixty nine pound thirty five pence.
Right!
Good!
Okay, now F seven's gonna be the same.
Increase ninety two pounds by three percent.
That's right.
Nine pound four seventy six.
Good!
Right.
That's right.
Good!
Right!
Alfred's salary  is eighty thousand four hundred and twenty pounds and Alberta's is seven thousand a hundred and eighty four  Alfred has a twenty two percent increase  and Alberta a thirty eighty percent increase  who earns more after all this ?
So what you've got to do is to put down Alfred's  Alfred  and put his new salary down  and then you have to Alberta and her new salary and see which is  which is the most.
So you're going to look for
Oh, tell me again !
Alright.
So 
Oh .
so right, eighty four two nought  multiplied by
Erm
eight  that's right.
So what's that, ten  two seven two forty?
Yeah.
Put a, put the forty down cos it's forty pence.
Right!
Yep!
That's good!
Now, Alberta's.
Right!
So, earns more afterwards?
Alfred.
Right!
So Alfred is the answer.
Right!
Oh, we're coming to negative numbers.
Have we done negative numbers?
No.
No.
Right.
Positive, negative numbers can be marked on a number line which extends  in both directions.
You can do some simple calc calculations by thinking of a number line, for example, two, minus two, plus five  means start at minus two  then go up five  so you'll finish at  three.
So minus two, plus five  equals
Three.
plus three .
Right?
Minus three, minus two means start at minus three  then go down minus two, so minus three and minus two is  minus five .
Alright?
Now, before you right them down just tell me what they are and then we can go back and write them down.
Here you've got, minus four and plus three.
That's minus one.
Good!
Minus four and plus six?
Two.
Plus two, right.
Yes, two, yeah okay.
So write them down cos yo you obviously can do those alright.
It's plus two minus  one  
Minus one , yeah.
Minus
It's two.
Yeah, two.
Now two minus five?
Minus three.
Minus three.
Minus one minus three?
Minus four.
Right!
Minus six plus two.
Minus four.
Right.
And three minus eight?
Minus five.
Right!
The number line method works when you have to add or subtract and ordinary positive number  plus three means go up three, minus three means go down three.
But it does not tell you how to do four  plus minus three  or seven minus, minus three, for example but it does not tell you how to do four  plus minus three, or seven minus minus three  where you have to add or subtract a negative number.
Adding a negative number.
Think what happens if you start with four  and add on different numbers.
Four plus three, as the number you add on goes down  so the answer goes down.
Four plus three equals seven  four plus two equals six, four plus one five, four plus nothing equals four, four plus minus one  is three  cos you're coming down here, three two, one, nought, minus one, minus two, minus three, minus four, minus five.
So as the numbers that you add on get one less  so the answers get one less.
So, four  plus minus one is three, four  plus minus two is two, four plus minus three is one, four plus minus four is nothing, four plus minus five is minus one.
What is important  is that you realise that  that number  is minus one  that number is one  plus one if you like but you don't need to say it but if th any, if the sign isn't there it's assumed that it's plus.
But that number and that number are two different numbers.
They're as different as one is from three.
That is a different number from that, that is a different number from that.
And that number is minus one.
Don't think of it as taking away one  thinking of it, think of it as  minus one, a number.
That is minus two  that is minus three  that is minus four, that is minus five.
You've done some algebra haven't you?
Found out the value of X  well you can X  equals minus five.
And that is a value for X, it equals minus five  and minus five is a number.
So, try and remember that, that that is a number in it's own right.
Now when you start thinking of what to do  you've got plus four and you've got minus three  if you take the smaller digit, now that digit is four, that digit is three  if you take the smaller digit from the larger digit, you take the three from the four you get one and the answer is whatever sign that larger number is.
When you've got two numbers that are both, all pluses, four and two is six, four and one is five, four and nothing is four, four and minus one means you got  plus four minus one, is one less than four, it's three.
You've got four plus numbers, you got two minus numbers  which leaves you with two plus numbers.
Let's go on and see whether you can pick it up.
Write down the next two lines of a pattern of the bottom of the opposite page .
Notice that four plus minus one  has the same answer as four minus one.
Four plus minus two has the same answer as four minus two and so on because the plus and minus gives you a minus.
So we've got four  plus minus one is three, four plus minus two is two, four plus minus three is one, four plus minus four is nought, four plus minus five is minus one  what's going to be the next one?
Four plus
Minus six
Equals?
makes minus two.
Right!
So write that down in your book now safely.
A is A two, write down the next two lines.
So you got four plus minus six is minus two, then you'll have four plus  minus seven is gonna be?
Minus three.
Right!
Okay?
So  let's go on.
Adding minus N is the same as subtracting N   adding the minus number  is the same as subtracting it.
So copy and complete these .
So write down A three A.
Five plus minus three  equals five minus three  equals?
Two.
Two.
Right!
Two plus minus six is the same as two minus six  which is going to be?
You got plus two minus six
Four.
Mm?
Four.
You take the smaller digit from the larger digit  so you take the two 
Eight.
from the six and it gives you four but then you give the sign of a larger 
 
so it's minus four.
Alright?
Now this is minus three plus minus four  which is the same as minus three minus four.
Now you can, those are both the same sides so you're gonna en add them together  and give it the sign that is common to both.
Minus six.
Minus?
Six?
Three and four?
Seven, sorry!
So , alright?
Minus seven, yeah?
Happy?
Right, so A four,work these out .
Now if you can do them then just put the answer down.
Six  plus minus three is the same as six  plus and a minus give you a minus, so it's the same as six minus three  which is?
What's six minus three?
Three.
Three!
Right!
You take the smaller digit from the larger digit, so you take three from six gives you three  you give the sign of the bigger number which is a plus.
Now this time  you've got two  minus five.
Yeah.
You take the two, the smaller digit from the larger digit  but you give the answer the sign of a larger digit.
So it's?
Minus
Minus three!
Alright?
Yeah?
Okay, you got minus one  and a minus four.
Minus four.
No, you got a minus one  and a minus four  they're both the same signs, cos it's minus one, minus four  they're both the same signs  so you put them together  four and one make?
Five?
And you've got
Minus one.
minus , so they're minus five.
Let's just have a look at  if we've got  six and four  we can have six plus four  or you can have six minus four  we can have minus six, minus four  or you can have minus six  plus four.
Now  that's a plus six and a plus four  what's the answer?
Ten.
Ten.
Nice and straightforward.
Both the signs are the same.
So you add them together and you give it the same sign.
This one  what's the answer to that gonna be?
You've got a minus six and a minus four.
Both the same signs.
Ten.
Can't be the same as that.
They're both minus.
Those are both plus  so we call it plus ten  these are both minus so the answer is?
Ten.
Minus ten.
Alright?
If the signs are the same you add them together, you give the ssssa the sign that they're both the same as.
Now, here you've got six minus four  now what's six minus four?
Two.
So that equals two.
Now here you got minus six  plus four  take the smaller from the larger  and give it the sign of a larger.
Minus two.
Right!
Does that help  a little bit?
Let's do another one.
Let's do erm  eight plus three  eight minus three  minus eight, minus three, and minus eight plus three.
Let's see if we can do those.
What's eight and three?
Eleven.
Right.
What's minus eight and minus three?
Minus nine.
No!
Minus eight and minus three?
Both the same signs.
Minus eleven.
Minus eleven.
Now this is easy, eight minus three is?
Five.
Five.
But this is a minus eight 
That's five, yes.
plus three, it's minus five.
Alright?
Tear that out and keep that by your side because that gives you  all the four possibilities.
Alright?
When the signs are the same  if they're two pluses you add them and it's plus  if they're both minus you add them and it's minus  here you take the smaller from the larger and give it the sign of a larger.
Three from eight is five, that's plus five.
Three from eight is five, but that is minus, so it's gonna be minus five.
Okay?
So keep that by your side  and see how we get on.
So we've what were we doing?
A  B  D!
This one here is it?
Minus two plus minus five.
Which is minus two  minus five.
Minus two  plus the minus gives you a minus, so you got minus two, minus five.
Er, minus seven.
Minus seven.
Right!
Now here you've got nought  and a plus minus gives you a minus, so it's nought a minus four?
Minus three.
Right!
Good!
Three  minus three?
Three
Nought.
minus three.
Nought.
Nought, right!
Minus five  minus two?
Minus three.
Erm
Minus and a minus.
Same as that one, look.
Minus two, minus five.
You got that one right.
What was that?
Minus two and minus five.
Seven.
Is minus seven.
Right?
So here you got minus five, minus two which is?
Minus seven.
Minus seven.
Now here you got seven  minus nine?
Take the smaller from the larger which will give you?
Seven 
 
from two, nine is two  and that number is a minus so the answer's going to be a minus, so it's gonna be?
Minus two.
Minus two.
Alright?
There we are, are you okay?
Did you get any more?
No I haven't
No
I've just picked it up
 
Oh I see, mm 
Some money in the, something of
Yeah I just saw the headlines with it, I didn't, I haven't actually read it, no, yes I must have a look at that  There has been really, a very sharp frost this morning, the erm, the park is white and the roofs are white
his own erm stability don't you really don't you?
Retired of course he's no, no longer, mm  I think it must be, you know, he's probably building this wall all over I suppose people object to the wall
Do you know, I don't think I've ever seen that before where the robin has gone up onto the seeds
Oh
they don't often do that
no
They've been inundated with them I expect
I've seen another one, the address for it is  would you believe?
Is it so?
N N W
gosh  Oh this should be interesting this is from the A A erm travelling abroad you know
Oh yeah
useful because erm, I'd still love to do another trip abroad you know, go down to France go to  perhaps 
What's Molly's telephone number?
Is it O, two, is it's 
yes
Oh this wasn't yesterday
No
this was the thirty first of January, it was fifty two minutes, two pounds, one, two pounds eighteen pence.
Well I've been very good I've not been phoning anybody else 
Well actually it, it is down this quarter, it is down this quarter, because our erm, our total last, last quarter, the balance brought forward was seventeen pounds fifty five and this time it's six pounds seventy six, so we've reduced the erm the deficit so it is down
The er
that was I mean, that was, there's a couple you know one to Bridget and one to erm Demelza obviously that we, we phone them up and that's fair enough, you know but, I was just interested in how one 
and, yeah, well didn't we phone her and hadn't she had all that trouble, she'd had shingles and
Oh yeah
and she was feeling very depressed wasn't she so that was 
that was it 
that was probably what it is
Yeah and I'd forgotten that I'd spoken to her the other night
yeah  no, no the total of current charges was fifty seven pounds and we pay sixty eight pounds in to pay, mind you that isn't so good when I look at it cos there four lots are going this month, this quarter, still never mind eh?
Alright if we've done it in this quarter
Well yeah I mean it, it er
Happened that way
it just happened that way you know the twentieth of November and there's the nineteenth of February
Yes
so it's 
nineteenth of February
Yeah, twenty pounds has gone in
and that's when it went in yes, yes 
Mm, mm 
But when is the phone call
the phone calls, er, well the seventeenth of February looks to be the last itemized one
And where was that to?
That was to Bridget 
well no that was only last night before last wasn't it?
This 
Might do that then, if we've got the money
this is up to the eighteenth ah, ah, this is up to the eighteenth 
This is the twentieth, yes it was the nineteenth 
eighteenth of February
nineteenth I phoned her
It just didn't get in, right
another big one as well But that one the other night I don't mind it having been so big, because it was sort of helping my conscience
Yeah, is the, there's a leaflet here about B T you see and they you, you know the erm the O eight nine eight numbers which are these erm
Yeah
any entertainment sort of thing or, or like you ring up best on the thing
Yeah
the charge to call an O eight nine eight number from any phone other than a pay phone is thirty six pence per minute at cheap rate and forty eight per minute at all other times, over half of this money is paid by B T to the business providing the informational service
Yeah, yeah
so, you know, it's making a profit to all the people that are using that 
The best will get a profit
Aye that's right
Unexpected, strange 
Strange 
strange strange 
strange 
oh dear
on your
 
well that's not surprising
It's making it difficult to save money
Mars your ruling planet normally endows you with drive, but as Saturn grows nearer your energy level will decrease  now how about that?
Mm
Do it to me Capricorn  this is an extremely significant time, a close relationship has undergone a complete transformation in the solar eclipse of the sun, you may feel insecure this week  I always feel insecure


but only temporary
oh good
increasing security and
money, investment are proving sound, there is no need to worry about my expenditure  
Oh
Oh good, shall I go out and have a rave up shall we?
Mm
My health, I am feeling strong and looking confident on the outside, so you must try and feel it on the inside   oh dear   the planets are on your side this week for love, needless to say
oh
best on the nineteenth  money, finance has become a little shaky as Saturn the planet of restriction approaches to Venus on the twenty sixth, this is not a time for speculation.
Health, living generally, are enjoying good health, however those of you who are born in earlier
to re-think your diet  and the end of September as well I should think 
If you're thinking of going to France this year you'll be deli , you'll be delighted to hear that we're currently offering a three week inclusive holiday in the South of France for the price of two weeks, ask at your local A A shops for details of this and the free ferry crossing offer 
Oh 
Oh  so do we want three weeks in France?
Where to in?
I dunno, I mean it's erm
We're going to France of course 
I know we are then  and if we book.
if we book er, any, er, erm, a deal with them through P & O European Ferries, if we book one car and a person on a standard return fare crossing, they'll give you a free five day return to be used on the same route in the autumn  them are the deal with exclusive to the A A so don't just get across once, cruise across twice
Mm
Hello  right   oh dear   good morning I'm glad to see there's another one as idiotic as mine


It's embarrassing isn't it?
That's a beautiful sight isn't it?
Oh dear the colours of the trees reflected in the lake, everything is beautiful and the gulls and it's so still  that would be a mega painting wouldn't it?
That is beautiful  oh  good morning 
Thanks
Well put it on there
No
show you put away like that
going to this erm, what did he say?
The erm
Oh yes I think it was
 

You know I very carefully picked up my glasses and put them in the case and put it in my  in there
Mm, mm 
Is this the new marmalade?
No
No it's  mm 
mains water burst which was between Church Road and erm Devon Square
Yeah
South West engineers were called in to try and to trace the leak in the mains pipe and after identifying it they carried out the repair work on Saturday and Sunday, but while at the scene early on Friday they smelled gas, and the
British Gas South West whose workmen has discovered a kerb side leak, they worked throughout the night in there to cut away the damaged pipe repaired to make it safe 
Strewth
For three days out going traffic was deserted by Devon Square  and vehicles heading into the town from Penn Inn were filtered into a one lane of the dual carriageway and diverted along Station Road and Lower Queen Street 
God
So that's what they did at Devon Square, that's why that was all that, that people came up East Street and then had to go down Devon Square and back out
Yeah
you know the road we came out of 
You know you saw an advert as we turned into Devon Square, building plots for sale 
Devon Square, oh yes, yes, yes, mm
That's, that doctor's surgery
Oh is it?
Yeah  numbers twenty five, twenty six of the junction of Torquay Road is for sale with a building plot in one of the gardens, the premises being used for many years as doctor's surgery ancillary accommodation and car parking, the property will be available when the doctors move into the new practice home in joining Cricket Field Road car park 
Yeah that's what it said, mm
Mm  detailed plans have been approved for a single storey dwelling in the garden on one of the houses condition on the surgery reverting to living accommodation, the houses would have considerable scope for use as offices subject to planning or paramedical use especially where large car parking areas are required, the whole is available at two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, but offers may be considered for number twenty five with the garden and parking area building plots to the agent 
Oh, the whole of two hundred and fifty thousand
Yeah
I reckon you'd, the building plot itself would of erm, and I've seen them advertised, for about fifty thousand pounds 
Yeah that's right, mm 
You were saying this morning on the end of the news you were talking about the four man
Yeah
thing and they were saying it started already and the Austrians were in the lead at that time
Oh 
You might get it on erm Ceefax
 

Mm 
On there you see it does say six o'clock Olympics today the first two runs in the four man bobsleigh, sport on Friday at two twenty five
Mm
with winter Olympics that have to run in the four man bobsleigh 
It just, it just said Olympic three, nine, one, but there's nothing on here at the moment now
No, well, he, you know, just at the end when they're giving the last news just before nine o'clock
Three nine five
erm, said that it'd started already, erm whoever was doing the erm, whoever was doing the  sport and that with the bob, he had said he could of dropped in a note to say that erm started already and at that stage, erm
Oh Mark Tad has lost, a lot of ground to make up for Britain
only setting the eighth fastest time
and crewman only clocked fifty eight point four nine O to being handicapped by a poor start number of ten 
Oh they went down at ten?
set the pace for Austria with the , track record run of fifty seven point seven four  and the second bob is fifteenth   see I mean they're, they're, they're fifty seven, eight for nine against fifty seven, seven, four, so I mean they're not half a second  then, I mean they were, they were first in the two man and then they dropped six after one run so
Yeah
so I mean it's erm
Mm
you can make it up obviously
We could do, yes, yeah we'll do that
Better, have a better selection I would think
Okay well I 
I just happen to see the
Yeah the advert for them, well we'll go out there first thing, I mean we'll go out there first and then we can come back and get a card and we should know whether we've got to get one here or not shan't we?
Yeah, buy sixty varieties of fuchsia cuttings, thirty nine pence each, they're under three pounds fifty
Oh
they're doing, you know here
Well that might not be a bad idea to get the cuttings now because er that lot will be cheaper than
I reckon of we'll see it now
Yeah  mm  the frost is going fairly rapidly now, oh I know what I meant to do, I'll go and do that now
You were going to feed the
Yeah I got the, I've got to put erm seed out as well cos that's gone 
Daffodils
Daffodils
Yeah, cos they're quite tall there aren't they?
Yeah, it looks as if they've just been sort of put in in a heap
Well I don't understand how they're like that cos I mean there's, this side of the pot hasn't got any and I would of thought I would of put them in
Spread them out
Yeah, so perhaps they've moved 
That looks nice
Yes the white's all gone, I mean the, the playing fields
smart
that are along here were absolutely thick white
Mm
this morning  but it's all gone except for where in in the shadow 
Yes, yes, yes, yes 
you can just see it's left
the shadow of the trees, yes 
Oh I meant to switch me pump off, no, still I think it'll be alright cos there's water in the erm, in the pond is alright, just won't be able to go through the waterfall
Well we're going just out here and then we're coming back aren't we?
Yeah
I wonder if they might have anything  don't know whether they sell other than the time 
No they don't do normally 
but I, I'd like to go and ask there some time whether they did  Oh that's the one for sale which I saw advertised in the paper today
Did you?
Mm  oops 
There's cows
Mm, one was, I don't know whether they both were, were they?
Well I would of said so, but 
Perhaps they were , mm 
looks like it don't it?
Are you returning Doreen and
today?
Because they're saying because their kitchen is in absolute uproar
Oh is it?
they're going out to eat each day you see 
I see 
and erm  I don't think I can, you know want to invite them back to our place here, so I told them I can't  but erm I suppose we could always go out with them, if they were going out you know, if they haven't made any other plans
Well yes we could do that 
well he doesn't seem
A car
to be in a very great hurry
able to get up any faster  perhaps he'll be alright on the flat  I've seen some as well in erm some way, I looked in
and this weekend they've got sort of erm vegetables in
including one carrot or
yes
try this weekend ourselves to see what's there
Mind you we've now caught up with some more traffic which is going even more slowly.
Well he's rushed on now you see, that fellow has  in the pick-up truck I mean, did you see him?
Yes I did
See the pick-up truck?
Yes he's caught up with two more cars
Cars, I actually saw those on the side
because of that  well never mind it's a nice morning
Yeah
we're not in any desperate hurry 
This one in front has obviously got a fear of going more than forty miles an hour that's for sure oh 
Oh he's pulling in
thank goodness for that  mm 
probably belongs to the
yes it does you see
Mm 
And there's quite a few
wasn't there?
Yep 
Mind, must of re-done those toilets or something cos look they've even got a disabled
Mm so they have, yes 
Well I got six trailers and four bush ones
Yeah
yeah, five different plants, two of each
And that's, that's ten is it?
You've got ten 
That's ten and I've bought that parsnip, it's only eighty nine, there's three plants there
Oh
and if there's plant out in the sun for one we can put one in a pot and keep it in the kitchen
Ha, I've just been looking around
things that
So you haven't bought anything?
I have, I haven't seen anything
Right, okay well then we'll go into market or Tesco's  right
Yes it's nearly opening time
Yeah
no, they've got them in the garden
yeah, they've got them in the garden anyway haven't they?
Did you say you wanted some pot some, or did you get them?
Well I got a couple and I thought well I'll wait till I go out to Tregole now, they're probably cheaper there than anywhere
I just happened to see these selection of pots  no I think there these fancy ones more
no they've got ordinary ones here  but I mean these, are a whole lot expensive than they were at W Smith's, yes, erm I just don't believe this price  no I suppose they're three for one fifty nine, but that's the size I got 
That works out at fifty P 
What?
That works out at fifty P
Yeah, well I paid forty  forty nine I think or something like that
And as you say they'll probably be cheaper at 
Cheaper at Tregole, yes right
Do you want them now if you wanted them?
No I mean I'm alright for the moment, I've got those two
Oh
 

Put the potatoes in the bottom
 

Two thirty nine please
Hello nice to see you
How you keeping alright?
Fine, yes, yes, mm a bit of a nip in the air this morning
Yes it's nice though isn't it?
I like it like that
It was very sharp this morning first thing
It was because when I came up it was minus one in the car, cos I got er, oh thanks, I've got a temperature thing in the car
Aha
and I haven't seen that for a while
No
but it's lovely you know when we were coming past the playing fields, it's erm  I didn't
there's ten there
Thank you 
Are there some trailers?
Oh yes I can see they're trailer 
Mm, mm 
And this as well?
No, this is mine, I'd better pay for my own  
Four thirty nine please 
How much?
Four 
Four thirty nine please, oh that's not nice is it having to pay for your own


I don't think it is either


 

We'll have to
a nice red erm 
Thanks very much 
you know a red flower pot plant for somebody who's got a ruby wedding this weekend, but there's nothing up there, not much at all, Azalea's are sort of all off you know 
Not fancy a Polyanthus they're very pretty and they come in erm a box 
No, yeah I saw those, yes , yes but erm 
you know erm 
put them in one of those and
yes they look really nice in the red containers
Mm
Do you want me to show you what they look like?
Erm well look, let's get rid of these 
We had this one you see put together and it looked quite nice, it all in reds
You gonna try and put them in there?
Well I try
Here's a bag look
Now if I can put them in here, it'll stop these falling over, providing they don't get squashed with them
let you have that one


Thanks
One O six please  thank you
Whoops
Always doing that
No, me 
I'll just go and look and see what this looks like 
Yeah okay 
Okay?
Yes I'm waiting, my wife's gone back to be tempted  
I think she wants your advice
How much is it worth?
Two ninety nine
Right
Now can you see this, she, she just put that together, now that does look quite nice doesn't it?
Yes that does look nice, yes I think so
But if we sort of, you know, she said, you know look around and arrange something yourself
Well I think that, I'm not sure the white doesn't set it off
Yeah, but I want a better white bigger than that one 
Oh I see what about a pink?
That's rather pretty isn't it?
That was the one I liked the look of 
And another pink
There's one there look
Yes or this one?
or that one, yes
Mm, it's a bit tatty perhaps in places that one, that one's coming out, what do you think?
Which one?
That, that one there?
Yeah, or this one
I think the other one looks rather pretty
This one?
Right
Is it, is it or is that the one you said that
Well it's one flower that's probably gone, but take that off really
 

That's got buds in it there?
Yeah, okay, put that one back there then
What do you think?
Yes, fine, now you want it in the red one and not the silver one, yes?
Well I think the red
Yes well I think so, I think so  alright
That's the erm  some of these
There's not much red there is there?
Not much flower there is there in that one, look, or is there?
No, no, we could do with changing that
Oh
Let's see if we can get a, see there's a whole lot of buds as an example in that one isn't there?
Yes, that'll do  okay?
Fifty five each, I don't know how much
 

I think she said two ninety nine 
And that's ninety nine and four 
How much each are they?
Sixty five, so that's two sixty and ninety nine
Yeah, but I think it's two ninety nine for the whole lot
Oh is it?
Yes look, under the, under the bottom 
Oh yes, yes it says that yes 
That's your change, thank you 
Erm 
and erm, at least these look a bit 
Oh that's alright 
These are ten P each and the other's twenty two
Are these blood oranges?
No
No, they're so similar you know, seven forty nine altogether please  thank you  did you get a handle to go with that one?
Did I get a?
Handle
No, is there a handle?
Yeah, in the basket in the wicker basket there, there's a handle and it just clips on
Thanks 
I'll buy a handle
No you can buy, get the handles here separately
Oh you can get the handles separately 
Can I just advise you to swap that one, some of the flowers 
Yeah, go on 
are going a bit 
thanks very much
Can you swap that one, the flowers are going a bit 
Oh yes
I'm just looking at, erm this one it looks so pretty, no not that
That one?
Yeah that's
what do you think of that one 
Yeah that's very nice, yes I like that
Unusual
That's a nice one
Yes that is a nice one
 

You see all the buds coming out
Oh yes, yes mm, mm
alright?
I'm wondering now, looking at it, if that erm is a bit tall for the rest of them
Yes
Do you know what I mean?
It does look a bit tall, you're quite right, erm  that one's quite a low one, what about that one?
Yes I thinking of the red 
Thinking of the red really 
Deeper red?
Yes
Here you go, what about that one?
Oh that's, yes
What about that one?
That's got nice
yeah that's a nice one
Yeah, okay
Yeah, okay, right, yeah
Yeah?
Oh that's nice of you, thank you very much
You're welcome
I've got a handle here, I've got a handle
Oh you have
 

Bye 
That looks nice erm, all we have to do now is go and erm get a card  and take the price, oh the prices must be on these
Yeah they're on there, take that off 
On that, mm, mm 
Yes 
Does he want to play?
Here have a sticker for these today  that's two ninety nine then please
Thanks
No I've got, do you want to change another note?
No I don't, I think I can, you witness that I paid for this won't you?
Oh yes


most definitely, I don't think it's gonna go in there, oh it might do, just to protect it a wee bit, you know 
Lovely, thank you very much, many thanks indeed
You're welcome  and a penny change
Thank you very much
Thank you bye now 
Alright?
Bye  Oh that's very nice of you, thank you very much indeed, many thanks.
Run out of arms 
Yes, that's right 
Well that was good, that's very attractive for three pounds isn't it?
Yes I think so 
Put this in the back in the
Box
couldn't we?
Yeah 
Yes that was a nice, good job I mentioned it to her wasn't it?
Yeah
I mean we wouldn't of known, I never saw that erm, you know diamond thing with, four, I mean even then I when we bought them I was thinking four sixty fives, that'll be two sixty and erm three sixty, so you save a bit really don't you?
Oh yes
Now we'll go down and try and get a card will we?
Yeah
And what else was it?
I've got to go to Muriel
Oh that's right  plenty of time to get out
Well he's so badly parked you see, he's got to wait for both traffics to go whereas I could go easily
Yeah  Now where shall we look for a ruby wedding card?
You would generally go for that one in the market wouldn't you?
Well no I don't know that I would, I would probably go to erm the one, you know, by the egg basket
Mm, funnily enough I don't like it in there  well I suppose I might get something in
they have some quite nice ones as well don't they?
Yes
Tim was quite taken with that big card  that he had for his birthday
Mm 
There now, two
well it's the only way the
well somebody else is coming, join onto us, but er  learner as well, why most of them seem to be learners don't they?
Yeah
You hardly ever see a motor cyclist  these days  you know unless he's got an L plate up  of course you can't get passed because of the erm
Mind you the van's a long way behind him anyway
Now he is, isn't it?
Now what are we going to do erm?
Well I think what I'll do, if I go round by the market I can drop you there by the multi-storey car park and you can then just walk through to Baston's can't you?
Yeah
And I'll go down to the church and park by the church, how about that?
And then you can walk back down is that alright?
Oh that way, yes
That's an ambulance would you believe
Ooh  help
anyway, one less, there's a car sort of in front of the ambulance kind of thing 
Yes I think that must of come out in the roundabout there, it wasn't in front before, erm, so I'll do that yes, I'll drop you off
Yeah and I
and you can just walk through to Baston's, whatever and I'll go to Muriel
Baston's or erm
Oh whatever you want
go up to the shops by the egg basket if need be
So I'll see you back at the church  I mean if I can just park down by Devon Square I will, but otherwise I'll park
Yeah, right
behind the church 
Perhaps the ambulance has got somebody really ill in there or something 
I wouldn't of thought so, I would of thought it was more or less the van than anything else 
It's a ruby wedding it is, isn't it?
Mm, mm 
Just sugar and eggs in there, and the card  why did you come back for?
Eh?
Why did you come back for?
Well I, I turned round and backed in so that you could see me here
Oh 
The sugar was only fifty nine in the market as I came past at Charlie's you know, I thought well I'll get some of that and I got those jumbo eggs there, only a pound a dozen big ones, you know  You done?
Well I'm looking for my glasses really
Oh I see, they're probably under the paper, yeah
Wonders will never cease
Pardon?
I say wonders will never cease  I have just written a receipt for Mrs  and I have put it in her envelope and I have written my name in, in on, I've put from and put my name and crossed out caretaker and put treasurer and I have put underneath we do not have a caretaker  so we will see what happens  How did, how is it that they got to go back with them?
How's that?
Oh well her father decided that erm his wife
put them in there again  erm, his wife hasn't realized how much it would be looking after er 
Oh he's taken something else has he?
Do you know the pots there, the two that I bought were forty seven out at Havercom, they were seventeen out at Traygo
Oh
so I got four more, had a look round thought I saw it, but Traygo was heaving  I tried to park by the erm garden centre, but to not only were there people all parked there, there was a great articulated lorry delivering stuff, so you went in and you couldn't even then get out, go and park further up
Still you
going and pick up your own 
well I parked 
I parked sort of out in the car park and then got a tr a trolley and wheeled it rather than have to try and get back into that lot.
What else did you get?
Flower pots and compost that's all  oh let's have a drink of water 
Phone call from somebody who wanted to book the hall, erm children's party, and erm this person kept on saying are you the man that does the, that sort of lets out the hall
I am Mrs  who's sort of the secretary and books, does the booking for the hall, he couldn't get that, anyway it occurred to me afterwards it must of been the grandmother of that girl that bought the erm, cos he kept on talking a Michelle and  that's the girl that bought our suite and I reckon it's her child's birthday party, she said erm  you know my, you know my son-in-law, I said do I?
Yeah, Frank, Frank   and of course and then afterwards I realized that that was Michelle
That's right, yeah 
oh did she?
I always times, the thing I forgotten to think about was that lock, I really ought to do that
Anyway, erm  she said will you tell
I said you know, will you bring your own things?
Meaning you know paper plates and what not and she said oh last time sister Joyce would even let me use the kitchen, I said you can use the kitchen, I just wondered erm, you know, so anyway
Well I brought one of those
up and put them on the window sill 
Yeah I saw that , what was that one with the three leaves and that 
Yeah , they were root bound, those three  All you have to spend is the money 
They went to Merrivale today, she and Chadam, I knew they both had today off, she said it was gorgeous there
Mm
but as you say I, I can never have a real conversation with her like I can natter 
No 
into anything I do
Yeah  If you could hear what she say it'd make a difference I expect  I'd of gone for another vowel there, it you'd gone for E it of been
Got three
Yeah, but you have an E you would of been much better off wouldn't you?
oh no, that's right  or an I would of helped  coach
Coach
that's only five, paunch 
J A Z if we got another Z, can only have the one, J A R 
Dozed  can't you have dozed?
Yeah
So if I do some potatoes
Yes, thank you
mm, yeah
I just put them up
if you bring up the erm  thingamy
Do you want the pressure cooker up?
No
No 
Erm
in there
 

So I switch it on, or er
Yes
Yes 
have er just erm
What do you want?
have the lid of the saucepan here, here we are 
This Busy Lizzy is really coming on isn't it?
Yes, mm, you re-potting it did it some good
Yeah
cos it's now spreading out 
Yes it is isn't it?
Be awful for erm, you know an ex wife and son, to take the decision to phone in they
Yeah
they're very brave  Can dry them off on that 
I wonder if we've got enough forensic evidence, you know, to erm
Well I should think there's probably a whole lot more there that we didn't move 
Oh, I would of thought so 
Hello, what time does erm Gavin go off?
Er not till half past one in the afternoon
Oh
so it's erm the times have all changed now because of going somewhere different, but of course you've gotta go out tonight, we've got to, in fact we've got to go out within the hour, it's Steve's mum's birthday erm so tomorrow you know you can't get think and my brother turned up last night so you just can't, I haven't even packed his case yet.
Where have you got to take him to school?
Yeah, up to right up to the school
Yeah
got nice er double decker bus type thing with a video player on and all that, mind you it should do really cos they're on there for a long time
Yeah
see till Sunday night they're on that bus apart from the crossing
And they don't get there until Sunday ni , no I suppose they won't will they?
No
Cos by then, they won't get to, they won't go to the crossing until about eight I suppose in the evening, it'll be a night crossing won't it?
Yeah, that's right, he's getting excited about it
I should think so too
Yeah 
I didn't put the other one in
 

Oh Chris has got to go out tonight
Has she?
it's erm Steve's mother's birthday and Gavin's, they've got to get him up about midday, one o'clock or something up the school tomorrow she said I haven't even packed yet.
She said he's now beginning to get excited
Oh
but they don't arrive there until erm Sunday night, so it's a long time on the coach
Yes, I just wondered if they couldn't sort of do a, a deal, you know to get them by air, the only thing about it is if they got to sort of 
probably where they would go for erm
still gonna take them a couple of hours
Mm, that's right  and they've got all the hassle of the airport, mind you they ought to be able to get a local airport  I don't know who they're going, going with, who the erm  Gavin said, I think Gavin said or somebody said something the, the original company have gone bankrupt
Oh is that right yeah?
so yeah that might be why they had to erm
 

Did you put out those erm
no I haven't put anything out
You just, you know speaking to Chris then?
Yeah, she was just sort of coming down the stairs yeah it's alright, you know, had a word with her
Do you know that
This is, you know you just can't begin to believe it can you?
You know Shaun, Moyra's husband?
Yes
Well his sister's erm a social worker as well in Manchester and she was going next week to spend a year in Romania
Is she really?
and that, that's why their er you know, Shaun, erm, Amelda brought erm Moyra down with the babies, you know she was up there and she could help her down, but Shaun is coming down now wi , this weekend in the car and of course they'll be able to go back in the car, erm there's, there's gonna be a party for erm, of course should warn the girl  Of course that's the awful thing about it isn't it?
took about four of them to do it normally, Paul
Mm
his new wife and also Melanie, ha  you know what it says on the top there
No, I'm 
it says 
or something
That's filled you up has it?
That's very nice, yes, yes
Do you want a bit of ice cream or?
Yeah, have ice cream, have that lovely one we had the other day
 

Sometimes you know when you see these programmes like The Bill 
yeah
always getting themselves
That's very nice, yeah
The strawberry can be a bit, you know, can really be could be like thaw 
Thaw a little bit, right
When I went for the paper this morning there was this dog, two dogs actually, but one
Jessie cos he or she had got about a six foot long tree trunk in its mouth.
I said to its owner oh I said another one as daft as ours , she said yes 
Oh thanks very much, right I'll just go and get the paper 
Go and get the paper then okay 
Yep 
okay 
I don't know where, I thought I left my case here, I don't know what I've done with my case that's all, it's probably downstairs  oh  oh I don't know, mm  still not able to find it  I think I'd better put these plants out  mm that's right, oh, mm  that's not there  right, I'd better switch this, the tape off cos there's not much, be much conversation now for a while
Good morning
Not too bad
Not quite so cold this morning is it?
I shall
no that's right .
Hello
How are you?
Very well and you?
Fine
How's Alistair?
Got the monster
Pardon?
Got the monster
Oh you've got the monster


Two monsters, Alistair's fine
Is he?
How's, how's Margaret?
Oh well she's up and down you know 
Yes 
I mean sometimes she's better 
Cos weren't you going on holiday when I last saw you?
Yeah that's right we went erm
You were in a dash
Yes that's right we went to erm  in the French Pyrenees
Oh lovely
and er it wasn't bad, the snow wasn't very good to start with but it snowed on the Thursday and then we, you know, we skied quite a bit after that, but poor girl she got sciatica on the Wednesday
Oh that's painful
and erm for a week she really hardly left the hotel
Oh
She came out with us for two or three days and sort of sat you know up a bit and saw us, but then the next week she was really no good at all 
Yes, oh dear
so that was a shame, but er it got better slowly you know
And are you on your own or, or dog with you?
Yeah I'm dogless, I just walked 
Oh 
I just walked to get the erm, the pi , to walk to get the paper
Oh yes
it gives me erm, a bit of exercise
Yes I was looking around for your dog 
I don't get very much now , no, and how do you like your guard dog?
Very well, he's great he really is, isn't he?
He's fluffy and squeaks
Yes he's dreadful, I think he's slightly frightened of our spaniel
Is he really?
say he squeaks 
He's at
all the time 
Hello 
Max come here, come here, come here 
Like I was just saying if we were going to a
there's a big bus somewhere near I'd drop him and then it would run him over


cos he, he goes on and on
Oh dear
it's just like a squeaky jaw
It's really annoying, he's not like that at home it's just that Pip I think Pip intimidates him 
Pip gives him dirty looks sort I think
How old is he?
Two
Two
so he's only little really
Oh, my goodness he needs some exercise doesn't he?
Oh yeah
And he's, he's, the dog
Oh he's obedient isn't he?
Self erm
Come here, come here
Who's a good boy?
no, there, sorry
No he wants to run thanks very much  oh yes keep you fit
Mm, oh yes
I tell you who I would see and asked after Alistair yesterday and that was Bill 
Oh yes
He came to see us
Oh how is he?
Er, he seems very well
Yes
very busy and 
Yes 
still working on his new house and, what they've got in, you know Wokham area
Yes
and doing a lot of work, but he was erm, he was asking said do you ever hear of Alistair, I said yes, he said oh well give him, remember me to him
I'll do that


Yes, yes, yes cos erm, he's a nice chap isn't it?
He was a nice chap yes, oh he was very good, yeah and did you know Ken  no perhaps you didn't know Ken , he was
I don't know the name no 
No he was, he was right at the very beginning of the school
Yes
er and he was one of the kingpins building the swimming pool
Oh yes
which has now been filled in
Oh yes of course 
erm
yeah
but er, he died about two, three 
Oh 
weeks ago and his poor wife was absolutely devastated 
Just complete 
Oh he'd been ill for about six months I think, but erm 
Yes, yes 
only sixty two
Oh dear
but you know, but er yeah, you know it sort of goes on doesn't it?
Anyway nice to see you
You know I
cheery mood at the moment isn't he?
Yeah
Oh he's in a cheery mood
Oh that's good isn't it?
I think he's settled into school
Oh that's great, yes that's great isn't it?
Mm and I just, he kept, you know how teachers go  so I said, I said, when you meet anybody and they say to him how's teaching him he says  I say stop it


you're really actually enjoying it, so I say don't do it


I think it's a bit better isn't it?
I think you get into a habit of some people 
We've had erm , he may see at some stage, he might just see my son Christopher
Really?
Yes, a fortnight ago he was appointed chief art advisor for Devon
That's very good isn't it?
so erm he's moving, he's moving down in April
Oh you must be thrilled
We are pleased yes, cos they're a lovely family
Yes 
and they're gonna be, they'll be sort of down in this area you know
Yes otherwise you don't see them for 
probably the Exeter area , well we go up and stay 
 
with them up in you know
Yes
in Cheshire, but er yeah
It's not the same as really taking part 
it's a long way 
is it?
isn't it?
Oh yes, oh that's lovely
So er, yes, he's, he's, he's 
About to get a good job 
a little bit frightened I think, you know
Mm, mm
well I, apprehensive is the word really, but he, I think he came down the other, this week just for a day and spent back here and saw one or two people and I think he's happier now
Mike,
he's beginning to get some ideas as to what 
Mike 
you know what he'll be able to do and to what contribution he'll be able to make
Yes
so erm, yeah
Are
quite good authorities to work for or, I mean no cash I suppose, but erm got some money
I mean I, well, I mean you know, I suppose it is, erm
Does it have er, where some authorities have a
Tell Alistair because erm, he'll enjoy the joke because, Emelda came down to us you see, she arrived at lunch time, out of the blue to us
Yes
and said that Christopher was on interview and er if he got through the first part to the second part he would in the afternoon he would give us a ph a ring, erm but he, by ten to two he hadn't phoned so she assumed he was on his way back having 
Yes 
not got the second part, anyway, he phoned up about ten to two and said, but, but before that she had said that he had met Mark 
Mm
do you know the name?
Yes
So erm, I said to Emelda, oh dear I said if Mark  puts two and two together I said there's no way he's going to get the job I said because Mark  and I, well just, you know
yeah, you see, so we were laughing about this, anyway, Christopher phoned up and said he got through to the second part, he was the only one that was going through to the second part and he phoned up about forty five minutes later to say that he'd erm, he'd got the job
How lovely
and er, then he said I believe you know Mark , so I said yes, so he said well he's standing here at my side, he'd like a word with you,so Mark  came onto the phone 
Mm, mm
then and said he said, I, I he said the penny only dropped afterwards, he said
Er fortunately
and I suddenly, I suddenly thought  I said your father isn't Terry  by any chance?
So Christopher said yes, so he said well he said, he said Mark said well we've done a good job this afternoon so I thought that was nice of him 
Yes, yes, didn't say cancel everything
That's what I  that's what so tell Alistair cos Alistair will, will remember the fights that we 
Yes, so 
had with Mark 
so, yeah
but he's, he's the chief advisor for the whole of Devon is Mark  still, but anyway, yeah, so
Oh they're
aren't they?
They are, bye
Give my love to Margaret
I will, bye  Hello, alright?
Yes
What's this, last, last minute filling up your tuck bag for the
No get the paper
great journey
Packed
You are packed?
Yeah
Gavin wasn't packed last night
I was, I was a bit excited so I started mine last night
Oh, so you're getting excited?
Yeah, very
I bet, what time do you go on the ferry?
Erm half past one, no we leave on the coach at half past one
You leave on the coach at half past one
and wh , in the evening we get on the ferry
This evening?
Yeah
Yeah, and then a night ride across France
Yeah and then we stop off in, then we, while we're on the coach we stop off in Germany for breakfast
Oh yes, yes, I trust you've got your Deutchmarks
Yeah 
Five, that's about right, fine thanks Alex
Bye
Bye
Hello, thank you, ah I wish I was going with him
Where?
Alex
Where's he off to?
Pitsfield
can do with a bit of skiing
Yeah


Saw Mima
Oh did you?
Yeah she was just coming out the car by the er you know in the car park by Decor Lake
Yeah
with erm, with the daughter, what's her name?
Yeah
erm the one with the dog 
Yeah
er she's just bought obviously she had her dog there and her two dogs and er, so it was nice, had a little natter
Ah
Said how's Alistair?
She said very happy really she said, he's really has settled in and you know sort of and that was nice wasn't it?
Oh that's good yeah 
Yeah the dog's a black sort of long legged labrador
Oh is it?
Yeah, taller than, a lot taller than Jessie
Yeah
and my goodness me it's got some bounce in it, two years old, yeah and then of course in the paper shop who's waiting for a paper but Alex, so I said oh I said you all packed?
He said yes, he said
he's getting excited too, but do you know isn't that strange he, he came to get a paper you see for the family
Yeah
now that family, you know, the Mirror, you know it, it, it that sort of thing
Yeah surprises you 
astounds me 
Yeah
it really does  So what's the latest on the cricket have you heard any more?
No I didn't actually, cos the news was you know coming on and I thought I don't know whether there'd be any on there 
Well it'd be on Ceefax I'd expect
Yes, let's see if they're talking about it
on this erm 
Just what did you say?
work up cricket live and exclusive on Sky
It's on three, the, the commentary on three
Yeah radio 
Radio Three 
Yeah  but the pictures and that they are on Sky Television 
Yeah, that's right, nine wickets fifty overs, two, three, five
Two, three, five
Well I suppose that's not bad, it's over four, it's four and a half 
Against them 
four and a half or an over
Yeah, you need
to make up ninety one
Oh he didn't get the hundred 
No 
They were saying the last time I heard them saying anything he was sort of going
Defreites was run out look for one
Oh gosh
obviously hitting out you see, they were just 
Yeah 
trying to sort of score the runs and that was it 
trying to get two hundred and fifty I reckon 
Oh well that's not bad I suppose 
Well should be all fit erm Botham does his business I suppose it'll be with, who he bowl with?
Well there's Lewis and Pringle and Reeve and Defreites and Tuftnot, I mean they're all bowlers
Is Tuffnel, oh Tuf , Tuffnel is a slow bowler isn't he?
Yeah
Does Reeve bowl?
I think so yeah
Lewis does of course and Pringle does
That's right, and Hick can you see if need be and Botham can I mean let, it's a good all round side really
Yeah
Oh well  right well I've got some porridge on I'm gonna have that now, we can go out 
I should think Alex has become a sort of completely different boy, of when you think how, of when he first had him
over
there, you see he's accumulated erm confidence
Mm
didn't he?
Mind you it seemed that they had a test at school last week and he wasn't terribly happy with it, he said he couldn't understand it, he tried to explain to me what it was, but erm, it's not, not easy, but Ga Gavin said erm, he said they'd had a test and he said it took him time to get into it but once he got into it, you know, he did alright in it, I think he said how many he got, he didn't seem to do too badly, but he said Alex didn't really do anything and what he did do he thought was wrong so he didn't hand it in, he said and in actual fact what he had done was right, so I don't know, I told, I told Alex to go and see, you know, and ask about it and sort of erm, apparently he did do that so at least he'll know, but erm, it's strange really because normally Alex
So much better
copes very well, you know
And yet that other time, you know, when he came to you
That's right, yes and, and Gavin of course, yeah 
because he couldn't do it and that Gavin had done it yeah it's amazing innit, yeah 
that's right, yeah, mm , yes Gavin really has, yes he's one that's come on tremendously
Well I think that you know, this, this that the ground they're obviously looking at
Yes, and also the car and the railway being close at hand
Yeah  Gosh didn't know, I hadn't heard that
What's that?
One of Stephanie  close colleagues has been under gun guard, police guard for a week following death threats on the alleged kidnapper, as the net closed on him he phoned estate agent Jane  the girl who helped prepare the second artist impression, Jane had met him face to face when he called at the office in Great Bar Birmingham days before the kidnap to collect details on several houses for sale, her blood ran cold when she picked up the phone on Wednesday February the twelfth to hear his voice again
Gosh
he told her that even if he was caught he had now enough money to get her, police monitoring calls to the Shipway's office traced the call within seconds to a phone box at the service station on the A one at Groinby near Gran Grantham Lan , Lincolnshire, police cars arrived at the call box only minutes after the kidnapper had left
Gosh
part of the telephone box used to make the threats was dismantled and taken away for forensic examinations 
Oh dear 
Mm, seen this job share police girl to boost
Yeah oh yes 
on crime reminds me that Bob told me only he doesn't, he doesn't know how much Bridget knows, so we mustn't say anything to her, but he said that there is some possibility that she may get erm, I think April time she may be made what's called Court Officer
Oh
in which case she'll be a nine to five on her sort of on a Monday to Friday basis but 
Yeah 
she'll be sort of liaise between the police, the court and the erm prosecuting service
They should know everything there was there to know
and do you know she'd be good at that I think
Yes
so there's a possibility of that apparently
Yeah, oh well we
I knew that you were talking to him about something 
Forgotten all about that just sort of it triggers 
and I thought you know to myself well, well all secret 
triggered the mind 
things I wasn't supposed to know 
No, no it wasn't that at all it was just that it completely,complete completely went from my mind 
Well that would be good of course 
that's better really, and we surely don't want to lose them do we?
Yeah  Gosh  a record seven hundred thousand Brits are expected to head for the slopes this winter with the snow the best in Europe for twenty years 
Mm, well I suppose when could we fit it in 
Be nice to go back to it wouldn't it?
Yeah, still we can't have three holidays in a year can we?
Why not?
Sorry?
Why not?
Can't afford it 
Well how's the time, half past nine, do you want to go Tesco before you go to erm
Yes
church?
I'd better go and get changed 
Oh dear, I don't know who writes this, erm bit of the er you know erm  oh it must be the  sellatory yes, mm, mm, he's writing about erm, erm  did you in every
long time  see, see such an impression of dodgy back acting, poor old William Roche who plays Ken Barlow in Coronation Street has been moaning and groaning and wincing and rising in the most frightful and indeed the most convincing of manners, he has even for the match of the
those few
to Coronation Street do not know all the facts of course, we are ignorant of the finer points of the time gone by, but why is Deirdre so lasted to Ken I've yet to catch up with Wednesday night's proceedings on my video contraption , but the last thing that I heard Deirdre say to Ken as he was recovering on a put-u-up in her front room was, I'm stuck with you till you back on your feet and as far as I'm concerned it can't come soon enough for me, Ken lay there immobile, stunned, a cruel carry on, what's the poor chap done, but then I've missed too much   
Oh dear 
Yeah, that's right
But erm, I suppose it's difficult really  because the sun's not out it feels that much colder
yeah, well they said it would feel cold today
It's only because the sun's not out I'm 
Mm 
quite sure
Yes and in actual fact it's warmer than it was yesterday
Yeah  I think over there.
I thought he was looking at the station as if , to see if a train was in or something
Yes I'm not sure he's gone on the double yellow lines, but still 
I don't know what to do about this milk if it's still two lots, have we nearly finished the one we're on?
Yes
I suppose I could get two, yes 
Well I mean this has been alright hasn't it?
Yes, yes I mean what we're having now is alright  erm  see erm Texas has sort of thirty, forty and fifty percent off some items
Is that so?
as a last sort of erm two days of the sale or something, they have their special offer next week or  fifty percent off everything or something  I feel sorry for these places really, that  do you know it's funny I only saw the car immediately in front of this grey one  in there must of been a dip there because there's two cars in front of me
That's it there are
but I only saw the white one in front of this grey one 
But there are three
No two in front of the white 
Oh two, I see, yeah 
one, I could see the white one but I couldn't see the erm 
Well I don't know whether there's anywhere here
I think there is, somebody's going in there, are they?
Yeah 
You get out, I'll just straighten out when you've gone
I'm sure there are people who don't sort of bother  with them at all, you know just saw er  a man he dropped he's erm, he dropped his till receipt and he looked as if he had a tremendous amount you know in his basket so I reckon it would of been over, but there was no erm cos you get it stamped  yes so we have er, yes I'd forgotten about those little erm chickens of course , so we can have that roast
Yeah 
There's Linda, have those for me, oh she's coming
 

One ninety two point three 
Yes, you might wonder
Cor there must be some reason for it of course, perhaps they're not, not erm picking up or  yes I could easily of bought erm a couple bottles of wine to make that 
Mm, mm yeah 
up to twenty
Mm 
Didn't have my little er calculator
cos I haven't taken it out, but you know, I didn't think any more about it  now we're going to church right away?
Yeah I think so I mean it's
We're alright, there's nothing there that erm, needs to go into the fridge I think
I mean it's coming up to twenty past 
Oh yes, yes, I I know that, I all I was wondering was 
Yeah 
whether we needed to go back for anything to go in the fridge or freezer  If I got this page sort of full by the end of the week, people there were picking out their, they were getting tea bags and coffee and biscuits, you know for two pages full, I've got one page full and of course with that I could get erm, packet of the  Ferrera Roche 
Oh I've come in the wrong way
Wasn't you, were you going up that way you reckon going up that way?
No I'll go up the next one
Oh
I wasn't, I was going to go right, I was just not thinking you know, sort of 
Oh this place is all
 

Oh I'll get before this thing comes, oh he's pulling in for you
Yeah, he's not pulling in for me, he's pulling in for himself I think actually.
Well he's pulling in, full stop  and if he can see where he's going, well good on him lad, it's okay left
Mind you I could park it down the road couldn't I?
Oh yes , there's room
Well still going 
Bend right, be already to go out
Yep 
Got a light on here, now, look, that light
Up there?
No it's always been there
Oh has it?
Mm 
Well I'm not going out to buy any now I'm gonna wait till next week so we'll just have to 
Yeah that's alright.
have milk.
You've 
Alright.
got some 
There is some in the, in the packet isn't there?
Where?
Well I mean I, I didn't empty the last packet.
Well
There was still some left in.
Well it's not here!
Well I haven't thrown a packet away.
Well unle , unless you come up here and see if you can find it.
I mean if I'd have  if I'd have, if I had come to the last one 
I mean if if you'd told you that dad was coming down which  
Well I'm sorry love!
I've be 
Well that's alright.
It's not fair.
I can't see anything there.
Well I can't  but I mean I I certainly didn't erm  haven't thrown one out that's what I mean, you know?
Well  I suppose it must of been me but I have no idea when or why or where because I generally cut the erm  side bits off.
Well I know you do so that's why I would never have thrown it out.
Yeah, well I don't know.
Anyway, there's none there .
No, doesn't look as though there is does it?
Oh!
If I'd have known I would have brought that this morning   
Okay!
twenty pound !
No I'm, no I'm not blaming you!
I'm just saying I would have 
Oh yeah!
done it!
Yeah, that's right.
You would of done.
They're not doing bad are they?
Well no!
Doing very well.
I thought there is  but I mean before .
Yep!
Yep!
or kind of oven  in nine, I can only think of  Oakhouse as a kind of oven but erm  I don't know whether that's it or not.
If it is the  Hindu  Sage begins with an O.
Oh!
And I don't really  I can't think of one.
Who?
One trying to get in one side and the other one I think that's what it was wasn't it?
Yeah.
Well wha what did you want say ?
Just wanted to speak to you about the skis that was all.
Oh well.
Well .
He'll be wanting to go down there.
Oh yeah.
Were you thinking of  going skiing  er  before then?
Well    shouldn't think so!
Well I suppose you could go off.
If you hadn't of pulled my  jacket I would of known that you
Right.
wanted
Did you see this erm, Bill then?
With somebody with  fingers chopped off?
Yeah !
The fingers en route and for the purpose of being chilled  were placed in a packet of ice lollies!
That's right!
It 
Oh God !
They, they had to get ice you see
Yeah .
to put these things in ice and they hadn't got any of the, of the
When the unpleasant severed object  finally arrived at the hospital a nurse said brightly, normally one would , fingers crossed!
That's right!
Th th the final  the final sort of sick joke was the fact that erm  having  having disposed of the fingers to the theatre, the hospital  they'd got this box of ice lollies so they proceeded  then to give them to people!
Handed them out at the Police Station!
Have a ice lolly !
Yeah, that was very funny!
Can you see on the floor there  to the left of the  picnic table.
Yellowish you mean?
Or on 
No on the floor.
Yeah.
Oh I don't know what that is.
It may be an apple core.
Maybe an apple cos I put some apples down there cos the black 
Oh could well be.
the blackbirds like those apples.
Anyway the erm  squirrel came and investigated.
Oh!
Cos you see 
Got it into its hand
Oh yeah you see it's probably an apple bit.
But then he decided he'd go and look for something else.
This way this morning  .
Well I always do come this way!
It's nice.
Yeah.
I mean we can go down to the, drive out by the lakes.
Well we do!
We turn right here 
Oh turn right, of course yes!
Oh dear dear dear dear!
I was thinking  !!
It's really quite a hill up there isn't it 
Yes!
?
Yes!
You sort of quite a nice spot for houses really just up the top there.
You must get quite a nice 
With a lovely view!
little view, yeah.
If you'd gone that way .
Well I mean that's, that's certainly true of Doreen's isn't it?
Yeah.
That's right.
I mean she said it.
I think she said  that there are no erm
No buses are there not?
buses up there.
Are there not?
Oh!
I think  yeah 
Mm.
I you know I'm 
Mm.
not absolutely sure.
.We'll do ev , we'll be counting tomorrow so you can see Father  
See Father then, that's right.
Yes.
Yes.
He's only just gone that feller.
Next to me 
Only just gone?
yeah!
Still sleeping was he?
Ya, I think so.
He's so used probably to a left hand filter going
Yeah, I suppose it was!
You see?
Yes!
And the filter didn't but you tha tha tha 
No, but doesn't it always go?
I always they're  you know.
Well no it doesn't, if there's nothing , if there's nothing coming round  from the other way  it doesn't go.
There he is there.
Is it?
No that's not him no.
Oh.
Oh.
But, in fa , I was just gonna say to you well the filter didn't go.
No, well it's  the filter goes when there's traffic coming  across from the other side.
Just remember to take a few tins of things.
I was going to do it this morning and bring   and for the box that they have  the old prayer  I think going up to Yugoslavia  soon
Oh yes!
for foods and things 
Yes.
like that.
And I meant  you know, to bring some, I meant to put them out last night.
I'd been thinking of  you know things that that  I had that can go.
Oh yes, there are children there.
park on the grass  when you don't have to.
Yeah.
It seems to me that it doesn't  put a lot of weight on the grass.
be the  best thing.
Good morning!
If you're not in a hurry!


I've got a query as well.
I'm down to read  on Ash Wednesday
Yes.
with Grace  but, I'm also down to read at St.Joseph's  and Father tells me  there won't be two masses  on Ash Wednesday.
We don't usually have a mass here on Ash Wednesday.
You don't do you?
No.
No.
So 
I should forget about it.
Alright.
Yeah.
Only Grace is not here so I can't see her today.
No, no.
Well we never have one on Ash Wednesday.
You don't have one do you?
Nope!
No, so I think that's probably 
 
a mistake and that  so I can, I can go ahead and take the St. Joseph's 
Yes.
one without any worry?
Yes thank you.
Hello !
Fine thank you.
I'm thick, I'm thicker than Henry's dad's .
No erm  no what's his name?


Sid?
What?
Said they don't have a mass on Ash Wednesday there.
So he said I should forget it.
Brian said that?
Brian, yeah.
Brian


Right.
Is it that?
Yes that's  yes that's right.
Oh is she going or not?
Oh no they're picking up somebody else there.
There, I said they 
Nice little family in front of us wasn't it?
Yes.
This one here, this family here  I saw her come in first of all you see  I  wi with the legs!
Oh yes!
And the bottom that sort of was really 
Well 
quite
as tha er 
revealing!
as they would say in the army  she had legs that went all the way up to her bottom!


Morning!
Good morning!
Nice and mild isn't it?
Isn't it nice?
Come in.
You don't need to  ring the bell.
Oh right.
 
Yeah, sure?
Terrible!
Yeah, don't worry about that!
You sure?
Alright, let me get them.
Here you are, twenty Silk Cut 
What's that?
That's  mix.
But it's got .
Laura!
Mummy!
Can't be very big.
No it's alright  .
Well 
Savory white that all she had.
Yeah.
What bread sauce?
Yeah.
You want those?
Twenty Silk Cut that's what you got.
Yeah, well that's right I got them.
Hopefully Mick .
Alright, then we'll get the till open on that .
Five  forty you say?
Forty  thirty   each other.
Have they?
No.
Two fifty  two seventy  that's five, six.
Thank you very much madam.
Have a nice day!
I shall!
Well er  thank you 
Thank you.
very much.
Sixty
Fifty five was it?
Fifty five, yep!
Er  thirty  there er  there you go.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Try putting that door open  
Good morning to you sir!
How are you?
Alright.
I mean, I say!
The one with the  handbags all different colours?
Hello!
How are you?
Very well.
And you?
Does it bring it back mem memories for the last ten years?
I know!
Doesn't it just!
Yes.
So it won't be long ?
No.
No.


Morning.
Good morning to you!
Oh!
But Doris has just said  doesn't that  bring back memories?
She was only getting her paper was she?
Yeah.
There was a whole lot of paper getting there, getting papers and someone else  but the lady in red actually  was getting groceries as well so of course that takes time.
I opened er  the queue builds up.
Oh yes, that lady?
This one here?
Is she the one that read ?
That's right, yeah.
Oh, that's where they live, there!
Oh at least they're stopping there.
Oh yeah, one of the two.
Cos it also brings back memories for me  of er   Mayday celebrations .
Yeah.
It's nothing like that 
I don't know 
 
I I'd  I'm not sure!
 
I'm not sure that it doesn't still go on actually.
Oh!
I don't know what form it takes mind you but the  Of course, another thing about those new houses  those new hous , I think the ma new road will go just up over here .
The new Kings  Kerswell bypass I think cuts  through  up, just above.
So what!
Well i 
It'll be away from the houses  
Well I suppose it is a bit away, yeah.
They probably run a road so that anybody can get onto it.
Make a road from that little sort of estate there and  nobody get onto it.
It's .
I wish she would say it.
If we ever got confront her wi with Christopher when she was about.
She said, well why do they want to live in Exeter particularly?
I said well I'm su swear I couldn't leave it.
Look after the children.
So erm  she said oh what do you think?
Ever so much more expensive living there.
Oh!
That's what she said!
She said they'd be much better to look for a house in this area but 
Yeah.
I don't know, it's
Well they make
I would never ever say though.
No ah, no you ,yo we can't!
No.
No.
No.
As you know you may find that out in a course of 
Yeah.
erm  looking around.
I said she'd just see  telling them as well you know bu i it be better  it's   it's away fro , away from Newton Abbot .
It does i er, in fact, that really doesn't even enter my mind.
Does it yours?
Not really, no.
Well I mean I erm  I mean   they've been so awa 
Awa away 
away all this time 
Wherever they are going 
then it doesn't make any difference really to us you see.
Wherever they come will be sort of near but we'd still would never ever go and
That's right.
like, we'd never go and sort of erm  disturb Richard and Chad do we?
And we never go up there unless it's .
No, I I mind you, I don't know whether we ought to perhaps.
I don I it's, it's very difficult, you know?
They may feel that we don't and they or i I don't know, it's erm
Well we sat here with both Richard and Chad .
You see they had mm, er Friday off  now  they went off to  Merryvale , which is fine!
I mean, I've no no  er 
Oh no.
beef about that  but because it was such a lovely day
Mm.
you know the we you would think, oh well perhaps they'd say to you or would 
Yeah.
you know, do you wanna come out that way?
This is where the  roundabout's gonna 
Yeah.
go, here.
That's what I thought, yeah.
Yes.
Or, you know  something like that but you see they  what they keep thinking is that erm  you know, they don't  to be together  you know, on their own  and this is the way I think they think.
Yeah.
Which is really quite right but then, I mean, you can't sort of just  love needs to be sort of spread out a bit doesn't it?
But, you know when I say it I'm not  Ken and and Eva are the same, they don't go up there
Mm.
you know  willy-nilly And I think Jack and Toni goes in there once a week.
Does she?
Yeah.
I think so.
You know 
Yeah.
erm  or at least she used to when she was in the hospital.
She'd go in and sort of erm help her mum have a  bath.
Christmas th they did, get windows on the side,to big windows  she  and that was that which  is probably as well we .
Er, often .
Except the front ones.
Do you want a coffee?
Er
Do you want a coffee?
No, I don't want one just now, I may have one later, not just now cos I'll  just have mineral water again.
Just water this time not  erm  .
Erm  .
Is it  is it boiled?
Mm mm.
I get used to it.
Oh you've got your .
I might go for something.
Here are.
Is that the news coming on now?
Well   Woh 
What?
That's right.
Is the news coming on now?
No,tha , yeah it will be.
cos it grows like that.
Yeah.
What's she been putting them in for ?
Well I think they're trying to pin the murder on him.
I think  that i i i I don't, I'd I  I reckon they've got him on the kidnapping charge.
It sounds to me  with me being    they got him the first the  the  their victims .
Oh is that so?
Well somewhere.
Mm.
I think you like playing with that!
you know.
What?
You'll have to him .
Trouble is, when it's raining  you know, when it's wet, you need to do it every day almost don't you really?
Yeah.
Cos that's the only trouble is with black it never looks er  ca you know  unless it's shining it don't look nice does it?
No.
Yeah.
You alright?
Yeah.
Yeah.


What time is Lucy coming to you by the way Terry?
What time is?
Tomorrow  Lucy coming in tomorrow?
Do you just have it at the same time?
I don't mind.
Whatever!
Erm  Joanna's coming in I think at erm  her usual time.
She is?
But erm I mean, you know, she come in  oh I can't have her in the morning anyway cos we're  we're counting in the morning.
Yeah.
So we shall be out er, you know  early in the 
Oh well 
morning.
the same time.
Erm
And if she wants to go off she can er  go and make  or  can't she?
Yeah.
Or unless you want her a bit what ti , Joanne  Joanne comes in at quarter past six does she?
Yeah.
I mean she can come in at two if she likes  but erm  bu if she's gonna be out, I mean she can come in at quarter past five.
Well if she's home  if she's home  I'll get her to pop in at two, if she's not home I'll get her to come in at quarter past five.
Okay.
Okay?
Yeah.
Erm  now that's  th that's the half term week isn't it?
Now the following week  Victoria's away
Yeah cos she's away all, she goes tonight.
That's right.
But everyone else is in but I want  to clear  Wednesday and Thursday cos I want  we want to go up to Suffolk.
Oh that's alright.
Erm
Yeah.
Midday 
Is that this week?
midday Wednesday, so that 
Yeah, well the 
it probably means
It's their English innit?
It don't matter about Gavin and Lucy not 
The English will have to be back a week I think.
Yeah.
And it don't matter about Gavin and Lucy not coming in Wednesday night, don't worry.
Don't worry.
No, we'll put the English back a week
Yeah.
erm  I think  and what I'll try and do, I'll try and bring erm, I've got two on the Thursday and I'll try and bring them forward to the Monday, cos Monday's a baker's day isn't it?
Yes it is actually.
Yeah.
Yeah, they don't go back till Tuesday do they?
You see, so I could erm
Yeah, that's right, bring them forward to Monday.
I could change the times on Monday a bit.
Yeah.
Yeah, course you could.
Yeah, no problem!
So erm  but I 
Yeah.
think i , we'll we'll we'll put the English back a week
Yeah, that's no problem!
and erm  give Gavin and Lucy a miss on that Wednesday.
Yeah.
That's fine!
Because there's a special offer  erm  on erm  there's a, there's a Forte Hotel in Woodbridge in Suffolk  which is a nice hotel  and they've got a special offer for erm  five nights for the price of three!
 Ho That's very good!
And that's erm
Two nights free 
bed 
then!
full English breakfast and, and an evening meal!
Erm  so it's worth doing that we I, cos I was gonna go  I was gonna go Thursday and just come back on the Monday but  as it is now we'll go Wednesday and have Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday night, so we'll come back on the Monday.
Erm  then, you know we should be back  without any problem by er  quarter past four.
If we're not
Yeah.
I would give you a ring but erm
Yeah, don't worry!
Don't worry.
And it'll give us a chance to go and see my  aged aunt.
Mm.
We haven't seen her for about ten, twelve years and er
Yeah.
she's the last one of the family that's really  still alive and she's well into her eighties  and erm 
Yes.
I, you know I, I just loathe the thought of leaving it and leaving it until the next thing is you're going up for her funeral you know?
Yeah well , that's right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I think her husband will probably die before she will but erm he cos he's older than she is even, but erm and he's not very well, hasn't been for a long time.
Mm.
So we'll go up there.
And there's other friends up there we haven't seen so
And it's a break innit?
Dozen  dozen years or so.
We haven't been up there since seventy eight you see when my mother 
 
moved down here!
Yeah.
That's the last time we've been to Suffolk.
Yeah.
And it's 
So erm 
a break as well.
Innit?
It's a long time.
We were gonna go this we , coming weekend actually erm an , because that would have been easier to put everybo , move everybody this week  but   are coming, is coming next weekend !
Ah!
And
Yeah.
And so erm  we didn't wanna put them off and I like to be here  because erm  Bob likes to go on the Moor as well, so we shall go out on the Moor with the dog a couple of times 
Yeah.
you know.
Yeah.
And that'll be nice!
So erm
Yeah.
Oh that's alright then love!
Alright?
Yep!
That's okay.
Well anyway, Lucy tomorrow two o'clock if she's out, she'll come in quarter past five  and then erm that's it until  the Monday after.
No!
They're coming in on the Wednesday aren't they?
Oh no that's right!
Lucy will come in on the Wednesday.
Lucy will come in on the Wednesday.
Yeah!
Lucy will come in on the 
Yeah.
Wednesday.
Course she will!
Erm
And then the Monday after, and then then it's the Monday after that.
Yeah, it's okay.
Alright?
Yep!
I've got it.
I've got it .
And I'm, and the following Monday.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah.
Right let's go!
Okay.
They reckon the driver of that car fell asleep!
Gosh!
Because apparently there was no brake marks on the road at all!
Just swerved off into the erm
Probably  
hard shoulder.
safely.
Yo mean you know cos of
Yeah that's right.
Been a nasty accident happening to us.
Shall I ring them up?
No.
He needs buttering up.
See it doesn't give addresses  for the hotel.
It's, oh yeah call now on  that's what you'll have to ri ing, the central  or see your agent.
Perhaps see Tony tomorrow cos presumably you get a bit of commission.
Well could do that couldn't I?
Especially as I went in and he gave me those brochures.
Mm.
I Think I'd better put the car  in the garage cos I think Steve looks as if he's gonna be  cleaning erm  Gavin's go-cart.
Morning Steve!
Alright?
Yep!
It's mild today innit?
Isn't it mild?
Incredible!
I mean it's just  it's just a different life isn't it?
Turn the heating up one night thinking it's gonna be cold in the morning,ha 
I know.
and it's er  boiling hot.
Oh I see, so you're making a  the most of his absence are you?
That's right, yeah.
Thought I'd get it cleaned up now cos he won't be needing it.
Till we start racing again.
When d'you start racing again?
March the eighth.
March the, oh!
. Oh!
Yeah, it's not a bad way to start.
Yeah!
I suppose he'll be sort of 
Yeah I should think so.
on his way to Germany now I 
Yeah.
suppose?
I think so, yeah.
They were gonna breakfast in Germany so, I don't know whether they stop overnight or what, I  
No they don't, they travel.
Do they?
Yep!
No,th er er I mean he would of  you see it's about erm  well it's two hundred miles to border  from Calais
Oh.
to erm  where is it?
Near  Arken where they cross the border  that's about two hundred miles  and then, you know, by the time they've gone through  er er, they'll sort of be well down into erm  sort of Stuttgart way I think that sort of area probably.
Mm.
And there's service stations on the motorway you see where you can stop for breakfast.
Mm mm.
And then erm  they'll have a couple of hours or an hour break there probably and then erm
Yeah.
they'll journey on to ge er erm  where's he going, Kittsbeile ?
So gi , they'll probably go down to Munich  and then drop down on the motorway from Munich
Mhm.
erm  the corsair there, the motorway goes through  ah, what's the name of the place?
 Wurley I think it is
Mhm.
 Ergel Er, no  something like that anyway.
Erm, and then it's not far from there from Ki to  Kittsbeil you know, sort 
Mm.
off the track.
So erm
Mm.
Oh .
Either that or they go through to Salzburg  and then come off the motorway there.
I don't know which, well you know i , when it's that sort of area it's , as you say I mean it's  from here it's nine hundred, at least nine hundred miles  you know it's about two hundred and fifty to Dover isn't it?
Aha.
And then you've got about  you know, you got six hundred and, six to seven hundred miles the other side.
Well that camper can cope with it.
I know.
You know I I sometimes wonder when you go by plane and you get all the  the  hooha at the airport and you, you get fog delay and delay, get delayed here and delayed there  think why on earth you bother you go by train!
Go by plane!
But  when you go by coach you you realise why you go by plane, you know!
That's right.
Cos we went to  Winterlarken the year before last, was it the year before last?
No!
I don't know when we went on the coach  to  Mannock Farm Camp Site  erm  you know, and it's a long old haul!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yo you know sleep in the, you sort of have a night's sleeping in the coach while it's travelling but 
Yeah but 
it's , it's never the same you see.
It isn't until ah th , the only time we did have a smashing journey, we went with erm  oh  what's, what's the name of a local firm from Plymouth?
No.
No.
 Traffens 
We went with  Traffens one year, the first year in fact we went with  Traffens and that was super because  when we got to the other side  sort of, it was then about ten o'clock  he said well if you  if there's enough people want it we will transform your  transform your seats into bunks  and most people wanted  and  you were able to  push the seats  so one, two pairs of seats  one of the seats went up and the other went down  and you had four bunks
My God!
flat  across two seats  two pairs of seats.
And you, you know, you used, you used anything as a pillow that you'd got
Aha.
erm  and you were flat.
And I had a se , you know, I mean you you were aware that you were in a coach and you'd you'd wake up occasionally and realise you we , but by enlarge I had eight hours sleep!
Oh!
And it was super!


And the fact that you lie down you you yo , you spread the weight you see 
Yeah, that's right.
it's not all on your bottom  or on 
Yeah.
the sle lower part of your back yo 
That's right, right.
and you can turn over one way or you can turn over the other way.
Mm.
And it was really, it was very good!
But they haven't done that, you know, the next time we went they hadn't got that sort of seating arrangement.
I don't know why because that seems to me to be  a first rate way of travelling, you know!
lay down, yeah!
I think it's super!
Anyway i , d'you wanna use your hose I mean I'll put the car in the garage if you do.
Yeah I'll think I'll start washing  so I er
Well I suppose I can leave mine out you might do mine as well!


Cor!
Yes, the morning before last, I mean it was so cold in the morning!
There was such a heavy frost!
Oh yeah!
Yeah!
No, this  mild is very warm, you know.
Very warm.
Strange though.
Bring the bulbs on.
Bring the bulbs on .
Mm  I like that one up!
Do you?
Yeah.
I expect to go higher  really.
It's just on, it's just using its  ha hanging on the existing one.
That isn't Felicity Kendal on the front there is it?
Good gracious!
She doesn't need a licence I know that.
But I mean, you know  yeah, during the war you got one for
You did it yourself.
Nobody was  doing that then.
You swapped your provisional licence automatically for a full licence.
Well and get a couple of days like today these daffs will be out you know!
Yeah.
And now co , considering it's still February we've got quite a lot of blossom out in that garden.
Absolutely!
I was looking at it the other day and I was thinking all the bits that are out now.
I mean those snowdrops are 
Still the holly even.
Yeah.
You know, with the erm 
That's it , the berries on.
But those snowdrops are really standing up now!
Yeah!
And the crocuses are out.
And this, these other things are out, whatever you call them!
The primroses.
And the daffs are  just about to  burst out.
Hi Maggie!
How you doing?
Yes, another chip butty.
Although, erm  you know, I I can remember the time when I have not been  a , quite enjoyed having bread and butter and chips.
Yeah..
I see he's still on that go-cart!
What?
He's still working on the go-cart.
Really!
Yes, that's a good idea!
I think I must have a drink, I've been thirsty as well.
 Poo 
I suppose they have to keep the go-carts  you know 
Well it's 
I suppose it's better than
it's an investment of course.
First time it was to the  did he say whether  Gavin got off alright?
Oh he got off alright?
He'll still be on his way of course.
Yeah.
Well it's what, dinner times or evening time?
Evening time.
They were hoping to get their skis and parkers sorted out so that they could get off I think tomorrow  but they only got five days skiing  cos they leave again, either Sunday morning or Saturday night.
That's the trouble with these damn  
 
you know they went and they tried for the erm flying business.
You get the extra days skiing in.
Yep!
Oh it seems a long way to go just for five days skiing.
When you go down to  again get him to give you that one   
Rain water?
Yeah.
Yes I will do.
Whereabouts have they gone?takes so long to get there so I mean .
You could do actually cos I've had some in the bottom  underneath.
Oh, well this is 
Mhm.
what I said!
She'd have to put that in the compost.
What's that?
Well it's the fat.
Oh put it down here I'll cut it up and give it to the birds.
Okay.
Well I always feed the birds.
Yeah.
Gave them a bit of chicken.
Not cooked or anything.
That won't matter.
I'll only cut it up smaller that's how they like it.
Anything with fat they eat.
Oh!
I'll be glad to sit down again!
You've got the  to do it and th I'll have to be ever so careful I'm we wearing  a .
And so  kept on finding   bits of the erm  Angora wool  sort of in the .
Oh dear!
Did you?
I think there's only another one of these down there.
Where's that?
I shi , think I used it up.
Yeah , I think you have used the o , one other.
So if I see any more offers  can't seem to find any.
Found four erm  
Yep!
Surprising to see  children , they're going back so soon.
Mm mm!
Did you do the erm  this?
Mm?
Yes.
Quite a saga, you know all of this.
So with my    doo da it puts out sort of 
Tuesday.
It's Tuesday, yeah.
I've got this  you know .
It means that when the
When the other side have got 
 
when the other have got one off.
Again.
That's two nil.
That's it.
But is he ?
Yeah  but the top two went through you see.
Oh I see.
You see?
Oh yes!
I must know how, I've been looking at  at the .
Well that's it!
They've scored again!
They've erm
Have they finished?
No, not yet.
I could do with having someone to take this out.
Right!
Let's see  and that could go to the compost.
Is this the pairs?
He's playing with er  oh no it's not, it's not it's singles.
Oh does he usually with the chair?
Oh yeah .
Well this is .
He's now up five four.
Ooh ooh ooh ooh !
Do you think you could just sweep that up
Yeah.
for me, to save me bending down there.
Mm.
Ooh ooh!
He could now lose it!
Hey?
He could now lose it on the last ball !
Okay.
He's missed it!
He's only got two and he wanted three!
Really!
He, ha!
So now it's, so he wants one and  Bryant one for two.
Ah!
Gracious me!
Bryant thought he'd lost it then!
He should of done really it was
are they both ?
No, I think, oh I don't know he's an exiled Scot.
Did he have a little  cos he's in er  oh no, of course he's wearing the blue of Scotland isn't he?
Well of course they have to wear different colours anyway don't they?
Mm.
Nice that  isn't it?
Yeah.
Short innit?
, Andy Thompson innit?
Yeah.
Oh, medium length.
So
Well Thompson needs 
Bryant 
Thompson needs one and Bryant needs two.
And that's Thompson.
I'm going with David this Saturday.
Worked hard hasn't he?
To get back there.
He has worked hard.
He only needed two at the last end.
Thompson needed three.
Erm  but he just had sort of he wasn't so good.
Well that's a better ball!
If he'd done that in the last erm, he'd have won it.
And he's come back and sort of go round the back cos that other fellow sort of he came down
Mm.
and then he appeared up the top there.
They come down to see  what the situation really is.
Please!
Come on then!
Oh it's gone further though this
Yeah.
Well presumably they si , they have to throw or they're supposed to throw, or have they not?
Cos he just said that should of been enough.
Oh, he's looking worried!
Ooh ooh!
Ee ee!
Well that's much better than the other two isn't it?
Yeah, I don't, yeah.
Could be two.
Yeah we've dropped two more.
And he's got two more balls.
Mm.
Well, is that a problem?
He's gonna try and knock 
So he's gotta  again.
Yeah.
Oh it's going right through!
He's trying to knock David out of course isn't he?
Mm mm.
And drop himself in.
Yeah.
Well I should think he's now got wo one red I should think.
I suppose you could say David had it so often    that it be nice for him to get it.
I should think David will come out on the forehand and try and knock that  blue ball out.
The one that's 
He's only got one there.
Mm.
Yes I 
The re 
thought he only got one.
Interesting to see which way he comes.
I think he'll come round this way.
Oh no he's not!
He's coming round the  back the other way.
Ooh ooh!
I th probably only red still.
It's still his one.
Still only got one.
Yes.
Well he's got three  so this is the fourth one from this fellow isn't it?
That's right!
And Bryant has the last one?
No.
A chalk.
So it just needs  David to get through?
He can do what he likes 
Yeah.
with this last ball really.
Well, yeah.
This red one.
If he gets another red he's won the match.
But if he  if he plays it and misses it he could give it to Thompson.
And if he  if he doesn't play  it'll be a draw.
Oh not just , not just one ball he needs to play 
Yes.
but two.
He needs two.
Thompson didn't play his.
It's all or nothing on this one!
Oh dear!
So has that fellow won it?
No, it's one all.
I it it's one red, so they're now  six all.
Oh gosh!
It doesn't matter then.
Bryant has now got to draw within four inches of the jack otherwise he's out.
He's fired a shot and he's missed!
So that's
It's out.
That's out, yeah it's Thompson.
Right.
Couldn't have been closer, mind you could it?
Two all and six all.
Fancy going to the supermarket like that?
I'll put these on for erm  I bet erm  Bryant  was sort of he wasn't feeling he's hard done by and i in fact he, you know went 
Yeah.
He's always  pleasant.
They look rather nice don't they?
great grandfather   a big house


before he was married his employer  pictures off the wall and gave them to him
Gosh
as a wedding present
Yeah.
m
Makes you wonder how much erm ours is worth, not as much as that obviously but er 
Cos ours is eighteen something or other isn't it?
Is it?
Mm.
Ours looks homemade to me.
No I don't think it is.
I bet the local shop sold out of helmets.
Mm?
Bet the local shop sold out of helmets.
Mm.
You couldn't get them actually.
Mm.
and many more wearing them.
Yes   
Yes she did, yeah, mhm.
Yeah  
Yeah alright we'd better go and  put the flowers in because I put a lot of the plants out this mo today.
taking them indoors though  
Yeah I think so.
Fifteen.
About twenty three she would of said
Twenty three percent.
herself, yeah.
Anyway erm  what sh when I said to you when you, you said to me last thing   oh yes that's right, and he, anybody that father's spoken to who has sort of had this Walkman on him, which has had umpteen sort of erm batteries and what have you  tapes conversations, now she'll be back again next Friday er to pick it up.
That's, that's, that's what it was when you, you know, saying you're coming back next Friday, that's what it was because father said to me what, what, what erm when is  coming so I said well I don't know.
But er she's coming a and gives him twenty five pounds for what  he's done  oh he came in, he came into the kitchen, it's ever so funny, he came into the kitchen  to tell me about this you see   Anyway he came back in there and I said to him I'm not really enthusiastic about the thought  er thinking that I was involved with this as well so the dear woman turned round  and said to me it's only your husband   so I said well I'd better go back in the kitchen where I know my place.
Said she slapping in her hand.
I slapped my hand.
No but anyway, that erm  well, well we, well he is going to be  twenty five pounds better off.
I'm not.
You'll be twenty five pound better off cos you're gonna g we 
am I getting it?
Yes.
Yes beca 
Oh I'm gonna have the twenty five pounds 
Cos you get twenty five pound worth of vouchers.
Oh it's only vouchers is it?
Oh I thought it was money.
Well I thought it was to start with.
I expect  Dixons.
Anyway er so they're coming anyway.
Well erm I hope that erm you, won't be too long before you're reunited with your husband.
Where is he?
He's gonna have it at Wendy's, I said to Bridget oh he said no because I've
Wendy's?
Yeah cos erm he's taking erm erm  David up to Andover which is his next posting
Oh I see.
and David  phone him up and said will you take us up dad.
Cheek isn't it really, I mean he could have got the train couldn't he?
I gather there's a  yeah alright 
Oh!
all is forgiven.
But   no  yes 
When's he come back, tomorrow?
so he'll be, he'll be back later on tonight obviously.
Aah you're, and you're on earlies tomorrow?
Oh well  yeah, thank you.
What?
I think I'd better take these books back down again I think, oh mind you I can put them up here perhaps.
I got one, there was one up here actually.
Yeah I knew there was you see  
Yeah.
you know Austria and Switzerland  
Mm 
Yeah there was one up and one down.
Erm  what was I going to say?
Oh yes, I know, this  that one is really and truly an office lamp.
I know it is, yes.
I realize that.
Yes.
Yeah I mean it, it's perfect really for er well for me cos  
Well 
as well 
Yeah.
erm you know when  the light  
Well I knew it was but it the fact that it had a nice easy switch in the base  was something that I'd been looking for.
Well that, that's, you know,too hot I think to have that one on today  so m so much milder.
But erm 
Well it certainly is much milder.
Right.
Have you got  the erm  that paper that had that sort of erm
No I've got it in, it's in  oh you've got it there
well I had it in there.
It's not there now.
I put it in there 
I haven't touched it.
cos that's why I put them all together.
Or did I put it in this one?
No I didn't.
You must have picked it up.
What do you mean I must have picked it up?
Well because I put it in that book.
I would never have taken anything out of that book that you had put in because I wouldn't have known what it was about.
What day was it?
I've got no idea.
Here are these here 
Right.
that I've just picked up off the  here.
I like the way I must have taken it out .
Well I know I put them both there together ready for this morning.
Perhaps that's what you intended doing and never got around to doing 
No I know I did it, I d I, often I 
Well I  
often I don't know 
hadn't even seen it.
but I did know that one.
 

It was so cold the other day, you know last time we were in here.
If it's cold they'll give you a fire.
Mm?
They'll give you a fire if it's cold  the other day when Tony was here with his mum  they had a  fan heater 
Oh.
Well it'll probably be alright, it's not so cold today actually.
 

Good morning Muriel.
they missed it last week but it's supposed to be correct.
You know, they counted it but they missed putting it in.
So do we count it, do we put it ?
It wasn't counted in last week's at all.
It wasn't counted in?
No, so
So we  put it in as loose collection?
Yes.
Right.
Morning Muriel.
Morning Margaret.
Alright?
You look a bit sleepy.
Well I had a late night last night my hamster came, kept me up late at night.
A hamster?
Yeah, he slept on my bed.
Well it was, I was just trying to persuade it back to its normal cage when the, like,everywhere.
They like, they gnawing at all the box.
Oh I see .
Oh.
You'll have to give up hamsters won't you, most definitely.
Oh you've got two have you?
Yeah.
Well!
Perhaps they have to have their noisy times sometimes.
Nocturnal.
Nocturnal, yes.
nocturnal?
I suppose they are.
Put them over here look and that  that's it.
Cos there was only one collection yesterday wasn't there?
Aren't we the lucky ones today.
I think we've only had one for ages and ages.
Oh we  
You want to come you want to come to St Gregory's.
If there isn't a collection though, an official one, they'll have one of their own for the   


I think the Bishop's cutting out the 
He cut them down, that's right, yes, yes.
Quite right.
Quite right.
 

Now, what was I going to do?
Oh
The envelopes?
before the envelopes .
Fancy, you wouldn't believe that they'd miss that would you?
This got missed out?
This got missed out apparently.
Well they say it's alright, I  I think I shall probably check it.
Well you'll check it anyway.
Yeah.
Oh, oh we of little faith.
Yes  right.
Indeed.
Have you broken up erm
Yes.
Do you have the whole week off?
Oh that's good.
No we broke up on Thursday.
Thursday?
Yeah so  
Oh yes I think erm  Paul broke up on Thursday.
Think it's those teacher training days.
Ah that's what it is isn't it?
Yes, mm.
Just gives you an extra day off doesn't it?
Think that's what they organize it for really.
Do you want another pen?
I've probably got one in my bag anyway.
Well we keep on trying Father  we don't get a lot of encouragement, I mean you're only having one collection on Sunday nowadays.
Do you want two?


Erm  we went  I went into the hall and saw that fire.
Erm, would erm Mr  sort of look after it and, you know, cos, would he be responsible for it do you think?
Because it's, the school children go in there as well you see and that's a little bit of a worry but, but if they don't use it it'd be alright.
But you know I'm just wondering what would happen when erm
You see the, the elderly people on a Sunday morning who go in there and there's some, some rather 
Yeah.
disabled people and, and it's very cold in there.
They're too cold.
Well,wh you know,wh what happens when the cylinder goes?
Do you think he would erm  know what 
pay out of the parish I suppose.
Mm?
No well I mean I can pay for it, it's just a question of getting it and sort of erm  only we're not often here on a Sunday, if Mr  is here, is it  
He's not.
He's not.
he goes with Father .
Not Father , to erm  er  erm   that place?
Ashburton.
Ashburton.
You see there, there was a  er not paying for it, asking about it, the finance committee  how very cold it was for the elderly and they sit in there while some get taken home and 
Doris, you're quite elderly aren't you?
I'm very elderly, my husband's very elderly, we manage very well.
Well yes but you tell them that will you?


And they'll tell you to go to hell


if you tell them that.
Well I'm on my way there anyway you see  
 
But no I mean that's not nice to say that because there are cripples
Yeah.
and people who just people 
But some people feel the cold more than others.
who er yeah  and 
Don't they?
there's very few going in to coffee because of the cold in the 
Yeah.
hall, it is a very cold  
Yeah.
Well when we have our meeting
Well it's just a question of really of, of some if someone can, you know, I mean
Are you going to put a new fire in or something?
No no we've  we, we were talking about it actually, what we've done  and erm  of course it's the school children we've gotta think about
Cos we have our meetings  
There's nowhere to put it away is there?
It'll slide on th on castors.
It'll slide on ca I mean I moved it into the corner so that erm 
Yeah is there anywhere that it can be put away when the children are not there?
Or when the children are there.
Well I mean the children, I mean if I go into the school and I, and say to them look there is a fire there but, you know, please will you not use it but it's just a question of whether the children fiddle with it really, that's
 

We'll have to think about it this week while they're away, they're on holiday this week.
Yes they are, that's true.
But it's also a question of, you know, erm  when it's exhausted
Yeah well we can always arrange that.
Yeah.
But I'll talk to you some time about the heating because I mean the trouble is that no 
Well er er the whole thing, the, the hall is, is, is a big worry because they won't insure us  because it's dangerous.
There's no insurance on that hall  to my knowledge  there's no insurance.
I didn't know that.
Michael said to me, the first thing he said to me when I came here, that's the first I'd do, knock it down he said, it's, it's dangerous it's not .
That's what he said, the first thing he said to me when I came here.
That's, that's the first job you've gotta do, get that, rid of that.
So there's no point in spending a lot of money on it?
No that's what I say and, and I've written to the insurer  to the insurer to tell, ask them what is the situation and we're still waiting an answer.
I see.
But we, didn't we  
I thought, I mean I, the fire people gave it the all clear.
Erm and with, and with the erm with those fan heaters in there, there is  as it were, no fire risk from it.
No.
Well fan heaters can be on you know but you can't hear, feel them unless you're next to them I think.
Mm mm.
And the overhead heaters were no use either, I mean that's why we put the fan heaters in cos they were better than the
Well let me wait, I'll tell, I'll sh I'll tell you what the insurers say when they come back, when it comes.
I'm waiting for them to answer.
Right.
But it's not insured I can tell you that.
I have no erm er policy for it.
And I've, I was, I don't know if it was Michael or somebody else told me that they wouldn't insure it.
Oh   well we've never known that have we?
No we've never known that, haven't heard that.
Well that's, well there's no 
Cos it was sort of insured when we first took it over.
Yeah, there's no record of an insurance in the, the file.
Oh I see.
And so I, we have written to them and waiting for an answer.
Right.
So when we, you see there's no good putting anything in there  erm  or doing anything with it  if we're not going to use it  or if it's gotta come down in another year or two.
No.
Mind you when I said it's gotta come down it might be five years before it comes down, but you've gotta think of your outlay first.
Yeah I mean there's no point in re-roofing it for instance.
Oh no.
Not as, as far as I know.
But we'll see what they say.
Is the insurance through the diocese Father?
Well it's, it's done  it's a di er no
No.
it's done privately but it's, the diocese have appointed the insurers.
I see.
We're done through Peter 
Mhm.
he's the insurance broker and it all works through Norwich Union.
Mhm.
Erm  and he's got some very good quotes for us
Yes.
you don't er insure a building according to its size now but according to the number of people who use it.
It's far er fairer.
Mm.
I mean you might have a massive building  
And hardly anybody using it.
you've gotta pay for it.
Yeah.
So it's according to the number of people that use it, go to mass, how much you pay
Mm.
erm on the insurance.
And it covers everything but as far as I know, and I'm willing to be corrected
Yeah I don't know.
that, that is not insured.
No well we don't know, we had thought that it was.
Especially after 
No as far as 
it was all done up.
Mm.
Yes  after it was sort of 
Well as far as well I know that Michael 
renovated.
Michael said to me, the first thing he said to me, that has to come down.
How funny, he never ever said anything like that to us.
You've not heard that either?
told me.
That's the first thing, I know nothing about, no well I know nothing about structure or anything else, you know I mean 
But they had I don't know if you know it had been absolutely dilapidated, the hall, I mean it was absolutely run down and it wasn't used.
But then there was this erm er er what was it called?
The scheme er er to help 
The scheme, the youth scheme and er  
The 
youngsters
Oh
so that if  
The work, work something something scheme and and they, they'd refurbish it, all th th that we had to do was to pay for the materials, they provided the labour.
And in fact, you know, I mean they er they made it 
Well it looks alright to me.
they made it useful again.
But if I, if I
Usable.
if I had anything to do with it, I would like those, those gas fires that we've got in the room at the back of the church there, they're ideal.
The trouble is there 
The trouble is there's 
no mains gas 
there's no gas.
into the hall.
No well 
That is why we didn't, we would of liked to have had it but the cost to put the mains gas in was going to be so enormous
Oh well
and the electric supply is limited to the heating that we've got, we can't put any more in because the mains supply again is not sufficient.
 
This is amazing because in Cornwall they would put in the gas for nothing.
Well I mean, you know, I mean
Cos we had it done in our hall.
they are now , perhaps if you had a word with them 
We, we we had it in our hall, we, they put it into the building for nothing
Yeah
and then you have to wire erm  plumb it in or whatever they call it  
Yes  
Yes, that's fair enough.
but they put it in to the meter in  
Well well th this was the problem, it was gonna cost I don't know how many hundreds of pounds just to have the s gas supply put to the hall and we felt that, at that time, we couldn't do it.
Well I had the one  
Presumably there's no gas here is there?
There's gas here.
Yes  
You have got gas here, yes, mhm there's gas  
Well that might be that might be worth a a query 
 
I mean that might be worth a query if the Finance Committee are sort of erm er er worrying about the heating.
Well well we'll have to see what, what the, what the er insurance man says first
Yeah.
Yes mhm.
but it's a long time pl er term, we've gotta look at it  and we've got to do something about it  for, for heating  if we're going to use it, if we're going to let it or something
Yeah
then there's got to be heat in there.
Mm.
But you see the rent  Father 
We each want the same  same thing.
the rent of the hall is very cheap.
Yes, but they'll have to
But they have to put fifty pence into the 
Yeah 
the meter  
yeah well  the gas ones the same  
That's that's fifty pence a  yes?
 
Mhm mhm
They have to sort out  
But i i i if you find out about the insurance, see what that is 
Yes  
and then perhaps sort of contact the gas people again and see
Yes
I mean this was, how long ago ?
Oh this was seven years ago I suppose.
About seven years ago so  
two years ago when I was at  we had the gas put into the hall.
Yeah.
They didn't charge to put it in.
No.
Well it would be worthwhile investigating anyway 
Yeah 
after we hear about the insurance.
find out  yeah it's all an ongoing thing
Yeah  it's all go isn't it ?
Okay then thanks.
 

It's good isn't it?
  

Well I think so.
   

I thought I was giving you a lift  
Well I, I thought of perhaps, you know, of giving you a lift somewhere.
Good.
Well I'm eleven forty one
candles.
Well that was  here and Saint Gregory's you see.
One two three four five six seven eight  nine  ten  ten fifty, ten seventy, ten eighty, eleven, eleven forty one  Right I think we can put it all together can't we and erm get a balance, yes?
Yes I've added mine up.
Have you got  Post Office?
I've got the Post Office one.
Yeah.


Well it makes you feel that you might do a bit of work with something
Oh but I erm I mean my husband  we had some nice dung  
Yeah 
round the roses and I didn't fancy doing it so


so I thought let him do that,
 
Well they want them to do their bit.
You've got a nice lot of roses have you?
Yeah, yeah.
Have you got a big garden?
Erm
Biggish?
well I suppose in front we've got  two dozen roses I should think, could be more  
Yeah 
cos some of them are getting
Yeah.
and need renewing.
And we've got  out the back as well cos we did away with some of the vegetable garden because I mean 
Yes.
You don't need so much now anyway.
well  not really because, and I think you can buy it sometimes as cheap, by the time you 
Yeah.
Yeah.
keep on erm
Yeah.
getting caterpillars off and
That's right.
 
rest of it  biggest part of it and some of, part if it's in to grass and the other part I think is gradually gonna go to grass I think 
We've only got a very tiny little garden
Yeah.
We've got a big 
er but 
quite a big bit out the back behind our garage, there's quite a big bit there really.
mm we've got erm just a little erm front garden
Mm
but we've a lovely lot of daffodils, they're all out now they're really beautiful 
Yeah, yeah I know.
and crocuses
Yeah.
and erm  snowdrops.
Yeah.
We've got a little tiny pond in one half of the front garden 
Oh yes yeah.
and er that's very nice
Yeah.
to see the fishes and 
We've got a la quite a big lawn I suppose.
Yeah.
Before we came over here when we lived in  we had an enormous front lawn
Yeah yeah 
and the back well it must have been the best part of   should think  a third of an acre  
Yeah 
plot that we were on.
Yeah.
Too big.
Too big I expect yeah 
not the time we didn't, we haven't got the to  
Well that's it, it's like my husband I mean he's working, he hasn't got the time and I 
That's right.
I haven't got the time nor the energy, I mean not so much 
That's right.
as I used to.
I mean I 
Yeah 
cut the grass so
Mm
he doesn't do that, I cut it with an electric cutter.
Yeah
But I think that 
Yeah but erm we used to have just an  
But it used 
he said he
it used to take half a day to cut our grass.
To cut the grass.
I do too, yeah,
You know?
Yeah .
We didn't have an erm mower in those days either did we?
We didn't to start with, no.
We've got two, we've got the one that runs on petrol as well but I wouldn't use that one.
No.
Well er actually Bob bought this other one cos he knew I liked, I quite enjoy cutting the lawn, I  
Yes mhm.
I don't dislike it at all but er 
But we've only got a ti now we've only got a tiny little lawn
Yeah.
but I mean if it was sort of about  s s five yards, it wouldn't be five yards by three yards.
No.
I suppose ours is from there  to over there I suppose, the front one  
Yeah now ours were nothing like, I mean
No  
half this room and that would be our lawn in the front.
Not, you know, wouldn't even be as long as that.
No.
But we've got sort of as I say the daffodils out there and 
I took up a lot of my daffs and started, erm erm I never take them up every year
No we don't, we never take ours up.
er but these had got really, they were choking the roses and
Yeah.
and I took up quite a few, thinned them out and my sister 
Yeah 
they live at North Bovey
Yeah
well they can see the Manor House Hotel from where they live but 
Yeah 
but my brother-in-law's gotta sit on a machine to cut his grass cos he's got 
Yeah.
such a  
Yeah.
and they've  I gave them to them and they put them on the hedges
Oh yes?
and I expect they're coming out and looking 
Yes mhm.
a picture now.
Well ours are, ours are lovely at the moment erm 
Yeah.
as I say erm we've got those but we were looking the other day and were quite amazed at how many different flowers there are out.
Flowers yeah, that's right.
You know oh there's a  out there as well isn't there?
Yes there is.
Er we've got a magnolia tree sort of out the front
Yeah, yeah.
er we had a lovely one but frost got that a couple of years ago.
But this one erm 
I love the magnolias but they don't like the frost do they?
you know, it looks as if it it will sort of er be showing you know  quite 
Yeah  
It's one of those  ones.
ones.
Oh yeah
star ones, you know?
Yeah 
But erm  and then we've got still, we, we were looking  we've still got holly with berries
Yeah, do you know I think, cos I go through the woods every day with the 
Yeah 
dog you see, but er you can tell it hasn't been that tough a winter because there's still 
Mm 
berries up there  
Yeah, yes.
And we've got a  
 
on, on the side
Mm.
and that's got erm got a lot of berries as well.
Berries yeah, yeah.
But erm, mind you the birds we've got I don't know how many  ever so fond of his birds
Yeah
and he hangs up nuts, I think he's got about 
That's right yeah 
four different little net things of nuts
Yeah.
and he's made a little sort of bird house
That's right, yeah,
er and a seed, we er hang up a seed thing so we've got loads of birds come 
Yeah, birds that's right, yeah.
which is sort of quite pleasant.
We also have the squirrels coming   
Oh yeah  they're quite funny really.
Oh they are.
There was a piece on the television the other day 
Yes 
Yeah we saw that 
have you seen that?
Yeah 
yeah.
I don't think our squirrel is anything like as inte as intelligent as that one.
that one 
 


Well that one really is I mean cos I see them up in the woods quite a lot  
Yeah, yeah 
cos the dog chases them  before she's got anywhere near them  
That's right yeah.
When when we have my daughter's dog with us
Yeah
erm she just takes off and 
Yeah, that's right, yeah.
 
If she had one wish in life it would be that she could climb trees.
Yeah  I suppose so, yeah.
Well she, she'll take cats on 
Oh yeah
I think she thinks they're rabbits
Yeah?
I'm sure she does


but er   what's she seen?
She'll go up up the path  and all I could see was this cat, and it was hanging on for dear life up this big tree and there 
Yeah, yeah 
was she sat at the bottom you know 
Oh yes  
thinking oh
well Jess, Jess will sort of, if a cat came into our garden, she'd see it off 
Yeah well then we don't get cats in our garden cos she, she, they know she's there and then
she would see it off in no time at all.
Mm.
But we seem to er where we live erm at the top of Church Road
Yeah I know yes, yeah 
you're going down into  park
Yeah
whole lot of those sort of big houses have been converted into flats 
Flats yeah, yeah.
and erm I think there must be some people there who have brought cats in because all of a sudden there are a whole lot of cats about which there weren't before you see 
Cats, oh yeah I see, no that's right.
so that er they, they haven't learned to keep  out of our garden yet   
But they have to in our garden because erm I know the first  she was a  the one we've got and the first day me husband brought her he went up to fetch her out the kennel and she sort of saw this cat and it's a  
 
one it's  just over the fence and that  


and there was this ginger and white cat hanging on to our fence 
on for dear life  
you know she walked straight to me again and   


But she doesn't come in the garden now  
Aah  
It's amazing how it all seems to happen, in a way, quickly  
All of a sudden innit?
Yeah that's right.
Yeah  
But the trouble is then you see what wants doing outside then don't you?
too much.
Look at my windows and think  it's about time they were cleaned  
I know I'm  
Four five eight ninety nine.
That's right, yeah.
Another penny would have made it a tidy
Yeah it would wouldn't it?
Mm.
Right.
Ah well it's gotta go into Muriel.
Oh we'd better write in the 
Yes.
Right erm  I shall have to get Muriel some change actually.
So do you want to write it down?
I've got pound coins, one hundred and eighty
One eighty 
er fifty pence, thirty pounds fifty
thirty fifty
twenty pence, twenty two forty
twenty two forty
ten pences, twenty pounds exactly.
Now I, is that just silver?
Oh no it's er it's oh twenty four sixty.
Twenty four sixty  and bronze is the same together 
Bronze will be one  forty nine.
One forty nine.
So that's   is ten nineteen  two   and four   So is that three fifty eight?
Two fifty eight.
Two fifty eight ninety nine.
Erm  that's one one ninety nine  three over seven  eight, eighteen twenty one, twenty three, twenty five  and cheques two hundred is it?
Two fifty eight ninety nine and the cheque is two hundred, yeah.
This is more cash paid in from the last three weeks actually.
That's what I was saying you see, that's 
There's two hundred and thirty four, two hundred and twelve, two hundred and forty seven.
That's what I was saying that 
Yeah 
erm
two hundred and fifty eight ninety nine.
it's amazing 
And look they've put them on the bottom, instead of doing the top ones first, they obviously haven't.
the bank?
I don't want to go to the bank but what I want to do is to go to erm 
Oh Tony's?
Tony's.
Yes  
Erm  yes I, I've got to go back with  the money to 
You've got to bring  money first, yes.
So if you want to go anywhere  I will  I'll see you back at the car shall I?
Yes?
Can you tell me,do you know if it will be okay for me to come in at quarter past four?
Quarter past four?
Yeah.
Right, not two o'clock?
And not quarter past five?
No 
Okay, quarter past four, righto.
Thank you, thank you.
Right she's coming in at quarter past four 
Oh.
and Joanna will come in at quarter past six.
You've just got the two coming?
Yeah.
Shame they can't get together isn't it?
Well it was just that erm  erm  erm  was it eight weeks your hospital appointment?
Think so.
Oh it was, that was right.
Didn't you write it in?
Yes I have but
Yeah.
I, er I it did 
Oh you thought eight weeks  
Yeah, one two three four, it's gone on to, you know, it's into April and I just wonder whether that was, that's alright.
Yeah well these daffs have really come out now.
Mm.
As you say all down the side there they are all out.
Yeah.
They're probably not so deep you see as the other ones  that side
cos there's not the depth of soil in this one.
I can't remember when, which cos  if you remember I bought some late  some sort of bulbs and I can't remember which.
And you put those in and I can't remember where.
Is this the erm  the 
No 
faulty one?
Er do you want your dinner at dinner time or  
No I don't know what I've done with it it may be upstairs.
Oh don't bother with it
No.
I mean 
Erm  well either that or we can slip it in at quarter past five, how about that?
Oh yes there's that time isn't there?
Yes.
Oh I can see a bag of crisps there, I think I'll indulge.
Gosh   police who found nineteen thousand five hundred pounds at  's tool repair business in Newark yesterday
Did they?
dug up the garden of his cottage home.
Oh 
We believe it had been buried in tin cans and hidden in walls 
Cos I was thinking  
all over the place, it could take months to trace and it is possible we will never find all of it .
Oh dear   Ian Botham's dream of helping England to victory in  his last world cup campaign took thrilling shape in Perth.
Botham inspired England to their nine run win over India with his enthusiasm, experience and will to win.
He was involved in everything, opening the innings, coming back as a runner for Graham Gooch, bowling a match winning spell, holding a vital catch and finally ending the game with a calm run out.
Beefy's presence in the England team was a huge bonus for Gooch.
The big fella is more keyed up than I've seen him for a long time and he is channelling all his energies into one final world cup fling.
Don't ask me how he manages it but there is still an aura about Botham that intimidates even the finest player.


Indian youngster handled England's other bowlers with ease, he looked in tremendous form but when Botham came on and bowled him a harmless straight one, somehow managed to edge it into his pads and nearly played on.
Not that Both would ever admit to bowling a straight one   the ball he produced to finally get rid of  was a gem and it turned the match away from India .
The thing about it is, I mean they've all got eat their words now haven't they?
I mean they've all been sort of saying oh well  you know it's ridiculous to take him, let him play his panto and then sort of just join
Mm
the thing, I mean everybody's been complaining about that  but considering all that  he hasn't done bad has he ?
No.
Oh I see I thought, I don't know why, I thought there was two,ta two sort of  halves to this world cup but there's not
Oh.
it's, it's just the one table.
Oh so they've done  what they've got to do  
Well no I mean they're each gonna play each other obviously  but you see  England, New Zealand and Sri Lanka and West Indies have all got two points from one game, Australia, India, Pakistan and Zimbabwe have all lost so they've got no points from one game, South Africa have still to play.
So I should think it's gonna be the top four  that will go into a knock out competition or something like that at the end, you know?
Yeah.
Yes of course these bookings had to made by the twenty fifth of th of erm February didn't they?
That's right.
Yes, well the twenty sixth was it?
Twenty fifth.
Well that's 
Twenty sixth, twenty sixth.
Yes.
Now that's Wednesday you see so I knew we'd got to do it.
Oh so that's Wednesday   You can even get to the Imperial for two ninety seven pounds per person for five nights.
If you think what the Imperial in Torquay is anyway.
Yeah.
Oh yes it says    this is the first world cup  the new way of playing the qualifying rounds, this is the first world cup where every team has to play each other and it should mean the best sides make the semi-finals.
Under the old two group format it was very much down to luck as to who you were drawn with, the new system is much better, it allows for the odd hiccup, gives an extra dimension to every game and rewards those teams that perform on the day.
Mm.
It also gives the smaller nations like Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe a crack at all the big boys .
So everybody plays everybody else once
Yeah.
and then it's the semi-finals so obviously I should think the top four clubs  will go into the knock out.
Oh so they hadn't have had that at Woodbridge.
Lavenham they have erm  at the Swan there  
Tope?
T O P E that was 
Yeah.
name ?
Yeah.
It's in here.
Well I never ever  
 
heard of them.
Just suddenly remembered it.
Mm now what does it say it was, erm
American pop star or something wasn't it?
Mm  oh well  
An  microwave,
perhaps  horse play interests here.
I've got one here and I can't get it.
No?
Well nine down try  no take over from  S blank  oh that's an E not an L of course, that's better.
Even so S blank, S blank P E blank S E D blank
Sorry?
What was it?
S 
Take over from.
Yeah?
S blank P E 
S blank
P E blank S E D
Superseded
blank.
Superseded, yeah, super.
Well done.
I often can see it  
Yeah 
when it's written down.
Supersedes
supersede or supersedes or superseded.
Superse S E D blank.
S E D E.
Superse oh supersede yeah, of course, supersede, yeah, supersede.
Mm gosh.
a funny thing  the, the chappy who  you know erm  was in the Neighbours and then became a pop star and all the rest 
Mhm 
well I'm trying to think what he was called in it  but his father  his own father  is in fact Doug Willis in the series who's the father of the  that girl Cody
Oh
and what not
mm
he plays father of four Doug Willis in the series and also told Woman's Own magazine that the family on screen  a happy on screen family life made a welcome change from real life.
He brought up Jason alone after splitting from the boy's mother Sue and said I'm very proud  I'm very pro that sort of thing   ohm
I couldn't hear you then?
No it's alright I, I answered myself.
I said yes you did.
What?
Bring out knives .
Yes.
Those erm  erm  fuchsias that we bought  I reckon they've doubled in size.
Mm.
I thought that
goes with that.
Yeah but what would you get with the two?
With the two you get  Tesco's premium teabags, a hundred  plus Tesco's freeze dried gold coffee, two hundred grammes of that plus  packet of erm biscuits.
Well the teabags don't mean anything to us really  
Thought you said something about a chicken.
Well that's if you get the, the next page  which means that you have to have twenty stamps in all.
Oh I see.
You have to have four completed pages
Oh I see.
and with that you would get erm
Oh well 
I'm not likely to have that next week, that's 
No you won't get that, no.
going to need
So you're looking at either these  chocolates or  well you don't want the premium teabags anyway
No.
But then we don't use teabags do we?
I mean 
No.
they could go to parish hall but I'm thinking to myself well  why bother?
Well you can always charge them, could always take the cash for that.
But erm
So how much is the coffee?
Well the coffee is what we got the other day.
Yeah that's about two fifty is it?
Something like that, yeah.
And what else is 
And I've got a spare one of those anyway haven't I?
I bought a spare one anyway.
Yeah.
And you see other than that there's just the biscuits.
Yeah.
And we've got plenty of biscuits there.
Premium teabags, a hundred and sixty  plus the freeze dried gold coffee  plus  spec erm Fox's  speciality selection biscuits.
With the four completed pages  you get a large frozen chicken er six pounds  six pounds four ounces plus  erm  party size, fourteen portions  black forest gateau  plus  a bottle of Bordeaux white wine.
Yes but you're never gonna get that, I mean that's 
Yes that, that would be ridiculous wouldn't it?
Well that would be what,f 
Cos I'd need to spend
hundred fifty pound, hundred and forty pound something.
Well erm  four completed pages, twenty stamps you need to have two hundred pounds in all.
Well that's ridiculous, I mean you won't
And you see I've got 
Fifty, sixty
I've got sixty.
So there's no, that's no point.
No point.
It's really only a question of whether you get the extra one page or, or leave it as it is.
I'll leave it as it is I think because
Yeah.
the teabags don't mean anything to us
No.
and  and I have got
Mm.
I mean it would be just as well to buy another  thing of coffee because at the moment you get that extra little erm
One anyway.
jar for any, any, free anyway.
Yeah.
Mm.
So  well we could go out there anyway   to see whether they've got any er  you see if they carried it on for another month
That would be different.
but it was only for February.
Yeah.
Right, so anyway you want bread and you want, we want milk powder don't we?
Oh yes we could get that, yes.
You crafty devil you .
Erm what I do need, but I'll see how expensive they are,a lettuce but I can go out and buy a lettuce anyway  erm
thinking about salad stuff for tonight.
salad for tonight.
Yes.
What were you looking  for?
I'm reading Wednesday.
Oh 
Oh well I'm quite happy.
Sorry?
I said I must admit I'm quite happy here.
Oh well I
Certainly  Saint Gregory's I mean.
I think we can do without the erm  the other things.
Yes.
You know, this fund raising, it's I mean we, we'll be giving them over a thousand pound, well a thousand pound anyway
Well may 
well 
may not be actually.
Yeah well it may well be
But I think this will be, I mean I'm  more and more I'm thinking that erm
And erm  you know the other things that you do.
They have come on well haven't they?
Yeah.
Yeah they have, I mean they're just
Yeah
they're just sort of shooting 
able to plant them out then  
shooting up you see aren't they?
We could bring that other erm 
Yes I meant to do that, I'll do it when I come back down now.
There's erm  And I mean looking after the parish hall as well, why should we bother with that?
Yeah that's right.
I mean we   we have more than done  what was supposed to be to start with  to see that it wasn't a drain on the parish.
Yeah.
must get bored silly  not being able to get out
Yeah.
No I, the other thing is if we're out here, I don't know what to do about this lamp for the bedside, I mean I don't know that I need it and it's another ten pounds isn't it?
What do you think?
I mean you're gonna get twenty five pounds in vouchers or something aren't you?
I don't know what  kind of vou did she say what?
Oh I see, you mean not get it till then?
Well it's only Friday, I mean we can 
Yes.
pay for it now.
I mean what are the vouchers  gonna be for?
I've got no i I've no idea.
Probably be Smith's.
 

taking off across the road like that in front of a car.
You'd think they want to commit suicide wouldn't you?
You would wouldn't you?
There's ever so many more people about, it's a nice day of course 
Yeah.
but as well as that of course there are all the school children around.
Mm.
 

Now where's he going?
No the fellow's stopped there, taking the cart off to go in there.
No indication, just !
Yeah.
He's shaking his head like mad.
Yeah he didn't indicate.
What was he supposed to be shaking his head for?
Goodness only knows.
Cos I was shaking mine at him  
Oh, I see.
perhaps
Well it was ridiculous!
It was, he didn't put on  
There was no indication or anything.
suddenly swept in there.
another bank there, talking about a clothes bank  
Oh that's right they've got, at the Cricketfield Lane erm car park there's a  where, you know where the bottle bank is on the 
Yeah?
they've got this clothing bank.
Oh.
It did say something in that little magazine that came yesterday.
Did it?
Mm.
Yes it did come to think of it.
So they're actually doing something about this   looks almost as if they're putting steps in there.
Did it?
I didn't notice at all.
See where that erm thing is there  oh there's a place there by the  
Oh someone's going out here.
Oh someone here look see.
Oh is he going in there?
Oh he's going in there.
It wasn't a big enough room there.
Oh I see they're painting up there.
You get out, I'll straighten up and come in.
Whoever would have thought they'd of ended up like this?
Yeah  
How are you?
Very well.
And you?
Yes.
Saint Mary church wasn't it?
That's right, yes 
Yes.
that's right.
Long time ago though now.
Ken   
I know.
Are you finished as well?
Yes  
Oh yes six years ago.
How long have you been finished?
I think it's nine and a bit now
Oh yeah
just ni nine years Christmas I think it was, yeah.
yeah.
I erm can't say I'm sorry.
No I can't  
You, you look at what go you look at what goes on nowadays and you think erm 
Oh yes.
you know?
Yes they can keep it.
It's erm  it's been very interesting actually this last month because erm  talk about your sons joining the enemy  erm  my second son who's been up in Cheshire for  well, twenty years I suppose  he's just been appointed senior art adviser for Devon.
Really?
Yeah  but the stuff he's shown me, you know  the sort of,th the  mandatory for seven year olds in the primary school  they've got to be able to recognize all the different sorts of painters
Really?
painters.
He said  he said it's ludicrous
Yes.
he said because he said half the 
Yeah 
half the teachers won't know
Yeah.
let alone the kids themselves.
Oh well, when you've got buffoons 
 
like Clarke in charge  preceded by an idiot like Baker
I know, you see
what can you expect?
And really you know, I mean I think to myself well I'm glad I'm out of it really because erm
Yeah, yeah.
Mind you 
yeah 
looking at the recent salary increases
Yeah well you wish you were back in don't you?
Yeah 
That's right
yes.
I know, yes it's true.
But I warned my children completely off teaching so none of them even contemplated, well they did contemplate, two of them did but I just told them  no, not to countenance it  
Yeah well two of mine did go in, one's gone out into the fire service and the other one has stayed in and he's got, he, he's been doing very well, he's been in a big  big comprehensive school up in Runcorn, and then he's been seconded to Cheshire County  to the advisory service for a couple of years and so, hello!
Hello.
So that erm  but yes, and all the heads you speak to, they say to themselves
Yeah
thank you very much
Do you ever go to any N A H ?
I haven't done, I've been invited to go once or twice and I 
Oh I haven't even been invited.
and, and I've thought well er no well there was so there was something about the erm  they're trying to form a, a retired teachers' branch of the N A H T
Yeah well I I 
and 
wrote to them and said yes I'd be interested but I haven't heard anything since.
Oh but you haven't heard any more?
I didn't even write, I was afraid to,co I've, I've been inv I'm involved in so many other things I don't want to get involved in anything else.
Mm.
Mm.
Erm and my wife's not terribly well, she's about here now but she's had a  she's been in hospital two years ago with her heart so I'm 
Mm 
having to cut down a little bit  but I enjoy my look at Dartmoor when I get out there and I'm busy with the church and
Yes.
I still enjoy my skiing when I get the chance.
Ooh.
I started after I retired
Did you really?
and it's addictive
Yes  yes
it's addictive, it's
I suppose so.
Did you go to
Yeah I went to, we went in the French Pyrenees this January.
I usually, we've been to Austria other years but
Yes?
we had a change this time and I, it was quite good, yes it was erm mm frightening  you get the adrenalin flowing.
Yes, yes I can well imagine it.
You know there's, there's apparently there's a black run in Switzerland which is named  oh my god and 


I, you know the feeling, you know 
That's right.
aah!
Yes.
Still, well it keeps you young doesn't it?
You know?
Oh absolutely, yes.
Yeah, that's right, mm.
Yes so we come down to this don't we?
Pushing trolleys, yeah?
Yeah yes 
 
Bye bye, nice to see you.
That was Ken 
 
Ken  from Dawlish.
Was it really?
Yes.
Er I was looking at these  and er you get, you know, with the er a set of  free
Yeah?
for one twenty eight.
What three packs of three?
Three packs of three, I was just wondering if that's good value for  
Well it's not really is it?
I mean it's
Isn't it?
well it's, it's, it's  it's erm
It was nine you know
nine so it's, it's less than two and a half litres.
Well I suppose that's not bad.
Well I was just thinking, you know,w er when we have the kids with us and that sort of thing, presumably we'll be having some of them down over  erm Easter 
Seven hundred and fifty  twenty two  yeah it's just over two litres isn't it?
Well that's, that's not bad.
Er I mean it brings it about the same price as we're paying anyway doesn't it?
Yeah I know, you know,really to   I don't know what we've got downstairs if any
We've got some small ones but not a lot I don't suppose.
I mean it's mostly for the kids  or if,w when we're travelling in the car anywhere.
Right.
Well is that down here somewhere?
Do you want a cup of tea?
Can you remember how much those biscuits were?
What, the ones we bought the other day?
Yes  packet   that packet there.
Were they about fifty two, something like that were they I think.
Fifty t I thought they were fifty something but I didn't know.
Either fifty two or fifty seven I think they were.
Cos I owe you for those, oh you need to take it out 
and the two lots of erm  coffee 
Coffee.
Well you'll take the biscuit  you'll take the biscuits out of the erm  Wednesday thing won't you?
But I'll pay you for the two lots of coffee.
I mean I had them in my erm  handbag  and I think I must have just chucked them out this morning    
Yes isn't it?
Well I suppose if I take fifty two out and I've got to 
Well you'll have to get that in the morning of course.
Well Wednesday morning.
Wednesday morning, yeah.
away till Thursday  well we won't see her Wednesday and I've got to tell her about that Mrs what's her name that's 
She's away till Thursday is she?
Well apparently.
Er I said to Muriel  
Mm.
oh maybe it wasn't you, maybe it was erm Doris 
Doris I think it was Doris actually who said it to you.
So you still haven't been able to find it?
Oh I know what I was going to do.
I was going to phone up  the A T S tyre people just to find out
how much these tyres are.
the second, I must get that  ten pence off there, that's June's, that's not bad  and that one's July but that's March the second  I should have remembered that today.
Well March the s second is next Monday.
Yeah.
What, what, do you want to find out how much for new ones?
Well I, yeah I do I mean I don't I don't need them just yet, I mean I think  I shan't need to get them till we come back  from the trip.
But erm I'm just really interested to know how much they're likely to be and erm  find out how much the Byrite people will erm  charge for them.
Well you may as well give them a ring, you found their number didn't you?
Yeah I found their number, yeah.
Gosh    clematis nursery Westlands Saxmundham 
Yeah  that's right
Yeah  just saw
just the, you know, opened the page and there it was.
He's supposed to be he's supposed to be the  real expert for those.
Yes the erm  coffee is two lots of one eighty nine so that's three seventy  eight isn't it?
Mm.
Oh that's lovely,three years ago my sister died leaving a household of two men, my brother-in-law aged eighty and myself approaching retirement age to cope with ourselves, to cope for ourselves.
Er because neither of us could really manage in the kitchen it was not long before we became very tired of having to eat convenience food  sad looking old meat pies, dried out chips and heated up frozen vegetables soon palled.
I began to despair  in the local press I noticed an advert for an evening class, cookery for men  being the young one in the family I plucked up courage and enrolled but it was great, with great apprehension that I went to the first class.
I needn't have worried.
There were twenty of us, other chaps in much the same boat as me, Nancy our tutor was cheerful, down to earth and did not expect us to be cordon bleu cooks.
That course changed my life.
With a mixture of demonstrations, simple methods and constant humour, Nancy taught us to fend for ourselves.
I now have the confidence to tackle almost anything in the kitchen, pies, pastas, cakes, soups, meat dishes, vegetables and bread.
There have been many disasters along the road, Yorkshire puddings you could sole your shoes with, burnt offerings of several varieties, a pat that even my dog wouldn't eat and last Christmas a chocolate log that disintegrated, the proud little Santa on top sinking without  trace in a sea of chocolate gunge.
These setbacks however  were more than compensated for by the successes.
We still keep meat pies and vegetables in the freezer but only for emergencies and I'm in the third year of  the course now .
Oh that's lovely.
He got fifty pounds for writing that in as well.
Did he really?
Yeah mm 
I was taking my very independent three year old daughter for a walk and I asked her to hold my hand.
I can hold my own hand thank you  came the reply and she did .
Yeah.
Tell you what, it's gonna be a strange journey up to Woodbridge
Mm
because  where  all the sort of a route that I reckon I know  I, I am not gonna know it all.
No.
Oh dear , you'd say this would be me   as I was leaving the travel agents I heard a woman say  my friend and I want to get away from it all, can you recommend somewhere completely unspoiled with a really nice shopping area .
Mm ah you're right there.
Somewhere like  Trega Mills 
Oh that's a good idea.
Good lord 
Use dampened string when tying up parcels, when the string dries it shrinks and 
It tightens up.
makes your parcel more secure .
You know the steep hill at, at erm  between Martlesham and Woodbridge, you know  as you left Martlesham you went down that steep hill down to the erm  the pub at the bottom of the hill where you came out on the   looks to me as if the new road misses that altogether
It goes round it.
goes round that, goes to the Bealings side of it.
Looks to me 
You ought to give John a ring tonight
Yeah
you know and sort of erm tell him 
yeah 
what  we've done, you know say that you  we only want to see
Mm
while you're still able sort of comfortably to drive and that sort of thing, I mean if  you put it that way  and you'll be saying anyway she's my er she's my only living


real relative.
That's right.
I know they are of course 
Mm
er because er her children but erm   say that we  we didn't want to sort of upset her by erm you know
Landing ourselves on them.
landing ourselves 
That's right.
on them so 
Mm 
we've arranged this  five day break.
But if we have everything ready  to leave as soon as I get back from chess and I'll make sure I leave promptly  if we can come straight away then, with a bit of luck  we'll be on to the M twenty five b by half past four  so we might 
How far round do we have to go on that?
Practically the whole wa half way round.
Do we?
Yeah 
About forty miles on it.
It's not a lot further than Gatwick but in the other direction.
Yeah.
But it's gonna take us, I mean, what Gatwick took us about three and a half hours didn't it?
Yeah.
Well I reckon it's gonna take us three and a half hours to get to the other end, so two and a half hours to it  and an hour on it if it's not too bad and then of course we've got to go up from there to Ipswich, Woodbridge  but it's dual carriageway all the way now you see.
Yeah yeah.
So I mean it's seventy miles so it should only take us another hour.
 

So  perhaps four and a half hours, if we don't get held up on the M twenty five, four and a half hours would do so that, if we leave here at two, we could be there, you know, well by seven.
So you're going, you  will be at three 
Quarter past five.
What's the time now?
Oh yes erm 
Com coming up to four.
I'm just going to do er a salad aren't I?
And 
Yeah.
and erm
Cold chicken.
cold chicken yes, and you can have the  the other little erm apricot thing and there there is a yoghurt which I'm quite happy enough to have 
Yeah.
so
Have you got erm  John  's telephone number in your erm 
Isn't it in there?
It's not in the long book.
Oh.
Well it must be in the front  here of my, here  one of those two small 
Oh yes  oh no, you've got their address.
You haven't got their telephone number.
Oh.
But I wonder if it's in the chr Christmas book.
Yes it could be.
I can ring up Directory Enquiries.
They said, they erm  they said something or other they were going to be closing down somewhere in Cornwall because the Directory Enquiry service was not being used
Yeah but you're still erm
and you're ch you're charged for it.
Well you're charged for it from the erm a private call but you're not charged 
Oh and not from a phone box.
not from a phone box.
Oh well.
Well do you know I never knew this   I was recently hit by a car and, although not seriously hurt, I did go to casualty to have some cuts cleaned and an X-ray taken to check I hadn't broken my ankle.
Now I have received a bill for nineteen pounds thirty from the hospital for the treatment I was given.
I thought all treatment was free on the N H S, do I have to pay  and they answer  no, nor should you have been sent the bill although the hospital was within its rights to make a charge for the emergency treatment fee.
There is a standard charge for immediate treatment given by a doctor or a hospital to any casualty of a road accident.
According to the nineteen eighty eight Road Traffic Act the E T F can be charged only to the driver of the car involved irrespective of who caused the accident.
The hospital should therefore have sent the bill to the driver who will be able to claim for it 
 
insurance  
That's right, yeah.
All policies must cover  many insurers will reimburse it .
Return the bill to the hospital and explain their error then you should hear nothing further about it .
Ah you see  here's somebody who's writing about, you know, her part of the erm  the interest on an er on erm  and it says    and provided you have no other income er that would take you over your personal allowance  register for  on the Inland Revenue form R eighty five, interest with no tax deductions.
You can also get this form  tax office or bank.
If you register immediately you'll benefit from a whole year's worth of tax free interest for what's calculated on April the fifth.
If your building society won't allow you to register you can still apply for a refund of overpaid tax  financial year.
For details see leaflet one R hundred and eleven, how to claim a repayment of tax from banks and building societies .
So I should go into the tax office and  
No I think I think we've got the interest  your interest on my buil on the buil 
Yeah I know you sent that to the building society but I was 
Yeah 
just thinking then of the other
Oh that tax credit, yeah.
Yeah.
the, the tax office and ask them
Oh yeah, could do that if you don't get, hear from the
I should have heard from them by now.
I would have thought so, yeah.
Didn't you say somewhere in St Austell?
No no no no, I've seen one since then.
Oh.
Bearing in mind too that as a non-taxpayer you can open an account in just your name and so enable all the interest to be declared gross.
do you?
Well  it's neither here nor there but I mean the thing is that we don't  as it is we're not losing anything because you're getting yours, half of it's coming back as, as gross interest.
I'm tired.
You're tired?
Mm.
Well you haven't been doing anything have you?
Yeah.
Oh.
Pam
is cycling
in  
at a constant speed  here she is
four seconds later
and here she is four seconds later .
Pam went twenty miles 
Twenty
twenty met 
Well she wouldn't go twenty miles in four seconds would she?




twenty metres?
In four seconds.
That's a lot isn't it?
Not really, no.
Not cycling.
How far does she go each second ?
Five metr 
Right.
How  what was her speed 
What is her speed
in 
in metres per second.
Five?
That's right.
Five M stroke S.
Right.
Good.
Ken is rowing at a constant speed, he covers eighteen metres in three seconds.
What is his speed ?
Six
That's right.
The plane flying at a constant speed takes five seconds to go one thousand five hundred  miles what  
No.
Metres.
Metres,what is f what is his speed in metres per second ?
Fives into that goes  three
That's right.
so three hundred miles
Three hundred metres per second.
three hundred
I think you'll find here they won't deal with miles at .Having said that they do.
No they don't.
They do show miles but they also show kilometres, yes right, so number  four.
The lorry  travelling on a motorway at a constant speed goes hundred metres in four seconds, what is his speed ?fours into sixty
Mm?
I'm being a bridesmaid.
Are you?
Yes.
Oh, when are you gonna be a bridesmaid?
In August.
Mm, who's getting married?
My uncle.
Oh.
oh, is it fours into that?
Yeah.
Mm.
Fours into ten goes
Fours into a hundred.
Oh!
Twenty five oh oh 
Right!
twenty five
M S 
I'm  aren't I?
I think I've seen this one before.


Pardon?


, that's a good picture isn't it?
Mm.
It is that one isn't it?
It's probably a photograph.
Yes.
That's good though that is.    was running along a track at a constant speed  he passed the  hundred and fifty metre mark.
Ten seconds later he passed the two hundred  fifty metre mark.
How far did he run in ten seconds ?
A hundred metres.
Right.
Erm a hundred metres per second.
Now be careful  cos you give the speed in metres per second.
Mm.
So how far is it per second?
How far is it per second?
Well it's, look he passed the hundred and fifty metre mark, ten seconds later he passed the two hundred and fifty metre mark, how far did he run in ten seconds and you've put down a hundred metres
Yeah.
Right.
Now it says, B, what was his speed?
Ten 
Yes a hundred metres in ten seconds but you don't give the speed like that.
You give the speed in metres per second.
Yeah.
So?
What was his speed?
Ten metres
Ten metres per second, right.
Right, here are the distance time graphs of two walkers, there's the time in seconds  there's the distance in metres 
How far did Ann go in ten seconds ?
How far did Ann go in ten seconds ?
Right, what did you get?
Erm twenty five in two seconds.
Good.
Right so B one   up to now speeds have been in metres per second  we also use miles per hour  M P H or M I H  and kilometres per hour, K M H or K M P H 
If the car has a constant speed of fifty miles per hour this means it goes fifty miles in every hour .
Right?
Yeah.
So how far will a lorry go in three hours  at a constant speed of fifty miles per hour?
Hundred and fifty miles.
Right.
Just shut these doors cos otherwise we're gonna get very cold in here.
Two people are coming in this week .
Gloria and Gavin.
Three people.
Three people.
Who 
Alex is coming in isn't  
Oh yes!
Right
well  that's what comes when you have a holiday.
Mm.
Right, B two   if a train is going at a constant speed of ninety miles per hour  how far will it go in two hours ?
Hundred and eighty.
Right.
Do you like teaching us Terry?
Yes it's quite erm  quite a challenge.
Oh yes if I've got a skill to impart I don't mind helping people.
How far will a plane go in four hours that has a constant speed of five hundred miles per hour ?
Oh  one, two thousand miles
That's right, good.
It's been hot this  like summer today isn't it?
It's been lovely hasn't it?
Mm.
And all the bulbs are coming out now nicely as well.
Everything's, everything will start growing with the warmth on it.
And loads of people are mowing their lawns like summer today.
Mm.
I in fact mowed my lawn yesterday.
Oh.
No it was the day before yesterday.
It's been hot all   the car is going along the motorway at a constant speed.
It covers a hundred and eighty miles in three hours.
How far does it go in one hour ?
Sixty miles.
That's right.
Write down its speed .
Sixty miles per hour?
Mm.
The  's top speed is  two thousand three hundred kilometres per hour  no kilometres er, yeah   how far does it fly in three hours at top speed ?
Oh  
No, careful.
Oh three times
That's right.
Six thousand nine hundred.
That's right   kilometres per hour.
Yes.
No kil kilometres sorry.
Kilometres.
Yes.
It is one thousand and fifty from  London to  
It is  what did you say?
It is  one thousand fi and fifty kilometres 
One thousand two hundred and fifty 
two hundred and fifty
kilometres from London to?
kilometres from London  to Veneta
Vienna.
Vienna .
Where's Vienna?
Don't know.
Italy?
No.
Oh.
Venice is in Italy.
Oh yeah it is.
Vienna is the capital of Austria
Oh!
and it's right across the other side of Austria from us.
Where you went skiing is this side of Austria, but Vienna is about two hundred and  two hundred and fifty miles further on across Austria, very close to  erm  Czechoslovakia and erm Yugoslavia.
Right  so  it is twelve hundred and fifty kilometres from London to Vienna, can a Concorde do the trip in half an hour ?
How far does it go in an hour?
Two hundred and 
Right.
thirty.
So can it go twelve hundred and fifty kilometres in half an hour?
No.
How far can it go in half an hour?
Erm one hundred and 
One thousand 
one thousand an 
one hundred
yeah, yeah fifty 
and fifty, right, so the answer is no it can only do  eleven hundred and fifty  kilometres in half an hour.
Right, average speed 
Ha  oh   Terry
Mhm?
Will you take me  letterboxing one day this week if you can?
I don't think it's gonna be possible this week but perhaps in the Easter holidays erm
Okay 
we'll be able to manage it.
Yeah.
Okay.
It is a hundred miles from King's lions
King's Lynn.
King's Lynn  where's that?
Erm  do you know where The Wash is?
No   if you think of a map of England  erm  the south coast is there, there's Dover, there's the estuary for London, London is here  erm  then it comes up like this, the east coast of London, the east coast of E England  like that  this is East, called East Anglia, here you've got Norfolk and Norwich and then you've got Ipswich here and then you've got Suffolk there and Essex, right?
Can you remember that bulge in the map of England?
Well that piece up there is called The Wash 
Oh.
and King's Lynn is close to the wash, King's Lynn is in this area here.
Oh.
So from London to King's Lynn is, they say, a hundred miles and I'll take their word for it, London to Ipswich in fact is seventy miles.
Oh.
But, yeah, that's about a hundred miles you see, that would be about right, yeah.
Oh.
So that's where it is.
North of London.
Up by The Wash.
Right  it is a hundred miles from King's Lynn to London, the train takes two hours to do the journey  the train does not go at a constant speed, it speeds up sometimes and slows down at other times  it also stops at stations on the way  and on once of course as it, as it's stopping it's going more and more slowly and as it's  er moving off again it starts slowly and starts to go quickly but because it takes two hours in all  the train goes a hundred miles in two hours we say its average speed for the journey is fifty miles per hour.
It says if it was travelling at a constant speed of fifty miles an hour.
It doesn't, sometimes it goes more slowly sometimes it goes more quickly, sometimes it stops  but because it takes two hours to do the hundred miles we say its average speed for the journey is fifty miles per hour.
Its real speed changes during the journey  sometimes it is more than fifty miles per hour, sometimes less  but in two hours it goes the same distance as it would if its speed was fifty miles per hour all the time.
Oh.
So we say its average speed is fifty miles per hour.
There used to be a train called the Cheltenham Flyer   there it is   it went from Cheltenham to London  a hundred and twenty miles  in two hours  do you know where Cheltenham is?
Well if there is  the south coast along here and Devo C Cornwall is there and Devon is here and you get the w the Bristol Channel going up here  and then you c the coast coming down here and there's  Wales is here  right?
Bristol is there, right?
And if you go up from Bristol on from here you go up the motorway to Bristol and then you go along the M four to London  well north of Bristol, up where the River Severn gets quite narrow and can be bridged is a city called Gloucester  and Cheltenham is just inland from Gloucester.
Oh.
So Cheltenham is about there, and it's about a hundred and twenty miles from Cheltenham to London.
Mm.
Right?
Okay.
So there's Cheltenham.
Right so it  went from Cheltenham to London, a hundred and twenty miles, in two hours, what was its average speed?
Mm 
Well if it, if it  average speed is a hundred and twenty miles in two hours  how far in fact would it go in one hour?
Sixty.
So what was its average speed?
Sixty.
Sixty miles per hour.
Oh
It wasn't its actual speed  there will be sometimes it will be going very slowly, sometimes it will be going much more quickly  but its average speed  was sixty miles an hour because at sixty miles an hour it would cover a hundred and twenty miles, which was the distance, in two hours.
Oh
Right?
This book isn't very big is it?
No, none of them are really are they?
Well this one's very small isn't it?
Yeah cos look  
Oh well you're gonna get on aren't you?
Great, yeah, you're half way through.
Ha!
Only got s nine pages
Mm.
Right so that was C one, C two   it is a hundred and fifty miles from Hereford to London by rail   Hereford is north of Cheltenham, it's going up from Cheltenham is Hereford  the first train in the morning takes three hours for the journey  what's its average speed ?
Right 
Can we go on the computer today?
Well there might be time, we'll see how we get on.
Now it says B  what did you do with th the numbers one hundred and fifty  and three to get the answer ?
Divided a hundred by three.
Right so you write that down, you divided a hundred and fifty  by three.
I wonder what my brother's doing now.
Well at the present moment it's about, where he is it's about half past five, twenty to six, so he is probably  waiting for his supper I should think  his evening meal.
He won't be, he'll have finished skiing now.
Mm.
Does it get dark over there quick?
It probably gets dark about the same time as it does here.
It's not dark quicker there now  would it?
No it would probably be, you know, no it will be about this, be a little bit darker than this.
It gets dark, it'll be dark there before it is dark here
Mm.
mm
because it's further east  so the sun is further away from them  because the sun rises in the east so it gets light earlier  that's why we put the clocks on  when you go to Europe, one hour.
Oh.
In America it's loads isn't it?
Well in America it's the other way, in America i i it is after us because they are further west than we are.
Yeah cos it's about six hours different.
Mm, that's right.
Right C three
I've been to Penzance.
I know 
Yeah.
where that is.
That's near mile end  no what's it called Land's End.
Land's End that's right, yes.
Yeah.
It's right down at the far south west.
It's  it's more than a hundred miles from us.
It's about a hundred and thirty miles from us down to Penzance.
So you know we're  about two hundred miles from London, so we're about, only about two thirds of the way from London to Penzance.
Have you been to L erm Land's End since they've 
Yes.
done it all up?
Oh I don't know since they've done it all up, no probably not.
It's good there now.
Is it?
Yeah they show you this 
Mm 
erm you go in this place and erm  and it shows you all the boats and things, and you can have a go on, there's this thing where they crawl up .
And then you go through this door and it's all old like things  and then you go and see erm and you go into this place and it's like telling you all the erm history and things like that
Does it.
and it's got like rocks and things and erm statues doing like  erm  digging up gold and things a and it's got 
Oh yeah?
erm like a ship
Working models?
Yeah.
And it's got a ship and erm there's people on there and it shows you this thing round the ship erm they have a storm and suddenly the sh the erm  what do you call it?
The th that big long thing?
Mast?
Yeah that's it, all fell down and it went  like that  
yeah .
And there's lots of other things there as well.
Right,Penzance  is three hundred and five miles from London by rail  the train leaves Penzance at five eighteen A M
Ooh ooh
and gets to London at ten eighteen AM .
How many hours does the journey take?
Five hours.
Five hours.
And B  what was the average  time  speed of the train?
Erm  five into thirty goes  ei si sixty five?
No.
Oh.
What's five into three hundred and 
Fives into three hundred and five.
Fives into thirty goes six
Sixty one.
Sixty one.
Good.
Right  C four  from Carlisle to London  is three hundred miles  gracious me, you see  if you've got a map of England, we haven't  got it on here but  if you imagine England going up here, Carlisle is right  
now just think about it  if you go out of your front door
My front door
and you turn left
turn left
and you go to a junction  don't you?
Yeah 
Now if you turn right at that junction 
The train station!
What?
If you turn right at that junction, on which road do you go?
The   no the erm  goes to 
Yes, which road is that?
What's it called?
I don't know.
You don't know!
No.
If you go out of your f well go out of the gate here and turn right
Mm
and go across Church Road  don't go left down Decoy Road, keep straight on
Mm
past all the new houses that have been built, past the playing fields
Yeah?
and you don't know the name of that road?
No.
It is called Coach  Road
Ooh!
and it is the er it's called Coach Road because that is the road that the coaches used to go along  to Totnes
Mm.
and from Totnes to Plymouth.
And it is the old Coach Road.
So a hundred and fifty years ago  you would have the stagecoach going past here.
Were these houses there then?
No.
No?
No.
What would of been here?
That house might well have been here  that big house just there across th in there which has now been turned into flats.
Mm.
Er I don't know when that was built, it might not have been built but it er it's Victorian so it could have been built like in eighteen thirty soon fa certainly soon after eighteen thirty that would have been built.
When were our houses built?
About nineteen sixty  nineteen sixty six.
How old are our houses?
Well if they were built in sixty six, and I think they were, they are now, how old are they now?
Sixty six did you say?
I said I think they were built in nineteen sixty six.
So how old are they?
Nineteen th eighty something years.
No!
Eighty four years old.
No!
Nineteen sixty six, what are we now?
Nineteen ninety two.
Right, well how many years is that?
I don't know.
Fifty seventy eighty ni three  thirty years?
Well ninety six it will be thirty years.
So twenty   twenty four years?
About twenty six years.
Yeah!
About twenty six years.
That's  oh I thought they were very old.
No.
Where have you lived in?
Would you a hou the house  did you live into it when it was new?
No.
No?
No.
I don't know ho certainly  I know there had been  at least two peo different lots of people living in ours before we moved in, and I would think there were probably more than that.
Cos we moved in in about nineteen  I think we moved in in nineteen eighty  nineteen eighty, nineteen eighty one we moved in.
Oh 
Mm?
in the house that she's lived in that she's in now all her life
Who?
My nan.
Your nan.
All her life since she was little.
She 
Gracious 
she, she came  g went to the house  when she came back from hospital and she's still living in it now.
Good lord.
Right come on me girl let's get on a little bit.
D, otherwise we're not gonna have time to go on the computer
Oh!
D  well yes we can because you can, you can finish it off at home can't you?
Yes, right.
So D  calculating journey times  
Oh  oh look it's got the place.
You know there, Poole, is that 
Yeah 
no it's not is it?
I don't know.
Is it what?
No cos, can you go across there to France from there?
I don't know erm Portsmouth more likely.
Yeah that's where I'm going to go 
Yes.
Mm
yeah Portsmouth.
Oh Portsmouth is here.
It's not marked but it's there is Portsmouth.
I'm going to France  from there.
Are you?
How long does it take to get to there from our house?
Or from 
What Portsmouth?
from Newton Abbott?
To, to, to Portsmouth?
Yeah.
Well, three hours, three to four hours.
And then it's eight hours on the boat.
I like boats even though I haven't even been on one.
Oh do you?
Good.
Yes.
Do you like boats?
Don't mind them.
You've never been on a big boat?
Have you not?
Haven't been on a boat I don't thi o only like little, you know,
Oh.
Oh that's gonna be quite an experience then isn't it?
You haven't been to France then?
Yes you have, you've flown of course.
No  haven't been to France.
Well you've been to Austria.
I've been to Austria, yeah.
Yes but you've flown?
You haven't done a, been on a boat?
Mm.
Yeah, no not on a boat, no.
Right.
It's nicer flying.
A motor boat has a speed of four miles per hour   this means it goes four miles in every hour
Oh.
how many hours does it take to go from Lulworth to Bournemouth ?
Twenty four hours?
No.
Oh erm silly me 
It's twenty four miles.
Twenty four miles?
And how, it takes a minute a mile doesn't it?
No.
What does it say it goes?
Twenty four miles.
Yeah but what is the speed of the boat?
Oh!
Four miles per hour.
Right.
Six.
Right, six hours.
Six hours.
How long does it take, how many hours does it take to go from Swanage to Ventnor?
Ventnor.
Where am I?
Swanage 
Well it tells you how far it is, look
Yeah
so you can, there's Swanage and there's Ventnor
That's in the Isle of Wight.
That's on the Isle of Wight.
I haven't been there.
Have you been there?
Yes.
Have you been that part there?
No
Have you been to that part there?
No I don't think we landed at Cowes I think we landed over here further.
Did you fly?
No, went on a hovercraft  well wen went on the hovercraft and came back on a, a ferry  on the boat.
What's a hovercraft?
Well  it's a very specialized boat in a sense, I mean it goes on the surface of the water and it literally goes on the surface of the water, it's a  hovercraft is a sort of a  it's a vessel which has got a skirt all round it 
Is it a rubber one?
Yes, heavy thick rubber skirt and that  the engines do two things, they, they drive  propellers in the air  and they  pump air from under the vessel onto the surface of the water  and the skirt round the boat 
Keeps dry 
keeps a cushion of air under the vessel so that really it hovers on top of the water and the air propellers drive it like an aeroplane
Oh
but it skims across the surface of the water and it's very quick, it only takes half an hour to go from Ramsgate to Dover.
Mm!
Right  er from Swanage to Ventnor is thirty two miles so how long would a motor boat take?
Eight hours.
Eight hours, right.
Colin's dad's got a boat.
Has he?
And how long would it take to go round the Isle of Wight, which is sixty miles round the Isle of Wight?
Er  erm  fifteen?
Fifteen hours, right.
Right D two  how long does it take to go from Ventnor to Swanage in a launch with a speed of eight miles per hour ?
Oh  Ventnor, where's Ventnor?
Ah  twenty two miles  four
Right.
four hours.
Right, now you get the answer to D two by dividing the distance  by the speed
Mm?
thirty two's the distance divided by the speed  which is eight, thirty two divided by eight is four  this is the rule for working out a journey time  distance  in miles divided by speed in miles per hour gives you the time in hours.
Right.
You need a calculator.
I need a calculator.
Ooh
How many hours does it take to go seven hundred and five miles at forty seven miles per hour?
Fifteen hours.
Right.
This is fun I like talking into   This diagram shows the reach or an airline  distances  are in kilometres  the figures for them are only rough  one, a jet flies from Beirut
Beirut to
to Bombay at four thousand kilometres.
Its speed is about eight hundred kilometres per hour
Eight hundred and 
fifty
fifty
kilometres per hour  to work out the time it takes we do four thousand divided by three er eight hundred and fifty.
The answer on the calculator is four point seven O five double eight two three hours but we do not need that  as that 
To be as exact as that 
because the distance is 
because the d not exactly four thousand miles and the speed is not exactly eight hundred and fifty kilometres per hour .
The nearest whole number of hours is good enough.
The nearest whole number of hours   Do you take it by that number?
The nearest whole number to four point seven  the wh nearest whole number to four point seven nought  five double eight  two three is five because  to the nearest whole number you look at that four, it's either gonna be four or five depending upon what that number is
Mm.
isn't it?
If that's five or more then you pu increase that by one and make it five.
So the journey time is about five hours.
So D four  work out these journey times to the nearest hour.
Bombay to Perth at about eight hundred and fifty kilometres an hour  
Bombay to Perth   eight
Hours.
Mm?
Eight hours, right.
Rome to Beirut  two hundred and  
Pardon?
Two thousand two hundred
Two thousand two hundred, right.
Four hours.
Right.
London to 
London to Geneva
Oh.
Geneva.
Geneva.
hundred and fifty.
One hour.
Right.
It only takes half an hour to go to Austria doesn't it?
No, it takes an hour 
No it takes an hour and a half.
Mm, yeah,It takes four hours to get to Lanzarote.
Six hours.
Good.
Right
E
Now this is quite important, you've got to think about this   calculate as work in decimals .
But we usually think of time as hours and minutes and seconds too if we are being very exact.
This scale shows both minutes  and decimals as an hour.
Thirty minutes  half an hour, nought point five
Mm
right?
Erm fifteen minutes  nought point two five.
Forty five minutes  three quarters of an hour, nought point seven five  and all the different calculations in between fifty minutes is about nought point  that's nought eight, that's nought nine so it'd be nought point eight one, two
Four
three isn't it?
Just over three.
Mm yeah.
Right?
So it says  this scale shows both minutes and decimals and now use the scale to change these to minutes .
Now what's point three of an hour  in minutes?
Ten point
No  nought point three's there look
Mm
now you want to read off the top of the scale for minutes.
Fifteen minutes
That's ten minutes
Yeah.
that's twenty minutes  that's fifteen minutes
Mm.
what's each of those little divisions?
One minute.
Right so point three 
Fifteen minut er fif eighteen minutes.
Eighteen minutes, right.
B nought point seven five of an hour ?
There  forty five minutes.
Forty five minutes.
C nought point four three hours  nought point four three 
Oh!
four 
Nought point  
four three 
There
That's right, well what's that?
Twenty and six minutes 
Si twenty six minutes.
And nought point nought five of an hour?
There
Mhm  in minutes.
Three.
Three minutes.
Then  E, change these to decimals of an hour  twenty four minutes 
Nought point four.
Nought point four.
Fifty one minutes?
Nought point eight five.
Nought point five, good.
Five minutes
Nought point  nought point nought eight.
Right.
And thirty five minutes.
Nought point five  eight.
Right.
Right well we'll just do this then you can have a go on the computer.
The distance from London to Weymouth is a hundred and forty three miles  the train takes two hours forty two minutes for the journey 
Mm?
we can find the train's average speed like this  change forty two minutes to a decimal of an hour   what's that?
Nought point seven.
Right.
From the scale above forty two minutes equals nought point seven hours
Mm.
that means the journey time  is two point seven hours , two hours forty two minutes is two point seven hours
Mm.
divide the distance by the time  hundred and forty three divided by two point seven equals fifty two point nine  round off to the nearest whole number  that would be?
Fifty three.
So the average speed is about fifty three miles per hour.
Oh.
So do the first one here
Okay
D two, London to Bristol, a hundred and eighteen miles at one hour twenty seven minutes .
Nought point f n nought point four five.
So one hour p one hour point, point forty five?
One point four five
Yeah.
Nought point   one  nought.
So that's the average speed?
Yeah  er
What did you do wrong?
Divided it.
Yes, but what did you divide by what?
Divided a hundred and eighteen by
No you didn't
Oh.
you divided one point
Oh no
four five by a hundred and eighteen.
Oh.
So what have you got to do?
Hundred and eighteen
Right, divided by
by, I've forgotten what it was now.
One point four five.
Aha!
What's that?
Eighty one.
Right  miles per hour.
Yeah.
Now just for interest's sake  do what you did before, divide
Okay
one point four five by one one eight, equals  now


that's the wrong way, you've done it the wrong way  haven't you?
Mm.
So  push that button
Oh!
Oh!!
It's turned it the other way round.
It's the reciprocal button
Oh
and  a half, one over two  the reciprocal of a half  if you turn it the other way round it's two over one
Yes.
so it's two.
Mm.
A half is point five 
Mm?
the reciprocal is gonna be two.
Ooh.
Right?
A quarter
Oh haven't we?
That one we had first so
Oh finish that yeah, yeah
just find it in the fridge
I bought some ham as well today you know 
Yeah 
because I like chicken with
Yeah
and then some time, these
the erm, you know they had some sausage left over, so I thought if I cook them then you know, if you wanted to we could cook the ham 
Yeah 
or we can have
ham tomorrow
Yeah
or something, but I cooked
Have you got potatoes?
 

Where did I put that?
You put it there and I put it somewhere else
What's that?
The mat?
I thought I put it over there, erm I would only want half of these potatoes, would you manage those?
Ha, I don't know I'll have one anyway, I'll see then when I, whether I can manage the other half afterwards or not, cos it looks enormous
Well they're all big now aren't they?
They are, that's right
There was one that I had to throw away because it was erm
Oh is that so
all damaged at one end and I, you know, erm  thought I'd cut that away
Yeah
but in fact it was bad all the way through
Mm 
so , I must confess when I say that we've had bad, like that time when  Did you give er Lucy back her English?
Mm, mm
I thought she was clutching it as she went past here  but erm, oh you've had some?
No I haven't, I haven't, when you've had yours 
This is the cheesy one  I bought some beetroot the other day, they had some nice little ones, which I must cook, they were ever so cheap, I've forgotten how cheap but you know they were really cheap 
Mm 
Now can you see what I did with the lid at them?
Yes
Oh perhaps I never had it  a man came here, from somebody or other double glazing
Oh I heard the bell go 
I thought it might of been Pat sort of at that time, but erm  when I looked out I saw a man with a billboard thing 
One of the little maps in the book shows the Isle of Wight with some towns round the Isle of Wight, and it said Poole so she said Poole, she said  the boat sailed from out of France?
So I said no Portsmouth oh she said that's right she said I'm going from Portsmouth
Oh is she?
Oh I said, yes she said, I like going on a boat, she said not that I've been on one she said  she's never been on a boat across
No I don't think any of them have you see
Oh, she's you know, when she's been to Austria of course she's flown
Yes that's right 
so she's erm, quite looking forward to that
She is, gave her some of the warnings that er
No I didn't actually, but 
I shouldn't think it great easy to fall off a boat actually would you?
No  well  having said that, if you're fool enough to sit on the side
Oh yeah  but I mean if you're sitting on a seat or if you've got sort of have the rails 
Ah, mm, mm, mm 
looking at the water, I think you would have to sort of climb up over the rails to fall in wouldn't you?
Oh yeah, you'd have to perch up on them, sit on them, you know
Mm
well I mean you know, you know what children are, you never know what they might do
I always took the point about the children in the hall didn't they?
Mm, mm
They hadn't thought about that  do you know, I reckon that Sister Josephine erm behind all this, she wanted that hall and she and Father  used to talk about this you see  they want to extend the church back and do away with the car parking area as well, oh that's alright, but erm  sort of can't see any point in it, I mean congregations are going down, they're not increasing, the church is big enough for  what is necessary I would of thought wouldn't you?
Don't need a cathedral in it 
Well of course you never know I mean if they close Saint Gregory's
I wouldn't of thought they'd do that
Mm, I wouldn't, but
They'd of more like I would of thought close King Staiton  because Saint Gregory's was a purpose built church
Yeah 
but I never forget the way that Doreen when she said we were doing things, she said you shouldn't of started it she said, you'll only get kicked in the teeth at Saint Joseph's
Is that what she said?
Oh yes right from the beginning
Did she really?
I didn't know that  oh
Yes, when we came out here   I'll never forget Mark, not even saying thank you, not, not even for raising the money I mean I wouldn't expect that from the parishioners, that's what we should be trying to do, but even for the food and that, till erm Kitty and  and the way he got up then and said it, most ungraciously
Yes  mind you I had to admit, you know me, I know, never have been very impressed with him 
With him , well for some reason he doesn't like us, well, you say I was thinking, I've been thinking as you know this is the sort of thing that I, gets on to my mind, but I was thinking to myself well really and truly we are so honest people ourselves, we don't go round you know and screw sort of fiddling things, I suppose it comes to hard to us when we discover other people have
Yeah 
but I know Kay wasn't very pleased with Sister about these sort of erm  stout things, cos Sister said well if they're not collected by the time of the next jumble, we sort of empty the cupboard and put them all in for erm the jumble sale   Kay said to me they're not hers to do that with
Mind you
No, no, no that was, I mean Kay did what she had to do and sort of got the person 
Yeah, fair enough 
to do it, but Sister wouldn't of even have that, she would of just erm, chucked them, but I know Kay put a lot of work into, she's not coming
Who's not coming?
Whoever is due to come
Good evening, hello Richard, mm, mm  they have turned it down, oh good
Our prayers have been answered tell them
Mum says our prayers have been answered mm, good  yeah, of course, yeah, oh was it?
Oh good, no well, erm, I bet you were too, mm, mm
Some justice yet
that's right, yes, cos she was thinking it was Friday, oh, you were there were you?
Yeah, was there a lot of discussion?
No  yeah, yeah  oh  yeah, very good, oh yeah I'm sure you are, jolly good, mm, yeah, fine and there's some, Paul off half term of course, yeah, yeah  oh is he oh very good  oh of course you're going up to Cardiff aren't you?
Yeah, oh well I hope Helen gets on well, yeah
When are they going, tomorrow is that?
When are you going, when is it you're going?
Wednesday, yeah, oh well have a good journey, mm that's right, yeah, mm, mm, okay love thanks for phoning, bye, bye  
I was thinking of him
today, at this erm
Planning
planning, what did he say?
He, it was unanimous
Turned down
Turned down he said now of course we have to wait and see whether they go to appeal, as, as of course he said they're entitled to do, but er 
She'd say they've just had a restaurant there, that wouldn't be so bad as a take away  But getting back to the finances, I mean the Two Hundred Club over the years it has been in operation, I mean with what it gets this, what they get this year, supposing it's not a thousand, supposing eight hundred, it might even be about eight thousand mightn't it?
It might be eight thousand, yeah
Mm  and I was just wondering if that is your girl who is due to come at a quarter past six then she erm 
Oh yeah 
And I thought they were going to the meeting er on Friday because I knew they were both off
Mm 
Are you having any more of this?
No thanks, that was very nice
Mm, it was weren't it?
Yeah
I don't know why I've done this whole plate
lovely
I mean when you consider that the cost of those chickens
Yeah
somewhere else, mind you they were very cheap ones, where was that?
Was it in erm Sainsbury's?
I don't know, I can't remember
Could of been
Mm
in Exeter last week, took, made me think about him I think 
in the fridge  Oh leave this washing up, come and have your erm, sweet
Oh yeah, well this won't take me a second
er, well there's hardly that much to do there actually
That's right
this thing, this erm, sort of a dinner I think
Yeah
Alright?
Yes, very nice
Is it alright, you know quite happy with this?
The Father came out this morning to say that the hall could, one of the first things Father told him was that the hall couldn't be insured, I mean it even staggered erm  Doris , cos she's not heard of that before, impressed, I don't know what impressed is, but
I understand the
go upstairs and get erm
You see, you there?
Yeah   jointly insured for major contingencies and potential legal liabilities, the recent re review however has highlighted that we can only insure our own legal liabilities and that we cannot insure or assume responsibility for your prudential legal liabilities 
This is to the rent is?
Yeah  hall hired from you for a function
injury due to affect the hall itself, E G the floor tile, it is likely that the responsibility for the floor tiling ensuing claim would fall upon us to be dealt with, however you're insured to
lack of supervision
public liability insurance  but you see we can 
We insure 
only insure our own league and so it, I mean  insured for major contingencies and that 
I mean you showed that to Father when it was all, cos wasn't there something
No I haven't showed this to er, I haven't showed this to
No not to Father
No 
Father Michael
Oh he gave me this
That's right
he gave me this to 
Yeah 
to send out and I sent it out to all the users
That's right
but, so they've got some sort of cover
Anyway, I think we'd better say well look
Yes
Father we're too old to be
Is that for birds, that fat?
Yes  Before you throw that water away we need to wash the grill pan now  sorry I just
 

ha, see anything else
Pardon?
apart from anything else we might not be allowed to do anything like cooking or having sort of things to sell like that in the hall
Yeah 
 

I mean it is, it is ridiculous because we've had that November party down there, and if it does need a bit of planning, you just put the heat on a bit early  anyway
Well
I can't be bothered any more
No, I think you just wash your hands, that's it, cos we've done long enough  and I mean from say the Sunday thing, I mean we've never ever thought of the Sunday making thing, being a profit making thing have we?
No
That was always right from the beginning
That's right
it was always sort of for social thing and pe people couldn't pay well that was alright, they didn't pay  as you say, we've done our whack really
Too true we have 
By the way is there anything we need to record, something
No is, I mean I have to be out by half past seven, actually, something on half past seven on, you know, on the other programme that'll be worth recording I think, something about
There is a
ski safety in America
Yeah that's right, mm, that's erm what's his name, isn't it?
John Stapleton
Yeah  so we'll certainly record that
But is there not something on at seven?
No I don't think so, not today
On I T V, I make, I make the erm soup sort of peppery have some
Right
High Wycombe please, John    seventy and that could well be, my mad, bad numbers , thank you very much, thank you, bye
Hello there you are 
How are you today?
Thank you very much
Thank you
Thank you
A bit thick isn't it?
Isn't it just?
Yeah, okay 
Oh you're coming down
It's got one of those  letters  Father gave you, Father Michael gave you
Yeah
erm on the way it might be an idea to take it down with you
Well if I see him 
I mean I think you could say that while you were
only a short time ago
Yeah
you know and Father's given you this
Mm
to give to any of our
Yep
erm  well I was gonna come down as you know and sort of do something about the loos, but
Oh no
what, what I wondered was if you can take some bleach down, I think there's probably some down in the loo downstairs, and at least put some of that into, can you do that?
Yeah I can do that
And, what are you doing afterwards?
Coming back home?
Well yeah I mean I'm, I shall go up to the bank but that's all
Well I was just wondering, I wanted to go up to, or if you're at the bank you'll be near the income tax office wouldn't you?
Mm, mm
And if you could pop in there, you know what it is I'm 
Yes 
wanting, you know say that I sent away for erm
Yeah for erm tax credit 
you know but, but
Yeah okay 
about three weeks ago
Yeah I'll go in to them
you know and if there is a form to fill in or whatever
Yeah
you see cos you've got to get it filled in, in this financial year
Right, okay, well I'll go into the tax office then  No I cannot see any bleach down there
Isn't there some in the
nothing in the loo
Well do you think you could pop upstairs and look and see if I've got by any chance have
I've put, put this heater on which might give us a little bit of, a little bit of warmth 
Well I don't know, er up in the loft
Oh
er, I mean you know it's, there looks like some like, it's almost like jumble isn't it?
It does doesn't it?
Well if there's stuff that's you know, you don't want and it's all right for jumble, I mean if you want it for jumble take it, but if not we'll have it for jumble, I mean you know it's erm
It's all the same kind of thing
It's all the same sort of thing yeah
That's right, yeah
What are you going to do about this bottom cupboard?
It's gone, it's empty
Oh it's empty, you've emptied the bottom have you?
Yeah
Oh well done
Good, all is
oh very good
There's this, what you see here is actually for your jumble
Is it?
Yeah
Right, okay that's fine
that one was intended to go I expect  yes that one was intended to go
Yes  erm is this rubbish here?
Oh this is er, not that
Cos I mean we might
We could of done with a plastic bag under it
Well we might be able to put some in a wheelie bin
Oh yeah, that's right, yes
but shall we get, shall we
Let's get, get on with these
Yes  Oh well
What?
old semaphore flag eh?
Well they're meant 
No 
to be but
they could of been 
should of been but they're the wrong colour
tis the wrong colour innit?
I think that's what, that's what I, I run a school you know for signalling, morse code and semaphore
Do you?
Yeah, they should be
Yeah there should be stripes across
red and yellow or blue and white, but still they're 
I used to know my semaphore I'm, I've never really mastered the morse, but I used to know the semaphore
Aha 
Come to that I mean I can put some of this in the car and dump, just take it over to the tip
Er yes alright, let's see how we get on and er, there again absolutely 
That , that has come off
Oh
that cabinet hasn't it?
it has too, oh yeah, I'll put that back up there
Put it back up and I'll nail it up some time when I bring up erm, I'll bring up a hammer
I'll put it that way then
That's right, yeah 
see exactly where it is, right, well we're er
Shall we, if I go up and hand stuff down will that be the easiest way of doing it?
 

In fact some of this can be thrown can't it?
Can I drop that?
That looks like a
Er yeah drop that
 

Can you manage there?
Yeah, alright 
You be careful won't you?
Yeah 
This can be chucked, I'll chuck it down
Alright 
Old
things here aren't there?
Really a lot of this is
Quite a lot of it
almost chucking isn't it?
Yeah well that's, that's right 
I think probably if I can get this in a box it'll be a lot easier, cos it's a lot of loose stuff, that's a saddle, I'll chuck that down, erm, I don't know about these things, but er 
We'll ditch them those
Ditch them I think don't you?
Yeah
 

Tell you what, this is a bit of exercise this innit?
Yeah , well they say every step you go up adds a second to your life
Yeah


yeah  me too  erm  er this is, is a lot of school stuff in here, powder paints and paint, I'm just wondering whether being a school might like it, oh I don't know it's empty, that's empty, that's empty, that's empty, no
Ah, put it all in with, what's that er
Yeah
put a
use this you know
What, oh
Yeah you can use this
Right that's fine, oh right, great, yes
can use it alright, I should
be up there on Saturday, I shall load the car up and take them 
Let me can I
Wait a minute
You get down a bit lower and I'll drop it down to you
Wait a minute, see if I can just
You be careful
Whoops  that's right 
yeah, erm, I don't quite know what to do about this, this is, I've taken some stuff out, if I can slide it down the
Yeah
If you, if I hold this at least until you get a bit down
Yeah, I don't, wait a minute, wouldn't you want this for your own kitchen window?
I don't think so
You won't, alright 
we've got , we've got ever so much stuff
Okay, I've got it
Is that alright?
Yeah 
There is another lot here in a bag, but this plastic is beginning to go, so I'll drop it down to you
Alright, I'm there
Mind the plastic because it might split
That's right, there 
Now there's some of these, I'll just drop them down onto these erm, so I'll drop it down onto that
Wait a minute let's  yeah 
You know it's wicked isn't it really, cos some of this stuff, I mean this is not at all bad is it?
No, got it
Can you manage?
Yeah 
to collect such
 

No don't come up I'll slide this down it's not very heavy, I just put some bits of stuff in, it's not terribly heavy 
Alright then
Okay?this is a box of Tide soap powder, I mean there's quite a lot there
If I drop this down can you just erm, not drop it down 
Sorry
Okay?
Yeah
I think that's the lot
Good, ha, I was, I was gonna say leave you to it
Yeah 
just as well I think 
Actually in honesty they have taken quite a bit out of there, cos there was an awful lot of stuff in there, you could hardly get in at one stage  now what are you gonna do with these bike things, are you gonna chuck them?
Oh yeah I think so, I don't think that I can make anything of it, I'll take that box to school because they might be doing a
might be able to rescue that lot
Yeah
Anyway, I'll see what I can get in the car
Right well I'll, I'll open up mine and we can see what we can get in mine
Ooh it's a load of rubbish isn't it?
I think if I take this lot to the tip now, I'll come back
Alright
then perhaps we can dispose of
Yes, there won't be a lot left
the rest of the stuff
That's right
Okay?
Yep
You'll be here for as I come back won't you?
Er yeah I'll be here 
Is that all rubbish in there?
All rubbish, yeah
Right
and I think, I think in there  er I don't think we're gonna get anything else in there
No I don't think we are, well I can, I can get this erm  right, well I can take that in
Er I'll take that one with me
This is rubbish?
Yeah that's rubbish
Right, okay, give me a hand with this 
This as well, right  didn't take long to get down the tip?
No
What a lot of stuff they've got down there, I can't understand why people threw it away
I know
There's windows and doors
I know it's, it's fantastic isn't it?
Before the war people would of screamed out for that
Well I mean people say, you know, there's, there's so many poor people about, but there's no, there's not the poverty there was
 

oh
Right, that's it, that'll do, I won't go any further and I can get the other things in  well we had er, we had an aluminium friend, a double glazed enormous window over our landing and it was, the aluminium was so cold and it was conden there was so much condensation that we had a new window P V C put in, but I tried to sell this other window, cos it was beautiful you see, nothing wrong with it except you know, but nobody wanted it and I kept it and I had it for about two years standing outside and then I thought I can use that and I cut, it was a three section, three lots of glass all in one, cut down, divide it into two and one, and got myself a plant house under the erm
Yeah
under my verandah
Yeah, yeah  er right I think we've finished 
Have you got to go to the tip?
That's it
Yes 
Alright, leave the car there just for a bit I want to go over and see
the dentist just for a minute
Right
alright?
Yeah, erm okay well I'll go, I shall be coming back here actually, but er, I'll take this lot I think now anyway, well no I won't I'll do what I've got to do here now and then I'll, I'll go afterwards
I shan't be long, I'll only be about ten minutes
Okay, fine
Er those snowdrops are really  quite something.
A beautiful bank full of them.
And you see they say that  erm snowdrops really want   The best way to sort of erm  increase them is just sort of 

pick out a lot of those and then put them in another part of the garden.
yes yeah.
They, they're two  ninety?
Mm  yeah 
Should be nice  fuchsia there   fuchsias.
Forty nine pence each or four fifty for ten.
Oh yes.
It was three fifty for ten.
Mm someone's scarf?
Yes mm  child's by the  size of it.
Thank you very much.
That's the second person that's c said that in the last three days would you believe ?
Yeah      Now what was that that went behind us?
I thought it was a little er blackbird.
Oh was it?
Mm.
I w I would have said it was an animal, you know?
Didn't, didn't fi 
Oh yes   Erm 
you wear it  
Right 
you're 
Oh isn't it nice?
skiing.
Oh yeah    
 
Right 
Let me get my broth back.
Oh   Oh we'll go back home if that's alright.
Unless you want to go somewhere else.
No I, I was just sort of erm  A wondering and B wondering whether to go back a different way round and 
Well it's up to you cos I'm quite happy to go  have that little walk, I wanted a little walk.
But that's enough?
Oh no no no, I mean I'm alright if I sort of get on a  a straight  because oh these that are coming out  
Mm 
that  is out.
No I'm alright as it happens, so that's okay.
it's still okay left if you want to nip over   oh back this way.
Mm 
Did you hear Christopher saying that he was going to be getting erm  a new Cavalier?
Yeah.
Having, having booked it that morning
That's right, it was twenty pounds cheaper  
was it now?
Was he  
No it was twenty pounds a month less.
Twenty pounds a month less was it?
Mm.
Oh I thought it was more than that.
They hoped it would get through.
He says he was gonna have to get something anyway wasn't he?
Yeah oh yes.
Sort of a yellow
Yes 
tinge to that, don't know 
Oh look 
Yeah, there's a rugby pitch there, I didn't know there was a school there.
that's one of those erm handicapped
Is it?
.
David could have gone to it.
Remember your mother taking David up to Birmingham way  where they had erm  big new 
Oh I thought it was me making all that noise.
I was breathing and I could hear sort of I was thinking first of all it was coming from, you know  somewhere outside like somebody


sawing a tree or something.
Widening the road here or something.
Yes, just widening it and straightening out some of the bends.
cos that was a bend there wasn't it, obviously.
Mm.
Gosh the valley goes really far down there.
Yeah it is deep down isn't it?
one or two houses, you know, when I caught sight of it first  I don't see them now.
He must have been fishing.
Looks like it doesn't it?
He's got a big keeper net there.
Was the disabled toilet alright?
Yeah  
Nice little waterfall things.
Yes, a weir.
It's good to have those on the ground, you know, for people who are   gosh  who are you know incapacitated.
But sometimes people think well they're only for disabled but  I don't believe that's so
No I don't think it is either.
because I think to myself well  you know  if there are no disabled people about, and more often than not  there are not  why shouldn't anybody use them?
That's it.
Yeah
we're going past.
Mm
big erm tree  
tree that's making it fall down yeah.
The thing is beginning to look  you know  light comes 
They're gonna get, yes 
through it.
that's right.
had to take a sort of erm   south to  erm  not   just thought of both the names   and the other one  but they would be nearer to Exeter  but it wouldn't be sort of in Exeter itself  I was thinking, you know, probably get erm  you know, see if there's any new houses being built there and  what sort of price and what have you.
Yeah.
 

I'm not quite sure where you mean.
Well it's sort of on its way to Exeter.
Chudleigh
Chudleigh 
Mm we haven't been through this way for a long time have we?
No we haven't.
I could certainly do with a drink.
Could you?
Mm.
Well I suppose it's not far to go home for a  well it'd be nice if we saw somewhere that was nice.
Or do you know somewhere?
No I don't know anywhere, no.
The   The Olde Lion, don't think we'll go there.
open for lunch and dinner.
The Coach
The Coach House 
House  Funnily enough I was  going to say to you  when we were out at erm Dartington instead of buying that ice cream, we should of had a cup of tea  probably would of been about the same price, and so 
Yeah.
Probably the tea would of been better for us.
Small development, that must, that must be down there somewhere.
But you see practically anywhere here would be within Christopher's 
Yeah
erm  you know, distance into  Exeter.
I mean he was saying that er    erm what do you call him?
 
Yeah  he lives in erm  in, in  
No it's warehouse units going up there, I thought it was gonna be housing, more houses.
Oh there i there is new housing, you know, there's more 
Mm.
development er back there, that's what made me think of it.
They wouldn't want to be near warehousing units of course but erm  there's a lot of new building going on and with so much competition  Thinking of Imelda for a job, I mean  there's, there's loads of places here as well for her    Exeter Hospital   you know the   Torbay.
Somebody mind you was  on about Torbay this morning on the  radio I think it was  saying that there were so many complaints and nurses are under such great stress.
And    I was very naughty I, I  felt like saying well some of their, they, them aren't  er do you remember the very last time we were up in the hospital at the waiting area, there was those two nurses that walked up and down 
Mm mm 
about five times doing nothing.
That's right.
So really and truly I mean it's not all nurses that are so stressed.
I'm sure there are some who are  you know, are in a bad way and they're having to do other things that they shouldn't be doing.
But this is the trouble with everybody these days isn't it?
Yeah.
Everybody just wants to do what they should be doing whereas  with my job it never even thought about it did we?
No, no.
Tell you what erm when we get into  you can just drop me down to  the greengrocer near the church because I'm out of erm  spring onions and if I wanted to  add up to that bit of salad that we've got
Right.
tonight, if you're gonna have that, oh I can have a bit some other night then
Mhm
But this week is the last  that we can go to the erm Beefeater and get that  
Oh ha have you got that voucher still?
yeah
Oh.
off the cost of a meal.
And then you get half of a bottle of wine as well or something.
Got double lines coming up  that's funny  stuck there like that 
Well I didn't sort of notice what it was.
Oh it was just two
Oh I see, well some signpost, yeah 
 
poles for a signpost 
see them?
Yeah I can just see them in the rear mirror.
Oh could be for a signpost, yes it could indeed.
red car's coming, coming as well.
And another one as well coming.
Oh he was far too close you see, he was far 
He's going to tr she, he or she is going to try and go now.
he was far too close to it and he didn't see what was happening you see.
The other car did.
He is telling it to go now look, you see he's put on his lights.
Yeah  Wonder why the police car put its lights on at that moment.
I don't know but erm
Oh you were quite legit
Oh I was legit, yes, nothing wrong with me.
I was well clear.
Yeah.
The other one's not in sight, the whole of that straight.
It never came did it?
No.
But I think the, the tractor driver put on his lights
Yeah
to say it was clear.
I was thinking when Daniel was down here  that erm  Paul  you know and all his girlfriends, various girlfriends, for a long time now  and I said something to Daniel well you know are you sort of courting yet?
No no, he says no, no 
No.
And I don't think Tim is very interested.
I think there's many more women driving now aren't there?
If you look.
Yeah.
going round anyway so  she's going round as well 
Well I think I'll go round actually cos they're queuing up,we want to go to the grocers so er if we go up The Avenue  we shall just come past the front of it.
Colin something or other?
I forgot in that second what it was 
Yeah  always happens to me.
It was Colin somebody.
It is well worth going down 
Yeah.
I should think in this day and age they could  
Now there look at that lot as well.
I mean it's amazing isn't it?
All on to one post.
Yeah.
I think this building is  dreadful for the poor people living in those houses just behind it.
Mm.
Oh but this is the erm council office as well isn't it?
well there's in gonna be income tax isn't there amongst other things.
their light and their view and everything, I think it's dreadful.
And it would, I mean they, they wouldn't of even had expensive houses anyway but they must have taken their value away tremendously.
at the back of the houses there but erm  There's that and then there's the new doctor's surgery.
Mm.
That's been pulled to bits in the erm press.
Yeah.
I've not seen a lot of it actually, so far.
I mean I must say it looks a bit bitty  but erm  er  now you see up there they've got the same, similar sort of style really to those houses.
Did you ever get in touch with the erm
No I didn't, no.
It's not A T S
Er well I mean I want to find from A T S or someone like that how much their cars would cost
Well what was the one that erm Maurice gave you?
It wasn't A T S was it?
No.
That was, no that was that was  Byrite and that, but I w I would go there but I'd like to go there  with some idea what the price elsewhere is.
Yeah.
Oh.
round the corner.
You'll be in the car.
Right, if I'm not there I will come round the block.
He was looking at you.
He's listening you see.
Go on, have a drink    something.
Oh those daffodils are really coming out now aren't they?
Aren't they lovely?
Yes.
Oh one's gone right up to the top of the 
The other one's staying on the ground.
Well I mean we've still got two bottles there.
Even so I mean  we might not be so lucky.
Yes, it'll be nice to have a cup of tea.
Shall I carry it through?
Please.
Now is there going to be enough there, salad- wise?
I mean are you going to  
Oh I would think so yes.
Cos I got that other meat, the red meat to do for a supper but I can do that for tomorrow  
Well that's fine isn't it?
Does she  
Oh you've taken the bread out have you?
Oh these bits?
Yeah I was just gonna have that 
Oh you were?
Yeah.
Sorry.
I don't know whether sh I shouldn't think so.
I don't know ho they're gonna do, well I mean I don't know how they, how they work it.
It must be quite a job I should think.
I mean I don't think I would of 
But then he'd, apparently he seemed to have an older brother with him
Mm.
It said something about 
Yeah.
the older brother had said, I, I can't really remember what it 
No.
was.
And presumably he would swim, but you don't know that, I just, it hasn't come out has it?
The child is  still very seriously ill in the hospital .
it could be   I have to put in my erm  investment
Income.
interest as well.
But that is paid gross, that is paid, they don't deduct  there isn't any tax deducted for that.
Oh that's right, that's right.
But you have to put that and put your erm
You've got to show all your income in other words.
Mm.
They can find that ou find out the interest I suppose.
Well your, your book went in last November didn't it?
Looking up?
I'm just looking at the selection of flowers.
Mm.
And , when , was it November?
It goes in in November, yeah.
But I, I don't always put it in do I?
No.
I think you did this year, but I di I don't remember seeing those standing up as tall as that.
They're really quite pretty.
So it's starting.
What are you, what are you going to for ?
Well  just to get some of that erm
Soup mix or something or other.
Soup mix, yes.
I mean I know it's stupid er  I just wanted to  and there's no hurry at all for it and if you'd rather go somewhere else now 
No it's alright, no we can go there.
let's go there another time, I don't mind.
We'll wander round, I mean let's  to know that we can sort of just have a little walk as it were.
Yes erm I'm trying to think where there might be 
Oh they've got names on those gates now, did you notice that?
Hillside?
Er here you mean?
No on erm
Oh!
the, what do you call them's?
The  's.
Oh the  's, yes I think I have se noticed them, yes.
The cottage is on one side and something on the other.
And it's  something on a big gate.
This can be our half term treat.
Right.
Where did Richard say  was yesterday?
You said something or other to him
Yes, I can't remember now.
Helen's  is she?
Cos they don't have half terms do they?
I think they do actually.
Oh do they?
Yeah.
There you are, dog warden.
Dog warden yes, mm.
Mm.
Now I filed my nail this morning cos it was catching, I didn't file it long enough obviously, but I filed it with that erm  you know you opened up the 
Oh yes, yeah.
and left the f the file on the windowsill  I hope he pulls in and lets people go past.
Oh he's going left.
He's going l left here.
Going into the cemetery.


Trouble is, person in front's got a trailer as well.
Oh yes, mm.
Oh he's going right    right into there.
Oh this one's going right as well, oh, very good.
What were we talking about?
I don't know .
I was talking about something, I don't know  mentioned about Paul and then I'd said about Helen  
Helen, yeah.
Anyway erm  Richard was feeling quite relieved about the
I think so, yes the planning 
about the 
permission being turned down, yeah.
No I don't blame him, I mean  
No I don't.
lot of times I've, you know, thinking sort of is sh 
I mean he's got a nice house there, he doesn't want it erm
That's right.
spoiled.
The trouble is I mean if, if it did, it came up and he wanted to sell it would of  it would obviously decrease the value.
Yeah, that was what he was thinking of.
You'd get all the rubbish from a  take-away as well blowing into his garden, I mean it wouldn't have been very pleasant.
much  he reckons his house is worth now.
But I suppose in a way they would have then been contemplating  selling their own house and getting somewhere else before in fact
Yeah.
It's a shame because I mean it  I think what they've got is really  you know, er er er they'd be hard put to it to get anything  as good really at the price I think.
Mind you they'd probably get a hundred thousand for theirs I should think now.
Yes I think, that's what I was thinking of.
Do you remember when we used to come out here for the primroses?
That's a long time ago isn't it?
Did we come out this far then?
Well used to come out to Totnes didn't we?
By 
Oh yes  
Oh the sun's trying to come through now.
Yes.
said there might be  this afternoon.
I haven't seen any primroses sort of like in the hedges yet
No.
but erm  yes the garden's alright but then they've been there in the garden all the winter as well 
Yes that's right.
There's a lot of sheep there.
Look!
Tony and Doreen will be back tomorrow won't they?
Thursday they said.
Well Thursday, tomorrow's Wednesday.
Oh yes, that's right.
Police.
Said she'd try and er 
?
before the weekend, you know, to say
Mm.
when they could come.
She said that had been her first earliest morning.
It had been?
She didn't say anything about the
No.
possibility of a new job and I didn't mention it to her.
No well I, I'm n 
I got the feeling Bob said it wasn't
I, I'm not absolutely sure from what Bob said whether she even knows about it.
I think  I don't know, I may be wrong there but erm 
We ought to go down and investigate the erm  the  you know.
Mm.
I know people say well oh it's, of course it's changed ownership, well  things change ownership and it can be for the better as well for the worst can't it?
The  sit down snack bar
Yeah 
or something.
Didn't get to read  
No I didn't get to read it either.
Something on the right I think it was.
bed and breakfast there, whatever that is.
Think that er  sounded like a snack bar that might be on a
Mm.
lay-by or something.
Must be here look.
Oh it is a lay-by, yes.
Yes that'll be it.
Gosh, suddenly a lot of traffic.
That's the first we've erm
Mm.
Mm.
Perhaps it's market day at  Totnes?
It's funny er when Richard came in the other day and said he'd been  he'd been to the dentist and you said oh well they haven't been in touch with us yet.
Yes isn't it?we ever meet this lady.
 

It was funny to hear Miss  and not Harold .
Oh is that her name?
Mm yeah.
You can walk along the river can't you erm  that's at Dartington isn't it?
Erm
And that's where you can walk along and you, you know, er when there are  salmon leaping
Oh it's only the road, I don't think there's a, I don't think there's a walk along there  not here.
I thought there was  somewhere.
They've got that erm  got that big sculpture somewhere about there.
Somewhere near the college I think.
Well I mean we can  we're er I'll,w we'll 
I just can't remember.
I'll go to Dartington via that back road  cos you can go that way  turn off up here  and see.
Was it through the grounds of the 
Yeah 
college
mm well
that I'm thinking of?
you can drive through the grounds of the college.
Are there lights?
Yeah.
side and Dart side.
I can't really remember where it was exactly.
We did walk somewhere one time and erm  very very nice the  it must have been the time when the salmon were  riverside walk.
Oh yes  yes.
Well we've never been along that, actually.
Still got a lot of erm
Yeah, making ponds and things by the looks of things.
Making new roads?
Making ponds by the looks of things,
Oh.
yeah.
Wonder if the only time I was, when I saw this, was
somewhere er when Christopher was with us.
You see that's no, oh no parking in this area.
Erm 
Well it doesn't matter really, it was just that I sort of 
It looks as if there is a walk down there but we've never been on it but tell you where you may be thinking of, you may be thinking of that walk that goes towards the erm  adventure park  at the other side of Buckfastleigh.
No it wasn't, it was in here in the grounds of erm  Dartington.
We've sat here in the car and watched the erm  the birds down there.
I'm wondering whether it was erm  one ti er we, we walked up a hill and the  the erm sculpture was sort of up on a hill.
There's a railway line down there you see.
Yeah.
Funny isn't it?
Have to ask Christopher if he knows.
I can't think of how we got in.
Th there's that but that looks fairly  
That's very new, yes.
There's a bridge somewhere, do you know a bridge anywhere here?
Funny isn't it?
Yeah it is funny.
I, I have got a sort of vague feeling that  maybe it wasn't with you we walked along it, maybe it was Christopher and Amanda.
This is all the college  buildings isn't it?
There's Park Road there, now I've never been down there
Well I d 
Gallery and 
Now I've just seen traffic a long way down here, leading to Ella Park and Warren Lane, now I, I've  never been along here and I don't know but I  c coming up the road I saw cars down here
car park for residents only.
And that's no through road there, obviously.
Well there's no point in going through here then like that.
He's turning right as well.
Cos we can get out here I think.
Oh is this the 
This is the car park.
Oh this is the car park is it?
Well this is the car park for Dartington College but you can get out through here.
Yeah.
Oh well here's the college that I saw
Mm.
art and design, up there somewhere, yeah.
office  Department of Art and Design.
Cos Sue might well be coming there.
Oh I should think it's more than likely.
cottages.
All these sleeping policemen they've got.
Mm.
I suppose with all the students  wandering about   pedestrians   Yes I wonder where that was cos I'm sure there was a Henry Moore sculpture.
Oh there's a Henry Moore sculpture in the grounds
Yeah
Dartington.
Well there, it was there
Yeah.
that we walked to
The river, but then I don't know the walk 
No we sort of 
No.
we walked up
Mm.
to the  like a field  but we were near to the river when we saw the erm
Yeah.
salmon.
Now  can I get to the  no I can't get to it there, through there can I?
No.
Oh so you knew about the Henry Moore statue there?
Well  I then remembered that we'd seen it and it's in the grounds.
Yeah well er you see this was in the grounds at Dartington 
Mm.
Mm.
as I said.
But it's that side away from the river, you know, I  I can't link it with the river.
Well y we walked
Yeah.
like er  it would be a sort of
Mm.
hill like that, a grassy place.
suppose they've still got quite a bit of  own a lot of   put plants up there  and there.
's quality meat, my goodness they're still going strong.
Gosh, lot of cars parked here for Dartington.
daffodils out yet.
on the left
Oh yes.
There  or here.
Well there's one, two further along actually, so 
Bet there are plenty up there.
Well there's certainly one there and one there  and one there  depends on which way they like to get in   like to get in that door  
Excuse me, do you know if this is the only entrance into this place cos we left our car in a car park and we 
There are three car parks
Ah
there's one there  that's the first level  there's this one  and there's a third one up there.
And that's all, there's nothing   
No there's nothing down that way as far as I know.
Okay, it must be one of these then.
Okay 
It's one of these, yes.
Thanks very much.
Erm i i i that's the first one you come to, that one.
N no, we went into about the second or third I think, is there one up there one up there 
Well that's the second and that's the third
So we can get to it by going up this way.
Or you can go up that way, yes but I mean if you, you know, you can walk through to make sure you're not there if you want, but you can go up, that's the way
Yeah.
Let me check this way then 
to to it.
Okay, thanks very much for your help.
Alright?
It is a bit awkward isn't it?
Oh when you've lost your car park.
See if they can't find it  
Yeah well they don't think it was they don't think it was the first one, no.
No mm 
 

Now
Now where was that shop?
Well is it here?
Oh yeah it's  Food you want isn't it?
So it's up here further.
  

Yeah.
Now what's in here?
Is this it?
Well there's, see look there's herbs and things here you see look.
Oh right.
I mean it may be further up.
No this is probably it.
Celery seeds, I was looking for some of those yesterday.
What?
Celery seeds.
I know I've got some but I don't know where.
Dill tops.
What?
I see dill tops, rosemary 
Rosemary I go out to the garden for.
Mm yes you do don't do?
Mm.
Certainly some mixed scents here aren't there?
Lovely aren't they?
Erm 
You can get aniseed here.
Do you want some aniseed?
Yes.
I 
Mm.
 

Casserole mix, mm.
Is that them?
Is that what you wanted?
Think so.
It's dear.
What?
Homemade orange ground rice cake  two pounds twenty.
Mm.
So how much would your sponge make?
sixteen pence?
Yeah.
Dear.
Homemade chocolate Victoria sandwich  two pound twenty.
Yeah.
Marmalade buns 
They look quite nice, how much are they?
Well I don't know, is that  I don't think that's thirty eight is it?
Probably thirty eight pence each I should think.
Mm
Well I know, well that's twenty three 
 

Pigeon and bacon pies.
meat on there.
Doubt it do you?
I shouldn't think so.
Minced beef and  four times this year.
Oh yeah.
What would you like?
Wha what variety do you want?
Maple and walnut, strawberry, chocolate 
I think I'll have the 
toffee.
I'll have toffee, yes!
Apricot and vanilla.
Big enough toffee!
Oh!
is very unpleasant.
Yes, well it might be .
Are they?
Erm  .
It's very soft that one, you'll find.
Thank you.
I'll have a maple and walnut please?
They seem to be the favourites don't they?
The 
They have been over the past few days  erm  usually it was chocolate and apricot.
So flavours do change.
 
Yeah.
Flavour of the month.
That's right.
That's one forty please?
Thank you.
Thank you.
Oh!
Mine's lovely!
I could have a lick of yours though  couldn't I?
Three sixty change.
Thanks very much!
Thank you.
Okay love?
Well, I've got a  now!
Well that's, that's what I meant if we were make them
That's the, that's why.
Plenty of  at home.
I was going out the other way !
Is that the one you're gonna do?
Yeah.
Mm!
Lavender.
rosemary isn't it?
Lavender.
Oh I dunno!
Perhaps it is rosemary!
But are there, you don't get this with rosemary do you?
Oh it's lavender!
Yeah, so I thought.
Just stand here for a minute and eat your ice cream.
Oh, don't tell me that I shouldn't have this!
Why not?
It's cor!
Why not!
There's a lot of people here!
Mm?
Quite a lot of people.
There are a lot of people here!
Oh that's .
Difficult to tell  isn't it ?
Mm?
Difficult to tell!
Oh it's very , some places are so noisy!
Some old dears coming out  bleeding apathy!
Ooh I know!
What's yours like?
Very nice!
They got a  fire burning there or something, look!
Yeah.
It is isn't it?
Probably in the restaurant.
Mm.
Mm!
It breaks doesn't it?
their rates it's because they are paying that's all!
Yeah.
Phoned up to see how much he'd charge me.
It says Maggi for Men.
Pardon?
It says Maggi for Men.
Maggi for Men!
Oh!
Phoned up .
I'm not sure if that is  this.
Yeah, I think it is by the looks of things.
Oh, I'll ta I'll take mine through cos they'll surely   stuff 
Yes it is, yeah.
around there, no?
Well, that's it anyhow.
Like the, I mean that doesn't really bear any resemblance to that but it's obviously the way.
Mm.
Well would you like one now?


Do you both want 
Well 
one?
that's alright, no.
You see how they   the cucumbers over there.
No.
Have half a dozen of those floating around in the garden.
Sorry?
Say, have a dozen of those floating around the garden.
Yeah, they're nice actually!
Well yeah I su I suppose there must be!
Mm.
No, I said do you want to?
Yes!
Well!
Have some stuff.
Well do you want to go into the fashion shop?
I wouldn't  buy the stuff in in here whilst .
You know for a  Christmas decoration.
They always get chopped down.
Oh I don't think you can walk here!
We'll have to .
Yes.
Yes.
You can go upstairs in here.
Probably, yes.
Say, the toilets  
Yeah.
It's    
Sorry!
Sorry!
I know you're not allowed.
Oh green that er
Oh no, look I was saying there are no primroses out yet!
Oh yes!
There are, yeah!
Yes!
Mm.
I noticed the green as we crossed 
Mm.
up there.
Oh just look at the  honeysuckle .
Yes!
I think that's good, cos we've got that.
Is it?
You go there and have a look at  and snowdrops in it as well!
Oh yes!
There a lot more over there look!
Oh yes!
It's lovely!
Beautiful!
Ever so many here as well 
Mm.
just coming out.
You really  crossing roads.
I'll have a go.
What do you say?
The  fish  thing.
Oh yes, there's a lot there look!
Yeah.
Here it comes.
Okay.
Shall we just look in here and then we'll have  for lunch?
Yeah.
What's the time?
Time?
Ooh!
Ten past three.
Ten past three?
Ah.
right, you're going up there.
Yes.
La la la la!
All the way.
Mind the !
Special designs 
A special design.
available o in request for so many other designs in stock.
Mm.
That's er the design you want
Mm.
isn't it?
Yeah.
Yo when will you be able to see them better !


That's four ninety five for that  .
Mm.
Suppose an unusual
Yeah.
Well 
 
that's a  sort of erm   water based isn't it?
Yes!
Mm!
No.
And that's where they
And that's where they do the
do the pots.
so , mm.
Oh yeah!
Pardon?
The water is a bit dirty looking isn't it?
Yes, it is isn't it?
Although you can still see through it.
Yeah.
Probably just the bottom that's dirty.
And you can
They're going to the  I gather.
Obviously!
Mm mm !
They've got a  there as well.
Mm.
There's lots of these old sort of  posts  along here with these holes in them.
Yeah.
Almost looks as if they're gates or something .
Yes.
They're big aren't they?
Mm!
take 
Yeah.
a nap is that about what you wanted?
Yeah !
don't they?
Mm.
It's only because of I know.
Perfect gentleman!
Thank you.
See look at all those  cross pieces, they look as they've  been there for some purpose, you know?
I mean these haven't just been put here, they've been there for a long time!
Yes.
See look!
You see there's original cross piece whatever it was!
You know, they're obviously cutting paths through 
Oh yes!
there.
Or the erm  few blocks over there look!
Mm.
Then go right at the back again do you reckon?
I don't know.
I don't know that's a  sort of a  proper path there.
Er  well if it wa if it was it would be very convenient cos it would probably come out on the car park but er
That's the  you say?
Yeah.
Well we could try there.
Well!
There's another one along here, look there!
Yeah.
Look at all the erm  cars going up to those houses up there look!
Yeah.
Gosh yes!
Well do you want to walk back along here and see whether  or do you want to walk a little further along here?
Well I don't mind just a little bit.
Well  we could always sit on the seat when we come back.
If I'm 
Mhm.
exhausted.
We'll probably get  and  having to walk along.
Well  perhaps we better not go down cos we shall have to 
Oh 
come up again shan't we?
okay yes.
That's right !
Right, well we'll go back.
We can't walk   
Well we could go , go along there, I dunno, go along here and see whether it comes out.
No I don't think so.
No.
Go down.
Dad!
That's right here.
Look!
You have to wait here.
up to the  and across there.
What?
Up here  towards dad.
Alright.
There we are!
Oh!
He's got quite a job hasn't he?
Mm.
Yes I know.
The weir there!
Must go right up to the edge.
Mm.
Look at them then!
Yeah.
Mm.
Yes.
It's all very nice!
Sorry?
Said it's all very nice!
There's a bunch of daffodils up there actually in the, yeah.
Oh yeah!
Whe what, where you was 
Whe , that's where I was, yeah.
Thinks  what were these do you know?
They were  leet hangers.
They used to carry  leets .
Oh did they?
Yeah, that's, oh!
Yeah.
Well that's what they told me anyway.
Yeah, well that's, that makes sense doesn't it?
Yes.
Yes , they seem just about level
That's right.
Yeah.
for the the  mill.
Down to the mill of course.
Yeah.
Yes.
Oh thanks.
more flour and  
That's right, yes.
free, free flour.
Ha.
Yes, it's amazing isn't it?
Yeah.
Wha 
And he said   leets what you're hanging something on them?
No , if he er, it'd be a, a wooden trough with water.
Oh!
It'd be a  leet and it carried the water.
Oh I see, yes!
You see?
Erm, in fact  further down there you've got the  leet on the ground going down to where the waterwheel is.
Oh I see, yes.
Mhm.
And er , but this must have been a  leet that came haf , from higher you see?
Yes.
Yes.
Oh!
So, would there 
You know.
be other ones that are going, going up there?
Well ha , we saw higher up , we saw the
Yeah.
th the carriers you see.
They've got daffs er, coming here you know, see?
Oh that's right yeah.
l
Good morning!
Oh !
Alright?
Thank you very much indeed!
Thanks.
Bye!
Thank you.
Bye bye then!
Thank you!
Hello.
Have you any erm  stamps?
First class or second class sir?
Second class.
Yes.
Five please.
Right.
Certainly!
I'll get those for you.
Give that gentleman his paper.
There you are.
That's right.
Lovely!
Thank you very much!
Thanks Mr .
Five seconds my love.
That'll do.
Let's see what we've got, ooh I dunno if I've got, ooh yes I have!
Yes I have!
That'll be ninety pence won't it?
Five tens are 
That's right!
fifty, five eights are forty, ninety pence.
Good job I learnt my tables when I was at school!
There's a lot that don't do it these days!
Well my son does.
They're very hard  at his school, we've always done them!
It's very important!
It's ever so important!
But, from an early age because without 
That's right.
tables you can't do multiplication,
It takes so , it takes so long to do everything you see.
You can't do anything!
That's right.
You know, and I mean where he used to go to school they didn't teach them them till they were ten!
What the hell of a use is that!
No good at all!
So I mean he is very, very good at his tables and  we bought one of those Early Learning  tapes when he was quite young that you sing 
Yeah.
to.
Mm.
And I always learnt mine parrot fashion using 
That's right.
sticks.
That's right.
And then we  got a table tester  to help them refresh their memories, it's like a disc and then you got the slots and then it tells you your eight times and that's good as well but  I mean he's got them off by heart which is brilliant!
Well it it saves so much time as well you see because and you get on so much quicker with everything!
Well absolutely!
And I mean, fortunately he is very good at his maths and he's quick at his sums and things because he knows his tables.
There's erm 
That's right.
so much difference!
Well I've got, I pu put a program on, I've got a computer and I 
Oh yes!
put a program on the computer  for maths
Oh right!
and it's er  it's erm  it's a table program  amongst others, adding 
Oh that's good!
and subtraction and multiplication.
Yeah.
But, you know they can pick it and er, it just flashes up and they have to put the right answer in, if they get the right answer it it goes on to the next one, if it
Oh that's good!
get the wrong answer
Yeah.
then i it says no that's wrong!
Sorry la whatever he name is that  
What age group is that for then?
Well this is really for anybody learning the tables.
But, primarily it's it's it's, you know  top end of the primary school.
Oh it sounds good!
But you co could go on, I mean if you if they don't know it you can still use it when they get to secondary school.
What computer is that then?
Oh it's er, it's erm
B B C  or 
It's a Tandy actually , it's one I had 
Yeah.
given me  about eight 
Right.
years ago.
So, and it's an old one actually
Oh!
but I've put, put my own program so that the 
Ah!
That's a good idea!
But how old is your
He's nearly ten.
Yeah.
Nearly ten.
But he has,we we've only got, my husband's got a computer at work, we just got one of the Segas, the master systems you know that you you got th the games that you put in those  but he wants to get another one next year  but that's a good idea something like that!
Should be very good for schools I would think, wouldn't it?
Well, yes of course, I mean I, the schools have got programs I mean you can, you know  they er 
Yeah.
Yeah.
Da ta for it.
Yes.
But that's, I think that's a brilliant idea actually!
Because where he goes is a smaller school where they go  and erm  I think something like that is nice for them to actually  
Where does he go?
He goes to a school in the  Tene Valley, it's a teacher that, he used to go to Exeter school and the teacher's opened her own school  and, only for lo a small time and then she's opening up actually in Exeter but this is an in between and she's a very good teacher!
That's great, you see!
And you see she's bringing him on very well!
Yeah.
I mean there's only a few kids there, they're all good mates and it's like private tuition.
But, I 
That's right.
mean you pay for it, course you do but then 
That's right.
on the ar , we well you know we've paid for his education since he was seven because he wasn't doing anything at primary school!
Half the teachers le left them doing nothing!
It's a shame really!
Yeah!
Yeah!
But er  you know, and it would have been such a waste cos he's bright.
But that he was always naughty!
They used to write back and they said he was always being sent out and I said that's because he's bored!
He couldn't be bothered  you see.
And how many more children slip through the net that way?
That's right.
It's very true.
An and so we we said right, that's it!
We'll have to get him out and  pay for it and it's  worked total dividends!
I mean he's very good at  maths.
They say maths and science are his strength subjects well I'd never have known that if he was still over there!
I was just told he was a  a fair average.
You know?
Erm can I have sixteen of those  there?
How many darling?
Sixteen.
They're two each, you know that do you?
Oh!
I'll have 
Yeah they're two each my love.
Er, then I'll
You can have ten can't you?
If you've got twenty.
Erm  Yeah I'll have ten of them then.
Cos you got twenty for your crisps then haven't you?
Yeah.
And erm
Right.
Yeah
Are those all one P?
Yeah, all those  my love are one P.
Erm
I'll have  erm  yeah, ten of those.
Er 
These ones?
Yeah I'll have erm  twelve of those.
One, two, three, four, five, six  ten  twelve!
Right, so what have we got there?
We got thirty two and twenty, should have fifty two?
And that's what you got innit?
Here's your crisps.
Here are love.
There's your .
Alright?
Fifty two, thank you love!
That's my allowance.
Mm?
That's my allowance!
Oh!
No I wa I'm I've I
You haven't got a number or something I could always go in and ask his teacher she's never interested in  if you've got a  a tape or anything.
I mean if you do know sort of 
Yeah!
Erm  I mean this is only a er  this is only a sort of a a wa a program I've built myself
Oh!
but I mean, you know, yeah I mean it's erm
If you have just, you know, drop it in 
Yeah.
in cos it's always handy to give to her because she's  she's looking for  you know, I mean, sort of you know different things all the time and she's got various 
One of those?
Twelve ninety five?
teachers that  that come and help and erm 
No not one of them cos they're frozen!
they've got one of the teachers from the old school who's very good at maths and erm geography 
You can have these Jelly Tots.
and  erm  games.
And erm, she's very good!
She's a good all-rounder and she's good!
Or you could have a Milky Bar?
Or a fudge?
But I mean I'm so pleased with it!
Could have some fruit gums?
I mean, I've noticed that just 
Yeah, it's great isn't it?
Well 
Want some Fruit Gums?
you know er, I mean we went only about  ago.
Fruit Pastilles?
Thank you my love.
Fruit gums  as well there.
Yes!
First or second my love?
Oh !
Erm first.
Don't you ask for it ?
That's 
That's mine!
That's twenty four.
I have to take that one separately though
Yeah.
for the stamp is that alright?
They are to take granddad's this afternoon.
You're not eating them now!


Oh yes!
Thank you very much indeed.
Yeah.
Mummy I've seen daddy in there!
Mm.
Fifty five change.
Put it on the shelf again please?
Yep!
Okay?
Thank you very much!
Hello there!
What have you got today?
You've gotta have  
 
day today.
Five , that's twenty two.
Here are, twenty two!
Seventy pence!
Thank you very much indeed!
In fact they're so espe .
Right.
Cheers!
Thirty change my love!
Thank you 
Thanks.
very much!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Very 
Mm.
handy to know!
Did he need a bit of help with his  I mean a lot of them did  made them that sort of I just found a lot of was so  so  behind and so
I it's i , I'm 
 
terribly sad that it happens, but it shouldn't happen, you see!
And the thing is I found, also, it was  
Ge da bo to to 
what what I found 
serve this dear lady!
What is the , tomorrow will do!
It's the wrong, it's wrong you see it makes  no discipline and the staff 
Er er 
just bringing you work then!
They should of had .
Now that's sixty one isn't it?
Yes my dear!
, much better?
Oh
twenty
she's alright thank you.
Well I .
Oh right!
Yeah they say oh yes she's alright!
Alright!
Yeah, cos it's usually a Friday, they do mess me about!
It's not right is it?
Course it isn't!
We'll have to complain 
Is it?
to the management!
Fifty, sixty one !
Thank you dear.
Oh well it's nearly pay day we'll see isn't it?
 
 
 
Thank you love.
oh I shan't
Somebody didn't even know  how many months there were in the year!
I know!
I can imagine!
You know?
Yeah.
And days in the year is, is a 
I know!
is a closed book!
I used to help them there  and one of the teachers  oh my God!
I used to help with sticking the  the er money onto the  well this used to take about, you know, an hour all these kids didn't know what two pence was, didn't know what twenty pence was and  ten pence and fifty pence and then we, they were in go about groups of seven and we get all this done then it would be assembly, then it'll be games and then that'll be it for the whole morning!
And I said what have they learnt?
Nothing!
What have they done?
And then she would listen to them read, well  this is what they finished with  they'd have a book and they'd take it up and she'd listen to one line!
How can you tell how er fluent a child is with it, with their reading
That's right!
and their, and their word knowledge by one line on a book?
There is no way!
And it was just reading , listen to, go and pick what books they wanted to.
If they wanted to!
If they wanted to!
Yeah!
Yeah!
That's right!
And i and my lad would bring home all these damn great big books that he couldn't read!
So I used to buy erm  I used buy a lot of er the Meg and Mogs cos I found that they sort of helped him.
I mean, I was brought up on Janet and John, you know  
Well it's great!
But it was a number, you wrote down the one you wanted to  
Yep!
And 
the 
it's progression!
by your word knowledge!
That's right!
And erm  wha what happened was we had Martin er assessed by an independent tutor, a guy that teaches  and he erm  gave him some tutoring with maths, like probably
Yes and he said  he's very bright!
He said but unfortunately  because he's boisterous, which he is  and because it's easier for them with their numbers to let him just get away with it or  say oh Martin go outside we can't, you know, then then he wasn't  learning to 
That's right!
his full capacity.
So where he is now, they really stretch them but they unwind them in the afternoons by games and and 
That's it.
and, you know 
Yeah.
dra , and drama 
That's right!
and  er as it should be done.
And he's getting on very well.
Because he went to Little Abbotsbury Prep School and at the age of four  I mean, he could read and read quite well actually, and erm write  very well actually!
And do lots of things that I knew he was capable of doing.
And I learnt from various teachers that when you go to these private schools and they've been to  schools, they hold them back  because they like, they don't like the
They don't like somebody 
No.
They 
That's right!
they, they like  
it it it upsets the system!
Yep!
But like there  and be all the same and that really upset me!
And I thought my God you know we've got him really on this far
That's right!
And then it gets held back!
and then he played in the afternoons!
And I  i , you know at six and I said my God  he did that at Abbotsbury when he was four!
That's right!
And so,i I mean it was to me it was a total waste of time over there!
I'll be honest with you.
Yeah.
And I live so near 
I know!
that damn school it really, I thought 
It's a shame because years ago when Miss what was her 
Miss .
Miss   and they had a lovely violin group there  and 
But it's down to head though isn't it?
I mean 
You know?
and you know, and it was tremendous!
Thank you love.
But i it's a shame because you see it's, it's really down to the  a lot of the advisory staff and erm  yo your teacher training colleges because there was a period when, I mean, I was always very formal I mean I, I, you know
I think it's the right  
you've got to work and and  th 
Yeah.
we had exams and  you know?
That's right!
Er, it was  er re 
And the three R's!
Which are so important!
Course they are!
Vitally important!
But, towards the end, before I retired  erm  a lot of the staff didn't like what I was doing  because I was still, you know,ant and the advisor would come in and say you know, you should do it,yo yo you know, it's too strict!
There was that chap that was sacked up the country wasn't he?
That's right!
He was there being pushed out 
Same sort of thing you see!
because you see they didn't 
But things are beginning
Yeah, that's right!
to go back you see.
But you see it won't help my lad!
Or doesn't help .
No, that's right!
That's right!
It may, I mean i in the next decade it may help those but it, you see 
Yeah.
that's why we had to get him out because it wasn't gonna help him!
That's it!
And this new curriculum at seven 
That's right!
was gonna do nothing for 
No.
him!
My er 
 
my son, one of my so 
Yes, erm  on the other hand there are some 
 
there are some very good comprehensive schools!
Oh yes!
I mean you can't, you can't erm
Thank you.
Thank you love.
There's some very bad grammar schools!
Yeah, I agree with you.
You know, again as you said earlier on it all comes down in the end to the head!
You see we've had some very good reports , I mean that went through a very bad patch but they've this new Doctor Colin   he's meant to be pretty switched on
Mm.
and erm they say, you know it's it's  turning into a very good school!
So that's one possibility to look at.
But  I mean a a grammar doesn't suit every child does it?
Some kids  erm er , you know.
No it doesn't, you see.
I mean I yo , I would always say, you know if a child was borderline
Mm.
If there was a doubt then he would be better not going to a grammar school
Mm.
because he would be at the top end of the other school 
That's right!
That is exactly that!
and then success breeds success!
That's right!
That's right.
Erm  whereas 
Right.
er the same child goes to the grammar school, he's in the C stream, he's at bottom 
Yeah.
at the end and they perhaps don't bother quite so much  and
Yeah.
he, he drops back, he gets 
Yeah.
further and further and further behind.
Yeah.
Now I found that, you see, cos I passed my eleven plus and I lived in Hampshire and the grammar school was Hampshire Grammar School for Girls, which was quite a long way away from where I lived and it would have entailed a bus and the train and I  and there was only me that passed and I, I didn't wanna do it.
So I went to a very good secondary school but I was in the A one stream  right the way through  and I was always within that top three of that A one stream and it gave me confidence and I really got on.
And I never regretted not going.
No.
That's right.
You know a lot of people said to me oh how stupid!
To my mum, you know  she's passed, you're daft, but  there'd have been so much hassle for me to get there!
Yeah.
And I didn't feel confident, and I wasn't happy within 
Yeah.
myself and my mum said if you're not, then you don't 
That's right!
wanna go.
That's right!
And that's how I felt about 
Yeah.
it, I didn't  and I felt I'd have no friends around where I lived and  you know, I'd always be alienated, I'd always be home later  and I said to my mum I don't think I can cope with it, so she said right then you don't go!
And I didn't.
And I never regretted it, I'll be quite honest with you.
And I think lots of children probably feel that way.
Yeah.
And 
That's right!
you know.
But it's 
Ha!
nice talking to someone about education cos I talk to some people and they think I'm crackers cos I took my kid out of a state school!
You know?
Ya, I I, I'm only sorry that you felt you 
Yeah that 
had to!
And I'm sorry 
I am!
the fact that you had to!
I am!
Erm but I, you know I think that's  that, that's an indictment of it you see because I 
Oh it's cost us an arm and a leg!
It really has!
Yeah sure!
An and it's  what makes me so cross as I walk past that blinking school every day and you think my kid should be over there!
That's it!
That's just  the way I feel  
Yeah I know it's sad isn't it?
Do you know what I mean?
Yeah I do.
I do know what you 
Yeah.
mean and I think it's, it's, it's a shame!
It's awful really!
when I speak about it I get so upset that they've got three or four and they can't !
And that's right!
You see.
You can't!
And there, lots of people and and lots of them actually they came from Abbotsbury and  that all their kids were doing so well and then this period of a year, nothing!
No progress!
No !
I know!
Well
You know!
Nice to talk to you 
See you again.
again.
Bye bye!
Bye bye!
Erm  lady in the  Post Office
Eh?
You know that new  one that's in there?
Yeah.
She's ever so nice!
Th the the
Oh yeah.
But er  I don't know how we got onto it  er sh and I think she said something about oh, she knew her tables
Yeah.
and erm  you know, she'd come from Hampshire apparently and she  an an yo you know, er we got talking about ma and she's taken her child away from the local school  and sen , is now going to a little private school up  the  Tin Valley, near  Tingrace apparently.
Fra 
Good morning.
Yes.
I it's erm  Monsignor , that's right, I recognized your voice.
Yeah.
Yes.
Right.
Would you hold on a moment I'll just get Margaret to the phone cos she really deals with the bookings  hold on a second!
Monsignor .
He wants the hall  Ma March the twenty sixth I think.
I i he's got  to  organize meetings for priests  to deal with the new accounting system.
Hello Monsignor!
Yes, I'm just looking and March the twenty sixth is free.
The twenty second, the Friday?
Yes, that's fine that's  that's free.
I'm a  large friend  !
Okay then, what time?
What time?
Six thirty.
And  obviously you want go in a little bit before that just in case somebody comes.
Yeah.
Mm mm.
Yes.
Fine.
Is that so?
And we have got, I must tell you, I don't know if you've been, and win , we have got it in the hall  I don't know if you've been in recently but  ha we have got some new chairs!
Is that so ?
No, no, no, no, no, no  they may be functional but they look better!
Right.
I, right away Monsignor!
Right.
Six thirty, twenty second.
Lovely!
Yes, bye bye.
God bless!
Of March is that?
Yes.
When you in Newton Abbot leads  all the rest of us follow.
That's what he said.
He, that's what I, what I used to say when I was there!
Oh!
Ha!
Gracious!
Now  six fifteen  Monsignor  .
It's a meeting of parish priests.
And .
Ah!
Right!
And they want it open a little bit earlier because erm  you know, in case anybody comes.
What does he, Botham opening big trumps
Hicks is hoax.
Hoax.
Er, what does that mean do you think?
Well it means that if  if Botham does open then the only place for Hicks is in the middle taking Lamb's place so when Lamb comes back
He'll be out.
he might not have a place.
There's one here about British Gas  complaints about British Gas rose a hundred and thirty four percent last year according to the recent Offgas report.
In one case a Leeds man received a quarterly bill for more than three thousand pounds  after British Gas engineers fitted his new meter back to front !
Very funny!
Good gracious!
Times may be tough but it seems we're taking less care of our money than ever before.
According to the Royal Mint around twenty three thousand pounds of coins a day disappear!
Some is taken home by tourist and some is lost in the street and down the backs of sofas.
But amazingly we are just as careless when it comes to bank notes.
Last November the old style fiver with the Duke of Wellington was withdrawn yet there are still sixty million missing !
You can understand sort of you know,th the coppers and that that  as they say get down behind sofas and what have you  but erm  it is quite amazing  where notes get to isn't it?
Sixty million's a lot isn't it?
Yes.
That's quite interesting that!
There's a mutilated notes department as well that you can  send really  screwed up notes to.
Yeah.
Haven't you heard before about that then?
But how I know, that's what somebody told me.
to send  some notes in 
Yeah.
you know, put them in the washing machine.
They  they have  in there  and they take out bank notes and coins from the washing machine.
But, so long as you  first.
Erm
Oh that's right, well the they detail here exactly what you need to have.
But, you know, that's how I knew there was a department somewhere because they do  
I think  just, if you've got the number you can take it into an ordinary bank.
Yeah.
Amazing!
Yeah !
Yes, I know how we got talking to this  girl in the Post Office cos I erm  I asked her for some stamps as well, you see, I wanted some  cos I happen to be sending stuff of for Germany  tomorrow.
And I haven't got any second class stamps so I thought well I'll get five  and it was, you know, dealing with that that erm
Yeah.
it cropped up.
You didn't say anything about  school  did you?
Oh no , no!
But, I mean that's why  Victor came away wasn't it?
That's right.
She was really upset about it.
Bet you were surprised to hear Monsignor  on the phone weren't you?
I was , yeah!
I've I, when I heard you saying  you recognized his voice I thought to myself well perhaps he's sort of inviting you to er, whatever!
Oh aye!
and they were going to be here.
Yeah , I never thought of that.
No, I, it was just that I, you know, I mean he  I recognized the voice really as he spoke.
Yes, distinctive.
Got a very
Oh yes!
very distinctive voice hasn't he?
It's still only half past nine so that's not bad!
What?
I said it's still only half past nine, so that's not bad!
Have you gotta get any milk  this morning?
Yeah.
I'm gonna put this French  this is a little French thing that soma er  we brought back .
Oh!
Oh you'll have to charge them francs for it.
But then we'd be looking for  francs.
And shra , oh you said francs didn't you?
Yeah.
Yes, I, the birds don't half have a go at those nuts don't they?
Look at them, one, two, three  four, five on there!
Yeah.
You know?
Yeah.
Yes there are.
And the one on the left.
Yeah , that's right!
And one there.
One, two  three, yeah.
There's one at the back on that erm
Yeah.
hanging one.
And one on the other one.
They're so busy around here!
I mean, in the trees as well aren't they?
They're always
Yeah.
Perhaps may it is because we've got all these trees I mean
Yeah.
was saying when she lived out at erm   cos I mean there were trees about there where their hou 
That's right.
But the nuts didn't come to her house.
Where has that come from?
Where's what come from?
I'll put it on there.
I can put it on there.
It's alright!
Well I knew I had caps on all the others.
Yeah.
But I had one over, as it were.
Suppose I mustn't really, I'm reading this morning.
Let's have a look at that.
Well you always thought about going to the Beefeater a bu really I suppose it might be better to go today than tomorrow.
Cos today  Lucy will be here but  tomorrow  might be more difficult.
Well
Erm  because I wouldn't sort of finished till  quarter pa 
I said to Kevin as he was talking, he came to help to wash up
Yeah I let him erm
and er
go and help you because I thought you know you might have a natter with him or something
he said, you on the finance committee?
Oh he says no he says I'm no good at figures, I said well not alike except blonde ones I said you know cos he made
he made a joke about a blonde you see just before that, anyway and I said I just wanted to, do you know who is on so he said oh  he thinks is on and that must be the  from 
That is that is the one that left the erm heater 
That's it yeah, and erm I was erm Wally and Gordon  and he thinks there's another couple you see, so I said well, you know, and I told him about the heater you see and he know, I said  when people sitting on their backsides in committee making decisions, I said, you know, I said it just makes me bloody well annoyed, he said I know he said they don't, they, they make the decisions and, but they don't do the nitty gritty, they you know 
Yeah 
the person that has to implement these things they don't and I said 
These, none none of those would have the foggiest notion about it
About the hall
about the hall, you see you, as I said to Kay, oh of course Kay has this you know on about this scouts
but, she did say she did this that and the other thing as well you see, but there's nobody knows anything about the hall in its new state as you do
That's right
I mean you don't
 
I mean I was asked to do it right from the word go wasn't I?
And you dealt with the erm, the, the various taxes and whatnots.
That's right 
As I said to Kay it's Terry that does all, he gets the money in, he pays all the bills, Muriel brings him the bills, I said he does all that apart from the fact I said he spent the whole day yesterday, the whole morning yesterday here clearing this, oh she said I did as well, erm you know help, I said what you, but as well as clearing
stuff, I said he swept the hall, I said look how nice it looks this morning, I said and he did all the toilets and everything else
I wonder who did then  and
you see Sister makes all these arrangements, it's she who does so many of the arrangements, she has made the arrangements about there being no coffee, several people have come to me and said I don't know why you've got to stop coffee because we can always go over and have lunch anyway, you know, er after the coffee, but Jean  came to me she said look I'm giving you this, and she gave me three pounds, she said I would much rather that was put into this, there your charity thing than take it across the hall, she said my Margaret won't go over there any more, because they, they say, you know, put in for your lunch what it would cost
Yeah
to have a lunch out
if you don't go for a lunch out
That's right, she said Margaret never goes, I said well we never go for lunch out, we hardly ever really
That's right
erm she's got a family Margaret, she said she won't go there any more  she I, I don't know whether that er Jean does  so  Didn't she just cotton on quickly,she said do you know that, I said why do I want anybody wandering in my house and my kitchen, I said it's a bit like it's clean, why should I have somebody sort of, well I mean just because I'm doing cooking, she said you wouldn't stop fancy one, you never know, she said well unless you want to stop at the, please don't, you'll let me still have your jam won't you?


So I said
and she cottoned on what I had in mind  Michelle said to her well how will this sort of erm  what are you looking for?
Erm cheese
Oh yes there's cheese there, how will this erm, yes of course there's
there if you want to, have that with a biscuit or something, I said what about this then, erm everybody gonna be taking things to sell at the stalls
but they what, I wonder what about that?
And that's true you see isn't it?
Yeah  well of course it's bureaucracy going barmy isn't it?
Really 
another one of these for you for tomorrow, oh god, rest of it, oh it's only on the cloth it is dirty anyway 
Another one of what?
A bowl of soup
Oh
you know, there, made another 
I mean the next thing they'd want to do is to come in and do in this kitchen before you do any cooking for yourself
 

I mean who knows, this soup may be erm
Contaminated
contaminated
Been in the fridge  this is
there is room for soup, I'll put it in this one  there
 

Anyway  did you say there's only Lucy or is there Lucy this afternoon?
Lucy
She is coming as far as you know?
Yeah 
And that is quarter past four
Yeah
her usual time
as far as I know, mm this is nice soup again
Oh did really that chicken was jolly well worth it's wi weight wasn't it?
Mm
But, two good dinners we've had from it
That's right
two lots of soup and there'll be, it won't be a full bowl for you tomorrow, but there'll be about half a bowl unless you want it now?
No  no, mm I have a word here belittle beginning with a D third letter from the end is an A, so I put depreciate
Denigrate
but the third letter has got to be an S , as it turns out now the third letter's got to be an S
I heard you say that as it turns out now 
so, so it's wrong 
I wouldn't of thought denigrate was erm that's to belittle
Yeah I know
No you don't really 
Well that's the same as denigrate I mean that's erm
Sorry?
What I had was the sa same sort of
delegate or something is it?
So it's E blank S
What's, what's that poker stake?
What's that what?
Poker stake, a stake in a game of poker, it's got a special name, four letter word
I don't know poker
I don't, but erm  Wonder where, wonder where the word penthouse came from?
Surely it's with somebody you know, some connection with a prison or something, didn't it?
I'm not up with the name of it 
Oh no , no
the name of a prison penthouse
Pentonville
Pentonville, yeah
They're just an expensive flat and of course the answer's penthouse
You just wonder where these words come from
That Holly the other day was saying  where do the names of the weeks come from
And of course some of those
Some of those have got an origin I think Thursday is it's, it's got a thought isn't it, yeah?
Got a thought, yeah , but erm Sunday has, what's that?
Tuesday certainly has and Wednesday, Wednesday is woodens day
god of war of Norway or somewhere or something like that, or it is sort of thunder
Mm
thunder isn't it?
Mm  No that's er making me jolly cross, not like myself I don't do anything like, not as much as I used to do at the hall, I mean I used to do a lot as you know, but I, I know how much you have done, but nobody else knows
Aha
Kay said I know, I said Kay you couldn't begin to imagine what he does, and of course she said, and she had been doing that erm painting, Father came in and said something like oh you, you've done a good job there, but she said he never said oh go over to the kitchen and get a cup of tea
He just doesn't think you see because he 
But he never did actually
No
I mean that's typically Irish of course, Irish male  oh dear, dear
I suppose that could be a good argument for having married women priests.
Well I often think there, there could be something for women priests because they would see the more practical things that had to be done 
Let's get this out of the way
 

I've bought that erm raspberry jam and some strawberry jam for us, I didn't realize that this would want replenishing as well 
Oh the chocolate
Chocolate, yes  But you see somebody I think it was erm what's his name?
Erm
what's his first name?
Who, Wally?
He's a little, a little chappie who comes in, came in this morning
Les
Les, yes, that's right 
 
mm, mm
erm, he said I don't know we've got to stop having the coffee, so I said well erm Sister had spoken 


Kay doesn't know why anyway, nor does erm Kevin and erm Denise 
So in other words it was an unilateral decision
Oh yes, sister made it 
Well I mean we can always unmake it presumably  cos next week it will be, it'll be different time I expect won't it?
A natter about ten I'd expect won't it next week?
Er
yeah
It's usually ten isn't it?
But I mean there's a Wed a Thursday night we could always of said you know
meant it to be on Thursday  ours not to reason why  apparently erm Sister Josephine us, she went off by train to wherever it is she's gone, but will be coming back with another Sister in a car tomorrow
Oh
so, do you know, I was thinking the other day, you know Sister Margaret we like her very much really don't 
Mm, mm 
we, with this erm pressing 
Mm, mm 
with her really, we never get the chance to, but she is always on her own, none of the other three, if you look, never
No
sit near her, talk to her or 
Poker stake is ante A N T E.
Is it?
Mm
Take an ante bet or something
Well, mm 
ante post betting that's, that's erm something, no
well that's not that's anti A N T I that means erm 
No it isn't ante A N T E ante post betting on a race
Before a race?
I don't know when it's for, but it is for when, that's what it's called, you get a list  and it is sort of ante
It's like ante natal, before
No it's not, oh could be, ante natal, yes
before the birth before the, before the race 
but not ante, you thought that was A N T A or something you put the other thing with anti, but it isn't, or are we at cross purposes, you don't know what you're talking about to me and I don't know what I'm talking about to you so 
South African captain was thrilled with the way his men overcame the odds to beat Australia, Worsel Lane, Vessel's the main man of the match after leading his side home 
He used to 
with an unbeaten eighty one said it means a lot to me to win here against this team.
Australia made a good start and we were a bit behind the eighth ball after
I don't really, I don't really
Alan Ball admitted his men had it all to do after his men crashed to South Africa, the Australian wicket went for a duck as a defending champion slumped said we are going to have to do it the hard way now, we just didn't play very, we didn't get it together against New Zealand in the first match and today we were never in the picture, our brothers never really had a chance of any attempt of a hundred and seventy, but full credit to South Africa they are a rate, a better to side
Yes they really made a
 
South Africa made a stunning with a nine wicket, nine wicket triumph 
Mm  this erm what ever he's called
yeah
apparently he paid for his
and sort of fairly recently gone back to home to South Africa  where he
where's that?
Mm
Good gracious me
 
look at that a hundred and seventy one for one
Mm
after about forty six overs  oh er, that, oh dear, fancy that Australia don't even get into the semi finals 
Oh they're the favourites apparently, the kids they, they have it now
That's right they are, well England, England next, but even so you see that's erm, that's in, that's incredible
Mind you when England come against South Africa let's hope they
 

Of course if anything happened to us tomorrow or tonight because we play West Indies tonight 
There we go, mm
still at least we've won one game 
Leave those I'll see to them
What?
 

I think perhaps I'll just have a little bit of water I'm very thirsty, I know I haven't 
So am I , I'm going to have a, oh have a, an orange and a lemonade that's right, that's what I'll have  well you mustn't forget to have a wee before you go out
That's right 
I don't know who that woman is?
Those were the, oh yes got one of those  right I'll have these then and this, if you want the sugar  Kay was saying that they're promising heavy storms and erm gales
Oh they are yes, for tomorrow or tonight
Yeah
but erm
Cranks at Dartington
Oh he's talking about that is he?
Yes, that's why I called you in for
Oh I didn't hear you call me 
Cranks at Dartington is going, they're going to keep it open while they try and find a buyer for it
Oh
er, mm the Cranks who have got six other outlets, erm have gone into, what do they call it, miners, administrative liquidation
Oh yes, mm, mm
erm apparently have expanded 
somebody 
vastly into the wholesale business and erm, so
Oh well
I was saying to Jean this morning, cos it's funny enough we went out to Dartington yesterday and we were sort of looking at the restaurant there at Cranks, and I said to her you know about this bowl of soup and then the erm
Yeah
talking about the prices of you know, lunch
Yeah
and that was just a bowl of soup and a, a roll 
Yeah , yeah
Good morning
Hi, alright?
Yes thanks
A fifty and a thirty, eighty pence today for you my love
That's right, yeah
Thank you, breezy this morning isn't it?
It is breezy yes it's surprising how breezy it is
Twenty five 
Lovely , okay thanks a lot 
Thank you very much, thanks a lot 
Thank you bye 
Bye
Fifty for one, Botham was out for eight
Oh dear, not again
Yeah  bit of a shame innit?
Oh dear I was thinking he was going easy
Yeah
he was gonna take over from Gooch
Yes
or whatever
Smith is now in, he hasn't scored yet, fifty for one off thirteen overs
Mm 
so providing they just play it steadily they should be alright, there's a lot of discrimination over the Australian defeat in the paper, they reckon that if erm
Only  no, no, go on what was it?
They reckon that if erm Australia lose another match it could mean that they won't even make the semi finals and erm they reckon like that, that channel nine that's supposed to be backing all this
Oh yeah, aha
well they think they'll pull the plug on it
Oh yes
and show re-runs of Neighbours instead, now can you think  can you imagine   anything worse than that?
Oh dear, I thought that was funny  yes  cos there's been so much
in Australia, you know, I mean it was really a competition 
 
just to show that Australia was gonna be champions again you know
Mm  that and erm
Australia play India next then they play England, that'll be a match and a half I think
Should be, especially with this erm, this
oh yes, yes
Do you want to take that?
No I, well I'm gonna, yeah okay, but I mean she, well you're gonna be, you'll get up in a moment now won't you?
Er yes I'm gonna get up in a minute anyway, so
Right, mm
Oh fancy Botham being out, I was hoping that, you know he was going easy
Yes, I was
erm letting Gooch score 
Perhaps he was going too easily you see, not playing his natural game, I mean it's, you never know do you?
Well perhaps it needn't where he just had  plenty of porridge
Yeah, yes
 
Now I should be
should prefer cutting my hair, I'm not gonna have it cut quite so short this time I think
Right
you know just have a little bit off it 
Yeah 
taken off it, cos I was looking at the length of it when we were in France
Mm, mm
and I think that looked a nicer length 
Yeah , mm, now do you want to come up the town?
Because I shall be going up the town
Yes after Lucy about, er yes that was what I was getting around to, by that time of course I should be erm
It'll be finished in half an hour, yes
erm, so I would come up the town with you if I could think what for
Oh right  
 
it'll help, okay
It had Steve Martin in it, it's a comedy
Yeah
it's called Father of the Bride and it's about this wedding kind of thing
Oh, er, I, I have to plead my ignorance I don't even know who Steve Martin is.
Well how can we help today?
I finished this book
Did you?
Yeah
Good  so let's see what you did, who did you go to the pictures with?
Oh my friend Emma
Emma?
So where did you go from here?
Yeah, where it starts in the pen
Where it starts in the pen  mm  what was it?
Right  right, so let us see what we can do shall we?
Erm where do we start?
I need a
there yeah,
Yeah
E two, now you've got to work out the average speed, right  try and think roughly what the answer would be, because if you thought of that, then you would know that's a silly answer, cos look, how far is the journey?
A hundred and twenty miles
Right, well say, a nice, you know just to the nearest, to the nearest erm whole number
A hundred 
Right 
and twenty seven miles
A hundred and twenty seven, what's that to the nearest hour?
Two hours
Right, so if it goes say a hundred and twenty six miles  or a hundred and twenty miles, to the nearest ten miles, it goes a hundred and twenty miles in two hours  how far would it go in one hour?
Sixty
Right, sixty  so that can't be right can it?
Right, so how are you gonna find the average speed, what do you do to find that average speed?
You divide what by what?
Divide that by that
Right, but, what are you gonna divide that by on a calculator?
Two point twelve
No, this is the whole thing isn't it?
Don't you remember look  if there were a hundred minutes in an hour that would be two point one two, but there's not a hundred minutes in an hour are there?
How many minutes are there in an hour?
Sixty
Right, now look, it says there, so what's twelve minutes?
Nought point two
Right, so what are you gonna divide that by to get the average speed?
Twelve point two
No
Nought point 
what's the time?
Erm two hours and twelve minutes
Right, how do you write that as a decimal of an hour?
What's two hours, twelve minutes?
Look  you've got two hours and you've got twelve minutes, now what fraction of an hour is twelve minutes?
Erm  five
No, what, twelve minutes is what fraction of an hour?
Oh, nought point two
Right, so that equals the minutes is point two, how many hours?
Two
So two hours, twelve minutes is two point two 
Two 
hours
Yeah
Right, so to find the average speed what you gonna do?
Two hours divided by
Right, but and what that by 
That divide by that
divide, come on say again
That
That by, by what?
Two point two
Right 
Fifty eight 
That's right  right, well what about the next one?
Doesn't say
Well how many minutes is it?
Nought point nine five
nought point nine five
Where does fifty eight come?
There
Does it?
No
Right, there, so what are you gonna divide it by?
Mm
That's nought point eight, nought point nine, nought point nine five, nought point nine
Six
six and that's half way to it so that's nought point nine, six, five 
Five 
Look, nought point nine, six, five and so you're gonna divide
Five
you're gonna divide fifty point five  by 
Fifty two
Right  right now D 
Well that one point two
That's right 
forty two
Right  right, now, the next one
Er  how you gonna take it out of it?
Three at, thirty nine
thirty nine 
So what is it?
Two hours, thirty nine minutes
Right, two hours, thirty nine, right 
Two point six, five
Right 
Seventy two
Right 
I've got erm, how many hours and all this written down at home if you want me to bring that up
Erm
write all the hours down 
Yes you can do
It's just afternoon, what time is noon?
Twelve o'clock
So that is just eighteen minutes after noon, so how long is it from nine, ten in the morning until, until eighteen minutes past twelve o'clock in midday?
So how long is it 
Three hours and
Right so Switzerland is three hours and eight minutes  isn't it?
Yeah
And you had two hours, fifty two minutes, right, so which is the next one, this one?
Now that's five, ten P M to eleven thirty eight P M, well what's five ten, to eleven ten?
Erm  six hours
Six hours
and eighteen minutes
and eighteen minutes, er wait a moment  six hours and what?
Ten, thirty eight
And twenty eight
Right, so that is six hours and twenty eight minutes isn't it?
Yeah
Right, now what's the next one?
Two fourteen to ten twenty, er this again is easier because what would be two fourteen to ten fourteen?
Erm  eight
Eight hours, so fourteen to twenty would be how many?
Sixteen
Right, so it's eight hours six minutes  now the next one
Erm
two fifty to ten twenty nine, well, come back to the same sort of time, the hour just before that, say two fifty to nine fifty, what would two fifty to nine fifty be?
Erm seven hours
Right, now you've got to go from  fifty to twenty nine
Erm
so fifty to an hour would be
Thirty nine
Right thirty nine minutes, so it's
Seven, eight hours
No seven hours isn't it?
Seven hours 
Two to nine, seven hours and thirty nine minutes isn't it?
Got thirty nine
Right, now this next one  ten A M to two thirty seven P M, well what's ten o'clock?
Four hours
Four hours and?
Fifty seven
Right and I think the next one you got right, because you worked it out alright, cos it's seven days, which is how many hours?
Five, three, erm  seven times twenty four
That's right, which is?
Erm a hundred times twenty four
Well it's a hundred and sixty eight, seven times twenty four, but then you've got five hours to add onto it which makes it a hundred and seventy three, right, so now work out your average speeds.
Okay  but I got some right, I got the actual question wrong on that one, just I, shall I do that one?
Have you got the second one, didn't you get the second one, oh you got that one wrong?
Yes
Right, so yes, do that one  this is what this is Dublin to Cork?
Erm one hundred and ten, no one hundred and twenty
Dublin to Cork, it's two hundred and sixty six
Oh I've done the wrong one  a hundred and six, I've got that and you've marked it wrong 
What did you divide by?
That
What?
Two point five, eight
What's two point five hours?
Erm  a hundred and
Well what's point five of an hour?
Six
What, what fraction is point five?
Point five something, what fraction is that?
Point five?
Yeah point five
Half
Right, what's half an hour?
Thirty nine
Right, so two point five is two hours, thirty minutes, but it's not two hours, thirty minutes, it's two hours
Fifty minutes
Right, so what have you got to do?
You've got to change the minutes to a decimal
Oh
haven't you?
Eight, eight point eight, three
Right 
What did I say, point eight three?
Ninety four
Right
erm 
Right, now what's the next one?
erm Switzerland
Switzerland, right
Eight  there, nought, point, one, three
Right 
Did I say nought, point, eight, three?
No
Nought, point, one, three
Right
Nought, point, one, three
but you're not gonna divide by nought, point, one, three are you?
No  ninety one
Right  now what I shall do before you go any further is divide that at the side here, what those and minutes are as decimals of an hour 
Nought point four, seven, nought point four, seven
What was it erm six hours twenty eight minutes was it?
Yes six point nought, what did I say?
Yeah
Six point three, seven
No, four, seven isn't it?
Yeah
Right 
Nought point one  six, five  nought, point, four, two
No, how long is it?
Twenty seven
Is it twenty seven?
Yes
Which one we dealing with?
Britain 
Right, no it's not, look, it's ten o'clock to two thirty seven, what's that?
How many minutes?
Thirty seven
Right, so it's four hours, thirty seven minutes isn't it?
We want thirty seven 
Nought point six, two
Right 
ninety eight
Right 
eighty six
Eighty, you're not far out, but it's just erm
Madrid to Barcelona 
 
six, eight, seven 
Erm, eight six
Right  just don't do it again
Six
Is this the seven hours, thirty nine minutes?
Yeah, six, eight, seven
Seven hours
seven
thirty nine minutes
Twenty six 
five
Five, no I do it the wrong way
Right, start again, eight hundred and, no it were doing
I'm doing Spain, that's what I'm doing anyway, oh I've got that one right 
Right, so West Germany 
One hundred and six
Right 
One, three, seven
Right  right, what you didn't do almost all the time was to change those minutes to decimals of an hour wasn't it?
So you must remember that whenever you're dealing with speed or anything to do with hours and minutes you've got to change your minutes to the decimals of an hour before you can use your calculator.
Okay.
Now, just let's have a little help here, because you won't have this graph with you all the time  will you?
No
Right, so, how can you find out what forty minutes is?
Divide it by ten 
No, what decimal fraction of an hour is forty minutes?
How can you find out, you can use your calculator
Quarter, three quarters
No, what's, what's a quarter of an hour?
Quarter of an hour, twenty minutes, fours into sixty, fifteen
Right, so three quarters of an hour is?
Forty five
Forty five minutes  if you've got forty five minutes, what's, what's the fraction of an hour?
Over sixty
Right, it's forty five over sixty, you want to change that into a decimal, what do you do?
Erm  divide into
No, how do you change any fraction into a decimal, now this is something you must 
Divide it by ten
No, no, no, no  you've got fractions here look, erm  now how do you change all those fractions into decimal fractions, what do you do?
Nought point five
But how did you do it?
You knew that, but how do you do it?
Erm
How do you do it on a calculator?
What does that really mean one over two, how else could you write one over two?
How else could you write it?
Two over four
Yes, but I don't mean that, erm, could you, would you write it as one plus two or one minus two or one multiplied by two or one divided by two
One multiplied
One multiplied by two?
Two ones are two?
Does a half equal two?
So what does that, you know this, which of those four rules do you do for that?
One 
What's one plus two?
Three
What's one minus two?
Nothing, minus
one, minus two?
One, no, nothing 
One, minus two
Minus two
Minus, one, come down two, come down one you get to nought, come down another one 
Minus two 
so one minus one, one minus two is?
Minus one
Is minus one, what's one times two?
Er two
What's one divided by two?
One
If you've got one apple and you divide it
Half
Right, one divided by two is a half, so which of those answers is that one?
Right, so what does one, how else can you write one over two?
Erm one divide
One divided by two, right, remember that, so how can I write that?
Forty five divided by six
By?
Sixty
Right, do that on your calculator 
Nought point seven five
Right, so that equals nought point seven five, what's a half?
Do it on the calculator
Nought point five
Right  what's three quarters divided er as a decimal?
Nought point five  nought point eight, seven, five
Right, so how do you change a fraction into a decimal?
You divide it by the bottom
You divide the top number by the bottom number, so, supposing you've got fifty seven minutes and you want to change that into a decimal of an hour, what fraction of an hour is it?
What's fifty seven minutes as a deci as a fraction of an hour?
That's forty five minutes
Fifty seven over sixty
Right, so how do you change that into a decimal?
Nought, point, nine, five
Right, nought, point, nine, five, so now you can see how easily you can change your minutes into a decimal at any time, right, now, let's look at some of these, this is four hours and thirty 
Thirty 
seven minutes, so it's four hours, four hours and thirty seven minutes, so what fraction is that of an hour?
Erm 
Thirty seven minutes?
Forty
Thirty seven minutes?
over sixty
Right thirty seven over sixty, what's thirty seven over sixty?
Cos the ans that is four and thirty seven sixtieths
Mm
so what's thirty seven sixtieths as a decimal?
Nought point six
Right, so what's four hours, thirty seven minutes?
Four point six 
Point six 
O
Well six
One
to the nearest two decimal places what's that gonna be?
Nought, point, six 
Nought, point, six one
to do decimal places?
Oh, two
Right, because that's bigger than five isn't it?
Yes
So it's nought, point, six, two, so for our thirty seven minutes it's, four point six, two, there we are look, but the thing is you can now do it without having to look at a scale
Mm
Right?
Mm
So do this one  what is this?
Four
Eight hours and four minutes
Four, six
So, so what's that gonna be, eight hours and four minutes?
Nought point nought
It's, it's eight hours
Yes
so it's gonna be eight not nought isn't it?
Mm
It's gonna be eight point
Nought one
Nought what?
One
Nought one, what's that?
Mm, erm nought
Nought, six, six, so it's gonna be to two decimal places it's gonna be
Nought point nought seven
Right, so it's gonna be eight point
Nought seven
eighty point, nought, seven  right
Yeah
So you now know how you can change your minutes to decimals 
To decimals 
Right, now you may have to do that on this next one 
Tired
I can see that 
Oh my brother does motor racing
I know he does  Have you heard from your brother?
Yeah
How is he?
He's okay, he says the resorts are very good
Does he and the snow good?
Yeah
And has he been up to the top of the
I don't know I wasn't there when mummy
oh I see  so what's today Thursday, he's only got today and tomorrow left hasn't he for skiing 
That's Silverstone 
That's right
Yes I know where that is
Do you?
Yes
Have you been there?
No, my brother has
Has he?
He might have I don't, he probably has
Right  so it shows a Silverstone motor racing circuit
Yeah
Right, so what's the first
circuit has five corners and ten kerbs, car start
ha, car start near Woodcape Corner and go clockwise, which corner do they come from first?
aha  Copse Corner
Right Copse Corner  what would you expect to find at Copse Corner?
Ten cops
And what's a copse?
I don't know
That's what I wanted to find out


You don't know what copse is?
No
A copse is a smallish group of trees
Is there lots of trees there?
Well there would be, yes, I would imagine or if they certainly would, they would of been in the past, they may have been cut down, but that would indicate to me that there were probably trees 
Probably been cut down 
at that corner, a group of trees
Mm
Copse Corner, copse er, is, is a name which we give to a small wood, a small group of trees is a copse, in India that can be called a shola, S H O L A
Mm
and at one stage when I was walking in India we used to stay at bungalows and one was called Marian Shola and another was called Pine Shola, because it meant that it was a, it was a bungalow in a group of pine trees
Mm
but copse is a small group of trees, right, so, the next one B
Which curve is just after Beckett?
Chapel kerb
Chapel kerb 
Wonder who's got a Chapel there?
I should think almost certainly there was a chapel at that point 
Famous people go there
Oh they do indeed, yes
Mm, mm  which corner is at the end of Hammer Street?
Stow Corner
That's right
Why is that called Stow?
I wouldn't know that one 
Banker's got a nice track
I hate to think what was in that corner too
Ugh
Oh dear, right
Look, I have a magic pencil
You have a magic pencil 
It moves
mm 
Car going from Woodcape to Copse who
To Copse
Car will be travelling roughly from west to east or eastwards
Yes, now remember that, what that means, west to east is in fact going eastwards
Yes 
Where would it be travelling roughly southwards?
Where am I going from Woodcape southwards, that way
Which is southwards?
Down
Right, so where would the car be travelling in a southward direction?
There
Right, so how would you describe that stretch, it's going from
Copse Corner to
right 
Oh  there we go
Right, so where would it be going, roughly going 
going northwards 
Northwards
Going up
So where would that be from?
There
There to?
to Woodcape Corner
Right 
Where are we?
Fourth of April
No, come on.
Oh we know it.
Tuesday the seventh  when, I've just got to write it in my book you see because I haven't gone that far ahead.
Ah 
Ah 
What's Thursday, the ninth isn't it?
Thursday is the  ninth, yes.
That's next week.
That's the ninth of April
Ninth of April.
That looks alright.
Okay?
Right.
Should  try the  again.
Don't worry though honestly, I know these things do happen.
What time?
Quarter to ten.
We've gone and got lumbered
A bit waylaid.
Did you?
Well it happens doesn't it?
I mean
She went to do a lady's hair and then the lady said well if you, could you just sort of trim my husband's.
husband's


 
that was my whole morning gone, no it's not too bad actually.
No well er I, I expect you've caught up a bit now haven't you?
Right.
Right.
Well thank you ever so much.
Thank you, it's nice to see you both again.
Oh, nice to see you.
Okay.
Look forward to seeing you again in six weeks time.
Lovely thanks 
Okay then?
Bye bye.
Bye bye.
Well they're a hundred and forty six now.
Oh I hope Hicks gets his fifty.
He's got forty six now.
He's got forty six?
Yeah.
 

Gooch was stumped.
Was he?
Yeah.
Oh 
Well shall we have a cup of coffee before we go out?
What?
Shall we have a cup of coffee before we go out?
Yes may as well might 
Oh yes that's true, yes, I'll put the kettle on.
said all I'm worried about is did I wash my hair too early for you  so she said it's alright I've got a spray that I can sort of cos she likes it quite wet when she
Yeah.
It's thirty eight overs so I mean they've got another twelve overs yet.
To get about twenty runs.
Ten runs oh no less than that, ten runs now.
Ten?
Well twelve I think, hundred and forty six they've got now.
Oh that would be twelve then.
They're just obviously between overs at the moment, it's just finished an over and they've got the bowler up.
Hundred and fifty, Dick Hicks got his fifty.
Oh good.
Fairbrother's doing, you know, he's holding up the other 
Yeah.
side obviously.
Was Lucy sort of late with you?
Or did she have to go back for something.
She had to go back for something.
I, cos I saw her at a quarter past nine so 
No no she'd erm she'd been in, hundred and fifty three, Hick again.
Hundred and  fifty three, so he only wants five?
Yeah.
Oh well let him hit the  the winning thing.
Well he won't be er he, he won't, he won't have strike now, Fairbrother will have strike.
Cos he's obviously just got a three.
Unless they've changed ends.
Thirty eight overs, yes, as you say they've got another twelve overs.
Hundred and fifty four
Oh he's got one yes.
so he had four  cos he got one then didn't he?
Mm.
Oh well the jubilation  
Hundred and fifty six.
So only wants two and he's got fifty six look you see 
Mm.
he's doing the scoring.
Well I expect they like him doing it.
Fifty four, it's changed, Hick's not out fifty four  it was fifty six a minute ago  wasn't it?
Yes it was, Fairbrother's got the nine you see, look.
Yeah well he's still got nine.
Yeah but he had seven.
Oh I thought it was nine he had.
No.
So they only want two.
Six six four oh  no 
No  
not quite, no .
Something's come up which shouldn't have done.
Well switch it off and bring it up again and see if it changes.
Oh it will change again as soon as it goes round to the, to the three four one again er y you don't see it changing it but
Oh I know, every time it flicks 
Yeah mm 
it's changing.
You see it, I mean I pointed that out, like now.
For four wickets, oh Hick caught and bowled!
Oh dear.
Oh.
Probably trying to, probably trying to hit a six out of the ground 
Should think probably that was probably what that erm
Yeah.
was about probably 
caught and bowled  he was probably was sort of erm
Just trying to hit a six.
trying to hit, you know, get it finished.
That's right.
Yes erm  she didn't come till after ten and I was beginning 
Yeah 
to wonder whether I'd got the right time.
Have we got a p is there a piece of cake left?
Sorry?
Is there a piece of cake left?
What did you say?
I said is there a p no it's alright, a biscuit will do fine.
I just said was there a piece of cake left.
Oh there is ca oh of course I have got cakes in the .
Oh gosh, help me, help me, help me.
Good, not out    bowling again.
Presumably you took those chicken  things downstairs for me  yesterday?
Presumably I did.
You know the  
Yes I think I did, yeah.
The what?
Oh yes I put them in the freezer, yes, yes.
I was trying to think of rubbish that I'd taken out.
Do you want a bit of cake?
I, I'd just taken this thing
You're not gonna have a piece of this?
Oh you can have, you can finish that up if you want to.
Thanks.
Oh they're taking a long time to get these last two runs aren't they?
  

Mm.
look.
Oh gracious.
Fairbrother got a four look.
Oh yes.
Well we've eleven overs to spare, I mean that's erm
England's maintaining their  Britain and the West Indies in one day games  
Six wicket victory, the West Indies batting self destructed after the loss of two early wickets and only  at fifty four and  scores.
They were all out for just a hundred and fifty seven and the outcome was never in doubt after Graham Gooch and Ian Botham  an opening stand of fifty in reply.
Gooch made sixty five, Graham Hicks  boost boosted his confidence with his second international fifty and England reached their target with ten overs to spare .
Well I think they w they were something on  three four two I think.
Now that was ma that will be in the score card of course, three four two.
Oh this is it look.
England  bowling  West Indies  course for their second cup victory   on their back caught by snaring  in his opening   
of course 
caught Botham bowled Botham 
he's doing alright.
Mm.
Oh
How did it go?
It went er on its own accord er now what number were we on?
Three four two.
So I'll go to three four three because I think there's something else on, someone else  result.
details.
Was there  last night?
Oh no that was the night before 
picked up their first points with a fifty three one o w win over Zimbabwe
Oh is that ?
Pakistan 
Oh I see, he, he was the opener.
He was docked four times on his way to reaching his first one day century.
Oh, so Pakistan 
 
beat Zimbabwe.
Oh it was Pakistan was it?
Mm.
Now what was that about Food and Drink you wanted to see?
No I was, I just saw Food and Drink
Oh.
but I think I saw it, didn't I, the night  before last was it?
Yes I think you did didn't you?
They haven't got news yet of the erm cricket win I don't suppose?
No.
Well it won't be on the national news I don't suppose cos it comes under sports
Oh it'll be on the national news because 
thing mm 
they  reporting it.
Well I've got one of France but I'm not sure  what scale it is.
I don't th 
You see if we had seen that one that would be very ideal for Richard.
Yes it would.
Erm  erm 
Doesn't it tell you?
now you see this is three inches to the mile and this is  this is one to  no that's not one to a million, that's ridiculous that is.
Erm    have to work it out all the time, this is erm  this is one to two hundred and fifty thousand.
Erm
This is three miles to one inch, that one isn't it?
Yes this one is, look this one is  erm  that's  ten kilometres is eight miles isn't it?
Yes mhm.
So that's eight miles, that's, so that's, this is about four miles to the inch, this one I should think.
So it's not bad you see, so I mean I've got that one of France which is 
Yes so that's okay.
more or less the s 
So the other one is  I don't remember what it is I wanted  but I think I'll go in to erm   and erm   
Well I've got to go to the building society and I've got to go to
The bank.
the bank.
Erm
 

I'll go down and get the car out.
It's really quite warm now out  sort of out of the wind.
Yes   well I think that the erm  I mean the sun is a surprise.
Yeah.
Yeah that tub of daffs is really erm looking good isn't it?
Mm  They look as if they're all planted near the top you know
Yeah.
as if you put a whole heap of  as you say th the t the two of them 
Yeah.
in the wheelbarrow  
Yeah, both out, yeah 
sort of 
So we just wanna go and park somewhere don't we really?
Well really it's about it  I'll have to see if there's a carrier   
I think there is one in the box, yes.
If we put one back in again.
I haven't got as much room in this one to put the bag.
Have you not?
No.
Gosh 
Mm  Oh the moor is  visible again.
Yeah.
Oh well perhaps  the fog and erm   got a appointment on the Saturday hasn't she?
Has she?
For hair 
hair
Yeah.
and erm  well perhaps  young Bob and Jess can go on the moor on Saturday.
Yes 
If it, I mean if it were like today it will be lovely.
Yeah.
Yes well I hope we get the opportunity.
Yeah.
Gosh that car looks a bit rusty doesn't it?
That's a Fiat of course you see.
Oh yes, yeah
It's like Richard's old car, you remember that, Fiat?
Fiat one two seven like that one is.
Yeah that's right.
Oh no he's coming off on, off the lorry so that's no good.
Well it would be a bit tight to get in I feel.
There's nowhere up there is there?
No she's just got in 
It's very difficult to get in 
Yeah.
Well we will just hope for the best, he's not going up there so that's one less.
wondered if  
Yes I did too.
Oh look, we've just got one there.
Oh yes.
Great.
Oh look it's one of these that's nice because  you can just sort of nothing can come in behind you and  that sort of thing.
Mind the disabled person just coming past you here, that's it.
Good, right, so I will do what I've got to do, you will do what you've got to do 
This is all mucky at the back, what happened to it?
You got a bag there?
Oh.
Oh that will be alright
Yes.
very strong.
Well it's probably stronger than that one, still.
Mm, that's the  one, no, leave that one.
Erm 
This one will be alright.
stay here now.
wasn't there anyway.
I thought it was sort of a er you know, by the  
 
so  I was wrong  
Yes.
Cos the other thing I was gonna do was to go into Lloyds, I must do that some time about this interest on that account  cos I reckon it's very low
Oh yes.
and I still haven't, I keep on forgetting that.
You keep on forgetting to bring out the book.
Yeah.
  

Yes.
Oh well that was lucky cos there haven't been any more 
Another space, no, that's right.
Anyway  you  just go where you've got to go
Yes.
the bank and the building society
and then I'll go down to Devon Travel  to pick up that er
Right.
so I'll see you back at the car.
Right.
I've got a funny hat on, ah that's fair enough isn't it?
Some people like it.
It keeps  
That's right.
It needs to.
 



funny hat 
Good morning Tony, erm, you said come in 
Now nothing else has come.
Nothing else has come.
Now you've got the vouchers, did I give you the vouchers?
No.
I didn't, right.
This lady's  from New Zealand 
Oh 
And I said er
Yeah?
I've got a cousin 
Yeah?
She said where?what's their name?they knew 
No, yeah, incredible isn't it?
from one, the very south of New Zealand 
Incredible isn't it?
I meet people 
I was in Adelaide once with
m
Ten  ten, can
Can?
Oh well I suppose, yes it, you know, it might be, don't know how but  it might be 
Ten down   thus it's safe to take it in  
Now I, let me just try and get this one.
 
what is    it's barely credible .
Now which one do I  well  shove roughly  
pushed  pushing?
I've not got a P in the anagram so I don't think it can start with
Well it do isn't necessarily an anagram is it?
Ah yeah I mean, oh I see what you mean, there, mm.
No.
Right.
Shove roughly .
Mm that's right.
Step on newsman as tyre is .
I had  treaded in but you can't have treaded, still, oh a tyre is treaded isn't it?
Step on newsman as tyre is   treaded?
Well why treaded?
I mean 
Cos i 
apart from 
step, tread
Yeah, yeah.
And, I mean why newsman?
eded, editor, E D.
Mm.
See what I mean?
Yeah.
I mean I 
Oh tread  T R E A D  and four down would finish with D
Firstly doctor or surgeon every day gave treatment 
Doctor  firstly  erm we think that must finish with an E D did w did we?
Cos that was
That one 
Ah yes.
step on newsman   tread, T R E A D 
So if that's a T then that's gonna be
To
to   it's barely credible   hard to  hard to, can you get out of that?
H A R D, hard and to  and then it starts with an I 
H A  R D 
I haven't got
T, oh yes you have, you've got two, you've got th two I's  G and an I
Ah yes, gin  two I's?
Oh I have I've got  
Yeah because look er er gin I dream and you've got an I in gin and you've got the I
You, you think it's hard to
Hard to, and it's going to be
What have you got left then?
Well you've got a
See look the last one will start with I won't it?
You've got a G and N and M and I and E and an A er to follow that I.
Hard to imagine.
Yes.
I wouldn't have thought that was easy to do?
I know, you should see her hair.
Gracious me.
Hard to imagine, right.
So  twelve over  gets ready for more fire   relax  relight, no 
One across  Shoved roughly got the money illicitly 
Oh yes that one.
Hassled?
Mm got the money illicitly?
I mean
H A S S L E D hassled erm  haggle?
No,Well suppose you have three down 
Hero worshipper, list old boy  
Well supposing it's hassled, H A S S L so this old boy would be  L, don't think, one two three four five seven  hero worshipper  
Do you know that one,the music about a bird ?
Air  air?
Oh, well air is about a bird I suppose  but not what I had in mind.
No I wouldn't have that in mind really.
Fifteen over, where is it  well what is five down?
Well five down is  bad ideas, question mark, a very, exclamation mark  
Do you think, no  which we haven't got.
bad ideas  D  D E M U S I L M 
Glowing players in court 
D E M U S  oh so that would be S  blank E blank S?
Glowing players in court, is that what you said?
Glowing players in court.
No idea   Got the money illicitly 
Seeds?
Oh yes!
Very good.
Very good.
So you think that's delusion?
Well D E L U fifteen over would finish the music  
Oh yes.
Why?
I'm just trying to work out
E M U
Oh yes.
Fury at a  
Fury at a bad deed 
outrage  So twenty five over  after one two poles drink here  must be inn of course.
I one, N N, two poles.
So four down  firstly doctor or surgeon every day gave treatment  
So it's either gonna be M D or D R isn't it?
If that's the doctor  every day gave treatment   Well we're not having this     forty four down   get one off the point of advance line  
Well, we're not having this 
Oh yeah 
Illness?
The cool rips open the side,coo rips open the side 
Cool  rips open the side 
Coo rips 
mm so it must be cool and rips  
Well it can't be it hasn't got two E's look.
Oh.
Oh no that's thirty five  always set out in Nepal 
In Nepal.
Always set out  in Nepal, it must  there's two E's.
Ever
Everest
Everest
in Nepal.
Ever E S T  yes Everest.
So twenty seven down  hard sailors fear it 
Hard sailors fear it 
Hard hard
sailors
sailors fear it  in the main 
that one 
Yeah.
I mean I reckon that must I there cos whatever that is  with a G at the end  possible, could be I N G couldn't it?
Iceberg.
What is that one there?the -ing.
Twenty six  going easy  
Ambling?
Could well be.
Right, forty over   provided the outcome   provided  What's thirty six down?
I'd  I'd set off watery moves  it must be I'd set 
I'd?
Yeah, very good.
Thirty six  so that must be G E D mustn't it?
Provided the outcome, yes  
Provided the outcome.
And forty down, did we try that?
Well forty down is  proclaim point  noun on English church  
It's a steeple, what do you call those very 
Proclaim 
Proclaim a point.
I thought of weather vane but of course it doesn't fit in  so that's out.
The point on an English church, well nou no it's a noun on an English church, yeah it is.   provided the outcome 
Supposing that a point I suppose is erm
Well it's north or south.
Yeah.
Or east or west.
Oh right  well what's thirty over?
Same again   ditto  I should think.
So nineteen down?
It's boring  dancing outside  
It's boring  well that'll be an O blank S
Well I think that's S, I mean I think that's encores, I mean er calls for repeat performances?
Well I should think so, yes.
calls so, well anyway  the eighteen over is  art with brie can produce a dish  
A dish well that's this one here look, erm, where have I got it?
I've got it down somewhere here, R blank, here it is look
Brie
it's R blank R and you've got A R E T B
R blank  rarebit 
Rarebit  good  I thought the chef might get that one.
Rarebit 
So nineteen er down again is 
Nineteen down we have the T, it's boring dancing outside.
It's boring
it's boring  it's boring dancing outside.
B O U S won't it I should think
Well I was  I, I just said tiptoes.
Oh tiptoes, it's boring 
Well twenty four over  no it probably isn't that but what, what is twenty four over?
Material flower in Scotland  
In Scotland.
Material
Tweed?
Don't see what it's got to do with a flower
yes weed 
Yeah.
material flower
E D  so
I mean I don't know but  tedious 
T E D I O U S  well I mean why would that be?
I mean 
It's boring dancing outside  T E D
D I O U S yes 
Yeah I don't see why the dancing outside.
Well this is, this is what I'm wondering, unless it's something from say tedious  it's boring  and think of  necessarily  boring being tedious  outside 
Yes look  O U T  S I D E 
side oh yes.
So it was an anagram really.
Yeah.
So that's another U. 
And what is it again?
A social group with plenty of bread  
Plenty of bread  crust  upper crust
Oh very good  I like it.
Yes, upper crust.
Oh dear  so we've got the two 
 
we've got the two U's and we've got the C and the I, yes.
Upper crust.
Oh dear, right .
Twenty four over  well if that's gonna be an E, that, that ten down is  thus it's safe to take it in   thus it's safe  eatable?
Thus 
Well
 

if you say what's so  
Actually there is no such word as eatable come to think of it, it's edible.
Edible.


Yes it is isn't it?
That won't do, no,jack's pitch tar   er so, right, so that's not wrong 
So what have we got there then?
Well it doesn't matter really.
No.
It's E 
Blank T blank B blank E
blank E   and what is it?
Oh his studio  look   
Oh dear, thus it's safe to take it in 
It's safe to take it in?
Mhm.
Well I should think it will be a meal alright.
Well  well I suppose we could do the card couldn't we?
I've got two letters to post anyway for Jeremy.
Oh you haven't got that sorted out?
Yes erm  yeah I mean erm I, I've transferred a  a hundred and fifty pounds to him.
So if he phones up  I can say, you know  it's on its way as it were.
So who's this     is it?


And it's ?
Yes,Oh you've just put, well I always put
Well they don't put it there do they?
Yeah  
Erm  Right, I'll put the stamp on it  and go and post 
I hate these as it were things you know?
Mm 
One lagging behind  advertising screen show   so that's where  forty nine over  trailer
Do you think that could be stew pot?
Wet post cut up for the cook  and it's an anagram of wet post?
Yes, stew pot.
Now you d you went and interrupted me there and, and I've forgotten what I was saying  which was right.
Trailer for forty nine over.
Is sure determined to get in first   you get a trailer, you know
Mm 
So now  and this is this one   much like while I was taking time off  
Oh oh, what have you done?
Hello Steve.
Ooh it isn't very often you wear 
Oh 
Mummy, I've finished 
Alright darling I'll t here you are let  
It came off on the playing field and so there was no way I could find the little screw.
Oh it's okay.
Why not?
Is it alright?
Shall I leave it?
 
Oh thanks ever so much Steve, that's great.
Fine, I'll do that if you 
You're standing up, I mean that's not good for you standing up eating a meal you know.
Oh he he's spent most of his life doing that Terry 
I'm quite used to it now.
What?
He spends most of his life doing that.
There, alright then love?
Lovely thank you very much indeed.
pop them back in to you 
I'll drop them in later 
No  I've got my other pair that I wear, you know   
Bye bye Terry
drop it back Terry.
Right.
Bye.
You've heard from Gavin I hear?
Well yes, we did, we rang on Tuesday, we had a bit of a trouble getting through, I think we rung about seven times before we got through  but er  he, well, well he didn't say anything to me, everything I asked him he said yes to, but Steve 
He said the skiing was good, it was 
Yeah he said it's fantastic skiing, he  mind the 
He said it was lovely and hot at the top  
Don't do it there love in case it comes up.
But he was in the middle of a restaurant he said and I can't, think he felt a bit awkward speaking  
Yeah 
didn't say too much, you know.
Well he told me off because he was out on the erm bank sledging, outside the hotel  so I called him in.
That didn't sound very nice
but he sa he, he weren't homesick, he, I think it must be a nice place
Mm
he said er he normally gets homesick but he hasn't, you know?
Yeah
He's growing up isn't he?
Yeah 
Bye
Cheers Terry
Bye
Bye 
Oh they've heard from Gav well she phoned Gavin yesterday apparently and  he seems to be having a whale of a time.
Good.
He's not homesick.
Not really.
So how did you go, have you got some more?
Well I just got this patterned.
Patterned?
Oh yes very good.
I'm trying to work out this fifty over here a whisky with bread ?
Rye.
Oh very good.
Yes very good.
Well I hadn't got down to the R yet I hadn't reached 
 
with my alphabet.
Forty eight down   held in high esteem   held in high esteem  held in high esteem  
What's the Nelson touch?
You turn a blind eye isn't it?
Yes, where's that?
Erm  there, fifty  
The Nelson touch important if you fight like this  
What's forty eight down again, what was it?
Held in high esteem.
I'm just wondering whether it's E D or E S, to fight like this.
That fifty seven is  seep strangely and quietly  in, quietly inside for furtive glimpses  now  it's quietly P isn't it?
So seeps strangely  peeps  peeps
Where do you get the other P from there?
Quietly inside.
Oh the P yes, true.
So that's a P, which 