

Good idea really.
Yeah.
Even though you can't tell any difference after they've finished.
Yeah.
I see well it's convenient that it comes at the end of a week's holiday isn't it?
Pardon?
It means they all get an extra couple of days off on their holiday doesn't it?
No we do  don't 
You do.
Do you think they're all there then or are they all in at school?
Pardon?
Do you think they're all in at school?
No
No.
They're skiving.
They're all skiving are they they're all wagging off Lesley.
Well enjoy your tomorrow when you go back.
Where do we need for a Kids' County where are we after?
Pardon?
Where are we after the Kids' County you know what you rang up for in the first place?
Sorry  talking to me and I'm totally Dennis McCarthy.
No it's not.
Who who's there heckling Lesley?
Er Philip and Andy.
Philip which one's your boyfriend then?
.
Philip?
No.
Andy?
An Angie.
Oh Angie.
Yes.
Oh I see I thought you said Andy there.
Anyway bye Lesley it's nice to speak 
I'm a Radio Virgin by the way.
Oh are you well I'll give you a a, I lost it at lunchtime ex-Radio Virgin certificate for being a first time on and er I'd like to say it's been a pleasure.
All right thanks.
Bye bye.
Er Sue from Bulwell hello Sue.
Hello Geoff.
How are you?
Fine thanks.
You've not been on for a while have you?
Where have you been?
Well been here  there and everywhere .
Ha have you?
I came in to see you but you weren't in so.
When was that when did you come in?
Er about a fortnight ago.
Was it?
I'll be here I'm always here.
Well you wasn't.
I would have been somewhere.
You're skiving like the teachers.
No no one could skive like they do.
I mean what a good idea you have a week off away from all the kids and then you have another couple days and call them training days.
yeah my two have them at school as well.
Have they?
Isn't it a good idea though?
And then they have all those big long summer holidays and then they moan about the marking.
Oh I know but saying that I think my kiddies' school's all right so I've got 
Is it?
so I've got no grievances about it.
I'm only doing it to wind him up.
I know 
That's all I'm only doing it to wind them up you see there.
I wonder if they get an extra allowance for red pens?
Although they're not meant to do it in red any more are they?
No it's black and blu black and blue.
Black and blue I see and and anything exciting going off Sue to report?
Ooh I got sloshed on Friday.


Did you?
Hey do you care about you know the other day we were talking about the erm I wanted to get one of the councillors on to talk about this but I I can't find the right one.
But you know the other day we were talking about that tulip thing that's down by erm Marks and Sparks?
Yes.
In t you know that statue thing?
Yes that thing that trickles out a bit of water.
That's there yeah the dribbly You know  upturned dribbly nose that one.
Yes.
Erm  they were talking about moving it and everything there was a big fuss about it last week well now there's a fuss about they want to pull all the trees down around it as well.
No I think if I had the choice I'd move the tulip and leave the trees.
Well I would you know.
They want to rip all the trees down as well they want to make it a little piazza thing don't they?
Oh well why don't they just bring  down as well you know might as well.


If they're going to do it proper do it all.
With a bit of extra mozzarella on the top love.
Yes.
Erm Kids' County anyway who are we talking about Sue?
Totally wrong I said  D H Lawrence .
No you nana No it's it's not Sue but it was a lovely thought wasn't it?
Totally wrong I knew it was afterwards I'd said oh well.
Never mind though good bye.
See you bye.
Give us a ring Sue.
Er it's not Kenneth Clarke and it's not Brian Clough and it's not Dennis McCarthy and it's not D H Lawrence.
Here's the clues who were they talking about?
He's famous he's got a wife he's normally on the news he's posh and he dresses up smart he writes he writes papers out.
There who are they on about three four three four three four to call it's er a very public figure very public you're bound to have heard of him you've probably seen him as well I would have thought I would have thought so as some stage picture always in the paper there as well you know nice big swanky car too.
Three four three four three four to call for a bash at Kids' County.
It's not Kenneth Clarke Brian Clough it's not Dennis McCarthy and it's not D H Lawrence either.
There Mister Mister and er Broken Wings June from Mansfield is our Loot at Lunchtime champ hello June.
Hello.
Are you all right?
Yes thank you are you ?
Has it changed your life being a champ?
Oh yes.
Has it well what what's happened then?
Ooh erm I I'm cooking dinner today.
Are you?
Yes.
Who who's heckling there who's chiming up?
That's Rob.
Is it?
Yes.
Rob the gob.
I don't think so no.
Look Sharon from Grantham is taking you on today.
Mhm.
Now be kind to her because it must be awful living in Grantham hello Sharon.
Hello.
You all right?
Yes thank you.
Erm what was erm Scoobie Doo's pal called?
Shaggy.
Shaggy thank you.
Do you remember that then?
Yes.
Off the telly and everything.
What do you do with yourself Sharon?
Oh knitting  sewing.
Are you?
It sounds like there's a lot going on where you are.
Oh yes.
What is it?
Oh there's it's er my daughter she's got the television on.
Oh is it?
Yes.
I thought you'd got a raging battle going on in your front room.
Oh yes.
Erm give me thirty seconds worth of famous dogs they can be in cartoons, they can be in history, they can be in films, they can be anywhere and we'll do it in half an hours time.
Same for you June.
Yes.
All right so we'll have thirty seconds worth of famous dogs and pooches.
Right.
Later on you can go and control Rob there.
What was he saying then when he was shouting up there?
Erm what were you saying Rob?
He's taken things off the floor and now he's taken the floor up.
Oh has he?
Yes.
Well so long as he's happy June that's the main thing isn't it?
I'll talk to you in half an hours time.
Right-oh.
All right then and I hope it's all calmed down by then as well.
So it's June from Mansfield who's our reigning champ and Sharon from Grantham on Loot at Lunchtime we'll do it at around half one.
Now these are The Who and A Pin Ball Wizard.
They're The Who and er A Pin Ball Wizard a car park queue wizard is er Annie Smith what's happening?
The Walkden Street car park in Mansfield that's got plenty of space.
In the centre of Nottingham Trinity Square  busy but you won't have to queue for the Victoria Centre or the Broadmoor  next update in ten minutes time.
Almost called you a witch there but I stopped just in time because it's not 
Thank you.
quite what I meant.
We'll do er we'll do the traffic and trains and planes in full after the er main news in ten minutes time we'll check the whole lot then.
We love her really.
Good afternoon from the county's favourite station now it's one o'clock.
And the headlines this lunchtime it's confirmed that Calverton Colliery in Nottinghamshire is to go into the review procedure putting another six hundred miners' jobs at risk.
Preston Crown Court is told that the two boys accused of murdering the Merseyside toddler James Bulger each blamed the other for attacking the child.
And a court in Nottingham hears how a taxi driver sexually assaulted a female passenger after driving her to a secluded spot in  Park.
They're the headlines today the news in detail from Alison Ford.
Calverton Colliery's been put into the review procedure by British Coal.
They say the pit's lost more than six million pounds this year and it's prospects aren't good because of a lack of markets.
But Calverton's six hundred and forty miners must wait another twenty four hours before hearing their fate because the Coal Board have refused to say whether they want to close the pit or reduce its workforce.
Nigel Bell reports.
The Midlands leader of the pit deputies union NACODS was first to emerge from the review meeting at Edwinstowe Ray Hilton summed up the mood of the mining unions.
The reaction in there has been a bit bitter really because one feels that British Coal aren't telling everything that that's happening.
Obviously they're starting now to pick the bits off one by one.
Equally critical was the U D M President Neil Greatorex.
We're sat in there like lemons waiting for an announcement that allayed the fears for the future of the industry and we've got absolutely nothing.
Bilsthorpe at least lives to fight another day.
The men at Calverton will find out their fate tomorrow when a reconvened review meeting's held.
Ian Slater Calverton's U D M branch delegate says the speed at which the meeting has been arranged is another attempt by British Coal to reduce the review period which could give the mine a nine month life line.
They would have had to have done it within three weeks anyway and I think the way they are looking at it if they do that tomorrow then they're counting from then till the next stage.
Miners will have up to two weeks before they need to say whether they want to challenge British Coal's intentions.
The funerals are taking place of five people killed when gunmen opened fire in a bar at Greysteel in County Londonderry on Saturday night.
Two more victims will be buried elsewhere.
Speaking of the funerals the former Bishop of Derry, Edward Daley appealed to politicians to treat what he described as this intolerable situation with the utmost urgency.
Lucy Atherton reports.
Bishop Daley said we must appeal repeatedly to those faceless heartless murderers of all organizations and to all those who identify with them to stop their diabolical activities.
We must appeal to Government and those charged with political responsibility to treat this intolerable situation with the urgency and priority it deserves.
The local priest Father John Gallagher said Saturday's slaughter had united rather than divided the community as the killers had intended.
He believed on this sad day that feeling of reconciliation was a reason for hope.
Two more men have been arrested by police investigating the shootings.
Eleven people are now being questioned.
The jury in the James Bulger murder trial at Preston have been hearing how the two eleven year old boys accused of murder blamed each other for most of the violence.
The prosecution said that in interviews with the police both children had demonstrated a fluent capacity to tell lies.
From Preston Crown Court Kevin Bucket reports.
The prosecuting barrister Richard  Q C described how the two boys were interviewed separately by police.
At first both denied having anything to do with the abduction and murder but later changed their stories when presented with police evidence.
One child referred to in court as child A, finally admitted taking James Bulger to a railway embankment near Walton but he said it was the other boy child B who threw bricks at him and hit him with a stick and a metal bar.
Mr  said that when child B eventually gave his account of what had happened he claimed that he had only thrown small stones at James and had deliberately tried to miss.
He blamed the other boy, child A for most of the violence.
Mr  said it was clear both defendants had played a part in causing James Bulger's death.
The trial will continue this afternoon.
Nottingham Crown Court's been told that a taxi driver sexually assaulted a woman passenger after ignoring her instructions and driving her to a secluded area in Clumber Park.
This report from Chris Throup.
Forty one year old  of King Street in Worksop denies indecently assaulting the twenty seven year old woman in October last year.
The court heard she went to a taxi rank in Worksop and asked to be taken to an address where her mother lived.
The woman told the court  drove her instead to Clumber Park where he unclipped the sign on his taxi then assaulted her in the vehicle before driving her back to Worksop.
The whole episode allegedly lasted about an hour and a half.
told the police it never took place.
The trial continues.
You're listening to B B C Radio Nottingham news the time is five past one.
Police say organized groups of children are behind a spate of thefts from elderly shoppers at Long Eaton.
Gangs of children some as young as eight have been targeting pensioners in the town centre and have stolen money and property worth hundreds of pounds.
Rob Sissons reports.
Police have described the crimes as despicable.
On Friday and yesterday police received eight reports of youngsters stealing property from pensioners.
The thefts all took place at lunch time many on the town's High Street and some inside shops.
Sergeant Martin Cooper believes about twenty youngsters are involved.
He says they're highly organized and work in small groups.
He says all the thefts followed a similar pattern.
Three or four of these youngsters will approach the elderly person, try and confuse them by speaking to them about something completely irrelevant, and just er disappear during which time of course er valuables have been taken from these people.
Police suspect the thieves come from outside the Long Eaton area and it's thought the youngsters who are aged from eight into their early teens may be organized by adults.
Seven law lords acting as the highest court in the Commonwealth have ruled that two men on death row in Jamaica for fourteen years should have their sentence commuted to life imprisonment.
Their death sentence for murder has nearly been carried out three times.
The ruling by a British court could decide the fate of more than a hundred other men across the Commonwealth also under sentence of death.
John Silverman reports.
On three occasions since nineteen seventy nine execution warrants have been served against Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan.
Each time they've been reprieved at the last moment.
The law lords in their ruling talk of the agony of mind the men must have suffered as they alternated between hope and despair.
We regard it as an inhuman act, they say, to keep a man facing the agony of execution over a long extended period.
Jamaica alone has a hundred and five prisoners who've been on death row for more than five years.
In Trinidad some condemned men have awaited execution even longer.
Like Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan they're all now expected to have their sentences commuted to life imprisonment.
Sixteen labour MPs are calling on the North Nottinghamshire Health Authority to relocate all the staff from the Harlow Wood Orthopaedic Hospital when it closes.
In a Commons motion they say they deeply regret the decision to shut the hospital which they argue is a direct result of Government reforms in the National Health Service.
Jeremy Ball reports.
The sixteen include the Sherwood MP Paddy Tipping Ashfield's Geoff Houn and Alan Neal who represents Mansfield.
They say that when the decision was made to transfer the spinal unit at Harlow Wood to Nottingham's Queens Medical Centre about a third of the hospital's work was removed and no new contracts were negotiated to fill the gap.
Health union officials say as many as a hundred and fifty jobs could be lost with the closure of the hospital which was confirmed last week after months of speculation.
The year long campaign to save it included a petition to Downing Street with twenty four thousand signatures.
Nottinghamshire police are appealing for witnesses to a road accident on the A six three one Beckingham bypass in which a young boy was seriously injured.
Four year old Jessie Smith from  Lane in Gainsborough is in intensive care at the Queens Medical Centre.
He was travelling in a Lancia Prisma saloon which lost control and overturned just before midnight on Sunday.
Now the look at the lunch time sports news here's John Shaw.
Notts County manager Mick Walker has named the same fourteen that were on duty at the City ground on Saturday for tonight's journey to Wolves.
So Andy Legg is still out the question remains as to whether Gary  will be in the starting lineup after Tony  impressive performance against Forrest.
Mansfield Town travel to fourth placed without fane Wayne Fairclough who's still injured and Ian Stringfellow who's recovering from flu.
Paul Holland is available again though after suspension.
Rugby Union officials have decided to take no further action against the All Blacks over the controversial Phil  affair.
The England player was left needing fifteen stitches in an eye wound after a rucking incident during the All Blacks match against the South West on Saturday.
The R F U condemned the incident in unusually strong terms but now seem ready to let the matter rest.
And ice hockey, there'll be an extra game at the Ice Stadium on Saturday before the Pampas meet Cardiff Devils because Peterborough Pirates no longer have use of their rink.
They'll be playing their match against Sheffield Steelers at the Ice Stadium at half past one.
And the main points of the news again this lunch time.
A court in London has heard how a taxi driver sexually assaulted a female passenger after driving her to a secluded spot in Clumber Park.
Preston Cro Crown Court has been told that the two boys accused of murdering the Merseyside toddler James Bulger each blamed the other for attacking the child.
And Calverton Colliery has been put into the review procedure by British Coal.
They say the pit's lost more than six million pounds this year and its prospects aren't good because of a lack of markets.
Ten past one traffic and trains and planes in full.
On the trains British Rail say it's all fine no problems East Midlands Airport it's all fine there no delays to the services at the moment.
Let's listen for a space with Annie Smith.
In Nottingham city centre you'll find space to park at the Broadmarsh Centre and Fletchergate you won't have to queue for the Victoria Centre car park but Trinity Square that's proving to be fairly busy so expect a short wait to park there.
No problems if you want to make use of the park and ride service.
The Forest  Race Course and Queens  they've all got plenty of space while in the centre of Mansfield you've got room to pork park even at the Walkden Street car park.
Finally taking a look at the traffic on Nottingham's roads as far as I can tell it's all moving fairly steadily.
Annie Smith radio Nottingham travel.
I suppose you could pork if you wanted to couldn't you ?
you could if you wanted to.
Nobody would know.
Well thank you have a lovely afternoon.
And you.
Tarrah.
Bye.
Erm other places to watch out for in Baysford the work is continuing on David Lane and Southwick Street the crossing there is closed diversions are in place and there have been long delays in the area there so unless you have to I wouldn't.
In the centre of Newark there's works on Beesmarket Hill part of Bargate and Castlegate have been closed and diversions are in place there.
And on the A one there are lane closures at Claypole just south of Newark and South Crescent is closed in Clipstone between First Avenue and North Crescent.
That'll do us for now we'll update the traffic again for you in half an hour's time radio Nottingham F M one O three point eight and ninety five point five Nottinghamshire's favourite station with the weather forecast for the rest of the afternoon.
It's going to remain dry but dull the temperature only rising to seven Celsius forty five Fahrenheit so it will feel chilly in the easterly breeze.
Mainly light rain expected this evening the outbreaks should die out around midnight the rest of the night then being cloudy and misty with a little drizzle in places.
The overnight low six Celsius forty three Fahrenheit.
And Wednesday another cloudy day with the risk of an odd shower it will be warmer than today though Wednesday's high twelve Celsius fifty four Fahrenheit.
The Strawbs and er and Part of the Union and I'm reliably informed by John Shaw that the Strawbs are supporting Lindisfarne at the Concert Hall in er December so there you are one to one.
This is Radio Nottingham it's a quarter past one  at these are the clues for Kids' County what are they on about here?
Who are they on about here?
He's famous he's got a wife he's normally on the news he's posh and he dresses up smart he writes he writes papers out.
Those last clues, He's posh and he dresses up smart somebody rang and is it Dennis, no.
It's er it's not Brian Clough and it's not Kenneth Clarke and it's not D H Lawrence either.
Erm Terry from Top Valley is on.
Hello.
Hello mate.
Are you all right?
Yes not bad are you?
Well I'm fine coping with it all.
Oh jolly good.
Are you going to bonfire at the weekend?
Er might do yes.
Do you know where you're going?
Might go to Lolworth Corporation on the Forest.
Er oh right I see.
pretty safe isn't it?
Yeah there's our Action Line are doing a a bit list of bonfires and you can ring them up and they'll tell you where to go.
Oh I didn't know that.
In er in the nicest possible way.
Oh super.
So er if you're stuck for one to go to give them a call four double one two double two
and er they'll tell you where to go.
Similarly if people are organizing bonfires and they want their bonfire to go on Action Line's list then they can give them a ring as well you see?
Mm it's 
What's 
a good idea.
What's the number Terry.
Er four double one two double one.
Four double one two double two.
Four double one two double two that's it.
That's it now don't forget will you?
Sorry yes.
Just checking.
Yes.
Have it written out five hundred times by the morning.


Else there'll be trouble.
Now and and are you doing any exciting today that you can tell us about and share with us?
No not a lot really no.
Nothing.
No just listening to the show.
Oh yeah listen to the rattling on and everything.
Yes  it's good.
What what do you think about these erm the this tulip thing and these trees down by erm the church?
Well myself personally
Mm.
You mean the er stone the
Yeah the one that's by Marks and Sparks.
I think it's superb.
Do you love it?
I do.
So you don't you don't want them to move it at all?
Not at all.
Any what about the trees that are around it as well?
I think well I mean the bit of green's good isn't it?
Well I you know.
I don't think people appreciate art a lot do they?
There are some people who think that you shouldn't be allowed to cut trees down.
No I do I I believe in that as well think you should keep a lot of er green about, looks good.
But I think that I think the plan is to move them and to put some other ones down as well.
Oh yeah yeah.
I'm going to try and get them to come on and talk about this tomorrow.
Yeah that's right.
These er these these council people cos it's
Yeah.
People ringing up about it and talking about it all the time aren't they?
Well that's right yeah.
I think the plan is to to shift the tulip somewhere else.
Somebody said the only suitable place for that daft leaf is in the middle of the arboretum lake.
Not at all.
.
I'll take it put in my back garden.
Well you know you have it then if they're sh 
I would.
If they're short of somewhere to put it we'll send it up Top Valley Terry.
It would take a lot of doing.
Well then I would get up there although no.
Er look erm Kids' County anyway who are they talking about?
I think its John Major.
John Major no.
No.
No it needs to be somebody who's connected with Nottinghamshire.
Ah does it?
You see.
Ah.
Yeah un unless er he might have moved into Top Valley.


You know he might  might have a little weekend house there.
You never know.
Just opposite Tesco.
Yeah.
Might be but I doubt it so no it's not John Major but it was a good thought Terry.
Okay.
Tarrah.
Have a nice day now.
Oh well I'll do my best and if er if they're stuck for somewhere with a leaf then er we'll send them round.
Jean from Clifton hello Jean.
Hello.
How are you?
All right thank you.
And what's happening up your end then?
Erm well ironing washing  baby sitting .
 Bory snory chory things isn't it then eh?
Yes.
 Bory snory chory things going on .
Yes.
Dear.
What do you think about this tulip thing?
Erm I'm not all that impressed.
Aren't you?
What about the trees around it do you think they should stay ?
Yes I think I like the trees yeah I think they look all right but I I just don't like that  that ornament thing or whatever it is.
That big big doo da thing you know big thing.
Oh Norah from Compton Acres  has rung up and says why spoil the arboretum lake ?


Cos you know one of the people says that the best place for it  is to lob it in the arboretum lake.
Yes 
You know it's a shame isn't it?
Yeah but I ju just think it's waste of money.
So you think save the trees but ditch the tulip.
Yes definite.
All right so cos this is vital isn't it.
Cos we all walk past it don't we every week?
Yep.
When you go shopping.
Yep.
Mind you it's whe it's when that waters trickling down.


It sounds horrible 
Well it's not trickled for a while has it?
No not not down the street like it used to do.
No cos it it gives no and then it used to freeze over and you got a beautiful skating rink there 
Yes.
didn't you?


When it freezed over.
Erm I'll try and get the the erm the council people on to talk about it to us 
Yes.
I think and just tell us what they're doing what's going on with it.
Anyway Kids' County who are they talking about Jean?
Er Brandon Bravo.
Erm no it's not.
Oh right.
It's not Martin Brandon Bravo it isn't no.
Right.
No it could have been but it isn't.
Could have been.
Anyway never mind .
Yep bye.
Tarrah bye bye.
Erm Joyce is on from Sandiacre hello Joyce.
Hello.
How are you?
All right thank you.
Good you've not been on for a while either have you?
No.
Why?
come on.
Aye?
I've been on once  once or twice but no
But but no.
No.
I see cos you like to keep yourself to yourself don't you Joyce?
True true.
My daughter phoned up actually but she's just had a phone call to go out so she's left me  t' answer .
Oh she gone out ladding has she again?
Er not ladding no.
On the razz is she on the pull?
She's just gone to see  somebody .
Oh has she?
Cos I always like to know Joyce  you see .
I always like to find out you know never leave any  unturned.
That's it.
That's what I say so nothing much happening today with you?
No I'm doing a crossword, listening to the wireless .
Are you are you stuck on any of them cos I like to help.
No I've er just got one to put in  
What is it then?
look at the clue.
What is it then?
I don't know for a minute wait a minute  
Go and get it and we'll see we'll see if we can help.
What what paper is this in then?
The er Peop er the Mirror.
The Mirror.
The Mirror I've done the Sun.
Right.
I've done the Sun, I'm on the Mirror now.
Erm which one are we on number one down near the courtyard.
What?
Near the courtyard five words .
How many letters?
Five letters.
Begins with a C.
Yeah.
And the third letter is O.
One two  and it's near the courtyard.
Yep.
All right we'll see if anybody knows.
You do that.
All right we'll see we'll see it's not got to fit in with anything else has it?
Er no.
No right and that's er what number down was it?
Number one.
One down in the Mirror .
Yes that's it.
Cos I always like to help.


And we'll see if anybody knows then we'll pass it on don't you think about it now don't you fret about it cos some somebody will have worked it out and will ring and tell me.
So er you can just continue now putting your feet up I think Joyce 
Oh yes definitely.
The best thing  don't worry yourself.
All right so it's er it's one down in the Mirror crossword it's C something O something something
That's right.
And it's near the courtyard.
Yep.
All right then.
I think it must be close
We'll we'll see 
perhaps could be couldn't it?
See how the it could be couldn't it?
Definite.


The brain's just worked.
Erm Kids' County Joyce here's the clues.
He's famous he's got a wife 
The Sheriff of Nottingham 
Eh? he's normally on the news 
The Sheriff of Nottingham 
Eh?
I wanted to play the clues again.
Oh so sorry
Oh go on let me I like doing that.
Go on then.
The only bit of pleasure I get  Joyce .
Who'd you say it was?
Sheriff of Nottingham.
No.
No.
No but you're on the right lines now.
Oh.
Well you're thinking right now you've got your crossword sussed.
.
And er you think you're right with Kids' County give us a ring soon.
Okay bye.
Tarrah.
Bye bye.
Here's the clues then,
He's famous he's got a wife he's normally on the news he's posh and he dresses up smart he writes he writes papers out.
Who are they on about?
Three four three four three four to call erm David Judd from Eastwood says close is the answer for Joyce's crossword so we worked it out together and we got there so er one down in the Mirror is close.
Cos David Judd from Eastwood says so.
To business with Kids' County here's the clues,
He's famous he's got a wife he's normally on the news he's posh and he dresses up smart he writes he writes papers out.
Now it's not John Major and it's not Martin Brandon Bravo and it's not the Sheriff although we're thinking on the right lines there, and it's not Kenneth Clarke or Brian Clough and it certainly isn't Dennis McCarthy and it's not D H Lawrence either.
Three four three four three four to call for a bash at Kids' County er we'll see if we can sort it out while this is on from the Dooleys.
They're the Dooleys, Wanted by the Dooleys.
If er if you're coming into Radio Nottingham today or ringing up for anything then erm say happy birthday to Victoria who is er on reception and er the birthday cake is lovely.
Mm delicious that whoever made that it's gorgeous and er what else have we got the chocolate and things here brilliant so if you're ringing up for anything say happy birthday to Victoria there cos she's erm celebrating today.
Dunno how old she is but looks good on it anyway erm  the erm  the er let's do these  these bits of paper er lost cats and dogs and things.
The R S P C A at Hyson Green are on seven eight four nine six five.
Er today a er an injured young black female cat found in Lincoln Street in the Baysford area if it's yours seven eight four nine six five er give them a call at the R S P C A at Hyson Green.
A dog lost from Bulwell on Sunday morning it's a Jack Russell with long hair and it's white and black twelve years old and er it's a bitch seven five two seven nine O seven five two seven nine O if you can help.
That's a dog lost from Bulwell on Sunday morning it's a Jack Russell with er long hair it's white and black and it's twelve years old and it's a bitch, seven five two seven nine O if er you can help there.
A dog found it's a black one found on Third Avenue at Carlton and it's a black collie it's young and it has no collar on.
It's now with the Gedling dog warden that one.
Er cat lost, lost since July the twenty sixth  oh I remember it well  er lost in Hendon Rise er it's been seen again in Cromer Road and it's er it's a black fluffy cat and it's male with a bushy tail and a yellow collar and it's got one of these I D chip things under it's skin.
eight seven two five four six eight seven two five four six to call if you can help there.
More from the R S P C A at  Green, seven eight four nine six five found on the twenty ninth of October two black female kittens with collars on found in Aspley, on the twenty first of October a green budgie found in Hyson Green, and on the twenty third of October a white adult female cat with a collar on found in Bulwell.
Seven eight four nine six five to call if any of those are yours.
Nearly done erm Sue in Bulwell needs help with her Amstrad P C W nine five one two.
She can't get any data back  can anyone help ?
If you're an expert on these things these er Amstrad things because I know some they do tend to lose things don't they to disappear of  you just can't get it back out erm can anyone help cos she's stuck with it, seven six double one three four.
It's an Amstrad P C W nine five one two er can anyone help other than saying put it in a carrier bag and lob it off Trent Bridge.
Seven six double one three four to call if erm you can help Sue in Bulwell with her Amstrad problems.
A budgie found found this morning in the Bobsmill area it's yellow and green, two nine three eight two five two nine three eight two five can you call after four o'clock and er last one a cat found in Standhill Road in Carlton found last night it's black and white and it's got a pink collar on, five two six six seven one five two six six seven one.
That's a cat found in Standhill Road in Carlton last night it's black and white with a pink collar and it's five two six six seven one to call if you can help there.
And anything that I can do you for three four three four three four to ring.
B B C radio Nottingham is proud and pleased to take you to the major of far away places so why not spend a November Tuesday night in Rochdale with us.
The warmth and luxury of Scotland will greet Mansfield Town in the third division, Simon Mapletoft is your courier there.
Oh been there already ha?
Well why not try Wolverhampton the golden glow of the amber shirts of Wolves will take on the proudly bar coded Magpies and wouldn't we like to see Notts wallop Wolves.
Well yes we would and you can hear Colin Slater beamed from Molyneaux tonight in a sports special.
Also words from the former England cricket captain Graham Gooch, Nottinghamshire's Jimmy Smith on basketball and of course the globe trotting and well tanned Martin Fisher from five past seven G M T.
Mm lovely must phone and get a brochure for that one.
You've got until nine o'clock tomorrow morning to have route round the attic or down in the cellar to see if you've got a small fortune waiting to be discovered.
Yes tomorrow morning Bruce Fern will be here for our monthly antiques and collectibles phone-in.
So we'll find out together whether you're sitting on a fortune tomorrow morning.
Catherine Marsden will be here tomorrow to give you advice about keeping your skin young and beautiful and Dennis Howell who's always young and fairly beautiful will be looking at the films on T V next week.
There he is like erm a bed sheet with a gob on.
Dennis Roussos and er For Ever and Ever June's on from Mansfield hello.
Hello.
Are you all right?
Yes thank you.
Good you you sorted out and sussed with Loot at Lunchtime for today are you?
I hope so yes.
Well I hope so too and er Sharon from Grantham taking you on hello Sharon.
Hello.
You sorted out as well?
I think so.
Is it is it really dull in Grantham?
Well it's rather dull and cloudy yes.
No I mean just just life in general not the weather .
Oh definitely yes.
Is it very dull?
Yes.
What's the most exciting thing that's happened to you in Grantham?
Not a lot really .
No  paint dried once did it or?
Oh something like that yeah.
Cos you know Grantham has the reputation for being the what was the dullest place in the in the country wasn't it?
Yes.
Or the dullest place in the entire universe.
Probably the dullest in the cosmos.
Yes.
And some people say that's the best thing that happened to it being voted that cos it meant people had done things about it and sorted it out but you think it's still dull as
Yes I do.
dull as er 
Not a lot of activity.
What would you like to do to to sort out Grantham then Sharon?
You know get a bit of life in the place a bit of zest .
Oh I don't know a bit excitement I think 
A bit a bit of vim and vigour.
Wha wha what's your idea of a good time Sharon something exciting for Grantham?
Oh I don't know a bit more for us for us women I think.
Is it like what?
Oh I don't know anything that's going .
Anything that's going for us women.
Yes.
Right I s well I'm sure if er if the Grantham planners are listening then  sound advice for them Sharon isn't it?
Yes.
Anything that's going for us women for them well that'll have them sorted won't it?
Erm look I'll put June on from Mansfield first of all I wanted thirty seconds worth of famous dogs cos we had er why Nottinghamshire's dogs are too dumpy earlier on didn't we?.
Bonzo, Bengi,Bo Boson, Bullet, Black Bob, Bess, Boop, Bonny, Bernard, Bouncer, Beethoven, Deputy Dog,Do Dougal,Droo Droopy, Fido, Freda, France, Goofy, Goldie, Gabby, Hobo, Lassie, Lady, Mr Dog, Masher,Ni Nipper, Petra, Patch, Rover, Rhubarb, Rin Tin Tin, Rolly, Snoopy, Spots, Spit, Sandy, Shep, Snowy, Spike, Sweep, Scooby Doo, Scrappy Doo,Swor Snorbits, Woofter, Winnie, Pongo, Woolly Jumper, K-nine, Guide Dog, Sheep Dog, Dirty Dog, Lazy Dog, Mad Dog, K-nine erm.
Two canines in there June.
Ooh goodness.
isn't it?
In there and Rhubarb I used to like that.
Yes?
Do you remember Rhubarb on the telly wasn't it good that it like came on after Magic Roundabout finished didn't it?
Yes Rhubarb and Custard.
And they put Rhubarb on there.
Yes.
I didn't like it at first cos all the animation was all too fuzzy and wobbly and everything I can remember cos I didn't think it was as good as the Magic Roundabout but then yeah I love it now.
Aha.
Don't we ramble on about some strange things June?
We do don't we?
Don't you think strange but true Sharon from Grantham you've got fifty three to beat are you read?
Yes.
Here we are.
Lassie, Snowy, Wolf, Benji, Lady and the Tramp, a Hundred and One Dalmatians, Hobo, Hooch, Sweep, Dougal, Rin Tin Tin, Spot, Scrappy Doo, Scooby Doo, Bouncer, Rolly, Rebel, oh K-nine,I can't think of any more erm Andrex dog, oh oh dear I can't think of any more.
All this time left I'm not used all this you could have snuck another ten in by now.
Yeah I know I can't think of any more.
But but you're stuck?
Yes.
There er twenty one Sharon and I think that might be a bit on the generous side so you've got to come back next and do the weather forecast for me is that all right?
Oh well I'll try.
Well you you're do your very best won't you I'm sure.
All right I'll I'll I'll talk to you in a minute with the weather forecast and June from Mansfield.
Hello.
I forgot to ask are you busting out all over?
Oh yes.
Oh you are, oh right erm I'm searching for your prize list I know I had one there all these bits of paper you have to bring in every day.
All this I've got it.
Mhm.
Eureka I have found it.
Er you had three and seven and ten yesterday so choose three other ones.
Two.
Number two some sugar free sweets.
Oh.
They're quite nice they are you know.
Yeah.
Another one?
Four.
Number four a big wodgy pile of C Ds.
Have you got a C D machine?
Yes I have.
Oh good and er what sort of things do you like?
Erm classics.
Classics.
Yes.
Ooh I don't know if we've got any classics in there.
I think it might be all er noisy thump thump stuff.
Oh.
we'll sor we'll find you something something on the mellow side, June.
Yes.
Er another one.
Er six.
Number six is er a Radio Nottingham mug.
Oh lovely.
All right a new design new styling.
Yes.
Are you  looking back on tomorrow then ?
Yes I can tomorrow.
Good well I'll I'll talk to you tomorrow.
Why you can't the day after then you mean?
I can't come on Thursday cos I'm doing a charity stall at Chesterfield.
Oh right you're doing that?
Yes.
Well we hope you lose tomorrow  then June I'll talk to you tomorrow .
Have to lose tomorrow won't I.
Bye bye.
Bye.
Tarrah.
Er if you want to come on Loot and Lunchtime tomorrow ten to one quarter to oneish listen in then for the qualifying question and you can come on and take on June from Mansfield who's our reigning champ.
This is erm Paul Young winding up Now I Know What Made Otis Blue.
Paul John and er Now I Know What Made Otis Blue it's radio Nottingham Nottinghamshire's favourite station it's eighteen minutes now to two o'clock.
Buses are er trains are fine say British Rail the er airport's fine as well say er East Midlands Airport no problems there er city centre traffic's all moving fine as well there's work still in Baysford on David Lane and Southwick Street where the crossing is closed expect a delay if you're heading there.
The B six O three O at Edwinstowe is closed between the A six one four and the B six O three four for repairs.
In Collington, Chapel Lane is closed for sewer works there.
In Stapleford there's extra lights on Bessle Lane by the Derby Road junction and in Mansfield, Toot Hill is closed from Bridge Street.
Also in Mansfield there's improvement work still on Chesterfield Road South and Rosemary Street too.
Updates on the traffic throughout the afternoon and the full service at tea time tonight, Alan Clifford on for John Simons between half past four and seven later on radio Nottingham F M one O three point eight and ninety five point five.
Nottinghamshire's favourite with the weather forecast for the rest of the afternoon, we go to Grantham and er Sharon tell us what's coming out the sky?
Hello
Hello off you go.
Dry but dull today outbreaks of light rain this evening, Wednesday will be another dull day, risks of an odd shower.
Thursday outlook for other fog patches will clear then dry but cloudy 
Thank you.
Thank you.
Was er marvellously done Sharon and we got the gist of it.
Oh right 
Give us a call soon won't you?
Pardon?
Give us a ring soon.
I will yeah 
And I hope I hope they sort out something in Grantham for us women for you .
Yes so do I.
All right then.
Right thank you bye.
Tarrah bye bye.
Er Loot at Lunchtime back tomorrow ten to one quarter to oneish listen in then and we'll give you the qualifying question.
Now Simon Ratcliffe's been in er all this lunchtime sort of keeping an eye on me haven't you Simon?
Yes.
Sort of er watching what I'm doing and everything and er you're not bored yet are you?
No
No give it time give it time.
Have you seen er oh no Dennis hasn't come it yet actually I was going to say have you seen 
I've I've looked but he hasn't come in .
Sitting in the other studio but actually it's Carl in there now and it's it's not Dennis in there at all and er how on earth I almost confused the two I don't know.
But you want to say thank you to some people don't you you said.
Yeah
Off you go.
Firstly can I say thank you to Asda and Long Eaton who I work for for allowing me the day off so I can come into Radio Nottingham.
Bless 'em.
Bless 'em all thank you as well to Radio Nottingham for allowing me to come in as part of my successful bid for Money Spinner.
Well thank you for your money  I mean that's 
That's the thing yeah.
And finally thank you to anybody else who know me for whatever they've done during the year thank you.
All right then well thank you Simon that's a broad thank you and and thank you very much for your money as well a hundred and fifty quid he gave that's loads of dosh er to to come in for the day as well and I'm going to take you out for a a nice lunch in a bit when he can wonder around have a poke around everywhere this afternoon too so should be all right shouldn't it that?
More to come yeah.
Yeah more to come yeah so it's it's worth all the dosh.
Er Cilla Black this er she's to come now and er You're My World this one ooh go for the high notes.
That Billy Joe Spears erm and er A Blanket on the Ground.
It's Radio Nottingham it's eight minutes to two Ann Green from Mansfield got the er family ticket to go to Alton Towers for spotting the firework noise popping up at the beginning of Billy Joe Spears.
So Ann Green from Mansfield off to see the Alton Towers fireworks display at the weekend enjoy it be brilliant.
Kids' County these are the clues.
He's famous he's got a wife he's normally on the news he's posh and he dresses up smart he writes, he writes papers out.
There who are they talking about so far anyway it's not Kenneth Clarke or Brian Clough or Dennis McCarthy  or er  D H Lawrence or John Major or Martin Brandon Bravo or the Sheriff.
Freda's on from Hucknell, hello Freda.
Hello.
Hello how are you ?
 
Are you all right?
Yes thank you, listening to you.
Good.
Having little little laughs about you.
Well why what have I done?
One of the ladies that she was talking about the dogs she said Freda you see.
Yeah.
Well it reminds me when I was in a shop on the High Street  for many years and a little boy and girl came in with a, with an Alsatian dog, a puppy.
Yeah.
And I said what a lovely little puppy, what's her name, and it said Freda.
.
I said Freda they says yes we've named it after you because we like you.
Oh was it.


You know er you know in Woollaton Hall?
Yes.
You know that big monkey that's in there that big stuffed monkey that's called 
that's Freda.
Eh?
Don't say that's Freda.
No that's called Geoff.
Oh is it?
That is but I don't think it was after me.
Oh.
but it is.
Was it re , oh I say.
Oh well this  was a nice Alsatian .
Was it?
You're obviously happy today Freda aren't you?
I always am.
We find you in jovial and jolly mood which is a good thing.
Oh I always am.
I'm looking outside at the lovely trees changing the colour.
They was once green and now they're yellow, they're gorgeous.
Really gorgeous.
Do you like it, you like autumn do you Freda?
No I like spring.
I like spring best cos autumn's dirty.
Do you like spring when you can start to feel frisky?
What at my age?
Don't you Fre well you never know.
I'm at the age, that er more things come to you than your old age pension book.


You'll come to that Geoff if you're lucky.
Well I kno yes.
Yes.
I think I'm catching you up.
Look I 
 
Look I, Kid's 
 
Kids' County who are they talking about?
I've got two names really but my first one is Councillor Pettit.
No.
Well it  
only one bite at the cherry .
the other one is then?
Well  I don't want to know.
All right then.


All right.
 
Bye bye.
Give us a ring soon bye bye.
Bye bye.
Tarrah.
Pete's on, from Ilkeston, hello.
Hello.
How are you?
All right thanks.
and your bit of Ilkeston treating you well is it?
Yes not too bad.
Good good a anything going off of note?
Er no not really, they just had their local fair last week but er.
Oh yes Ilkeston fair, did you go?
No.
Why?
Cost too much money.
Y well, what was it, a couple of quid a ride or something or?
Well I think they put them up to, yeah two, two fifty a ride, yeah.
Did they?
Yes.
A lot innit that?
It is.
That's a lot,you can't have a go on everything, can you?
No you can't.
Unless  unless  you're worth a bob or a hundred.
Look erm 
Well that's right.
Kids' County who do we need Pete?
Er I'd say it were Dr Hilary Jones.
No.
No.
It needs to be somebody who's got something to do with Nottinghamshire.
Oh.
And er, unless you know something that I don't, I don't think he has Pete.
Yeah okay then.
I don't think so.
Tarrah.
Right cheers.
Bye bye give us a ring soon.
Dorothy's on from Carlton, hello Dot.
Hello.
How are you?
Fine.
May I call you Dot?
Yes.
You don't mind do you ?
.
You don't mind do you, you don't give a monkeys, do you Dot?
No.
Well that's the way to be.
Can I say congratulations for Money Spinner  
Oh 
worthy cause and fantastic we were glued to the radio all weekend.
Oh were you?
Good.
I think my 
I've got the autograph book and
Oh right at the end did you ?
Clayderman collection the lot of it I get 
Oh brilliant I think my gob's just recovered from that.
I bet.
There all that ranting at the end.
Anyway look there's Kids' County er Dorothy who do we need?
Lord Mayor of Nottingham?
Yes  Oh thank the Lord for that.
Got to thank the Lord Mayor for that  actually Dorothy .
Er you can have some er some sweets and things.
You can have erm loads of toffees.
You can have a video.
You can have some mugs and you can have loads of nuts in tubes and all sorts, all right?
All right, thanks very much.
Tarrah.
Tarrah.
Bye bye er that's that done, now we'll do another one tomorrow.
Now Nottinghamshire's big bang, a week of pretty fireworks day two.
Guy Fawkes has got to answer for, hasn't he.
In a few days time we'll be sitting him on top of a bonfire and standing around in the cold night while we light up the sky with loads of colour.
Bit strange when you think of it like that.
It's the time of year, of course, when the fire brigade can be busy, when things go wrong.
Mike Stone is an Assistant Divisional Officer for the Fire Safety Department of the Nottinghamshire Brigade.
Most of our extra work comes in fact the run-up to er bonfire night.
Certainly over the years the the major proportion of our fire fighting, in terms of secondary fires, what we term secondary fires, the bonfires, was always concentrated around this period and going back quite a few years we used to have special appliances put on standby, extra crews and so on.
But because of the advent now of erm organized bonfires, that risk has receded but having said that it has only receded, not gone away.
These problems is erm young people, using fireworks in not the proper manner.
We still get an , er quite a few calls where fireworks have been pushed through letter boxes,in including pillar boxes, and they can cause all sorts of havoc although they'll not do an awful lot of damage to individuals.
But then of course with erm, the modern fireworks there is still in injury problem.
Seventeen people were injured last year that we know of, er probably many more were injured that never even bothered to report it, and that's just in Nottinghamshire.
So we and that's that really is er is too higher proportion for this day and age, particularly with all the publicity that's being put out.
So what care should you take when handling fireworks?
Richard Lowe and Jean Terrington are the directors of Fireworks Galore in Bulwell.
The first thing of course is to follow the firework code, which is to keep the fireworks in a box and closed until you're ready to use them.
To read the instructions which is paramount and every firework has instructions on.
To light it at arms length and then to stand well away while it fires and never return to a firework if it doesn't seem to go off.
And particularly don't do something that's foolish or thoughtless or silly.
Use a bit of common sense because they can be quite powerful.
When you start to build bonfires in someone's back garden, there's never enough space between the fire and the property, and consequently you can get all sorts of damage er either of a minor nature of blistering, or at the other end of the scale complete burn out of the house.
Bonfire night is one of those traditions that we perpetuate and if it is to be perpetuated, then go to organized bonfires.
You'll get better value for money, better fireworks and it's going to be a d a darn sight safer.
One classic er case that only occurred a few years ago and it was way before bonfire night, but erm, people working from home to try and make a little bit of pin money, a young lady had taken on the task of putting sparklers into five into a little bag for a particular manufacturer.
This was done from her own home and there were something like fifty thousand sparklers in that house with young children running around.
Now when we came across that it was dealt with very quickly and the, er sparklers were removed, but, er you know, the potential danger there particularly with young children running around, might want to play with a sparkler, with thirty or fifty thousand of the things in the same room.
So that that sort of thing we've come across.
Other things are where people are throwing fireworks around thinking it's a great joke, erm serious injuries have occurred in the past with that.
We've had houses set on fire, we've been to a furniture factory, manufacturers, er they have had a loss of, massive loss through erm a sky rocket falling into their timber yard.
So you know there are lots of things like that happening.
Nottinghamshire's big bang day two with the fire brigade, chunk three tomorrow.
It's Dennis next Tuesday afternoon so it's Where Are You Now on Afternoon Special, on the county's favourite radio station, it's B B C Radio Nottingham at two o'clock.
Radio Nottingham news with Rob Thomlinson.
British Coal have put Calverton Colliery into review, but the pit's six hundred and forty miners must wait another twenty four hours to hear whether they intend closing the pit or just reducing its workforce.
A meeting will be held at Calverton Miner's Welfare tomorrow morning.
The President of the Union of Democratic Mine Workers has condemned British Coal.
Neil Greatorex says they refused to answer questions on the long term future of the industry.
We're no better off now than what we were before.
What they've actually done today is announced that they want to put er Calverton into review and at least it tells people at Calverton what the situation's going to be for the future.
They've not said a word on the rest of the industry and in fact won't say it and they've been pressed very very hard on what the future entails for the rest of the coal field.
It looks like they're going to announce it by stealth, one pit at a time and take it right through the review procedure at three month stages.
Preston Crown Court has been told that the two eleven year old boys accused of murdering the Merseyside toddler James Bulger, blamed each other for most of the violence.
On the second day of the trail the trial rather the prosecution said that in interviews with the police the pair had demonstrated a fluent capacity to tell lies.
The two boys both deny abducting and murdering two year old James in February.
The funerals are being held today of the seven people who died when Loyalist gunmen attacked a bar at Greysteel in County Londonderry on Saturday night.
Five of the victims have been buried this morning at their local church in Greysteel.
From there Peter Hunt reports.
It was a dignified and deeply moving occasion, the funerals of five ordinary people leading ordinary lives until they were gunned down by Loyalist terrorists.
Three of the coffins arrived at the Star of the Sea Church together.
Hundreds walked behind them holding hands.
The body of eighty one year old James Moore was carried into the church by his brothers some of his twenty two grandchildren walked behind.
During the funeral mass there was much talk of sadness, grief and bewilderment but no reference to revenge.
The congregation heard the retired Bishop of Derry, Dr Edward Daley urge politicians to treat what he called this intolerable situation with the urgency and priority it deserved.
Two more men have been arrested by police investigating the shootings at Greysteel eleven people are now being questioned.
Meanwhile the Prime Minister is understood to be arranging a series of meetings with the leaders of all the main constitutional parties in Northern Ireland.
Yesterday Downing Street said Mr Major had concrete proposals to put before the parties to achieve a lasting peace in the province.
The first meetings are expected to take place on Thursday.
Nottingham Crown Court's been told that a taxi driver sexually assaulted a woman passenger after ignoring her  This report from Chris Throup.
Forty one year old Kumar  of King Street in Worksop denies indecently assaulting the twenty seven year old woman in October last year.
The court heard she went to a taxi rank in Worksop and asked to be taken to an address where her mother lived.
The woman told the court  drove her instead to Clumber Park where he unclipped the sign on his taxi then assaulted her in the vehicle before driving her back to Workshop.
The whole episode allegedly lasted about an hour and a half.
told the police it never took place.
The trial continues.
Sixteen labour MPs are calling on the North Nottinghamshire Health Authority to relocate all the staff from the Harlow Wood Orthopaedic Hospital when it closes.
In a Commons motion they say they deeply regret the decision to shut the hospital which they argue is a direct result of Government reforms in the National Health Service.
Police believe organized groups of teenagers are behind a spate of thefts from shoppers at Long Eaton.
They say gangs of youngsters have been targeting elderly people in the town centre and stealing purses from them.
There have been several thefts including some yesterday and last Friday.
Police are appealing for witnesses.
The weather forecast now for Nottinghamshire.
Much of the daylight hours should remain dry but dull the temperature only rising to seven Celsius, forty five Fahrenheit which will feel chilly in the easterly breeze.
Outbreaks of mainly light rain are expected this evening but these should die out around midnight.
B B C Radio Nottingham news, it's five minutes past two.
Hello and welcome to Tuesday's edition of Afternoon Special linking the East Midlands.
With it being Tuesday our all important feature our missing persons feature Where Are You Now around about half past three.
If you've lost touch with a friend relative or neighbour we could find them for you this afternoon if they're still in the East Midlands.
Call us on Nottingham three four three four three four if you want to go on Where Are You Now the feature we have at half past three but ring soonest please.
On the hour the news and weather, and we'd like to hear from you this afternoon cos we have a phone-in and you can take part and have a chat on the air.
Simply ring us on Nottingham three four three four three four to have a chat.
You have to dial the code O six O two if you are ringing from outside the Nottingham area.
Music throughout the programme and a musical competition at the beginning giving you a chance to win a prize if you can answer the question about the record.
And we'll sort out last week's postal competition so don't ring in for this one and the question was, What's this got to do with a company?
We'll sort out four winners.
Yes we've got four winners I think after the record.
What's this got to do with a company?
What's that got to do with a company?
That's the question we asked last week, well because they're chairman of the board.
The group is called Chairman of the Board that's what it's got to do with a company  and er  corny isn't it.
Never mind.
Er prize goes to J Saxton of , New Whittington Chesterfield.
You get a prize for telling us it's Chairman of the Board that's what it's got to do with a company.
You too you too Joanne Sullivan of , Boston a prize for you.
And for Mrs Stephanie Pearson of , Coleville and one more coming out the bag and it turns out to be C Fletcher of , Chilwell.
You win a prize as well.
All said Chairman of the Board that's what it's got to do with a company.
All right that's how we play the game a question's asked about every record we play the question about this next record give us a ring on Nottingham three four three four three four if you know the answer is, Which local group had a hit with this one?
And the question is, Which local group had a hit with that one?
On the line from Lutterworth, Glenys  Glenys.
Hello
Yes.
Is it the Marcels?
Well which local group had a hit with that one?
Oh oh I thought it was made by the Marcels.
No the question is 
Oh 
which local group had a hit with that one ?
Showaddywaddy.
Yes.
Oh .
Yes.
Yes all right so you get a prize.
Can you call for it any 
Er no they're going to send it to me  
Okay all right okay.
Okay.
Bye.
Bye.
And from Church Gresley Angela  is it?
Hello Dennis Angela .
Angela  yes  you'll al always get called that
I do yeah.
What were you going to say?
Er Showaddywaddy.
Tell me one more hit with Showaddywaddy?
Oh Under the Moon of Love?
Brings you a prize.
Thank you very much.
Can you call for it or what?
I'm sorry no I'm afraid I can't.
They know your address?
Yes.
Right we'll send it.
Thank you very much Dennis.
Bye Angela.
Bye.
Yes Showaddywaddy of course had the er big hit our local group from Leicester.
Erm ah here's an interesting one, How many legs have these got?
How many legs have these got?
Call us on Nottingham three four three four three four please.
And the question is, How many legs have that lot got?
That's the question, from Hull we've got Carolyn Holden, Carolyn?
Hello.
Hello how many legs?
The Beatles so it would be eight.
All right er er I'll buy that er a prize for you.
Okay thanks.
Thanks a lot.
Bye
Bye.
Er told you it was a bit crazy.
Baysford Ada Kerry what were you going to say?
I was going to say the same, the Beatles eight legs.
Give me another hit of the Beatles.
Oh dear 
Another hit of the Beatles.
No good?
I can't think off the top  of my head 
You can't name a hit of the Beatles.
No.
Oh dear all right okay well thanks for trying.
Okay bye .
Bye postal one coming up now and for the postal one the question about this record is, What's Christmassy about this?
What's Christmassy about this?
Answers this time on a postcard please to, The Music Quiz, Linkmail, four one four, Derby, Leicester, Lincoln or Nottingham whichever is closest to you.
Postcards to be here by Tuesday of next week on that postcard, What's Christmassy about this?
Now the question is, What's Christmassy about that record?
Answers on a postcard please to, The Music Quiz, Linkmail four one four, Derby, Leicester, Lincoln or Nottingham whichever is closest to you.
Postcards to be hear by Tuesday of next week.
What's Christmassy Christmassy about that record?
That's the question on the Music Quiz.
Er now   Who was that er well not who was that but er that's another record from er the Music Quiz competition, What's Christmassy about that record?
The same as the previous record.
Answers on a postcard by Tuesday.
On on Friday the twelfth of November that's a week on Friday at the Royal Concert Hall in Nottingham, a very special concert for those who love the big bands and the vocalists that go with them.
The concert is by the Ted Heath Band and it's a gala concert at the Royal Centre in Nottingham on Friday November the twelfth because in attendance will be Mrs Moira Heath, Ted's widow er Jack Parnell will be on drums, Kenny Baker on trumpet and one of the country's great song stylists will be the guest singer.
Dennis Lotus who's on the line from his home now.
Good afternoon.
Hello Dennis.
You've had to wait for me I'm afraid.
Well that's okay I'm lying in bed so it didn't make any difference.
No that's right you were supposed to be here facing me in the studio and you gone and got ill.
I know I'm sorry about that.
But okay you're going to be all right for the concert a week on Friday?
Well I hope so I sincerely hope so I think I shall be though.
You must have been spoilt rotten Dennis Lotus, er singing with a band like Ted Heath.
How can you sing with any other band after that?
Oh I don't know actually it it was it was quite dramatic when I left the band because I went into variety you know and er some of those put bands are something else, cos some of the guys were sort of semi pros like just come from the mine shaft you know.
I remember going to one rehearsal up in Durham and I said, Well where's the trumpet player? and they said, Well he hasn't come off shift yet.
Oh dear oh dear  bit frightening isn't it?
Oh yeah but still you know we got through it was great.
But it was a marvellous grounding wasn't it Ted Heath ?
Ah tremendous I mean it's a wonderful apprenticeship I mean I don't know where the guys go now young fellows 