

Right well that that's er er for  now commence the meeting.
It is half past seven and we have apologies from Mrs .
And I'll now ask them, everybody else is present, so I'll now ask the Clerk to read the minutes of the previous meeting please.
Minutes of the Parish Council meeting held in the village hall on Friday the fourteenth of January at seven thirty.
Apologies from Mr .
Present Chairman Mr  Mr E  Mr  Mr  Mrs  Mrs  Mr  and myself as Clerk.
Minutes of the last meeting were read and signed as a true record.
Matters arising.
Tables.
It was agreed to leave them as they are and to take no further action.
Mrs  was to phone her rights and complain.
I know that sounds a bit odd.
Memorial stone.
We're waiting for a price.
Er three names have been put forward   and .
to contact War Commission for further information.
Correspondence Notts mineral local plan.
We agreed to take no further action.
Public transport conference.
Mrs  to attend if possible.
Allotment hedges.
Mr  explained the situation concerning cutting the hedges and the council agreed that he should go ahead and do them if possible.
Planning.
Mr  Chapel Bung Chapel Bungalow Back Lane.
Report passed unanimously.
Any other business.
Recent lottery winner Mrs  one hundred pounds.
She made a twenty pound donation back to the village hall the clerk was to send a letter of thanks.
Hill.
Was told to contact Notts County Council concerning the state of  Hill including the entrance to Hill Farm er where water runs off the road into the farmyard instead of down to the gully.
Garden open day.
It was agreed to support  nineteenth of June ninety four.
Bus shelter cleaner.
The bus shelter cleaner resigned her job after the after the article in the Village News concerning the school survey.
The Clerk was to send a letter of apology to Mrs  thanking her for twenty years of service and ask if she'd reconsider the job.
Date of the next meeting set for the eleventh of February at seven thirty.
As there was no further business the meeting closed at eight fifteen.
Thank you very much.
Is it your wish that I sign these as a correct record?
Yes.
Thank you.
So the date is the eleventh.
Mark it 
I was going to say make sure he gets the right .
He's obviously shell shocked after his journey.
Yes I am.
Right minutes  matters arising from the minutes.
I made a note of several here.
Erm first of all the table did you 
I'm sorry I've got the telephone number now and it's in my mind to do it.
Right.
But I've not done it yet.
Fair enough.
Erm transport conference 
Yes I've been to that.
Would you like to report on that ?
I can give you a report if you want me to do that.
Do you want me to do it now?
We can take it at this stage I think yes please.
Erm I can only say that it was an exceedingly expensive conference this.
I mean all this sort of thing  did not come cheaply.
Erm you may find that quite interesting.
I suggest that we do the usual thing of passing that one round so that if anybody wants to read it they can read it.
Pass it around and when they've read it initial it and pass it pass on .
Er yeah initial it and pass it on round.
Erm
So will you start the ball rolling Harry on that one.
It was quite an interesting conference.
Erm there were representatives from pretty well all the transport organizations in Nottinghamshire there.
A great many erm county councillors because it was a county council conference.
Erm so I think it was probably quite well attended though there were a vast number of these green files left at the end so may be it wasn't as well attended as I thought it had been.
It was quite a good venue anyway.
Where was it at?
It it was at Edwinstowe the South Forest thing.
The only snag was  for a tran public transport conference everybody  needed a car to get there.
Only one person managed it on public transport .
And that was someone from Nottingham University  who spent a great deal of time grumbling about the bus service from Mansfield to Edwinstowe .
So there you go.
Erm some of the speakers were excellent.
Particularly the ones from private industry.
Erm I think really it didn't say anything very constructive because it seems to me that the local council county council hasn't grasped the nettle and got all the private contractors together to make a reasonable service.
They keep talking about what they call seamless journeys which means you should be able to go from A to B to C without too much problem.
But unless you can grasp the private contractors and make them cooperate within this or encourage them to do so, there's absolutely no way you can have a so-called seamless journey.
Erm they wittered a lot about the cost of erm extending the Robin Hood line.
Though it does seem to be in their mind to extend that.
Partly for tourist reasons but partly because it does in fact provide quite a good service.
And it would seem that the park and ride service and something like the parks and the Robin Hood line would transport a lot of people.
I think it boils down to the fact that it's fairly economic to transport vast quantities of people but not to transport from the outer edges and the odd bits in the middle and there's no way that they're going to get a full and comprehensive service come what may.
Erm
They're putting a lot into this Robin Hood line though aren't they they're going to 
That's right that's right.
And they want you know there were lots of people wanting it.
Extending a lot further south to connect up with Leicester and the border areas there.
Cos it can take apparently about two and a half hours to get into Nottingham from erm some of those areas.
Whereas really it's only a few miles as the crow flies as it were.
And it would be much quicker on a train.
I think we're very well organized here and we don't have to worry too much about it.
Erm and for some reason or other county council seems to have set its face financially against making bus lanes in and around Nottingham.
Erm even for peak period times which would certainly help them.
Though they swear it will just block absolutely everything.
But if you make it difficult for cars people would consider park and ride.
From my point of view the interesting bit was meeting so many different people.
And I think that's about all that can really be said about.
They they put on a very good show and they brought a splendid bus to show 
But it was worthwhile going.
us and erm the dial-a-ride
Yeah you didn't feel it was a waste of time is how you felt ?
Slightly.
I mean there were a lot of county councillors huffing and puffing.
Erm they thought it was  a bit like the dying froze you know .
May be I'm being a little unkind but that was rather the impression I got.
But the the people I met made up for that.
Did anyone ask why the O R T system in Nottingham is going parallel with the er Robin Hood line er once out of the city?
No they didn't Richard.
It seems it seems very odd that it's running parallel basically with the Robin Hood line.
I wondered what's the matter with the rest of the city.
I don't know.
I've got a splendid map that they've put out.
May be that will identify things for you.
Do you want to have a look at that?
This was launched at the meeting.
They're very proud of it.
But I mean a lot of us suggested that rather than pick out all these very difficult to understand erm time tables it would be far better to have a personage at bus stations and things.
Cos people would far sooner ask somebody than they would cope with the complications of this sort of thing.
I don't know whether that's any good to you Richard .
There's one other thing too about this debate.
Before the L R T system line to Hucknall you've got the Robin Hood line going through Hucknall
Yeah.
They're in the in the Sherwood area for our constituency aren't they?
Oh yes.
So if we start going on about transport they're going to rub that into us that we've got owt.
I see.
You know.
And I think it's a re and it's a bit er
Oh I didn't feel that I had any gripes from our point of view.
We are reasonably well served .
No we're reasonably well served here yeah.
It's just that I think that they don't publicize a lot of the services as well as they might do.
And you aren't aware that you can actually go from A to B at different times.
No you know it's just to have a point if anyone had thought anything about it but of course 
No no one no one said a word about it seemed  keen or do too keen on the Robin Hood line of which there were plenty.
But er I I  looked into all this but there you go.
I suppose the  thing will be to connect Mansfield up in due course.
Well they want to connect Mansfield then they want to connect eventually right up through Worksop and on out into the main lines.
The only thing is you see if British Rail gets privatized it may be that Retford and Worksop places will lose some of the services that they already have.
Which of course at the moment on the one two five line are excellent.
Are there any other questions for Mrs  on this.
Yes Harry.
You you mentioned the private bus contractors need 
Yeah.
to be better coordinated
Yeah.
by the county council presumably
Well I think they're the only people who 
what what control have they over them?
Do they provide a licence ?
I think they have licensing control under the 
They the county council licence the whole service is  of where they can run.
Yeah.
Under the nineteen eighty five act.
But they still tend to go round in packs every so slightly.
They been held up by all the traffic and they can't  get through.
Yes.
Yes well and they're very much yeah.
They they feel they can't keep to a timetable for that reason.
Therefore they would welcome bus lanes and feel that they could get things shifting a lot better.
But I mean 
 
unless you've got, yes, but unless you've got excellent erm er transport services people will stick to their cars purely for the convenience.
You really have to make it inconvenient for the car or improve local transport.
Is there another question Harry?
Well I was just going to say, do do they actually get tenders for certain routes?
I believe so yes.
So they still do that.
I know the bus times  
Yes yes yes yes yes yes 
So there is an opportunity to coordinate it?
Oh yes.
Oh yes.
So presumably if they don't get bids for those routes then they they can't do anything about it.
Can't make people 
No.
And of course they want the most economic ways of doing it.
So they've got to connect up as much as is humanly possible .
Yes yes.
But it would still help if they could help with this seamless journey bit you know .
Yes yes 
and connect up with rails as well as.
How does the contracts work then?
Do they
I don't know.
Don't know.
sign an undertaking to provide a service.
I mean 
I honestly don't know how it works in practice.
I know I know the local the East Midlands now are saying private cont er private firm isn't it?
Mm.
Has been taken over by a stagecoach.
Which is a 
There were some representatives from that there.
That's right.
And imm and immediately they got hold of it they've whopped the prices up too.
The whole idea is competition.
There wasn't too much grumbling about the prices interestingly enough.
I thought that would be something that a lot of people would 
Well that would be a  wouldn't it because you all went by car you said.
No no no.
But from people who'd brought that things to talk about.
Oh I see.
You know the the price of the service wasn't something that really upset people too much.
One pound seventy five to  
From here to Newark and that's not a return though.
That's each way isn't it?
No no.
All the buses that are on the routes now extra buses, is it a better bus service?
No.
No no no it isn't.
No that's the problem.
Since they brought in this new act, I think it was about eighty five 
Nine eighty five the transport act  
They er operators have a tendency to overcrowd the profitable ones and those that are not profitable loose out altogether.
Whereas before it was more of a service.
Instead of shoving all the buses on to one route.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's it's what philosophy you adopt.
Whether you adopt the the one which the Government favour as a commercial it's got to be a commercial enterprise and pay.
Er the survivor of the fittest.
Or whether you feel there should be a service for the whole of the area.
Er which is subsidized.
If you saw in the paper as I did.
There's one firm that had about nine buses took off the road try trying to cut corners as well.
It just 
When you say the Government is it controlled by the Government.
Coun county council's labour controlled isn't it ?
It was the it was it .
If you re recall back in nineteen eight five Tony the Government brought in the transport bill which let operators compete.
I mean they they started the initial scheme was in Hereford.
And Hereford was so blocked that nothing could move.
So blocked with coaches.
Beg pardon?
Man falling off a bike   it's only a small place isn't it ?
But one thing I'd like to mention while we're talking about buses and I think this is the right place.
At Edingley when they discussed this they were concerned about buses going down Station Lane.
And if you recall some time ago we wrote and said we would like the buses that go down Station Lane Edingley to come through our village.
Now Edingley want to get rid of them going down Station Lane because they don't pick anybody up down there.
I mean they pick somebody up at Goldhill Cottages and that's about all I don't know.
Didn't manage it did you?
Erm but Edingley did ask for our support they were writing to  and they were supposed to send the top copy of the letter to our clerk.
Well the clerk tells me it hasn't arrived.
And the meeting was about ten days ago or something like that.
Erm so whether she hasn't got round to it I don't know.
But what they were asking for our support would we also write to the bus companies again and urge them instead of the buses going down Station Lane to come through our village.
What was the object, I know we discussed it at great length, but what was the object of it going that way in the first place?
Can you  
I don't know.
The bus com the company 
just did it didn't they?
Yeah.
Yeah but there were about three 
 
Every other every other hour.
One goes that way every other hour one comes through every other hour .
When I go down er to get on to bottom road to pick up at Norwood Gardens
want them to go down School Lane.
They can't they won't we've already 
 
Yeah they wouldn't, at the time I wrote, they wrote back saying School Lane wasn't  send buses down.
And twice this week a bus has come down School Lane.
Has it?
Came down Halam Hill and went down School Lane.
Well I have to say it isn't suitable.
You're right I mean the edges are appalling .
There was a bus went down School Lane at half past two this morning cos I sent it down there.


This morning?
This morning at half past two yeah.
Dropped me off at the cross roads and went straight down there to drop off at Newark Road .
I can remember one I can remember one going up  Lane at half past two in the morning.
I don't know whether he's travelling fatigue or shell shock.
I mean whether you want to support Edingley or not that's the question really I'm asking you.
And they want to get rid of the buses down Station Lane.
But where do they want to send them?
They really don't care where they send them so long as call up up Edingley Hill what 
They  School Lane.
What what I did say that Halam had already objected to them going down Station Lane at Edingley which we did.
And so they they virtually what they said was would we would we again renew our pledge that they came through Edingley.
Good idea.
Now one at a time Harry.
We could do without the  stop the buses altogether.
Well if it doesn't pay you're not going to  them.
We can't pick go round Norwood Gardens and not want to do it.
We didn't object to the buses going down Station Lane before.
All we asked was if it was possible for them to come through Halam and go down School Lane to pick  to get an extra bus service at Halam.
They said that wasn't possible and I think I'm the same opinion as Harry if you're writing off  and stop them going down Station Lane they'll probably withdraw it altogether.
Yeah.
I'm also concerned that if they went down School Lane, although I think it you know I understand they've got to go to Norwood Gardens and things, that with the car park at The Plough now being blocked I mean School Lane at peak times for schools is a nightmare.
And I think trying to get a bus through there as well would be absolutely lethal.
Well I'm putting it to you it's up to you I don't mind.
I mean it's
Well as I say it is a different company now.
Well I I think we can  
There's two companies.
One one at a time Tony please.
I I don't think they'd sort of hold up their arms and say well we'll finish altogether if that's your attitude.
We can at least answer them couldn't we.
They can always say no.
Richard?
I would suggest that it'd be a good idea to give .
It would be beneficial to this village if they
Well if they've got to pick up at Norwood Gardens how's the bus going to get to Norwood Gardens.
They don't run a bus  
With with your permission I'm gonna ask Mr  if he can recall the argument.
Did they not say that these buses did not pick up at Norwood Gardens didn't they?
They went direct.
I think their suggestion was that they had to go via Norwood Gardens because they then turned right at the  in  and went up into the middle of  and it was to get them on to that line that they had to go through .
But they did say I think distinctly that they did not pick up at Norwood Gardens.
There was another pathfinder service that goes down to Norwood Gardens .
There is another pathfinder service that starts there.
I mean you were at the meeting that's why I'm  referring to you .
I mean that's er that's what was said.
service from Norwood Gardens goes to Nottingham.
Yes but as I've I've seen many a bus coming towards Norwood Gardens goes round the little  and back out again.
As I understand it from what was said at Edingley it wasn't necessary for these buses to go to Norwood Gardens because they were well served without.
I don't know.
That's the trouble  with being car drivers isn't it ?
Do do you wish to take any action.
You're you're proposing Tony that we do write to the bus company again and ask if the buses can come through just say through Halam rather than go down Station Lane at Edingley?
You're second
I would second that yes.
Is anyone against that proposal?
Are you all happy with that?
Yeah fine yeah.
Thank you.
As long as the driver's to go through Halam and not  
Writing to what?
Writing to the bus company and ask that the buses if the bus service can be diverted from going down Station Lane at Edingley to coming up Edingley Hill and through Halam to improve the service through the village.
Alright got that.
And  bus company did you know.
So long as they don't do it at those two times a day .
What what I do suggest is you know the clerk at Edingley  
Yeah yeah.
ring her up and have a word with her and she'll probably send you a copy of the letter she sent she should have done that.
Yes.
And er yes have a word with Pat and so that you're both writing along the same lines.
Could we qualify that that we do not want them to go down School Lane?
Yeah but if I don't see how  go down Norwood Gardens otherwise.
This way they they could tip over on the grass verge couldn't they?
Very easily.
If they're not picking up at Norwood Gardens they're they're  
 
Well that's that's what we understood at Edingley meeting and there was 
That's correct yes.
no need for them to go to Norwood Gardens or or they they specifically didn't go to Norwood Gardens they just went through didn't they?
Yes it's been understood that it was a routing thing to put them at the right side of Southwell to drive through the middle of it.
Yes.
What I don't understand if all they need to do is revert back to what they used to be and come straight through on the on the ordinary route.
That's what we're really asking for yes.
Yes.
We've already got that service.
Every two hours.
Ah every two hours and it can make it every every hour.
Which is what it used to be of course isn't it?
Yeah because if you want to go to Southwell at the present moment you go on a bus and you got to wait two hours to get one back.
Yeah.
Well we've already agreed now that we write to them 
Yeah that's fine yeah.
And I did s I did say through the village Harry so that we didn't er
I really feel School Lane's out .
Which way we go through the village doesn't really matter does it?
Yeah it does cos no one 's 
Well they not
They might go down Hill Lane instead .
Can we get back to to other other matters arising please.
Erm I not sure I er Don Don's planning application is approved.
I understand it's passing erecting, there's been a problem with the erection of things.
Er bus shelter.
What what was Mrs  's reaction to that?
Oh dear.
Oh dear.
Yeah well.
Thank you 
I haven't 
very much but er
I haven't seen her since as I was 
No she thanks you very much for that but er
No go.
She's just not interested.
Just not interested.
When you get  report into this news was that factually correct?
Or was 
I think what was in the village news it arose out of those children's survey down there and what happened was that Mrs  didn't think we'd er put in perhaps as politely as we should.
I don't quite know how to to put this but but er she found what was in the village news offensive.
You Tony could be cleaner the bus shelter .
So we're ba we're basically
I'm deciding what Joyce said.
You wrote it let him clean it.
Basically we're looking for a we're looking for another cleaner.
And I don't know whether anybody's been successful.
Any ideas or
I actually took all those letters home  and I went and I listed all the things that were listed er mentioned in all the letters and also that I tried to consider giving you know my impression of the meeting and tried putting exactly what what they're saying.
And I put it down entirely factually from all the letters you know.
It it's one of those unfortunate things that I mean I think we've we've got to look around and see what we can do about.
Do we do we ad did we advertise for one before  village meeting?
Yes we have done yes.
What recently?
No twenty year ago.
No no no I mean since this.
We we've used it for things like the street clean 
Street cleaning and things like that.
and erm assume there's no reason why we shouldn't do it erm this way.
It's er I mean it's the only thing to do isn't it?
To advertise for somebody.
Oh yes.
Are you all agreed to that?
Yes.
Thank you.
Might get somebody to do it half price.
There was something else that came up out of the minutes.
Can I
Yes there was.
mention it?
And I've got several other things.
Oh alright go on.
There's the there's the names there's the stone erm the allot I'll deal with the stone for the last because I thought there might be more discussion on that.
Halam Hill that
Yeah.
The  work is not satisfactory yet.
The buil the  I've rung them up and they said they'd do it.
The hole's got worse at the top of the hill.
So I rung them again and said it was dangerous  and they came out more or less straight away and did the few holes at the top.
Yeah.
They have put yellow marks round some of the holes but haven't been back to do them yet.
No there're great big yellow marks across the road with big arrows facing down into the village now.
I don't know what they mean.
They've been they've done before I believe.
Oh have they?
Oh.
They have started the work but it isn't complete and I was going to say it's not satisfactory yet.
budget.
There's one on Back Lane as well 
I haven't reported that one.
One at a time yeah.
So
Well well I say I rang them first time.
Nothing happened.
The holes got bigger on top of the hill so I rang them again saying they're dangerous for cyclist for a motorbike could have an accident.
And they did come out more or less straight away and well I say  drop a bit in
But they are aware of the situation on the hill and they haven't been yet.
That's all I can tell you.
Mind you I should think they've got holes absolutely everywhere aren't there.
The roads are terrible they are dreadful.
Oh it's terrible terrible all over the place.
Can can we couple with this there's the  room  pavilion, can we coupled with this New Hall Lane.
I've been away all this week because my wife took a telephone message from Nora  yesterday and it is it is in our parish .
It is dreadful I walked along there the other day.
It's appalling.
and er he said that when they took it up three years ago of course they  from the first six months I think it is and  we got on to them and they they did agree 
They did yeah.
But since then nobody's done anything about it.
It it's in a terrible state it really is.
So so can we ask the clerk to look into that and couple it with
Back Lane as well.
And Back Lane as well.
It's only one but it's quite a good one I think .
And somebody's reported a bad pot hole near your house Harry.
Mrs Mrs  rang me up and ask me about the one
Somewhere 
a big hole hole down between her drive and the road.
Where the water's stuck and it keeps coming down and it's getting quite wide where anyone could slip in.
And that you know they leave they've left it for er two years  
It's going to cost so much money to get all this right in the end isn't it?
It's a false economy.
But now now's now's the time strike on because for two reasons.
Because of course the county council have 
And we all know why.
and secondly it's coming to the end of the financial year and this is when they want to spend the money.
So I think now's the time to er make a bid for all these.
So is it agreed the clerk write to them again about all the ones we've listed?
Well shall we mention School Lane then because that is absolutely 
Yes we might as well.
appalling.
The sides of the road are giving way aren't they ?
They are yes.
You have to stop 
They seem to be happening daily.
I mean it's just getting worse and worse and worse.
And perhaps perhaps Pat could we ask
could we ask for a site meeting with them?
And see if they'd somehow.
That that's the best way and then you and I could perhaps walk round with them or ride round with them and show them.
I used to be able to do that.
But the last time I tried they didn't want to know because well nobody will take responsibility.
No I know.
At the end of the day.
But they seem to get things done at Edingley at site meetings.
They they've 
Well I'll try for a site meeting.
They've er they've done fairly well there with  Perhaps if it's happen to be a time when I'm busy Richard you might do it as vice chairman.
If I'm available yeah.
Some or one of us will anyway.
If we can fix a meeting a date up to suit them
Yeah.
and one of us will fit in.
Right fair enough.
Right.
Allotment hedge edging I've got down here.
Yeah we
spade work.
we er spoke spade work that  sort of told you about, spade work recommended a list of do work.
He's billed them and they pay out direct.
That's fine.
So
Hang on just a second.
I was walking that way with Ernest  on Saturday and he said he thought the bottom hedge belonged to  anyway.
Well I don't think that's right
No.
I I don't I don't think that's right Glynis because
That's okay then.
I just thought I'd mention it because I didn't want anybody 
That that hedge was cut by David  's father last time 
Oh that was a good long time ago wasn't it?
Yes yes.
Albeit I think it was done for the parish council so.
Right okay.
That's okay I just thought that you should know that .
Well we're we're quite I mean we agreed to it last time and if the billing's going to go direct we we can we can forget about it now .
Yeah oh yeah.
All we've got to see is somebody that wanders up there just see that the work's done satisfactorily.
I'm sure it will be.
Well like keep and eye on it anyway.
Yeah.
Right now the only the only other item I've got er rising from the minutes is the stone and the names.
Now just to complicate the issue  who probably probably is the oldest person in the village I'm note sure, erm has brought another name to my attention.
And she's even gone to the extent of checking on the stone which is a memorial in  churchyard of the.
The person in question was a relative of hers and was killed or died I'm sure not whether he was killed or died but certainly served in the forces in the four fourteen eighteen war in  he was buried in .
But there is a there is a er inscription on the stone in the churchyard to him.
So that makes four now.
Have have you found out any more the cost Harry of this?
Yeah for a stone that is ?
Yes.
Inlaid stone into the brickwork.
A stone of about eighteen inch four by four with the appropriate heading I would have thought up to four names, depending on how many names there is in the 
Yes.
village.
Er between a hundred and thirty and a hundred forty.
That doesn't sound out of the way to me.
Mind you if you do it properly and you put their rank and regiments and things 
Ah well that well that 
like that on it it makes it a lot more expensive wouldn't it?
I said I didn't think probably that would be  but I wasn't sure.
But anything extra like that would be extra.
Of course.
Yeah mm.
I mean if it's if it is a war memorial which it is
I said to  just the name of the person who'd died in the .
That that's all we're looking for at the moment.
And if we want to put rank and
Yeah.
I mean you'd be doubling that wouldn't you?
Yeah yeah the writing is pretty 
It is it is.
Because you're paying by so many letters usually.
Usually on memorial stone you just put the initials and the name don't you?
You do.
I wouldn't I wouldn't bother with rank.
No I wouldn't.
Because I wasn't sure whether  he get it right  anyway.
Not unless it's proper 
And and they don't know the date.
I don't know it would have on the date actually.
No it was really a case of things were residents 
Just four names really.
residents of the village who lost their lives in the nineteen fourteen eighteen war isn't it?
After all 
You think that would cover the situation.
Well considering nothing's been done for fifty year I suppose really 
.
Yeah.
Matter of  of people who'd died in the first world war.
could be more.
Well we've advertised in the village news and Miss Clark's the only one that's come up with anyone.
Probably the only one who's got a member in .
Yes.
I mean she's
I haven't heard any comment from people at all about it.
Whether they willing that we  I mean 
Well that's what we elected for I just  
I mean in some 
I I I'm afraid Harry I'm one of those that we take our our responsibility and if they don't like what we're doing they can  
What you mean is they had chance.
They've had chance .
Well they've had plenty of chance haven't they?
Does that include erecting it Harry?
Well no it's just the stone.
Well no no no no.
If they're gonna have to cut hole out and put it in.
Well no won't it be built in.
Well I thought the idea was to put it on one of the original walls though.
Not on one of the new walls.
Well it won't be on it'll be in.
It'll still have to be cut in though wouldn't it?
Yeah
If it's no I think what we agreed Glynis if it was going to be a stone it could go in the wall where it could be seen from outside.
Oh right yes sorry I beg your pardon .
But if we were deciding on a brass plaque or something 
Yeah.
like that then it would be 
It would have to be 
inside.
And I for what I'm trying to do I didn't think we'd be able to afford a stone I thought I thought it would be much more than what Mr  's quoted.
I still think the plaque might be cheaper.
Oh it would be cheaper but I'm not sure whether it would be
Then the  brass plaques tend to get taken off and  happens where a stone remains.
So with this this stone could be built in so that it's facing the road couldn't it?
That's right.
Exactly like these are in this place.
Like the ones out here yes.
Been in there for a long time aren't they?
Yes.
Been there for a hundred years haven't they?
Well they're all part of the history aren't they?
Great memorial I think really isn't it?
Beg pardon?
Be a good appropriate memorial if we can afford it.
Well I would have thought so but Pat have you found out  about the names?
Yes.
David  was going to let you know about his relations.
No.
He asked me to contact  the War Commission.
Yeah.
He asked me to contact the 
The War Graves Commission.
War Graves Commission.
I haven't found them yet.
We've found everybody but them.
I've got the Commonwealth War Graves Commission.
No you haven't.
No not on the
Well I think we do because I yeah it seems so
Well if it's  yes.
The Salvation Army were trying the  community council the local community council.
Just phone the Citizens Advice Bureau they'll help you best.
We didn't try them.
But nobody else could find the address.
If the Commonwealth War Commission don't know how to get hold of the War Graves Commission  The Commonwealth War Graves Commission can give us the information we want provided we can give them the christian name of the person and the regiment.
Then  
Ah well.
They otherwise suggest they otherwise suggest er 
If we knew that we don't need them.


chasing back to the local paper to the approximate time that we think they died see if they report enough about them.
Or go back to your local paper to the end of the war to see if they were all honorary.
Furthermore, they're they can can't get any information on deaths that would have occurred from injuries after the war.
None at all.
Well we're not looking for those anyway are we?
Well there was one query wasn't there?
Yes.
Even for the thirteen fourteen year?
Oh it would have been a long while after the war yes.
In fact I don't think it was.
No.
I mean I wasn't born until nineteen thirty and I mean I I I can remember Jim  well so he didn't die until probably nineteen forty.
How how many years after?
Fourteen fifteen year after
Yes.
So if you're gonna talk about him what about Jimmy  I mean
That's right.
It's not relevant then is it really?
No.
No.
I I think these are fellows that were either killed or died on active service.
And I mean this one that Miss Clark's mentioned he probably died on active service through wounds or something like that .
Well he's the least of the problem because if he's got something in the churchyard there'd be something dated probably .
was actually going to get the information for tonight but she hasn't been able to and I haven't seen her.
But she was trotting off to the churchyard to clean the stone the other day.
Yes I was just trying to think as to who it was to be quite honest.
I know which it is but it's somewhere down in the corner where your brother used to live that corner down there Harry somewhere down there.
So we've got four definites at the moment.
Mm.
So in that case we've got to do a bit of research haven't we?
Well I've got the 
Ah.
Let's let's have the 
Well well you've just said we've got four definites.
Well now you're saying that the one that was injured wasn't one.
The one that died after the war
Right Richard.
that was his name  
Yes yes.
nothing more.
He was a member of the Sherwood Foresters mentioned in despatches died nineteen sixteen approximately.
Was he anything 
No.
No he was a relative 
 

There was a Tommy  used to come here you see.
I'll I'll I'll I went to  cows one morning and they started 
Well do not let too many skeletons out of cupboards.
Very naughty.
The reason the reason we know it was nineteen sixteen was the fact that someone named  died
Which one Richard?
The reason we know it's not it was nineteen sixteen er that  had been killed was that he was home obviously at the beginning of the war he went off and then someone named  left a house well left they died and the proceeds of the house were left to Mrs Miss  's grandmother.
And to Seth.
And Emma's mother got both lots of money because Seth was deceased and so was
Oh yeah
So we've Seth  this one of Miss Clark's relations we can trace that.
So we're really struggling on two .
 
Some people say it's cos he's got a thing in the church don't they?
can you can you chase David  when you get home?
Yes it's in the window.
You've got this you've got this information off Richard I'll make sure  excuse me, you get the information from May Clark.
You chase it up from David .
Now who does that leave us with?
Er one more?
Yeah  er Clark the one in the one in the   
 
 
or ?
.
oh.
Is there anything in the village book?
Just another point of interest to you people  just a little thing that dropped out was that Mr er Mr  died
Yes.
and the and the same day as they buried Mr .
of the shock?
Yeah.
He died in nineteen hundred and ten and that was the same day
It says here Mr  died on the same day as Mr St er was buried .
 
You'd better get slimming then.
Mm there you are you see.
Anyway he was  nineteen ten so I thought it would be interesting.
Yeah but it was different  
But he was I tell you he was resurrected again.
But er yeah so we've we we've got a fair bit of information on three.
It's  that we're struggling on.
How would we find out about  then.
He's got to go to the War Graves on that 
Well in that case  we we need a christian name do you have a christian name for him?
I haven't no.
And well Miss Clark might remember I mean she is as you say probably one of the oldest people and perhaps Miss  could rattle her brains a little.
Who else might know?
I think er  came to visit who did she come to visit?
Well then ask either then may be.
My dad will remember his name.
Oh well ask him then David.
That's the answer then isn't it?
Yes.
Yeah.
Ruby  she'll have she'll have some children though because I mean they're somewhere down in 
 
they're somewhere down in Gillingham down in
Kent
Yeah they're down in Kent.
Yeah but you know after such a time with children there is something like that 
No I I I honestly don't know I mean we fetched Mrs  home to bury her but I mean that was oh nineteen fifty odd.
Can't remember the address.
No we can't.
I know it's somewhere near Tonbridge Wells because that's
Ask ask Ida.
probably with Jim and er his brother being buried .
I wonder if he'd carried all the information 
Oh Ida will know if anybody does.
I mean she's the link person in that family.
can you have a word with Ida then?
Okay.
Or David what about you?
You just want 's name don't you?
Well want as much information about any of them but er but I think we can find er sufficient about the others.
But it's  's name yeah.
I'll ask my dad.
He he told me but I forgot.
I'm sure he told me when I was asked
Oh well that we'll leave that with you then.
Old Jack  and so and so and so.
It might be possible otherwise to go would it be in the local paper.
I don't know I don't know.
What would have been the local paper then the Advertiser still or what was perhaps the precursor of the Advertiser yes .
There was the Newark Advertiser and the Newark Herald in those days.
Newark Herald.
But I would have thought that one lot of er papers would either have gone to the archives office or er been retained in the Advertiser if they amalgamated at some time.
Another possibility is the censors for eighteen nineteen one which is the last one you can look at.
There's a hundred year secrecy on them you know.
Yeah.
If he was born by then before then and lived in the village his name would be in the censors.
Possible that there would be of course.
I mean I don't .
But a lot of people went quite young didn't they?
younger than twenty three presumably.
Probably mm yeah.
If they were born in the village they could well be in the erm baptismal book in church .
This this is first of all can we I should tell you that the planning permission for this is passed.
The district council has no objections and of course the county's granted themselves planning permission on it
Yes.
and that actually came through this morning.
So so they will now be getting on with it fairly quickly.
So if we're going to do anything
We'd better get on with it.
we've got to act fairly quickly so can we decide in principle whether we're going to do this or not and let them know that we either are or we aren't.
That's the important thing.
Oh yes.
You you've got the original letter there haven't you?
Yes.
So can we have a decision in principle whether we're going to do this or not?
They they don't want any further payment for doing it on our behalf do they?
No what we were invited to do.
We were invited to provide as the parish council we were invited to provide a stone with the details on.
And presumably their builder would build it in for us.
Yes.
I propose that we get on and do it a fast as possible.
I'm going to second that.
Thank you.
That's all agreed.
Yes.
Thank you very much.
That's a unanimous decision.
Richard how far does the christening go back in church the baptismal book?
 
Beg pardon?
They start building on the twentieth of March.
How long is it going to take to get the stone cut Harry?
If we can take it back to about eighteen ninety  
I've no idea this time.
I'd have to ask him again about that.
We've got, can I have a bit of attention please.
We've gone back quickly so I've been informed that  build that's definite starting on the twentieth of March.
Well there's two projects running side by side.
Erm which they start  they're supposed to be running together at the same time when they'll start I don't know.
But er
Well they're gonna start on the twentieth of March
They'd better start doing something.
so they'll want this pay the month's wages.
Well it's only it's only 
No we've got to pull that 
It isn't 
Well it's only coming out a yard isn't it?
They might not do that 
On the other hand on the other hand they could leave  get the exact measurement right and leave a hole.
There's no problem about that.
The thing to do is have a word with Martin .
Why why?
Well he's hurt his hand hasn't he?
No.
No no no no.
Oh he said he he's like tendering the er the erm project people doing the tendering.
No.
probably going back to it.
But anyway we've got a tight we've got a tight time scale .
Nothing  Martin says so.
That's the important thing.
We've got a tight time scale so we've got to do this reasonably.
Give them the measurement they  the hole.
I will is it agreed we just put the names on?
I think 
I will I will get the get the information 
If that's a suitable inscription.
as regards.
You're going to chase David  up you're going to chase  up and you've already provided the information as regard Seth .
So that's the so we've got it covered.
And when we get it all together you and I'll get together and we'll draw something out ready for the next meeting to either agree approval or or yeah?
We weren't going to say just the names  initials initials and initial 
Yes that's why I want the christian names.
We want the initials but not the rank and
Yeah.
If you don't see David  have a look in the church 
It's the St Michael window I think.
It's in the St Michael window just round back of the door.
Yeah.
The little door there it tells you
The name of it on the back
Yes it is it is
Yes that's right it's all there yes so there's no problem.
I'll have a look on Sunday morning and see if erm erm baptismal book 
I didn't realize I didn't realize  we had such a tight schedule  and it reminded me when they got the plan, well I don't know when it came through, but I opened it today and.
Right now then that's dealt with all the matters arising that I've got down.
Are there are there any other matters arising from


No because the hedging was the one thing I wanted to talk about .
The hedging I see yes.
Alright.
We'll now go on to correspondence then Pat please.
You've got the seminar on planning haven't you?
Yes seminar on planning and law .
Oh by the way, just going back to that other thing, can you let them know Harry we're definitely going to take in this
Yes I'll yes I'll er contact them yes.
And and at the same time ask them for a date when they want the stone .
Yes 
Well  area education office.
Right correspondence.
Seminar seminars for parish councils on planning policy law and procedures.
Have you come across this?
Do you know anything about it ?
Yes I do yes.
Erm
Do you want me to explain it or do you want to read it out?
Yes I can explain it.
Virtually what it did it came out of the last parish council's conference which I attended on your behalf and er the Director of Planning and Development, Colin  promised to lay on a seminar for parish councillors because it seems to be the one service which always gets criticism at the parish council's conference.
Either the district council planning committee hasn't agreed with the parish council.
Or if they have agreed  reasons why they haven't .
And so they're laying on this seminar for as many parish councillors who want to go to explain the planning procedures.
And when you've been to this you'll know more about it that what I do.
The date is on the twenty eighth of March and the location will be at  Hall and it will be it doesn't give a time but it will be an evening meeting.
In the dome.
I don't know where it could be in the dome if it's  
Twenty eighth is a Monday is that?
Checking Glynis just checking.
It is.
Yes yes I've got a note in my diary that's right.
Monday the twenty eighth of March.
And they want to know how many's going.
Edingley are sending about four and  are sending about four but er as many as like want to go.
But anybody who's interested in planning or you either don't agree with us.
Is there a meal or anything?
No  
No you should have gone to the one that I went to.
You refused to go you see.
I haven't had time Glynis.
Glynis you would like to go.
Yes please.
That's one.
Tony you would like to go?
Two.
Do you want to go Simon?
No.
He's just gonna  sit and be argumentative isn't he .
Richard?
No 
Harry?
What do you two know that we don't know?
You'll enjoy it I'll tell you.
Who's doing it.
either you agree or disagree  
Come on.
is that the whole meet what the meeting's about?
 
Come on it's obviously something fishy about it  
Seminar for the parish councillors planning law and procedures.
Those parish councils who were represented at the annual parish councils conference at  Hall last year will recall that the suggestion was made that a special session may be held on planning topics should there be sufficient support from parish councils.
And the intention would be to have three or four speakers from the planning staff here who would talk about different aspects of planning rules policies procedures etcetera.
And there would then be a discussion section session.
I would envisage the talk to last about sixty to seventy five minutes and the discussions for another thirty to forty five minutes commencing  Oh it does say,commencing at seven thirty P M.
I have earmarked Monday the twenty eight of March nineteen ninety four as a possible date and the location would be  Hall.
I would be grateful if you could let me know within six weeks whether your councillors wish to attend such an evening and if so how many representatives you will wish to send.
You can if you wish ring  extension three five one rather than send a written reply.
If the demand is high we may need to limit the attendance to a maximum of three per parish council.
At this stage it's not limited .
It would not be the intention to discuss individual planning applications  .
So now then I've got two so far.
There's myself anyone else?
No I'm busy.
Right three from Halam then Pat please.
I'll be out that night.


D'ya know I just wish that you'd share this inner knowledge with the rest of us.
I do really.
Go there on a false errand.
We're all busy people aren't we?
 
How do you know I'm on a diet?
Put put three down from Halam if anybody else wants to go I'll
You can turn up on the night if you want
No.
I want a reply to that one.
Right that's seminar  thank you.
The second item of correspondence economic development strategy consultation.
Oh yes yes it's it's for noting yes.
Put your name in it like.
Put your name in it and pass it on.
That's the other one thank you.
What's this scratch roof?
Oh that's this er they want they can all have one of these.
Not even a hand round one.
It's the er one from 
Oh yes yes I see yes.
Yes got their .
There you are David I bet you picked one up in your 
And that's the  district council newsletter coming round.
Oh I've got I've got one of those yes.
When is this erm commission due to report
in April.
Oh yes.
Ah but they've erm
It's been put back.
I was going to say they've  isn't it?
The I can't remember the exact date but what I can tell you is those of you that take the Newark Advertiser and the exact dates are in today's Newark Advertiser.
Oh I haven't read that then.
But it has been put back.
We expect the findings the final findings to be in the Autumn of this year now.
September this year.
But if the Government keeps changing its mind and it's  then it really is
Oh it is a pain isn't it?
It's a very expensive undertaking all this and it's such a waste of our money I suspect .
And you see now what the Government have said that they are going to accept that there are going to be two key authorities in some counties.
Because their own backup
their own back benches in rural counties are kicking up so much in Somerset and Hampshire in particular that they've had to back down.
But well I mean  I think 
they've reported they've gone down.
I think local Government's gonna be an absolute pigs ear if you've got two tiers two tiers in one county and and  authorities in another.
I mean well I don't know but there you are.
I don't really 
It's had everything else it goes the full circle in the end doesn't it?
Rural rural voice here we all look through.
I will say this Mr chairman Newark district council is much more appreciative of you can't put  but you could the Notts county council one.
They've guaranteed costs down.
That's all I can say.


Your not with me?
Your all with
I bet the whole thing is going to cost millions of pounds.
Course it is course it is.
We never 
 
it never ought to the exercise never ought to have gone out Harry.
I mean that thing I went to on Wednesday it must have cost thousands of pounds.
A total waste of money really.
But it was a Government decision.
And I want 
You've all read this from  have you?
I've read  
I want to stress this please I want to stress this.
When I say it was a Government decision I'm not speaking politically because whoever had've won the last election whether it be Liberal Democrats Labour or Conservative all three parties were committed to reorganizing local government.
God knows why but all three parties were.
So the outcome of the last general election made no difference at all.
It will take year and years to recoup 
They'll never recoup it never.
Right.
The final on the correspondence is highway briefing.
You deal with this and 
Right well we've had these before.
It's highway
It's all in the Advertiser Mr chairman.
Right 
As Mr  it's all in the Advertiser.
It's all in the Advertiser.
The highway briefing we get one each month out.
Tells you what major road er roadworks going to take place.
Major maintenance schemes to start in the next month include Danby Road Newark  Road and  to  Road
Have we any in our Pat near us that are affected?
No.
We're going from  that's the nearest.
Oh well.
Well done Pat.
As from as from April nineteen eighty four.
The word children will be removed from school crossing patrol sticks and will be replaced with the children crossing signal.
Erm you can have a look look through if you want.
No you can  when they're doing these repairs 
You wonder who dreams these things up don't you?
in your back lane  
Traffic traffic 
close it to both ends.
traffic management the A two the A six one two Nottingham Road at Southwell er closed to extended thirty mile an hour speed limit.
Er 
 
By a hundred meters further out 
Oh they they've applied for that at the bottom of  Road isn't it?
So anybody wants to have a look at these  says it's not viable.
Well if they take as long to do it I mean good heavens there's been one clanking manhole cover at Halam and it has taken them weeks to do it.
And they've got traffic lights up again today.
You know where you
It's a sewer that's burst or something.
No it's that clanking manhole cover.
No.
Yes it is cos they've resealed it again today.
Right that's the actual clerical correspondence.
Can we go on   and that's the bill for the tables is it?
Bill for the tables a total of one hundred and eight pounds ten pence.
A hundred and eight pounds ten pence.
I'm gonna make a note of that.
When I'm complaining I might just as well 
Pay that price.
Is it your wish that er about the same price for a table 
Well work out a fifteen 
Is it your wish we should pay this account?
Yes.
Thank you.
Then we come to, oh the general consensus of opinion was yes.
I never heard a word uttered except mine.
Well David was nodding his head and that Richard.
Is it is it agreed that we pay the account for the tables?
 
Yes.
Thank you.
Ooh can I just mention while we're while we're on about tables, well we're not really on about it, but can I just mention it.
Harry and I thought at one stage that if we could find a proper home
Oh yes yes I wondered what you were going to say.
Pinned
And they wouldn't actually cause so much damage to the paint work all the way round didn't we?
We ought to devise a scheme and an area
So they didn't scratch the wall.
That's right yes.
Will they fit into the porch?
Well
They'd never get carried in there I don't think.
one particular place 
They would but I doubt if any 
did you not?
Well we just thought somewhere at the back where we could pin them against the wall.
I think that's sensible.
Well basically two  up the wall to lean against basically.
And probably a strap that comes round
Some sort of clip to hold them in so that erm
Every time a table  it scratch the wall.
Is it agreed that we ask Richard if he could deal with this for us please?
We'll devise something Harry.
You know you know what you want.
You know what you want.
Strung up to the ceiling.


So as you don't ask me to get the so and so's down.
Right.
Now the clerk's got any other business down here and the date's two meetings past.
No well you see.
The annual parish meeting and the annual parish council meeting.
Just advise you on the dates of last year.
Last year we had the annual parish meeting on the thirtieth of April.
Yes.
And the annual parish council meeting on the fourteenth of May.
Well that's how I've got the corresponding dates.
So if you want random dates.
If you want to settle them at this meeting.
Cos they want settling 
No I 
don't they?
It's a good idea yes to settle the next meeting.
What d'ya mean.
Why  under any other business for?
I saw planning on the A G M on the the  
You can see what you like.
There isn't any there isn't any official but I've got one that I'll show.
Can we just deal with this please.
Well that comes  
It came as a great surprise to me  for some reason or other .
What date are we looking at?
May the thirtieth that was a Friday.
Yeah you're not tied to them dates at all.
Just giving you an idea of when you had them last year.
The corresponding date is the twenty ninth of April.
How does that strike anybody?
Yes.
And that's for the parish meeting .
Twenty ninth of April 
Is that it.
Well we're all here tonight so that if we
Yes.
Twenty ninth of April.
Start earlier.
Seven thirty.
Nor normally starts at seven thirty does it?
Yes for the parish meeting.
Well the parish meeting doesn't last very long as a rule does it?
Ten minutes and it'll be done.
Nobody comes.
Might be a surge.
Harry  and a couple of other faithfuls and that's it.
What time?
Seven thirty?
Seven thirty then.
Annual parish meeting.
Annual parish meeting.
Seven thirty P M.
And then the annual parish council meeting was May the fourteenth last year so the corresponding date will be
Be the thirteenth.
May the thirteenth.
How does that strike you?
Right.
Which is the one where we carry on and have the meeting afterwards.
The annual parish meeting 
The annual parish meeting yes.
is the reporting one isn't it and we elect officers at that one do we?
No no.
This is the one we elect offic officers at.
Officers at mm.
Yes.
This is the thirteenth.
So what do we call this one ?
parish council meeting early so that we get a committee meeting .
Well we do have a committee we do have a council meeting afterwards yeah.
So the annual parish
The one you're on about is the A G M isn't it?
The parish meeting I thought that's.
We have a parish council meeting afterwards don't we?
Yes.
That's what I thought.
Just on a technicality why do we need the two like this?
Beg pardon?
Why do we why can't we combine them with the parish council meeting?
Because we've always done it that way.
Well the annual parish we do have to have an annual parish meeting.
That's statute.
And we do have to have a meeting of an annual meeting of the council to elect your officers.
I mean it's the annual meeting of the council that agrees the finance and everything else.
Well you can have a committee meeting  
But we usually have we usually have a council meeting
So you can start that bit earlier.
Well you can start it at seven o'clock if you like I don't mind.
What time
I should have started the annual parish meeting at seven and followed by 
Is it agreed we start at seven?
That's what you're talking about now is it?
Parish meeting.
The annual parish meeting on the twenty ninth of April seven o'clock.
Followed by a parish council meeting.
Yes it'll be followed by a parish council meeting.
And then we're looking at May the thirteenth for the annual meeting of the parish council.
Don't they call that the annual general meeting?
Yes.
That's at seven thirty then.
Last year.
Right.
Now then.
As you wanted some as you 
 
as you wanted some planning Glynis I haven't got any official plan 
this is just unbelievable  
planning for you but what I can show you is some sketches which the gentleman who bought the plot at Grey Lane brought to show me asked my opinion.
I said it's no good asking my opinion I said it looks alright to me.
I said, Take them to  Hall and ask the planning officers if they'd be acceptable to them.
Because it was agreed it should be a single storey dwelling and he's going for he wants a chalet type bungalow.
But it it's sort of built into the ground apparently so that it'd be pretty low down.
So I said, Well before you have your plans drawn up go and.
He said, Well would I show the plans to the parish council and see what their reaction is.
So there you are.
I can't remember what their names are but somebody tells me they're are the most extraordinarily noisy family.
They're not.
They're er they live in  at the present time and er his name's Paul  and he's the main Skoda dealer in Nottingham.
It isn't built into the built into the ground it's just following the the the level of the ground.
It isn't built into the ground .
Didn't know there was that much profit in a Skodas.


And that with it being a chalet bungalow the roof goes up
Their chain is  in Nottingham.
Yeah 
Where the hospital is up there.
But that's not the main office they've got a big one.
But I thought we wanted to keep this a low profile bungalow and that's pushing it up the same as the other one in Grey Lane went up.
That's right that's right.
And he isn't showing a ground level.
No no.
He isn't saying this is ground level at all.
All he's doing is following the lie of the ground.
That's a lot of artistic licence then.
I I object to this.
Yeah.
I think we'd better switch off at this stage.