

Does this have to be done writing it down?
Yeah
is it an important part of it?
yeah 
you know when you have french
yeah
we'll have to take a, french kids and that talking
oh yeah
that's to do with the Norway from English  
yeah, but, there's a thingy on it, they'll be a  but it ain't just us school, it's other schools in it as well 
yeah I know, but, they, they'll all, there, the others is two schools is one after another school and we're the only erm boys school and it's not  an all girls school doing it, otherwise it ain't 
no, there's more schools than that, cos er the lady said that er, she goes I'm, cos there is  when you  he went what schools are these?, and so reading out a couple of schools, about four of 'em
and 
no, quite out far they were
she  that hotel 
I know 
oh, er 
all what?
the what?
 

how do you know it's thingy?, how do you know it's for the kids in Norway?
she said something about it in school, she goes she wants their names right and their occupation  cos say like you go to the butcher shop and then you go to  that and the other
yeah
so Norwegian they learn in English don't they though
oh yeah  oh but, yeah, but, this is gonna be done mostly on the streets in it for us?, so what they gonna learn about that?don't remember when thingy
the last
remember when he hit the first stone and hit that car window
I don't
well  this thing weren't it, it was parked up, this was ages
yes
this was two years ago, just before er activities week weren't it?
he goes what  
 
away and


he found that 


legged it
he meant to hit the car that was going
I know
so silly in he?
he hit the back window and then he didn't do nothing, but then it all shattered 
did the man go up the school?, he never did he?
he did and he thought I grassed, but I never, geezer want your window smashed
yeah
a red light come on the back and when, and then when the  and let them go, must of heard it, saw  running  and he's 
er, he didn't have to pay did he?
no, he 
what happened about it then?
and then Andy got enough trouble that year cos he  as well didn't he?
I know, he put all the paper up his arm
that was  
how long these tapes for?, like the first seven 
there, then, they're ninety minutes tape
no not first, not all of 'em is it?
yeah, they're T D K ninety they are
yeah, I don't think the other ones are
is that ninety minutes each way?
what?, no it's just, it might be forty five
and I'm gonna go like and Leyton Orient just scored the goal for this, that and the other  it's a big area, and everyone's going what commentator for  I said I'm not  I'm on the radio
yeah, that'll get nicked off ya
no it won't
that will
I will go  what I'll do tomorrow is  zip it in my inside pocket there and wire it  and all you can see, that's enough really  you don't have to ask
who?
does he bunk off a lot Peter?
no he don't bunk, he, he has got a lot of things, you know, he orders and that 
see you later 
Ah Ricky  did you see the state of our trainers?er ah Richard it's fucked up, just gonna go over there it's alright Ricky I'll do  Rick I can just tear this off, but I like the noise on the thing


you never know
yeah you haven't got, you touch fucking little shit head
what 
shit head, shit head
fuck you
right, oh you don't live on bother, you fucking cheap oh big Jim blouse, cheap back and side 
is that enough information
what?
is that enough?
enough what?
you got enough?
eh, I, I was supposed to do   well I was suppose to do ten, do you know how many I've done?
no
one side, not even one, one side, I'm doing now 
 
no, oh Rick, Rick borrow  bikes weren't we?, so how come I done it?
should of put it on your bike
oh what?, what?, bung it on and drop it 
Oh I have really, not, what I've done is I've taped one, one whole side and then I taped over it again by mistake
oh 
what did  say, she ain't come yet?
what about if she lets us keep the walkman
mm?
what about if she lets us keep the walkman's
yeah, yeah, that'll be wicked
she wouldn't, I know she ain't  never do that  
is your tape recording?
yeah
 

oh no
when a country makes a produc a product, whether it'll be fruit or food or, er clothes and sells them to another country  what is that called?
don't look at him, I've written the answer down  when a country buys the two, Mark take your coat off, give me your walkman, not suppose to bring to school
it's a thing sir 
they make 
animals and crops


okay
Hey bud, where you going?
I was supposed to be going home 
Example a thousand pound  normally two and forty eight pounds, now only forty eight pounds
What?
D'you think it's the wheel of fortune?
Well it says it is, it's been
It's a whole page spread  from such an established reputable company.
All prices are fully inclusive of double glazing, grade one security p v c delivered .
I don't know.
It doesn't say anywhere there's a guarantee  .
Cheshire.
I wonder if it's the same address as when we got ours?
Well we should have guarantee somewhere in the box there
I mean it's it's, how long is it since it was supposed to have gone bust?
Well it's years since I thought it had gone bust
I thought it was about ten years
Wasn't there somebody from  who got
I can't remember.
When we got that, when we had ours and er they said if you if you found someone else who would like who would have  you would get seventy five pounds back and you gave the thing, who was it who was thinking about it?
Was it erm what did they call?
Isabel?
Isabel?


.
Wasn't it her?
It might have been, I can't remember
Wasn't it just before or after her husband died?
It's been that long I don't know.
Her husband died when we were .
It couldn't have been that.
No.
Well I phoned Shirley and she said she's fine.
I told her off for not let not telling us she was ill and she said no, no I'm fine.
She's got her friend Sandy staying with her 
When's Gareth back?
He was he was in the house, I didn't speak to him though.
I just spoke to Shirley.
Erm, Sandy's staying with her for a few days.
What else did she say?
Did you say about us going down or not?
No, I didn't mention it, at the moment.
She's got Sandy staying now 
 
I asked her about the letter and she said she couldn't remember anything about it but she filled in something when they came back from Belfast and she said open it, so I opened it and it's one of these things er if you book to go to Dublin before May the whatever, the end of May, then if you went again in the Autumn, you you get er fifty pounds worth of vouchers or something, you go half price.
It's one of those con things like they tried
Well,
Yes,wh why, I mean why would she go to Dublin 
Dublin 
before.
What else?
And why Dublin when i when they were
When they crossed from
when they crossed from Northern Ireland?
I don't know.
Cos they're trying to sell things all the time.
Anyway, she doesn't want it.
Martin still hasn't got his erm invalidity pension sorted out but he's managing alright at the moment.
He's filled in all the things.
I forgot er I haven't watched the television at all and I forgot to record what d'you call that thing? with the devil in it?
Well it was half way through when I came in 
I forgot to I know I forgot to record it for you.
I think I'll go to bed early tonight 
Does that rain mean it's off the coast or it's in our area?
And was that minus one just the Western side or us as well?
We'll get to know better with the local news after this
Oh well, according to that it's cloud.
At least it's a white cloud, not a black one 
Did you see your mother?
No but I get a message, will you tell my brother, no don't tell my brother, they said, she said to one of the nurses and they said, your brother?
No, my son.
I said well what did don't you have to tell me?
She said, we're not gonna tell you.
So I didn't get to know what what they didn't have to tell 
Oh.
What was she doing tonight?
I don't know 
Mostly dry, sunny spells 
Mostly dry, sunny spells 
Sally was quite intrigued by that 
 

We'll have to get her a set of books.
There's some bottles, jars, for the bottle bank as well 
You know the last time you  the erm, the last time you missed the television pages, television supplement in the  out of the Mirror.
I don't think they believed me.
And it's erm it'll be twice in a month and Chris is back again as our paper boy.
The other one was so useless but according to the er that new manager in the paper shop everyone else got theirs.
So I said I'm sorry but I'm not included in everyone else and he gave me one.
The Radio Times?
Why?
Because it's got all the 
Ah.
Are we staying up all Thursday night?
Well, it's up to you .
Of course, well you could stay in bed all day on Friday  And I could take the kids to schools and go back




I need to go, I need to go into the Co-op and Iceland.
What shall I get for your mother?
I'll get some chocolate biscuits I think.
You would think she would put on a lot of weight, wouldn't you?
I don't think she's fat though
I know she doesn't eat that much but what she is eating i everything's sweet.
Chocolate
Pardon?
Well sh I don't know.
.
if anyone offered me a chocolate when I was nursing, yes I would eat it but there was always .
Which reminds me, I meant to get weighed this morning before I had my breakfast and I forgot.
Remind me tomorrow, before I eat anything.
I think I'd better put some washing in before I go out.
Are those ankle boots dry?
What?
achilles tendon
It's better now.
I d on Wednesday I did the erm  said to me don't do the high heel part if you think it's going to hurt again, you can still have the support under it, but I managed ok.
It didn't hurt.
The pink one's the dish cloth, the little one's the one I wipe up small spills off the floor.
I wonder how Bryony is?
What?
I said, I wonder how Bryony is?
She wasn't very well yesterday.
Every time she got a bump or a knock off one of the others, she was howling instead of clouting them back.
And Richard had, I don't think Richard's very well either.
I said I don't, well stop running the tap.
I said I don't think Richard's very well either.
He cried more than usual.
I wonder what kind of a night Trevor had with them on his own?
What do you think of Granny Jean offering offering again to get Martin from school to save Trevor walking him home?
I don't know.
I like her.
Mhm?
I like her 
I'll just ri rinse my fingers  hand cream on my hands.
That  was used as er, I can't remember what Richard was using it as yesterday
He was poking it 
What're we going to do about these tiles for the step?
To cover this little hole up.
I hate to think what must be down there now.
Oh, where're my other glasses?
and they were cheaper than
Cheaper?
Fenwicks?
Cheaper than what you call it, the place in  I've got the price 
Cheaper than the do it yourself shop up ?
But when can we get through to Newcastle?
Well I, well I'm on a weeks' holiday aren't I, at Easter?
And I've got to go, unless we go to  Tuesday  been to the dentist
Which Tuesday?
After they break up?
That's right.
Which is  next Friday
Yes
So I hope they've sorted out 
The what?lin 
The  appeal at the school that Mrs  was supposed to have let Miss White know so she could send it off to the parents to get the money back  scanner
You didn't tell me about that
I did tell you
You didn't.
All you told me, hang on, ah  
Miss White 
all you told me was that Miss White was retiring but I hadn't to tell anyone, which I haven't done, which I don't intend to do
At the beginning of Lent, Miss White approached me to see what she should do about the  appeal
Ah ha
as she always does, since I said why send money to Great Ormond Street when there was plenty of children  locally?
Yes
So I asked if they wanted anything and she said a bed at the cottage hospital
What good's a bed with no extra nurses?
Well there are special beds
Oh you mean a bed?
You mean a special kind of mattress?
Well she just asked about a bed so I told her that
You mean a bed to replace a bed that there already is?
She just said a bed, so I told her there were special beds that we are very useful in fact very necessary in  cases and we tend to be short of them
Ah ha
and a  bed costs two thousand pounds.
There's another one  can't remember the name of which costs a lot more
Ah ha
Something like five thousand .
Anyway, I said I'd make enquiries as to what was wanted and I said because there's a new children's ward will open at the  hospital and perhaps they would .
So I saw Mrs  and Mrs  said they were aiming to raise money for scanner appeal
Yes
They're also going to have a obstetric  department  first time
A what?
Obstetric and patients
Yes
and that obviously they would be tend to be other children with mother's there so they would need perhaps a play facility there and other children who goes to the E N T clinic can go to the  not just go to the outpatients  casualty
Yes
There's very limited facilities for children to play with.
So, but I also approached Mrs Earl about a .
Anyway, she wanted me to go and see her.
She said there was the scanner appeal, the  talk about all sorts of other things that were possible and there's an arts appeal and for arts facilities in hospital and all sorts of things.
So I went back to Miss White and said about the scanner appeal and she said that would be she thought that would be the best idea, not the .
I also told here it's the diamond jubilee of the hospital and the children from  invited to the hospital that day, that week sorry, it's gonna be a week in June so she wanted to know the details so I asked Mrs  t would she write to Miss White and give her all the details but she thought it would be far better if she went to see her and explain it all.
She was going on Wednesday, I hope she went.
Hold on, which one was going to see which one?
Mrs  was going to see Miss White 
was going to see Miss I see
So then I saw Mrs Irwin on Tuesday  when I was in  and she came up with all sorts of things that she would like for the new  development.
but there's nothing ready, of course.
There's this giant sundial we're going to have in one of the courtyards.
It's a giant one.
It's it's th the building and the blocks of things in in in the in the courtyard that make the time.
So the sun shines  bit of the courtyard when it's eight o'clock and that when it's nine o'clock and so forth.
This is just for the courtyard and these shrubs and things
how?
Where is it going to be seen from?
I presume it's seen from the wards that're behind looking down into this courtyard.
There's also erm a play area for the children's ward.
There's also some murals on the walls, various artists did murals and of course they've got this grant from  for six thousand pound for a  exhibition.
A six thousand pound grant for  exhibition
Well, well, over, over a period it's and other things too but this this set of murals and  are involved in it.
And various other art things.
But also there's the thought of th gar a garden and the children keeping the garden up.
But that's  a long way and they have transport difficulties to cope from here to the  hospital but then I though perhaps, if
I can't see the education committee, with their lack of money, paying for transport for children out here to go to  hospital to do a garden 
 
The the education committee and the school governors have no money at all to pay for that  
I know, I would have thought it was very low priority
well it isn't even a priority, it's nothing, they won't get the money,th they won't pay for  walk to go swimming but I thought that now that the  has acquired that bus and it's gonna be standing around doing nothing for most of the time and it's a twenty nine seater bus.
I mean, the seats come up so that wheelchairs go in, but in between times it's twenty nine seats
And then you need a P S V licence
But that's that's perhaps easily remedied, if you could get a er a driving licence holder to take them, who, a volunteer driving licence holder, among one of the parents or somebody who could take the children at periodic intervals to visit the hospital to do this sort of thing.
So that was a possibility.
But I haven't seen Miss White yet about all these sort of things.
But I did also say to Mrs Earl that a new head will be appointed to take in posts from first of September and it might be better to discuss it with them after I discussed it with Miss White.
I only know one person, I only know one bus driver with children
There's ambulance drivers
And he g he I think their children go to the Catholic school.
Er, this letter from the Multiple Sclerosis
Yes, it says
It says if you've got wheelchairs in you reduce your number of people.
You're no you're not reducing the size of the bus 
well I think that's crazy 
And someone who's been u just used to driving a car, are they going to be able to drive a huge long bus with no extra tuition?
Well
Whether it's got sixteen people in it or twenty nine, it doesn't alter the length of the bus 
Well, I drive the mini bus at the hospital
I know
Which only takes four wheelchairs and of course there's the drivers of the minibus thing at .
I think I I would query that anyway
Would you like to get into a vehicle the length of a bus with no extra tuition 
No, no but 
and just drive it
But but I query as well whether, just because you reduce the number of passengers in it, that you don't need a P S V licence or the equivalent, it isn't a P S V licence but it's it's
have looked into that
It sounds doubtful to me, but anyway, there's the insurance point of view, but anyway  if people whoa re willing to drive can have experience in driving before they take passengers out.
Y'know I didn't drive the minibus until I'd driven it without passengers.
Y'know I I drove the minibus with only somebody in with me before I drove it with people in it
Did you drive 
Oh yes, I drove that, but that was a long time ago that
Yeah, but, you drove that one
I drove it to Ashington and back
You drove  to Ashington in it.
Erm do you think I could throw these roses out?
They're dead, aren't they?
I'm afraid so
It's a shame
Pardon?
They'll they'll have been forced from last Sunday, that was the  wasn't it?
I know, I know but they were dead by about Tuesday.
The yellow one was dead by Tuesday.
What a shame, never mind.
Right, I'll put my make up on
Can you tell me where you want this umbrella tree?
Er 
it needs a saucer of course 
Well there's a huge saucer on the old one
Oh but that's in 
Well
plant pot  altogether
Well, just leave it there for now.
Erm, I'm going to put my make up on and think what I need from the shops
It's ten o'clock
I know.
I'll have to hurry up or you'll get no dinner .
Oh my head feels .
I do I haven't had a headache like this for
I wanted a carton of live yoghurt.
I don't think the live yoghurt I used was any good because, for a start it was fruit flavoured, no it wasn't it was natural, but it said mild flavoured and I don't think it was the proper like the Greek style really live yoghurt that would have started all the fungus growing on it.
It is beginning to look like a proper .
Er, ok, I'll go and get ready
I don't think it matters but if the weather's still going to be freezing at night
I know, but it's got the polythene bag round it still.
I've got it standing on that brick to drain.
Wish I knew what to do with the other azalea.
Some of the erm stems on it look as if as if , not mouldy, but er they're sort of 
Well we'll just have to dig it up and put another one in
green 
Those hyacinths in the corner are taking a long time to come out, aren't they?
I'd have though the tulip  in the coal scuttle, the tulips in the cauldron, I thought they'd had it, they were lying down completely
I know, but they've straightened out
but they've grown up again.
And those forget me nots that're called blue ball and are supposed to have brilliant blue flowers are coming out with tiny pinky purple flowers.
If they're blue, so am I
I wonder if that miniature rose is gonna come up 
the w the one in the tub, no.
Oh yeah, the one in the tub looks ok, it's the other one.
I like the other one best as well, it's the peach one.
When're you going to prune them?
Well, when I plant that other one where you want it planted, that's
I wonder when er  going to have the erm
wheel barrow ready
Yes.
Oh, it said in yesterday's paper that someone had had a wheelbarrow valued at thirty pounds stolen from her back garden and it was somewhere at , where the back gardens aren't particularly accessible.
So ours must have cost, I'm sure that would cost them a lot more than thirty pounds cos it didn't it didn't say a wrought iron wheelbarrow or anything, it just said a wheelbarrow
Well there was er four 
So we'll have to get it
Those four tapes incidentally  Tchaikovsky.
I sold them for fifteen pounds.
What four tapes?
The four tapes  sold them for fifteen pounds in
That who sent you?
That Shirley and Gareth sent me for Christmas
Oh.
I wish you would think of something you would like for your birthday
I've told you, I want a  you need binoculars to go to Rome with 
I can't see very well through binoculars
The Cistine Chapel.
Unless we take those big ones with us.
Oh Jim, they're too heavy
It doesn't need an easier camera, it needs you
What happens with that camera, you've got to rewind it every time.
There's better ones now, automatic rewind, that's what I need.
You have never sat down and read
It's the rewind that's the problem
all the, read all the instructions.
The same with the video camera.
You haven't even watched the tape
When have had an opportunity to watch the tape?
Oh, you must have been able to squeeze half an hour some time or other.
Anyway, I'm going to get ready or we'll never get the shopping done before you go to work.
Anyway 
Right, I'm ready.
Have you locked the back door?
I thought we were walking.
Are we not?
Ok.
Pardon?
I thought we were walking
Well, do you want to walk or do you want to go in the car?
Well I have to go to the paper shop
Well I'll drop you at the paper shop while I go round
Oh, that's a good idea  I hope we can get out at the .
Have you stuck a poster , you haven't, in the back window
No, I haven't
I think more people see the back coming up that way than they do the front window
Yes
but I'll stick one in the back as well 
Hope I've got my glasses with me or I can't see the prices.
Oh, I haven't got my purse.
Oh brilliant.
Is that a squashed ball in the road?
That means I haven't got a key to get back in the house .
If you just stop here I'll run over the road.
Give me the key please.
Thanks.
Oh 
the car wants to be 
Sorry  He didn't look very pleased, did he?
If he was in such a desperate hurry, he could have gone round and gone the other way
We don't usually get a second post on a Saturday
You do, you had a parcel
Oh yeah.
I've dropped my pen under your seat.
I'll get it when we s unless you, have you got another one?
Thanks  Have you seen Kath and Rory recently?
No
I've just realised I haven't either.
When I saw that woman crossing the road, I thought it was here.
Please let us out someone.
Press the button somebody
It wasn't  
Oh, thank you kind sir .
It wasn't what?
It wasn't the cars there, it was the cars turning  at the end of the road
We need some sugar.
We've had no sugar all this week, not that you've noticed.
I made the custard from er sugar cubes.
I didn't know how old the sugar cubes were.
Right.
when we packed up your mother's house.
Right then, I'll met you at the Co-op 
Co=op 
Ok
I can't get out any quicker.
See you later.
Hello, please, and there was no erm television supplement and no comic in the Daily Mirror this morning.
That's the second time in the past four weeks we've had missed that 
Seventeen
That's three sixty five please
Two four five  sixty five
Thank you
Thank you  Thank you.
You haven't given me the bits missing from the Mirror.
Well that's erm 
Well I'm sorry but my Daily Mirror was dev delivered this morning without the television supplement and without the comic and I want them
the actual page?
The whole supplement that come on Saturdays
That part
That part wasn't in?
This part was not in.
And there's usually a free comic as well, and that wasn't in either.
And that's the second time in the past four weeks that those pieces have been missing from it
Well 
No, I don't need the whole paper.
I've got the rest of it.
I canna gi' you one under there though
Well you're going to have to because when I pay for a paper, I want it to be complete, so I want that piece and I want th that piece, no wait a minute, where is it?
Which is the television?
Where does this start?
That's forty change.
Thanks a lot.
There we are.
Right, so I've got the two pieces that are missing from my paper
Well, I've already paid for mine so I'm going to get
Well, you'll just have to tell them that it's missing but when I've paid for a newspaper I expect to get all the pieces that I've paid for and I've already paid for mine, so this I'll take.
Thank you 
Hello 
Hello 
Hello 
raises a lot of money through sponsorship  few people committing money every month.
Will it go in?
Yeah, I'm sure it will.
Thank you
Thank you 