

What's the kettle for?
Erm I'm not, well I was boiling it for this
What?
thing, did you want it?
No, no
No, I'm just, I'm just using it I'll knock it off now
 

You wanting to vacuum that
for me  oh shush up Paul 
Come on Paul get a move on
I'm a zombie
Pardon?
I'm a zombie
Oh come on stop this
stop it  what's the matter?
 

That's a good way of breaking your neck that  er stop it, just get up, turn round, turn round 
Whoever put this plant on the stairs
Yeah, whoever put this plant on the stairs didn't realize that we've got silly people like you in the house
But it, it keeps on falling over
whoever's put that plant on the stairs doesn't realize we've got silly people like you in the house, just have a look
Oh you silly 
no just look
I can see what he's doing
he's being a zombie, so he's coming downstairs with two sleeping bags over the top of his head and knocking everything over, just look at it
Well he can vacuum up again
He can do the lot  and he can grow up as well, fifteen and he's be playing at being zombies
get that from up here  now do you want me to clean out the chicken?
I said do you want me to do the chicken?
Yeah, alright then
Er I'll do it
er that's not got any giblets in
Do you want, do you want
have you got an onion for it?
In here 
Here there you are poppet.
Oh yes please I
   

Are you going to the hospital this morning?
No
Well if you do it'll give us a chance to find out whether he's coming home today or tomorrow, and it'll give your mum a chance to get back to Southwold 
Isn't it likely that he is coming back?
Pardon?
Is, isn't it likely he'll
Well, we don't know till we're told do we?
I think you could find that out over the phone
I don't think so
for any news
I don't think so
pardon?
Do they always smell those things?
Did he think so last night?
No 
No it's not that, what I'm thinking is, if he's coming out tomorrow 
And he's got to
you'll need to get back to the bungalow
I will
to sort things out won't you?
I will, keep him
so the more time you've got to do that, the easier it'll be for you won't it?
Oh yes
How many sugars do you have in coffee is it one?
 
Do you have one sugar in coffee?
I'll just ring up and, and see
The only trouble is Arthur the trouble is, there
you get more
is, how do we get Philip back?
Oh
no, well I can walk
get him back and  can he drive your car on your insurance?
Yeah your insurance
Me?
No, well I can, but it's only third party fire and theft then, just hope the fully comp goes, can you get some milk please?
I think it's different milk
It's not is it?
you know where the other one is, it's still at the front door
So what do you suggest Arthur?
Well, the sooner we know what's going to happen
if he's going to come out, they'll be coming out, well it's Thursday today, yeah, so be coming out Friday, yeah?
Yeah
did, did
 
They won't send him out Saturday or Sunday
They did they sent people out Saturday and Sunday 
Oh they sent people out Saturday and Sunday 
Did they?
they did Arthur
Oh yeah
I thought they kept them in over
No they sent them out Saturday, Sunday
The only thing is Arthur that the, it's Philip, can you grab his car?
Or not 
Well I'll check on my insurance
If you can drive his car over I get it, it's no problem, it seems we might all be talking above ourselves
Yeah, as soon as we know something we can start making decisions can't we?
Otherwise we're, we're in no man's land 
Was he saying Mr  in there
Mr  round this morning yeah
Oh well they, they, give them time, it won't be till
Yeah
he won't of been round
it's half past ten
he won't of been round yet
how d'ya mean, nine o'clock, hour and a half
yeah I suppose
  

mm  Paul
Yeah
that plant, those stairs
Hello er how's Mr ?
get out of there and get it done 
Has he had the results of his second biopsy through?
He still hasn't had it through, cos we were  yes, yes, big improvement, it was just that we were arranging visiting and things like that and er whether there's any need to do certain things, so er, but he's still on a, he's come off all his painkillers  his morphine's out completely, that's fantastic isn't it?
Yeah and he's, but it is quite difficult to kind of withdraw isn't it  oh not know, oh that's super, well  oh I thought it was quite difficult to withdraw from  no
never used it to kick, lord no  yes that's lovely, now we can organise our day, right, thank you very much indeed, right thanks a lot, bye, bye .
Good news
He's off his painkillers
he's off his morphine completely
Good
how about that?
How about that?
Beautiful
Well that's good because it means that
beautiful
whatever it was, isn't hurting him any more
True
so
so
it's a step in the right light
it's, I think it's another step, I think that's a, an enormous stride 
Oh, I
It look like it's all clear then doesn't it?
I mean
Ah, well
the painkillers, you, they'd have to 
I think it would be, it'll come as 
it comes a hell of a shock now I think it was
put that champagne in that fridge
I don't know
oh honestly
Yeah, put it in the fridge
Paula all this anxiety 
All these painkillers
all this drainage
Going to the toilet as well normally yesterday he said
Really?
Yeah
Oh isn't it wonderful 
brilliant, don't drop it 
it is, it is a miracle that
I'll just brush the dust off
Yeah we've had a, we've had a plant over, we don't want the champagne over 
Oh I don't want to be silly it's just a miracle  oh God, it's normally thirty seconds that's enough
Are you putting er pieces of bacon on?
Not at the beginning
Oh you don't put it until the end?
No because it goes, it goes too hard 
I put that onion there 
I've got it in
You've got it in, have you got your
 
I can smell something
Oh thank God
Off his painkillers, my God 
Here don't forget these 
What you doing?
I take that off
Yeah, but that belongs to chicken shape together
Oh you keep yours, yours on ah, you sure the giblets out it


Mother


look on the packaging it says without giblets 
I always check it 
She always cooks it in the plastic bag though
No I, what I do is I test it, I clean it out even though they've done it
It's been washed out
because they leave bits in the
haven't you watched her doing it
Ah?
this morning, have you seen Paula doing it this morning?
She's been cleaning it out
I've seen 
 
It's alright, she won't let you catch anything
no but I say, but surely sometimes they, they have left them behind you know
Oh
Are we using these love?
Yes
if you put the
Yeah
put the peelings in the cupboard and then
for the guinea pigs  let's go and see how Paul's doing.
Oh is that it
It's brilliant news  I think he's gonna be home very, very soon now
Yeah I'll get a
very soon
If a, if he, if it was the
was a possibility
Once this biopsy's cleared, he's off his painkillers, they, they were his big drugs weren't they?
Yes
They've got, they've got his bowels going 
he might be home the weekend
Well I think
it's possible
he might be home tomorrow you know
No, I think they'll have to get
well that's today, once, once they've cleared that
Yeah, well
is there any need then to keep him in?
Oh no  oh no  oh no they'll decide I mean Mr  will know, they'll know what they're doing, I mean they know what they're doing, I don't know what they're doing, I'm not a doctor, I'm not God, nothing
yeah
how many times has he, has he done this to us now?
Over the years 
Don't tell me Arthur I go through all these panic stations and


and
life's one big trauma with him
Keeps you on his toes
That was the week when Peter came that day when they had that very, very ill
no you, I don't use a pan you use a
and Peter came in the morning, I never thought anything I'd been listening to the radio, I heard there was a big accident on the road, a car accident
Mm.
on the road
It'll just go in there
Peter came in and it, nothing sunk, er, nothing sunk, I'm doing these
well I'll give you a hand, give you a hand
er nothing sunk that there was something the matter
Yeah
and Peter walks in and Andrew said to him do you want a coffee Peter?
He said yes Mrs  well then he followed me in the kitchen, stood behind me and I thought what the hell's he hanging about for, I'm gonna take it to him and the, his son- in-law was there
Yeah
and he stood in the kitchen but he said nothing
His son was there you said
His son was with him cos they, I mean
Who is Peter?
One of the fellows that used to do contract work
mm
and it's, John  what happen was he finished, I'll have a bowl this side, a pile this side where they're
I can do, I can cope with that, you're alright, here
He stood there, no I don't mean that, I mean me rubbish, oh dear, and he said erm  er, sorry, he started sipping his coffee, he never said anything and then he says I've got some bad news for you and I said oh my God no, car accident, I just heard it on the radio  he said no, then he told me, oh God I nearly
What, what, what was that one then?
That was when he was buried in that lime at
Oh in the
in the
How many men were buried in that with him though?
They still haven't got their compensation, the fellows that were really injured, the chap that lost his eyes, was 
Lost his what?
His, his eyes?
His eyesight, a young fellow they still haven't 
How young was he?
Well, well, he, he, with a young family, wasn't he
In his thirties?
No, a bit older
Forties
Yeah, he's got
Yeah
a young family like yours
Yeah
and er
How, low long ago is it then, the, the accident?
It's nearly three years, but you see
Three years
oh it's been more
it's more than three years
it's more
you've been down here two haven't you?
Yeah
So
more than that
I bet it's, no, I bet it's more than that
and er
and they haven't had the compensation yet?
No
None of them?
No
Did father get any compensation?
Oh he didn't apply, he never, must admit


nothing wrong with me
not much 
I'm alright
not much
I'm alright  I'm alright that's what I said to him you silly bugger you should of applied, even if you didn't
Oh no, no, if he's fit, you shouldn't of
Well then
no, come on 
how do you know that this isn't the result of concrete in his phlegm and lung
No it was lime not concrete
Oh whatever it was, anyway nothing matter with him
Yeah
so
Yeah
anyway, it, it, what happened was that, you see the Irish  it was a funny set-up because the Irish people were responsible for the erection of the, and the supply of everything, well they've gone out of 
Irish?
The 
The 
Irish 
Which Irish , is that a company or something?
They were called 
Yeah
Yeah
Oh
and ha, they were the ones that did the design and everything you see
Yeah
and then they computer people, and it, both the firms have gone bust, and each one was suing from the other for, er, insurance
Oh yes, yeah
and the insurance won't pay, won't pay out the claim
Typical, yeah
until  took more responsibility because it was outside contractors you see
Yeah
you understand
But it was a take on site then or was it, what was it?
The site belonged to, er,




was it, it was the  was it?
Yeah
Yeah
redesigned with computerized site
Yeah
so therefore the Irish people designed it and the Irish people gone bust and out of business
Yeah, yeah
the  the chap at the  at the computer place died
Oh my God, hmm
his partner


they were, they, his firm was folded up because, yeah it was a sudden death, he was only in his forties
Oh my God
and er, er that was a shock you see, because he, his partner then lent  mm went into liquidation, well whatever they do, I don't know
Oh
they went bust or something and they, cos his, and his wife was a partner, the chap's wife was one of the, one of the directors or partners
Mm
how they do it, you know, for er, for income tax and what have you, and of course one, one blamed the other
Yeah
and of course the insurance people would not pay out on either, wiped their hands of it because they reckoned it was nothing
So  did the Pontius Pilate bit yeah 
so consequently they're still fighting and the chap still hasn't got a penny
And he's got no sight at all 
Yes
or his
he's got partial sight in one eye, have kept him on
That's good of them
Brilliant int it?
Yeah
Of course he can't do the job that he was doing and he'd got potential of the future with, you understand what I mean?
His
Promotion
Yeah, well yeah, I mean his
Yeah
his, he can't drive, he can't
Yes, got
his potential working potential
When did your dad have that accident Paula at er, you know with the lime?
I don't know 
About four years ago 
Well, your, your mum's been down here two years hasn't she?
It must be four, but you see daddy went to the 
I'll ask father 
Oh don't mention it he just er 
I don't know why 
it was way back
that's, that's one of the nightmares 
One of, they haven't paid any compensation out
that's one of the nightmares he gets you know
Still?
Oh yeah
What being buried?
when he came home 
Buried him alive 
oh you don't know what he was like when he was home, he was, I mean I've never seen daddy er sort of, occasionally cry and shaking
What cover himself up?
Oh yeah
What when he was asleep or when he was
No, during the day
During the day?
Don't ever tell him, my God
Oh my God, I didn't realize that 
he'd just sit in the chair, oh yeah, he used to sit and 
 
why don't er what cowing?
you know he, he was, if he, that's, that's possibly one of the nightmare he's having that he doesn't 
That's possibly what?
One of the nightmares he's having
What when he's on the drugs, some of these painkillers?
Oh yeah
He's get he's reliving this 
he's, he's you see, he
this burying alive 
 
and he, of course that's what he does, you see him do it, oh yeah when daddy's not, it's
It all comes back
oh I, I mean, he sit inside, normally he'd have the present, he chucked his glasses off, he stuffed all his hankies, he had about ten hankies in his pocket 
Yeah 
he filled all down his mouth and
He stuffed them all down his mouth and his nose, all his hankies?
Oh yeah to stop
To stop the lime, the dust getting in, yeah
That's why he got away without too much damage
Ah
cos you see
and the others didn't?
No, because he had the present, how quick thinking
You could of copied that
his quick thinking
Mm
so immediately he knew if that comes I choke, if that comes I'm blind
But he did more than choke if he, if he inhaled erm, lime
Oh yeah
it burns your lungs doesn't it?
Well you see one of the l one of lads, naughty, he had to finish, but then he had a bad chest before
Ha and that finished him off completely won't it?
he panicked and they had a hell of a time with him because he panicked in there, in the hospital and there was a, going berserk and that  but you see daddy didn't, oh there's nothing
in there, and he
In the hospital?
Yeah
Yeah
but when he came home then he
the shock
he was able to
the shock hit him
he was able to let it go
But you know, when you said there's been no damage to him then, physical damage there hasn't has there?
But psychological damage
Oh yeah
I didn't, I didn't realize he was
Oh yeah
he came home and he cowed
Oh yeah, I mean I had a horrible time with him for some time and it just, just 
How long's that?
A cou couple of weeks?
A couple of weeks yeah and then he used to cry and he was like that and then he got it out of his system didn't he?
God, I didn't realize this Paula
What?
Your mum's telling
Oh don't ever tell him
What?
No, no, about your dad when he came home
Don't
Don't ever tell him
you know from dad's, when the lime went
Yeah
be sitting in the chair wide awake and suddenly cowed and cover himself up 
That's suppose I think 
he's wide awake for no reason, crying for weeks afterwards 
Oh I think, well he would do
Why?
It's like it's shock 
Did you, did you know it though?
No, but it would be shock
It would be shock
if you'd been buried alive you think
if you were buried alive, I mean, Uncle Nat when he used, when he was in, in  Uncle Nat when he was out in the war, he used to come back home and he'd only to hear a siren and he'd throw himself on the floor
Oh yes, yes
covered himself and, and fluff out, he was psychologically
the war
Mm, mm
and he, I mean er, he could, he would never showed nowt, because he was at, he had men in, he was in charge of men, like father, would never show it to them in hospital
Mm
but the minute he can come home
And relax
and release himself
relax and release himself
but, for some time he, and it, it just used to let him get it out of his system
My God
and say something
I didn't know that
I think when he was so near to death I thought bloody hell I bet it's that nightmare but I've not mentioned, don't mention it 
He keeps saying it's the same one 
don't mention it 
No I won't do 
cos it'll, it'll come out, he'll say to me Sunday when were at home
Mm
he'll say, you know that nightmare I keep having, it was that one, he will he'll say, and I'll say to him well 
Same one, same one coming back 
if, because, he saw what was going on, in a split second he saw what was happening, I mean it was, it was
when we found his glasses and that and things they were all buried and, and Peter said to me I've got this of John's, I brought Jonathan's, I couldn't care less as long as I've got John you know 
Yeah 
and er
yeah
he said, well, I know he's on about his glasses again ain't he?
Mm
But I think possibly as Philip said his drugs are affecting his eyesight, but then they'll need, he'll have to have them tested and, and then, because he was on yesterday about them again
yeah, but your eyes are changing all the time, so you, you should go back and have them tested regularly shouldn't you?
Oh yes, now, I get even get the woman to come up and 
Does he have to pay for it now?
Oh yeah
Really?
Yeah
Mm
you see the trouble is Philip does, because he just  you don't tell me, unless you tell lies  you think  if you tell lies
Then you can get it free
you can get it free, but you don't
You shouldn't have to pay anyway should you?
but anyway
Basic thing like your sight 
that doesn't mat listen
Yeah, but, but 
as far as I'm concerned Arthur, John's more important to me than a bloody pair of glasses
Oh yeah, yeah
I mean, and it's the same with that business 
No, but it's 
he'll most probably come out with it when he gets
Come out quietly, yeah
Oh yeah he never says anything at all, till this happening and he'll say, he'll say, you know about the nightmare I had it was that one, oh I know I mean, but it, it was so
I mean you, you have it, you be in a situation like that
Oh yeah, I, but I didn't realize you know with him the old man, the toughy, yeah
Yeah but if you, if you
No but he, he does put out
Oh yes he does 
out that air doesn't he, that sort of
Yeah, but you don't sort of you don't let on 
nothing gets to me 
you don't let on, you don't, you just don't
But he does do that doesn't he?
He does say 
In everything
Oh yeah, I mean that's it, he does, he just doesn't say I mean he, he just keeps it to himself
Yeah
and then he, you see he's got, at home he's got, he can release things cos there's nobody else around
Mm, yeah
you know, but that was a nightmare really, well I didn't, I won't be surprised if that isn't the one he's having
Oh God, see what Paul's doing, if he's up 
I'm looking
where's Paul?
Upstairs, still in the bath 
doing what?
Ringing that order through
 

Paula do you want anything else done love?
No that's it
Is that f is that our lunch, dinner?
What, is that for tonight or 
Are we having it tonight?
will we be having this?
We'll have it for dinner
We're having it hot
For dinner?
For dinner
Right  so if we get down to the hospital this afternoon
Well
Mr  would of seen him this morning
Yes
so we'll get down this afternoon then, alright, fair enough  at least we know what we're doing now  Your bedroom's a tip.
Yeah I know, I'm working
oh God
What you doing?
Maths
Maths, it looks like English
Yeah, it's really notice you can change it, cos what it does is it, oh hell  you can edit the colours of everything so if, if you can't understand, cos sometimes it goes over itself, like grey means normal writing, yellow means bold and underlined and pink 
That's about your name at the top
erm pur erm blue that 
yeah 
means italic
italic, purple
erm upper case
upper case
twelfth subscript
Why doesn't it just, put it in upper case then?
You can but it's, oops, you can, but
Oh that's how it looks
That's how it'll be
that's more difficult to read then isn't it?
Yeah
Mind you, you've got all your enters in there haven't you?
Yeah, er you can turn them off
Yeah  and you've got all these what, what are those Ts at the side?
That means you've got 
On the screen 
a tab stop
You got what?
A tab stop
A tab stop, what does that do?
in the, if I go down to
what does it do a tab stop?
You see, you see that there
Ener yeah, energy yeah
the big space after energy
Right, yes
it, it gets everything in line, see how they're all in line?
Yeah
Just hit that there and put a couple of spaces
ad that's what the tab stop does?
Yeah see them all the tab regardless of the, the length, like the one after iron will be a long one
Mm, mm
and after calcium will be a short
What about vitamin C?
There isn't one
There isn't one, I'll just put a space in
and the one after fat, yes, yeah 
That's a long one 
yeah
and it indicates you put one in cos sometimes it's confusing if you've put in a tab and you don't know what's 
What happens if you want to edit it and you've got tabs in, does it make it more difficult?
Does it throw, throw things out of line?
Yeah, yeah it can do if you forget, so it's handy if you have a T besides it's handy that
Just to remember, remind you?
Ah
Does it print it?
No, all these characters are not printed
So can, can 
I think 
sorry can you have your tab stops on?
You know like you can have your enters in
Yeah
but not showing your tabs, not showing those Ts, but there, can you put them on and off?
On the screen
Er, yeah, how'd you do it?
Can't remember, erm that it?
That's it, it's gone, yeah.
Has it moved everything in?
It looks different  oh press them again, put them in 
Oh I thought I had
Oh I, what have you done?
There
What have I done?
I don't know it looks different doesn't it?
I think I copied from the old lot of
have you?
No
No, it just look different when you took them off
Yeah it, it's
 

Er alt, turns them on and off, yes it did, it does it then
What turns them on and off?
Alt F four
Alt F four, yeah
What's happened to it
I don't know Tony
they've disappeared
Yeah 
Control F seven
control F seven
load quick  er
 

Well you've saved it haven't you?
Oh shit, I've just lost the doc 
What you lost?
impossible
What have you lost Ton?
Oh God, control F seven, transfer load set
take your time, take your time, don't panic
I've just lo 
you haven't lost it
Yes I have
What have you lost?
I don't understand that alt F four meant to change, it's not meant to do that to it
You've lost your headings, or the, or the work itself?
No, I've lost the, the whole work itself
How?
Had you saved it?
Yeah and it's lost it again for me, oh shit
Well it can't of
Yes it can, it's gone, loads of work, ah shit,
well how can it lose it, if it's saved it?
get out of it quick, erm, quit
Can't you get it back?
I'll try 
Take your time, take your time, don't get annoyed with it
It does do backups
it, it's done a backup, yeah?
Erm, yeah
Well don't lose this then 
Oh the document, the document's longer with the two, let's try it.
Try it and see what happens  there we are, well done
Control
go  is it there?
No, I know I'll get it back
It's not there?
I'll get it back, wait, erm how do transfer, merge 
What about your options no?
Erm
that, transfer, merge
erm, maths
 

Is it there?
No  it's got no other
then what?
Arthur 
Calm down
Arthur
if you've saved it Ton it's got, it's got to be in there hasn't it?
No it isn't
Just a minute
I'm just ringing Mr  up
Mr  who's he?
Shall I
Erm
oh yes, well he said he'd phone us Paula
I know but he, we've got it here early March and we said that we'd do his paperwork for the the afternoon 
Have you got it back?
It was there all the time 
paperwork for the what's it called?
It was there all the time?
Yeah
You poor thing 
gets rid of
What's it got rid of?
erm
See you panicked then didn't you, ah?
that's stupid, yes
Yeah but you panicked didn't you?
you know how it gets rid of the Ts, it gets rid of everything it's showing there 
Oh
it's a bit daft
what down, all down that side?
Yeah
So if you put the Ts back, if you put the tab sign back on it brings all those vitamin Cs, fibres and fats up as well 
Yeah, yeah 
really?
Yeah, no, no, I just pressed the wrong button 
That's a weakness that isn't it?
I thought it was
that's good, I like that
to get that back, that's outlining, you know I merged something on the end that I don't want to, it's deleting
Not bad
and you can insert it again 
subconsciously been misspelt go back to that, you're showing 
What?
some cracking spellings in here
That's, that's fall back again 
where's, where's that subconsciously?
There
Oh
I'm gonna get to do it right
That's subconsciously  Tony
Wait, wait a sec
go home page up 
Do you want me to go through this for spellings?
Balanced God lad
No, cos I'm not really balanced, there look relief of
does this have a spell check on it?
add to
God, there's some great spellings in here 
 
Pardon?
is wrong
Shh
Have you picked up that plant?
Yes
Yes
I have actually
you wanna grow up a bit you know, how old are you?
Er, that and
well
what was?
Zombies
Zombies
it's Gary 
How do you spell conscious?
Conscious?
C O N C I O U S 
Try it
Is that right up on the screen there, conscious?
No
Ah
Conscious
that's what you've just spelt
C O N C I O U S 
Yeah, can't find it, it won't be found either Tony
Con 
That's right, the C O N part's right, conscious objector
I don't know
that's right, you're closer
Conscious
er science
conscious, okay go on then
Wait take that out
go on, try it, try it see what happens
Mm, I'm gonna look at that and see what it gives me
That's conscience yeah, but where's conscious?
Conscious
See the first what, two,fi first five letters 
What?
of conscience, you want conscious, well you can go up to the I and then it's conscious, you've got conscience, conscious
Oh damn
Mr T  manager, what's the name of your company?
freebie, another freebie
No, I've just rung up Viking to get some box sealing tape and, and this here, he, he said is your name T  manager, what is the name of your business?
What is the name of
It's T 
That's what Douglas said was that it's T 
So what's the name of the business?
T  
I said it isn't, no
It's T 


T  Trading
T  Trading and what is the nature of your, I said we're a charity, how many people are involved?
How many paid?
Oh
Oh it's gone into that computer now
Yeah the thing is it's, it's, it was, I got the stuff, paid for it by Access it'll be with you tomorrow, I got a free
You're wheezing again
Messiah
I got a free, a free one and I bought an extra one
Necessary
you wanna see the spellings in here, you want to leave them in Ton
Oh Ton
it'll give somebody a good laugh 
I thought this was
N E S S
necessary, necessary
N E S S
like knife, yeah and scissors 
I'm not surprised nec nec necessary's not found, is that your spell check?
Necessary, necessary
Necessary, oh
N E C  it's not double C


it's not double, your mother's worse than you neces 
No Tony 
E S  
Necessary, aha
You, it's coming now, isn't it?
S
Yes
No 
that's alright, it'll find that
It'll find that
It's close, there you are


Knackers


Oh God have you seen it, you, you want to see balance as well 
Essential
Go on then, spell balance
Oh it's at Tony's
fibre
Fibre is repeated
Roughage, oh God 
What's that?
Roughage
 
no 
 
no leave him, leave him, leave him 
Oh damn I've got
easier
you've got a letter too many there, can you see it?
Yeah
Balance, what, the E's wrong in the middle


What's that?
Break time
Break time, that's okay, break time
Erm add document
Should add it to dictionary
Questionnaires, there you are, you've got it there  possibilities, that's okay
No it's not, that is
It is
Consuming
Consuming, what have you got in there?
Double M?
Yeah
Else, else's


Random
God ain't that clever?
Randomly, it's not clever at all 
Yes it is
It's like that
Yes, it's just looking for certain letter groups
And
Yeah it's quicker
 
and if you start with three or four letters in 
Paul just hang those up in his wardrobe please, hang them up I've ironed them
Have you got balance now?
Healthy sensible eating has reached, has reached finic 


Have you read through it?
No
You should read through it every so often 
Yes spell check 
I will do 
in this,as more and more people become concerned with their health and the effect of what they eat has on it  I'd think about your English in that and how you put it together, that there sentence 
Yeah, I know, I've got, I've got to read through all this 
And that's your introduction the first sentence that somebody's going to read, yeah?
I know, I've got to, I've got to read through all of this
Okay, health conscience, not, it isn't health conscience people, it's health conscious people
Yeah I know
You're conscious of your health not conscience of your health  health conscious
Where?
Fourth line down, first word
Oh yes 
that's it, try do it, blow your nose rather than sniffle please,balanced diet in order to provide their bodies with enough.
But not too much ingredients, essential for some of the most necessary substances for a healthy life include   have you got whisky in here as well?
Right that's about it, save that 
Healthy substances for a healthy life, you're very good on the, is it, is it the protein he's good on?
Vitamin C 
Got too much vitamin C 


Too much vitamin C
I don't know where it comes from
I wonder if it makes your brain go doolally though
No, it means you're clever
Supposed to innit, yeah, they did a study on that didn't they?
They fed these children with these tablets that would make them go  and the parents were rushing out and buying tablets to make the children intel the children intelligent.
Just imagine that for, taking half a dozen before you going into Mr  's geography lesson.
I'm going to read through this properly
I'm glad you are 
out loud, I'll write it first and then I'll check it 
Not with an audience  right, go on 
What it can't do erm, can't check up grammar mistakes
True
A machine to get that does that, is a good program as it is, it's three hundred quid normally but it's a copy Dudley gave it to me
Watch your toes
it's pirated
It's pirated is it, oh God
Well he, are you gonna fork out three hundred quid?
Paul you gonna shock me?
What's that?
He started his homework you see
Yeah I have
Yeah, tomorrow
Tomorrow's too late
No it's
Manana
tomorrow never comes 
 

Those curtains in there Paula the side, you know that track I repaired the other night
Drop again
it's gonna come down again, the we cos you're stacking stuff against it
I've just moved it all away
But did you notice?
Yeah it is, what it's done 
It's fallen against it, it's gonna rip it down again 
push the bed, the bed had been pushed up and the stuff had tumbled and I just moved it all away
Yeah, draw the curtains back
A window could be opened in there er Paula
It's like an oven in there 
I see this piece in the, about Southwold beach huts
What about them?
Well you know the Council, Waveney Council
Yeah
you see they want people not to se not to sell them privately
Why not?
Because they say, they've got a waiting list on er on the Council
Yeah
and they've got to sell them on the waiting list
Really?
and Southwold are up in arms with it 
Who's beach huts are they?
The people whose they are?
The people 
Or do they rent them off the Council or what?
No what happens is you buy the beach hut but you rent them on, you rent the plot
So the Council are saying although it's yours, the hut's yours, the land is ours
The land is ours 
we want a say in whoever has these 
have these beach huts
not, not the price that they go at 
and you can't sell the hut, no and you can't sell them privately, anybody you want to
So who's handling the sale then the Council or est cos I've seen these things 
The Council 
in estate agents
Yeah
have you?
Yeah, but you see they sell them privately to, erm they'll, like you'd sell your house
Yeah
privately
Yes
The Council wants to make out that you've got to let them have the first option
Of buying it from you
of buying it from you
and then they sell it on?
Yeah, they've got to wait 
They've got to make some money out of that haven't they?
Otherwise it's costing you lot over at Southwold a lot of money 
and people in Southwold are objecting because they say 
I don't blame them
I don't blame them, that it is right that people should, should have the right to buy from the Council, but I don't think you should 
Yeah there's that side to it 
I mean it's 
You see some of them only live in a small cottage with no garden and that's an extension to their home, you can go down there with the children
Yeah.
and enjoy  they've bought the hut to enjoy
Mm.
the privilege of, of them like you would have a shed in your garden
Yeah
a shed, a 
except in your own garden
Yes
it's your property, it's your land it's 
that's correct
Whereas down at the erm
The land belongs to the 
down at the erm seaside it belongs to the Council 
it belongs to the Council 
Yeah, what a pity
yeah 
What's it saying in the paper then about it?
Has, it just a report or is it a comment?
Oh they've had a meeting you see because people in Southwold have checked
Yeah.
you see, the fact they say they should be allowed to sell
Yeah.
and to who they want to  if they want to 
I thought, I though Southwold Council was a Conservative Council
No we belong to Waveney that's
Ah is it Waveney Council that's decided it?
It's Waveney you see we belong to Waveney 
District
District
Ha, yet the Southwold Parish Council, I've seen it in there, er there's been a  some vandalism on the golf course, you know on the common and er 
I didn't know about that
Yeah it's in there somewhere, and they're complaining, you know the people who play golf, the golf club are complaining, and the, the Council are saying it's the Southwold Council, so maybe it's the Parish Council, they're saying that er yes it's our responsibility this club and we must look after it and we must find the culprits and so on, it's in there somewhere cos I read it this morning
Yeah I thought I 
cos it happened over the weekend digging up holes in the erm in the golf course.
What this last weekend?
Yes it's er, I'm sure it's in there somewhere  yeah  I wonder what will happen then  with the beach huts  it could be  it could be that you've got to get the, you can still sell them private but, and the Council will, will just say yes or no 
No, it just said them you will offer it to them, no you've to offer it to them first because they've got a waiting list of people wanting
Right
to buy, to be, it's, you see it's the
or something
You see, with all their beach huts all the way along the coast, is that, or is it Southwold that they're doing it with?
No, they must own Southwold, Kessingland, Pakefield and straight into Lowestoft, all that
That strip
yeah
They own the fo what they call the
but why, you see er the end of Southwold when East Bramont went into the sea you know
Yes when the cliffs, when the cliffs collapsed, yeah 
they wouldn't shore that up because there are only about eight houses up there, so it doesn't pay them to  
Although they own that bit 
Al although they own that bit
or are responsible for it
or are responsible
Yeah
But there again I don't know how much of the er, whose fault that was, whether they should of done, I mean it's, it's the same as Oldbury and Dunwich isn't it, how that just went into the sea, they let it happen
Mm.
they won't, they won't,th they don't intend to let it happen at all there
Mm
I knew some 
but there's, there's a
Yeah
a village isn't there really, a small town a village 
you see and now at the harbour they've done that  harbour mouth so that Walberswick will not be affected
Mm, mm
oh well then
Yeah, but again there is, there are more houses at Walberswick than there were at East Bra is it Bravance or Badance?
Oh yes, East Bramont.
Eastern Bramont yeah
Well the reason they wouldn't do it there, the cost is so great in comparison with the number of houses
Mm, yeah, yeah they're on about erm, below erm, not Thorpeness, where's the one with the, Orford isn't it, Orford castle
Oh yes
there's the farmland below the castle you know going towards erm Felixstowe that way, they say the land down there, the farm, that low-lying farmland is very susceptible to flooding and the coast is being eroded
That's correct
oh they are, is it our Poll Tax?
Yes
What have you got?
Go on then
Oh you're not too bad
What've you got?
yeah
Erm, get meant, get the right one ain't it?
Er two four seven forty three 
Two hundred and forty seven a head?
No, two four seven forty three, yes
Per head, yeah
that's not bad
that's cheaper than our rates
They're cheaper than the rates, yes.
I feel sorry for these old folk who are over here though, on the other side of the road, two forty seven for them
Well that's what
That's what's wrong with it though, isn't it?
That's what we
Mind you there again it's cheaper than it should be because we're paying it on VAT, you know, it, er, they must think we're fools
Two four seven forty seven, you're quite low actually because some 
Well there's a general election coming up, it's a Tory Council, they're not gonna raise it as, as high as they possibly can are they?
I think that fee is excellent, if they'd of kept it at that, I think most people could afford it.
But you're paying for it in your tax,you you'd paid a whopping subsidy on it, it's a big con.
Yeah but the first year was, was an awful amount really
Well that was, well it should've gone up from that, what did they do with the VAT stuck two and a half percent on it and said there you are we're gonna hold the Poll Tax down, how?
By making you pay more on your VAT, so we can knock the Poll Tax bills down, you're still paying for the damn stuff, ah, ha
What's happened to your paper 
why don't this country wake up?
about er
I don't know what's happened today I think it's, they've run out of 
They've run out of ink or something 
out of ink, yeah
Ron  has sent us a copy then
Yeah it must of been a few they'd got through
Mm 
It's the biggest con that Poll Tax thing go er the amount going down  that this lot have pulled on us and everybody's fell for it hook, line and sinker 
 
ha
the first year was horrible but last year was 
Look, if, if somebody charges you three hundred pound, and you say that's too much and you complain and they knock it down to two fifty, but they say but we want you to pay fifty pounds on something else, extra, do you think the two fifty's fair, eh?
Not really, but  
No, well that's all they've done 
all this paper is
there's about six erm, six sheets in it ain't there?
There er, more like ghost printing 
Ha, that's funny, bad news for people paying fifty pound per week rent, you could buy your own home for forty nine pounds per week 
Sounds like Marks and Spencers there 
 
forty nine pounds, ninety nine
Woolworths nineteen and eleven 
Yeah, we won't charge you a pound for this we'll charge you nineteen and eleven 
Oh do
it's under ten pound, yeah nine pounds ninety nine 
The funniest, the funniest thing about that was, a friend of ours he always remembered when Woolworths opened in Oldham
Yeah
and they had a, er, for the opening news you see everything in Woolworths was sold for sixpence
But was it Woolworths or Marks who had that little slogan, was it, nothing, not a was it not a penny, nothing more than a penny or not a thruppence 
Anyway, they, they put on their window er
Yeah go on
for er opening day
everything's a sixpence and a, they have this great big display of buckets in one of the windows, sixpence
Sixpence a bucket 
there was a little hardware shop just round the corner
Mm
and his were fivepence ha'penny


and there was this long queue outside
Woolworths for sixpence 
Woolworths to buy buckets for sixpence
and could've gone round the corner for
Bought them for fivepence ha'penny
See there's, there's the con again you see, it's the same thing, you can convince people they're do they're doing brilliantly and charge them more 
But we said we, we couldn't give over laughing about that and they thought it was hilarious because it, it's like C & A's they used to always say, nineteen and eleven or nine and eleven or, it was always the
Well Marks and Spencers look at 
Yeah 
Do you ever see a price in Marks and Spencers that doesn't have ninety nine P on the end of it?
Yeah that's right
It must cost them more in time in getting that penny out you know
One penny out of the till 
till yeah, crazy, well look at the erm, the price of sugar the other day you were talking about that, what was it, fifty odd P?
Fifty nine P
And in the supermarket it's what about?
Erm sixty eight
Sixty eight, yeah, and that's a corner shop
That's a corner shop
you go to the big supermarkets
Yes
and you think it's gonna be cheaper, it's gotta be cheaper because it's wherever 
There's a reason the little corner shops do that you see, that corner shop especially he always has a blackboard outside
Yeah
and it, it, it's always erm  some offer off like cauliflowers
Yeah
and in the summer when they were thirty nine P it's to get people to go in the shop really
Well the supermarkets do the same thing don't they?
Oh yeah
Loss, loss leaders or if they're not loss leaders they're very low aren't they?
But when you think if you go to your corner shop and you, you don't want a lot it's cheaper to go there than to get in a car 
Oh yes I'd rather go to the corner shop 
spend your money on petrol, pollute the place
Well when, that's what I said to, er Paula people should always go to that village shop because in the long run I know it might cost you more, but the hassle and everything, the only thing is they haven't got the variety
That's the, that's their weakness isn't it?
Yeah, mm 
but that's their weakness because they can't take, they can't take the stock
Yeah
but surely when that corner shop closes the elderly people round here would be in a state
They've got the erm, that mobile shop that comes round here 
Oh have they?
I didn't know about that 
Haven't you seen it?
The blue one, from Debenham, and you can phone your order through
On er get  
ready boxed up for you 
Oh that's good
so you can do that with him, so if you're not too well you know like
Yeah
say if it was yourself and father who both weren't well, he would, if you just pick up the phone and say, I'm running short can I have a b b and he, he brings it round, like you know,j j 
Same with 
I can remember my mum when, when I was little, she used to have a book, a shopping book and she used to write in it
what she wanted from the shops, it was like erm a thick notebook did you 
Yeah 
ever have anything?
Did, is that right?
And prices at the side 
And er it 
and she knew 
it was all printed tea, coffee, cocoa
Oh no she wouldn't of, no didn't have that, no
they had tea, coffee, you know the essentials
Yeah
so that, I mean a person that was a little bit muddled always remembered
Aye.
but you see people with shopping lists so the 
She used to hand it in at the counter, this 
Yeah 
book, she wrote a list out what she wanted, she used to hand it, I remember, I'd forgotten all about this, let's just say we were at the Co-Op, she'd hand it in at the counter so the, the groceries counter all, and she'd written it all out, and when it came back it was, was five minutes, it was all together for you, there it was, it was built up on the counter, and each time the amount was written at the side so 
Yes 
that sort of predates this er till slip, this till roll you get 
Yeah, but 
don't it?
But she, she knew 
in normal 
what she was getting at, she knew exactly what she was shopping for, she went into that shop, there was the list, it was handed in, I bet it took her less time to shop then, than it did later when she went shopping with a vague idea well I mustn't forget this, I mustn't forget that, but then the wandering around sort of oh that looks nice and I fancy that
Yeah but in, in your mother's days mine  my day as well 
Yeah
when you went shopping you could shop everywhere and a quarter of tea it was that price every shop, there was no competitiveness about it
Mm
a pound of butter was that
Mm, mm
two pounds of sugar were that everywhere
But people still shopped at different shops?
Yes, you did, you, you mainly, I mean in the, in the
Well, well why, well why would you choose 
Well because 
to shop at that particular shop rather than 
because 
that one?
the Co-Op used to give the dividend
But not everybody shopped at the Co-Op did they?
Most people, there was quite a lot of people did
Yeah most people did, yeah, but not everybody
I mean I did, it was, it was great at
My mum used to say such thing as like you know bacon's better from
From
from such a place rather than such a place
Well you
so it was, she knew you know 
you always went to a proper butcher then, you didn't go to the supermarket because you had a good butcher that you used to go to
You knew him and he knew you 
and you knew what he, and he would sell you what he, there was no cons, no trying to pretend that this was best, and this was
Mm, yeah
so therefore a butcher was a butcher he was a tradesman in his own right
But he was also a family butcher and he served the family didn't he?
Yeah
Yeah, er we used to go to certain ones that's right 
Yeah, and another thing is I 
It's amazing how much you forget isn't it this, the supermarkets know, you just go, you pick it up, you stick it in your trolley and move on you pick it up, you stick it
But you don't
there's, there's no se there's no erm 
There's no service 
there's no service is there?
None at all 
I mean what used to make me, what made me laugh too, is the same with linens and things
Mm
go in the shop and the girls do not know the stock
Yeah 
Yesterday when I went in the shop, we get underwear and things like that
Mm
the girl on that department had gone for her lunch
Mm
now the girl that was left for er, a, an hour
Mm
admitted that she didn't know and it's about that department what's
What shop was that?
That was Debenhams
Debenhams, well you see, are they really trained for, for those 
so therefore 
little departments within the store those people or just put on 
No, no but you might go in at that time wanting help
Yeah
and there's nobody there that can give 
that's right 
help
but that's not just because somebody was away for their dinner, it's, if that person was back from their dinner
Yeah
they most likely wouldn't be able to give you the help as well, they're just placed on
I can always remember years ago going into, going 
these particular department little sh 
into Lewis's in Manchester
Yeah
which  was one of the good stores and I wanted a bolster case
Mm
and there was a girl on and she said what is a bolster case and when I tried to explain to her she looked at me as if I lived in the ark and that was going back twenty years ago.
Mm
You don't


But do you ever see bolsters sold now?
Possibly not, but they still, in the stall market 
Peo 
they can, you can still buy bolster cases
Where at?
That shop, I don't know what the name of that shop is, but I've seen them in the window lately
its possible, yeah
Yeah  so if they're still selling bolster cases I wonder if they're still selling bolsters somewhere?
Well they most probably do, yeah, we only sell, sell these, stupid pillows like this, curved pillow cases for these
Mm
somebody must do them 
Yeah, true, true, true
You don't, you don't get a service from the shop now
No
you, you, you just, it's make your mind up, your own mind and you're left to your own devices.
When I was er, you know this Saturday morning work and weekend you know this weekend, but not Saturday morning this weekend work and holiday work at a tailors in Runcorn, the manager of that shop, gentleman's outfitters right, the manager of that shop, there's two other men worked in there full time and myself at holidays and weekends or if they were on holiday you'd have to work, you know, the erm to cover one of those and he, the manager was brought up, he's, brought up, his training was in Liverpool, in tailors where they, a man would produce a suit for somebody 
Yeah 
you know you'd produced the shirt but produce er, and there would be lots and lots and lots of these people, these very skilled men
Oh yeah men  
all working in their own little houses sort of they looked liked houses but in fact they were little workshops
Yeah a lot of the Jewish folk  
I remember once, yeah it was like that, yeah that's right, not one, but a few times I used to get on the train from Runcorn to Liverpool, I had an address to go to in Liverpool, rough directions how to get there, to pick up a suit or to pick up a fitting, you know you'd get the, the different 
Oh yeah 
stages of fitting
Oh you do it's, it's the
oh yeah, all that, you know all the 
And you had to keep going, striving on
That's right, that's right
Yeah
well the slight adjustment so to get it, get it right, that's what you're paid for  and he's, that's where he was, that's where he was brought up in the trade, and he could take a piece of cloth in his hands, he had rolls of cloth, and he said that was made such a way, the quality of this cloth is because and that
Yeah
socks the same
exactly the same with socks, the blend of wool or nylon, er, just pure wool or nylon or whatever whether it's cotton in it, all these things type of shirts and that, the strengths of the cloths feeling it, telling you that'll wash well that'll last
That'll last
that is worth that money
Oh yeah
and that's a bargain, and se you know these reps would come round selling this that and the other and if, you could only see samples after, wouldn't touch it with a barge pole like you know, yeah I'll have that, that's all but that's because he had a good grounding
Oh yeah
now he passed that on, that had, sort of knowledge on through the people in the shop okay, if you, soon as that link gets broken and you go into a shop something like erm Burtons okay, big retail shop like Burtons, you go in there you'll have a manager in there and assistants and so on, but their background knowledge has nothing to do with tailoring, nothing at all 
Aye, er, it is 
so you can go to them and ask them for advice and they can't give it, because there's not that link back to where you know 
Not now there isn't
Yeah
but, I, when I was in Stockport I went to work at that tailor's shop
Yeah
and, and
oh yes, yeah, I remember that, yeah 
and 
I'd forgotten about that
I mean, and I'd worked in one in Oldham and the difference between the one  that was a fifty shilling tailors in Oldham and
Fifty shilling tailors
Fifty shillings and you could
nothing more than fifty shillings
Twenty five shillings for er a cheaper suit
Yeah
and fifty shillings for
A good quality one
good quality
and it would be as well.
And those suits were made to measure 
A week's wage 
and you had fittings
Yeah it's a week's wage now
Yeah
right and you had
and you had fittings 
Mm
and you had, and the man there looked at his stock and he wouldn't, he wouldn't sell you rub well they didn't get rubbish in, because
But now you see you've got these big 
you 
but they're all
these big retail shops 
off the peg now 
these, you know these national thing, all that they're interested in from that manager of that shop is  how much did you sell that week
Oh yeah and
just pure inset, and just headquarters, that's all they're interested in, not whether he knows his job or not, not whether he could give advice because he has no control over whatever comes into that shop, he doesn't decide we're not having these T-shirts in or, or we're not having these suits in because really they're a load of rubbish, headquarters decides it, all he does is put a nice little display out, usually, and it's shown how to do it by headquarters and so on, these people come round and show them what to do and so on , do all that, in fact he's as much expertise in there as I have or you have, anybody could literally with a bit of training in the company way of doing things
Mm
take on that job, you don't have to be erm somebody who has knowledge about cloth, about way, the way things are made, the sewing, alright, how close it's sewn to the edge
Well there's very few people 
yeah, things like that 
that have a made to measure outfit, how often that people have 
Oh I don't know 
it's all off the peg now
not all, there's still a fair amount
I don't think there is
Oh yeah
I mean all 
still there, there isn't, there isn't as much as there used to be, but some are fair amount 
Yeah, but all they were interested in that shop in
was the commission they got
That's it
so they, I mean they flogged the cheaper lines and they could have through the door like
it, it didn't matter did it?
No
No, that's what I'm saying 
 
and
I mean they wanted the commission 
if you'd of gone to them for advice and say which is the better buy, which will was wash better and why, you know, I want I want 
Oh yeah 
this particular thing, they'd be, they'd be flummoxed
Well they'd sell you the most expensive because they'd got the most commission 
Yeah and convince you, if you pay more for it, it must be better, and it, that isn't always true either, usually is but not always
What used to annoy me about that shop was that, that the fact that you know people used to  buy the things on the never- never
Mm 
and er  they used to come to me and say how much does this man owe now and if he'd been paying quite a bit next time he came in the shop they was all round him trying to persuade him to buy
Yeah
a mac
Yeah
trying to persuade him to buy 
So they were waiting
cos look your account is
Getting low
getting very low, you're a good payer and er I'm sure you need a pair of trousers you need this you need that 
Yeah
and some of them a bit it's all sales talk
he walked out the door, he's forgotten
Yeah
Yeah
all they wanted was to get their commission.
Yeah, do you think it still happens?
Oh yes
It happened with us, when we borrowed money to pay for this car, finished it off now, the bank, oh the letters they send you, about three months before you're about to finish paying, I am an esteemed and valued customer you know and all that crap
Blah, blah, blah
oh God did he 
I tell you what
They don't esteem you, you're not valued
I tell you what annoys me
you're, you're just a number on a damn computer but they crack on
Yeah
as if you were something, somebody very special and again it's a big con and it, they must think people fall for this 
That's why I think people got in debt because they'd been having things that they couldn't afford, I mean er, at one time you was never encouraged to ha er have things, now I mean the minute they see you're getting low on your, oh have something else, have something else 
Yeah, yeah, yeah 
and then they forget they have to pay for it
I give you a good example of that, erm, well not how easy it is, not on that, but how easy it is to get money without having the money, okay, Tony wants that, the computer
Yeah
and we wanted to get it through Access, and the credit limit on Access was  what was it a thousand?
Something like that, trying to remember now what it was, sixteen hundred, sixteen hundred that was it and it says your credit limit is sixteen, sixteen, you could spend up to sixteen hundred pounds, whether you got it or not you can spend it, so we said if we're gonna get this computer because you get these Air Miles out of it, you know, every ten pounds you get an Air Mile, well if he's getting a computer over a thousand pounds you know with all the paraphernalia that goes with it, well that's a lot of Air Miles there, well we said we'll get it through Access, but there isn't, our credit limit on Access isn't enough to pay for the computer, sixteen hundred it's more than sixteen hundred, in, in the long, once he's got his printer and God knows what you know, so I phoned them up and he said erm is it possible to adjust the limit upwards?
Oh yes  we said well what's the limit?
Well they said what do you want it to be  oh God, I can't, there you are it's as, it's as easy as that, it's as easy as that 
And then they want you, I tell you what there's another thing on television that makes me really laugh is that advert about electricity and it says
About electricity?
Electricity yes 
Yeah 
and it's, keep your house warm and it's this, you know er she comes in, in the middle of the night, she gets up in the middle of the night and the house is lovely and warm, she gets up first thing in the morning and the house is lovely and warm
Yeah
with erm storage heaters, yeah 
storage heaters, yeah, yeah
right
Yeah
she goes on about all this but they don't say how much it's gonna cost, never mind the storage heaters 
That's got nothing to do with it
that's got nothing to do with it, but you can be lovely and warm 
and warm 
twenty four hours of the day, until you get your bill and then you're lovely and warm  
and warm  
Where's that table dad?
I don't know Paul.
You can burn it 


Where's that table that Tony had for his, that erm old camping table?
I don't know Paul, it's erm, ask Tony he's the one who'd of put it away, have you asked him?
No
But really it's a waste of time you know 
Close the door please 
when people are sitting there and thinking oh yes I'll have a storage heater, you keep lovely  and warm  you get your bill at the end, a few hundred pound er 
Yeah
oh it's, it's just all con isn't it?
Yeah they, they're telling you one part of the story
Oh
and they forget to tell you that once upon a time doesn't always have a nice ending, yeah
I think though er, they're encouraging people to be constantly in debt because there are some people, indeed a lot of these people have bought their home like
Mm
Maggie Thatcher had told them to do, they haven't realized that owning your home like you know you buy it off the Council or things like that, it ends there, they're forgetting the maintenance part of it you know
Yeah, but they're also forgetting as well it isn't just the maintenance that it's a long term commitment to paying 
Yes 
back money
but
twenty, fifteen, whatever years, whatever years, and in that time you've got to be pretty sure that you can do that 
Oh yeah 
that your job is secure, yeah that you 
Well nobody's job is secure now
Nobody's job is secure, but some jobs are more secure, have always been more secure than others and if you've been, as some of them have been relying on overtime
Oh yes
and the building societies 
and the second job 
this, will, oh the second job
Oh aye and the building societies 
and the building societies at one time would not take overtime into account, but in the eighties oh my God, you know, how much, oh have as much as you want 
Yeah, that's right 
but they took all that, they took overtime into account, now as you can't guarantee overtime, you can't actually guarantee your basic wage 
Oh no you can't 
but of the two you can't, you can't have a ba you can't have no basic wage and only overtime
Oh no
yeah, one will always be there if you've got, if, if you've got a job, the other one is very iffy and yet they were lending money to people who right, right, rightly in their minds have, and as Maggie T said oh yes go on, go, yeah, independence and all that, erm they were going out, never having done it before, no tradition in, in maybe in their family of doing it before, got this goal this sort of Disney World ideal you know erm, sort of make believe world who are we gonna be and we're gonna be dreaming the dream, the dream 
Like the electricity isn't it?
Yeah, like the electricity, but your chickens come home to roost when your overtime goes, when your job goes and you take on a commitment and they never, the last ten, fifteen, twenty, twenty five years and they've never ever, ever taken on a commitment like that before, when it's presented with just the roses around it, everything's sweetness and light and roses and the other side isn't really put, put to you, think of the worse scenario, you're out of a job, what can you do?
Can you keep it going?
In that case could you keep it going for a while if you're out of a job?
What limit of borrowing should you be borrowing to?
I know accountants say borrow to your top limit because of tax purposes, but they're talking about people who've
Well people that have got it
so much money you know, they've, they've got to erm 
That's right, yeah 
they've got to spend 
but I, I disagree with them  lending money to the extent, the old way was better when it was two and a half times the salary, your salary
Do you know how much it was when we got our first house, just before we were married, it wasn't two and a half times your salary, it was one and a half times our salary
Yeah, but it was one salary
and one salary 
and then people never got themselves into debt, it was only erm unless you were unemployed 
That was, that was the realism of life wasn't it?
Yeah, is was the ideal thing 
That your marriage, one your marriage could break up
Oh yes
two, even though you're both working you can't guarantee that both will continue to work, it's taking it to a real, a realistic level
But I mean I feel sorry for young mums now because there's no way if they take on these mortgages they can have a family
Right, yeah
now that is wrong because nobody should be committed so much to the hilt that they can't have a family
Yeah
and choose a life, it's all going in bricks and mortar and the not 
Yeah 
the building societies
but this is, this is the way of, values of of 
Yes 
the place of the moment, at the moment isn't it?
Yes
That bricks, mortar, tellies, carpets and God knows what 
That's it, more than, yes 
rat matter more than people
Yeah
it seems to be
but you see the, the sad thing of this is, if you've got a, a little family and then you can't, because the man has lost his job, you're turned out of your house even if you've paid five or six years on it
Mm
and then they can turn round and offer you bed and breakfast
Mm
at two hundred pounds a week
Mm
now that is wrong, why they can't help that family to extend the mortgage until
It would cost them less than two hundred pounds a week 
It would cost them less 
that's right this is the meanest of it 
And there's no  
Oh yes 
this is the meanest, you get into the system of the, of the legality of it, the, the er,thes these people who lend money where we want our money back
Yes
we want it there, we want this guarantee, it's, it's a bit s it's sort of well 
Well you see 
it's a bit Shylockish, we want our pound of flesh at the end of this day, now that, the fact that the cost of that pound of flesh will cost you more than this two hundred pound a week
Yeah
cost you far more getting it like that than saying we'll support you
Exactly, but you see the point is this 
it's, it really is a bit Shylockish 
I think it's wrong because they, they're putting these houses now on the market, the building societies
Mm
and they're putting them into auction and the people that have got spare money
Mm, mm
are snapping them up
Yeah
and yet
Hold on, it's not people who've got spare money, it's people who
Who want to invest money
who've got plenty of cash, always will have as well and this is, this is the unfortunate part, this, this is the sinister part of it really, because the people who've  scratted around and have suffered
Yes
borrowed up to the hilt, they, they, their er, I, what should I say, their erm  unfortunate circumstances
Yeah
are benefitting people who don't have to, never had to  scrat around 
It's still wrong 
they actually they had, the poor
if you look at it one way are subsidising the very rich
Oh yes
the very, the ones who've got so much money they could and they're buying up things as a result of somebody's misery at a way lower price than it should be bought for 
Oh I know it's horrible 
and they're doing it again and again and again, it suits them, it suits the ones that are really rich to have ordinary people struggling like that and it suits them not to have that two hundred pounds a week going in to help those people and they're the people who it suits who will decide whether that two hundred pounds a week goes to help on the mortgage or put them into what is it, a bed and, a bed and breakfast?
Mm, don't know what they call them 
So if it, if it look at it like that, these people are benefitting ho again and again, time and again and again out of some, out of somebody's 
Yeah, but you see 
misfortune, and yet, and yet the cost of putting them into a bed and breakfast would stop those people's houses going on the market and it would stop those people who are benefitting from it, from benefitting from it
Yeah but you see, the, in this, in this 
They're parasites aren't they?
in a vicious circle too it's working that the tax payers are having to subsidize bed and breakfast
Yeah so 
so 
the rest of us
they, they might as well 
are subsidizing the rich to buy houses that are becoming cheaper onto the market 
In, yeah, in a vicious circle, yeah 
so we're all helping the rich to become richer
Yeah
because these poor sods can't pay off the mortgage
and er, er, er, and the poor are getting poorer and they will not let them get out of the poverty trap.
It suits them
Yeah
not to let them get out of the pov that's what I'm saying, it suits them because they can buy up property much cheaper than if that two hundred pounds a week that's being spent on bed and breakfast, that, they were spent on helping them with the problems as they are at the moment.
Yeah, they should, I mean it is a problem 
It's crazy, it's crazy, if only people again'd sit back and look at it and see exactly what's happening, rather than saying it serves them right, they shouldn't of done this, they shouldn't of got themselves into that position they're in that position 
They can't help it sometimes 
they're in that position, it's gonna cost us to get out, cost us to get them out of it and they can go out into a bed and breakfast or they can stay in the house 
They're better staying in the house aren't they?
That's right 
You're better letting them 
but to start with they shouldn't of borrowed to the limit they were borrowing 
Well there's the building societies fault 
That's building societies, yeah 
if they go, if they're wanting to let people have as much money
Mm
and know full well that it's very difficult for them to pay
Mm
they should of, go back to the old system that they took the man's wage in, only into consideration
Or, one of them, or one of them
Or one of them, well yes 
or one and a quarter or one and a half or whatever
Yes, it used to be two and a half times the wage and in the long run rather than mess about taking the house off them
Mm
if they're only young extend the mortgage
Mm
they'll still get their money in the end
That's right
and they'll get more money
These people who are buying up houses now so cheaply from these, you know from these repossessions 
Oh it's terrible 
they must rub their hands together you know when these booms are going, you know, oh as much money as you want
because they must know what's gonna happen when they, you know, when the cows come home, they must know when the chickens come home to roost they must know what's gonna happen
What they're going to
that there are gonna be so many thousands of people in a right mess and they're 
Well 
gonna pick up cheap pickings, they're gonna go round like the vultures, just taking it and taking it
In one way they should do something about people having second homes and make it more, that they get more tax out of them or something 
Right
unless they're going to let, unless people are going to buy them and let them at a reasonable rent to people 
What's reasonable?
Ha
Yeah, but I mean
reasonable to whom?
in a few years  this er, they're not building houses so these houses are gonna go, rocket again
When the Council houses were sold, a lot of money went into the, went into the Council
yeah
Yeah, well they're not allowed to spend it 
and they're not allowed to spend it, that's the craziest thing of all but housing associations can build houses, but Councils can't
Yeah 
or they can but a tiny amount, it's this sort of  dogma, this blind faith, has put commonsense right out of the window completely out the window 
I don't understand these 
it's 
how these housing associations though
How they work?
Well no, how they can afford to let the houses when the Council can't.
Well the government subsidizes them a lot  for, for a start and it's, again it's the government, the philosophy of the gover of a government either subsidize something or it doesn't, doesn't it, and it subsidizes what it 
Yeah 
wants to be a success, it did, it takes the subsidy away from 
 
something that it, either it is successful in itself and it no, no longer needs to be subsidized or something that they want to see go to the wall, if they want to see something going to the wall, it 
Yeah, but it belongs to the association
I don't know exactly the
Oh
the ins and outs of them, but there's a lot of government input into it, there's a lot of government help in there, a lot
Oh
and it's, it's the philosophy that people will stand on their own two feet and own
But why
and own their own houses 
you see 
which is a good philosophy
in some ways to though, I mean I can understand  I think people, some people
Arthur can you just turn the bacon on the chicken and the potatoes?
alright, alright
Yeah, better see what's happening, anyway I've sat long enough
Yeah
I'm as stiff as a board 
You're a fat board
yeah 
We've put the world to rights
Oh it's not a case of putting the world to rights  I'm looking for this bacon
There it's in the fridge 
Got it, got it
The bacon's on the chicken
it's only two pieces
Yeah that's all we want
Paula
bacon
Paula
Yeah
it's only two pieces of bacon
The bacon's on the chicken
It's on it, oh, thought you said put it on it  oh God 
Up, not on the pillows but actually sitting up as if he was
Bolt upright?
Bolt upright, yes, fast asleep and then he'd move his hands
Yeah
erm, do you know like erm in meditation people, when they're meditating and their minds are away and, and the bodies are calm and relaxed, it was like that then, then he'd 
 
go back into his sleep
Yeah
and then he woke up, his, his eyes opened from this, he was actually asleep and his, he woke up from it, not with a start, but the, it's, he woke up very quickly, instantly and he just started to do things.
What do, what age do you think he is?
Oh well in his seventies, touching eighty 
Do yo think so?
I think so  if not he's in his high fifties 
 
his high fifties and he's very old, young
Yeah  what was Paul like last night was his mother there?
Paul, erm he was  his wife was there and his dad  he went for a bath  for a walk, a walk around
You know his dad's a very calm person isn't he?
Yes, yeah
He's very calm
he's, erm
Did you say he was an, in tele was a telephone engineer?
I think so, yes
Oh, he's a nice man, and he seems to be, I mean he seems to be in control of everything
Yeah it's erm 
I feel sorry for the mother though she seems quieter than Colin doesn't she?
Well she's got something wrong with her legs hasn't she?
She suffers a lot with her legs you know 
Yeah
she drags them along doesn't she?
It's an awful strain though when you've got a young person like  you know like Paul, because I mean  they have their future before them and  but very sad really  he erm  That other boy seems to of gone out doesn't he, that was in the other day, that was walking around, he seemed to of had his treatment and gone.
Which was that one?
There was another one like Paul with er that had had chemotherapy
Oh yes at the end, yes, yes 
he seems to of gone 


Want me to do your hair or anything mother?
No  er I thought I'll leave it till tomorrow and then
  

well, well if I'm going to be going home, leave it, cos if I'm going to go home it's pointless
change it or anything, we haven't had any visitors
 

Mm, I mean we might
today  I'll do my hair tomorrow just in case I was going
 

Anything else need going on?
How far are the potatoes and the
About half an hour off the potatoes, you don't want the sprouts on just yet, do you?
No
What er
are we doing those in the microwave?
Yeah and the frozen peas as well please 
What time did you put the chicken on?
I'll get those out .
What time did the chicken go on Paula?
I can't remember
it's ten past now, ten past twelve
I can't remember
I said I wish you'd of timed it of it on top
about ten o'clock, half ten
No it was turned that, about half eleven
It was eleven, about half ten, it's been in an hour and a half
Oh
is that enough?
No, I'll just go to the freezer
You've got to be careful with chicken
That's what I said  what are
what's that?
They're the tops of paint pots, you put the
Oh
you put the plastic pot on the bottom, that on the top and so long 
they look rather nice, they look
Ha, they're dirty 
they, they look expensive don't they?
They're dirty, and so long as you erm fill your paint pots up so the water in the pot is below, below that, if you tip it over it doesn't spill
Oh very good that
That's the theory
That's the theory
the practice is a bit different  How long do the sprouts take in the microwave Paula?
Pardon?
How long do the sprouts take in the microwave?
Twelve
Twelve minutes?
Yeah
That's too much, yeah  spilling the peas all over the place here 
What a beautiful day
A good drying day isn't it?
Gorgeous
Yeah
I tell you what I'm going to do
What's that?
I want to
can I iron in here?
Is there any possibility of ironing in here?
Nah I think Paula might hit the roof if you start ironing
I only want to do daddy's pyjamas for the hospital
Well he doesn't need them today
He does, he hasn't got any with him
No pyjamas?
No, he'll be going berserk because he has, he has three pairs of 
How many pairs of pyjamas has he got?
He's got three pair
Paula, Paula says hundreds
dirty, only bottoms, Paula he hasn't any jackets
Well, do them then
If you don't mind
Do what you want to do
I want to, where can I plug in out here?
In the socket in the wall  you can plug in 
No I mean, it seems pointless carrying it through
Mind yourself
That's 
Well do it, see the light there, the that thing 
Oh yes I can use this
I'll, I'll put it up for you
Pull it
which way do you want it?
I'm only doing his top 
Don't pull it out like that, pull it straight out, don't wiggle it
Wiggle what?
You watch
She's a wiggly wobbly one
watch, oh missus
I'm no missus
just pull it straight out, if you do that to it
you'll wreck it, never mind good God
 
that's true, you're a what?
I can see 
A Uri Geller 
A Uri Geler
I make, I make a mess of everything that
well if you do that to it, to something, no wonder, is that the right way round for you?
Yes
Which way you ironing?
This way
Where you gonna stand oh yeah 
I'm gonna stand looking outside at the garden  oh I must do
he's got three pair here
Do you want them on st do you want it on steam?
How dry are they?
Are they too dry?
No they're just right actually
Are you sure?
Yeah, only I want him to try these on you see because I bought him a new pair yesterday 
What d'ya buy, are they cotton?
Are they cotton?
in the morning, cotton, yes
Are they cotton?
Great
they're cotton
they are
it's not hot yet, give it a chance
It's hot
still warming up, oh God
it won't take me, I'm not spending a load of time on jar jamas
Ha don't bother ironing them then
Yes, make them look beautiful
not, not like the other night when we went
yeah
I think that's been worrying him more than anything else you know 
I wonder why he keeps being sick
Well they said it was, cos his bowels weren't moving and that
Oh gosh
he said that's, and yet he says now they're moving but, by themselves he doesn't need any, any  anememas or enemas or whatever
yeah, what she done with them?
You've not thrown them away have you?
What?
The peelings, the erm, what you call it the sprouts
Ooh
they love those
I'm sorry, can I fish them out?
I think it's a bit late now 
Ow 
Right, have plenty of peas there aren't there?
More than enough
I thought so  what needs doing?
I fancy a cup of tea  It's a crack it's a cracking day isn't it?
Yes
are you getting out there?
Get the, get the grass cut
get the grass cut, what the heck is, oh I see it
When they begin 
When you going down to the hospital this afternoon or tonight?
Can't do
well look in that case I'll do this afternoon okay?
And I'll do
yeah
about six o'clock I'd quite like to go and have a chat to Bob  otherwise if he
Oh you broke that, sprung that one on us
I've been thinking, I've been thinking
Well I, he'll only just be getting in from work
Yeah we'll have this a bit and then carry on
Well erm, at half past six Paula he'll be in the middle of his tea, you've got to give the guy a chance to turn round  try to suit you, but think of him, he's just getting in from work and boom
But I've got to get my
well get that done  what else have you got to do?
  

I forgot, right  well get yourself in there.
But I can do
in fact I'll go up and do half an hour before dinner
Well this, won't be an hour yet will it before this is ready?
Half an hour, the lid of this won't come off this
oh no it's not ready yet, leave it on
Oh for the bacon
Oh the bacon's alright, you don't want it dried up, hate dried bacon 
Right I'll go and do erm
right off you go, go on, clear off  you okay?
Fine, if I get them done be ready for the
is this all the ironing there is?
Oh yeah
I'll do those trousers then
that's all there is
What about these jeans have you checked those?
No they've only just gone out 
Oh
those aren't ready, they've only just gone out
Right
I don't know whether Paula wants to put another
or what?
I'll ask her
might as well now while it's, the weather's as good as this, Paula, Paula
Yes love
do you want another wash done again?
You might as well seeing the weather's as good as this  oh yeah
Oh that's 
all this lot 
that's four, six
do this four one
on an economy
on an economy right, what else, what's in the basket?
Nothing
Are you sure?
Well there are things in there, they need hand washing but it's all
but there's a shirt in there
It needs hand washing
A striped shirt?
It said on the label, very strong colour, risk it in that four wash, go on, on the four wash
Well it's, a bit crazy if you've gotta a shirt, is it one of mine?
is it one of those new ones
look how strong that red is
Yeah but it doesn't say hand wash it
No, it said for the first wash it's a very strong rinse 
Where does it say that?
On the label, but it's cut off
Hand wash, hand hot, four, machine fifty
from a label that's been cut off, it can go in a four wash, cos it doesn't matter what it's in with cos it's only on shirts for us.
That one isn't, that's Tony's, yeah, er mine I'm not bothered about those
right, I'll leave you to it
call you down for t dinner when it's ready
Like a cup of tea
Like a cup of tea would you?
Do you want it stirred clockwise or anti-clockwise?
Right
can I just get to the washer?
Yeah
Alright, you're alright that's plenty, plenty
such a beautiful day it'll dry
Ah it's a bit daft not to, isn't it really?
It is really, well I've been hanging them out because it's, that's such an effort, you know what the cleaner s 
they iron better you know if they go out
That's what the cleaner said the other day, she said have you been hanging your clothes out?
I said yes, she said it's lovely, she said make it so easy for ironing, see
That's right
the trouble is I find that they go very boardy when you got
it loses all the
It's good when you put them in, if you put them in a tumble dryer
Yeah
that helps them, but if you put them on radiators and God knows what round the house trying to keep them, get them dry
dry actually
Yeah  true, true, true 
well you've got to do it in the winter so
Oh yeah
 
well not really stick, stick them in a tumble dryer if you're lucky  depends how much money you've got 
That's a good t washer that I've bought you know 
What's that?
Well it's got thick and thin dryer
Oh, yeah, yeah
and you don't get, you know how you get steam and these
Steam from what?
these tumble dryers
Yeah
it goes back into the washer
Into the vent?
what make is it?
Oh I can't remember it, it's a foreign one
A foreign
Mm, ah, I didn't realize your tumble dryer was on its, you could of had my other tumble dryer
Is on its what?
On its  you know there's something the matter with it
Oh it's only the return spring on it, there's nothing wrong with the dryer
because you could of had mine
Ah there's donkey's years in that yet, oh God
Oh mine was not used 
No, there's nothing
got rid of it
Yeah, nothing wrong with that 
What's the worry about it?
Well you see when you turn that you see turn, turn your control
Yeah
and it's set and it should click back shouldn't it slowly?
Yeah
It does that, so there's a 
Oh I see 
return spring gone on it that's all
Mm
get in the top of it one day
nah, nothing wrong with that, it dries them, dries them beautifully
You can get, well the trouble is with the new  
Well done Paula she's used all the hot water
Oh yes she's, she's
Had a bath
did she wash her feet before?
Yeah well if, it's a stupid way of doing it when you've got a boiler that's heating up, you can just wait on a bit 
You might, you might as well wait
Yeah, it's an expensive way of  of doing it anyway
you see you might as well wait 
I can set it up 
Yeah
economy wash
That's not, they're much nicer when they're outside
Oh yeah
much easier to
oh I couldn't agree with you more, that's plenty
We got a good dryer
yeah you catch enough wind there don't you?
Yeah
Same as this, this catches a lovely
This is lovely this 
Will be once that hedge gets up
I like that divided hedge it's beautiful 
You notice how the Pyracantha are there
Yeah, yeah
these, this little group here are different from all the others
Yeah
different breed, different variety
It's a pity you didn't do your outer edge with roses
Which one the
Yeah the beech one 
the beech 
Yeah
that was already in I was gonna 
Was it?
Yeah, oh yeah, that's gonna look good that when we, when we get it to something like
How
when it fills out
how long did, has, has that one been in the Pyracantha?
Pyracantha, about four years now
And can you keep them that height if
Yeah, well we will do once we'll get them to the height we want we'll start trimming them and they'll bush out a bit more, that's not bad they're about four, four or five foot now aren't they?
Is that man, that man you 
I don't know whether to have a brick wall or whether to
Well you've got your hedge trimmer haven't you?
Yes but I cannot get 
So you've got the tool to keep it 
but I can't
to keep it under control
I'll never be able to do it myself
No, but you've got the tool I'm saying to keep it under control
Yeah, but I couldn't use it so, so
No
so I didn't know whether to have a brick edge er a brick wall 
See these, this type of thing, this er Pyracantha, the reason why you've go that, it's evergreen
Yeah
its thorns, it's got thorns in it so it stops 
Which is good it stops animals
any well anybody can
deters, deters them
Yeah
you've got some, you've got flowers on it,wh those white flowers and then you get those lovely red berries 
You got them lovely red berries 
so you've got a mix of everything in it
Yeah
it's an ideal thing
Where'd you buy those from?
Erm, a nursery up, going towards Norwich on the A one forty
Oh yeah
and he just got them in, real, there's a 
I tell, I tell 
there's a better one now, you know, er where we found out, you know where we got the Laurels from at the other side?
Yeah
Well they are erm, we got those from a place the other side of Ipswich on the Shotley peninsula, I think it says Paul Doubleday in, name of the nursery and that's a genuine nursery, not some of these pretending to be a nursery in a garden centre, he se he grows stuff to sell to Councils and you know big organizations
Yeah, they're good plants and everything 
Cracking plants really good ones, and alright, they're not, they're not the cheapest in the world, but you get quality plants 
But you get quality, oh yes you get what you pay for
I suppose if you're buying by the thousands the price'd come down a lot, but when we were only buying about, you know, forty odd plants
I tell you what I, the hedging I liked too, is if you can have a hedging that comes, you know, some of the garden centres sell them that you got something every month of the year
Oh yeah, well you could plant it yourself couldn't you?
Yeah, oh yeah
Yeah
Ah, that means trying to 
but it, that, that's okay providing in the winter, you haven't got some of it that's evergreen and some of it that you, you know, then you've got to hedge it's
Oh yes you've got to cut it 
and mish-mash in the winter 
you see, er, er Mary was a bit silly because she's had a lot of air plant, they just pulled them off and threw them out, now I wouldn't of done, done that because I would of kept some of those
Mm
because she does it, she didn't know what was in the garden, cos she hadn't been there long enough, now I think that's silly because I think you're better waiting a couple of years, seeing what comes up
What it does
and then decide
Yeah
because you're spending a lot of money
When did she move in?
Oh, well she bought the house same time as we bought the house you see
Yeah but when did she move in though?
She didn't ah, she didn't move in till after us,Aug in the August sort of thing, the summer that we moved in, a couple of years ago
Mm, mm
you see she didn't give it till the spring to see what came up, I mean she had it all paved which was silly because they, there were a load of rose bushes and that
Mm, mm
which she, I mean you, you're throwing away a lot of plants that you might decide to keep
True  very true
But I do like that hedging I think it's beautiful when the red berries are on it
Mm
but er
Well it's not, it's not a bad hedge  and it's now starting to get you know 
you see, I'm 
a, a good growth on it 
I'm static the only trouble is with our front is that because we're getting old we can't manage, we're not going to plan each garden, so it might be easier to have a, a big lawn and then
Concrete the lot
Ha
paint it green 
No, no but it, it, you've got, I mean that hedge
it's too much work, see Archie was gonna come and do it this year
There's no way that's gonna happen now is it?
No, it's not gonna happen 
No way
Well you see Archie said to dad that he would help him to take all the bush bit out
And he got Paul down for that, Paul and Tony and myself
Yeah
he'd of done that you see, all the 
with the 
grubbing out
Well it's the, it's because we don't want the
It's a  isn't it mainly?
Yeah, but it's
Bits of other things in that 
Yes it's gone it's gone, the bit, it's gone too straggly after
Oh yeah
you know once you, you, you lose all that bottom
Mm
and it's all dead wood really
Mm, mm
and you've got to keep trimming it and all to keep it nice and, and chic, no I, I think like
you're doing a good job here aren't you?
Keep going, that one now.
That's nice, bought these yesterday aren't they nice?
Bought them yesterday?
Yeah
And you've washed them?
Well erm, I've just gave them a quick rinse because the erm, that stuff's
the sizing of the, I don't like the
Oh he will be pleased he'll think it's his birthday
He will, well this is his celebration didn't you know?
Pyjamas
It annoys him because his best pyjamas are here and he's seeing the specialist
He won't be annoyed
Well he would if, if he gets to look at his
he doesn't get annoyed father does he?
Oh no
No
no but I say he, he would be wanting to dress up today in this
well he can't 
He can't, he's got three pair here, oh these are beautiful.
Where you get off at?
Er
Debdens 
Debdens, they had a sale on
Well
Three pounds
hasn't, hasn't everybody got a sale on?
Yeah, they've all got a sale
Made in Hong Kong, brilliant
yeah, yeah
Everything's made in Hong Kong 
Hong Kong 
now
Yeah
or Pakistan
I've not seen that, right do you want a cup of tea?
No thank you
You sure?
What time's lunch then?
Well it's gonna be a long time off that yet, another half an hour
Oh go on, I'll be a devil
ha, be a devil
I'll be a devil and celebrate 
Celebrate with a cup of tea, that's not bad  do you want a strong cup or a weak one?
Oh a strong one
A strong one, you're really celebrating are you?
There you are, you can stand your spoon up in that 
Oh you can tell they're made in Hong Kong
go on then why, how can you tell that?
Well, look at the sleeves, I mean you wouldn't do that in an English, in an English pair of pyjamas
Why not?
put a piece in
No
our clothes are definitely


no correct
I, are, it's on your heat 
that 
those are very bad
Take them back to Hong Kong
Take them back
right
Slow boat to China
Who sang that?
I'd like to get you on a slow boat to China?
I like to get you 
Who was it?
Who sang it?
What's his name, ooh  cup of tea, have you finished it yet?
Ah?
No I haven't
Have I hell  ah going through the diary now, it's at that stage, enjoy it?
oh, oh  oops push your chair in a bit, how's it going?
Alright
Are you out there?
Just pull the mike out
crash, bang, wallop, gone  what they did for work today  a little bit of exercise, desk work a lot of exercise, exercise.
Not
Do you spell roughage like that?
Where?
Put it back to fibre, go back to your bit on fibre 
Roughage
a section on 
oh it, it might, it won't 
Yeah 
pick it up cos it's in speech marks  I'll put the speech marks back after it
It just doesn't look right
Let's find out  no that's how you spell it
Where is it?
Oh it's gone back 
I suppose it's gotta be hasn't it, when you think about it
Yeah
Ah, you should be able to tell
Do you want me to check your spellings for you?
Yeah, put your speech marks round it now
rough, yes
okay, put your speech marks round it, I take it all back then I said about that, it just didn't look right.
Do you want me to check spellings for you?
No it should do it, oh I've got to go through it yet properly
I thought you'd done that.
No, not yet
Have you had any more problems with it?
Whoops
You didn't, ha didn't 
Can't
yes that's okay
veg
Vegetables  think of vegetable 
Oh I, yes 
that's it
in convenience
con that's convenience, convenience
partici 
par  paricipate 


 paricipate , that's a good word that, paricipate 
ex 
Yeah, alright, exercise, exercise rather than exercise 
exercise oh yes exercise, where is it now?
There
Where?
There
that's exercises
Yes
you just want the S off the end that's all
Yeah
oh put it in if you want to then 
Erm
it's got it in there
yeah I got it, I've got it 
Yes 
right down there, but
okay do they live in a house, bungalow, does it 
Ignore, that's it, save that and try that  eight thousand characters
So you
yeah
eight thousand characters
Yes
not eight thousand words?
you find out the number of words if you spell check 
Go on then how many words have you got?
Erm,
ignore that  ignore that
Ignoring a lot
No just ignoring two
One thousand, two hundred and 
One thousand, two hundred and thirty 
It's over twelve hundred bytes and this is in a maths
Oh yeah it takes about six thousand
Where does your maths come into it then?
Oh later on
What will it be?
What will it take the form of, your maths?
Oh dear
Statistics?
Yeah I expect it's what it is erm control
format  centred, yes, statistics, the whole thing is, the
paper, do it, computer
pardon, you need what?
Do it with the computer program, it's a lot easier, use erm
grass or
I thought grass was, had a lot of limits on it?
Oh yes it has, you can get round it, if you use erm Basic and can run graph from Basic, and then a Basic program to counteract grass limits
I put a capital J there 
on 
yeah, cos it is a title isn't it?
I forgotten about doing all
maths coursework
How's it going?
How's it going Ton?
Fineish
Fineish?
Oh yeah
That's it, good lad, is it still F seven to flip it over from 
No control F four, some strange, it's got a mind of its own
Control 
What you really want is a printout of all those commands
There is
so you cho so you can actually print it out
Well if you bought the
 

It might go wrong
what might go wrong?
You lose it all  just a slight detail, leave the door
Right, what
this may explode into a thousand fragments so I'll just have to start all over again without having to print out copy
Are you saving this on disk or is this going onto hard disk?
Well it's the same thing
The same thing
save it onto hard disk
all the hard disk is, is those little floppy disks on top of them 
Stack of them, yeah, but how d'ya get it out, are you gonna save it from the hard disk onto a floppy?
Yeah, yeah
That's what you're going to do?
Yeah
You just save it instead of when you save it you just 
won't be enough room to do that 
type A drive
But, er yeah, cos if something does go wrong, if there's a power fail er now
transfer save, oh that you
you would be up the creek without your paddle wouldn't you?
Er, no, not really
Wouldn't you?
Well if it didn't save it on that how does it, how do you get it back?
It save it every nine minutes or something, it's got a backup save, you know on the
without you telling it to save 
Yeah 
and a
you can set it so it's erm, it says, backup save and you type Y or no
Yeah
and you can set it so it'll backup save every minute or every hour
Really?
Yeah, it's brilliant so you know on the Nimbus when it's turned itself off
It won't matter
you might only lose about a paragraph of work 
Well it depends on what you, what
Ah this is good 
Your frequency is
Operator
Oh no
Ditto, ditto  my or may?
Key words 
Key words 
None
None
Comments 
Comments rubbish
I hope I get an A 
You daft thing  
Version number one
Thing is when it comes up on words that 
How do you know, oh it's saving it onto the disk now
And it tells you how much spare there is left 
How many bytes are free yeah 
Nine hundred and ninety nine characters oh 
A hundred and twenty four thousand, nine hundred and twenty eight bytes free 
Free on that disk, there's considerably more on the hard disk, ha
It'll probably fill
Yeah
a hole
What frequency does it save it at?
You can change that escape 
If you want 
options, auto save, enter auto save into the
minutes, zero for none
Why don't you do it one, every minute?
Erm it's just 
What happens if you
because if, if you're editing it
Yes, yeah
and you don't, you don't and you make a mistake
Yeah
you don't want it to save it
You can undo that
So, so when it's auto save it's, then you edit it does it auto, will auto save again, does it take out the things already in that you've altered, that you've edited?
Yeah
It's just like a normal save it overrides 
Yeah it overwrites everything 
Yeah
Yeah, you can
You can tell it to
and you can
so what you, auto saving every ten minutes
Yeah
I think you're a bit wrong there old son
No you're alright, cos sometimes you make, you, you know, you're writing and you need a flow of ten minutes cos then it interrupts and says do you want to save this?
Oh I see what you mean it doesn't, it doesn't do it without you, not telling you
You can, you can get it so it doesn't interrupt
it just does it without you knowing it, that would be good wouldn't it?
Well you can
Without interrupting your flow
you can but if you're, if you make a mistake
Yeah
it just saves it like that
Yeah 
Oh my, oh my goodness I've lost everything
You've lost the lot
Yeah, so
Can't you undo it though?
No
So it's auto save every ten minutes
Yeah, with
this is the window options
Mm
Where'd you get this program from?
Dudley got it 
And where did Dudley get it from?
I don't know
Was it
was this pirated?
Yeah
Yeah
God I, you know, shouldn't do that
Nearly everything on that hard disk is pirated
No, no way 
dad oh I'm sorry
 

Oh well
I never knew you were
you get the law in here


Ah, rewind that tape
No, staying as it is, use this in evidence
 

Oh dear
You shouldn't of brought the subject up
Well you should be innocent shouldn't you?


Lily white 
Is anybody lily white?
Dunno
This is rather an
conversation
No, go on clear off
He needed any  
leave your mum alone, Paul leave your mum alone
Can you shorten that thingy then
Oh be quiet 
Er I don't know what we'd do without you Paul  I'm gonna, I'm gonna
Potatoes are nearly ready
What?
have you turned them off, have you turned that thing off it'll cook in the heat that's on there won't it?
Take the top off the chicken
Yeah, but I mean, I'm gonna take the heat off it's pointless it blasting till the end 
Is it ready?
Yes and the top of it
And the sprouts are on, twelve minutes you say
Yeah, on its
You've got about twelve minutes left
Right okay
that's what I'm warning you of
I can do the gravy and all that, yeah, I can sort that out, I don't need to be told that, you're alright
You want me to do the gravy?
Pardon?
Do you want me to do the gravy?
No you're alright, Paul's good at doing the gravy
Am I?
Is only Paul who can do gravy, so he tells us
Have you got to fill all those twelve tapes up?
Twenty
Twenty, blimey, are they all blanks then?
Pardon?
Are they all blanks?
That's why I've got to fill them all up because they're blank, yeah
Oh my God
I wouldn't be filling them up if they weren't blank, are they all blank?
What did you put me down for accent?
Your accent?
Yeah.
Outer space 
How, I haven't got an accent have I actually?
I don't know
Non
Pardon?
It's non
Non, neutral, neuter  now give it a chance to cook
Yeah it's
mm, mm, if I put the chicken on Paul
Oh yeah 
it'll only take you a second to do that, bring you, mind yourself, let me just, whoosh that's hot
It's smoking
Right
it's not cooked yet
Pardon?
It's not cooked yet
Oh it is well and truly cooked, tell me when
Whoops
Oh damn
can happen  that'll do won't it?
Yeah
Plenty, just sort that bacon out, here are
Thank you  er
What's the matter with it?
Looks like it's green
It taste like it's green?
It looks like it's green
It looks like it's green, yeah
Oh no it's horrible
It's horrible is it?
Yeah
Let's get the
 

Put that in here, that's right
it'll soon get up
where are the plates?
Are they in the top oven?
Yeah
Yes it's all
No
Thank
erm no  have a knife please out of the drawer, just check the sprouts, wash, they looked cooked, they looked cooked
Yeah that'll do
They're cooked aren't they?
Yeah  I'll just put them back in for twenty seconds just to get them up to heat, keep your eye on this Paul, it'll go over if you don't 
Yes it's started to boil now 
these peas are neon ready  there we go  right
Yeah it's boiling
It's boiled?
Yeah
Right
turn it down put the cornflour in 
Shall I put the cornflour in?
Yes, that's it, keep stirring it
okay?
Put the plates
It's Paul
aren't we?
Yeah you're alright, yes
Have we got the plates?
you're okay, yes we've got the plates ready
We're all ready
We're all ready, we're just waiting for this gravy now
It seems to be a certain line of fat round it
Where?
Let's see
That's okay, keep it going Paul
Fat's good for you
Ha  keep it going
Where's the fat?
Can't you see it, look?
That's not fat.
that's not fat it's fat when you see all grease on the top
That
Where?
when you pull the spatula across that's oil 
That's it 
that's oil
that's oil that,, that's axle grease 
Oil is fat isn't it?
Yeah
That is oil
You a good cook Paul?
Of course he is, he takes after his dad 
Cos making the gravy
takes after his dad don't you Paul?
don't, don't
who does the carving
yeah it's coming out now, right, can you get the dish out please?
Are we ready?
Where's the steel?
Oh dear out you come, right, can we
Can I have a go at carving it?
Yeah help yourself
you'll learn
 

How do you know when you're getting low on batteries?
How do I know what?
When you get low on batteries?
You've got to change them every so often, mm, it tells you to, I suppose that's to stop it erm suddenly dying on you, it's sense I suppose
why did you
Can I have the dish out, the carving dish, out of the cupboard
No you can't cos I can't find it
It's in there
I'll get it 
Okey-dokey and the chicken now, open the oven, let's have that Paul, please  get the other, if I can find it, what's the matter you haven't burnt yourself have you?
No, it's the heat
Brought it up, no leave those in, otherwise it'll get cold, er, can you get the plates out now please?
Why didn't they supply you with an adaptor?
adaptor what?
So you can plug it into the mains
Plug it into, oh this thing, well you can't move around then can you?
No, but if you stay sitting down
Ha
Okay  plates out
  

are you gonna carve this or what?
Yeah I'll carve it 
You want drinks
er orange juice or anything, ha?
It's hot
Is it warm Paul?
Just a bit 
Oh it's the
int it?
You don't carve the onion
Ah, don't you?
No
What do you do with the onion then?
Throw it at the cat
loves the onion and she always eats the onion
It happens when you're
when you're brought up in the war you see, waste not, want not
I hate it
There you are try that side, here you are
How much do you do?
like that at that angle
Aha
cos if you keep following that cut then sooner or later you'll come across the, the bone okay, there, that lot
The breast bone
don't worry about that, right
Oh you're learning to carve 
just inside it, he's trying to, why not?
Good idea
Good idea, one day you might be able to do it, oh
I'm not cagy handed


oh he's cagy handed int
No he's not, no he's not
Who's left handed?
Tony
Tony
Can you
that one please?
Yep, what you do is see that 
Does, does 
it just lifts up, it doesn't
Oh
You've been trying to turn it haven't you?
Never mind
What a wonderful thing education is
Yeah, it's called commonsense, but never mind
Never mind
never mind my dear
never mind, er
We don't need that much in there
No I know, I'm going to make two glasses out of it 
Be that, the best way of making this, can I show you?
You get a jug
Make a jug full yeah, seriously
oh, okay
What do you do now?
Now you start to share it out onto the plate
Now you do the legs
No you don't, no you share it out first and then you see if you need to do the legs  or we can have the legs, the legs on, on butties or
or a curry, yes  okey-dokey, here we go
He likes chicken breasts
Oh good, that's enough for Philip, yeah
No, no this is Philip's
Oh, okay, that's alright, okay
What I, I carved the chicken
I carved the chicken
I tell you what I can't do is carve  
Sing 
there's a technique isn't there?
carve meat 
Yeah 
Oh aye
I like the way he gets bits of fingers in it, you know
Yeah
yeah, that's the bone, it takes a lot of skill that getting a bit 
go on then
Who wants a leg?
Erm, yeah, put a leg on somebody's, it doesn't matter who and then we can sort out later, is that, that the right number of plates?
Six
Two, four, six, yeah, that's alright, yeah, leave that there
Shall I just dish 
no leave that there 
another leg
ha
takes one to know one
Ah, damn  okay 
Where'd you get those
from for the
Get the what from?
the tops for these
For what love?
That's enough
oh no, you'll want a bit more than that in
Shall I carve the 
You reckon?
Yes, yes
It's very strong that one 
I know it's very strong 
right up to the bottom
erm, where'd I get what from?
Those top, those new tops
that, it came with it
Oh I've seen him with
Yeah
Can it be put on a, on a coffee jar?
No
A coffee jar?
cos it hasn't got the screw
Not with it
The, it has, you know the old coffee jars when you empty them
Oh I know what you mean
Yeah
Er, no, never thought of that, to tell you the truth
now these sprouts mother, these sprouts
they've been cooked in the microwave for twelve minutes
okay, well we don't know yet, until
Oh that onion's beautiful int it?
to keep it open
put sprouts, sprouts in a microwave and
veg cooked in a microwave and, if you can get it right
If I can say
you must get one of these you know, oh yes 
Must get one a microwave if Debbie comes home I think, I'll see, I've been saying that but I was thinking if, I'll have to wait and see Debbie 
They are nice, they are good things to have 
whether Hank
them
Oh he's not  right, are you ready with the, with that Paul?
Try and get to boil again
Pardon?
No it doesn't matter seriously, turn it up, right up 
They are, okay
Right up, okay
I'll put it in a jug shall I?
Yes
Arthur, if he comes home as brass as 
you can do mine in here Paul if you want 
a button
Yeah
it'll be a waste of time
How would it be a waste of time?
Well, he'll, he'll wait up for his meals
Oh I see what you mean, no I don't think he'll come home as bright as a button, somehow or other
I think, I think you'll get the bright times won't you, like he's been in hospital
Yeah
but he's been really
really on the ball, but I don't think it's gonna happen much, not for a month or two 
What you, you've got to keep it  
you want something on your, you want something on your feet or
I know
old son, you're gonna stand on something sharp or something hot spilt on them and you are gonna scream
And now where er, what you doing with the gravy, put it, let the people 
Paul's 
put their own on
Paul's got it in the bowl, in a, in a, on a bowl?
was that Philip's that little one?
The one with the leg is Philip's 
Yeah 
Right
if he doesn't like his bacon we'll have it, tell him
If you don't want your bacon
cos there's one here without bacon  you done 'em?
Right who want there's a leg here, bits and bobs
have you told your mum Tony that dinner's, can you tell her
yeah, I'll have that, the other two, bring the gravy through, here he is with the gravy
In here with the gravy
Paul and the gravy
Who's having er what?
Oh I don't want the leg
That's not yours, you can sit wherever you like
I'll sit on
Paula, Paula, it's all out, come on
Oh what a lot of
you have some
oh we haven't put the, Paul you haven't put the stuffing on
Oh no shock, horror 
Can you get the stuffing on a plate
okay
Tony
taste nice that
do you want more potatoes because I can't eat these
Yeah I'll have
One potato
rather than start and
oh
Are we on air?
We're all on air, we have been all morning
Who's on air?
You are
Oh God
while you've been swearing and that been going ever so, police'll be round tomorrow
What doing?
Arresting you
What for?
Yes
That is terrible
Ooh what a lovely dinner between us
Now do you have to re play it back to get the voices in the order?
No, I can remember forty five minutes' worth no problem, oh Tony er Paul get erm a bowl, erm, a dish, a dish, don't put it ah
Take it, no way out, it hasn't got a pourer
He's put the wrong one, he's put a soup bowl out


give the lad a chance
It hasn't got a squirter
Is that why it goes like that?
Yes you've got to have a
A lip
the one with a lip like this
Can't put it into my
well this looks good
This is delicious
Mm, oh it's beautiful, oh, oh best meal this year, oh
Paul made the gravy
Who made the gravy?
I made the gravy
Paul made the gravy
and I carved half the chicken
Yeah he's been carving the chicken, yeah
Don't forget your stuffing Arthur, do you want your stuffing?
They are
Erm, no
ah nice one Tony
I tell you what's nice stuffing if they have it in Ulster Paula, is the chestnut one
Yeah it is nice that, yeah 
it's a nice one that 
Is it one that Ken and Margaret used to have?
Mm
What was that?
Have you had your, have you had a sprout?
Mm
Aren't they nice?
Yeah they're quite nice
Oh you're a wonderful cook Arthur
Keep 'em coming 
Why've you got a glass here?
Why've I've got a glass and no one else got a glass?
No if you look around 
Cos you're having wine, would you like the spare?
there's six glasses
Everybody's got a glass
Yeah, but why I've got a wine glass and everybody
Well we thought you were having a Concorde you see
That's for carving the chicken
You can have another one 
Who didn't give it a stir
Me
those are nice
It's all at the bottom
in the microwave those sprouts are, did you put water on them?
Tiny bit
well not just a tiny bit, you put about half way up don't you Paul?
You don't cover them in water 
Nice aren't they?
Mm, they hold the flavour better don't they?
Yeah, get the taste of the sprouts
they must be good for you
No it's a bit like pressure cooking ain't it?
Yeah, we're under a lot of pressure, yeah
Mm
Who's going 
You're a cook?
to visit grandpa this afternoon?
Mm, mm
Who's going this afternoon?
I'll go
I'll go this evening
I'll go this afternoon
taking me pack of cards this afternoon and a crib board
Oh, I'll, I'll go with you this afternoon then


What to play crib?
It's a
 

Who's going this evening then?
Paul and I
We, we could get a crib school going Tony


all bring their drips over and er God knows what 
You might find he's very tired this afternoon
Why?
Well because they've had, instead of having this sleep, they'll, they'll have had their consultants round
Mm, true
so that you may find that father isn't up to it today 
he'd have missed this morning's siesta
Can't he have a siesta in the evening?


he can only have a siesta
A siesta is an afternoon sleep 
afternoon sleep 
No it's not, it's just a sleep
It isn't, a siesta is an afternoon sleep
Oh it's just a sleep a siesta
It's not
a sleep taking during the day
No it's not
you can have a morning siesta
I would say a siesta is
an afternoon siesta
a sleep afternoon
Mm
Granted, it's a sleep taken during the day  cos you're naked
You're wrong
After he's had his lunch he might be sleepy 
it's only quarter past one well it's they, he'll be having his lunch now 
One fourteen and fifty nine seconds 
Mm, mm
then he'll button down for a bit
Mm, mm 
he was very sorry yesterday
What?
he decided to have liver
And it wasn't mum's
and he said it was horrible
What was it?
It was ox liver
Oh yeah  it's a bit sharp that ain't it?
Mm, it's very strong ox liver
You know that liver's very high in cholesterol
No
Is it?
Mm, mm
It should be 
  

It shouldn't be high in cholesterol
Cos they've been on about people
all the
Sugar goes into erm fat I think
You don't, this is a much nicer meal, isn't it?
Than what?
Vice versa 
Yeah depends what it is
Than yesterday
What did we have yesterday?
home cooking
oh you and, you and Sally had the same, at the pub
Pardon?
How much did they charge you for that down the pub?
I was disappointed in it
I was disa 
Oh we weren't were we Ton?
No
He said he was surprised at all the things that 
Where we went was 
were high in fat is and he was surprised
Well I'm sorry but where we went it was great 
 
weren't it Tom?
Well last time I went to that one it was okay
There you are then
weren't it?
Mm
but that, yesterday I was very disappointed
Did you tell them?
The first time we went
We had a great meal
we had a
didn't we Ton?
Yeah.
What did you have?
Well the first time we went when we went all together didn't we?
We had erm, what did we have Tony?
It was erm salt and vinegar crisps and a packet of pork scratchings 
 
It was nothing unusual was it?
No
There wasn't anything unusual on the menu 
No, ours wasn't, was it?
Ours wasn't, but what was there was good
that's right
Oh yes it was good wasn't it?
so you'd expect it to be up to 
Some sort of standard
Bernie's are about, usually very good
Yeah some standard or other
I was very, very disappointed
Oh the service was poor wasn't it Paul?
 
I mean, I mean she brought the
No she had a smiling face
She, she was a very nice girl
Mm, mm
well she brought the meal and she, she had to go miles to get the sauce, didn't she?
Yeah, she made it
She made it, mm
cos about two minutes later she come back with it
Just with the sauce where you'd think she took the order 
This chicken's good isn't it?
Chicken's good isn't it?
Mm
It's beautiful chicken
I think the carving bit's the best
Oh I do, I think the carving's brilliant
Only on the left hand side of the chicken


Anything left?
Let me think who did it
I don't know erm
Don't know
this what we
last night dad
Mm, mm
It's beautiful  I love chicken
It's good for you ain't it?
It's a good meal
This is a good time when you can't make rude noises 
  

Mm, mm 
Throw us the bin
Pardon?
Throw us the bin 
 

We should of done some more roasties for you shouldn't we?
Are you hungry?
Well they like roasties and I didn't realize 
sit there going ssss
Ha
oh, enjoyed that, good meal
What we having for pudding?
There's a tin of
there's ice cream I bought them
and ice cream
Could I have erm, rice pudding?
No
Ah no
Gonna have that tin of pears 
have that later 
and there's ice cream
there's er, erm big tub of ice cream 
Put it in the bowl and bring the ice cream out so it can thaw.
Tony does the pears you bring the ice cream 
Did you know the word Yorkshire pudding is in the English dictionary?
Why?
Yorkshire pudding 
I think I'll have the rest of that please Paula, good 
Stanley go away, er, erm
Yorkshire pudding didn't he?
Did he?
Yeah
How did it go?
Can't remember
I don't know how it goes I've forgotten but it  it's from the angels do the next thing, ha
What?
yeah, pancake day on Tuesday
Next Tuesday?
Mm, we all make pancakes
Right, we're all gonna make pancakes
When's pancake day?
throw them up, catch them
When is it?
Have them for school
we could have a trial run oh Paul's  
Then we'll all have the school dinners
Go away
then in the afternoon we have pancakes for his pancake races
a real good day
Bet it, bet it goes flat on you though
Shall we have a competition, ha, ha, ha 
No
what's he having lemon put on yours 
just see who can be sick first I think
Oh shut up
Liver pancakes 
Who's eaten the most pancakes, oh
maple syrup
I had
I had
and I went green
Oh there's a bird on the bird feeder
Pardon?
Pardon?
Children can go in the kitchen and cook them
Make a load in there
how'd you know?
Double checked it
what about the chicken machine, what if they put
no the automatic potato peeler
It's good, it's lovely there
Does the vicar come for the race?
Have you invited him?
Barry came last year, but
I mean the vicar usually comes for the pancake race doesn't he?
Oh, I
Gives the pancakes his blessing
Mm, oh it's
just tradition 
 
I don't know if they'll do that
Really?
We have pancakes for school dinner
Ah, but don't make them
No because there's three hundred people in the school 
Children to dress up in little
Pancakes
mop caps and
We have Easter bunny come to our school
Well yours are silly
Hide the Easter eggs 
Easter bunny 
Hides Easter eggs, Easter bunny
does somebody dress up as an Easter bunny?
No
I could just see it  a local farmer coming out with his gun
Ooh ah
ah I've got it, bang 
Easter bunny
You hide all the eggs and the
no, no, I do
Pauline and Pat climb out the window


hide the eggs
What eggs are they?
Climb out the window
and the telephone go
and then you climb back in
and then you climb back in and then the telephone goes


said these 
oh God just see it 
and then they go, the kids go out and look for them
who, who telephones?
Anybody we can get
I'll telephone 
Why don't you just dial 
I'll telephone you Paula
and then that re and that just phones itself up
Oh does it?
does it cost you anything then?
No
No
Oh  there you are


And you phone up and it goes hello Mr bunny oh
You wanna see, the kids'll see you dialling
It's Bugs Bunny
No they won't, they'll just hear the tone, tone
the Easter bunny has arrived 
 
Well if you, if you dialled and put it down and walked away from it then it rings, oh
No, I'm in the hall and the telephone rings in the office
Oh they hear it ringing do they?
and they bring telephone through 
So the, so the door's slightly open, so they can hear the, oh, oh what a surprise, oh 
oh 
it is the Easter bunny talking to me
do you think your mother, your grandma should dress up with a mop on the back 
top drawer, top drawer, bottom drawer, middle drawer, well I don't know
a bobble on her, on her back 
You just get out the path, you just get down the school path
 
All these kids are growing up, yeah, thinking there's this bunny dropped eggs, Easter eggs all over the place
Well I can remember my
my grandchildren coming to our house 
The national curriculum has nothing on her 
can't you Paul?
And grandpa lifting you up 
Oh yes and the cuckoo clock you used to 
and setting the cuckoo off 
 
The cuckoo clock used to lay Cadbury's Creme Eggs yeah 
Do you know, do you know what we did with that, that Cadbury's Creme
What?
we gave it to Tony
Really?
He couldn't eat it
Oh what a pity, he's, Paula you're dribbling
Er
er
And what happened?
Oh can't you remember these coming to our house?
Oh yeah, yeah
Well
thing is too, at Christmas we used to have the erm, when we lived in Buxton we used to have the front bedroom where they, do you remember Paul, and the bay underneath it?
Yeah
yeah
and we used to hang out of there on, on a long, long string all these bells and jangle them on Christmas Eve oh yeah, yeah 
Oh we used to do this at home
yeah and er oh Santa's here and that, God
Well, grandpa used to do this with these, when they were little
I, I used to throw a handkerchief through the door, do you remember that?
No
Oh yes
Do you remember that?
you used to think that there were
I had magic, I could throw a handkerchief through the door
I remember Paul putting out all the plate for the reindeer
Oh yeah, the carrots, the mince pies
Carrots, mince pie and the
Don't swing on your chair otherwise you'll break your neck
oh that was rather a nice thing to do though for Easter
What break your neck?
What break your neck?
No, for, for Easter
Break your neck
What an Easter bunny?
Mm, an Easter bunny, now
So you have an Easter bunny coming do you?
We have pancake game, we do all the traditions, pancake
I tell you another thing they do
What about harvest time, do you have all the traditions then?
We only have harvest
do you, do you burn somebody in the
In the stew
in the man, in the big man?
Throw them out
You don't want a
Put a, put a
all the traditions, nothing like the good old days 
Another, another thing you can do for Easter, another thing is, er you can go back to the old tradition of the pay sex
The what?
The pay sex
Rolling them down the hill?
Yeah, rolling them down the
Anybody seen the tin opener?
Yeah it's in the bathroom drawer
Bottom drawer
It's right in the bottom drawer
Oh
It's where it shouldn't be
The, sorry, er, you know the pay sex


You boil the
What?
Sounds stupid 
you boil eggs you know ordinary eggs 
Hand me the plates 
go on you go and get me a spoon
and you roll them down the hill 
In, in onion skins
Yeah
and then you colour them or you could use er
Did you know 
chenille 
if you want to dye wool, onions are a great dye for dyeing wool
Yeah, you want to see Hilary's
Dye
dyes, they're on plastic, do you know what she does, she gathers all the plants and herbs
Mm, yeah that's right
and she brought up, she had a bag as big as a bin liner
Yeah
she'd been up to Scotland
Oh well done son
and she got enough different colours 
Where, where'd she get them from?
She just goes er walking over the moors
Wild flowers
No
How many
No
how many people walking
Or people's gardens
No
use grasses
Yeah, you can get some cracking colours
Oh hers are fabulous 
How many people want them?
I've only got four
and she
Hold on, the lad wants to know, he's talking to you 
How many people want, do you want
I only want ice cream, thanks
Mum?
You'll have a pear
Yes
Dad?
Have a pear
Put that away we don't want it
yes we have 
that's gotta go in the box
a pear
Can we have a couple of spoons, yes Tony just a couple
Take the 
That goes in the box Paul
take the plates to the dishwasher
No she
Those are soups
first of all she
I know
she spins her wool, she gets one and, and does her own spinning and weave and then she dyes
Philip, you're nearly finished
Yeah take it that way
take
fourth time, please will you take the 
and she 
Hold on just a moment
Ah, he wants a pear, another plate please 
does anybody want, do you want
Yes please
Who doesn't want?
Nobody, everybody wants
Well then somebody's gonna be short here cos we only got five 
Bring another bowl 
I only want one pear I don't want two 
It doesn't matter
He only wants
can you get a bowl
Oh I thought it was pears you were short of
No
Not short of pears
a couple, a couple of pears here 
And she dyes all her er 
wool and she's got the most 
Here take these 
fabulous colours 
Really?
Yeah, I'll
Put the kettle on
I think
and er, things like that
The, what was the one that was very unusual
 
That was spot on 
There was two
what they expect them to be
Yeah, beetroot
Yeah, yeah, done that
beetroot
I did this with a group of children years ago in erm, in Buxton 
I did it when when we went to camp while we went
Yeah
we laid, we all laid on our own
yeah, off you go
Thank you
Away
Rolling, rolling, rolling 
If that's Philip's just a small 
Right 
The ice cream, did you know ice cream
I
is the most common way of catching salmonella?
Yes
Especially after eating chicken


Oh you tell us Paul won't you?
and bouncy ice cream that bounces around
Bouncy ice cream
it's even worse
Ice cream Paul
Put another spoonful on there
I don't want it, if that's mine, I don't want any juice
Right, you don't
No 
Do you want some more ice cream?
Yeah another spoonful please  brilliant
That's Philip's
Oh he doesn't want ice cream
Doesn't want ice cream
You don't want anything else on there do you?
Oh yes I wanted ice cream 
Oh, I've only got five 
Ice cream on that
dad I brought five
Five what?
Five what?
Erm
Your bowl?
There aren't six, one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four, oh
It's magic that
I ain't got a bowl
it's magic that
Does anybody want more juice?
No ta
No
There's more juice
Ah, it's magic
Paul do you want some more juice?
Yes please
Go on, that's enough, yeah oh
Yeah
fill it up
fill her up
er, he had a
We ought to start speaking in Spanish so the people who read this dictionary don't understand it 
Oh, my God
I don't think it's actually
 
Erm Tony can I have your, do you want some more juice?
Er, ah, yeah please
Erm pass it down then
 

Teapot
Is that enough ice cream now?
That's plenty, loads
Put the lid on, put that back in the erm freezer top
Be it Cornish
 

Did you put the kettle on as well Paul?
No
 

Right
No it's funny though, I'm, colours come up totally different don't they?
Mm, what you'd expect
Yes
Yeah, when you do your own dyeing 
your dyeing 
you know, plant that you pick and you think what's that gonna be 
Berries and 
Red and it turned out black 
green 
She does things out of the garden like sage and thyme
And rosemary
and parsley and 
What's the national flower of England, the, the, the one that used to be on the thruppenny bit?
Thistle
Thistle
No, not, not the thistle the
Portcullis


Not wattle, it's er
It used to be a thistle on the little thruppenny 
It wasn't it, thistle's the Scottish one, it's that round, the frown with the round head and
a thistle
That wasn't a thistle on a thruppenny bit
Are you sure?
Go and get one of the old thruppenny bits
I'm eating my
It's not a thistle it's a er
A rose
No it's not the rose
Portcullis
Daffodil
A petunia
Cabbage


It's a wild flower
It's a wild flower
A daisy, a nettle
Is it thrift?
Thrift
I don't know what a thrift is
We've got a
as far as I know a thrift to be a large mongoose inhabiting the
Mm
upper
well don't eat it so quickly
I'm not eating it quickly at all, it's just catching a filling every time I eat it.
Don't eat it, don't eat
I think Cornish ice cream is delicious
Especially as it melts and forms a
don't you think Tony?
This Cornish ice cream?
Mm, not as nice as
Eldercar
Eldercar's ice cream is brilliant
Who's Eldercar?
It's, it's
Just made out of cream and fruit, nothing else 
it's 
and no additives
Mm, this one's lovely
Got wobbles in it?
Bubbles, bubbles
Wobble, wobble banana
You ain't tasted nothing yet 
Can you buy it anywhere?
from the corner shop, oh no where else, no, no 
You can't buy it 
that's what I mean, can you buy it anywhere?
You have it, it's beautiful 
Are you take it to ho the hospital?
For grandpa
What?
And supposing it melts and we have to
No
No he means the
the recording stuff
the recording
Mm 
You can tell him that joke can't ya?
What joke?
Which joke's that one?
Oh aye yes
you start laughing
Keep it clean
no
What's the Irish contraceptive?
You know what it was?
We've heard it don't
Don't
Oh no we've heard it
Right then
no we don't
no, no, no
Just say it quietly so that the people can get the joke 
It's not very nice 


It's funny
it's not very nice
it's funny though
No it's not you're right  
It's about as good as your erm
Everybody in the ward was laughing about erm, what you call it?
erm, what, Only Fools and Horses
Oh yeah
That was on was it?
If anything he seemed to be a bit more brightly yesterday overall weren't he?
Mm
Did you not take it away with you on your weekend away?
No  going up erm
Oh
anything could happen to him
Yeah that's


interesting conversation possibly
Yeah
interesting recording bits half way up Snowdon
Mm, that was delicious
Mm, it was
It
just imagine doing this in the weather that we had, God, up to here, wind and rain 
Right whose pears are those Paul?
Those are nice, I want some pears
Tea or coffee mother?
Coffee mother
Tea or coffee father?
Both
Nothing thanks
Nothing
right
Do you want a cup of tea Philip?
Tea please
Did you hear about the Scout Club?
What?
Makes
oh no
Who's had a mixture of tea and coffee, you?
Yeah, Scout Club, it's delicious
Oh God
Oh that was
weren't it?
Have ya, have that er maybe tried it, it's really nice
Hot or cold?
Hot
Sugared and milked?
sug sugared and milked, yeah
Ooh
Paula, Paula
make them mixed
Yes love
Tony wants
Tea and coffee mixed
tea, coffee mixed
With milk and sugar 
milk and sugar, it's lovely
You've all got
 



You know
Winding your mum up 
You know at the camp, it's going, are you going again this year, the one you went to up the road?
Which one up the road?
Up on the, on the main road at that big house you went 
When?
when was it last year or the year before?
Oh I don't remember
Oh we k we went to have a look at them in
in the
Oh, that's not up the road it's Hertford
Hertford
Hertford
Yeah
it's down the road, it's not up the road at all, it's down the road, it's miles away, up the road
It didn't seem miles away


with a big house 
Tell you what walk it and you'll find that
There's no big houses
I thought there was a big house in the grounds 
Where was it Tony the one near Woodbridge that one?
Yeah
Yeah the one in er
Oh we went past the farm up to it, there's a farm on the left
Tiny ho farm shop
Oh I don't 
where you got the water from?
up the ground, that
grounds and a big house
Oh there's a what you call it at the end, the old folks' retirement home isn't there
Oh 
somebody's formed a country residence
If you boil up that chicken carcass we'll have some of grandma's soup
Ah
with suet dumplings
But we'll have some carrots
I'll send Tony to the shops
and some leeks
You can get those out the guinea pigs cage
Well I'll sent Tony to the shops he can buy 
get the car they wouldn't of eaten all the carrots yet
It's, they're closed today
It's not
Thursday
it's not closed today
Mum, mum says there is 
Wednesday 
Wednesday it's closed
Well what day is it today?
Thursday 
Sunday 
Yes
Oh it's Thursday oh good 
I'll tell Ton I send you to the shop, you get a frozen packet of
Yeah
stew vegetables and you just shove those in and that's it
Oh I don't I get fresh carrots and leeks and 
You should do, you should do, yeah get something like that Tony
Yeah, but then it saves you getting all the bits and
That's a proper job though isn't it mother?
Do it that 
And 
way, yeah, but if he gets fresh, a bit of fresh some fresh leeks and fresh 
It's alright 
you won't get vegetables in, in 
no
I don't
How about going to
They're even worse
Don't swing on your chair you'll break your neck
The trouble is during the week, a lot of little shops only have what's been left over from the weekend  and their vegetables, cos that's what happens at ours
Mm, yeah
and then on the Friday
You get a fresh lot in
a fresh lot in
If you get
When did you get that vase?
Or when did we get that vase?
That was from erm Sharon
Was it?
Sharon
it's very nice innit?
Er
You're not eating again are you?
God
I just fancy a biscuit
Tony your tea, coffee here
Sha er is Sharon still going around
Is that tea and coffee?
there, there isn't enough milk in it




Oh these are nice
Are they?
Mm
What are they?
Bites
Bites
Computer biscuits
Mm, they're ever so nice
What are they made of?
Caramel
Mm
are they
They're horrible
They're caramel
they're horrible
Oh they're beautiful, I like, do you like them Tony?
You could hold tiles on a wall with these things


Cor, very poor
No just get a packet of stew vegetables
Yeah
a packet of
It looks more like tea now, it looked like coffee before
what's it called suet
What?
a packet of suet, and then I can make
Soup
soup, chicken soup
Ooh packet of suet
Don't you like 
Don't you like suet puddings
don't you like dumplings?
I like dumplings but I don't like fat


I'll skim the fat off
Better watch that Paul you'll pull all your fillings out
First of all boil it and then let it
they're horrible
Safeway Bites, best before the ninth of May 
Are you going tonight?
I'll go tonight
Well I'll go with you 
nine, two 
oh, right, am I going on my own this afternoon?
Anybody come with me to the hospital
I'll come with you and
I'll go tomorrow
You're alright, you can go tonight with Paula
Let's have a look at the packet
I'll go with ya
Well have you got a lot of homework to do?
Ton
cos otherwise I'll
well I, you're fresh for your homework now aren't ya?
Yeah, alright
Well if Tony's going tonight 
you'll get more done 
with his mum, I'll come with you this afternoon
If you want to, it's up to you
We can all go this afternoon, we can all go tonight, makes no difference
Well, you know I'm going to Mavis, in the soup, loop the loop
All you have to do is put the chicken carcass in and leave it
Yeah
and then when you come in I can put the er
I can make, skim it off
put the vegetables in
being as you've got, being as you're getting in er thingy vegetables 
You're not drinking tea and coffee mixed
Why not?
Oh my God
What's wrong with that Paula
Have you ever had tea and coffee in the vending machine?
No, but what's wrong with it?
What's wrong with it?
Out the vending machine it's not proper tea to start with 
That's gonna spill if you're not careful 
Out of the vending machine out, out of a vending machine it's revolting
It's not proper tea to start with
it's
it's coffee.
Somebody was asking about this new
Instant tea
instant tea
It's supposed to be brilliant innit?
What's it made out of 
or what?
Oh no, they wouldn't do that 
Not much
What's it taste like Tony?
Horrible
Nice, he's, he's put too much tea in
I'll tell you something it will replace
Teabags
Yeah
No
it will
you can taste it
It will not, it's too expensive
It's not nice, it's not nice 
But the price will come down
it's too expensive
that's your opinion
Remember when teabags came out?
People said they'd never, never catch on, teabags
Do you know those Oxo Granules 
Daft way of having a cup of tea just got used to it
those are far more expensive then buying Oxos 
Only at the moment they are, in time they won't be, Paul stop swinging 
and they, they, they
Remember what we were talking about this morning how things have changed in service in shops 
Yeah 
and that, it'll all happen
Oh it'll happen 
You in time 
In your old age you'll be making yourself an instant cup of tea 
Look at coffee, how many people have 
They sell stamps don't they?
Right
I wouldn't be at all surprised
but you've got to find the place there it could be at the other end a mile away couldn't it?
Yeah
The size of that place
Yes, I don't know where it is  
Oh father says it's er  so far away from one end to the other 
See they use their, that, their room as a bedroom don't they?
They use that room as a bedroom, I'm not with you
That one there
Which one?
that room there with the window this one, look 
Chance to have a look, there
Yeah there's a 
as a bedroom?
yeah, you've got all the camp beds
Ah they might have somebody to stay with them, have somebody to stay with them
the only trouble this we need days and days and days and months or rain
it's lovely but it's not doing us any good this
Its too dry really, there's going to be a real water shortage still
Yes
a real calamity too because once the things dry up, the trouble is the, the water gets
seen this lady
What
she dresses in some of the strangest things, sometimes she dresses in sailor's uniforms and big white  
Really?
coats on, yeah she walks all over the place
Where does she live?
I think it's  I think  but I could be wrong
And does she carry her clothes about with her or does she 
Just like that she walks and walks and, nights, morning any time of the day you can see her, no paths, you know what the roads are like
all on her own.
There used to be er, a lady that used to come in the cinema when I worked there, and she had a
in fact not much bigger than that
Yeah
er, a shopping basket
Yeah
and she had all her clothes in it there
Oh God look at the width of this thing 
she could always 
look at the width of it, God, ah, oh that lorry, get past it.
She was always clean, you couldn't fault her for cleanliness, but I'm sure she must of either washed her clothes in the toilets, you know, wash basin in the toilets because that was the only thing she had was one bag  and she used to, er, her pension book was in and er erm
This is ridiculous this, this shouldn't be on the road.
He should wait you know to ask 
Yeah but, how can he?
If the width of it
I know, it's dreadful that
they're just too big for roads and this is a main road
Well this is what the grumble about don't they?
Who?
in Northern this is the erm 
Oh the farmers, this is ridiculous
this is the Northern
you can't pass these
Well it's the width of it
Mm 
It's erm, oh God 
Well do you think that lady sleeps out?
No I think she lay, I think it's
I think, I've never seen her, there's a rumour you know how you get stories about people 
Yeah 
like this
I mean there's 
Yeah 
We have a lot of oddities
well she, she will, literally walks miles, she'll walk, you see her the other side of Stowmarket, seven miles, six, seven, eight, ten miles away
It's madness 
all weathers all weathers 
it's 
as well 
They like it, they like that sort of a life
Oh rumour has it that her husband was in the forces
Yeah
now this is an old rumour and er, he was an officer, er I think in the RAF and he had erm an accident his plane crashed and he died and this is why she dresses in military uniform all the time  sort, you know she went a little bit deranged
Yeah
and that
but sur she never got over it 
the shock of it never got over the shock of it though 
and yet you see these days they would give her treatment for that
Well
if she, er, er, no, at the beginning they would of given her treatment or something 
Oh she isn't that old 
Oh
No
I thought you meant during the war
No, she's only in top twenties, early thirties
Really?
Yeah, that's all she is
Oh I thought you meant
No, no
Oh
Super jet, sixteen hundred, eighteen, Amazon, do we need things that big?
Mind you see, when you think about it you see
look at the size it's enormous 
some people they only live for their partner don't they and a thing like that get a
Yes, yeah 
her husband getting killed is the end of the world and there's, there's nothing else sort of thing and  they just  it's very sad really, I mean if you're a young person you can quickly pull yourself together and realize that
Mm, mm
life goes on
Yeah
which you've got to do
Yes
I mean  the way I'd look at it, would look at it if something of happened to John, well I still go
and you've got to sort of well 
Yeah 
there's, there's nothing you can do about it when 
No 
you've had your life, smile and
but
that's it
when me mum died everybody said oh your
dad I'll be dead in, within a year, two years, he'll give up, he's got nothing you know
Yeah
he lived ten, twelve years was it after?
Yeah
No it wasn't, no ten years
There's a, the person that took that words was your Moira
Oh yeah, well she went a bit 
she went a bit over the top didn't she?
Yeah
With remorse
Yeah
It was unnatural
and yet she was always treated as one of the, the family, but it's silly because you've done what you can when they're living.
I mean Margaret next door to me she went over the top when she was
all her sister's energy and thinking her sister should, I mean she had a sister living with her and her sister had her own family with her, er a Mongol son, well I'm afraid Margaret shouldn't of taken that attitude because she said ooh everywhere I go now there's only me, now that's being selfish, because she had three children  and she shouldn't really of expected all her sisters to keep coming, they were living with her, you know
never leave her alone
Did she ever get over it?
Well she
when I left
And was she getting over it with her, was she getting better?
Well not really because she was still demanding 
Coping with that husband not being there 
too much of her relations
Oh yes
that's why
Alice eventually said she'd buy our house after all that time and said, and said well she'd be right next door to her
Yes
but you're not fair to your own family which is even your own family gets first priority
Oh yes
I mean I wouldn't, wouldn't expect, I would expect Paula to
you know you're the first priority and I
support yes, but not
Take over
not demand all that 
Demand, yeah 
you know, you understand what I mean?
I do, yeah
Yeah  and she used to say well, well I mean oh well they haven't got, they'll be able to have their holidays together and all this, oh yeah fair enough, it's their life  no I think Margaret can be a little bit
she really did
But it did
You see the trouble is with Margaret her husband had always done everything for her, she went out to work and he brought the, he more or less did his work, did overtime, everything and still managed to look after the boys
How many children, was it three children you said?
Three boys
Three lads
Yeah  the eldest boy when his father died was eighteen
Yeah
the next one was sixteen
Mm
and the young boy was about thirte no he wasn't, yeah about thirteen yeah something like that 
Eighteen, eighteen, sixteen and thirteen
Yeah  well
how did they take it then the lads?
Well the eldest lad  was alright, but the middle lad he became a bit of a problem 
Sixteen year old 
by er, mind you they'd always been children that had had to fend for themselves a lot, the only sad thing
Mm, mm
that their own
Margaret used to be working she worked nights as well 
Come on get a move on 
you know
he's gonna cause chaos this guy, he's gonna pull in front of this lorry, watch
Mm, she worked and she worked night shift as well, you know they had to do alternative shifts, so consequently
sort of kept the house and the family going sort of thing
The day to day jobs, yeah
everything, the cooking, the lot
Yeah
I mean Margaret used to come in and everything was done for her, I mean she never had to do a thing  well that hit her terribly you see.
Did she carry on working?
Well she went on sick leave for a long time
Yeah
and er I don't think that was a good idea because she was lonely without all the
Yeah, if you go, if you can get back to work
Yeah
you get into, it can help to get your mind off it during the day or alright at night you might be very lonely
And she was at the cemetery every day with
Ah, yeah, yeah
flowers and
Yeah
I mean she had a picture of him on the headstone and oh, thought she went over the top I'm afraid and  she get loads of support because then that Clifford was very popular and er his was
yeah
and er the men were very good.
There was one man he used to come every week just to do  see if there were any jobs that wanted doing and er he'd spend, you know, a day there you know doing anything she wants doing that she couldn't manage herself
Right, did he work Clifford?
He worked for the Electricity Board
Electricity Board?
What putting the correct
Maintenance
Maintenance on the
Yeah
on the faults on the
but he was, the men that he worked with his friends were really good, you see and his sister, the youngest sister, Alice who she had, had the Mongol lad
Yes
well Clifford and her, her husband
Yeah
had grown up together
Yeah 
now he took it very bad like as much as Margaret
Yes
because his best friend
and he, and really Alice was supporting him as well as Margaret
Mm
through the crisis and she had a lot on her hands because he went to pieces and he had no other friend he had 
How did he go to pieces, when you say he went to pieces?
He, he
What did he do?
Well he, his own idea was he'd lost his friend
Yes 
he'd lost 
Yeah
he'd lost everything
Yes I can see that, but 
he was lonely 
how did he go to pieces?
Oh well his health suffered and  
Did he stop working or
Yeah
really?
Yeah, oh it really knocked him for a burton, you see his, you see Clifford and him, with this boy that's had their, their, his son that was
well Clifford would always integrate him in with his own family
Yes
If Clifford had, had er Alice husband went out
yes
the boys used to go out
Yeah
you know what I mean, football and things like that, he was always included in it.
In a way he  he was one of, you know
One of the family 
he was one of the family 
Mm
it was, it was very sad really
Just shows you that, but death can be 
Oh yes
death can show erm, people's dependency on each other 
Oh yes.
that can really show it, can't it?
Well they were, they were really dependent on, I mean on each other, they were a unit even though they were two families in a way
Mm
I mean it was only Margaret's sister, you see Margaret came from a large family, so there was always
Plenty of people around 
plenty of people around
Mm
and unfortunately it was only about eight months before that she lost her mother, only her mother was the dominant feature of the family you see she kept them all together 
I wonder what would of happened if she hadn't of died when she did
Yeah
and Clifford had, had died, I wonder how he'd of taken it then, perhaps sh you know they lost that
Yeah the mother 
the helmsman as it were 
Yeah they lost everything really, but the father you see, he, he was pushed in the background, the old man 
Poor chap
I mean the old man was well in his seventies and he, he was secondary, you see he never even er, he, he didn't even come to the funeral, Clifford's funeral and Margaret was very bitter about that.
And why was that?
Why didn't he come, was he ill?
I don't know
Could of been
I don't know but he could of been ill, he could, it could of been that he couldn't take any more you know that  but Margaret was terri terribly bitter about him Margaret not coming, but he could, he couldn't stand it
Yes you see funerals er, everybody likes a wedding don't they?
Yeah
Everybody loves weddings, dressing up, meeting and that, funerals, yeah alright we all get together again at funerals and the, after the coffin's gone in the ground and all that, that really high emotion point or once it's gone behind the erm curtains  to be burnt, once you've gone through that there's that sort of erm
Limbo
limbo yeah, you're coming together again in the house or whatever you have, a reception, and you need to go through that to come to terms with it or you can, you can need to go through that, but some people can't take the pressure emotional pressure of, you know, all the, hour, two hours, three, four hours before that it just, they 
It, well then 
just can't take it, and I don't know how they cope with it afterwards 
they cope, I mean as far as they were concerned, as far as they were concerned they'd never seen such, the crematorium was packed, the people was all lined outside 
Yeah very popular chap
and the, the he was very, very popular and they, and they 
Well you know when erm Scott erm died
Yeah
er, all, all his mates 
 
all his mates
and Paul and myself went up there didn't we?
Yeah
and, that was, it was 
it was 
it was like a football match crowd
Yeah
it was solid and it was all sort of, his age, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen year olds and all vowing they're never gonna sniff whatever again, you know all making these
Let's hope they don't
pledges
but you see with him you see, they, it was packed, the house before the wake was packed, because Margaret kept coming over when he was all dressed up in a suit and everything, I didn't, she asked me if, once to go, I just said no I would prefer to remember
Yeah
Clifford as he was, cos John had been in the hospital I think the day before he died
Was it a heart attack, heart?
Yeah it was, it, well what happened is, was, that he  on Sun on the Sunday gone swimming with the boys in the morning
Mm, mm
and then they'd got us playing foot 
football in the main park and they came back
He wasn't well that's right, no 
and Clifford, no Clifford said, the lads to each other are we going out again dad you know cos oh Margaret was in, yes, and there was some other boys, the boy across the road was eating something and the boys said and Clifford said do you mind if I just sit in the chair and be quiet for just a few minutes and he just sat in the chair and had his heart attack
He must of been feeling unwell then
Did, he was feeling a bit groggy, I suppose Arthur thought he was tired
Yeah
and er  he said the lad across the road, the hardware shop, he did first aid so he started on him, on the, Clifford resuscitation with the
Oh had he actually collapsed from his heart attack?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, and then and Margaret called for the ambulance, I heard the slop and I heard, and then they put the dog out right away and I said, that's unusual of them, it was one of those tiny little miniatures you see
What, they put it out where?
Out in the back?
Oh they put it outside in the garden
Yeah
and I said oh there's Benjy, there must be something, you know, I thought it was one of the kids that had jumped or something because the little one had always climbing and jumping off the wall, breaking his leg you know the weak one, and the next minute saw the ambulance outside, but he must of been, it must of been too massive to be able to do anything cos he wasn't breathing that bit you see
Oh, it been gone too, stop breathing too long, yeah 
you could only go so, yeah and 
poor chap
and say
so they put him on a life support did they?
Yeah from
how long was he on the life support?
er, er, something about he, in hospital about eight weeks
Eight weeks on a life support?
Yeah, he was on it some time and Charles and they'd put him back on the ward becau when John last saw him, cos he, John was visiting er, used to be having treatment or something at
at the time
Mm
for something, I, I think he was going for his skin 
Yeah
and he used to pop in you see
Mm, mm
but it was waste of time because he, he, he didn't know, he wasn't Clifford, well that's what he said to me, it's not Clifford you know
It's just a body there then
it's just a body there
So he's on the life support right to the end 
Yes and the funny thing was I 
was he on that life support right till the end?
Yeah, no, he was back on the wards
Did, they took him, taken him off the life support?
Yeah
Could he talk and, no
No
No
Oh the funny thing was about that was Margaret was with him
That's his wife?
Yeah
Yeah
now erm as well as much as she could she was never in the house and the day that he died she didn't get there on time
Oh God
Oh she wasn't
well you can guarantee that can't ya?
Yeah
Sod's law
she'd gone out, she'd just slipped out with Alice for something
Maybe that sort of hit her as well I think 
Oh I think so 
you know
after being in there all the time, but I mean, you, there's nothing you can do you can sit with somebody
Ah that's it, maybe that starts to explain a bit more 
round the clock yeah
how, why she took it so badly
Oh she did she
if I'd only been there when he died, I'd of hold his hands, blah, blah, oh God, poor lass
She never did
poor lass
But she couldn't really what's er, er
she couldn't of done any more
No
and she er she couldn't sort of feel guilty about it
No, no 
I mean because she spent every, every bit of the time with him.
But she, she won't see it like that will she?
Well I told her that I get, I said to her look Margaret you could of been, you could of closed your eyes and he could of happened
but it does happen non
Mm, mm,
you don't and you've not got to have any recre you know
Recrimination
recriminations about it because  well  it's maybe meant that way anyway  you've taken enough, you, you've taken enough yourself haven't you?
Mm, mm
But I mean there was er, they were so kind to them in the hospital if there would of been any sign of distress they would of, you know, usually anyway you don't usually have distress at the end you're usually at peace aren't you?
Oh that's what it looks like   whether you are or not oh, oh 
Oh you might not 
oh look at this Union Jack and the oh my God 
Where?
There
Oh yeah, oh somebody
oh the what you call it?
The erm British Legion
Oh yeah British Legion, was your father in the British Legion?
No, use, use, used to go to the club, Legion club
Was your father ever in the army?
No he's down the pit
Oh yes of course he was
down the pit
have  
have you heard how Johnny is lately?
No I've heard nothing, no
Is it, the wedding
according to Les yeah
Oh
but I don't know when, where, how, what or whatever I, it's up to him, ha, he's no longer 
How old is Arthur?
Is he older than you?
He's older than me oh he's a lot older, he's about fifty Johnny
Is he?
Yeah, hold on what am I, yeah he's coming up to fifty yeah, forty nine 
Is it, he was always good looking lad though your Johnny


well I reckon he was, I reckon your father was really good looking


don't you?
My dad?
Yeah
Oh I take after him an'all in that
Yeah I think your father was a good looking man
Yeah, handsome sod  my God  yes it was erm  bit of blow that when me dad went
Yeah
but you see when you smoke all your damn life what do you expect?
The ironic thing is you can't
And he couldn't stop it, I, I never get over when the doctor said to him if I were you I wouldn't smoke, it'll do you good not to smoke, so he didn't, and he stopped it
Yeah
just like that  crazy after what, forty odd years of smoking he stopped it just like that, and then when the doctor said when he'd been, after he'd got the results back, you know, all the, all the ones they do at the hospital then 
Aye 
obviously it was no good he, you could smoke like a chimney it made no damn difference the state his insides were
Yeah
his lungs were then
Oh  
and when he said er, you know he said you know well, er, you like a cigarette the doctor said, yeah, and my dad was so proud of this, you wanna cigarette yeah, you can smoke if you're, there you are and he said it, it wasn't the cigarettes  
 
God it wasn't the cigarettes 
John always says the doctor says he's got er he's got 
He's got to stop 
he's gonna take it
Yeah, yeah you see and he's stopped 
No he's got it, no but he's gonna, start again if everything, they told him that it, he, he had no chance he said 
Yeah, I don't blame him
he said er
I don't blame him at all 
I'd die I think
Yeah that's it
 
mind you the trouble is it's alright in saying that but you see I've got a bad chest, Philip's got a bad chest
All God's children got a bad chest 
and the trouble is, no
What?
that the trouble is it affects us you see
We're alright 
Yeah I know 
we're go round with masks on can't you?
Oh aye, yeah
Eh up, we've gotta
Ooh the house is, smells
no
Oh aye, it might 
you don't, you don't know what you're missing
Ooh, I, don't you start again with
No thanks 
Oh exactly
I don't like Park Drive 
good for you, keeps the moths out the house
But surely the taste
it's horrible, ah, well I think it's horrible
It keeps the moths out 
I can't stand going in a, you see, that's one of things I would never go out to dos for cos I 
Because of the smoke
I couldn't stand the smoke
he used
There
Okay?
Oh he's alright, he is,who's gonna come looking?
Honestly Arthur there's, there, I'll have those, give me those back
draw the curtains round 
Oh he's going in the toilet, they're better, that's a nicer colour 
Yes, give me those
were you never a Girl Guide?
I'm embarrassed.
I'm not embarrassed.
I am.
Why?
Well the nurse is here
I think they see a lot, they see everything the nurse's mother
What is it, if you've got it, flaunt
He's, he's, what do you call it?
Pardon?
he's alright, it's okay
yeah, it's alright, completely, I wouldn't do it if it was illegal, don't worry 
The only thing is Philip's gonna have to be careful
well somebody'll have to drive him there
about what?
about getting home movies
he's a great fan
yeah, might be an idea though, well we'll see what's, what happens with the
nothing to be ashamed of yourself


 
Oh God, no 
 

Go on what's that
nothing's happening 
I suppose they could send me out tomorrow
oh God
That's what I said to ya, I said this, tomorrow possibly
Yeah
cos if they've got everything under control they'd want it, what else can they do?
It's all under control now
It might be rest they might think 
It might be 
they might keep you in for a longer rest
I don't think they will though, because they've given me that already
Oh
this is the second bite this is it
Oh I see
I've had the first one
Oh
think 
I could wait another forty eight hours while you wait results of that one you see
Yes
I'm off all me pills now
All of them?
Well
except the pills they give you in these places just to keep you quiet
You er
can give ya, so that you can sleep
Let's have a, let's have a look at your list, see what you've er
stop, stop
Alright 
getting on, getting on
Well if you were going to come for me you've got to drive and that and he's still not up yet today, so I, I have to get Arthur to draw some money
Yeah
and I think it might be better if he hasn't
maybe if, if he's
he would
yes
when he's suggested you go back to bed
Because they cou they have to
No I say,
shh, shh
There's a possibility
There's a possibility
that's a possibility
they'll, they'll come and visit if I go back with Philip and
yes because they'll see to it
Yeah
see to your visiting
We can bring you back at home or if they insist that you go back in an ambulance, you may, they may not put you back home you know, have you thought of that?
They might put you into Southwold
I know, I mean, I mean it's the same thing isn't it?
Yeah, but they might do that 
Oh well, if they put you in Southwold I'm alright
I doubt it
I doubt it, but they might do that
Yes, if they put him into Southwold I'm alright
you're not, you're not gonna be in here much longer, that's a fact isn't it?
Mm
No
So
that's a fact
have you seen the weather out there, it's gorgeous ain't it?
did you watch it yesterday?
Some of it yeah
I saw a bit of it
brilliant man
Brilliant
I thought
he only last one lap didn't he?
Yeah, why I didn't see that, I only saw one bit of it, tiny bit
Red one last
Yeah, the British lad, the English lad, Aussies, they're all the same these Aussies
The conversation
no I think the more sensible idea is to get
he's on soundings
Is he also adding sugar to him
I tell you what he does need, see a doctor
Ah
he does need to see a doctor
I don't mean erm what's his name, cos he's abroad isn't he? erm  what's the guy's name?
Mm
he wants to see a doctor, otherwise he's just gonna, he's not gonna get any better is he?
Neither of them are gonna get better, I mean you've been in here all this time and he hasn't been up yet
Yeah
so, the biggest one is to get him
yeah
and to get that
yeah
he drove me over
yeah, I know 
Yeah, that's a point innit?
I needn't of brought her
I mean, yeah, but how can I go out without the car that's the trouble, but many car drivers
It's not been out the house other than last night
How, but you, they're, they've done all the shopping
Yes I know they have, yeah
I mean they've done all the shopping and how can I manage without the car?
Well you won't be able to
well
what?
how's that, has it got rockets on the back?
I don't know I think it's a sensible idea 
Wings on it 
for
get in his house, see what happens, get that
yeah
he's still, he's still got his antibiotics to finish
Yeah
Mm
he finishes them on Monday and if he's no better by then, cos nobody
 
Well he will be he's gonna be, he is better now than he was cos them antibiotics are working
Yeah well give them till he's finished the antibiotics 
Yeah, well, what but, but I'm saying is it's not the antibiotics it isn't the
It's just not the
that
he wants something to, he wants something 
he wants , he wants somebody looking at him and saying well
there's something, something going on that leg all the time like a pain or something like it
he wants, he wants X-ray or something like that 
 
just to see what on earth it's like in there 
He's like , he's, he's like, he's like, he wants to be in here
Well not this place but somewhere
Yeah, well, you see, but if he, the thing is, if he, he, he seems as if he is carrying a weight, a terrible weight all the time
Well that, what are antibiotics gonna do?
Nothing at all 
Mm, mm 
about that
you see the, the doctor doesn't, the doctor that came out doesn't know his case and, well I don't think
and I think to have it, say watch Mr , Mr  you, if he's not here, he's not here and you've got to do something
I can't, he can't,
Could he
I can't see
see you can't 
You can't go and see
it's too far away
Well it's, they've plenty of people here
so you've got, yeah  and if, the longer it goes on, the more
I mean if possible that he can't be any better
mi yeah, it's a possibility but until somebody actually says no, you don't know
when he went to Liverpool the guy there did nothing for you did he?
it was a waste of time it was a waste of a journey for Philip and it was too much for him
Well, he, it's not that far away and it's, if he's in here and they can see to him, fair enough, or they might be able to point him in a different direction, a better direction 
So it's, you've got to see somebody
Yeah
It's just to get
can't go on like this
Oh no
crazy to
getting worse, he's been going
oh
He hasn't as a matter of fact
it's just bed and
yeah can get in
I thought what's that digging in until I realized what it was
Oh all the time you've been
Yeah
He doesn't need to see, see a dermatologist
Who?
Well one of those


or other
a lum  lumbatologist no, no, yeah cos all he's doing is just lying there
He's just lying
eating
but it
It's ten o'clock this morning before they
report on what?
On what Arthur's doing
What's that?
wind bag
Who's the wind bag?
Blow out 
You're the wind bag 
It's not in, you've lost it, there you are it's in that one  can't find it?
Cup of tea dear?
Yes please 
One sugar?
Er one please
Two?
Er one please
One, sorry
What's that?
Don't be a Rodney and spend  what, that's Archer isn't it?
No, the other one
Brian, a cup of tea?
Lang lingo
that looks like Jeffrey Archer
Rodney's
Jeffrey's, Jeffrey Archer, Jeffrey, don't be a Rodney and spend Jeffrey on a  cat and bob, it's the Daily Mirror as well  
It's a new language
Rodney's a plonker, yeah
  

oh God, good though ain't it?
is that what you're doing?
I don't know
Is it a side line what's
No, no
a bit of a side line on that
No this is just to do with a
Yeah
a, a Rodney, yeah
a Rodney
don't be a Rodney it says, don't be a Rodney it says and spend a Jeffrey on a cat and bob, don't be a plonker and spend two thousand pounds that's what he played, paid to the prostitutes, do you remember?
Yeah, just because you looked a nice girl was it?on a cat and bob, somebody who gives you lots of promises and it's load of crap
 

bimbo
Bimbo
why?
Why?
The favours, in lieu of favours given 
Indeed,
Oh I


Oh
You know you can
just have, I look as if I'm
mm, it's good though ain't it?
It's good, it's the longest
has it stopped, is it still splitting ah?
Oh it is
Yeah
it is
 

Did you hear about that chap he did
What's that?
he did, James Watana, he did a one four seven break on TV the fastest ever
Yeah
and his father was shot out in erm is it Bangkok Tha out Thailand way
Yeah
and killed, his father's a gambler out there
somebody came to settle up  bang and he was playing thinking he'd just been wounded and in fact he'd been shot and killed, poor chap 
Is he still playing in
Well if he don't he don't get the pennies does he?
Don't do it you don't get paid 
Last chance by a clever
time share
At these prices
at these prices, low season you can go for nine hundred and ninety five pounds  mm 
There you are there's your mobility chair for you
That's the one, yeah
Oh, aye, that's the
five forward gears, one reverse
exact one Mary and I have talked about getting a twin one
For what toy boy?
No we were thinking of getting


so we can travel together
Sharing between you  where would you have him then?
No, share
Monday, Wednesday, Friday, she'd have him Tuesday, Thursday and weekends 
cos I said to her what you gonna do when you get home if you can't drive?
Oh she said I'm gonna get one of those er chair, chairs that you see them
Mary I told her to buy a car you see and she said, she said no, I'll buy a chair then we can drive on the seat
I said I, I'll have to start having lessons
How to do wheelies in the
how to do wheelies
she'll have to give me a mile start  oh I say
Who is it then?
I guess that thing
Wind bag
It's hot in here
You feel, with your fur coat
I know, I'm gonna put it, take it off on
and like nothing on earth
Mm 
mm  honestly it's all sex in these papers
your eyes have lit up
Mm


don't like these papers really
No, I know, keep the, keep the, you've read it four times now but you hmm 
Ooh
thought he was dead  oh  I tell you who keeps young Cliff Richard doesn't he?
Mm
He never seems to age
Who's that?
He's not married that's why
Yeah
He has a
doesn't smoke, doesn't drink  not married
 

Oh I say  Jimmy White
Well 
yeah but there's only one missing
oh no
You must be joking
They don't know who you are
it's like er Jeremy Beadle
Jeremy Beadle, is it heck, is it heck
Course it is
It's not
Of course it is, I mean in your house and taking over
oh
 

can I pass you please?
Can you get past?
I don't like her
it's a terrible non event
 

How's your glasses?
Can you squeeze through?
I can now
I've left a gap a yard wide for ya
Oh dear, that's 
Oh 
I better had, put these back on again
Yeah as Philip says you're stupid wearing those or something because
Yeah
they're your new ones so
Are they a different prescription
Yeah 
than those?
Oh, oh well
It may of been when between there
But Philip says you shouldn't of got that
Oh no, it's a different pres different strength
he said, well, well I said well he keeps
You look better in them mind you
yeah those are better
suit you
Mm
they make you make you look sort of intelligent sort of
oh they're more expensive aren't they?
What is it, your eyes have altered the strength of your lenses haven't they?
They've all, I could do with glasses.
I thought you used to wear them at one time
For reading yeah, I could do now I think for distance
Yeah
if I look at things like that, it's all, er 
yes because you, when Paula, when did Paula stop wearing glasses?
I'd never seen Paula in, in glasses, ever, other than in photographs
Oh
not a liable
I don't think she had
no it's just for close work
Mm
it is
Paula
glasses as soon as she went to another
well she wore glasses when she was in her pram
In her pram?
Yeah she had
she had little tiny, little gold ones
Yeah
that were tied on with a ribbon
Ah
and she was  
Have you got a photograph of that in the pram with glasses on?
and, no she had 
Could, we could have that blown up
she had them a few month's old didn't she?
Yeah
and we could send it anonymously to
primary school 
but no, she had them er then and he spent a lot of time did Paula with her glasses you needn't worry
Did she have operations to
Oh yeah
or just a squint
she had the two, the first one wasn't put right, you know they had to get the exact one
Mm, mm
They get weaker and weaker before they'll do it, weaken the
What they do is
So it will
So it will, if one wasn't
was pulling to yes
Yeah, yeah
So they weakened the strong one
And the only, the only way you can do that, you can't string the muscle up
So they weakened the strong one
They have to
the root and the stronger one
Yeah
what they hand them down here do they?
So they a bit Monty Pythonish swing
But she, she had to have two because the, the first one they did it wasn't, it wasn't exactly what they wanted
Mm
so she had to go back in and have it done again
God
so, she was very good wasn't she?
Because you see then erm  until they take the bandages off
Mm
they don't know
If it's worked or not, if it's been a success or not
and it's an ordeal for a young child
Mm
What we did with, we bought her a little guitar so that she can play it and have a bit of music and something to do 
Yeah, yeah 
and she had, we bought her this little
Ukelele type of thing
and the second time she had it done it was very unfortunate because I
was on you know that big
no, I don't, but there's been that many
they were all down with it
Yeah
and they wouldn't let her out of hospital but they closed the ward and they wouldn't let any
Only those that were in could stop in
And only them
 
but nobody could visit 
So sort of isolation it was
Yeah 
Yeah 
and it
So how long was she in for then?
Be about a week
A week extra but
used to come up
Poor up
She took, she took them a walk to see the flowers in the garden and
In the hospital, yeah
they dressed up as nurses and help the nurses
Oh that'll be good won't it?
Yeah
Yeah
Oh yeah the nurses were kind to them 
Were good to them 
yeah, and they cleaned the ward and they, cos everybody went
oh they were spotless 
they were all fit 
Yeah
they were all fit, just keep them
Yeah
keep them occupied
and then of course erm because, because she just had the operation you see they didn't think it was advisable
Pardon?
Because she just had the operation
Yeah
they didn't think it was advisable that she came home
Mm
I'm not cheating out
Oh no
I'm not cheating out
But you
but I've been wanting, I've been quietly thinking, the trouble is, you see it isn't just the argument that drives you pot you wouldn't nip home, Paula to go with you to bring her dear Arthur back
Why?
I do that
Well is he going to walk back?
if I'm driving the Metro
The only thing, other thing is, that Arthur could take the
in his car
Yeah
and then they could bring the Metro over, if I go and do some shopping on my way out now at Asda
Yeah
and then could bring it another day, or
Bring back, that's right, either way it's gotta go hasn't it?
It, perhaps it's a bit much to try and get it all done to er today
No, if you took us in your car, you could come for, if you took us in the Metro today, oh
No, say it, go on say it
No, you've still got to get back to your place
To get back to my
to your house in it
Well either way we've got to do that, two cars have gotta go, it's gotta involve two cars either way, no matter when you do it
It's got to involve two cars at some time
whether you do it start, middle or end, it makes no difference
And then they come for him, and then, you come for him in your car
yeah
Yeah, when are they likely to tell you about your biopsy then?
They don't rush
No I'm not
The best thing you could do is ask at the
if I go and ask now
You go and ask them if there's any news
Do you wanna ask?
cos they only told me bits, they all came round this morning and er, we were having a laugh actually, it was
Was this big Mr 
it was him we were laughing this morning
oh God 
he were er, he were er, they said they, he haven't got, he said you
no need for painkillers he was that surprised, he was that surprised the way, of the way he did it, he got brutally treated with
with his
telling him now how he did, how he did it
yeah, yeah, and they, they say he was brutal with you?
I said, I said, I said
I was all prepared he was suggesting there was a beautiful big orange over there, it was, he found out that neither of us, non,
oh God




and he
I told him ambition's a good thing and what are you
take another sample from you please ?
And he, and this young doctor said, yeah he says the only samples I take
oh God  all fruits 
so he needn't of been right you see, he could of, he  oh dear
Yeah if you follow that, that sister
right, see what she says and whether it's gonna be, I'll get it on tape if I can, for posterity   Spoken to John , what's happening about his biopsy?
Oh that I don't know you'll have to see staff nurse 
You don't know 
  

John 
I know what you're gonna ask me and I don't know  
You don't know, we're just trying to work out when he's going home or and things like that
Erm, not before the weekend by the sound of it
Right
they haven't yet said anything certainly that we're aware of
Right
he, he realizes I mean he's quite a lot better himself
Yeah
he's now cut out all his morphine
Yeah
just on erm a couple of odd painkillers
mm, mm
erm, and, and seems a lot better generally so, you know, just a question of waiting until somebody comes
will it be today?
I don't know, I can't tell you really
He's, he's talking now
Mr  done another
Biop biopsy on Tuesday 
biopsy on Tuesday, and it can take up to a week
He said two, forty eight hours just now
Yeah, yeah
said I will know within forty eight hours and we thought we Tuesday you see
Yeah
Thursday afternoon
How, erm, are still here for the moment, I mean
Oh yeah, here, here for a while, yeah
because, you know, you will see a couple of doctors wandering around and sitting at the desk
I mean he may know
Oh
and not divulge the information to you
I was gonna say
he may know when it's likely to come
Right, oh we're just trying to work out, you know, car here and getting bodies 
Yeah 
here there and 
Yes 
everywhere, things like that, so, well I'll hang on a bit then
Okay
okay, yeah, thanks a lot, ta 
She said she doesn't know
hold on, hold on, just a moment, she doesn't know, but a biopsy can take a week, a week to come through, she wouldn't expect you out before the weekend
Exactly
Why?
Hold on, this is what you wouldn't, expects, this is only expects, this may not be, you might be walking out tomorrow morning
He's
she hasn't, she hasn't got the results through yet, but they maybe through and the doc says no already, but they haven't told her okay?
Yeah
So, erm, she said oh you are erm on a few drugs, but there anti-inflammatory drugs that you're on
Yeah
okay, I think that's for your stomach, erm 
You're getting all excited, getting everybody else
 
No, no no, no I said to her if we could just know, cos er, moving bodies and cars and so on, she probably understands but she said as soon as you see a doctor out here, speak to them and, and then we can erm, but they may know somebody
They may not
but I say, I said to her that you, you'd said that you had the biopsy within, you'd know the results within forty eight hours, but she said oh no
they could take a week
oh stop rushing us then 
We've had the word, nobody's being rushed
I know, I don't
he's, he's like this, he's got to get on, get everything done, that's what I said to you the other day, leave
and I can get myself sorted, because I know him, he doesn't, he doesn't wait
But he's not gonna be in that much longer are ya?
No
No, but he
but it's still, I mean, even if I don't, even if I don't come out tomorrow, I'd come out on Saturday
If you come out on Saturday night, the best idea for me to do is to get Philip home
This afternoon, yeah
No not this afternoon 
This is what we've been saying 
Oh not this afternoon
So what, what we could do
He wants us to call
no
Well, well, no
no, it's not that, listen, listen now, now listen to Santa now, listen to Santa, if you went home, if you went, listen to me now
if you went home the day before Philip goes to get everything ready for him so you haven't
No, I'm taking, no it's not that, he's got to go home and be settled
Well that's what I'm saying
that's what I'm saying, if you go then the following day we'll bring Philip and then by which time you most probably got news about the old codger here
do what, it just seems easier for you that's all 
If I get, it'll take the twenty four hours to settle in,don't you think so Arthur?
erm, he'll rush us out now, we can't
No we won't, we'll stay here
Listen, right, we'll sort it
yes you are 
He's not, he can't do, he's got nothing to do with this actually, he's got nothing to do with it
I can't
he's in the hands of these people here, who tell him what to do and what not to do
He's really, you, you know, he's
no he won't
No, I don't say a dicky bird to
Oh
It's nothing to do with him
that's a change, that's a change 
 
No
Oh you're getting better
no he'd, he's got to do as he's told and he knows that and that's it and at the moment she says we don't know so we don't know, but we know that sooner or later it's
I'm not
we know it's sooner or later
It's gonna be pretty imminent
Shh, let's
shut up about it
I'm not to read
shut up
I'm not to read
shut up
shut up
Yeah
we'll make our minds up
That means she'll make her mind up and tell us, yeah we'll make our minds up, the royal we 
My husband and I 
I might see somebody tonight, I might not
Oh you'll see somebody
Er Arthur
What?
my husband and I 


Are forever rowing 
no, my husband and I
No, we've come, we've come to the agreement that what


ah, we will make up our minds
Yes
We will
We will
My husband and I will decide 
I, God
Well stop bossing
You'll be okay
Alright, we'll get off and have a visitor's night
yeah, but he's gonna do it, he is gonna do it, he's gonna do it
And he's
he is gonna, yeah
he's so busy
I did tell her that about two days


he's so busy doing other people's jobs, he can't
Well he's so busy about to do it and getting himself ready to do it, that he is gonna do it though 
This morning he was playing erm, zombies, he had a double sleeping bag, two sleeping bags and made a, an enormous, erm, a double bed out of it and he was inside it
Yeah
I'm a zombie, and I said get it off your head lad, I'm a zombie, who, who, walked downstairs so, there's a big plant there and, it's ever so large mind ya, sent it flying, I'm a zombie 


bang
He had it flying then?
He looked at me gone out, absolutely gone out and I clouted him and he's  what's the matter?
And there's this thing scattered all over the place
coming home at fifteen and he's still playing at zombies


hmm, oh God
But he, I mean, he has
because it's hard to, and he can't settle down to it
He's got a lot of everything to do ain't he?
Poor Paul
I mean the
mm crosswords
Cleaning out that garage, honestly I mean that it's, I've never seen anything like it, he must of
that day
Yeah
he must of done Arthur, he moved and pulled everything, he's ever such a good boy, he's says to ya, I don't know why he says but I can eat as much as I can, said I never get fat, I said I know why you don't get fat


you use half your energy up in your jobs
That's right
every bit of energy he uses
Yeah, it's his jaw, a jaw tongue  I think jaws and tongues use up more energy than anything else
Yeah, I do 
Are you ready then?
Yeah, better put me coat on
No
Oh
ready, ready for this, this crossword
I put me coat on
we're not going anywhere, that was Scilly,nineteen down, stop  cease
Stop
cease   fifteen down, state, state for example, say, fifteen across, we're doing well here aren't we?
Fifteen across  machine gun from the er faster  
I haven't scored any yet 
from the er faster perhaps 
 
all the things to visit
right
Yeah
that's er,
you what?
Are your bowels alright?
Yeah
Have they had to give you an enema?
No
That's sun hat, anagram of sun hat, we're doing well here, N, S, I, G, N S  places 
 

U, H, A, T 
right 
we're doing well here father, were doing well, four down, I get it here, double S oh no  it's upset isn't it?
oh what
I think I was moving
Oh I see
I was waiting for the ambulance the ambulance just came
oh good
Don't, the only thing
yeah
and see what happens
but I mean as I say
Yes alright
yeah that's what I'm saying is at the moment the thing is you 
I don't want you rushing backwards and forwards like a bloody yo-yo
I don't think you
no
  

I think 
it's actually 
I think
it's actually green
when they can't visit, he's going to have to come and visit and that's when
yeah
to get in the car to go to the hospital
Yeah
I think that's his one
yeah
He goes to pieces, he's lost all confidence ain't he, in himself
and he's getting worse and you try to tell him but
 

Ah, it's beaten me, only a couple
Take it with you Charlie
No I'll let you do it, I, I've pointed you in the right direction
Yeah
after he's organized and bossed and
He hasn't done that at all you are amazing 
or organizing and bossing 
I'm in a different, I'm on a different planet to this one
no,
And whatever you do, whatever you do don't forget to get


get two of them
No, I'll get
get two four-pinters
who said that?
Paul, he's
Paul will tell you
anything
he's the class monitor you see, that's what it is
I said oh I 
Yeah, aye, he's alright
I said right, I said to
I don't bother to all the
I said oh dear Paul
Tony told his risque joke at dinner didn't he?
Oh
just after finish eating
On this, on this bleeper?
No it's not on this
Oh I hope not
he wouldn't of told it if it gone on this  
it's only that one isn't it?
Oh no, no, he told that one, he told some weird ones that go on and on and on and on and the end is
Oh yeah
No punch line
there's nothing to it, it's aargh
When, when Pat  and Ann was at Notre Dame, Pat  used to sell, tell stuff oh and they went on and on and on
Yeah
and they got boring in the end cos they went on, you know about a bit too, you've got to stop 
Mm, well it's supposed, they're designed to do that aren't they, so at the end of it you're ready to throttle them, when you got the punch line   it's on telly
Oh my goodness 
Is that on telly?
Yeah
How the dickens you've been listening to


It's alright, don't worry, don't worry 
I can't understand a word he says
he gets there in the end
Oh, oh well that's
then
We're not asking anybody
I know
  

no wonder he was bright
Yes
is he
pardon?
yeah, with us, sorry, there we are it's still on doctor's
Leave him don't, let him do what he wants to do
I thought he might want to go out there for a little while
She's, he's been round there
Oh
things are happening
the goldfish, seen the size of those fish?
They're worth a bit when they're like that aren't they?
Yeah
Alive
Oh yes
Those in that pond are the erm
oh aye, there's fish in it
they're that size
yeah
you know the other night you were on about the fish that you had for your tea
Mm
about that size, there's a few less today, have you noticed?
Yeah, had fish for tea
Yeah, had goldfish the other night, goldfish and
there's been some very good compliments flying round this place as far as the service is, the meals are prepared
Oh yes
it is good stuff
It is good stuff is it?
Oh yeah, by the way he's got to stay until after Sunday lunch
Oh aye, yeah, you're gonna have your whisk haven't ya?
We'll bring you out after Sunday, I'll tell, we'll tell them that
we'll bring them out this Sunday and take him in next Saturday 
 

He says, he er
in a bottle
Really?
So you finished it off
We, we had the er
the what?
This always comes in the
the bottle does?
Yeah
Ah does it?
Ah
Have to water it down when they get to him 


that's why, that's why he's in
So who, who has the drop of the hard stuff in here then?
Everybody
Everybody
like they've had in the corner, he likes it does he?
Oh yes
what happens if it runs out, have they got another bottle that's
I've, I've no idea
You'll have to find out won't you?
You're allowed one and one only, do they not come back for seconds do they?
it's er normal
Get down the pub 
say when 
I've got a terrible stammer 


oh dear
Oh, bet, bet you spill a lot though when you drink it don't ya, right down your throat it goes 
I've never known anywhere where they do that
Oh yeah, mm, the thing these days
I live in the past I do
You do, I'm afraid you do
I'm afraid I do
you never know 
there's me
look at it here
You should of seen them this morning, Paula was lined up with her pills and then he stood next to her with his pills and erm 
the first time I've taken a pill for years and years and she said, my taste and my smell
The taste
trying to get my taste back and my smell back
yeah, but it came back the other day didn't it?
Yeah
but it, no don't know, no it's horrid innit?
it's all catarrh she says 
It's all er 
doesn't sound like it does it?
No you don't sound as if you've got
No she says I do, the doc
Yeah, catarrh
I tell you, I tell you what it was
I'll have a Polo, give us a Polo
I tell you what is good for catarrh Arthur is
Have you got any grapes?
No
You've got, I can see bowls of 'em
Yes
There are, look at that, it's a hospital Polo there's a bit already been taken out of it
Yeah, he's already eaten some 
Have you, er have you seen that Polo advert on the er, on the telly?
On a
The Polo advert, when Polos were first invented
Mm
the Polo on each mint on the hole
Mm
was laboriously
knocked out, chipped out
chipped out, aye and of course we had a machine doing all that work, it was no longer done by hand it was done by machine
Knocked out by machine
yeah, and he, the hand, the hand as a chisel
Mm
revolving it, two hands doing the first job just changed to
a machine
a, a machine, yeah 
Mm, that was to the bits in the middle, don't tell you that
do you think that's true?
Must have got machines to do it round like that
mm, how'd they do it?
Hell of a skilful job that, to carve Polo on each Polo  mm  I can't do this, it's too hard, it's tart, four letters
What for, what
Tart
Yeah, but what's the clue?
Tart
Tart
four letters
Four letters
No, can't have that, pie, cake 
what, is there any letters been there?
No, no I'll give you one with a three letter one, first letter R, clue, rank  could it be row, rank, row
Oh what's that
I was thinking of rank like, officer's and things like that
Yeah
couldn't be a row could it?
Couldn't be what?
A row
R O W  ranks, the rank of something  R O W  ain't it, row?
No not  R O W  is it?
Yeah it is now, yeah  oh
Tart
savoury food item, first one D last one T, six altogether, savory food item 
D and the last one was?
Was T and there's six altogether
Six altogether
renowned, famed if you're renowned ain't it?
Sorry, have you got it?
No
Give you another one, standard, four, first one is I  no, they're too hard aren't they?
Much too hard 
How'd you spell occasional?
No it's too many letters occasional
I think of that
 

It's not
cartoon here, can me dad borrow the racing page?
And a fiver
and a fiver, no, he must of put a bet on, borrowed the paper and borrowed the money to put the bet on  same day dry cleaning service, you can pick it up at two minutes to midnight madam
hmm
can't come to terms with it
Be that concentrating, it's too much effort to concentrate, yeah
Paul's thinking about his homework
He's probably done something you don't know, you haven't seen
Yeah, I mustn't put the lad down
Yeah, he's been working all day Paul
Yeah, he was doing a bit of drama this morning wasn't he?
I don't know
A zombie
A zombie, yeah
oh he said show me how to carve the chicken
He said show me how to carve, actually I bet he'd make a good chef 
He made the gravy, Paul?
and he made the gravy and he
He can make gravy 
he said there's fat on this gravy and
So Tony came along and said no it's not it's oil, fat is oil, when is oil fat, when it's, oh God
He's quite good you know, Paul
He's what?
He's a good cook, he knows what he's doing
Yeah, yeah, he's, he's, have you ever had one of his pizzas?
Had it, I
You know one of his that he makes?
No I haven't had a pizza
You want him to get you to make a pizza, you know how you buy these pizzas, nothing to them, brilliant pizza
Mm
get him to make you pizza, brilliant, I'm not joking 
 
what have the
He cooks really nice
yeah
oh yeah, it'll take him all day to get ready for it, psyching himself up, mentally prepare himself to get into the kitchen
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
but he does
he gets on with it
Cooking?
No anything, he get, he's like Paula he gets on with it
True, true
I mean he doesn't stand and dither and think, that's not
yeah, he can't 
he, he can't stand and dither, he moves around a lot and doesn't think  if only he could stand and dither and think 
No, you shouldn't talk
Paul
Oh come on he's
Oh he's a good kid Paul 
yeah
but, she's the one I spoke to the other day, she says you're a character
Did she?
Yeah, she said he's a right character isn't he?
She said she, she liked his erm pyjama bottoms


look at that how far we are from the rain, right across the middle
Yeah, oh yeah
he said it's like a spring like day he's saying in the South East
 

finest Southern over Scotland tonight
and what is it here?
Lovely tomorrow, erm, two or three tonight
That's nice
Yeah
Certainly is
Did they give you the results?
Yeah I'll ask her, she's the one I spoke to before
Oh they're talking about medication
Yeah, they're up to their eyes in there
They're up to their eyes in it, you can't ask them while they're, they're
it's not fair
  

going home on the Sun Saturday, he said well
looking forward to
Where, where d'ya leave it, it's not at home is it?
Is it at home?
I don't know if it, whether he has got it at home
Or a hostel
whether he's decided to
and now he's too ill to be able to, to look after himself
Yeah, so
yeah, poor old sod
It could be anything
Yeah I know
you can be any age from fifty onwards
Yeah, that's what we was saying wasn't it?
Yeah, exactly that.
Yeah, there's enough people coming to see me
Oh yes I know what I mean to say is
They're all the same 
yeah
on his own
Yeah
Yeah
How much time do you both say
lad with the glasses, was it a big lad?
No, he used to work for
or was that Wallie the one with the big lad with the glasses?
There was one of them a big with glasses 
Oh yeah that was Wallie
That was Wallie, Bob was the
oh yes, yes, yeah, remember Bob yeah
He was another, I had no bother really, no family
almost servant type you know, he tied himself to you and you feel he couldn't do you enough for you
Mm, mm, yeah, but I, but the lad he was the, he was a Communist who worked for you
lived round the corner to us
Oh yeah 
What was, what was he called?
Erm
you mean




what was his first name?
Norman, Norman 
Not Norman
Norman 
erm
he was a red hot red wasn't he?
Yeah
Red hot red
Slimmish chap
and quite, quite cuddly wife
I never saw the cuddly wife
She was a, she was a nurse
I never saw her
there's a sister 
We, we, we 
I did over Christmas, I did some Carlton and Alfy down there  no, no that's where I met, I had a Christmas holiday job, couple of days worked for him, I was lugging these vices up
You were working for me?
Yeah
Oh no it wouldn't be Norman would it
No, no, the name Nor the name Norman doesn't ring a bell
No
yeah he was a red
Frank
Frank
Frankie was
a little man
A little man he
was it Frank?
Oh he had a family, he had a family
It's on  is when you get a click  at the end.


No, doesn't fit on  it's stopped recording change the  change the tape  so  a su but going back to that she was so convinced that it was gonna be a heck of a job that she would save us time by taking all the clothes out putting them somewhere else  and I said  it'll take us three minutes
Ten minutes  time on
with two people 
Just go and see what he wants.
Oh some of that.
What do you want  drink?
Yes, please yeah.
There you are.
Your wish is my command.
Okay then.
Lovely!
Thanks very much.
Is that enough?
Do you 
Yeah.
want a bit more?
No I'll be alright there thank you.
Okay then.
Do you want that  a bit closer 
Yep.
for you.
Yeah, over there.
Okay?
Yep, thanks.
Ah.
If you need  anything just give us a shout, alright?
Everything is so cheap there.
Big job, I mean that job on the  on the phones  was !
Oh your  oh your extension?
Yeah.
Yeah.
You like don't you?
It's looks very good.
Those, you know your little pieces of wood that hold the glass
Yeah.
to stop 
Yeah.
them s sliding forward  they want, they want staining, yeah.
Yeah , alright.
That's all.
It looks  it looks passable  dunnit?
It certainly gives daylight in doesn't it?
Mm.
Yeah.
I 
Yeah has it been too obvious?
In fact it's an improvement rather than an alteration, it's  you've actually improved it haven't you?
But you will let me have my tablets before I go?
Yes, definitely.
Would you?
Thanks a lot.
Can't   to you how much to take.
No she's er  she's so  she's so keen at not letting  go of  a discussion  she comes back, she's like a terrier!
She worries it and worries it and 
Yeah.
and gets it by the throat and worries it!
It must be very frustrating to  try and sort something out with her!
it's all apologies.
out before we've absolutely  abominable!
Has she always been like this or is 
Yeah.
it  always?
Yeah, oh!
Come back to it and back 
 
to it and back to it!
She  if you've only had to have an   you can't just say ooh  watch your   and er  every time we've away  you take four times as much as it, it's possible to wear!
Sounds very familiar this does!
Yeah.
Did you never get to the stage where you  to took stuff out  or 
Oh yeah definitely!
I had to do that.
No
He had erm  you know whe when you go in a caravan  and yo you you you're towing weight aren't you?
Yeah.
So you've got to watch what you take and if it's not necessary  you don't take it if you've got any sense  but if you're gonna take everything on the assumption ju just in case, the just in case , just in cases you know, don't work all these  the fail-safes ten times over  you're overloaded, ah but you're so much unnecessary weight  it all comes back unused, untouched.
And with Paula  loading the caravan  she would be putting stuff in, I would say why are we taking that?
Will you have enough?
And I with that


you'd have one hell of a row over something daft but it was  di got this idea in her mind so I can see now where it's come from.
Oh aye, you ought to meet her mum!
Oh beautiful!
Anyway  so  yes, she's at the bungalow  she'll be back tonight.
What's happening with Philip I don't know whether Philip will be able  I think what we'll have to do is  one of us will have to drive the  Metro
Yeah.
er  the other one of us will erm  take the  one of the other cars and put Philip in that  and drive him there.
And then  you know, we've got a car there that we come back in  otherwise we won't be able to come back.
How's Paul today?
Mm.
Is he
Pardon?
How's Paul?
Paul?
The lad  Paul .
Oh he's a   he says until the likes of .
But he's  doped up to the eyeballs and  he's in  you know, painkillers.
Painkillers, yeah.
Yeah.
Oh.
He doesn't know what's coming to him.
Have you seen any doctors this morning?
Yeah, I've seen the lot.
Mr ?
yes.
Ooh!
five hundred, five hundred  I could only say he wasn't, five o'clock last night he was no  so he went to the one doctor, so to the erm   what's gonna happen when they  when he, when they can go down the doctors   that's first of all go into this and after ten, twenty four hours doing this kind of thing  for forty eight hours up.
So you can't  you can't rush this?
I it has got to go
A hundred eighty five .
it's got to  So if it's got to take forty eight you would of thought you'd have  you'd have known today then?
Does he expect  it to be, the results 
I think 
today?
Oh yeah.
They would expect them today?
Yep.
Oh yes he's think it's very .
They can do anything  but  it's that one.
This one?
That's the one.
Yeah.
I will do that.
Tha that's your drug sheet.
They've come to wake this gaffer up.
Who's gaffer?
This lad  nearest to you?
No I didn't mean my gaffer, no  the other one.
Oh the other one is your gaffer.
When you say you're not feeling so good  is it sort of headache-ish  feeling 
Aye 
off it?
Just feeling off it, yeah.
Yeah, there's a bit of that going around you know, you could have just that.
I'm continually dra drained   my  I seem to get tired,or  out of sorts
Mm.
my eyes   nuisance.


What do you mean?
It feels, feels  it, I feel as if I've got something in my eye all the time.
Like sand?
Yeah.
Like a like a rough 
yes,.
When was the last time you went to the optician?
Just before you came here I think.
Over two years ago then?
Yeah.
I'm due to go.
I think you need to go.
Yeah.
Oh I do need to go now I mean .
Yeah but if you tol if you told the optician that they might  might be able to do something about it.
If you don't tell him it though  and you assume he's gonna to pick it up just by looking at your eyes  he's not going to  or she's not going to pick it up.
Yes.
Have you got an optician down here?
Has brother?
Yeah.
Philip?
Philip's been going but  I don't know how to get to it.
Go home this afternoon?
You're not.
And he give me all the jollop  ready?
Take this, take this, do this, do that, you can fucking  kiss is better!
Always seeking attention!
!
I see.
You know, seeking attention.
Yeah.
I delegate these  in here
The chatterbox do it.
Find out.
I would of thought they'd have come and said to you, you know, as soon they got the results say  the news is this.
Did they do that when the first biopsy report through?
No, not not 
How did yo how did you find out?
When they were prattling  while they were prattling.
You listened in?
Yeah.
So nobody actually came along to you?
No, they were   see they were talking, when no, when they prattle  you're in tune with the prattle


you not outside the prattle in precluded completely.
So they're all prattling away?
Yeah.
And you prattle along with the prattlers?
Yeah.
So  ah well!
I'll pop back  I'll have a look   .
But i it's funny how  what happens now?
Does this lump remain in me?
Or take it out?
Well this is what you need to talk to 
 
them about  isn't it?
Things like that.
What if  it's  gone?
What was that?
That you will have it?
 

Is it
It's  in you isn't it?
Is it,i i is it, does it irritate you?
Does it itch at you?
Does is gnaw at you?
It just sli slightly gnaws at times.
Like your ear.
That's slightly 
That's slightly 
Yeah  slightly gnaws at you.
Feel a slight irritation.
I should I say.
I better find these.
I think I can  you see but it's 
Yeah.
been there all the time.
Yeah.
See
Haven't they given you any  any cream for your skin?
They have.
But have they given you any cream that you can't get other than through a doctor?
Oh yeah.
Cos i is it  pre by prescription or di 
All by prescription.
Ah well then.
Yeah  it's only to keep the itching under control.
Mhm.
I mean, that's all doctors know I mean  when it itches it itches and I scratch it and then I cre cream out and put  on.
Mm.
I mean I asked for cream when I came here.
And she couldn't give you any stronger than a certain level  could she?
No, she couldn't give me erm  the  the, the one
Won't give you Betnovate will they?
They won't give me Betnovate cos  
Is that on pre 
is the  from the doctors 
that's on prescription.
i the lower one down to that.
Yeah.
They will give you Betnovate if it's, if it's absolutely necessary.
But this one will do.
Has, has Betnovate got steroids in it?
Oh aye.
I think that's the reason.
Oh dinners are starting  being brought round dad.
Wouldn't say no!
What have you got?
Hydrocortisone  cream.
Does  does it do any good?
No.
Oh.
Tony used to find, you know when he wears erm  he used to have problems with yo he still has 
Yes he did.
still has, didn't he?
He used to find that er 
They cha he changed it.
change it every so often if 
Yeah.
you kept going u with it  it seemed to lose its strength.
Yeah.
Or it seemed to lose its  beneficial influ influence on your skin.
Yeah.
The old chap in the corner's got them.
Has he got ?
Is it, is it the man that?
Granddad in the corner.
That granddad?
No that granddad.
Not really, I never get a holiday in the summer!
Never get a holiday!
Never get a holiday.
That was the granddad that was over there when you first came in.
Is that the old guy who's
That was the ol he was  that chap was in that bed when I came in.
Oh.
And that's his wife that runs round after him.
No, it's a different one then.
Eh up!
 

Salad is it?
Is that for you, no?
Looks a good meal this.
I've forgotten what I've ordered.
Steak and chips I think.
An eight ounce steak  chips  side salad  mushrooms 
Yes please!
Can't I tempt you with you that?
Mm?
Can't I tempt you with 
Oh aye 
that?
Yeah.
Yeah, mm?a nice  mixed 
What?
grill.
A mixed grill.
Mm.
Well, what we're having for a dinner  for lunch  I think we're having bacon and eggs and sausage and things like that.
A, a, a grill, a real good grill.
Ee!
There you are!
Here you are!
Here's the food wagon.
Can they remember what you've
my mother used to
Mm.
A smooth walk, have you noticed how she just glides across, there you are!
What have you got then?
Side salad
Turkey with mushrooms.
And chips.
I'll just do this crossword.
I'll do your crossword for you.
I tell you what
Yep.
they make a good chip.
Ha!
Nice chips are they?
Bearable, attend   .
Have you finished with that?
Excuse my back  
No, I'm doing this!
and, and I'll forgive your ignorance!
I was doing that.
Oh .
Oh!
Can I sit on the bed?
Yeah.
Not a am I allowed?
It's a bit of lump there.
That's   Oh !
These are quite lumpy.
Oh !
Mm?
There we are.
Do you want a chip?
No, you're alright I wouldn't  no  wouldn't take a
A dying man's chip!
A dying man's chip !
Would you give your last chip  or is it, would you give your last Rolo to me?
 
It looks, it looks good that!
It is good.
How are you getting on with him?
Taste bud stuff.
I could smell something last  night  er
But your breath smells you realize that don't you?
No  does it?
Mm.
Oh.
That's
We we now whether that's a good sign or whether a bad sign I don't know.
Don't know  could be.
I'll have to have a  
Mm?
I'll have a  I dunno  what she says is  what it is  apparently it's right across, right through  is erm
A blockage inside.
a blockage yeah  it goes right across you, you've got  you've got catarrh  and I'm thinking  you can only have catarrh if you've got a, you know if you had a real bad cold and  or the flu or something but  she said it's all in there.
I've gotta keep taking these things  one a day.
Yeah, yesterday I could smell things  first time for ages and ages!
But it's been doing that you see, it's coming at  it's come and gone.
And when it's come it's usually been a case of you can smell something horrible like erm  you know when they're emptying the slurries  out in the pig farms.
But usually no  can't smell anything there.
Does it smell then?
Mm?
Does it smell good?
No.
No, oh  cos I can't smell anything.
The food tastes like to erm  cardboard!
You know it's all  it's all just  one taste
Mm.
it's like a flat taste.
Yet last night I could taste erm  er the  food we had for tea last night  and it's lovely when you can taste.
Yeah.
You just don't realize that, but when it dri drifts away from you.
Cor!
You're enjoying this aren't you?
Yeah.
Ten more of them I might be .
I dunno.
What on earth are you doing?
Taking the skin off?
You've done well.
There you are.
Can't eat it properly
Can't you?
The skin.
The skin off the tomato?
Nobody came , no.
Some did, save me going to bed!


Peel the skin, put the skin  .
Ooh  a bit of roughage does you good then.
Maybe you should eat that  knowing your complaint!
I thi I think he's coming up here.
It looks good.
It tastes good.
By golly it does you good!
That's got  in there those  got those  at seven  .
You know, when you've hit the  drains at the bottom.
Oh yes!
Yeah.
the er  the manhole
Mhm.
and digging stuff out of there  then after he'd gone  the whole  with all the dairy round it  it was  sprouting with er  .
Seeds  just go down there.
Say it was sewage farms that's
that's what they have  you've got a 
 
drip on the end of your nose.
Oh.
When I
Oh, you've got a bit of a cold haven't you?
Been and payed the poll tax.
The poll tax, oh.
Cos I got told this afternoon  he  haven't made a very good job of  this cleaning up  !
I  understand is he took some of his out  out of their storage, shouldn't be shifted  I said not worth   really.
What do you mean?
I said and er  sat and  he said I'll see to it.
So he we came along  dug the tomato plants up and took them home?
Somebody come over.
I dunno, on the one side   down a bit so he wasn't so noticeable  and round the other side  there's  !
Oh.
Supposed to be good for your back   found it very strong though.
What's supposed to be good for you?
This.
It's got iron in it hasn't it?
Something like that, plenty of iron.
That's why it's a green colour  it's got iron in it.
Mm, yeah.
It's not perfect for me.
I hear you didn't have er, you didn't enjoy your liver the other day?
Ox liver or something  is that right?
It was so 
It was foul?
Pity that cos  lamb's liver's beautiful isn't it?
Yeah.
Gorgeous.
Well I've never seen anybody carve erm  a tomato before.
This, this noo noo nouveau cuisine.
You'd never think we could eat  could eat  proper food.
Oh proper!
Possibly there's one 
Bet the queen doesn't do that!
What do you want to do?
No, I'll go back home and  get some bacon and sausage and eggs, see to myself.
And I've gotta go in and do the budget  and get the budget today.
Got to sort that out.
Gotta find this two and a half percent that  has dropped us in it!
You know he's given us all seven and half
Yeah.
and there's a two and half percent  short  fall  that we've gotta fight  so I'm gonna  se see where I can get it from.
See which courses they can put round what  and squeeze a bit of money out of it.
Good job they didn't give us more than seven and a half percent isn't it?
Mm.
I think we'd have been right up the creek without the paddle!
It's very good at the  actually  oh!
Or they're pun they're pouring money into the countryside now  forty five million, he's going in for these developments  er  to create a better countryside  just announced this week.
I wonder why?
I wonder why?
It's the most considerate and caring government we've ev we've ever had  over this last fortnight!
And it isn't at all, cos he knows  possibly the other way and they won't get in.
Right.
For how many years have we been told it's tax payers' money  do you remember Maggie and the tax payers' money, it's like  this animal somewhere called the tax payer  but it came out of the wall  as if we weren't one of them  and that we had to look after the tax payers' money.
What are they doing with my money now?
They're bribing people left, right and centre with it!
I object to that!
Mind you, I suppose if  the others were in they'd do exactly the same thing wouldn't they?
Yeah.
I don't think you should be allowed to tinker around with the  with things like this  say within  six months of a general election  and that's why they should have fixed term  appointments.
This is why   I know them, it's  loads of people to get to  decision  but do  er  this representation isn't it?
Proportional representation.
cross section.
Yeah,prov provided you don't get like you have in Israel at the moment  where you got  ve ve very  minor parties  the religious
Mm.
parties  that take about three, four percent of the vote  but they have got far more sway over the government  than their vote really.
No, they haven't!
It shows.
Definitely!
Well they're holding the government 
Israel 
there.
yes, but it's the rest of the government  the centre  that doesn't happen.
Well i it  is, they're building on the West Bank
Yes.
in, in wha what is Jordan really, not what was Jordan, what is Jordan they call it now, they call it the occupied territories  it  seems to clean it up if you call it that.
But these  they've erm  the religious parties  you've got build there, you know we've got to expand Israel this is our homeland and if you don't do this we're not going to support you.
Mm.
And the Americans are saying if you build that we pull out our  our, our aid to you.
It's, it's a bit like in  Northern Ireland where you've got your  the religious erm  influence  they've got somebody like  Ian Paisley  the strength of that man  and his group
Yeah.
phenomenal!
That a don't you want your lettuce?
Finished all?
Thank you, thanks a lot.
Sweet is on its way.
No real need for them, you know, they're bloody
What's for pud do you know?
Yep  there's er a  you select them.
Oh it's a  the trolley comes round is it and you choose?
Mm.
The cheese trolley and the sweet trolley and the gateaux trolley!
No?
Mm?
I think I'll, I'll go after you've had your sweet anyway  cos otherwise  mm, once I've had my dinner  two  be about three o'clock before I can get in  to do this budget.
So I'll go after you've had your pud.
I'll have a word with the doctor.
Pardon?
I'll have a word with the doctor.
He's there now I think.
Is it, now with the two nurses there?
A physio by the looks of it.
Time to go home  time to go home .
Alright darling?
Yes.
Alright.
You could still be in Monday couldn't you?
Pardon?
You could still be in Monday.
Could be, but I hope not.
I know you are.
I don't think they'll send you out today.
I think the earliest you can go, be out now is tomorrow  at the earliest!
Did they send you out on  people out Saturdays and Sundays?
Yeah.
But this biopsy lab does it work through the weekend?
No.
So i 
Tonight for sweet
Ice cream  fruit  cocktail  jelly and ice cream or apple.
I'll have jelly and ice cream.
There's rice pudding.
What are you going for?
Jelly and ice 
Ooh yes!
cream.
Wow!
Rice pudding  thank you.
Bit of rice pud?
Thank you.
Jelly and ice cream.
For you, what would you like?
Do you get erm  do you get a balloon with it  jelly 
Mm.
and ice cream?
And a cracker?
Mm, and a cracker.
I mean a cra Christmas cracker, you know jelly and ice cream, Christmas party.
You can have cheese and biscuits.
Oh Golly!
What more do you want?
I want going home!
You'll enjoy it, what do you want?
What would you like John?
Er, I'll have erm  yellow jelly  ice cream and a bit of .
Yellow jelly.
That'll do for me.
You ready.
What?
What?
You got another spoon?
That looks good!
Looks good aye, yeah!
It's alright that.
You know at least the erm
Should have had Paul here.
That's a good idea   these  these little  tubs.
Mm.
Why's that?
They're  it's a portion.
Aye, yes.
Guarantee the same portion every time.
That's roughage you see.
That's your roughage.
Put ten ton of that stuff down you!
So they're orderlies are they that
I think so, yeah.
So I reckon tonight you're gonna get mother and  Paula  round.
Paula's a lot better  he slept  first time last night right through  without 
Mm mm.
getting up and coughing and wheezing and  all the rest of it and they actually slept very well last night.
I think she down to five a day now  five today  is it?
Mm.
What did she start on, was it nine or eight?
Whatever it was.
You know she's doing the count down  little red things she's got  that she swallows  she's down to five, I think it's five.
I think Tony's made up his mind for which he's, school he's  he's going to go to.
He's got written .
But the, well we should have the forms in  completed today and  in the post today  but I think he'll go to Northgate.
Which one's that one?
The one close to here?
The one down the road here.
Mm.
I was impressed with his  how he didn't  disregard one  you know 
Yeah.
you know out of hand, he didn't do it 
Yeah.
out of hand.
He, he balanced  the strengths of one against another
Yeah.
and what I was a really impressed with  he, he balanced the, the human, what he felt were the human strengths of the school  what it felt like  you know, what the people were like in it  and erm  I think that's made his decision  more difficult  because he hasn't just gone on  the ec the academic side of it  he looked at the, the all round  aspects of it.
Still and where wo where would get most, most support.
That's it, and where is he likely to feel most comfortable.
Mm.
You know, which one is  more like  him.
Mm.
You know yo you can be in the best place in the world but if yo if you don't fit in, if you don't feel right there  you're not going to flourish are you?
No.
And once he makes this decision he  he can't  after a year or two say well no that was wrong, I won't  I'll er  I'll change now because he's only got two years  there.
So he's, he's really got to get it right from the word go.
But whether he will  I hope he chooses right for him.
But it will be his decision.
Where he's going?
Yeah.
He says, you know, what do you think and I say well look  it's up to you  and I put the question back to him and say well what do you think?
And that gets him talking then.
You've really enjoyed that haven't you?
You've had jelly, ice cream and  and fruit, fruit  cocktail.
What's for tea, have you any idea?
Wha have you chosen it?
Yeah, I've chosen pudding.
You've got   That's not bad.
Yeah !
 
Don't they have a wine list with your menu?
No.
So ideally when you come out is Sunday afternoon innit?
Is it two o'clock?
I'm not bothered!
Get you a wee dram!
Go and see this
He might go up there now.
Just nurses now.
Mm.
They could be on their dinner.
Having their dinner.
thing about
Well I'll find out.
And I, I'll ask, if they don't, they don't know.
I can but ask.
Enjoyable.
What do you say?
Do you want me to ask for you?
Okay.
Yep, okay  I'll only be a minute.
Are you being seen to?
No, erm just Mr   is there any news about his  biopsy?
No, but Mr  did, did tell him this morning.
Yes, just wondered if there's come 
No.
through this morning.
Haven't got
Nothing at all?
Yes, no, not yet.
When is he likely to be  home then?
Could be any time now, we're just waiting tha Mr   explained to him this morning, you know, why it, it ta takes so long
Yeah.
cos it's   
It's, yeah explained that to me, just wondering
Yeah.
if there's any chance.
Okay then, thanks a lot.
Hopefully later on.
Right thank you.
I will come and you know, er let you know.
Thank you.
Did you get the , no?
No news.
No news?
Nope, no news  no.
Hopefully today she said.
Right.
Hopefully.
Yes.
So when you're
And what is  what does hoping mean?
Would that mean tomorrow or ?
Now, is hopefully, today.
Oh!
Hopefully today, that's all she said.
She said Mr  explained everything that's all there was, you know there was nothing else.
Mm.
And I said maybe you'd  had heard  between Mr 
Mm.
and   but no.
Never mind!
Never mind!
Never mind!
I think it'll be  oh it's dinner time now they'll all be on their dinner, they'll all be on their lunch won't they?
Oh yeah, you can go and see  coming back about four o'clock.
Mm, yeah.
So the, the earliest you'll be home is tomorrow afternoon isn't it?
I would say, yeah.
The earliest.
If not it'll be Sunday.
But if, if do if you don't get it through  this afternoon  it won't be Sunday will it?
It won't be Sunday, home 
Er 
Monday.
be Monday afternoon  Tuesday.
Yeah.
I think that's what it'll be.
Anyway, better get off, okay?
Yes, thanks for coming.
Yeah, and er  tonight  no idea?
Most likely Paul and mother.
Might get the lads, you might get a pack of cards again and a  did they leave you their cards?
Yeah.
Better give me a game  gonna thrash you  whenever  I could of thrashed at whatever!
Course you could of done!


Can you bring in the, do you need the erm  big board?
No, the crib board?
The crib board.
Mind you, you could use a piece of paper and erm
Yeah.
what do you call it?
A pen.
Can't you?
Do you wanna quick game?
Give 
No.
you a quick game.
You sure?
Give you  a quick 
I don't 
thrashing at  crib!
First to sixty  on the back of there.
Go on!
Get your cards out.
 
Ex expect to be thrashed!
Right now can we go and sit down?
Coming down there?
Right, ready?
I'm a demon at this!
Okay?
Fives  two
up a bit the volume is like on this way  you put that up, oh we where's the gear stick don't wanna get that  turning with the gear stick.
You okay, right?
Yep.
It'll be okay.
Yep, well  Alright?
That's oh ah  well this is the last visit.
Oh we'll be seeing him tomorrow.
I mean at  to hospital.
Oh yeah.
Oh won't we visit him in hospital tomorrow morning?
No, no .
We've gotta get over to the bungalow
Move his furniture.
and rearrange the furniture in the bedroom  to the way he wants it.
Yeah.
So that's gonna take a bit of
Lifting, yeah.
lifting and  the best thing  the  to do is to do it when your  grandma's not there.
Otherwise 
not that grandpa.
Well, I think what'll happen tomorrow is  one of two things, either  your mum  and grandpa  will go to the hospital  and pick grandpa up
Yeah.
oh, must find this seat belt  ca can't find it  won't go in  it's flashing at me saying I haven't got my seat belt, but I have  or  and we'll go off to  Southwold
Yeah.
and get the  bedroom sorted out.
Yeah.
And we'll take with us  whether it'll be yourself  and me, or Tony and me or
All three of us.
you sa the three of us  but  whoever it is  it'll be with Philip as well 
Aha.
so  and we'll go in the Metro.
Alright yeah.
Yeah?
Yeah.
Your mum drives down  to Ipswich.
Leicester 
picks up the  picks up grandpa
Yeah.
and takes him from the hospital up to Southwold.
Where is sh yeah.
So  we we're there
With a bottle of wine.
Can we just take that, take that spare cassette?
Yep.
Otherwise it's gonna fly  all over the place!
Keep hold of it.
Erm, we're there we're sorting that out  the other thing is you see grandma will have to go shopping  tomorrow.
Oh yeah.
Take them out er
So you'll ha she'll have to get this  her supplies in  her provisions.
Her milk, yeah.
The milk and the milk and the milk.
And the other .
Yeah.
And then  o over to the bungalow, now she'll either do that  she'll do the shopping  before we go off to  the bungalow, maybe we'll pop down to Asda  and
Yeah.
and get it there  then go back  back home  swap cars, pick up the Metro  and drive over to  Southwold.
If we do that we can only ta I can only take one other passenger along with your grandma and Philip  so that could mean  either yourself or Tony being at home 
Oh 
staying at home
oh yeah!
or  going down into Ipswich with your mum  and coming up with grandpa.
Yeah.
Has mum told Anne or  or hasn't she?
Told who?
Anne.
No, she's gonna phone Felic up in New Zealand
Oh flipping New Zealand!
tonight  because ten o'clock tonight  here
Is ten o'clock   
is New Zealand  in the morning.
I know , yeah.
So if ten o'clock here is  at night, it's ten o'clock in New Zealand  excuse me!
Is that earlier or   
In the morning.
They're 
So 
twelve hours in front of us  exactly aren't we?
Ten 
Really?
ten o'clock, ten o'clock
Exactly!
Oh!
Ten o'clock at night, ten o'clock in the morning.
So Felicity's just waking up  oh!
Lucky old thing!
So Felicity now, well yes, they'll just be getting  getting up.
And  she's just getting up !
or opening her eyes.
Oh lucky old 
So 
her!
your mum's gonna phone  Felic 
Yeah.
and she'll phone  Anne  she'll most likely phone  Joan  and the rest of them.
Yeah.
To le that the end is not nigh  he's gone    it's postponed 
He's tricked us again, yeah.
He's tricked us again.
Stop 
That 
playing with that!
Do you hear that?
The champagne's going on top of him!
That Champagne's gro growing what?
It's gonna be poured over him!
Poured over him?
Yeah.
I don't think he'd appreciate that!
 
Poured down him, yeah but not over him.
Christ I've been up and down this road  this week!
Get to this hospital with your eyes shut now!
Not far off.
What a way to spend your holiday eh?
Oh it's a good end to the holiday.
Oh yeah, couldn't of been a better end!
This news is brilliant!
Yeah.
So he might get his wall built but he might have to wait a year  before he starts it.
We can give him a hand as well.
Yeah but 
Like mixing cement 
I don't think he'll be making it this year Paul.
No  it's just tha he won't be but he might be doing light jobs like say  putting, putting up pictures in about two months  er  er 
He was within a  a whisker of death!
Do you, he was as close to death  if he hadn't have gone in  se to Ipswich  and seen  the specialist at the time he did  er 
Yeah.
another day or two and that would have been it!
Really?
He was as close to death as that!
He was in pain when he'd just got here.
Yeah, his body would have just  couldn't have taken much more!
Yeah.
I mean he's made about fifty percent recovery in hospital hasn't he?
Well when  when the doctor saw him  on  a fortnight ago  this Friday  today, a fortnight ago today  the doctor phoned the ward and said  have you got a bed  I've got a man here who's be who is between myself and my curry  dinner time  and you could  be saving two people's lives  my life  cos he was so hungry
Mhm.
and your grandpa's  cos he was so poorly.
You know, when people pull out in front of you on the road
It's annoying.
they  you brake 
Why do they do that?
I don't know why do it then and then drive slowly!
If they're gonna drive so slowly why do they
He's even on the wrong side 
make these 
of the road!
crazy manoeuvres to  nip in front of you and then drive like a  snail!
I think we've got mum to thank as well for erm  convincing the doctor to send him into Southwold.
Well I think when your mum went
Yeah.
to see the family G P  in Southwold  I think that got things moving  because I don't they would have done anything, they'd have just accepted that  this is the end, you know, he's gonna die in agony.
And when  because the family doctor really know whe anything that was happening  but was holding on the phone  over the phone, oh  he's got a pain  you know.
Those painkillers you've ar aren't good enough.
Not, could you come out and have a look at the chap!
I think you just  assume that  if you give somebody painkillers and they don't work, oh that's it!
That's the end of the story.
Bye bye to this world!
Yeah.
They failed to realize  that you need  it's your own body
Yeah.
it's your own body and you  have got some say in what happens to it, or what doesn't happen to it.
Aha.
And if you're not satisfied with what is happening  or not happening  you should say something  but grandma insists that she mustn't upset
People
mustn't upset the doctors
Better to be ill.
ooh if you upset the doctors when you're ill, when you're really ill  they won't let you into hospital!
Tha that's her attitude!
Seventeenth century.
I don't know what century it is but it's  it's a crazy attitude!
Yeah.
Don't, don't upset them, don't say anything, don't !
Well this thing about this car
Yeah.
it's been going on now for what?
This new car


it's going on now for seven weeks
Put your foot down and say I want that car whe if you don't, if you don't do it now 
 
we'll just change company!
If you said that maybe they'd get it the next day wouldn't they?
Well I don't know whether they'd get it but  they don't want to upset people, the fact that  they've been  really inconvenienced by  not having it  doesn't seem to come into their thinking.
The only  people they don't want to upset  are the people at the garage  the fact that somebody isn't doing their job properly  somebody's  sitting on a form somewhere
Oh yeah.
not making a decision
Like me.
and they're allowed to get away with that  sort of  gently  what was it  his cosy middle job  could ta you know where you don't make a decision  where you  everything around you is nice and cosy here if  provided you don't make a decision  nothing will happen!
And if nothing happens  it's even cosier!
And so it goes on and on and until somebody  gives them a kick up the backside  they'll continue like that forever and ever  amen and a day!
Oh yeah.
I, though remember erm 
And that's what your  grandma doesn't want to upset people like that
She won't
in jobs
she won't complain in a restaurant 
in jobs like that .
will she?
No!
And if  if the soup was cold  she'd complain after it  tell everyone how bad it was but she won't 
Well er  I thi maybe, maybe 
well maybe that's why.
that's typical of Britain!
Yeah.
We accept things.
We shouldn't.
That's where the Americans score over us
Yeah.
they speak out, they're clear  what they want, what they don't want  mind you  they go over the top a little bit 
 
at times.
With the yahoos and the screams and the  what's happening over there?
See it?
It's a breakdown I think.
Oh !
Sunday.
Oh we'll have a game of crib tonight.
I don't like crib!
Well what do you fancy playing then?
We'd played Chase the Maker last night that was brilliant!
I had three attempts at trying to clear  get all the hearts  right, just keep .
just lose.
Yeah.
Well he beat me at dinner at erm
Oh aye.
at crib.
We had a game of crib at dinner.
What's happening here?
What's happening?
Er
Seven and half tons is it  weight limit?
Mm.
Is this the new 
 
thing?
They're trying to  relieve the  congestion on this Norwich Road
Trying to stop these things?
by trying to stop, yes.
Well they can't stop that one cos the bakery's here.
They can't stop the lorries coming over to the bakery  cos the bakery's just on the road  can they?
Well they'll try.
They'll have 
What do they do?
Do they have a chain of people or a conveyer belt  going across the football fields?
No , they'll let everyone 
With bread on it!
They'll let everyone but the lorries.
Everyone but them.
Or special  I mean lorries will have  with them and sa and say oh yes you can go and use this road.
You have to pay for half of the upkeep of the roads.
I wish they'd put more of the stuff on to the
Why, why they didn't leave 
on to the rails.
that erm  other entrance open, I'll never know!
The old Norwich Road entrance?
Yeah  why didn't they leave it open?
Because you'd have got a queue of traffic here, you'd have had a terrible junction 
Ah yeah!
here.
You would of.
Just back up there.
Oh, this car could do with a car wash as well couldn't it?
We're not going into a car wash.
Oh!
If you want
Yeah.
I'll give you a bucket


warm water, warm soapy water and a good sponge
Urgh!
plenty of ho warm soapy water 
I dunno you keep the doing car wash!
You can be the car wash.
I don't want to.
You can be mister automatic himself.
That's a flipping joke though we cleaned everything!
The 
Wisht!
We didn't!
You look at the back!
It cleaned everything but the erm  ro 
a 
the round number plate  if it had  if it had gone round to there again it would have done it.
It wasn't the number plate, is was the whole of the back there, it didn't really clean the back.
Oh yeah.
There's a Christmas tree  there.
What?
See it?
Yeah.
Yeah, I saw one in 
The lights on that car  like a Christmas tree.
I saw one erm  I saw an actual Christmas tree up  in erm  you know  the library when you come out in the road to library onto  the main road?
Which library?
In the  Ipswich library
Yeah  which 
on that road  the 
he 
library road
And you come out onto the main road?
Yeah.
The one runs across the 
the  Crumpalls yeah.
oh, Crumpalls Road, yes.
Bury Street , yeah.
Erm  there's a shop  erm  that's right up when you come out at the library  th on the  er, pelican crossing
I know where you mean but I can't
Well there's a shop there's still got a Christmas 
I can't picture the shop.
tree in it.
A shop did?
Yeah, still had a  Christmas tree in his window !
Ever tell you about the erm  a house Nottingham
No.
When I  when I was learning to drive  it was oh, right at the August, September time
Yeah.
and this house  facing the  the part of Nottingham they call the forest  it's  it's not Nottingham Forest but it's  called the forest, it's where they have the goose fair  each year.
And  it was one of a  a long row of  of Victorian  I suppose semi  er, semis or terraced, big houses, like these here  bit 
Erm 
like those
Yeah.
okay?
But I don't thi like these are detached or semi  it was more like that, that's it, like that there
Oh yeah.
long rows, but they're semis as well aren't they?
Anyway  it was the type of house you looked into it and you expected to see cobwebs  you know, sort of fustiness  sor 
Yeah.
erm  as if a window had never been opened for years and years and years  that type of a house.
Yeah.
It had the feel of it  this little garden you know, the doors, the paintwork everything about it  it gave you that feel.
Ah   home okay?
And
Yeah.
erm  I was driving past it  learning to drive, concentrating like  mad  and the driving instructor  er, said to me, and it was only the second  what, second, third, fourth lesson, it was early on  in the 
Yeah.
lesson he said to me  just look at Christmas in that house!
And I'm concentrating on the road
Yeah.
and the traffic and it's Nottingham and it's a busy place  he said  look at that !
Like a fool I looked!
And what happened?
Nothing happened, but
Oh yeah.
I should never have looked and he should never really have said  just look at that, oh aye!
Feel right silly!
Well  well for years after it
Yeah.
when I drove past that
Oh you used to 
I used to look in there  and there was the Christmas tree and the Christmas decorations  and they're always up right through the year  they never took them down!


So they're the first up with the Christmas tree decorations each year.
The last down.
And the last


down.
Oh !
Twenty to eight.
Did Tony tell you his purple knight joke?
Yes!
Yeah.
Indigo, red.
What was indigo?
Oh no, what the other one, the black knight?
That's right.
The black knight, I told you
Oh no.
I told you that in Spain 
No.
I think when we were  walking down  you know  in co in  Compesso 
Yep.
And walking along that erm  early one morning  erm  that the  they have a channel  those one way channels
Oh the erm
Yeah,wha what are 
aqueducts.
those things?
Aqueducts, yeah went over water.
Well it took me about er  ten minutes to tell it, it just took ages  and 
And what was his reaction at the end of that?
Don't know 
Did he thump you?
he did  he got  !
Black knight, black knight I was nearly at  
Pardon?
What's he, black knight,black .
Who does he know?
Daren't say that to him!
Who is pipping for?
I dunno maybe his hor his horn is stuck!
He had a bit of a cold this morning.
Oh did he?
Yeah.
His eyes were a bit watery, runny nose  I hope it doesn't start, if he gets home and starts with the flu  ha!
No,
That's all he'll need!
Poor chap!
I hope he doesn't because erm  the people on chemotherapy in that ward
Mm.
if they get a cold, they'll be in trouble!
That's right.
They erm
They  they've gotta be erm
Pretty healthy.
Yeah, we were talking to erm 
Yeah, try and keep it down, chemotherapy.
we were talking to Ted the other day
Yeah.
and he says he 
Oh he's back?
yeah, he says the main ingredient for the chemotherapy  is periwinkle.
What part of the periwinkle?
One of the main, that's one of  yeah  and it's poison!
Which part of the periwinkle?
Dunno, I think it's the  er, the  sort of thing, I'm not sure?
The what?
I expect it's the petals and
The petals?
I'm not sure.
Really?
It's part of the flower.
How much periwinkle have we got round our back door?
A lot.
A lot!
Are you 
They've got 
periwinkle?
Yeah that's what he said.
The flower periwinkle?
Yeah.
Not winkles the
No  the periwinkle.
the mollusc?
That little tiny blue flower.
Ah !bum bum bum bum bum bum bum bum
We're doing well here!
Doesn't take us long in the evening.
Strange that isn't it?
Traffic moves along  smoother.
Cor!
There seems to be as much traffic
Yeah.
you see it always seems to re move more smoothly in the evening.
It's a Friday tonight 
Pardon?
It's Friday today so everyone's  sort of relaxed and good.
Ready for the weekend.
Yeah.
Maybe, maybe not.
Some of the people are lucky you've got half term now.
Half term skiing.
Yeah, a lot of people have  in our school do that  summer.
Really?
Have you got 
Yeah.
plenty going?
Yeah.
A and on the skiing trip, no fourth years allowed to go in that.
Why's that?
Let's, just a minute let get this 
He's er 
got stopped here.
You've got the ma erm course  maths coursework  and it's gonna take place.
Oh, and because it's going to gi go in to your
Yeah then it'll coursework time 
coursework time?
Yeah.
It'll be si ski trip will be when we have our maths' coursework  so  the there was about ten fourth years going they're really  annoyed!
But the thing is we're going to  Edale when we've got our maths coursework.
Right.
I want .
interesting .
They'll let you do a  activity, this has been going for years but they won't let you.
What, does everybody go  on the  Edale visit as well?
There's about two people who don't usually.
Well and maybe that's the reason why.
What?
Because  you'll be going on two visits one to  to the skiing  and one  to the  Edale 
No, the reason why is cos it clashes with the coursework.
But the time, the sessions  of your coursework you mean?
Yeah.
Think so.
Oi, imagine living in one of those houses there you'd be woken up all night by ambulances sw blaring away!
I don't think they blare away as they come into the hospital.
They only 
 
they only put the sirens on erm  when they want to cle clear a way through traffic.
Yeah.
But if there's no need to  er, make a loud noise 
Yeah but it gets them  
they don't 
especially 
they don't put er  any sirens on.
And if a patient's really ill  they try to keep it as smooth  and fast a ride as possible.
I think if i if they  they 
So they don't frighten them, you know, if you're lying there  you're having a heart attack or you just had one the last thing you want to hear  is sort of the  noise of the siren, the panicking noise of a siren.
Nee na nee na nee na nee na nee na na .
Well this is the last time this hospital we hope.
Oh yeah.
Your mum'll do the rounds tomorrow the  the visits tomorrow  pick him up.
The packing.
That packing and the picking and the 
The, the 
portering, pick, pack, porter!
Bet he's looking forward to it as well isn't he?
There's a little bit of alliteration for you.
Eh?
Pick, pack, porter!
Have you taken your seat belt off?
Yeah.
If we have an accident the insurance is null and void!
Did you know that?
No?
Yeah.
Suppose so!
What do you mean suppose so!
It's true so
Shall I take this tape with me?
Mm, yeah.
Oh!
Oh no, let's put this off.
Lock it.
I'll turn this off now.
It's halfway through
You're turning it on again.
it's  got  put my  on.
Take it  still no!
Oh !
How you feeling then, okay?
Alright.
How's your cold?
Is it a bit better?
Still a bit rough?
No, it 
Little bit 
it's alright.
a bit in the eyes a bit 
A bit in the eyes, yeah.
Yeah, you're a bit wet in the eyes.
you're alright.
Seems to be brighter in here for some reason.
It what?
It's brighter in here.
Brighter?
It's 
She hasn't three lights on tonight.
And she hasn't got two, that means it's the first time I've seen those three lights on.
Never noticed.
Never noticed.
Right so
So I've had some more of  brandy in those.
Ooh my God!
If 
You 
I put the kettle we can do it.
It didn't quite hit the fan  it didn't quite!
Aye, well  erm  Paula will be coming here I think  in the morning.
Ha, yeah!
I'll be taking the  Metro   mum's.
We'll do your bedroom for you  okay?
Sort that out.
Why, has she got it all in hand has she?
No.
No, not at all.
But she says she hasn't .
What she and she's done  right.
So I'll do that  so in the i 
I it doesn't really matter now.
But if he'll get it done, he'll get it done the next  it's one less thing.
But I don't  happen anyway.
So they
When's she going to do it?
Don't know yet.
We haven't
I left them to sort things  like that out.
She wants, she wanted me tonight  to do your packing for you.
Do my what?
Your packing.
Packing


my clothes.
Yes.
Yeah.
I think she showed us how to do 
   
No  she said  I'm not doing that.
I said Paula can do that when she comes tomorrow.
Yeah.
Bring a bag with her.
And there's no I'll come  I'll do it for him!
All I, all I want is a carrier bag.
That's it.
Yeah.
But she said no  I'd better come tomorrow with Paula as well.
Paula said yeah, Paula said er  I think I could  I could  , you know.
Mm.
But I'd nothing.
So she's going to Southwold  to Philip  the Metro  and me.
Now but Paula  Paul will come with us  or Tony  or  whatever  Paul and Tony can come with Paula okay?
I have a feeling you'll have one of these two, yeah.
Well the best thing to do  when they're to come here  I mean, they might be ready for coming here before you're off to er  Southwold.
Well it's gonna take you longer, it's gonna take them longer
It is.
to come here  pick 
Yes.
up your stuff
Mm.
sort yourself out, say cheerio and the rest of it here
Yeah.
all on, all on here I suppose really, cheerio, cheerio and the rest 
Actually, yeah.
of it  and then get up the A twelve
Mm.
so it's gonna take you
Time.
it's gonna take longer, by the time  I leave Southwold 
In other words you're you're leaving  you're both leaving together.
If we leave about together.
Cos I don't think  .
You're leaving out together.
We'll, we'll get down at Southwold
It takes us about forty minutes to get there
Yeah.
It'll take
It'll take about
by the time we've had our third cup of tea yo you might be leaving here.
Oh yes, that's right.
I dunno.
No, we should be leaving it  we  er
It takes ha about twenty minutes, half an hour to get here.
Yeah, and you should get up  you should get home in twenty minutes  
 
and er  than I do.
No, it only takes me about forty minute, no hold on!
Er forty min 
Forty five minutes.
Forty minutes plus five minutes.
Well it'll take twenty minutes to get here  and it'll take about  forty minutes to get the other way.
Yeah.
And you've got all the shenanigans
of here.
Well you got your pyjamas, you got your glasses, you got 
I'll come and take 
Got your Polo, you got your 
six o'clock in the morning they wake me up time!
You, you
Just be patient!
Be patient!
You ?
A mu 
and do as your told!
he said 


he says, he says can we do it tonight?
He looked at the clock
Who said that?
The doctor.


He said would you like to get home, he said I'm sure you would?well  no he said  as far as he was concerned he could leave us
Yeah.
and then it'll be till Tuesday he's already got some  even though they gotta be sent out to the firm  
Mm.
whereas he's gotta  he says just one round here  so they could make decisions for you  .
Mm.
And yes he says 
Oh Matt hasn't made his decision then?
Oh no!
I told mother he had!
Oh well that's alright.
She thought
Oh God!
Well you  play along with that then  right?
Mm.
Okay?
The big  the big .
And when er  when er  when he finds out he'll then decide  when he wants to see me again
Right.
as a  as an outpatient.
How will you get here?
Will they expect you to drive down?
Or will it be by
Oh aye but
to tell you some truth
Oh!
News about the car as well 
Listen, did you tell Anne ?
Yeah.
I was going to tell her you know   half with mother  and up, up there
Today?
No,to to tomorrow, tenth of August.
Mm.
Tell Paula to come in and get me here, get me here
Mm.
drive me to your place  and she 
Mm.
and you 
No  you're not ready for that, you've sat in here for two weeks!
Mind you, just the majority of  
Yes.
Takes it out of you.
I couldn't I say I couldn't eat.
Oh you couldn't no  it's no good.
Na no  couldn't of done that!
News about the car!
Aye, good!
He had a phone call back from the garage
Yeah.
today  second week in March.
Aye.
Oh he went, he went to tell him he's got his .
You're saying I won't  that's right.
Did I tell you earlier what I thi what I think it is, is  these quotas, these monthly quotas
Yeah.
Well what you do is 
Philip says  oh yeah, here you go but he's, on Monday he's going to phone up the mobility people
Yeah.
yeah, but is that the D H S S?
No.
Well is it separate
Mm.
departments completely?
And er, he's going to phone them up Monday  and see what's happening.
Well I think  .
It's
He's being too
When did he  when did he choose the car?
He didn't say.
But when he did say yes I'll have that one and so on and that 
January.
January?
Early January or late January?
Middle.
Middle of January, that's what I'm sa that's two, six, eight weeks it's going to take!
That's rotten innit!
Eight weeks.
Why?
It's  
But is is that usual though, so they usually take  a form up for this mobility thing?
He can have that .
Oh it don't look too bad, it's three out.
These rooms they only have a certain
Because there's  I wish you'd shut up about you and your royalty!
Say what?
Royalty!
If it was royalty
Just because he might be royalty.
If he was royalty he'd have it done in a day!
Yeah.
and do a good job!
Royalty don't apply for !
I dunno, they just  because that's
!
Anyway  er, so that's what's happening there.
Said about a fortnight  you might, you might have this new erm    this new car.
I believe it when I see it!
That's right!


What colour was it  that he chose?
Silver.
Metallic silver is it?
It's only  metallic  silver, grey.
Have you seen it boy?
Ah ah.
No?
Have you seen it?
No  but I know what colour, I've seen  I've seen Nissan Micras in that colour.
Is it a dark metallic silver?
No, it's light metallic silver, it's  whitey   
Oh it's not like that
or something.
it's not like that Paul's pointing to 
Like that?
is it?
No.
No, no it's darker.
Yeah.


Anything like that there?
Yeah, maybe  .
I can take the truth!
Yeah.
As you can see it's starting  
So she's flapping tonight  packing everything up?
Yep.
Making a list of what's 
She won't sleep tonight.
she's making a list of she's
First thing she said was  I'll have to get my
Some milk!
How many?
Four pints of milk!
I had to get four pints of milk, you know  oh honestly  
But  I wonder if she's going to write a list  and do her shopping.
We had 
Well 
noticed!
I think have somebody had er half  suggested it and then said oh no, that's a daft idea!
She'd have taken it!
She'd have followed the hunt and .
 
Somebody had been shopping with her now.
So it's  Paul  Paula's erm 
How much?
back there.
All she wants is a tease!
What is she like  in some er
Some milk 
Bread.
Bread  and  got some sausages  bit of erm  boiled ham  which you can pick up on the way through
Yeah.
you can pick up that at the er  .
Well we had the ham  we've had that tonight  she's bought that.
When?
Has she?
Yeah.
When?
The thing is, Paula said  I can't see what she really wants to shop for because  just before 
 
she came  to us  Paula took her up to Safeways  Safeways in  Carlton Colville  and she said she did an enormous shop
Yeah  don't bother shopping 
took it all took it 
Have you  have you seen na nan pay for it?
Yeah, yeah.
Have you seen them?
The there's not room in it!
I know, well she's gonna fill that up again.
I'm going to  I'm going to put the  put another big sink out because that's
And jus just, just for the shopping?
Sorry?
Just for the four pints of milk each 
Yeah.
week?
Yeah.
Or each  each weekend.
Yeah.
Each weekend?
It's 
Well 
every other day!
It's every other day, four pints?
There's delivered from the milkman  I swa 
Per day?
a day
Yeah.
and then at least three, four pints   so we've
Per week?
so we should see some milk shouldn't we?
You're doing well then  keep them  your farmers happy!
When we went to Sue's it's all drunk 
That's fourteen, twenty six
Eh, I've been there  I've been there and there and there's eight nine pints sitting around!
There's that, and there's never anything  really, only  the only thing is the milk puddings  see you get this pudding she makes  .
Yeah.
She must have shares in Daisy!
Yeah !
She's, she's  pi she'd buy her own .
No, the only the only, the only milk that gets turned out  is when she makes drinks, milky drinks  she puts too much in the pan  be be because she make them!
Yeah  she put four pints in does she?
No   she puts enough for four in
Yeah.
it isn't, there's hardly enough 
Yeah, this is it.
there's hardly enough for two in  and then she has to do another two  only, only she can't pour it in after it's .
We we had a great thing tonight at tea didn't we?
What did we 
What?
have  tonight, at tea?
What was that?
Oh oh , yeah.
No


on the table.
Oh but  .
Oh but the what?
Fin finished his meal.
Everything!
Everything!
It's the novelty.
Everything, he did yeah.
And he pointed it out, this brother ooh look he's finished, he's eaten everything!
And he'd left more  on his plate  and 
Aye that's right.
Philip had all these bits so  so Philip got all  got all the bits and  and eat them  and Paul got all his bits so we had six clean plates!thing, not a thing thrown away.
Right.
How about that?
Why did you have?
Ah!
Chicken, ham and leek pie
With sweetcorn.
sweetcorn, broccoli
Nice potatoes,.
they looked, they're this
Scallop.
scallop 
scallop, yeah with the skin on.
Mm, fried  big chips!
Erm  I think that was it.
Oh yeah.
We had four
Oh no, it was in, in that, that roll!
four or five scallops 
That mi that chicken roll.
and a chicken roll 
perhaps she'd actually made these  er  bread pudding.
Oh well, after it
No we had rice pudding after it, Tony had his ri hates rice pudding, so had cold rice pudding!


I had that, it was lovely that, Paul had it hot.
Never had  cold rice pudding.
I didn't think 
 
he'd like that!
Lovely!
It's really refreshing!
Oh it's disgusting!
Beautiful!
It's like !
Gorgeous!
looks like it  as well!
Put some ketchup on, tomato ketchup, oh ho!
Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho !
 
Stir it up, stir it up, oh oh !


Better than jam!
Well it's one thing I mean it's  right here haven't I?
Oh , it's been different!
 
If nothing else it's been different!
Mm.
Different start to the year.
It's  start of the year int it?
Yeah.
Only just!
Ah dear!
You look tired again.
You look full of a 
I 
cold.
I haven't slept all day.
All day?
No it's
You're too excited!
Yeah, I want to get out, it's  yo you need to get out .
Mm, gets into you.
Didn't get any, much sleep last night.
You didn't?
No.
I should of brought you a drop of the hard stuff then  ah, and got you
No, no.
I think a bottle of .
Ah  just ask, just ask him for a drop of    
 
He had a doctor in this morning?
He was sitting down then all of sudden   he had this bottle of scotch   and he told  bring some whisky down .
Oh God!
He    I think he's .
He's forty five or sixty five?
that's the last one, look, last one  that's good.
What about erm  these little  going away gift  do you want them  do you wanna get some choccies for them or 
Yes.
Just get a box of these ones.
Yeah!
Well you  Pa Paula thought you know, if you come back when you're erm  what do you call it?
Your outpatients visit
Yeah.
er it's  when you're gonna bring it then?
It's up to you.
If you said tonight, you know, what you want  to bring for them 
Yeah.
or whether  you want to leave it until  as an out patient.
See if we can get it  tomorrow some time.
Yeah.
or the .
This one?
Yeah.
Or maybe just ask the er  the chap with the arm round her.
Could do,.
Right.
Oh!
 

I can smell food.
I ain't spoke to John today, he's been asleep or else ignoring me!
Oh he's been asleep, yes!


Right.
I told her .
You have to take that off don't you?
That'll come off with my milk.
You take that back with you  a souvenir!
Get a hacksaw !
Off what?
Off that.
Ooh  could do a bit swapping with some of those couldn't you?
Yeah, it's all mixed up.
I think they'll know me by now.
So what else has happened?
Erm  nothing much.
What's happened  today?
Paula went into school this afternoon  well today.
Yeah.
I know, her mother's been  
She's 
Yeah.
had a cha had a chat with Mary


Who, who's had a chat with Mary?
Mother.
Oh her mother.
Mary came back.
And er
had a good talk  and erm
She might, mother will know   how much   mother's business nobody know, I don't patronize, I don't think any .


She just  she just feels, she doesn't think!
And  that chap, you know the  chap that's doing the doors in Paula's  school?
Oh yeah.
He was in today  they weren't 
 
Paula was just saying he was in there doing, doing the doors, whatever doing the doors meant you know  whether he's actually putting them on or he's ba is he, is he just putting them straight into the existing
Yes.
framework?
Ah well he'll  he's not helped putting the doors in then.
He was doing that .
Got the budgie today.
Whether sh , oh my God!
I thought we  we were bo we were go 
I thought we were gonna do better this year than last year cos we got more children but  it's like wo working,.
It's the time, the time   .
Tight as a  duck's backside!
Where money is.
Yeah.
You've got to talk about something intellectual for a change!
Fifteen
Let's talk about
nearly quarter past.
bang!
Bang!
Cos he'll be self-employed.
Yeah.
Course, that's the only way he can get
I suppose the only  the balance to that is to say 
And you have  
how many new firms wo who started in seventy nine and how many new firms have started in  nineteen ninety?
With all this  with all    his persons  and the self same   
Well that's collared it.
Yeah.
It is  as opposed to quality.
What, new starts  new starts
Yeah  yeah
he's willing to start 
and er 
whether it's a firm or an individual.
I mean  I can see  a typical lot of people  at a time  
Mm.
you know, I mean  if  if you were self-employed like that  if you don't keep up the standard  and 
Oh yes!
you're on
That's it!
keep your standard
Yeah.
and you soon get in arrears you know!
Yeah.
I mean I used to have a good go at   keeping up your standard in my   but er
Just making su 
have to keep it up.
Yes.
And you had to keep up with their er  thinking tactics.
Mm.
And er  I was pe I was paying  I was still paying  er  five years after I'd finished!
What for 
And I mean 
everybody?
 
 
Pardon?
For yourself or for all the others?
Mm mm  should of tried to  you know, my collective one
Bu 
for the last forty years.
Yeah.
and either pay it all in one  I asked if I could pay it  do so much, you know  so much a year
And they allowed did they?
years, yeah.
Well the  income tax is fairly easy  it's the VAT that you've got to watch  they're 
Ah.
the ones, the va VAT!
Her Majesty's Customs and Excise and
Yeah  VAT people.
Apparently they've got more power than  most  organizations or, you know
Yeah?
Yeah!
The VAT.
I always thought it was the income tax but no.
No!
The income tax 
The VAT and about  they come and get it  wherever they want.
Yeah.
And they can go through your books like that!
Yeah.
And walk in  and expect to see them all in order.
Mm.
Right, any more there?
And if you're not
And if they 
and you 
if, if they get you on erm
and they don't  they don't bet it's a  than they are .
Sorry?
But it's just VAT, it's a, just a tax return to them isn't it, VAT?
Whether you've got accountants doing it or not.
Do you like his curly hair father?
I dunno.
Innit smart?
Yeah.
He's real smart!
Yeah it's nice.
I'm glad someone does !
Very smart.
Ha !
I'm gonna sleep tonight.
You think you will 
 
do you?
Yeah.
Want us to go now?
No, you're alright.
Are you sure?
If you wanna get 
You can tell us to go if you want.
but you must do.
Can you get a box tonight?
Yeah, I'll find some  
I, I've got one at home I think  somewhere  I'll have a look.
Yeah but not to  not to    cos you  
No no not a Glenfiddich?
No, it's only wine that I want.
Well I'll get a bottle of wine in as well.
Okay?
No, just a glass.
You need a glass.
No, well one for the nurses  okay?
And, and  
And wo a wo and one for the erm  alcohol one.


I mean we can wait but they won't mind which is which.
Yeah  I'll ask which one it is.
And then I'll keep the other one.
Course !
Did you finish your crossword after?
No, I ju I just had a look at that I couldn't do anything.
You haven't done any more!
Oh you have, you have!
It's difficult that is!
You have.
It's difficult.
Twenty one across   they'll make you livid 


something  I N G S  oh no, it's not I N G S  it's
Twenty two across  try that  cos we got half of that.
Wat waterways, US .
This gets in the way.
I know.
That happened 
Well why don't you get a top and trim?
.
It's just erm 
his trip
happened a few days ago 
this was
I caught it on a door handle
managed
and carried on walking!
Sort of green sort ?
It's gonna be more now!
Yeah.
Sort of green sort   can't get that one.
Right  don't know if these are ready but  fifteen across   prints it   phonetic  no, it doesn't go.
Anyway, you're best not to do it
No.
because er  you'll have to get mother settled
No, we'll be, oh God!
But you're having


Yeah.
well  I know you've been good.
Yeah.
I'll have my own bed tomorrow.
Last night I slept on the floor.
Poor lad having to sleep on the floor!
Mm.
You know, he's so uncomfortable he's up at the crack of the dawn because that floor is really getting into him!
The crack of dawn, half past ten crack of dawn!
Which floor are you sleeping on?
The little sitting room but I can't stand that !
It creaks 
That 
and it's really rough!
You're stupid you are!
So I just sleep on the floor.
You're stupid!
Well I'm not, well I know I shouldn't.
Good looking  so refined!
Then there's Paul!
Got it!
Got it, got it, got it!
Alright young man?
Hello there 
Hello.
Alright?
Fine thanks.
Six down,good looking  kip  so refined   ride a bicycle beginning with p?
A what?
Ride a bicycle beginning 
Pedal.
with
Pedal.
Pedal.
Well done Paul!
What have you wrote.
Cycler or  cycle !
Pedal.
Then, that's a D  twenty three across  lowest point   N=nadir  isn't it?
Nadir,N A D I R .
It's a madder.
It is.
Technical drawings  ooh you should know that 
Sketch.
one father!
Technical drawings with ten letters, second one is an L?
Ten 
Not plan?
It's
Ooh no!
Te ten letters.
Yeah.
Sketch, no N.
Te technical drawing?
I can't think of that!
Yeah, it says, technical drawings.
Ooh no!
Do you know?
It won't come to me.
But there is a word?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It'll come when you're not thinking of it.
I can see it.
I can see the cabinet


you keep them in  you don't say technical drawing cabinets  you say
Tech drawing.
What that's ?
Pull  slow
pull
Da ee der
Mm.
That and that, yeah.
Da   
Says something to her face  !
Mm mm !
Oh!
What's that, who wears?
Protective wear ?
Helmet!
A 
Could be, but protective wear
A helmet.
It 
Yeah.
just says protective wear.
Try and get that one.
Well that's a helmet!
Try and get 
Co could be anything!
Could be gloves!
try and get twenty acro twenty across.
Yeah, well this   this is the name.
Fluctuate .
I thought that was veer but  doesn't really make sense does it  but you can fit it in  there's now, what do you say?
Twenty four across   perform a surgery 
Ooh.
now if helmet is right M is the first letter of perform surgery.
I thought it'd be snicker-snack!
That would be operate.
Right  it's operate


helmet is wrong.
Overa overall!
The, no!
Over or no, overalls
Pro protective wear  er  what do you call it?
Those 
Armour 
Gauntlet.
Gauntlet 
Armour!
no.
Armour!
A M O U R .
A R M  O U R , protective wear, armour.
That's it!
Ah!
Mm mm.
It's made a mess of everything!


Most likely alter that one again!
Er er urgh!
Er
!
letter
Near enough.
Stitched   sewn
Oh aye that's
Mm.
sixteen.
Menaces ?
Yeah.
We're nearly there you know, we're nearly there!
Menaces?
Only a couple to get.
Well where's  well where's erm  where's this  testicle drawing?


Testicle drawing !
Oh you, now you've got a few letters in there  L  that's an 
I think 
L  A R and L.
Ten  .
That's a R A N C E. 
That's if  
is that an L?
It's an L?
Yeah.
Is it R A N C E, a R A N C E  looks like a R A N C E, R A N C E .
So that's why it's fun actually doing the clues as we are.
What?
A lot better than   than on your own.
What?
Crosswords are.
Seem easy but
Well that's  I N G S  rings  erm
Are you sure?
Yeah.
It's plural you see.
Ah yeah.
Might help you with sixteen down now.
Te tele-rings .
Tele-rings .
Clearings, no.
Cle cla cli 
Mm.
Mm,.
Ah!
Sixteen down
Ah, he's stuck!
Menaces   menaces?
Paul.
Menaces  Dennis's  Dennis's the menaces!
Annoying erm
Onerous ?
Ah thank you very much .
Eat them up ca take the box.
What, you're gonna start getting rid of everything are you?
Yes.
You don't have sweets like, just eat your supply.


Don't wanna take them back with you?
No I'll  take them back tomorrow.
Cravats.
Type.
Small particle ?
Atom.
Atom.
Yes.
Ah, wrong!
A particle?
Yes, yes, yeah alright.
Er
Do you want a er
Mint.
Oh yes, we'll have one of those  a fruit pastille.
Take a few with you.
Pass them round, fruit pastilles.
Years since I've had one of these.
Have a mix.
No  mm  no,.
Doesn't cravat have an E at the end?
No.
Have you written to everybody you wanted to write to?
No.
Written one!


Has it been posted?
I'm lying here
Ha!
I haven't  
John  
he wants to talk with me.
The answer's wrong.
Is it over there?
Put those in the 
Anything else?
are you sure?
You can take those with you 
Every single one?
Ah no, but then
last night
to jump out the bed to find out.
I can't, I can't see if .
Especially at the toilet  light.
It's interesting!
What?
When you chu push the light on it goes darker.
Well don't do that because it'll  wear the 
Exactly!
battery out!
Yeah, but that light's not for the light .
That's what it's for.
It's like that  it's in the dark so when you push that but there aren't many batteries left so
What you gotta do is  like that.
That 
Eh?
light push  push that at night then  
 
Yep.
But it's erm  er the light just takes away the inner tube  and the batteries  Tony said he was a manager so he got that as a freebie  so  is that it?
Where did you get that from?
Out of the  day room.
Well take it back.
Cheerio dear!
Goodnight Brian
Thanks.
Goodnight 
Well I 
John!
shan't see you again.
Oh!
Where you going?
I'm going.
Are you, going home?
Oh bless your heart that's great!
I'm going tonight.
So just behave yourself when you get home!
Yeah.
Yeah, right.
Well they can't do any  they can't do anything for me I'm an I'm an awkward sod!


Oh are you I, I gathered that!
No I didn't mean that, I'm only joking !
, yeah.




Bye bye, see you tomorrow.
Bye!
Bye!
Right  would you like a ?
Yes please.
Just one please?
Just one?
Yes please.
Got a pair of socks?
Got a pair of socks.
Yes, I've got a pair of socks.
Underwear?
No.
You've no underwear?
I'm waiting for Terry  come down  
Ah!
Right.
Tea please?
Do you take sugar?
Please, yeah  no not too sweet.
Just wondering how long it'll take you to read that paper Brian
Eh?
I was just wondering how long you're gonna take to read that paper.
Oh!
You sort of read a couple of bits then doze off and then !
 
Eh,yesterday.
I know !


I'll read a bit .
I tell you the learners .
Int you Brian, you enjoy guessing it all?
That's right, yeah.
That's his story and he's sticking to it anyway!
Yeah.
I think I'll try one of those tonight malted mi milk.
Yeah certainly  any sugar?
See if it'll make me .
How many, one, two?
One, no, one and a half  I'll be awkward!
One and half.
Just cussed!
He's awkward isn't he?
I dunno really, I ain't saying nothing!
I'm not saying nothing!
One and a half sugar.
One and a half yeah.
That's only a half a one to start with!
That'll do!


hello.
Hey?
and buy something.
Yes  not to worry.
Did you say you have to have
So what's that  for  what tablets have you got to have?
I don't know.
No.
No idea.
Alright?
Thanks a lot.
That's a bit hot you know, okay?
Oh
Don't want you to burn yourself.
No   we want you  we want you to .
Seen what's on the cup  on the mug?
The   other way up.
Rear right.
Oh yes!
I went to the   making sure they move us around one square.
So there's nothing you want tomorrow other than your  the bottles?
That's not drawings is it, just drawing?
No, it's a, an R in it, it's about  drawings.
Mm.
No, it's an L  like the letters.
Well change that L.
That's right.
What's the L
Nobody's gonna look at it anyway!
Number sixteen is something like gleam rings or  no ?
Plead means  a  place  rings  R A N C E
what about R A N C E at the end?
No space.
No spaces, no.
Something R A N C E  like tolerance  see
is a 
Mhm.
What on earth's up?
Pamphlet  there's only two letters missing out of pamphlet, two out of out of five  we've got three  first one, the middle one, the last one.
I reckon that's tart  where is it?
Which one?
T A R T.
T, what about that letter?
A R
Oh no, can't be that.
We'll have to make a word 
Pamphlet.
up there.
Pamphlet.
Make a word up  erm  T, oh no that's difficult without a T.
Mm.
The T's us usually followed by a vowel.
Mm.
T E
T and that.
T and  taste  taught
You must capitulate the word so yeah, surrender's right.
Where's it say  ?
Trying to capitulate  .
Well if I only wanted to know the crossword and every single one is  
What time do you want her in the morning?
If you name a time  just so as
As soon as you can  troops together.
Okay.
Now that doesn't mean  eight 
Eight 
o'clock does it?
No, any 
No.
time after ten o'clock.
Any time after ten.
Yeah.
Right  did you hear that Paul?
Sure.
Any time after  
 
to ten.
Oh.
So she leaves about ten  she'll be here some time after ten won't she?
That'll mean that gives you plenty of time to get up and get moving
And it won't take long 
the 
to move those wardrobes, only about  twenty minutes.
Oh it'll take us a couple of minutes!
It won't take twenty minutes!
How many wardrobes are there?
Two.
Two?
Yeah.
And I say if you get on your hands and knees
Get behind them  and push them.
and just pull and push   on the bottom
Mm.
Well what I was gonna do is just sort of 
Yeah.
nudge them round.
Yeah.
Pardon?
One person one end and one  the other at the other end  one in the middle  and then
Ar are they joined together?
No.
They're separate?
Mm.
Well that's a doddle that!
No probs!
Easy!
Do you want the er  re re-wiring ?
And you're not bothered if we go in front of the light switch
No.
at all?
You hear that?
Mm  and I'm pretty sure  I'm pretty sure there's, that there's a  electric light  points behind.
Sockets on the wall?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And you want your  bed head  so it loo looks towards Philip's room?
Yeah.
So you can see the lighthouse?
Well there's no difference   top and bottom of that bed I don't think.
Int there?
Oh.
You have it either way?
Yeah, I think you can .
But you will be able to watch the lighthouse.
Is there any
Yes,
Is the is there anything else you want in there?
No.
You don't want Christmas decorations or anything?
No.
And television  brought in?
No.
Television.
you know   portable television.
I usually have  with television.
Could lo could loan you our portable couldn't we?
Oh yes, if you could.
We've not used it yet !
I thought you had.
Well  but
I have.
they have  it was on one night.
Yeah.
You get up in the morning and it's erm  what do you call it?
It's a radio  put the radio on.
Should be able to set the telly shouldn't you?
You'd be able to get those timer switches on the .
Yeah.
I'm not so addicted to a television as to need that, oh  far from it.
Aye yeah, not bad!
Maybe you'll just want it 
What's that then?
Pardon?
What is it?
Malted er
Malted milk?
Yeah  the
Horlicks.
Ovaltine.
Horlicks.
I thought you were gonna be an Ovaltiney again!
No.


No, course not.
Here  in the morning te tell, tell Paula to bring a couple of  a couple of carrier bags and that's all I'll need.
Yeah.
That's all she was gonna do, that's all she was 
Yeah, she was.
gonna bring.
That's, that's .
Right.
Haven't got a jacket have you?
No.
Mind you, the car will be warm.
I couldn't .
The car will be warm 
if she parks down in the door  and he comes up
Yeah.
Right?
She'll be so parked down there
Right.
I think she'll want to come up.
Oh no, she'll wanna come up and say goodbye.
So you want  we want  whisky


Don't make a note of that.
one
No, you don't, just the one o one will do.
No, no whisky, one 
No buy a
erm
It's like a hotel isn't it?
What else for you was it?
Two, two empty carrier bags.
Any preferred sign or name  size?
Yes.
Asda?
An empty carrier, the Gateway and the er
Gateway and Asda.
and the er Asda one.
Do you want left handed ones or right handed ones?
Well it's 
It's a good job the nurses there can listen  .
She's nice she is.
Whisky, wine
I'm just gonna put you a new bag on cos that one's  has leaked .
Whisky, wine, carriers  what else?
Erm   I dunno !
Is there anything else?
No.
You don't want any
Socks?
Ah, better bring in socks.
Right.
You've got your erm
And I mean 
bedroom slippers?
Got bedroom slippers so
Do you wanna put shoes on?
No!
I got a pair of shoes here.
You've got a pair of shoes here have you?
No.
No, you don't need them.
When I came the ambulance  you see.
Ah yeah.
So  we get your  you got your  you got them  you don't need underwear  you got your shirt, you've got a pullover, you've got trousers 
I it's, it's  my shirt 
trousers  so that's it then!
Yeah, they're my trousers.
Oh I don't need that, I thought we were gonna have a long, a long list.
Whisky, wine.
Needn't   something to do with   lovely.
Keep you warm.
If nothing else it keeps me warm.
It looks like you've got some  bla some, some stuff here for you.
What's that?
All that stuff I brought  bring that back with you.
Bring what  ah?
Bring that back with you there.
Shall we take it back now?
How many bottles are there?
No, won't take it now we'll take it tomorrow.
You might be grateful of that.
What have you, tins as well?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven
Seven tins  and three bottles
six .
Fetch another carrier bag.
Shall we take them back now?
No.
Three, three carrier bags then.
Oh, what am I doing!
Three carriers, whisky and wine  right, got it!
You can ta take that back  in this bag.
Nah!
No.
Can I take it  .
Fill them up.
What a thought!
He had an accident in bed, yeah.
Oh 
Because 
That's a more evil thought still!
Yeah.
Oh that's a .
So there's nothing else is there?
No.
What a man!
Done very well!
It doesn't taste bad this.
Try it?
Na no thanks.
I can't taste anything again today it's gone.
Oh!
Smells gone and ev can you smell it?
Does it smell?
Can you smell anything?
Taste it.
Oh that's erm  malt.
There's something there.
No, I don't like 
Just taste it.
that much!
No thanks dad.
I don't like that.
No, I don't like that!
I don't like that!
I don't like that!
Don't like hot milk?
You don't like hot milk?
No.
That's   that's how you   .
Must have been an Ovaltiney!
An Ovaltiney!
He, he mixed it with hot milk?
Ha  does you good!
It's good for you!
See  at least once during the day  you have a  milky coffee  and that's a pint of milk  .
Mm.
And then cereals in the morning, that's another pint.
You see.
That's the two pints gone.
Yeah.
That's why the necessity for a full pint.
That's why you end up with nine pints is it?
Why don't you just get another two pints, why not have three 
Ah 
pints a day?
because  she  about three pints, the pints a day  the third pint cost you thirty five P  and right, a four-pinter cost you a pound and two pence  a pound and two pence, now work that out.
Twenty seven P.
Twenty seven and a half P.
Mm.
You save seven and a half P a pint.
You save seven  and a half P a pint !
That's not bad!
Four pints
you save thirty P, you see you've nearly the cost of your
Yeah.
Yeah,
your third pint.
Yeah but then  that's taking  
You see yo 
in petrol  by going to the shops
That's right.
and time
Yeah.
Er, you like the milkman  the milkman  I mean  absolutely stupid I thought  because  he kept putting milk up  it was thirty P when we went there first 
Mm, yeah  and now it's thirty five.
now it's thirty five or thirty six  I mean they put it up for the er  crisis
Do you know di 
it didn't come down again it, it went up tuppence for the crisis.
What crisis?
There were a crisis!
Which crisis?
The oil crisis.
We haven't had an oil crisis!
We have!
When the we 
Have we?
when the Gulf war was on.
There wasn't an oil crisis!
Yeah there was.
It's a heck of a  it's, it's thirty four pence a gallon it was.
It wasn't a crisis!
in fact it costs
The oil excuse!
and they're laughing at  
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah yeah, yeah, yeah!
What they  what they should do  the, the milk   I'd say  your first pint cost you twenty six  thirty six
Yeah.
all other pints will cost you thirty.
Mm.
Did you know  that the  people who sell the milk, the dairies that sell a bring it round to you  did you know, not many people know this!
Did you know 
Did you know  it's about twenty P .
No.
That they are allowed to sell it to shops  to shops cheaper than they are allowed to sell it to you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's a minimum charge they can sell it to yo individual customers
Yeah.
but they can sell it to shops, a crate of it to shops cheaper  than  than they can sell it  so that means 
And then the shops, the shop
bu 
the shop sells it the same price as the
No, no the shop could use it then as a as a loss leader  he could make say, a penny on it an ge so if he buys it at, you're buying what, thirty five?
I think they can buy it at twenty eight.
Right.
So if he sells it thirty, just, he won't even cover his overheads on that  but it means instead of having it delivered you go down to Joe's shop get it for thirty P save yourself five P.
Yeah.
Now isn't that crazy?
Yeah.
Now, the regulations  that control that, that decide that  are absolutely barmy!
Yeah.
Because  they're encouraging the people who are  providing the business  to go out of business.
Yeah.
Yeah!
Aren't they?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Then actual consequence of it 
Why not have three pints every other day?
Because I object to paying that much for milk!
Yeah.
Even it, even if you
Have four e 
i if 
every four 
if 
days.
if the shop, milk shop was across the road to afford that delivery price
No.
Yeah.
Er 
right?
Because the .
Mm.
You should start your own  milk round.
So  do you ever, do you have any delivered?
Yeah, two pints a day.
At thirty five P a pint?
Mm.
Well that's
Because if there's any 
And you get your er 
price 
and you get your other milk from the supermarket
Yes.
when you go shopping?
Yeah.
You should get one a day then there's six pints of milk.
Get two two a day and it leaves er  four pounds ninety.
But it's when you're built up to nine pints it makes you  
Why don't you get say, two four-pinters  on a Monday or whenever you go shopping
Will you shut up!
And yo 
and then 
you get you get, keep your own because  if there's any time she can't walk down to the bottom  we've always 
She's got 
got a contact.
Ah.
She can put a little note in there and say she wants some a taties and some, some bread  and then it's delivered.
Oh he delivers those as well does he?
Yeah.
Ah?
He delivers those as well?
Yeah.
So you're paying for a service really aren't you?
Yeah.
Mm.
You're not just paying for milk.
You're paying for the two things  you're paying for the opportunity 
No!
you're paying for the opportu by that chap coming round
Yeah.
and doing that you're paying for the opportunity of having  erm  other services
Yeah.
like bread
Yeah.
I think you may  
yoghurt 
like if you left a note for the postman he'd drop it through the door
Oh it's like that is it?
Yeah.
Right.
Fish and chips!
Well  , quite often than not  er 
Don't Paul!
there'd be post  post will come in the afternoon
Yeah.
and you dive down to the post box and pushes it in.
Mm  leave him a little note.
I think we'd better go Paul.
Yeah.
You're getting a bit restless.
I think he ca I think he came tonight for a game of cards that's all he came 
No.
for!
Truth is known  if the truth is 
Time for a game of pontoon?
No.


Pontoon?
Yeah.
Which is pontoon?
Twenty ones.
Ah alright,some time.
That just .
Twenty ones, unless you're playing for a pair of notes.
Well we play, we play for millions of pounds!
Once  ah, and a he ended up owing me fifty seven    !
You don't go pennies, you go sort of ten thousand pound or half a million on this one now!
 
I'll buy one for half a million pounds!
And then it's er 
And if the stakes look right, right  how much do I owe you?
Fourteen million!
Right 
Ah  
I'll have the next card for fourteen million!
It's a three.
Oh surely not!
Twenty eight million !
Oh, has it stopped yet?
I don't know.
Oh have you turned it off.
No.
It, it goes click and it's stopped.
Right, do you want us to take anything 
No.
tonight?
What's that?
 

The books?
Yeah, which book?
Has it stopped?
No, right  don't do that again!
The books
That bag.
Liquorice Allsorts.
They'll be gone .
Mints.
It's a pity nobody ever brought yo brought you grapes  cos I like grapes.
Do you like grapes?
you're moaning now!
Sherbet le these are the ones I got him!
Yeah I got him them ones!
Yeah.
One   
Did he give you those?
I was told to get you all stu tangy stuff.
Yeah.
Tangy drinks, tangy   
 
I was  looking for these and you got drunk and eat them!
Oh never mind!
You can leave those there.
Do you want those leaving?
You want the books going
Yeah, the books and 
the cards, the get well
Yeah.
what else?
  

Well your glasses case you don't want them going do you?
Er, yeah might as well then the glasses in there.
Oh your glasses are in there, right.
And the  and the clock, won't you need a clock for tomorrow?
You can jus just jump 
Oh you've got that one haven't you?
out of bed and
You can get up at six o'clock in the morning see what time it is can't you?
I shall be up at six o'clock 
 
in the morning, they wake me up at six o'clock in the morning!
They don't wake you up at six o'clock dad!
Yeah they do!
Six o'clock?
Yeah!
Yeah, they get up at six!
Every  everybody?
Every morning at six o'clock!
Good morning Mr !
Are you awake?
You hope it isn't!
No, go away!
Do you want  !


Then five minutes afterwards  they come and put this in your mouth  suck this
Oh, what's that, thermometer?
Thermometer.
Yeah.
And five minutes after that.
no, I  half an hour after this, an hour after that.
Cup of tea.
Cup of tea.
Ooh, I'd want 
 
a cup of tea right as  right away, ooh ooh!
fast asleep again then.
At six o'clock in the morning.
The then, then er
Oh  then breakfast eh?
out, out again
Straight.
straight to bed
Yeah.
make sure you     and er
So what time do they, do you have your breakfast then?
Eight o'clock.
Eight o'clock you get a bit of
Give it a lick.
Get off yo get it off your beard.
That's it!
So you get your breakfast when, eight o'clock?
Yeah.
That's not bad.
And then you get a cup of tea at ten.
Really they say    cos eight o'clock, any time after eight o'clock  and they start making the beds  and make you comfortable  but they've already had three goes at making .
So you want this lot shifting now?
Yep.
Okay Paul ?
And a
Now.
and one, two, three.
Three carrier bags.
Three carriers.
No I do n't.
Thre whisky, wine, three carriers we'll sort that out.
Okay Paul?
Are you ready?
That can go in the er  in the  one.
Yeah.
Just that one?
Right.
Yeah it's recording.
Er ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh!did say is he recording?
Is he recording?
Yeah.
What the machine?
Or whatever if the machine records .
Oh!
Really?
Strange thing!
Just one car is it there?
Why is there no parking there?
Ambulances being able to get in and out.
Oh it's .
Well that's a  hopefully that's our last visit.
Hopefully.
Hopefully
Ah!
that's the last  major thing that  happens to him.
It's a tight bend that!
Just a bit!
Isn't it?
Mm mm mm mm .
I wonder how many patients they get like him who are just  lucky?
Do you think he was lucky?
I think he was very lucky!
I don't think he was lucky!
He was fortunate.
He was fortunate in that he had the right doctor at the right time in the right  so hospital
But he didn't have  
the right  expertise  around him.
Oh yeah!
He hadn't had those  how they
Do you think if he'd been sent into hospital earlier he wouldn't have been in such a
It would have depended on which hospital he'd have been sent to.
Really?
Erm  if he'd have stayed at Southwold Hospital he would have died!
They couldn't have coped with it, no!
What they've done with him there is remarkable!
The skill  the level of skill
Do you want to go to the wine merchants?
No, I think I've got some at  at home Paul.
stopped, being stopped by the police   find a   bottle like whisky!
Oh!
If you haven't got a bottle of whisky at home or  I'm sure your mum can get one on the way in  way in tomorrow can't she?
Yeah, we've definitely got a bottle of wine.
Have you?


Have you got a cold starting?
No I haven't I just sneeze sneezed.
Everything I do  
Er er .
I don't know how you can be so tired when you only get up at half past ten in the morning!
Pardon?
I just look tired  for some reason.
.Mm mm mm mm  mm mm mm .
What do you want to do tomorrow?
Do you want to come over to the bungalow and sort this bedroom out or 
I'd like to go to the hospital  I'd rather go to the hospital.
You want to go to the hospital?
Yeah.
Okay.
Well we'll see what Tony wants to do.
If you both wa if you both would rather go to the hospital you can't do that.
Oh   Flip a coin.
One of you will have to come with me.
Flip a coin and see who gets to go.
Flick a coin?
What if Tony doesn't wanna go anywhere?
Pardon?
What if Tony doesn't wanna go anywhere?
You get Philip to help decide.
has to have  pick a cushion off, off the floor.
Really?
Yeah.
And .
No.
Well it will be upstairs cos there's a pillow up  no, no, hey listen  he complained because he had to step over the pillow, that's it!
And I says it's  
Will you blow your nose you're going to give yourself a real bad chest!
A really bad chest!
Aha, yeah  I haven't got a hankie  hankie.
Well at your age you should have a hankie with you, you shouldn't have to be told!
It should be there.
But you don't have to be told to put your socks on do you?
No.
No.
Well, we'll see what  see what Tony says.
Then if you both want to go to the hospital you can't  somebody will have to be  either  graciously accept to go over and get the bedroom sorted
Or?
or  ungraciously have 
 
to toss a coin!
That's a
Oh it's the red button on that recorder
Yeah.
but black  the orange light's  shining on the red button made it look black.
Have a look at it.
Don't press it but just have a look.
Oh, this light here.
Oh yeah!
See it?
Yeah.
It's like if you, if you look at the  on that
Mm.
and then you look at the normal lights
Mm.
they look really yellow, they look, don't look as yellow as these lights.
Because the  lights are
Ultra violet  er they're 
Ultra violet?
Yeah, that's the colour of the light.
And
Whi a bluey white?
No, it's the actual, the colour of the light is ultra violet  and the colour of the  those normal lights, I think they're red or something.
But isn't ultra violet blue?
A blue light?
Erm, erm not .
But the lights aren't blue.
They've got a blue  hue to them, a blue tinge to them  but the lights aren't blue lights are they?
Yeah.
No they're violet.
Does it still look like a runway to you then?
No, not any more.
I used to be down a straight road here.
Pardon?
I used to be down a straight road..
Everything that I do   The other night when we came back  the streets were deserted.
What night you come back?
The night of the  F A cup replay.
Was it?
So people who'd either gone to the football or
Watching it or listening to it on the 
or watching it on the radio or television.
Was it on, I think it was on Sky or something 
It was Sky, it was on Sky.
Sky T V  so  they were either watching it on their own or  being very neighbourly with their neighbours  or listening to it on the radio  or as you say, up in Liverpool.
Rather not go there!
Pardon?
I'd rather not go to  Liverpool !
It is a pity though  winning two one, being  being up two one and then 
Were they ?
Yeah!
And then losing three two.
That's a pity.
Yeah.
So who scored?
If only, if only!
I think Des Allan,
Yeah but erm  he was going out with erm  Nathan's sister.
Who?
The
Was he?
Yeah.
For how long?
I don't know how long it was.
Said they were going out  it's just that  that was ages ago though  .
Pardon?
It was ages ago..
Pardon?
I just remember.
this nuisance right.
Say that again!
I remember  about.
Did you know  that if a man
Jumps off, I know.
jumps off the top of Big Ben 
Yeah, I know.
wearing a tweed jacket
he
he'll hit the ground in  eight and a half seconds!
Did you know that this one?
Not many people know that!
That if you jumped off Big Ben  wearing a s sto sto sto sto sto sto a wearing a  wearing a  leather jacket
Mm!
your top speed would be two hundred and seventy two miles an hour!
Not many people know that!
That's right.
Nah  it's right innit!
 

Ha!
You know the fastest speed of one  is two hundred and forty miles an hour something like that.
It's thirty, it accelerates at thirty two feet per second
Yeah.
per second
But it can only reach
doesn't it?
a certain speed  but in fact 
Oh yes!
as you 
Yeah.
fall you slow down because  you ca there's more, there's more air friction  towards the ground.
Yeah, so if  as you're falling from a great height.
Yeah.
Okay if  the theory is, if you dropped a feather and a penny  at the same time from the same height the theory is that they both should reach the ground
Equally, equal time.
at the same time
but the feather there's a lot more of 
but in fact they don't 
the surface area to .
Yeah, so if
to collect the air 
there's a 
on
it tends to float down a bit.
Just hold on to your seat belt I've got somebody right up our backside!
Oh he's dropped back a bit.
I thought we were going to have a visitor in the boot.
He's right 
He's still there.
right up behind us.
Hit your fog light then.
Well  never mind.
He's trying to get a bit closer.
He just got a lot closer than that.
Blimey   
A lot closer than that that's
he's a Ford
and at a guess  is it Ford?
Ford Escort or something.
No it's not.
, it was a Ford.
It wasn't a Ford it was Japanese 
It is a Ford Granada.
I, I read  I read the, I saw the .
It's a funny shaped Ford Granada that Paul!
I thought we were going to have a visitor  coming in through the back door.
This door.
Yeah  he was close  I don't know why.
He was very close!
Here we go!


It's a nuisance that, isn't it that?
And you don't actually know it's going off do you?
It's only happened, you know when the windscreen  went  all the bubbles appeared 
Yeah.
on  in, in, in the laminates  alright  well  when they took the windscreen out and replaced it with this one  it's only since then  that repair
Really ?
that this has started to creak and crackle.
And one good  crack with the back of your hand  sorts it out for a couple of minutes.
What's in the bottom ?
Pardon?
It's in the back there whatever it is that's bouncing around.
Ah it's this tape.
Pardon?
It's this tape.
Shove!
Beep, boo!
Faster and faster.
Nice to be in the speed limit .
Did you see Tomorrow's World?
I saw bits of it, I was talking with your grandpa today about that.
The  bullet.
Pardon?
The bullet  the fastest bullet.
They  they were experimenting to erm  reproduce a space  what it's like in space when  erm  debris since the space shuttle  and then er 
Oh that's why I came up wasn't it?
You know 
You know and they were  they were erm  firing this bullet at seven kilometres a second
Yes.
that's the speed  and she's tearing into about  erm  five  five strips of sheet metal .
That's the bullet?
Yeah  i it's all done with hydrogen gas cylinder  compressing the bullet.
The most 
Those 
powerful gun in the world so
it was shot by compression  rather than explosion 
No , no  no it's an explosion
Yes.
sent this little erm  sort of  tube  sort of cylinder  through er  the hydrogen gas  and then  
Explain it again you've lost me already.
There was a  it's gunpowder
Yep.
that shot this
Why was there gunpowder?
in the end, the gun was a  the gun was about
It was an actual gun?
Yeah but it's  it's not a 
An ord 
hand gun
A rifle?
No!
A gu a gun about erm  forty metres long.
Forty metres!
Yeah, it's a gun.
So it was a gun that was only, you'd only find it in a building?
It isn't an, an 
 
actual gun that you'd  see
Oh no!
somewhere?
No, it's the only one of its kind!
So it's ju it's purely 
No it's  
experimental?
Yeah.
And they were er  and the gunpowder  when, when it  was ignited  this 
It exploded.
yeah, it's
the bullet moved away from it
no, no, not the bullet!
The, there was a erm  send it down  right, and that got sent down this  
They shot a cylinder away?
Yeah.
A solid cylinder?
Yeah.
And this, and this cylinder
But a cylinder is empty!
Yeah, oh it's  you know I mean a    er 
A ce it was cylindrical but it was  solid?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it shot it  went down  shot it through this barrel  and inside was hydrogen gas and as it went through
But it, but as it went 
when it went 
through, through the gas, yeah?
it erm  the gas just pushed  very hard
So the cylinder fixed tightly inside the barrel like  just as if 
No!
it was
Yeah.
a bullet?
Yeah.
And then this  hits a plate  and on that plate
Now what hits the plate?
The gas or the bullet?
The  both at the same time I think 
Okay.
the er 
What's the point in putting the hydrogen gas
I'll explain that.
Go on.
Okay.
And then  on this plate there's a, there's an actual bullet  no  a  and it, it, it looks like a bullet, I don't kno I don't know what it is  and it's like  that if you hit something
Yep.
if you hit something  twice as big  to what you're hitting it'll go twice as fast  as it does with a snooker ball.
But a snooker ball isn't twice as big, you know  when a snooker ball hits something the other ball goes away quicker  than the ball that's hit it  yeah?
It gains, it gains momentum.
Yeah.
So it, it ga it went twice as quick as that ball's going.
Mhm.
And then this went down the barrel and  you know, hit whatever it wanted to hit  and each shot cost a thousand pounds!
In setting each one of them, to get it all ready cost a thousand pounds!
But they  they, that wasn't accurate because it has to go up, to have  fifteen kilometres a second.
And they've only got it to seven?
Yeah.
But they do that, they reckon it won't take long.
Do they think they can get it up to fifteen?
Yeah.
And what's the purpose of it?
To  try  erm  make a material that  withstand  if it was hitting it.
At fifteen kilometres  a second?
Yeah.
Because of the danger of  space  things in space being hit by debris  and the  the debris is travelling at fifteen kilometres a second?
Yeah.
Yeah?
erm  a flake of paint hit a spaceship windscreen and it cracked it, just a flake of paint!
A flake of paint?
Yeah.
No metal attached to it?
No, just a flake of paint.
Just a flake of paint.
Is, is, yes it's, it's, that's doing it.
So how much  junk, garbage, rubbish
I know 
whatever is up there.
I know.
Is it in one particular area or is it just scattered 
No it's anywhere.
That's stupid isn't it?
Oh it is.
Why don't they collect it together then?
Well it's just like the ends of space rockets you know.
Mi you know the really old Russian ones,when they  I remember  when they shot the rockets up and then  the bits of them just  get left behind in space.
This is crazy!
It's waiting for an accident to happen!
Yeah.
Because if one of, not just a flake of paint if something  bigger than that
Yeah, and when 
a piece of a rocket or
and when tho when that 
a bolt or a nut or something
and when that hit  whatever it hit 
it would really damage it wouldn't it?
and when that hits whatever it hit that's gonna explode and that's gonna  send .
Oh my God!
So, are the plans afoot  to  collect this rubbish?
No, just tha I don't think they're gonna  
Are we go ar are we going to have dustbin men orbiting the world?
Yeah !
Ha?
Yeah.
Waiting for a Christmas tip!
That's a thought isn't it?
Yeah.
Maybe there's an industry in the fu er, for the future there Paul?
Seriously!
Refuse collection
Have to have some .
Orbital Cleaning Services!
Refuse  refuse collection of the world  world  out of this world, we're out of this world!
We're
Di did grandpa say he could drive back?
Oh, said he could drive back, I don't think  he might be able 
 
to but  I do 
He 
I think it would erm  that would set him back Paul  that really would.
Oh yeah!
Don't play around 
I think 
with that!
he's in high spirits isn't he?
That he's coming out.
Well it's good that!
It's 
Yeah.
it's important he's  feeling he wants to do things.
And what's this about a light switch?
When the wardrobes are moved it could be that they will hide the wall light switch and he's not bothered about that one little bit!
Because it doesn't, as he says  he doesn't use the main light in the room  he uses the bedside lights  okay?
Aha.
And if he really needs 
Good!
to put it on he can just  put his hand behind it.
Ha,dark.
He just doesn't want it on!
So i it doesn't come into it that!
Okay?
Aha.
Right .
It's such a small room that one.
Pardon?
It's such a small room.
Small  room?
Mm.
Yep.
Out tomorrow!
Hasn't he done well?
He's been very lucky!
That's right he .
Pardon?
He  he's the only person out of that  in that whole  Ward
Mm.
the only patient that probably hasn't got cancer  he's the only one.
But the others  that have got the 
 
cancers I think you'll find that  what they're doing with them ar a lot of those cancers will be cured.
Oh yeah!
No, all they have to do once they've found one new  cure for cancer
Yes.
the they'll have it for everything!
Cos they're all generally the same cancer so
Well, if you find a universal cure for something that's what it 
Yeah, I mean 
means!
No, if they find one cure for it.
If they find a cure for say, lung cancer  they'll just have to chase just a tiny bit and they will do  cancer.
I don't know.
Cos all cancer is your cells erm
Ah but that's the simplistic
I know.
side of it, er all it is is that 
That's all it, yeah.
It's what triggers it and what causes it to keep triggering and moving that and
Mm.
going out of control.
What  and if we can  find out what it is that does that
You go to people and say
and then
antidote  
and then find 
that sort of thing.
and then find  what it's  what we can do to stop it triggering  and carrying that  reaction on and on and on and on  or  turning it back.
If that makes that happen that way  what  makes it go the opposite way?
You know, what makes it reduce?
In safety, that is.
Cos you might find you give somebody something  erm  which counteracts that
Yeah.
but then because it's going into the body it's also counteracting so many other things that you don't want it to counteract.
What lu like  chemotherapy?
Yeah.
Mm.
Ah!
Right, come on then.
Can you bring in  all those things out of the back?
Aha .
Please?
The sweets, the books  the lot, everything he's just given us.
Go and shut that door.
That's it.
Don't leave anything behind.
Have you got the lot?
Yep.
Three carriers, whisky and wine  that was it.
And wild, wild women!
Close the door  properly.
Three carriers  bottle of whisky  bottle of wine.
Bottle of whisky?
Bottle of wine.
Here's his sweets.
And what do you want?
They're his thankyous.
?
He's getting ready.
You saw  didn't you?
Leave them!
 
He's given them to us that's why!
Oh!
No I'm not.
Well he's  no  once I'm home.
Whisky?
Whisky, wine  erm
Why whisky?
Well he, he asked the nurse  and the nurse said  obviously said  we don't care for anything like, we do it for the good of you.
And he said  said  yes
Not for long!
I know you do it for the good of us  but I still like to  to buy you something as a thank you.
Well I'll get  
So  she said well  and he said whisky?
And she said, oh no not that much, you know not, not that, no, no I want to, says well  oh no, how about wine?
We like wine.
So  he said yeah, alright wine and then  he said and whisky.
So, I'll see  I'll see what I've got down here in here.
Well I'll give you the money for it.
No you won't!
Yes I will!
It's our thank you as well.
Don't be daft!
I'm not being daft it's a fact!
It's our thank you as well.
Oh.
What was he like tonight?
Erm  he's cold 
Tired?
yeah, he was a bit tired.
Cold?
No, his cold from this morning, he had a  drippy nose remember?
Oh yeah you said so.
Yeah.
Er, his eyes were a bit full, you know, you know when somebody's
Yeah.
sickening for a cold  erm
What did the nurse say about that ?
God, they're not worried about that!
They've got all his tablets sorted for him  for coming home.
You know, what he'll have
Are they ?
dosage, frequency  so on.
And he has to contact the doctor?
Erm  he didn't say that  that'll all be  no doubt he'll have all sorts of notes and that  er 
When is he able to come out?
Any, any time after ten o'clock he said.
Ooh.
Any time after ten.
Better get up early then.
No, he said  don't break your necks he said  any time after ten.
I said, about eleven?
Yeah  whatever time.
He said but whatever you do don't come before ten.
Well  
Okay?
Aha!
Is Paula upstairs?
Yeah?
Any time after ten.
Okay?
Erm  three carrier bags
That's what he wants?
Yep.
He hasn't packed anything tonight?
Well I didn't bring  he didn't sleep 
 
last night he said.
Why not?
I don't know!
Just didn't sleep last night.
And three carrier bags  bottle of whisky  bottle of wine.
For the
They're the  gifts  they're the thankyous.
Okay?
For the  thingy?
Oh he said, he said he just, he's just gonna leave them.
I think the wine will definitely go to the nurses and the whisky will go to  whoever wants to have a drink of whisky.
So it'll be  never know, you might get some happy doctors!
Erm  what else?
Did he suggest that or did you ask him?
He asked the nurse.
She said wine, he, she suggested whisky and  oh no not that much then, oh no you're worth more than that, you know the usual thing to
But did you suggest it to him did he want to bring, take anything in  or 
Yeah.
oh yeah.
Erm  his, his cold looks as though it's settling in his eyes
Mm.
you know it's  what else?
Erm  we didn't play cards  he was a bit he was okay but he was obviously  he's finding it hard at times.
How do you mean hard ?
Staying with it  you know, he's tired.
Mm.
Don't look, there's no need to look like that!
He was just
I'm just a bit.
he was tired, he's got this cold coming on  but he said  you can be in here so long but after a while  you feel as though you've got to come out, you need to get out!
You know he, and he's at that point now
Mm.
where he needs to get out.
Which is fair enough.
Angela rang me.
What
Alright, yeah?
Has er  Tony  phoned?
Cos he said he'd phone back.
No.
Angela rang  er  anything happening.
Yeah.
I said well things are happening I said but quite honestly 
Yeah.
and er  she said she was   she said had we talked to Dick and Joan or not?
Yeah.
I said, Angela we just haven't had the time.
Have you explained?
What 
What?
why?
I said er  that we would do it this weekend.
Oh!
Right.
So we've got tomorrow, but she said till Tuesday
Yeah okay right.
and then I said I'd give her a ring.
Yeah.
I rang up er  Gareth 
Yes.
He wants  he'll send us a er  a rough erm  sponsorship form cos I said we could do it on the computer you know, the
Oh that's what I didn't bring back from school!
Computer for Tony.
And he said 
I'll have to.
Mm.
And also  he said could he have a news  sheet
Mm.
cos he says they're going round all the schools
Mm.
and er  I said ooh well I said we need furniture because we're adopting the school and  and
Mm.
you know  and I said that  so I put that on, he said and what you actually want them to collect
Mhm.
and he said we're aiming for five thousand.
Pounds?
Yeah.
And all the schools that they go into
Yes.
they're going to er
Which schools are the is it the high schools they're getting into in the Midlands?
yeah.
What about the pri they won't be do going into the primaries will they?
You was sat there !
Erm  now, so he said erm  that's what they're aiming for  this thing that they want them to do on May the eighteenth  plus a sponsorship walk on the sixth of June
Yeah.
plus all the schools that they're going to between and what do we want them to collect so they can do all  and that.
Is this a realistic target he's setting at five thousand?
Oh well he seems to.
I said could we do anything?
He thinks they'll be able to 
I said could we do anything?
Yeah.
So re I explained about  father and he said you know, we must get together.
Mhm.
Er Tony won't be able to come tomorrow he's got to do his homework.
Right.
You're joking?
Yeah, said he was going to do his homework.
I think that's a 
So he's not gonna welcome grandpa 
There might be too much going on tomorrow, I think it's getting  
There just might be too many people there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Getting   
Well we've got to  we've gotta go there sort this bedroom out.
I'd like to go and see him, I'd like, ah I know, say goodbye.
To who?
Everyone.
Doesn't matter.
Oh, just like to say goodbye!
Doesn't matter Paul, they say i i 
I'd like to.
in a place like that Paul people are coming and going all the time.
Yes, just like to say goodbye.
Anybody  in particular there?
Well let's hope we don't have to go back!
Er  no.
See if we got that bottle of whisky  got a bottle of Bells.
Unopened?
Yeah.
Yeah?
Erm  yeah he's okay, he was  he's in good spirits.
He's looking to getting out of the hospit looking forward to a, a change 
What's that  
of  of scenery and so on.
I was thinking you know  he's go I don't know how long he's gonna be cooped up in that bedroom
Mm.
you know, how long
Mm.
and  getting up and that  would it be worthwhile buying him
I suggested that.
Buying him one?
Not ge you know just 
Suggested that I erm 
To whom?
he don't want one.
To whom?
To both of them.
When?
Er  the other night  after we'd got that one  mm.
What was their reaction?
Mm.
No.
Really?
Yeah.
your mum doesn't she?
Yeah.
That's a simple one she said.
Just get her one of them .
That's what I was thinking.
But did he say anything?
No.
No.
The only thing is  he's gonna find  being a lot of tensions there.
Yeah.
Once the erm  initial  ecstasy of being home has  is over.
Er 
Why?
I don't know how long that'll take for it to be over, whether five minutes or fi 
.
or ten hours.
Pardon?
.
From them  you know  ma that she's got over the ecstasy of, yes he's coming home?
She's not looking forward to it?
.
No?
Right.
and now he'll have to change his ways and he'll have to take her shopping .
She's been saying that?
And what  and surely you didn't  just say nothing to that?
  

Didn't you tell her that was a bit unfair?
I can't can I ?
You can tell her, I'm afraid that's what you need to do!
Mhm.
No, no, no, the longer you  the longer you let something like that ride
.
Ah well no that's
staying longer and  she's going to come here  to tell  well you know the reality!
Yep.
there .
Yeah but  what I'm saying is  when she says things like that I think you've got to be clear  and honest with her.
The thing is they won't be going shopping, they won't be doing anything for a long time  and she's 
And it, it isn't a personal thing on his part  it's no not going shopping or driving her here there and everywhere  because he  he, he, he  er er he doesn't want to it's just that he's incap he will be incapable of doing it.
Sh surely she understands that?
She does, and then it  just fades into the background  she will have to go if she needs to get bread and milk and things tomorrow  I'll have to take her .
Come on let's ring up Aunty Felicity.
Why?
Well, in New Zealand.
Call New Zealand.
We we, we, we'll 
 
waffle.
waffle.
Waffle.
Potato, you can make out of potatoes
Right dad.
And I can  
is it like a crisp?
Or is it thicker?
Ah oh no!
No.
You know like mashed potato?
Yeah.
You know, you know when you're on 
I'm   I'm ringing Aunty Felicity 
make those toasties?
I'm ringing er
Yeah.
You know the toasties?
New Zealand.
If you make them  you can make a waffle  with mashed potato 
So it's fried potato.
instead of bread  gril yeah, grilled it, fry it type of potato.
Right, it's fried potato.
Grilled, fried 
have waffles 
They are erm  I wo I wouldn't call it he 
Paul.
I wouldn't call it healthy eating.
No.
You know, it's alright but if you just eat waffles, it's like just eating chips!
yeah.
Yeah.
Sooner or later you're gonna say that's not healthy eating.
I phoned up er, what do call her, Ann?
Okay?
Yeah.
You phoned 
And 
up Ann?
Paula?
 
Paula?
Paula?
Paul, shush!
You phoned up Ann, Paula?
Phoned up Ann, yeah she in 
Joan?
so I left a message.
Joan?
I rang Joan yesterday.
Rang her up today.
No, you can give her a ring later.
There's no rush for that one now.
Is this, is this New Zealand.
New Zealand.
Yes it  
Whe where's the number?
O
One
one  O
.
Shush shush!
eight, four
Is that one?
One










Gooday sport!
What's the name of the family?
 
Eh what time is it 
 
though?
Ah, well you 
Ma!
won't it takes ages 
Ma!
to get through!
I just got a long continuance tone.
Press it out.
What there  what time is it in New Zealand?
Twelve hours
Gooday cobber!
What time is it now?
Twenty five to ten, it's twenty five to ten there but in the morning.
Oh.
So Felicity's just got up.
Oh it's morning?
She's just up.
Is it ringing?
No.
Let me try it.
They'll be a way of doing your blocks.
Yeah.
Course it's morning there isn't it?
O one O just gets you out of the country.
New Zealand.
Is New Zealand six, four?
Hello cobber!
Have you got, have you got some ?
No, you got some ?.
O one 
O one O!
O one O


 
Yeah got that.
Is it nineteen next?


Where's your nineteen in there?
In that list?
Have you got a nineteen?
Well it's Auckland  , oh maybe that's a comma?
Sorry, you have dialled incorrectly!
It's telling me
O one O  
there's a  in there
is Auckland, which is there.
Auckland, yeah.


So it's not ?
No.
That's why.
O one O
You know the   you know what this is?
nine 
nine 
then it'll be the area code won't it?






.
Scrub out that one.
Say good news, that should be  over the phone .
It's ringing!
There we are  round the other side of the world!
Chin up!
Hello Pat, it's Paula  is Felicity around?
You can tell her it's good news, don't worry her!
Is it clear?
I said it, I said it's good news and she rushed off, he comes out tomorrow if er  I said, I said I shouted as your friend ran off,I shouted tell her it's good news !
Er  ee he comes out tomorrow, he's had  two biopsies  to doubly check  and
From different parts of the 
and 
lump.
the different parts of the lump and  today he was told that the second biopsy was clear  it's not malignant 
As was the first.
and it is a case of  it's, it's problems from the radiation treatment
It's a reaction to it.
it's a reaction and it's caused  that er, but it's not malignant  he's literally turned the corner  oh, Monday, Tuesday
Similar to his  .
Monday, Tuesday, he started getting better  and, and he's steadily got better and better and better, he's very, very tired, he's not well  he's very tired but er it's  oh yes, yeah!
It's not malignant  and  he's coming home, so we've got to pick him up tomorrow morning  and he's smashing!
No er, we didn't 
Sh 
think he would but he's done it!
She can celebrate in whisky!
Right  so you can celebrate  he said 
With whisky!
have a whisky!
Yeah.
I is it ten o'clock in the morning?
Twenty five to.
Ask her if she's enjoying it?
What's the weather like?
What's the 
Twenty to eleven.
What's the weather like?
Oh my word!
An and what, and what's it  really?
It's so nice?
It is here.
Yeah.
.
Yeah.
  

Yeah.
Yeah.
But  while we're talking here we'll be letting Felicity 
Yeah.
be late won't it?
Mm.
Slightly  it's got to be.
It can't be instant.
Oh lovely!
Oh well, oh well done!
It's the other side of the world!
I it th this is easier to get than Romania!
, it's the ideal thing!
Oh I'm glad you're enjoying it.
Anyway, it's very, very good news, he's turned the corner  I've hit him over the head with the newspaper!
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
In between yeah, here's Alice, he sh here she is she'll come and talk to you across the world  be go be going  be going back tomorrow 
I, she she's hobbling through!
Hobbling through.
The old woman!
Yeah  er, no  since he's been in, he th is, here she is .
Talk to Australia now  gran.
New Zealand.
Are you having a good time?
New Zealand, yeah.
Shut up  Shut up !
Is it?
Have you got yourself an ice cream parlour?


Not yet!
Line them up!
Line them up!
Line them up!
Here si sit down!
Oh he keeps looking at me.
Here's Arthur .
Oh!
Here's Arthur!
Hello, here's Arthur.
Hello there!
How are you?
Right across the world, fine!
Yeah.
Comfortable.
Yeah.
Yeah, and New Zealand is smashing!
Yeah, he's a, he's an old fraud isn't he?
Really?
Yeah, he's an old fraud!
Nothing more than ol bloody, old bugger!
Can I have a  


No, ah so that's right I've sworn into, I've sworn into the Pacific how about that!
Did you have a good flight?
Did you have a good flight?
Comfortable
Yeah.
Great lovely!
Right then.
Well yeah, well
Okay then?
Yeah, I'll see you, go back to bed!
Right.
Enjoy yourself.
Oh no,!
Oh I know you have a 
I've
I know I a I know I haven't got you up.
At the moment?
What time is it with you?
Erm  it's ju twenty to ten.
Twenty to 
Twenty to ten at night?
Yep.
You're ready for bed?
No I
We've lived that day!
No, oh you've had it !
Hey, must of ee ee,wha what's it like?
Is
oh you would love it!
Oh alright, in that case I'll stay up!
Oh but i we never pay the bills!
Right, I'll see you Fliss, I'll see you love!
Okay, right thanks bye!
Bye!
Yeah, will do, thanks, bye!
Right bye!
Bye!
Bye!
It's a clear line isn't it?
God innit clear?
Int it clear!
All tho 
All the way by satellite!
somebody in New Zealand!
I swore in the Pacific!
How about that!
Ooh!
That's by satellite that is!
I thought I was talking somebody in
Brilliant.
You when the when they say  it's better in  than er  phoning up down the road
Yeah.
It's right.
Mm.
it's right.
Good old B T!
I'm gonna  
Oh that smells good!
This is for them tomorrow 
 
for dinner.
Does she know?
You can say that!
Have you told ha you?
Yeah.
Oh is that that steak I got the other night?
It's clear on  
Is it all in there?
Pardon?
All the steak in there?
Mm, they'll 
Swap 
enjoy that!
tomorrow?
No!
Grandma's having this tomorrow.
You'll enjoy this grandma won't you?
What?
This  steak and onions?
Have you smelt it?
It's for you tomorrow!
Oh!
I said, I think we should leave it home and have it tomorrow.
I think you should as well.
Paula leave it at home!
Aye, leave it at home Paula!
Aye.
Yeah  I like that!
He likes that!
Yeah.
 
Yo your mother won't like that!
Shh!
No, leave it at home.
Will you
will your grandma like that?
No you'll hate it won't you?you'll throw it in the bin and grandma can throw it away !
 
I think we'll have a celebration tonight, now
Yeah.
Can't!
Oh I can!
Ah we can!
Ah oh, what shall we have?
Let's have a 
Excellent!
look erm
Er
erm, eeny meeny miney mo!
Brurgh, that one.
No, not that one.
Shut your eyes and point.
Hold on, there's a nice whisky somewhere!
Paula, they haven't !
How about a vodka?
Cor!
I know where there's a whisky!
It's up in the sideboard .
Has it been opened cos we're going to need one for the
That's it.
Lou's got my other bottle of whisky.
Can you put that away for me love?
Let it cool down first.
No, the oven's  
Oh, let it cool down first.
And you always turn this off, this  
whisky Paul!
My feet are killing me!
Oh, your feet are killing you!
Well you shouldn't have ironed!
No 
I shouldn't of got
no sympathy for you at all!
None at all!
You got a Glenfiddich.
A Glenfiddich.
I'll have that Jim Beam  that'll do.
The Glenfiddich's been opened as well.
That's open.
It never has?
It has.
Oh  I'll have to take that tomorrow.
Do you want a Glenfiddich now?
No, I'll have the Jim Beam thanks.
It's foul stuff, it gets in your mouth!


Haven't you ever noticed that?
What  ?
Whisky  gets right in your mouth!
Oh how original!
Ho!
Ho!
Ho!
Ho!
Ho!
Can I have a little bit?
No.
Just at the bottom of the bottle?
No.
That's a wonderful   you know, when you think of it it is wonderful!
What whisky?
What you on about?
No, being able to talk to somebody.
Oh!
I thought you were on about your husband coming out of hospital!
Whe whe whe whe whe when did father, grandpa said 
Was there a pause?
and they're pouring  it in there say well 


how much do you want?
The go he goes
Bu bu wha wha wha wo wo 
whe whe whe whe oh when!
 
You stammer  and they go and pour it!
Mm, you won't like this Paul!
It isn't a nice one actually.
Can't I have a tiny bit?
No!
Just a drop.
No you're too young!
Half a tumbler?
No, you're too young!
Can I have a
You can ask as much as you like and the answer will be no!
Mum, can I have a
You know when you're fortunate we're giving them 
Can I have  
Do you know you were fortunate when you're given wine!
That's about a .
Excuse me!
No, it's not fortunate, not wine!
When you give them wine.
No!
I  I'm sorry!
I, I, I can't get in!
Sorry!
We  we didn't reali eh are your shoes filthy Paul?
No.
No.
Take them off!
Look at the  carpet!
It's just been moved backwards and forwards!
It's just the
Oh is it the pile?
It's the pile of it, yeah.
Is that how it goes?
It's that long.
It's a 
how it goes.
a deep pile.
It's like that.
Over here will do the same.
It's not, I don't think  
Can I 
Can I have Advocaat then dad?
Yes.
Yeah, you can have one.
Ooh an Advocaat's enough!
What do you want then mother?
What would you like?
Would you like some of that brandy?
Medicinal?
Cor you
Mhm.
Do you want some medicinal?
I'll get you some medicinal.
Are you,are we allowing for this or
Oh, you're always allowed medicinal.
You be careful!
 
Medicinal.
Not with the egg shell in it, no!
Do you want straight brandy ?
Or  Kirschberry 
 Kirschberry 
You want the  Kirschberry one?
It's nice that  Kirschberry one!
It's nice, yeah.
I'll have a drop of that actually.
A wee drop!
A drop of Kirsch.
Aye!
I'll be like Geor Geo George's mother   one year  and his mo and his mother was in her seventies  he came in  says to daddy  ho gosh !
So John says well  take a bit  with some gin  so George took it
And she drank it and drank it!
so 
E'er.
so she sa she 
It'll do you good!
Put hairs on your chest!
She never, she never drank alcohol at all 
Oh yeah!
so
Ha!
George
I've met these people before!
you know 
Oh no!
she was marvellous
Yeah.
 
Yeah, yeah  
Only on doctor's orders
George  thought 
Don't sa 
and you know, George  it you see  so she said  that brandy was very nice


I think I'll have another glass 
Got a bit of a kick to it!
but er 


so he said  so he poured her another one  and she said  I want another glass George so he said 
 
and by time she'd drunk about six glasses 
She'd be flat on her back!
she was i she was  shouting
Yeah.
so he said they put her to bed and he said it was best Christmas they ever  !
Nice quiet Christmas !
That's quite good !
So that was George's
Get your own mother legless and 
That's it.
put her in the bedroom and then enjoy the rest of Christmas!
He said then he, we could carry on with the serious  stuff !
And what was that?
The whisky?
Well it's
Don't drink it too quick!
I'm not  I'm just taking a sip   
And he said  
another glass George that was real good!


Well  that time that I got   cayleyed I didn't realise I
When did you get 
You want to 
 cayleyed 
Well  when
We're recording now 
Yeah  she's very exhausting, ain't she?
She's an old lady though
Oh Arthur it's not that
It is, yes, that's making it worse  she's an old lady
Could you have her to live with you?
No she'd drive me 
 
up the wall
I know I've said that and you said oh no I could cope with your mum and
I thought I could, I thought I could  I really thought I could but oh God  I'd be okay if I could 
You'll never have any life you know 
could go deaf, if I could go selectively deaf, then I'll be alright
You'll never have any life of your own would you?
Well that's fair enough
I never said she, she, I mean, I think, I blame myself as well I think I was on edge, but everything, everything she questions, you know, like she can't be nice, says no you're not having anything oh she says
No I think that's just showing interest, that's the questioning that's just showing interest 
But then she'll ask you three times  again, three times 
Yeah, that's, that's when it's hard she asks you the same thing again and again and a few minutes later, then half an hour later, then, then you think have you listened  
I've told you that, I mean today she was asking, she, she was standing there while I loaded the dishwasher she says I've got to learn how to do it haven't I?
I thought oh go away
What learn how to 
and that's how you do it 
She hasn't got one
No but
She's not going to get one 
really, really she 
with her she had to learn
Oh I see, yeah, ah, go, she's just, she's just got to have something to do 
Yeah, but anything she does takes her such a long time, I mean like the ironing like 
Well yeah but she is seven seventy isn't she  has it always taken her or has it?
Yes
It's always taken twice, three times the length of time as anybody else?
but then she'll go upstairs and come down but then she'll go upstairs and come down
Bit of exercise  keeping herself fit
I wonder if Philip was or wasn't
Pardon?
I wonder if Philip was or wasn't
You wonder if Philip was what?
purely that he was really just
Oh I think it was psychological that 
if it was he's in a bad way int he?
Erm, well what your mum and dad said to me is that he gets very worried, het up, really tensed about doing things, that's going, you know, things that are gonna happen, like just driving down to a different place, er and he get's himse himself so het up , so worried, he makes himself ill, I think that's what's happened
And as soon as he got home the pressure was off
The pressure was off and he was fine and he was  he was his normal self  and that's what happens each time
Yeah cos if it was as bad as he said it was, I mean he would only stand up for one or two hours at a time, whereas he'd been up since nine, he was still sitting up at one o'clock when I arrived there
Yeah, he made a miraculous recovery today  and I think that seems to point or to confirm what your, what your mum and dad was saying 
Well that sort of problem will only get worse
Yeah I'm afraid so, I think it's compounded by the fact that your, what your dad says sums it up beautifully about your mum, I was talking to him about, you know, what does she, what she's got in her life other than what she ever had other than a home, working and so on, has she got any hobbies at home or does she do anything is there anything that takes her mind off things 
Yeah, but she still has Philip 
and he says no she hasn't, she, her hobby is Philip
but as soon as Philip can't do what she wants him to do I E run to the door 
Then she turns on him 
then she turns on him
then she turns on him, yes
I mean I hate the way she stands behind somebody mouths and
Mimics
mimics them and that, oh I hate that, I hate that  as I say a few times I thought to myself I do not like
You are my mother 
Yeah
the Germans are out are they?
Must get better a few people are walking about  very, very
how many miles have we done?
What's the tachometer?
Seven four three
We've done seventeen thousand
We've got seventeen thousand
Seventeen hundred
forty three miles
this month
Since when?
This month, we did one thousand in January, one thousand and four in January 
I, er, shows you, that's in this month?
In this month, mind you we've used this one most  Today she was saying, hadn't Tony decided which school he was going to and then she started which school should he go to, will you have to pay?
Well won't it take him a lot longer than going to Cramley?
And, and I thought we had this conversation two weeks ago
With her
Yes about when he was deciding
Mm
well why and why not, oh shut up I don't
Do you know when we came back from
last year when Jimmy and Anna
Yeah
yeah and we went round, you know we went round the
with them
Yeah
went to Coventry
Mm
yeah, when we came back, did we see your mum and dad and Philip when we came back from that?
Yes
Did we talk about where we'd been and what we'd done, what we'd seen and what had happened?
In Romania?
No here
Yeah
Yeah
Why?
Well today we were behind a G registration Jag and I turned to Paul and I said oh maybe that's one of the Jaguars we saw being built in Coventry and I said no, no, no, corrected myself, I said couldn't of been
G reg
because it would have to of been H reg wouldn't it?
And then she said oh, have you seen Jaguars being made?
I thought yeah, last year, don't you remember?
No, why did you go to Cadburys?
And then it was oh we didn't, you know, you had a free sample at Cadburys, oh, I said we got a free sample from Jaguar, we got some walnut veneer which is, I suppose, half Cadburys
no, oh I said well do do don't you remember we went to Massey Fergusons as well 
did you arrange it yourself?
Oh  God  I thought ya, ya, ya, ya, ya
She's partly dementia
She could be, actually she could be going
Yeah
started to go
Senile
She could be 
Yeah but if she is she's 
She's a bit young for that though
No, but if she is, she's, she's been going that way a long time.


Oh we're horrible
No I think the mother-in-law jokes are right  she's a cracker  hope it isn't too busy in here 
Oh well  pop over one night after school  just one night this week and that's it, just pop over and
You'll end up shopping then
No I won't
It will  you'll end up going shopping 
she had her chance today
Well do, do you want me to put a five pound bet on that?
Eh?
Will you bet me?
I reckon Philip will be capable don't you?
No, yes, but I think you'll end up going shopping just to get out the house
Yeah maybe father'll say take her out, take her out 
Take her out, take her out yeah
get rid of her
Okay, let's see if we can find a parking spot, here, it'll do nicely, or there or there, no there's not one there
No there isn't one in there, there's one up here
Do that one, bit worried about that computer in the back you know
Yes, I think I'd of taken it back 
There we are
There we are
Right, let's away, I think we're just
I wanted to get a cardigan for school the other day and
cos I want to come out of thick woollies now it is March 
Yeah 
Have a look in here and see if they've got any 
Pardon?
I want a cardigan for school
Yeah you just said  have they got a sale on?
Nothing there
Mm
no  what you looking for, what type?
Just a plain cardigan man's
Plain colour
a couple of man's, I've got a black and white man
Light to mid weight
Yeah, but erm 
It looks as though you're gonna be a bit unlucky, wait a minute, oh no, no   I'm a wanderer, do, do, do, do  no that's your lot Paula  I wonder if they've got any more of those decent  knives, those Kitchen Devils
We've got two, erm, we don't need any more
How much are these now?
Well what
It isn't a case of  wanting them  they're such good knives you don't get them at that price, too often  right can we just have a look at the price of microwaves, while we're here
pardon?
If you want one prefer one with conventional oven
Oh sure, no
she doesn't need one, she won't be able to use it  ninety four pounds
That's all she wants, here you are
Ah it's got a cheap, cheap interior, no it's too
But that's an oven as well 
Sanyo, it's even buy British  Have you found anything?
A Wrangler T-shirt for Paul 
T-shirts, what for Paul?
I wonder if he'll have one of those?
Blue he wants, doesn't he?
Medium
Well if he doesn't like it Tony'll wear it  get one of, Paula get one of those, one of these  made in Sri Lanka
I'm only getting one
Oh get, get this, too, doesn't matter, oh Tony'll wear it
Tony won't wear it with Wrangler on the front
He will  I will if he doesn't
They're the wrong size for you
Medium
bring it back, I wouldn't get a white one
Why not?
Because he, Paul gets them filthy 
There are, one of these  large
Medium
I'll have one as well for that price  reduced to clear, what's that?
 

Have you got any more of your compact discs?
No the, they're the cheap ones, what you looking for?
Them
oh this handy box, oh yes  are they the same price as before?
They were cheaper before weren't they?
I thought they were, but could be wrong, how many do you want?
A couple of
just one?
Two  just right for
boxes though
Mm 
He'd wear his
Where what was?
all starts now
Oh the  your shopping starts here  What do we need?
Binliners  you're okay for erm, what you call it?
Clingfilm
Yeah
might as 
but no, use that erm bottle stuff we've got, we dilute, it's supposed to be good stuff, you're suppose to get the same quality out of it as, out of that and it's cheaper  we okay for glasses?
Yeah, I bought some the other day
Yeah, I know you did, but, we okay
Mm
have you seen this?
An old, it looks like an old style  take it on to the Antiques Road Show 
Should of bought the gas bottle
Have you got one that's running out?
I thought you said it was
no, I said it was running out, have you one that's run out then?
Pardon
I thought that was the second one
So erm, if we run out, we run out  Which whisky did you get?
Bells
What, bottle of Bells, ah, oh you go 
Two, two bottles of wine
Did you get it from here?
No from that
From where?
you know those shops near
Oh near the hospital, yeah, and you got parked in there?
If you go behind the bank
Why wants some
 

Here we are, what do you need?
What shampoo?
Wash and Go 
Tissues, box of tissues 
Don't lean on it
make you go to sleep 
no I'm not leaning, you rotten devil
It looks like a bomb has hit it here
 

I don't think we need anything else out of here do we?
No
No 
Oh white
pardon?
White
they can see it, but  there's two different types  we'll try that one though
how much is this?
Two and five
God that brings back memories
let's seal it, now you want some goats cheese with that, that's what you'll need, lying on the beach at midnight going to sleep in your sleeping bag, with a bottle of that and your goats cheese 
We're going away in October by the way
Are we?
Where we going to?
We're going to go down to the travel agents
Famous last words
and we're gonna
he'll be back in hospital 
and we're gonna say, where's the cheapest place you can go
Here are Paula, it's better stuff
I don't think they're all that keen on that one
It's good for you
and we're gonna say where's the cheapest place you can go?
They'll say home
And we're having a week
 
We'll have a week at home then, cheapest place you can go, I tell you where you can go that's really good, your mum's, have a week with your mother  nervous wreck by the sea 
But we are
Do we need washing powder?
No
What about erm, oven top cleaner?
Got it, yeah  oh 
because with a bit of luck Tony wants to know
ah I think he might find he will be
Are we alright for, yeah
Yes we're alright, er salt, are we okay for salt?
I don't know 
I haven't bought any recently 
Are you pleased that he's chosen er Northgate?
Which one were you hoping to choose?
Facilities Northgate, I thought the people at Stowmarket at Stow Utland were on the par with the others, you know you can get, you can easily be convinced that the place is good because of it 
Well this is it 
because of the look of it, when in fact that's only part of it  it depends whether he's gonna be motivated there, they mo it's not gonna need much motivation but if people are interested in you for what you are like, like they have been, yeah, and he's experienced all, he's been somebody special there hasn't he?
Yeah
Yeah, and if he becomes just an auto run it could just knock him back a bit, one of the crowd, you know, just another one 
Do you think that's likely to happen?
Er, I hope I don't think 
 
I don't think it will, but I'm sure it wouldn't do at the other two places
Ah, so which one were you hoping he'd gone for?
I was hop I hadn't, I hadn't really made up my mind  that's plenty biscuits Paula, yeah it's plent don't get, biscuit mania, Easter eggs, God
Oh, do you want a Cadbury's Creme Egg?
No I don't  when is Easter, it's late isn't it?
It's ages, ages 
April, it's another six weeks yet isn't it?
Yeah 
What you looking for?
Anything special?
What do you want?
Pardon?
What do you want?
Oh let's have a Crunchie  you
Nothing   oh dear 
erm
No
Northgate
no I think it's the speciality is that, in him and how he reacts with people, it isn't you know just what he's good at or not good at 
You don't think he'll be er 
Don't think he'll what?
you know got enough to go to university, things like that to of been top dog all your school life, it might do you good not to be
Yeah, but it depends what, how it takes, what form it takes  if he's  if it's sort of their others are of similar ability, okay, but if it's because, if people don't take any notice of him because of 
Oh yeah, mm, mm
no just because of they're that type, they don't take any notice of anybody
Yeah, yeah  but you think that, that'll happen at Northgate?
you know, don't take an interest in them as people
Think that could happen at Northgate?
I think that could happen anywhere, but
 

but
It does have implications mind you for Paul, cos where's Paul gonna go?
No it doesn't, he, he doesn't have to follow his brother's footsteps
No
he's got to be his own person
he's got to be himself, for, yeah selfish it's been easier for us for transport problem, if Paul decides to go somewhere else I think you've got to give 'em them freedom to do it, freedom of choice 
Oh 
where Nathan goes
Really, so Paul is in, hasn't got freedom then?
He's been with him since primary school, it'll be nice to go to, cos they're going off to America when they've finished
Is that right?


Is that what Paul said?
Paul's gonna bum around for a year I reckon
Good, it'll do him good
I think, I think he needs to do it
No I just think he needs to do it
Oh he might never settle down
He, he just might grow up a little bit
cotton wool, Tony
oh yes, which ones
I don't know which ones they like
There's, there's one of these beef and tomato I think, I seem to recognize that
 

Yeah it might as you say with Paul but I'd be more worried about Paul bombing around every year than Tony
I'd be more worried about Tony, cos I don't think Tony's as well wise as Paul is, in some ways  really for both of them it wouldn't do them any harm you know because look, they're, they're, they're not typical lads in many ways
which I  they're not typical lads in many ways are they?
I'd rather they'd
university than before
you know I rather did it before because if you do it after that's when the job situation becomes a bit of problem, look at John, look what's happening there
You can't blame John, he didn't want a job, he can't turn round now and say he's got the wrong degree, he didn't want a job 
Don't know, I've never spoken to him at all, don't know
He didn't want a job that's what he had said he wanted to have time out he didn't want a job he could get a job when he wanted to, he can't now turn round and blame it on
The degree
the degree 
Oh God  do you want some toast then?
No
I'm gonna get some healthy bread  any blackcurrant pies?
I've not got them down love
Why is it that you have everything but, there you are, there you are  they're cheap too aren't they?
Yeah
Shall I get two lots?
yes, yeah  have you much bread in the freezer Paula?
Tony wanted to know what
Paula have you much bread in the freezer?
waffles, what are these?
Doughnut waffles
It's the way they're made, no that's we'll, that is heart attack time, that is 
That's not waffle love that, that's not
no, erm  Paula you can get them in the frozen food section love
Yeah I know you can
I've seen them down there  have a big bone through that, have they, looks as if that's been boned
There's your bone
Oh there's your bone, what about that one leg, boneless, four fifty nine
I'll just have pies
Actually a lot of the convenience stuff's been eaten and the
Fair enough they needed eating
Yeah 
Oh
most of it's gone
Pardon, most of it's gone
who's been eating it?
Well I know somebody's left it behind, do you want it?
That's right
Yeah  you're welcome  that's it
 

de, de, umbrella 
Pancake day
Don't forget
 

I ate a lot of them, but they've gone off, they'd really had
These are seventy nine
Which?
These look, well, these look a better bunch, get one of those, I'll get one of these
One of these?
Yeah well get one of those, I'll get, one of these, they look pretty good , mm lovely bunch of grapes those, oh yes, oh yes  what are these plums?
They're a bit hard aren't they?
They are really they're
well do you want some that are a bit hard?
No 
Do you want any salad?
pardon?
Paula
What?
do you want any salad?
Young gifted and black, do, do, do  are we okay for potatoes?
Yeah we're alright
Ah, do you want any swede?
Swede?
Not swede, parsnips sorry, miles away there, parsnips do you want any?
Pardon?
No 
Anything else?
Carrots 
Any umbrellas to buy today  umbrellas, singing do a do, do, a  is that it?
Yes, apples 
They look nice these Cox's
The skin on them, they don't eat them
beautiful apples though Paula  right what frozen stuff do we want?
It's a bit 
really
 

have they got the, the other pies that we have, this is it  how about one with ham in it?
Yeah
Haven't got it have they?
Is that okay?
They're the potato waffles
Yeah
that she was talking about 
Go on, let him try one
Which is cheaper?
The four or the fourteen?
The four
Well I don't know they may not be, won't pay five pounds  eight, fours, twelve  maybe  cheaper by about thirty P a box if you do it that way.
What we having for tea?
Tonight?
Yeah
Have that ham
Oh
the
you know what's gonna happen
Every time I don't
yeah
we buy ham
We're okay for ice cream
Yeah
What about veg, frozen veg?
Yeah
Yes we're okay or yes we want some?
No we're okay 
Is there anything else or is that it?
We ain't got one in the fridge
What's that?
in the freezer
Blackcurrant torte, blackcurrant torte, have we ever had one before?
No
Do you want an apple bar?
They're nice that, with a bit of cream, that'll do Paula  Paula come on now this one's free
That'll keep us going  biscuits, I go to the end 
Here I'll take them  I'll do the tins  is that it Paula?
I'll do these bottles as well then  oops 
That's a hundred and six pounds, eighty one
Ooh
I just said is that all we've got?
You don't get much
It soon goes  a hundred and six pounds, God
 

Ten Air Miles, we'll get to Paris one day
There's two of us
One of us, we won't get that 
How far is Paris?
From Gatwick?
I dunno maybe three hundred miles
Three hundred miles?
How many have you got so far?
Dunno 
Thank you
You're in the way Paula 
A lot of money for what we've got
Just check that, make sure you've got no doubles going through
 

no 
Anything?
We got, we got quite a lot of meat
Yeah, even so a hundred and six pounds is a lot of money, when did you last come shopping?
Our
three pound, fifty
Yeah  how much did those two boxes cost?
Haven't got that far yet  two ninety nine each
Three pounds each, six pounds
Fifteen pound on T-shirts
Ah, yeah, yeah, so, you take that off, you take the six off for those boxes that's a hundred, take fifteen off for the t-shirts, you're talking eighty five pounds then.
You know, you know you carry forward, you know say I've got, I've got about now, about six thousand carry forward as me trigger money
Mm, mm
can I put that in next year's budget?
Yeah, because it's money for you to spend 
I don't want to put it in me deposit you see, I want to put it in my next year's commitment 
Whatever money's left over that's not been committed by you, if they find that they've got fifteen hundred say, that's not been committed by you at the end of the financial year, that will automatically go into deposit
Well I want to commit, I reckon the, the change over I'm having in
is gonna cost me about four thousand
And were you getting that four thousand from last year's, this year's money?
This year's, no this year's trigger money 
This year's trigger
this year's trigger money
Ah
so I just want to carry that over
Yeah
earmarked for alterations to Pauline's guttering
Yeah
and then I'll only have to carry forward of about three thousand, plus me twelve thousand deposit 
So they'll have fifteen thousand on deposit
Mm
Ooh
I reckon I'll be using some of that, I'm, I'm gonna use I've got less than you 
But, hold on 
and now, I've got more expensive staff than you.
Yeah, but, er, I've got six thousand carried forward from last year, okay you've got twelve they've got six 
Pass it over 
yeah, see what I mean, and this year, the budget 
Which?
I've got this year it's all accounted for, I can't take anything out of it
Well I think I'm in a position 
and, and put it to and put it into a deposit, you know this, this building I want, at the back, there's, there's nothing there, pardon?
Oh I should of shown you me car
you would of been impressed
Well, yeah, there's plenty of time, I don't think sort of, it's not a magic one is it?Is it gonna fly?
Oh, there's one corner of it sticking up
Oh no
that wants er, just put it on the seats
Well just, I put it under here as well 
bring them back if it's sticking up
Oh I am gonna do
hold on, let's put this box in first, let's get this out, right 
You don't want heavy things do ya?
No
No these are heavy
that's light  the rest I'll have to 
these are heavy 
there are, all that lot'll have to go onto the seats, mind your fingers  can you go down there, open that door  no you'll have to come this side, I'll have to pass them through to you  okay  on the floor Paula might be bet the heavier stuff, then if it does fall off it's not going to  make a mess 
This one?
see that's gonna, see what I mean, as we go along that'll fall on the floor that, you'll have it all over the place, put it away  okay, get some petrol now on the way 
last year, weren't it?
Yes, that's because of the floor area
And your numbers of, and, what you, how many kids have you got?
At the moment?
January number
Sixty seven
Yeah you see I've only got fifty two and I've got eight hundred quid less than you
Crazy innit?
Yeah, but I've still got three
but the implication, the big your biggest charge on the school is the staff
Yeah
that's why it's crazy you see it, oh, it doesn't make sense that so much emphasis is put on floor area  if er less emphasis is put on floor area and more on children 
 
three, top of the scale you see
Er, yeah, but there's a heck of an
I'm gonna be really pushed 
 

because it, the biggest cost us teachers  and the number of teachers you need is governed by the number of
Children
children you have
Except the twenty five, fifty two in two classes
I'm not, I'm not saying that you should have any 
is not good 
I, I don't think you should have any less money, I'm saying that we should have more, we are, we're losing out
Yeah
you're not gaining it's
No
it's us that are losing out
we're better than you 
there should be more emphasis on, on number of children  that was lucky, it's on this side isn't it?
My side
Your side the erm cap, petrol cap  are we paying by Access?
Mm
Oh I thought that was your, that was one of the teachers at the course there 
The trigger on that gun went at fifteen pounds, er just about 
sixteen, I've got the card here okay
Have you got mine?
no I've got my own
Oh I, I've just put mine
 

thank you  it's cooling down a bit now, it's been a gorgeous day though, that sun
Mother thinks it was you 
five o'clock 
she see driving along, yes it's light now
Thank you
When do the clocks go, alter?
March
thank you  thanks a lot, thanks
Oh I know what you can have, you can have waffles and that can't ya?
Can have what?
Those waffles and
With the ham, yeah
Mm, please Tony he wanted to try them know what they're 
he can try them now
Yeah that's what we'll have for tea waffles and ham and can have a bottle of wine,I'm still on my antibiotics 
When do you come off your antibiotics?
Tomorrow
Tomorrow, you finish them tomorrow, completely?
Bet you're pleased with that?
Can I have a 
Yeah 
pot of  tea?
How do you feel now, how's that?
Oh it's still tight
Really, are you gonna carry on taking the those red bombers 
How many am I down to?
that he's given you?
What am I down to, eight Tuesday, eight, seven 
Seven 
six, five, four left then
Oh you've had today's?
Yeah
So it's three tomorrow  you know we've got away with this winter
Oh another, I can't remember such a good winter
Yeah we had, er that cold snap before Christmas and was it November?
Yeah, but we haven't 
And we've had one or two cold snaps, little cold snaps 
Yes, but we haven't had any frost, ice 
hadn't real we've had the frost of we have 
Yeah, but there's been, I think there's been one warning when 
we haven't had the bad weather, we haven't had the fogs that 
it was icy going to school
we haven't had the fogs that other people have had
They've had it worse in other parts of the country
we've done very well for escaping it, the only trouble is we haven't got the rain and now, this, this coming summer I dread to think what's gonna happen, look how dry those fields are, just look at it  if we get a wind up, if we, a wind starts to blow it'll move a lot of this, it will just lift it up into the air, we'll get clouds of soil blowing all over the place.
We won't, we won't have snow drifts we'll have soil, soil drifts, as daft as that, God where is all this traffic coming from?
 
Oh, yo, yo, yo, yo  if he pulls up he's, he's a goner, ah, pull off there, the bus got off, has he?
Yeah
Now
right up his backside
 

Father was very quiet though you know.
Was it because he was tired?
Oh
washed out  he very quickly got tired, you remember in hospital, he quickly got tired and if he laid down he quickly seemed to get his energy back, he'd come back and be
You think it is the beginning of the erm
God I hope not  but it is a reaction obviously er to the radiation treatment  but
But
it's the amount of tiredness that is cu you know he's showing and, and his speed into tiredness and then his recovery from it, that's unusual that he could be 
He's on tablets that are, er what's it, what were they called?
Erm
Well he's on six lots isn't he?
Yeah, well one lot of tablets were, was, they weren't for relaxing tablets but they were called  er
What?
I can't remember
What, designed to do what then?
Relax
To relax him
Mm, relax and  that will be to slow him down though
Ah, yeah, maybe
He's on relaxants
Looks as though Ipswich have won
Hmm
all the scarfs are flying
not necessarily
Well they usually don't fly when, when they've got beaten, let's see what's on  there we are
 

That's division three  division three this  West Brom
 

nil
One week, what he wants to do is to change it round 
Nil
Nil  seven away, scored seven away  four, three  he said down here didn't he that lad?
Yes
So what's, when you say he's
when you say he's got erm, he's going to Saint Paul's as a pupil?
Choir school, he voice 
He must have a good voice then
Yeah he
he's blossomed since you've been there
she, she wanted him to, the psychologist saw him cos he was
Oh  do you think Anna would of, I hope she's doing something like this 
I hope she's doing something
Pardon?
I hope she's doing something 
If she's er  if she's sorted a village out, that'll be great
Mm 
say, sort out erm a school
We said a village with a school in it
With a school, yeah  we could be asking too much you know 
Mm 
with that
I don't think so
You don't think so?
No, she'll thrive on it, well if she can't do it then we can't do it
That's right
No and I don't think you'll get away doing it any other way, mm, not with all the new, if these new restrictions are coming in, I must 
Yeah 
ring up tomorrow
What about the Hungarians, you know that thing about the
I'm going to ring up tomorrow
Who you going to ring Romanian Relief?
Southampton, Southampton
Is it only office hours?
Mm 
Does er  we need to know things like that and if you 
I still question whether we'll go
Why?
if there are problems
If these are the problems
Mm
or not
Oh have you got that on?
Mm, doesn't matter
If there are the problems of taxes and 
taxes?
Mm
That's why I don't, well if the Hungarians are gonna charge  is it two thousand pounds or something?
Mm
If they go and charge that we
we can't afford that
Well no you get it back supposedly
Yeah, but if you get it back in funds  well that's no use to you is it?
Who's gonna take two thousand pounds worth of pounds out of Hungary?
Who?
I don't know yet
Nobody in their right mind, do you remember that, were you there when that guy from Kuwait
Mm, mm
tried to change
Mm
his foreign and done it, done it all legally at the hotel and so on 
Yeah
and the state he was in and they didn't want to know did they?
They more or less called him a fool when he tried to change back into whatever it was  our current whatever it was  and if that's the case erm  Hungar Hungarians are holding on to this two thousand pound, it's surety isn't it?
Mm 
You'd be stoned dead
and it's if they're taxing on the border
well, well that's what it is but if you can get into Romania 
Into Romania as well you're being double blowed
I can't see that honestly I just, I just 
I can 
can't see them
I can 
seeing it as an import so they're taxing imports
Mm, yeah 
I think  I wouldn't of thought they'd be so thick skinned as to turn away help, that so much help, I just can't see it
 

They've had, not just from Britain they've had help, they've had it from all over Europe and it's still 
Yeah, but 
it's still going in, the media's involved in it as well, I would of thought people like Anneke Rice would of picked that up  Are you going to try her again
Yeah, I'm trying to get this ready for tomorrow, I'm just 
Well it's, it's gonna be very late there, you'll be getting her out of bed if you're not careful  I know she says it doesn't mind, she, she doesn't mind it doesn't matter, but   oh dear, there's a piece here in the newspaper did you see that?
Yeah 
Mrs  have you heard of her?
I read it
Have you heard of her?
No
No I don't, she's obviously been before or been involved with it before  What time does Tony want picking up?
About twenty past the same route 
Same as Paul 
Mm
Right  mm  wonder which way this paper's going to go, on the election, there's a piece here about title that  that's no way to treat a lady  no, I think it's all to do with, yeah it looks like
 

An Access card had been found at a meeting of the Liberal Democrats for Eastern Region contracts, and, M S Sue Sutton, who was a candidate for
South West
Hampstead they've found, and the paper says  the grey haired woman who
to collect the card but did Ms Sutton gracefully rise from her seat to hand it to her, no, she tossed it over the rim of the platform onto the floor below leaving the poor woman to scrabble around for several minutes looking for it  and the, and the punch line is  a little later an embarrassed Ms Sutton is contesting Cambridgeshire South West for the Lib Dems at the general election, apologised for her cavalier behaviour, let us hope she learnt from the experience  yeah
Mm
now what on earth has that got to do with a policy of a political party, the way somebody handles a lost Access card I wonder, mm?
No way 