

And Carla miss
I called your name  I did
miss Carla, you haven't called my name
Carla
Carla, Carla  oh you were here last week when
yeah
 

Carla 
yeah 
I'm slowly getting to know names, it's the twenty seventh?
yeah
Yeah
okay, rightio then, well last week we used our bodies  last week d'ya remember what we did?, can you put your bag down please, take your jackets off, what do you think this is?, come on,nobody else here in the room  okay, so last week we  we did  if you remember, erm, now this week we're going to do some sound tracks 
can I borrow this?
gonna make some sound machines alright 
I can't I can't
obviously we've got to work together on all, are you listening to me?, on all the different parts of the body, you want them all to come alive, okay, so, this week as I say we're gonna concentrate on sound, sound, sound, sound, you've got to play  on sound   that is the painting, I mean the, the pictures do you, alright that's fine, at the same doesn't matter we've still got to work on different things, yeah, okay?, erm, so, as I say we're going to make a sound machine in different groups, now to give you an example, what I what you to do is be , I'm going to give you a situation, give, choose a profession, okay, let's say we are in hospital, now I want you each and everyone of you in this group think of the situation, think of a sound that one might hear in a hospital, everyone to themselves just think of a sound, could be a patient screaming, it could be a heart machine, it could be, er exactly, could be that, could be absolutely anything, it could sirens, it could be anything, okay, for everyone I want you to have the sound in your head  okay, everyone's got a sound in their head?
Yeah
just an example, now when I come round and tap you, I want you to make your sound and will you keep on making that sound repeatedly until I clap like that and tell you to stop, okay, so if I tap you 
go on 
you make your sound and you carry on and on and on, I'm gonna keep on taping different people's make their sound and then we're gonna see what it feels like you're in hospital, okay, now it doesn't matter if somebody's got the same sound as somebody else, it's no big deal, alright, because eventually they'll all blend into each other, but as soon as I've tapped you, make your sound, alright    patients, come on where's the machines?okay, stop, now when did it start becoming out of hand?, at one stage we didn't really know where we were to, once, once I  say ten people, okay, and that was also due to the fact that we had perhaps too many erm patients moaning, alright, it was good in one respect because why, it made obvious that we were in a, a hospital well something like , but erm when you're in smaller groups and you're making your sound machines, obviously it's much easier to  to control and to make the overall sound more realistic, don't you think?, so, mm, what we're going to do is we're going to get into different groups, into groups of four, five, no big deal, you're welcome to only if you want to, and, you're going to, each group is going to choose er a profession, okay, you can be brick layers, you can be er musicians, er you can be er gardener, I mean absolutely you can be factory workers, you can be absolutely anything, and what you're going to do is you're going to choose, each person will choose a sound which is represented of that particular person, er profession, okay, and you'll going to make your sounds simultaneously so that as for the audience who are simply listening to you can just close our eyes cos we won't, you won't be acting you'll be making these sounds and using, we'll close our eyes and we'll know exactly where we are, okay, and then after that once we've done that just, before you choose your profession to know what this is going to lead onto, after that we're going to put movements to that profession, so when, if you were in a factory going er putting bottles on, on top top of bottles, you would have the movements going and you would have the sound going and I want you to build up, up, the sound machine which becomes the movement machine as well , so you're almost robotic so you, shh, shh, or whatever, however your sound, and each person does their thing in the factory or where ever they are and we will be able to see from listening and looking at the movements and obviously remember just because you're not an example it doesn't mean you can't talk, there might be for instance there would be a doctor going stand back, stand back, you know, er, in, in the  you can use voices, but also obviously very, very effective to have sound voices, shh, shh, to create that part of it, have instruments, but this is how they actually started lay down sound tracks for movies, people specialize 
 
that it came to make the amazing sounds, okay, and then after that, er, this is another thing it leads to is there's going to be a break down in your sound machine, okay, there's gonna be a break down in your, in your entire robotic machine, movement in our machine, and that break down could be due to some of the workers going off and getting  some of them erm you know, one, er part of the machine breaking down on the whole, sound changes, the movement changes and we're going to watch how this robotic machine changes as it breaks down, it could be sound shut down it could be it could be anything you choose, but I want it anyway, leave it to you so all you do is choose a profession, think of something that is, comes to life to you, in movement and in sound, okay, so let's get into groups of, see how many they are, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, okay let's get into groups of four then, okay  is that right, one, two, three, four, one, oh five, four, five, just get your group into a work in, I thank you if you don't get 
Vanessa 
into groups yourself I'll put you in groups 
come on into your groups please
come on then
quickly  er can I see people not working properly?
miss we've only got three
you've got three  what you got, can you work in your three?
yes, we can
okay, would you like to have one more?
we can work in the three
you'd like to work in the three?one more just simply because it's, it gives you more sound impulse
okay
is it going to be difficult to get one of them 
I don't know cos there're all together
yes, okay, you three go and make your sound, means that you have 
okay 
each one of you have to be louder and also it also means that you can make, one person can make more than one sound, okay, work it like, just you can substitute for the other two
I told you we walked off with the, with er Fel Felicity
I didn't walk of with Felicity I walked off with Sookey
well Sookey still come round  well you don't want to join us, the rides so, it's 
it's your fault
my fault?
yeah, your fault
half past three, I could of gone out even more then
 

oh yeah
ow
ow what?
they came look, they came this way, they didn't go, they didn't go the long way round, I believe ya, they came this way up here
I know
that's it  it's Sarah    noisy down here Amanda with them cars.
If I fall I'm dragging you down with me
no 
hi Flit, Felicity, hello, can you hear me?
pardon
oh 
sorry I just feel you were  
we're not always happier
oh stop squabbling  it's a nice, to nice a day to squabble
nice?
yes
I'm soaking wet and you call it nice and it's dismal, oh
it's raining and I call it nice
I call it rotten weather
Joanne I'll be singing, it's raining, it's raining
no, not particularly
cos it's not raining I don't know what I'm talking about 
 
don't worry  not me
not me
huh, got it, oh yeah I did do it actually
oh look at that dog, oh 
you thought it was gonna be a big alsatian didn't you?
what's your, what's your book called?
you know where you were?,
I hope you do cos I've just lost your page 
 

mm, mm  my shoulders hurting me
your shoes?
no my shoulder
er which one?which one?
my right one, this one
did you bang it?
no, just does, I slept funny or something
ee I found out yesterday that black tee shirt I was wearing has stained me black oh where my tee shirt was it was black 
how?, how? how?
I dunno the dye just come out 
oh cos the raining the raining, it was raining yesterday
yeah and the dye had all come off
there's Ben, there's Ben, there's Li , there's Ellen's lover boy
so about ten o'clock in the evening I had to go and have a bath to get all this black stuff off me, it was horrible
what colours your bath?
it's grey
oh so the bath, your baths grey yeah? so ba 
no, no, no no the water was grey because I got all this black stuff 
what colours your bath?
white
ah same as mine, the waters all grey, ah 
apparently black
are you still black?
no  I had to get mum to do my back because I couldn't see my back
ah
and I had black all over my back, it was really horrible, and all my hands were black as well, and the 
how the the tee shirt didn't touch your hand
no, no, no, but we've got your tee shirt, if you go like that
yeah I sometimes go like that 
yeah its rubbed off on my hand 
I sometimes go like that
yeah
I don't
it just rubbed off on my hand
I just leave my tee shirt alone, basically
ooh the  
where'd you get your tee shirt from?
the  and I have to go all 
the rude one to me
I dunno I haven't  yet
cos Jo got a picture of my head when I was sleeping and a close up 
 

there's Jasmine
where?
where?
there
oh yeah
speaking to 
she's normally talking to someone when I come in
she's not with me, she's like over there going, hi
yeah, she always says that  why, are you a bit pissed off with her?
no not, no  hi
hi
 

I've got a stomach ache
I've found my French homework at last 
I've got a stomach ache
oh just
I've got my shoulder, my stomach er, I'm in the wars today
yeah
okay 
my foot hurts
bye  bye
J O N E S 
Jones
Jones 
Who weren't here on Friday?
no me, I was here 
two, two exclamation marks and two for Mr erm  I wouldn't like to be doing this Carla 
 

can I have one?
what?
chewing gum
I suppose so 
Right, all the noise is coming from this 
I don't care
stop it, get on with your work  you're gonna loose some of your break, understand
erm, I have
I have been round here and I've asked  everybody and you've told me you've got your work sheets, now get a grip of yourself, get yourself sorted out  
all I'm getting is a load of racket from you lot
your first language isn't English is it?
mm?
your first language isn't English is it?what's it?
how'd ya do that?
well, my second name goes sort of like erm 
okay, I 
ain't got, I ain't got much money though 
you can get brilliant bargains on food  you know that?
yeah, but I don't want to stuff myself with junk
I know we're just saying
McDonalds junk, but
Marsha I'm going along to the chip shop and I'm going to McDonalds and get a drink, na, I'm gonna have to stay, how much, how much the chips?, sixty P and how much is milk shake?, one pound, that's one pound sixty  and then money for sweets after school     
why is it important that the thighs are strong and light?
I'm gonna get in trouble because you've been shouting away
what, what have I been shouting?
why does it get you in trouble?, just because
no cos he said we've gotta be quiet
oh
oh please
no you cannot use nothing 
have you seen what he's, what else he's put on that Mr Bond
what?
go and see 
Douglas yeah
let's have a look at that Mr Bond thing yeah, hang on a minute
you know I stood and asked who's got to do on a machine?, and everybody said they've got them, they've got a mark folder and they've got  I don't see that 
 
why don't you just co-operate? so we can get the show off the ground
were working I hate that teacher 
now who hasn't got the human machine working?
one, two,
for about the fifth time
three
you're not loud enough Sarah I can't hear you
four, five, six
oh and I've
if anyone's close to 
what?
finishing with the human machine working?
how can a thigh bone erm be strong and light at the same time?, not in the bloody
well he said that
how can the thigh bone yeah be strong and light at the same time cos it's hollow 
I know that oh yeah 
yeah I've got that see
yeah cos I'm cos your dunce 
she doesn't
you don't know that
I know
and Sarah goes to me I think he's quite flattered, and I went in your dreams  
okay
why they're stronger and why they're light
no why  there strong because they need to be, they need to
be held up, the bones need to be held up
and because they won't break so easily and erm, they're light because you don't want to drag down to the floor do you?basically
if you've finished that, people are waiting for it who is?, can't she wait?
no you do your work I am doing my work, god 
what?
fold them up and
what's  mean?
 

I've got scratched, oh no it's hot
I've got scratched, but you know, I've got
you put lipstick on?
no, does it look like I've got lipstick on?
I never knew you know, never work it before 
right who  their machine?
not me, I'm doing this one still
tough luck 
no it's not 
touch luck
no that was question six was homework 
oh six was homework you not  you weren't allowed to take the sheet home
who's got Tippex?
me
a piece of scaffolding
oh thanks for asking
and bone, a bone 
er, I don't wanna keep my jacket on  
 

where am I gonna put this?
put the er, how the human puts the 
no we shouldn't actually  who him?
yeah
Douglas says, let's, Douglas says let's have a look at Mr Bond, let's have a look at Mr Bond click your fingers at me
I click your fingers at me if I want to
 

why are you, on your feet and over there 
cos I need to 
and not there 
I'm looking at Mr Bond  Mr Bond
looking at what?
Mr Bond
what's that gotta do with the lesson?
erm  nothing much, okay, okay  yes sir
she's not here
 

 

sit down and stay there
well what if you have to get to machine, you're gonna have to get to move 
no one 's to answer your stupid questions
Let's have a look, I don't know, I think he, I think he likes her though, but I don't know whether he wants to go out with her or not
But does he, does he fancier her?, no
I don't, I dunno cos I don't really know her, I don't really know her  and all this, I was gonna say something, but I don't really know him, so I was gonna ask him does he fancy Sukey
I sit next to him in my erm F T
you should ask him if fancies her
yeah have Papya sitting next to me as well so Papya will go blurting up to Sukey, going 
yeah 
Carla goes, Carla 
she told and before erm Papya goes any further she's gonna go Carla why did you say it?
 

now you've made me forget what I was gonna say now  it was a, yeah, yeah, you see the  on her face
who Sukey?, she goes to me, he I doubt, doubt if he'd fancy me, but she's just like, she's all going I doubt if he fancy me and do you think he does?
yeah she goes, she, she, should see the grin on her face
you see the grin on her face when erm, when you say 
when you go 
and she goes, no you stop him and there's a big grin on her face
I doubt if many
use to see her no 
I doubt if many people are gonna come in today, wow, what's that?blinking car 
and we started early, we started late
it feels weird
no it doesn't any more
yeah it does, it feels weird, but we 
walking to school with no one around
yeah, it's better though cos you think,
you can hear yourself think
yes this is right, all this noise and thinking about, looking at me 
 

there's no one on the roads
alright, that's what erm, well a car  when we had erm about Alice and all that
yeah
erm, well, the, the roads are empty on the Sundays but I 
er I got a lift erm school every time that happened 
not ever erm, I, I kept seeing people on the roads though
yeah because there was quite a few people going to it
yeah I've never ever  like this 
never ever seen it like this 
it doesn't look up to about say the middle of the trees
yeah
near the leaves, it looks like, give, this is some sort of quarry or something, you know when they 
it's like an archway over the trees yeah    
huh, that dog better not bite me you know
no, I hope it's already eaten
yeah, it is 
is that one suppose to have a muzzle?
no 
  

it's massive, oh what they called? not the
Great Danes
no, I dunno, great big fluffy tail and massive and fat and they're big 
erm a rottweiler 
yeah that's it, this, she's got three rottweiler's now and 
three?
yeah, one died so only got three now  and he walks and that cos he's quite, he's, he's quite little, he looks like 
 
yeah, he looks like he's taken them for protection cos he's like  and no one will come near with them  cos they're like, really  if they'd see ya
yeah
so what
and there's, I'm, I'm glad about that cos they were quite
yeah
come in to our classroom and stay
who is?
for the French lesson you know 
oh there's that, that new girl 
what new girl?
the new girl 
oh yeah 
it's Wednesday
erm  does she know about coming to school? another car, huh, does she know about coming to school erm late?
I've no idea, er Sukey's gonna slap her up
probably
look    no one 's gonna end up getting left out anyway
no that's true cos there's, there's eight, there's eight of us now
is there?
yeah
who?
hi
huh?
why?
but I'm not late
well I don't know how to fill out the register 
that's alright then
no
 

well it's not freezing
no, but it
what they doing here?, oh they came
are we allowed to go in there?
yeah
yeah
 

I see 
where?
eight, five   gotta sign this 
no there
yeah I know
pens running out, pen was running out all yesterday
I've got one 
ah thank you 
 

I'm not going yet
I'm just walking around  
pardon
walking like this
we have to wait here and see  coming in from their lessons just so that we can go off and go to Geography
is, is it, is it just the second year that has erm, perhaps it not
where we going?
I don't know
who's got their tutor homework?
what tutor homework?
T P homework
what's that?
drawing you can do it, in it?
I have done it, oh I haven't, I haven't  brung it in
well
well he knows I've done it anyway
done maths?
homework 
no I
done your maths?
I've done, I've done Mr  my erm, my erm, that  homework last term and he's gone and lost it
you done your maths?
what?
maths?
no have you?
due today
I know but I haven't done it, have you?
yesterday
I wasn't here when it was given out so I didn't know what it was
what er erm, what was your answer?
mine?
what did you get in the, in the table assess yesterday?
answer?
yeah, eleven 
oh, you've got one as well 
what did you get in the table assess yesterday?
what did you get in the table assess yesterday?
table assess twenty eight, erm twenty eight, eighteen 
twenty eight 
eighteen
I, I didn't do mine, I
yeah
yeah, bye
yeah, bye
I got twenty out of twenty 
why have you got it?
I got twenty out of twenty
mm, cos listen to what I mean, Ollie goes, I was sitting next to Ollie yeah and she looks at my thingy, yeah, and she goes that's what, you've missed out three, so I sat there writing all the nec numbers, yeah, and miss goes the other table and I'm like oh come on Carla hurry up and do the numbers inside, and I missed, I just couldn't, I couldn't catch up
ah, ha
yeah
 

yeah  yeah anytime
yeah 
Sarah you need six,eight, four, erm
no cos the six was, yes 
Do you like, erm Chung Chew Ying
we don't know her she's 
she's very quite
that's why she  not really 
shut up
what?
apart from the way she does it, she goes
she goes to him, she goes alright she lives in 
she's alright, she's nice
in a way  to talk to her
I came up to her and started talking to her, yeah, and then Marsha goes to Gemma  like that, it's like
listen
that's when I came over to you two 
if you, if you've got 
and then you two started whispering so I went somewhere else, so I was whispering in class 
if you, if you are gonna do your world experience what would you like to do?
what would you wanna do?
what?
 
I'd like to go and work in the Old Bailey with a barrister
you can you know cos I know 
I know, I know 
my sister 
Jenny  did that
well my sister had a go, she knows people you see, like Jenny's
I thought, wouldn't it be good though if they, if what they did is on that day we went they pick everyone who wanted like the jobs yeah
yeah
and if lots of people wanted to study law, they'd all bring them to like a lawyer, say
yeah
be your partner on that day?
no, er, ah, yeah, if we go to the
yeah, same place and everything
I dunno if we're gonna be, oh Miss  didn't say I'm 
I think all the classes go to the same place 
yeah , no, he said separate 
 
he said separate
different employers
yeah, cos if you are, erm
yeah
the whole years doing it
I know, it would be no point 
it would be like the whole year was getting 
I know, but it wouldn't be any point if someone wanted to be like
a dustman  
a doctor and they got into a nursery place 
it's all worth the experience though 
I know, but it still wouldn't 
 
be any point, huh, if they, cos the thing is if you go to all those lectures and then, because you're allowed to go to an employer of what you wanna be, you see they talk to you about it and they, and then you go on the computers
oh this I'll be so
and you work on the computers what you're gonna be and then it'll be silly if they brought you to a nursery afterwards  if you  wanted to be
a nurse, you mean nursery
no, it isn't
Felicity wanted it, Felicity wants  teacher
yeah
she at school 
she already is in school, I mean you know for teaching like
what,really stupid, for work experience they just gave you places to go
I don't think 
they do 
cos you might not even wanna be that person 
yeah, but it has to have something it has to have something with what you wanna do
yeah, and that, if not 
like I once read a book where this girl she wanted to be a doctor and they brought her to a nursery for work experience
cos my sister, yeah, she wants to be responsible, she wants to be a scientist
yeah
yeah, she wants to be with the science lab, yeah
yeah
she worked in a lab for a week  and
but then you, then, it's that, it's, when you're at work experience it's then when you really find out what it's like
yeah 
so then you can decide whether to do it or not
but, it's only for a day, so you don't really know
it's not, he said two weeks of work experience
two years
no, no, not now, but in the sixth form you spend two weeks 
yeah 
in work experience,then you know really how it is and what, but if you didn't wanna do it, then, oh god, be a lot of  and like you decide 
it doesn't really matter because
yeah I know, but if you took like all your A levels for the, to be a scientist and then 
no 
you wanted to be like
you take yours
what do you wanna be and that?
I've sa I've always wanted to be a barrister 
I want to be something here I want to be something in law
yeah
or in a film
film
so I'm gonna study, I'm gonna do theatre study so 
yeah
and
what do you wanna do Carla?
something in law, what do you wanna do?
be a journalist
what?
journalism
oh yeah, journalist
tell you why
you can, you can do that, you know you can go into journalist, erm a newspaper probably 
I tell you what I like about 
send them to the Guardian
I tell you what I like 
or something like that you know 
about law and the film business cos there's loads of jobs to choose from,ba and you've still got to do the same thing 
they won't send you to anything like The Sun or the Daily Mirror I don't think
they, they will
The Sun?
something like that
come on The Sun
yeah, fun
yeah, no, but that's still a paper though isn't it?
yeah, but I doubt The Sun come all  got it
no, right
there're probably thinking, maybe the Evening Standard
I doubt, I doubt them two  something like Evening Standard or 
perhaps it would be a good  The Times or The Guardian 
yeah  something interesting like that but not, not posh ones 
I'd like to see a media 
oh I'd like to read the 
studies journalist where 
or 
they go and critic on films
I'd like to
d'ya know when they go and er
watch films
something like Barry Norman, that'd be wicked job 
no I don't like that  sort of job
what do you wanna do go to places like you know the alternative, do you wanna be er inside journalist or an outside one?
what's the difference?
like I want er insides when they work in the studios, outsides when they go like 
studios 
to Beirut  
it depends it depends really I don't know
about going there cos they're quite dangerous sometimes
yeah 
yeah 
I, I think I'd like to do  
I hate to be someone like you know, you know that Cooke Report thing yeah 
yeah oh yeah 
he got beaten the camera man got beaten up
who?
yeah, didn't you see it?
on Watchdog, the lady
yeah
erm, we've never seen  and they say this woman  big crooks yeah, and the woman she got her dogs chain and she hit her over the back, she's got all bruises, she told us after when when her report and 
oh I hate to have to work , I hate lawn mowers like that they're annoying
get an electrical one, they're much more chea , they're much more better, er shh, shh you're done  you don't have to spend all day mowing the lawn with the, the pair of scissors  
we might be moving again d'ya know that?
oh why, she get you in more trouble or something?
yeah, she nearly tried to knock my mum off her bike
what
in her car
you mum?
yeah
really
when's this?
er, erm, Marsha?
yeah  we take that off Carla
I can't
Carla rewind it, rewind it
I can't, stop it, it's on  I can't 
 
pardon
yeah
when you got on the bus, yeah
yeah
put your head phones on and listen to it
You know if you've, erm  do you know if you've erm recorded it, if you're like speaking if you like in a group do you put all their names down?, or just put a group?
I'd put all their names down
yes same here
cos it, cos it like takes up half the tape anyway
and it's, it might be the same people speaking again your friends
yeah, probably, I'd just go and the names are, I thought it was like I was like half through the tape, yeah, and I thought, and I was like, I had one name to go
I was like one, I was like half way through the tape and I had, I only had one name to go
the, the university isn't going to tell anybody are they?
no, right
think it's 
like 
confidential
want me to wipe it off, I'm not gonna
don't wipe it off
I'm not gonna
tell her you have that
yeah I will
and this is like  I had er half a side left, yeah
yeah
I had one name left and lucky it was on the back and just talking and talking and talking, it's erm, it was in my bag, and it did, it did pick up 
I have to check through my tapes cos I'm not sure if they, if I've used it all up
I've like got to last sentence and it was cut, and it was like really lovely of 
mine, half of mine cut half off people's conversation
ah, no, did you turn over?
no I just left it  cos it might, I don't know it might of been side B, I think it was, side B was  
I've only done blinking one tape, I wanna do three at least 
yeah
so I'm gonna start talking at home stop my sister shouting at me 
probably  
I take it up to this, yes
so we have to try and be really polite you see and she helps us like you are  and, and see how your 
my sister will shout at me  shut up you little  cow 
 
mum goes, don't you swear at her  no swearing thank you, and it's like  she hates swearing, it's like, not even swearing cows and animals
my mum told me to wipe some of it, some of it off cos I couldn't her shout, I, I, I caught her shouting at my sister, she got really angry with my sister 
 
wipe it off, tt 
I'm not, I'm not wiping it off cos I mean, they insist talking with us, it's, er, that's what we talk about 
 
it, cos we usually talk about that, erm, what's happening
what, boys?
no, I have
yeah,
erm, I've got a lot, I have  it's about her, the reason why she's moving all this stuff
oh  leave it all cos nobody's going to know what it's about
ah stink bomb
urgh
I hate that stuff 
you think, nobody's going to know what it's about anyway  
 
it's gonna be confidential, and they don't know who's, who's on the tape do they?, really
no, not really
ev even if you write down their name 
oh, who the person you're talking about 
yeah 
not  and even the person you're not talking about and you got 
well say Kate was talking and you were talking, and you wrote their names down, they won't know who's who
yeah
you see
hold on, I was speaking to erm Sukey and Marsha and in between master with Mr 
yes they were
no the grotty old one with the 
with Sarah
how?
cos I had a conversation with 
yeah, but I mean, if, it's just a group 
I've just walked to school for fucking nuffink I haven't got a lesson 
I've just got second lesson off
it ain't funny 
 
you've got first and second lesson, ha, ha
oh bloody hell everyone finds it funny, I don't 
are you going to stay at school or go home?
no, by the time I've get home I'll have to walk back to school again
where you live?
stay home 
 

no
Marsha what's her name again?
now I won't be able to get my cigarettes
no, erm, that, what she told us was her surname
that's her name though
no, that's how they, she told me that, that's how
yeah, I know that's her name 
they call it in erm but her names erm
or something
 

they, that's not
she doesn't say that
yeah, but she told Hayley that 
they call 
her name was 
can't they call her  
and that's how 
it's a lot easier
yeah
that'll be
what's her surname?
only say erm, only say their surname in erm in India because there's so many people with the name  there, but there ain't in our class 
ah, are you sure she's from India?
yeah
she doesn't look it at all 
but she is
she looks Chinesey
ah, but when we asked her where she's from she said India
she was born in India 
no, they're both Indian
make a wish, make a wish
erm, erm
don't tell us, just make a wish and blow it
I don't anybody
take it, hold a wish and blow it
oh god where is it?
got it?
oh got it, oh yeah I have
make a wish, blow it
look at handsome prince come riding pass and sweep you off your feet, is it?
just by guess, yeah
oh this takes the piss man, I bet you there's no one in school with a cigarette in his arm
still have ten minutes to 
she's bad
what?
right near my feet and she went 
yeah
oh god, I'm not half awake today, I'm not normally this quiet 
Excuse me, excuse me everybody don't you think she should enter in this competition, to be a model for 
 
yeah
oh yeah
don't she?, shouldn't she?
yeah  I told you there weren't no school
a modelling agency, for a year, a one contract 
she'll beat Kate  anyway 
a year, a one year modelling contract with a league premier
sounds good to you don't it?, you can buy me cigarettes every day  
 
I'm only joking, oh I wanna cigarette, who can I ponce off?, don't, that's what I'd say
yeah, don't
that's my motto, no chance, alright then I smoke drugs instead, no not really  I don't smoke drugs any more 
only when you bother, yes you do
no I don't
you do, you told me you did 
no I don't 
I don't
no, she doesn't really 
I don't I drink 
she doesn't 
she drinks
yeah
she smokes cigarettes, but she doesn't smoke drugs she
in other words it's just as bad good 
it's just as bad you know
my sister smokes drugs, I lied, my sister smokes drugs, she won't even touch a cigarette, but she loves her diamond white you know
what's diamond white?
it's a alcohol drink, she loves it 
this a  
don't know
ask her about, she was calling me Sharon on the train cos I was wearing a skirt, she's going oh Sharon, she was drunk
you're gonna enter aren't you Jasmine?
she should shouldn't she?
yeah 
exactly 
enter it shouldn't she?
ask her mum first
she'd, she'd beat them now, age 
yeah why don't you at thirteen?
exactly Kate must model, she'd beat her at 
I'll speak to my mum cos my mum doesn't want me bloody stripping
yeah, but you can just try it, they're not going to make you strip 
yeah that's what my mum said just the mirror
she said I don't want you stripping, I says I ain't gonna strip 
yeah, but they're not gonna, if they say it then they don't make you strip 
she goes I'll do porno's 
look's like you went and like all the clothes and  I suppose
you call this rust colour, shoe size
 

five six
bloody hell I'm five seven 
no, I'm, I suppose so I don't think so
you can't be
I am, cos last time I measured myself in
you can't be, I'm five seven
she's as tall as you
yes, she is as tall as you, she's five seven
who's fag?
mine, with hair all over it, my hair for my brush 
alright, maybe next time  alright I'll see you later
must, erm, stand back to back a minute
see you,around anyway
no stand, stand, stand back to back, oh I think she's taller  Jasmine's taller
oh that's not fair
you're five eight  you're five eight, you stand, you st I don't think  same size as my mum I don't think so  somehow  cos my mums five eight and my mums erm quite tall 
 
 
she's not five eight
your mum, you said your mum's five eight
yeah
she's not five eight
no way 
you saying she's five eight, Jasmine
er, yes
she's about five seven, six
my mum's five eight
who is five eight?
 
my mum's, no she isn't, well how would, how tall are you?
she's about five six, five six
I don't know what I am
she, you're more, you're more than five six and a half  measure yourself
now
no, when you get home, with a tape measure
I know what I am, I'm five four
you're five three
I'm five foot then
no you're about five two, five three, who's taller?, who's taller?
you
she must be about five two
wait, hold on, stand, stand with your legs together both of you
Hayley your feet are there 
yeah she's taller a little bit
yeah, but look Hayley's feet, you're about five two
right, that's it
both of you stand on the stuff here
we have, we did 
stop leaning on me 
I know
I am five four
how tall do you reckon I am Marsh?
I'd say about five six 
five six and a half 
yeah
she's five seven 
who's five seven?
Jasmine
did you measure yourself?
no
so how does she know she's five seven
cos this la , the girl out there said she's five seven, so she 
she thinks, she thinks she's five seven
she's, she's got
Jasmine's taller than my mum 
my mum you see my mum, yeah
yes
see my mum, five eight, my mum's taller than her, yeah, my mum's five eight, not five seven
my mum's five six so she's taller, and she's taller, she's taller than my mum
by about how much taller?
I dunno
the best thing to do is measure yourself
if I'm five eight  five seven
oh yeah
I'm five seven and a half
doesn't matter
well I'm five three, you're much more, it means you're taller than me
You could do it  if I was taller, yeah 
If you were taller cos all, you've got the right body
yeah
erm, you're pretty enough and it's like, taller 
I don't know about it actually
no  Sukey long hair
yeah, but, but  
you could of done it
I, no way
you could of seriously because they want, they don't want models like that erm 
yeah, but I need to be a bit skinnier and  a bit taller
yeah, if you loose, if you were taller
and skinnier
no, if you were taller you would get erm 
and skinnier 
because you would shape, you would shape out 
yes that's true you would shape more 
but she's, she's as skinny as well
has it 
er, yeah 
yeah
cos it's like erm, it's like, her, her calves and her shins are like same size as her thighs
yeah
she doesn't know she's all one size, best thing about being a bit podgy 
yeah, at least she has
oh you  it's due for about a bit more then
oh no 
often   what you getting?
erm, my usual, hamburger  
yeah I'm not that hungry 
I'll get a happy meal, but not in a, not in a box, a medium drink
hap happy meal are more expensive than getting 
yeah 
it separate
is it?
yeah
and I'm going to get a medium fries, I don't like small fries, I'll get a cheese burger I think 
oh you know those small fries you get those little weeny erm little fries
yeah  it's like they count them out and go that's a small one
yeah put it in the small pile 
and they get all the lanky ones 
yeah
yeah
in the larger 
yeah 
I remember when they use, they didn't use to be a medium  small and large
yeah
and the large one was the just the red packet
I remember I used to pick off all the sesame seeds of the bun
so did I
and erm
I used to pick it off
and leave the bun and eat the hamburger and my dad used to eat the burger 
Can you think of any, erm  names for a bar, it's got nuts and raisins in it?
A what?
my homework is yeah, my homework is er
what?
design erm two bars, toffee bars
yeah
with you know nuts and raisins summat like that 
yes 
my first one was oat bar, yeah
yes
a bar of raisins, muesli and oats, called oat bar
yes
and then my one was a bar with nuts, oh
I thought of a nice name
nuts on 'em and  yeah
nature bar
nature?
yeah
why nature?
well a natural bar then
no mum
what's that noise?
it's downstairs, a burglar alarm or something
who's?
I dunno
must look and see
tt
I wonder where the other two are?
they're probably snogging  listen to me yeah, you know what I done yeah
what?
I was hiding behind, I was hiding behind a tree and ready to jump out and flash my torch and my  going aargh, yeah
yes
they were, they were ha , I thought they, they, they were over there and they were looking for, there wasn't like taking  
yeah, yeah 
and they were like standing there, I thought they were looking, I shined the torch on them and they, still was there
snogging 
snogging 
I think, er she's going home now
probably, a bar with nuts and raisins called raisin  natural bar  I'm sorry about loo loosing the keys mum, mum  tt  the noise has gone  the noise has come back by the way
hello, hello  
I'm gonna get in trouble mummy, mummy
yes
have they found them?
I dunno, I don't think so
tt, Tina weren't looking
no I know, but she's just worried about this 
find them?
no
they've gotta turn up mum says
What?, what?
mum says they've gotta turn up
they're gonna turn up?
yeah
did you take them with you?
yeah, I 
what?
what you got in there?
little toy, whatever you, choose
aargh
No it's my plate
ah tut, tut, tut, I'm doing the tour not you, cos here we have the plate I bought for Paula  correction not Carla, Paula, there you go, with a P, you're P, which she probably don't like anyway with the nuts in
yeah I do
which is mine with lunch tomorrow and a  which has  
I thought he smoked 
no, they, they 
oh I know them, they'll all bloody wicked they are
three different flavours
I know she was, she, you did know that she was recording didn't you?
oh shut up Paula
recording what?, oh well I
er hello, who's calling please?, oh yeah, hold on  
oh let's have a bite of your yorks
no, it's for my lunch tomorrow you see
don't lie just don't give her any 
I am I'm not eating it today, I am, I'm not eating
oh ya, bull shit
yeah bollocks
bollocks you wanker
you stirring little woman you are
I know
let's have a bite of your flake
no
oh go on, I'm hungry  please
no
what?
she won't give me a bit of her flake
she wants my flake
oh that's not fair  tt, huh
no
what?
no  don't walk away no, don't walk away 
no
how are you?
fine  don't you put me 
don't eat that sweet either that's  
I don't care I don't want your poxy yorky, I've got a bike up there I can go and take it then
pass it and  nick it  huh, oh  
lend me, I know you're recording me 
so what?
okay, if you lend me that, I'll give you your Caroline 
you nicked my Caroline
no, no, she thought it was hers and she wanted me to 
you bitch 
not re no, no, listen, listen, no listen, listen, listen, it's not, wait a minute, no, right, it was up there, we thought it was hers but it wasn't hers, so I took the wrong one
and you didn't
it's not her thought it's my fault 
okay listen listen, listen, a bar with raisins, muesli and oats called oat bar yeah, that's my design, a bar with nuts and raisins what can that be called?, mum goes nature bar
erm, mum goes nature bar
what?
mum goes, yeah, listen, a bar with raisins, muesli and, and oats, called oat bar yeah
yeah
and this is my other idea, a bar with nuts and raisins
call it, it's good for you 
mum goes  mum, mum goes  natural bar 
call it, it is good for you, natural bar
natural bar
you caught one?, you got one?
ah, yeah I did
Paula
what?
what shall I call it?
what?, the new nut, new
nuts and raisins
I, mines got a  in it by the way, beer belly 
ooh 
and fluff
will you stop  
,
they're smart they are 
I wish you take that horrible noise, I don't like it, you understand, in the house okay, cos Sonny's coming round, and it gets 
horrible 
through my ears and gives me a headache
pierces her head
I beg your pardon
I said it pierces your head 
that's what I did  
oh pierce 
yeah, yeah
what's that noise outside?, that alarm was
that was an alarm
oh it's a car
a car alarm?
well I wouldn't 
Excuse me, excuse me, I'm recording here can you not kiss around please, mummy 
Yeah
so you've, have you put the potatoes away?
Already done
hurry
yes
shh, the potatoes
where've you been?, where she been?
she's been out and Tina has been watching over her
oh, she's been playing with computers?
yes, yes
right, and who was  
And Mark
and a boy called Mark
Haringey or whatever his name is 
and a boy called Mark
yes Mark
eh
and guess where he works, guess where we have to change, the bushes
huh,what, I'm sulking yes so I can hang around to whoever I want to hang around with
what about the  larking up like that, don't you think that's a bit much?
what?
your sister telling your brother and that
exactly
that's disgusting 
mum
yes darling
I need help
oh darling can I go to the toilet, I've got, I've got other things to do
oh fine
I don't like helping this time of night, sorry, it's half past ten
in the morning, so what   nutty nut, I've got it nutty nut
no fruity nut
no, it hasn't got fruit in it, it's nutty nut
it's, it's fruits, nuts and raisins, raisins are fruit
fruity nut
er no, cos that looks like fruit and nut, erm 
nutty nuts, nutty fruit, nutty bar, nutty, nutty raisin bar thing, ah, erm, a, a design from Carla   my voice sounds weird you know
I think, I dunno
does mice have, nut, nutty b , nutty nut
 
it's got more than it's got more than nu , it's got more nuts in it
no, yeah, but
tt, nutty fruit
fruit and nut
fruit and nut  can't copy  you going Hampton Court as well on Sunday?
mm, mm
you going what?, what ya say?
going to Hampton Court 
we're going Hampton Court 
who is?
me and mummy and Paula 
we are, me and mummy and so you have to feed yourself
yeah
when?, what day?
Sunday 
Sunday 
Sunday?
my holiday without oh  
oh god darn, it's not eleven yet is it?
no
no  it's only twenty five past ten 
oh god, darn 
yes nutty nut, er nutty fruit  yeah nutty fruit
nutty
nutty raisins  nutty fruit, fruity nut  well something that has nutty nut, I think nutty nut nutty 
I think natural bar sounds good
natural bar 
but I think that should be for the oats one
you think so?
yeah 
okay  natural bar  natural bar, so let's just copy  how'd ya spell nut, natural?
N A T R A  Paula, Paula natural 
yes 
N A T R I A L ?
no,N A T U R 
hold on, hold on  N A T 
U R A L  I think
U R   how do you know what English people like?, urgh what's this called?tt, I think nutty nut, nutty, fruit and nut, oh, nutty fruit, nutty fruit, nutty nut fruits 
too much though 
so I'll leave my homework there,are my pens any where?my   ooh, ooh, ugly man, ooh they're gross  oh yeah  huh, I've gotta go to bed now  gotta pack  tomorrow
Friday
yeah I can stay out even later   got a worm in the bushes lovey
eh?
I swept I was in the butchers you see the fl how wet the floor was 